Introduction
============

In the history of this East, the candle of the Prophetic missions, there
was no one like Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, in piety,
devotion and intense turning to Allah in repentance except his
grandfather, who illuminated the intellectual life with the light of
monotheism and true belief.

The life of this great Imam has given an account of the lives of the
prophets and the messengers. He was similar to them in all their
qualities and trends. Hence he was like Jesus Christ in his asceticism
and his turning to Allah in repentance. He was like prophet Job in his
tribulation and his patience. He was similar to prophet Muhammad, may
Allah bless him and his family, in his true resolution and his good
manners. His good tendencies and his spiritual abilities are limitless.
In the history of this world, it is enough for him that only he has been
called Zayn al -‘Abidin. This nick-name has been not given to anyone
except him.

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, appeared on the arena of the
Islamic life as the most brilliant Muslim politician whom history has
ever known. He was ill and captured by the Umayyads, yet spread with his
outstanding merits the objectives of the revolution of his father, Imam
al- Husayn. The latter was the leader who inspired the victorious
Islamic movement. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin showed the original values of the
revolution in a brilliant manner full of rationing, originality, and
creation.

This great Imam indicated the general thought. He removed the social
deception which the community suffered during the days of the black
Umayyad regime which intended to paralyze the revolutionary Islamic
movement. This regime turned the Muslims into scattering groups without
life and feelings. This Imam faced the Umayyad policy with his ideas,
where he destroyed their claimed victory and the marks of their
haughtiness and might. The Imam, peace be on him, achieved these
glorious victories through the wonderful enthusiastic sermons which he
delivered before the great masses in Kufa, Damascus, and Medina. These
sermons played an important role in enlightening the community and
liberating it from the factors of fear and terrorism.

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was the strongest factor in
immortalizing the Husaynid revolution and making it react upon the
sentiments and feelings of the community. That was through his wonderful
qualities of which history has never known in the world of bravery and
heroism. Among these qualities was that he was taken prisoner by bin
Marjana (‘Ubayd Allah bin Zyyad) one of the worst terrorists on earth.
However, the Imam disdained and reproached him for the great many murder
and sins he committed. The tyrant (‘Ubayd Allah) threatened him with
death. The Imam was in different to him. He aimed penetrating arrows at
‘Ubayd Allah’s heart through his eloquent words. The Imam’s conversation
with him had great influence upon the official and the non-official
circles at that time. The Imam went on shedding light upon the
objectives of the Husaynid revolution. Thus, he could proclaim these
objectives throughout history.

As for the Imam’s speech in Yazid’s palace, it was among the most
wonderful documents in Islam. I (i. e. the author) think that there was
no political speech more eloquent and influential in educating the
masses and enlightening the public opinion than that of the Imam.
Through this speech, the Imam confused. So the latter was unable to
defend himself or to justify his crime when he killed the master of the
youths of Paradise (i. e. Imam Husayn) and destroyed the pure family (of
the Prophet). For this reason the people talked with admiration about
the Imam’s speech that was among the results of the Husaynid uprising
and its bright stages.

Among the ways through which the Imam immortalized the Husaynid
revolution was that he wept very much over the tragedies which befell
his father, the members of his House, and his companions at the Battle
of Karbala. Indeed the Imam deprived himself of happiness and pleasure.
He was overcome with sadness. Thus, he was regarded as among the five
tearful persons who represented sorrow throughout history.

I (i. e. the author) think that the Imam wept very much, not because of
the great misfortune and the serious adversities which resulted from the
tragedies of Karbala. Rather he wept in order to immortalize the
revolution which his father led to liberate man from oppression,
slavery, and tyranny. His weeping over his father created sorrow in the
hearts of the Muslims. Perhaps this phenomenon (of weeping) was among
the factors that the Muslim masses used to fight against the Umayyad
regime. The first spark started in Medina. The children of the
Companions (of the Prophet) declared their armed mutiny against Yazid’s
government, who had disdained the values of the community and its fates.

After the tragedy of Karbala, the great Imam, Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be
on him, devoted himself to teaching. This is because he thought that
spreading knowledge would be the best way to carry out his reformatory
message. Besides he thought that it would be the best way to relieve his
soul which the tragedies of Karbala melted. Accordingly, the children of
the Companions (of the Prophet), the religious scholars, and the jurists
hurried to benefit from his sea of knowledge. The Imam began teaching
them, and they became teachers in the Islamic world. In this book will
illustrate their biographies.

The Imam enlightened the Arab and the Islamic thought with various kinds
of knowledge. He summoned and urged the Muslim youths to give importance
to knowledge. His students lauded and praised his summons to knowledge.
His grandfather, the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
planted a tree of knowledge, which grew through his (the Imam’s)
blessings. So the people were eager to seek knowledge. Hence, the Imam
was the brilliant founder of an intellectual culture in the Islamic
world.

As for the scientific and cultural wealth of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace
be on him, it represented creation, liberty, and development. This
wealth was not confined to a particular science. Rather it included many
sciences such as jurisprudence, explanation of the Qur’an, theology,
philosophy, education, sociology, and the like. The Imam devoted much
attention to ethics because he thought that Islamic ethics was liable to
collapse. He thought that the people turned away from their religion.

This is because the Umayyad regime intended to destroy all moral values.
So the Imam, peace be on him, spared no effort to reform and educate the
community. Concerning the Imam, the Shi‘ites said: “When the people
yielded to their desires and followed their kings, the Imam cured them
with the moral teachings and the holy verses.”[^1]

The Imam, peace be on him, treated moral and educational matters
objectively and inclusively. His studies in this respect are among the
most valuable Islamic studies and the most accurate.

Perhaps the most beautiful and the most productive tool used in
developing the Islamic thought is his great supplications called
al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya’. The scholars sometimes call it ‘Zabu’r Al
Muhammad’, and they sometimes call it ‘Injil Al Muhammad’, may Allah
bless him and his family. They regard it as the third important
reference after the Qur’an and Nahj al-Balagha. Indeed, it is an ideal
Islamic program containing moral values and social rules.

It is worth mentioning that al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya has occupied an
important position in the Islamic intellectual circles, where they
devoted themselves to study and explain it. The scholars have compiled
more than sixty-five commentaries on al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya.[^2] They
even wrote copies of it in beautiful script which is regarded as among
the precious Arabic script. Moreover, some copies have been embellished
with precious Arabesque.

We will continue our discussion about al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya’. We say:
Its importance is not confined to the Arab and Islamic world, rather its
importance has extended to the Western world. It has been translated
into English, German, French, and the like. The scholars and people of
those nations have devoted themselves to study and ponder its contents
carefully. In it they have found a treasure of thought and knowledge.
They have also found that it contains moral teachings necessary to
educate soul. Indeed, it has added incomparable wealth to the references
of the human thought. It also contains various kinds of high culture
which is rarely found in moral and religious books. Besides it is the
most important reference in our study on the character of the Imam,
peace be on him.

As for the ideas of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and his
psychological elements, they bewilder intellects. They move every Muslim
and every person who adopts his humanity and yields to its ideals and
values to admire the Imam and boast of him.

This Imam was endowed with all good manners. He was adorned with all
virtues and honor. He freed himself from all selfishness, and turned
away from all the vanities and pleasures of life. Among his prominent
qualities was that he turned to Allah in repentance and devoted himself
to Him. His love for Allah and his fear of him controlled his intellect,
his heart, and his body. His soul shone through the light of conviction
in Allah. His heart was full of hope of Allah’s mercy. The historians
unanimously agreed that he overexerted himself to worship and obey
Allah.

The people of his time did not see anyone who worshipped Allah more than
he did. Nor did they see a person who was more pious than he was.
Because of his abundant worshipping, he was called the Lord of
worshipers and Imam of the pious.

His family felt pity for him because of his abundant worshipping. They
were concerned about him because of tiredness and the hardships from
which he suffered. Hence, they went quickly to the great Companion (of
the Prophet), Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari, whom the Imam preferred to
the others. They asked Jabir to beg the Imam not to overexert himself in
worshipping. Jabir then talked to him and begged him to do that. Some of
the words which he said to him are: “You are one of the successors of
the Prophet. You are the representative of Allah on the earth. You are
among those through whom tribulations are driven away.” However, the
Imam went on worshipping Allah and adhering to obedience. So Jabir said
with admiration: “None of the children of the prophets was like ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn (i.e. Zayn al-‘Abidin).”

Indeed no one of the children of the prophets was like ‘Ali b. al-Husayn
in asceticism, piety, and intense turning to Allah in repentance.

Another phenomenon of the high ideals by which the Imam, peace be on
him, was distinguished was that he treated the slaves kindly. He pitied
for them very much. Among what he intended to do during his lifetime was
that he wanted to free them from slavery. Indeed, he freed a large group
of them. If he had lived for a longer time, he would have freed all the
slaves. This is because he wanted to abolish slavery and to make the
Muslims know that their religion came to liberate man from abasement and
slavery.

It is an act of truthfulness to say that this great inspired Imam was
not confined to a certain group of people nor was he confined to a
certain set of Muslims. Rather he was for all people in spite of their
different ideas throughout history. This is because the Imam represented
human moral values and dignity. Besides he represented what man usually
prides himself on, such as perfection, the rules of conduct, and
excellent morals.

Because of the Imam’s high character and his great importance to the
Muslims, many Muslim sects claimed that he belonged to them. For
example, the Mu‘tazilites, who were the most knowledgeable of all the
Muslims in theology, regarded him with pride and honor as one of
them.[^3] The Sufis claimed that he was among their great figures. As a
result, they have written about his life in their encyclopedias.[^4]

The Muslims thought that the life of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him, was the true embodiment of the Islamic values and high noble traits
of his grandfather, the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. He followed his method, his life, and his practices. Hence, the
Imam possessed the heart and the feelings through his excellent morals.
So the people thought that no one except the Imam was worthy of their
temporal and spiritual leadership. For this reason they disdained their
Umayyad kings who were void of virtues. The event which took place in
the Kaaba during the time of the pilgrimage indicates this. The Kaaba
was full of people from everywhere. The Imam came to circumambulate the
Kaaba, and it was as if that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, came to them. So they said loudly: “There is no Allah but Allah
! Allah is great !” They crowded around him as they crowded around the
Black Stone. Happy was he who touched his clothes or kissed his hand or
took some dust from under his feet to see a good omen in it.

In the meantime his opponent, Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik, who was chief of
the Umayyad family was among the pilgrims. However, no one paid
attention to him. The Syrians hurried to ask him about this great man
(i. e. the Imam) whom the people welcomed so warmly. However, the tyrant
(i.e. Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik) denied knowing anything about him. He was
afraid that the Syrians would renounce him. The poet of the Umayyad
royal palace, al-Farazdaq, opposed him. He then made the people aware
the Imam through his immortal and wonderful poem which represented clear
thought and conscience. The Kaaba then turned into the market of ‘Ukaz
(the place where the Arabs recited their poems). From all sides of the
mosque, the people repeated loudly the wonderful poem of al-Farazdaq and
invoked Allah for the Imam. As a result, Hisham was full of anger.

The Umayyads felt that they were not from the community and that they
were not worthy of leading it. Rather they imposed their government on
it as a weapon. They knew that ‘Ali b. al-Husayn was the real leader, so
they bore malice against him. Al-Walid indicated that when he said: “I
cannot rest as long as ‘Ali b. al-Husayn is in the world.”[^5] They
tried to kill him as they had killed the Muslim Imams and the great
figures before, because they thought that such figures were dangerous.

It is necessary for us to study the period during which the Imam, peace
be on him, lived. This is because studying a certain period has become
among methodical affairs which are necessary for the researcher. Such a
study represents political tranquillity and disorder. Moreover, it gives
a clear picture about social aspects such as creation, progress,
stagnancy, decline, and the like. It is natural for us to study this
phenomenon to discover the qualities of the Imam.

As for the time of the Imam, peace be on him, I (the author) think that
it was the worst time in history. This is because many great events
occurred during that time. These events befell the Muslims and caused
troubles to them. The most painful one of them was the tragedy of
Karbala. It was the most painful of all the world events. The holiness
of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was violated during
that tragedy. That was when the people attacked his womenfolk and killed
his grandsons. They did pay attention his Holiness concerning them. The
Imam, peace be on him, witnessed with great sorrow all the tragedies,
which are immortal in the world of grief. Hence, he remembered them at
every hour of his life till he joined the Most High Associate (Allah).

Among the sorrowful events from which the Imam, peace be on him,
suffered was the Battle of al- Hirra. The Holiness of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, was violated at it in his city and the
center of his mission. The policemen of Yazid b. Mu‘awiya desecrated
Medina. In it they committed all what Allah forbade. They destroyed all
values and customs. The revolt of the Repentant and the revolt of the
great inspired leader, al-Mukhtar b. Yousif, occurred during the time of
the Imam, peace be on him.

These revolts, which we will discuss in this book, resulted from the
revolution of the Lord of the martyrs, Imam Husayn, peace be on him.
Among the prominent events at that time was the revolt of b. al-Zubayr.
This revolt resulted from some political ambitions. I (the author) think
that b. al-Zubayr did not intend to free the community from the Umayyads
and to save it from their violence. Rather he revolted against them to
take the reins of government. Moreover, such a man did not take care of
the interests of the community nor did he take care of its independence
and its dignity.

There was another difficulty during the time of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin,
peace be on him. The difficulty was that the political parties fought
against each other to take the reins of government. As a result, they
filled the country with tribulations and disasters. Surely, the
political parties at that time did not intend to achieve any of the
community’s objectives nor did they strive to solve any of its fateful
affairs. Rather they strove to achieve their ambitions and their
material interests.

Among the most prominent parties was the Umayyad party, which the
government supported with all its abilities. The Umayyad party included
the leaders and the luxurious class of the country. Among those parties
was the party of b. al- Zubayr. Many people from Hijaz (Saudi Arabia)
joined this party. Their aim was to return the Islamic capital to their
country and to take the reins of government. Among those parties was the
Kharijites. This party was strong. It was indignant with the Quraysh,
for the government was confined to them. However, this party was
afflicted by ideological dullness and decline. This is because it mixed
the affairs, and followed dangerous ways of error. It believed in such
ways because of stupidity and ignorance. An example of its stupidity was
that it showed enmity towards the Commander of the faithful (Imam ‘Ali),
who was the pioneer of the truth and social justice in the earth. This
party regarded shedding the blood of those who did not believe in its
ideas as lawful. We will discuss this party when we talk about the
political life during the time of the Imam.

Among the important events during the time of the Imam, peace be on him,
was that the Umayyad government forced the people to curse the Commander
of the faithful (Imam ‘Ali), peace be on him, and the pure family (of
the Prophet). So the people cursed them on the pulpits, in the minarets
(of the mosques), and after Friday sermons. Hence showing enmity toward
them was part of the religious life of the Muslims. The Umayyad regime
followed the Shi‘ites (followers) of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, punished and killed them. The Shi‘ites
during the Umayyad regime were liable to very intense tribulations. Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, witnessed this. However, he was unable
to protect his Shi‘ites from the Umayyad regime. As a result, his heart
was full of pain and sorrow.

It is necessary for me to give a clear picture about the policy of the
kings who ruled the community during the time of the Imam, peace be on
him. In addition, I must mention their politico - ideological trends,
and what the Imam, peace be on him, suffered because of them. This is
because I think that such matters will complete the study about the
great character of the Imam, peace be on him.

When I mention the affairs of those kings, I will not become fanatic nor
will I be partial to any side nor will I be severe towards any party.
Rather I will present the sorrowful events of each party. This is
because such events have put them before the trial of history. It is
natural that to regard them as right and to justify their deeds means
turning away from reason, mutiny against the proofs, remoteness from
correctness, and deviation from the truth.

As for our study in this book, it has been based on the most reliable
handwritten, photographed, and printed references, which are the sources
of historians and narrators. Worth mentioning, I have quoted the events
from many books in order to support my purpose. I did my best to review
the handwritten and the photographed references from which I have quoted
these topics.

In the footnotes of the book, I have mentioned the libraries where these
references are found.

At the end of this introduction, I surely declare that this book
contains only few things about the life of this great Imam who filled
the world with virtues and knowledge. I have read ethics books,
tradition books, commentaries, jurisprudence books, and other Islamic
books. I have found that these books have mentioned the valuable works
of the Imam, his original ideas, his interesting sayings, and so on.
Therefore this book, though comprehensive, is a brief page about his
life or a faint point about the features of his life and character.

I (the author) have repeated the same words in the introductions of the
books which I have written on the lives of the pure Imams. That is,
Allah knows, not because of the very intense love for them nor is it
because of the sentiment of my grandfathers who followed the members of
the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. Rather, this has resulted
from serious studies about their lives. Whoever studies their lives
believes that the Imams, peace be on them, represented the lives of the
prophets.

It is necessary for me to say that these studies about the lives of the
pure Imams, peace be on them, are very important, because we live at the
time when people have become ignorant of these Imams. In other words
humanity has deviated from the laws of the cosmos which Allah has
created. Therefore people are liable to tyranny, persecution,
aggression, threat, and causing homelessness.

Indeed people are restless and perplexed. They are Absorbed in material
pleasures and dreadful wars. Their hearts are empty of belief.
Therefore, they are in need of the guidance of the pure family (of the
Prophet), who were Allah’s favor for people, and like their grandfather,
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, whom Allah sent for
people whether they believed in him or not.

Now, I want to end this introduction, but I think that it is an act of
truthfulness to acknowledge the creative efforts my brother, shaykh Hadi
Sharif al-Qarashi, made in writing this book. He suffered many troubles
when he read some of the encyclopedias. Besides he gave me many valuable
notes during writing these studies. I am, Allah knows, unable to thank
this loyal brother. However, I leave that to Allah, the Most High, to
reward him as He rewards His sincere servants.

**Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi,**

**Holy Najaf**

[^1]: Nazariyat al-Imama, p.350.

[^2]: Al-Dhari‘a fi Tasanif al-Shi‘a.

[^3]: Tabaqat al-Mu‘tazila, pp. 15-16.

[^4]: Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p.172.

[^5]: Hayat al-Imam Mohammed al-Baqir, vol. 1, p.51.


