Chapter 2: The Great Baby
=========================

The world brightened when Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was
born, for he would split the fountain of knowledge and wisdom in the
earth. He would also show, through his behavior, wonderful examples of
self-negation, renouncing the world, and cleaving to Allah. The
Prophet’s family was very happy to receive this blessed baby, of whom
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, gave good news.

All the companions who had good relations with the members of the house
*(ahl al-Bayt)* were happy to hear of the birth of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin.
Some historians said that the Imam was born weak and thin. Sayyid ‘Abid
al-‘Aziz Sayyid al-Ahal said: “He (Zayn al-‘Abidin) was born weak and
thin. Gleams as faint as dim worry appeared in his eyes. These broken
gleams indicated coming grief.[^1]” Misfortunes and pain accompanied him
from his childhood. Among them was that his pure mother died while he
was still a baby in the cradle.

The Rites of his Birth
----------------------

Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him or his son
Imam Husayn, peace be on him hurried to perform the religious rites of
birth for the blessed baby; he said the *azan* in his right ear and the
*iqama* in his left year. With this he established in his heart a temple
beating with the feelings of piety and righteousness. They were active
tunes directing him to kindness and good deeds.

The first thing with which Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin was received was the
words *Allahu Akbar* (Allah is Great) ! These words were printed in his
heart and senses, so they became some of his qualities. On the seventh
day of his birth, his father sacrificed a ram for him (in the ceremony
of a*‘qiqa),* cut his hair and gave silver or gold as equal to its
weight as alms to the poor and needy according to the holy Islamic
Sunna.

The Place of his Birth
----------------------

The historians differed over the place where Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin was
born. The following are what they have mentioned:

(A) He was born in Kufa.[^2]

(B) He was born in Medina.[^3]

I (the author) think that he was born in Kufa. This is because the
narrators and the historians mentioned that he was born two years before
the death of his grandfather, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him[^4]. It is certain that Imam al-Husayn and his family were in Kufa
along with Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him.
None of them lived in Medina throughout his succession (to authority).

The Time of his Birth
---------------------

The historians differed over the time when Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin was
born. The following are what they have mentioned:

(A) He was born on the fifth day of Sha‘ban in the year 38 A.H.[^5] That
was on Thursday.[^6]

(B) He was born on Friday on the ninth of Sha‘ban in the year 38 A.
H.[^7]

(C) He was born in the half of Jamadi al-’<U@la> in the year 38 A.
H.[^8]

(D) He was born on Friday the 26th of Jamadi al-Akhira in the year 38
A.H.[^9]

(E) He was born in the months of the year 33 A. H.[^10] This idea is
irregular and opposes the narrators and the historians who mentioned
that the Imam was born in the year 38 A. H.

The Imami Shi‘ites have adopted the first idea, and they hold their
public festivals on the fifth of Sha‘ban to celebrate Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin’s birth.

His Name
--------

The historians and the narrators unanimously agreed that the greatest
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, named his grandson ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn and gave him the surname of Zayn al-‘Abidin. That was ten
years before he was created, and that was among the wonderful signs of
his prophecy. The accounts have been frequently reported on his
authority. The following are some of them:

The great Companion Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari reported: “While I was
sitting with Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, he put
al-Husayn on his lap and played with him, and then he, may Allah bless
him and his family, said: ‘Jabir, a son will be born for him, and the
son will be called ‘Ali. A caller will call out on the Day of Judgment:
‘Let Sayyid al-‘Abidin (the Lord of worshippers) stand up.’ So his son
will stand up. Then a son will be born for him, and the son will be
named Muhammad. When you meet him, recite my greetings to him.[^11]’”

Jabir proclaimed this tradition, and he also met Imam Muhammad al-Baqir,
peace be on him, and recited these greetings to him, and the latter was
delighted with them.

2. Al-Hafiz b. ‘Asakir reported on the authority of Sufyan b. ‘Ayyina,
on the authority of b. al-Zubayr, who said: “While we were (sitting)
with Jabir, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn came. Jabir said to him: ‘When I was
(sitting) with Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
al-Husayn came to him. He (the Prophet) embraced him (al-Husayn), kissed
him, sat him beside him, and said: ‘A son will be born for this (i.e.,
al-Husayn), and a caller will call out on the Day of Judgment: ‘Let
Sayyid al-‘Abidin (the Lord of worshippers) stand up, and he will stand
up.’[^12]”

3. Sa‘id b. al-Musayyab reported on the authority of b. ‘Abbas, on the
authority of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who
said: “A caller will call out on the Day of Judgment: ‘Where is ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn?’ I will see my grandson ‘Ali b. al-Husayn appear from among
the ranks.[^13]”

These are some of the traditions which were narrated on the authority of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. They show that the
Prophet named his grandson ‘Ali and gave him the nick name of Zayn
al-‘Abidin (the adornment of the worshippers), and they also show that
the Imam has an important position with Allah, the Glorified.

Ibn Taymiya
-----------

Ibn Taymiya denied that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
gave this name to his grandson ‘Ali, and he said: “This thing has no
source, and the knowledgeable people have not narrated it.[^14]”
However, Ibn Taymiya did not want to mention what the main narrators and
historians reported, for he deviated from the truth and showed enmity
towards the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them,
whose love Allah has made obligatory, and whom the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, made life boats and security for mankind.
Besides he denied all their outstanding merits and deeds which the
historians have narrated.

His Kunya
---------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was given the *Kunya* of:

Abu’ al-Husayn.

Abu’ al-Hasan.

Abu’ Muhammad.[^15]

Abu’ ‘Abd Allah.[^16]

His Nick Names
--------------

As for his nick names, they show his good inclinations, his excellent
qualities, his noble morals, his obedience and worship to Allah. The
following are some of them:

### Zayn al-‘Abidin

His grandfather Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
gave him this nick name, namely Zayn al-‘Abidin or the Ornament of the
worshippers, as we have already mentioned. The Imam was given this nick
name because he worshipped Allah abundantly.[^17] He is known and famous
for this nick name, which has become his name. No one before or after
him has been given this nick name. Indeed he is the ornament of the
worshippers and pride of those who obey Allah, the Glorified.

### 2. Sayyid al-‘Abidin

Among his prominent nick names is Sayyid al-‘Abidin or the Lord of the
worshippers, for he yield to Allah and obeyed Him, and no one worshipped
Allah as he did except his grandfather, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him.

### 3. Dhu’ al-Thafanat

He was given the nick name of Dhu’ al-Thafanat or the one with calluses
because something like the calluses of the camel appeared on the parts
on which he prostrated.[^18] Imam Abu’ Ja‘far al-Baqir, peace be on him,
said: “My father had prominent marks on the places on which he
prostrated, and he cut them twice a year: (He) cut five calluses every
time, so he was called Dhu’ al-Thafanat (the one with calluses).[^19]”
In another narration it is said that he collected his calluses in a bag
and asked his children to bury them with him.

### 4. Al-Sajjad

Among his holy nick names for which he is famous is Al-Sajjad[^20] or
the one who constantly prostrated himself in prayer. He prostrated
himself in prayer to Allah and obeyed him more than the people did. Imam
Abu’ Ja‘far al-Baqir, peace be on him, talked about the constant
prostration of his father, saying: “When ‘Ali b. al-Husayn mentioned
Allah’s favors toward him, he prostrated himself in prayer. (When he)
read a verse with prostration of the Book of Allah, the Great and
Almighty, he prostrated himself in prayer. When Allah drove away from
him a misfortune which he was afraid of, he prostrated himself in
prayer. (When he) finished his obligatory prayers, he prostrated himself
in prayer. The marks of prostration were prominent on the parts on which
he prostrated, so he was called al-Sajjad.[^21]” Ibn Hammad composed a
poem about the constant prostration and worship of the Imam. The
following are some lines of the poem:

*The monk of ahl al-Bayt was and is still given the nick*

*name of al-Sajjad because of his worship.*

*He spent his days fasting, to turn to Allah*

*in repentance, and he passed his night with night prayer.*

*Therefore, who is strong enough to perform his knowledge*

*and his faithfulness, and who is strong enough to perform*

*his piety and worship?*[^22]

### 5. Al-Zaki

He was given the nick name of al-Zaki or the pure one because Allah
purified him, as He took away uncleanness from his grandfathers and
purified them completely.

### 6. Al-Amin

Among his holy nick names for which he is famous is al-Amin or the
trusted one.[^23] He was ideal for this noble quality, so he, peace be
on him, said: “If the killer of my father deposited with me the sword
with which he killed him, I would give it to him.”

### 7. Ibn al-Khiyaratayn

Another of his holy nick names for which he is famous is Ibn
al-Khiyaratayn or the son of the best two. He was proud of this nick
name and said: “I am the son of the best two.” He referred to the words
of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
who said: “Allah, the Glorified, has the best two from among His
servants, so His best one from among the Arabs is Hashim and from among
non-Arabs is the Persians.[^24]” Al-Shabbrawi ascribed to him these
lines in which he has shown his pride of this nick name:

*The choice of Allah among men is my father after my*

*grandfather, and I am the son of the best two.*

*Silver was formed from gold, therefore I am the silver,*

*the son of the two golden ones.*

*Who has a grandfather like my grandfather or (father) like*

*my father from mankind? I am the son of the two moons.*

*Fatima the chaste is my mother, and my father is the one*

*who destroyed the unbelievers at Badr and Hunayn, and*

*who took part at the battle of Uhud, which quenched the*

*thirst of one of the two armies.*[^25]

I (the author) firmly believe that these lines do not belong to Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidin, rather they belong to his father, for they are clear in
showing this.

These are some of his nick names, other nick names have been mentioned
for him.[^26] They show his excellent qualities and his great
inclinations.

The Death of his Mother
-----------------------

The first misfortune which befell the Imam occurred in the early stages
of his childhood with the death of his mother, who suffered from
childbed fever. Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, did his best to save
her from this dangerous illness but he was unable to do that. The
illness destroyed her completely where she lost her vitality and became
a lifeless body. She looked with pain and sorrow at her thin son, who
was deprived of her affection and love.

The fever attacked her intensely, and she suffered from severe pain for
numerous days till her soul ascended to heaven, so it was the most
sublime soul that went to heaven.[^27] When she died, one of the plain
pages of virtue and chastity and modesty ended. It was a sad day for the
Prophet’s family when this great lady died, for she represented honor
and virtue. Imam Husayn, the prominent Muslim figures, and a large
number of Muslims escorted her to her final resting house. They buried
her holy body in Kufa. Imam al-Husayn felt pain for the death of this
lady, who lived among them for days like the days of flowers, namely she
did not live for a long time.

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, suffered the death of his mother
while he was in the early stage of his childhood. This was the beginning
of the adversities and misfortunes which poured on no one else except
him.

His Nursemaid
-------------

Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, asked a pure lady from his slave-wives
to look after his son Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin. This righteous woman took
great care of him; she treated him as the affectionate mother treated
her own son. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him grew in an atmosphere
of intense secrecy. No one told him about the death of his mother till
he became a grown-up lest he should be upset and worried.[^28]

His Physical Qualities
----------------------

The historians have mentioned the Imam’s physical features and qualities
as follows: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn was brown, short, thin, and gentle.[^29]”
When he became old, he became thin and weak. This is because he
worshipped Allah constantly. Moreover, the tragedy of Karbala’ drowned
him in sorrow and pain, for its terrors accompanied him till he met the
Highest Comrade (i.e. Allah).

His Solemnity
-------------

The Imam’s face shined with the light of the prophets. Hence the faces
and foreheads yielded to his solemnity. Al-Farazdaq, the greatest Arab
poet, described his solemnity in his wonderful ode, saying:

*When he comes to touch the corner of the wall of the*

*Kaaba, it almost grasps the palm of his hand.*

*He takes care to be modest and he is protected from his*

*terror.*

*He only speaks when he smiles.*

Al-Shaykhani al-Qadiri said: “The beholders were fixed in gaze at the
handsomeness of his face.[^30]” His solemnity was similar to that of his
grandfather, the greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.
Muslim b. ‘Aqaba who was criminal, blood-thirsty, violated all Islamic
values and manners admired his solemnity. When he saw the Imam, he
shook with fear. Hence he received him warmly, treated him kindly,
honored him, and said to those around him: “Indeed ‘Ali Zayn al-‘Abidin
has the qualities of the prophets.”

The Inscription of his Ring
---------------------------

As for the inscription of his ring, it showed that the Imam depended on
Allah in all his affairs. The inscription of his ring read: “My success
is not but by Allah.[^31] It was said that the inscription of his ring
was: “You have known, therefore do.[^32]”

[^1]: Al-Imam Zayn ‘al-Abidin, p.18.

[^2]: Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p.104.

[^3]: Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p.187.

[^4]: Akhbar al-Diwal, p.109.

[^5]: Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p.212.

[^6]: Nu\`r al-Abbsar, p.136.

[^7]: Roudat al-Wa‘izin, vol. 1, p.222.

[^8]: Bahr al-Ansab, p.52.

[^9]: Al-Imama fi al-Islam, p.116.

[^10]: Al-Nafha al-‘Anbariya.

[^11]: Wasilat al-Mal fi ‘Add Manaqib al-Al, p.7.

[^12]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p.142.

[^13]: ‘Ilal al-Sharaiya‘, p.87. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.3.

[^14]: Minhajj al-Sunna, vol. 2, p.123.

[^15]: Nu\`r al-Abbsar, p.137.

[^16]: Tarikh al-Islam, vol. 2, p.66.

[^17]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 7, p.306. Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. 1,
p.104.

[^18]: Subh al-A‘sha, vol. 1, p.452. Bahr al-Ansab, p.25. Tuhfat
al-Raghib, p.13.

[^19]: ‘Ilal al-Sharaiya‘, p.88. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.6, Wasa’il
al-Shi‘a, vol. 4, p.977.

[^20]: ‘Ilal al-Sharaiya‘, p.88.

[^21]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 4, p.977. ‘Ilal al-Sharaiya‘, p.88.

[^22]: Al-Manaqib.

[^23]: Ibn al-Sabbagh, Al-Fusu\`l\` al-Muhimma, p.187. Bahr al-Ansab,
p.52. Nu\`r al-Abbsar, 137.

[^24]: Al-Mubarrad, al-Kamil, vol. 1, p.222. Ibn Khullakan, Wafayat
al-A‘yan, vol. 2, p.429.

[^25]: Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p.49.

[^26]: Nasikh al-Tawarikh.

[^27]: Al-Mas‘u\`di, Ithbat al-Wasiya, p.143. Imam Zayn ‘al-Abidin,
p.18.

[^28]: Imam Zayn ‘al-Abidin, p.19.

[^29]: Nu\`r al-Abbsar, p.36. Akhbar al-Diwal, p.109. Al-Sirat al-Sawi
fi Manaqib Al al-Nabi, p.192.

[^30]: Al-Sirat al-Sawi fi Manaqib Al al-Nabi, p.192.

[^31]: Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p.187. Akhbar al-Diwal,
p.109. Al-Sirat al-Sawi fi Manaqib Al al-Nabi, p.192.

[^32]: Ibn Qutayba, ‘Uyyiun al-Akhbar, vol. 1, p.302.


