Chapter 3: His Childhood and Behavior
=====================================

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, had access to the best education.
No one had access to such an education but him. These conditions helped
him educate himself and build his character in such a way that he was
among the leading generation of the Muslim Imams whom the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, trusted, and made the leaders of his
community and trustees for carrying out his message. Indeed all the
elements of good and virtue and perfection were embodied in the
childhood and behavior of the Imam. We will briefly explain these two
phenomena of the early stages of his life:

His Childhood
-------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, grew up in the House of
Prophethood and Imamate. That was the House which Allah permitted to be
exalted so that His Name might be remembered in it. The Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, took care of him in the early stage of his
childhood. He supplied him with some rays of his spirit, the scent of
which covered the whole world. The grandson was indeed a picture of his
grandfather; he was similar to him in his psychological elements and
qualities.

As for the period of time in which Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin lived under the
wing of his grandfather, it was very short. The historians limited it in
two years. It was among the critical years which Imam ‘Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, witnessed. During these
years the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, suffered from
terrible crises and events. Among them was that his army which fought
against the falsehood of Mu‘awiya suffered defeat, mutiny, and
disobedience. As a result the Imam asked Allah, the Glorified, to cause
him die and to save him from that mobbish society which did not
understand its objectives.

Hence ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Muljimthe most wretched person of the
community, the terrorist, and criminalattacked and killed him in one of
Allah’s houses, where he was standing and praying to Allah. In the last
hours of his life, the members of his family and his children surrounded
him, including Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin. Then Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him, entrusted the Imamate to his two sons
al-Hasan and al-Husayn. In the meantime he designated his little
grandson Zayn al-‘Abidin as an Imam. He recited to him the greetings of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and to his son Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir, who is the leading figure of this community and
pioneer of its scientific and cultural movement.

Imam al-Hasan is the lord of the youth of Heaven and plant of sweet
basil of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and his
first grandson. He was the pioneer of thought and righteousness in
Islam. He was Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s pure uncle. Hence he took care of
him, treated him with kindness and affection. He planted in him his
great ideals and his excellent inclinations. He accompanied him till he
(Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin) became a grown-up. Accordingly, he had great
effect on his inner self.

Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, is the father of the free and lord of
martyrs. He was Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s father. He thought that his son’s
qualities were similar to those of the Prophet and of the Imam. Hence he
took great care of him. He poured in him his noble abilities and values,
preferred him to his sons, and accompanied him most of the time. In this
respect the historians said: “When Zayn al-‘Abidin became ill, Imam
al-Husayn hurried to visit him and made him wish, saying: ‘What do you
wish, my little son?’

He (Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin) answered him with the answer of those who
turned to Allah in repentance and devoted themselves to Him: ‘I wish I
would be among those who did not suggest (anything) to their Lord. (I am
satisfied) with what my Lord decides.’ Imam al-Husayn admired these
brilliant words which indicated great knowledge and deep faith, and then
he said with admiration: ‘Bravo! You are similar to Ibrahim, the friend
(of Allah) when Gabriel asked him: ‘Have you any need?’ He (Ibrahim)
replied: ‘I do not suggest (anything) to my Lord, rather Allah is
sufficient for me and the best Agent![^1]’”

Indeed Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was similar to Ibrahim,
the friend of Allah, in his great faith, his turning to Allah in
repentance, and his cleaving to Him.

According to his education in his childhood, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace
be on him, was a model for those who were proud of sublime perfection
and noble moral traits.

His Behavior
------------

As for the behavior of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, it was similar to that of
his grandfathers, who were the source of guidance to mankind. The Imam
spared no effort to follow the behavior and guidance of his grandfather
Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. The narrators
said: “He (Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin) followed his grandfather’s behavior.
When worship made him tired, he sighed deeply and said with regret: ‘I
am not strong enough to perform the worship of my grandfather, the
Commander of the faithful.’”

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin carried in his inner self the spirit of his
grandfather, the Commander of the faithful and the Lord of those who
were cognizant of Allah. He followed his method and imitated his
actions. Now, we will talk about some aspects of this part of his life.

His Behavior in his House
-------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was the most merciful of all the
people and the kindest of them to the members of his house. He did not
distinguish himself from them, rather he was one of them. It was
reported on his authority that he said: “To buy meat from the market
with the dirhams which are on me for my family when they long for meat
is more lovable for me than freeing a slave.[^2]” He went out early in
the morning to seek the daily bread of his family. He was asked: “Where
do you go?” He replied: “I go to seek alms for my family by seeking
lawful daily bread because it is (the daily bread) is alms from Allah,
the Great and Almighty, for them.[^3]” He helped his family in meeting
their needs. He did not order anyone of them to carry out his personal
affairs; he performed them himself, especially if it concerned the
affairs of his worship; he did not ask anyone of them to perform them.

The Imam’s behavior toward his household was unique; he behaved
exceptionally with his family. His behavior was full of mercy,
cooperation, kindness, and self-negation.

His Kindness to his Nursemaid
-----------------------------

When Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, grew up, he found out that
his mother died, that his nursemaid treated him kindly in order to seek
nearness to Allah. As a result he treated her with great kindness to the
extent that he prevented from eating with her. The people blamed him for
that and asked him frequently: “You are the kindest of all the people
and the best of them in taking care of your blood relatives, so why do
you not eat with your mother?” He replied to them with great politeness:
“I fear that I stretch out my hand for what she stretches out her hand
for[^4], then I am disobedient to her.[^5]”

Which humanity is similar to this humanity? Which angelic soul is this
soul? It is sufficient for this Imam that he is the son of al-Husayn,
who filled the world with his honor and perfection.

A Fabricated Narration
----------------------

Ibn Kuthayr mentioned a fabricated report when he said that Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin married his mother to one of his retainers, and he freed a
slave girl and married her, so ‘Abd al-Malik wrote a letter to him and
blamed him in it, saying: “Certainly you have in the Apostle of Allah an
excellent exemplar for him who hopes in Allah and the latter day and
remembers Allah much. He (Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin) freed Safiya and married
her, and he married his retainer, Zayd b. Haritha to his cousin, Zaynab,
daughter of Jahsh.[^6]”

This narration is fabricated from the beginning to end for the following
reasons:

A great number of the historians and narrators mentioned that the lady,
the Imam’s mother, died during her confinement.

Imam Abu’ al-Hasan al-Rida, peace be on him, mentioned that in his
conversation with Sahl b. al-Qasim al-Nu’shjani when he said to him:
“She (Zayn al-‘Abidin’s mother) died during her confinement, and one of
his father’s slave-wives looked after him. The people claimed that she
was his mother, while she was his retainer. They claimed that he married
his mother (to a retainer of his). I seek refuge in Allah from that,
rather he married his nursemaid to a retainer of his.” Sahl said: “All
the students in Khurasan reported this on the authority of al-Rida.[^7]”

The sources of this narration are fabricated. As for that the Imam freed
one of his slave girls and married her, it is lawful because it agrees
with the Islamic teachings.

His Behavior toward his Parents
-------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was the kindest of all the people
to his parents because he treated them with great love and mercy and
obedience. He was so kind to his father that he asked his aunt Zaynab,
the heroine of Karbala’, to give the sticks to lean upon and a sword to
defend his father at the Battle of al-Taf. This was while he was ill to
the extent that he was unable to walk, but his aunt prevented him from
doing that lest the progeny of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, should be destroyed. Therefore, which kindness is similar to
this kindness? Among the services which he rendered to his father, after
his martyrdom, was that he settled the heavy debts his father spent on
the needy and the deprived. Among his acts of kindness to his parents is
his supplication for them.

His Supplication for his Parents
--------------------------------

As for the supplication of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, for
his parents, it concerns one of the most brilliant rules of Islamic
education. This rule aims at achieving the reform and happiness of the
family, spreading love and respect among its members. It is natural for
society to be righteous when the family is righteous, and when it is
corrupt, the society is also corrupt. This is because it is the first
cell of building and forming society. The following is the masterpiece
of his supplication:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad Your servant and Your messenger and his
Household, the pure, and single them out for the best of Your blessing,
Your mercy, Your benedictions, and Your peace! And single out my
parents, O Allah, for honor with You and blessings from You, O Most
Merciful of the merciful!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and His Household, teach me through
inspiration, knowledge of everything incumbent upon me toward them, and
gather within me knowledge of all that completely! Then make me act in
accordance with what You have inspired me and give me success to put
into practice the knowledge You have shown to me, lest I fail to act
according to something You have taught me or my limbs feel too heavy to
perform that with which You have inspired me!”

These brilliant words represent the high manners and morals and respect
of the Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin toward his parents. He supplicated to Allah
to single them out with honor and dignity and to help him perform their
rights against him. Now let’s listen to another masterpiece of his
supplication for them.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and His Household, as You have ennobled us
through them and bless Muhammad and His Household as You have made
incumbent upon us rights toward the creatures because of him.

“O Allah fill me with awe of my parents, the awe one has toward a
tyrannical sovereign, and let me be devoted to them, with the devotion
of a compassionate mother! Make my obedience and devotion to them more
gladdening to my eyes than sleep to the drowsy and more refreshing to my
breast than drink to the thirsty, so that I may prefer their inclination
to my inclination, set their satisfaction before my satisfaction, make
much of their devotion to me though it be little, and make little of my
devotion to them though it be great.” In the world of obedience and
kindness to parents, there is nothing like that which the Imam has
mentioned in this paragraph.

He asked Allah, the Almighty, to fill him with awe of his parents to
obey them and not to disobey them and to be devoted to them with the
devotion of a compassionate mother and to prefer their inclination to
his inclination and to set their satisfaction to his satisfaction and to
thank them for their kindness to him and to regard as little his
devotion to them. It is natural that such children treat their parents
in such a manner which agrees with the troubles of life and pains of old
age, and which brings about the happiness of family and the prosperity
of social life. Now let’s continue mentioning the brilliant paragraphs
of his supplication for his parents.

“O Allah lower before them my voice, make agreeable to them my words,
make mild before them my temper, make tender toward them my heart, and
turn me into their kind companion, their loving friend! O Allah thank
them for my upbringing, reward them for honoring me, and guard them as
they guarded me in my infancy! O Allah and whatever harm has touched
them from me, detested thing has reached them from me, or right of
theirs which has been neglected by me, allow it to alleviate their sins,
raise them in their degrees, and add to their deeds! O He who changes
evil deeds into manifold good deeds!”

This masterpiece represents the high education and morals of the members
of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them. In it, the Imam has
added other rights to the parents’ rights he has already mentioned, they
are as follows:

The son should lower his voice before his parents.

He should make his temper mild before them.

He should make his heart tender toward them.

He should ask Allah to forgive them and to be pleased with them for
their kindness to him during the days of his infancy.

He should ask Allah to reward them for whatever harm has touched them
from him, detested thing has reached them from him or right of their
rights which has been neglected by him. In the world of ideal education
there is no morals like these morals through which man is sublime and
his life is prosperous. Now, let’s listen to another part of the
supplication of the Imam, peace be on him.

“O Allah, whatever word through which they have transgressed against me,
act through which they have been immoderate with me, right of mine which
they have neglected, or obligation toward me in which they have fallen
short, I grant it to them and bestow it upon them, and I beseech You to
remove from them its ill consequence, for I do not accuse them
concerning myself, find them slow in their devotion toward me, or
dislike the way they have attended to my affairs, my Lord! They have
rights against me which are more incumbent, precedence in beneficence
toward me that is greater, and kindness toward me that is mightier than
that I should settle accounts with justice or repay them with
equivalents.

Where then, my Allah, would be their long occupation with bringing me
up? Where is the hardship of their toil in taking care of me? Where is
the stinting of themselves to provide me with plenty? What an idea! I
can never discharge their right against me, fulfill my obligations
toward them, or accomplish the duty of serving them. So bless Muhammad
and his Household and help me, O Best of those whose help we seek! Give
me success, O Most Guiding of those whom we beseech! Place me not among
the people of disrespect to fathers and mothers on the day *when every
soul will be repaid for what it has earned; they shall not be wronged.”*
Indeed this ‘Alid education is a breath of Allah’s spirit and is a
signpost for peoples and nations to raise the value of man and exalt him
to the Kingdom. This pious Imam shows that it is incumbent on children
to forgive their parents for whatever word through which they have
transgressed against them, act through which they have been immoderate
with them, right of theirs which they have neglected, or obligation
toward them in which they have fallen short. They must grant it to them
and bestow it upon them as a reward to them for their education, their
taking care of them, and their blessing toward them. Now, let’s listen
to the last part of the Imam’s supplication:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad, his Household, and his progeny and single out
my parents for the best which You have singled out for the fathers and
mothers of Your faithful servants, O Most Merciful of the merciful! O
Allah, let me not forget to remember them after my ritual prayers, at
every time throughout my night, and in each of the hours of my day! O
Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, forgive me through my
supplication for my parents, forgive them their devotion toward me with
unfailing forgiveness, be pleased with them through my intercession for
them with resolute good pleasure, and make them reach through Your
generosity the abodes of safety!

O Allah, if Your forgiveness reaches them first, make them my
intercessors, and if Your forgiveness reaches me first, make me their
intercessors, so that we may gather together through Your gentleness in
the house of Your generosity and the place of Your forgiveness and
mercy! Verily You are Possessor of abounding bounty and ancient
kindness, and *You are the Most Merciful of the merciful!*[^8]*”*

In this last paragraph, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
supplicated for his parents asking Allah to forgive them and to be
pleased with them and to forgive him through the blessing of his
supplication for them and to forgive them through their kindness to him,
so which love and mercy for the parents is like this love and mercy?

His Behavior toward his Children
--------------------------------

As for the behavior of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, toward his
children, it is distinguished by exalted Islamic education. He planted
in his children his good inclinations and great reformatory trends, so
they became among the most brilliant men of thought, knowledge, and
struggle in Islam. For example, his son Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, peace be
on him, is among the most famous Imams of the Muslims and the most
knowledgeable of them.

He was the founder of the greatest jurisprudence school from which the
great jurists and religious scholars graduated, such as Aban b. Taghlub,
Zarara b. A‘yun, and the like, from among those who enlightened the
ideological life in Islam. As for his son ‘Abd Allah al-Bahir, he was
among the leading Muslim scholars with excellent qualities and high
scientific position, so the people reported that on his authority.[^9]

As for his son Zayd, he was among the great Muslim religious scholars,
and he was a specialist in many sciences such as jurisprudence,
tradition, interpretation of the Qur’an, theology, and the like. It was
he who adopted the rights of the oppressed and the persecuted, and he
led their movement of struggle. That was when he proclaimed his immortal
revolt which spread political awareness in the Islamic society. He also
took part in overthrowing the Umayyad rule.

We will mention in brief some parts of the behavior of Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, toward his children.

His Commandments to his Children
--------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, supplied his children with some
educational commandments which were the summary of his experiences in
this life, as guidance for them. The following are some of his
commandments:

He, peace be on him, recommended some of his children to follow these
valuable commandments which shed light on friends, and which made it
incumbent on them to refrain from making friends with those who had evil
inclinations which might pollute their pure nature. The following is the
text of his commandments: “My little son, beware of five persons. Do not
make friends with them, do not converse with them, and do not accompany
them.” His son asked him: “Who are they?” He, peace be on him, replied:
“Beware of making friends with a liar because he is like a mirage,
making you feel that distant things are near and near things are
distant. Be careful of making friends with a sinner because he would
sell you for a meal or less than that. Beware of making friends with a
miser because he would desert you because of his money when you are in
need of him. Guard against a fool because he may intend to benefit you
but may harm you. Be cautious of making friends with the one who
abandons his blood relations because I have found him cursed in the Book
of Allah.[^10]” Indeed, making friends with such people brings about
destruction and loss and great harm. Such people are many in the past
and in the present while good and pure friends are few!

Among his excellent commandments to his children are these great ones,
which read: “My little son, be patient during a misfortune, do not
interfere with rights, and do not force your friend (to do) a thing
whose harm is greater than its benefit for you.[^11]” The wise Imam
recommended his son to be patient in the face of misfortunes and events
that afflicted him and not to collapse before them, for that would
strengthen his character. He also recommended him not to interfere with
the rights of others lest they should transgress against him. Moreover,
he recommended him not to force his friend to do a certain thing that
might bring about harm and loss.

Among his wonderful commandments to one of his children is the
following: “My little son, Allah is not satisfied with you as one for me
and He enjoined you in respect of me; He is satisfied with me as one for
you and He warned me from you. Know that the best of fathers is he whose
love does not cause him to neglect his children, and the best of
children to fathers is one whose father’s shortcomings does not make him
disobedient to him.[^12]”

These commandments have the following points:

A. Children do not harbor love and mercy for their parents as their
parents do for them. So Allah, the Glorified, has stressed in more than
one verse of His Glorious Book that children should treat their parents
kindly and obey them.

B. Allah, the Exalted, has warned parents from their children whom He
regarded as among the sources of discord and unhappiness for their
parents.

C. Successful upbringing is that the parents should not go too far in
showing love and mercy for their children, for that would weaken the
child’s character and make him unable to resist events. It is worth
mentioning that educationists and psychologists have underlined this
issue.

D. The best children are those who serve their parents and treat them
kindly.

4. He singled out his son Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, with these
valuable commandments in which he warned him against making friends with
a fool, saying: “My little son, beware of making friends and associating
with a fool. Abandon a fool and do not converse with him because he is
deficient and faultfinding whether he is present or absent. When he
talks, his foolishness exposes him. When he keeps silent, his silence
shows his feebleness. When he acts, he corrupts (his act). He loses (the
care) when someone takes care of him. Neither his own knowledge nor the
others’ knowledge avails him. He does not obey his adviser. Those who
associate with him find no rest (with him). His mother and his wife wish
that they would lose him. His neighbor wishes that his house would be
far from him. His friend prefers loneliness to sitting with him. If he
is the youngest of those who are in the assembly, he tires out those who
are older than him. If he is the oldest of them, he corrupts those who
are younger than him.[^13]” The Imam, peace be on him, made it incumbent
on his children to refrain from making friends with a fool whose defects
and shortcomings he had mentioned.

5. The following are some of his wonderful commandments to his children:
“Sit with the men of religion and knowledge. If you are unable (to sit
with them), therefore loneliness is more sociable and safer. If you
insist on sitting with people, therefore sit with the men of generosity
because they are not strict in their assemblies.[^14]”

These are some of his educational commandments to his children. In these
commandments he has shown his children the best methods necessary for
their behavior in this life.

His Supplication for his Children
---------------------------------

As for his supplication for his children, it is very wonderful in
showing his behavior toward them and what he hoped for them such as
excellent manners and noble morals. Now, let’s listen to this
supplication, which is part of the greatest wealth in the Islamic
education.

“O Allah, be kind to me through the survival of my children, setting
them right for me and allowing me to enjoy them! My Allah, make long
their lives for me, increase their terms, bring up the smallest for me,
strengthen the weakest for me, rectify for me their bodies, their
religious dedication, and their moral traits, make them well in their
souls, their limbs, and everything that concerns me of their affairs,
and pour out for me and upon my hand their provisions! Make them pious,
fearing, insightful, hearing, and obedient toward You, loving and
well-disposed toward Your friends, and stubbornly resistant and full of
hate toward all Your enemies! Amen!”

This paragraph represents the great spirituality the Imam, peace be on
him, followed to educate his children. He educated them according to the
inclusive setting right and the absolute education. He prayed to Allah
to be kind to him through:

A. The survival of his children in order that he might enjoy them.

B. Rectifying their bodies, their religious dedication, and their moral
traits.

C. Rectifying their souls through purifying them from vices and sins.

D. Making them well in their limbs lest they should become handicap.

E. Making abundant their provisions lest they should suffer from poverty
which was among the most dangerous disasters.

F. Making them pious, fearing, insightful, hearing, and obedient toward
Him (Allah).

G. Making them loving and well-disposed toward His (Allah’s) friends,
and stubbornly resistant and full of hate toward all His enemies.

This kindness to children strengthens the ties of the members of family.
When the child is brought up according to these high moral traits, his
parents will enjoy him. Let’s listen to another part of this holy
supplication. “O Allah, through them strengthen my arm, straighten my
burdened back, multiply my number, adorn my presence, keep alive my
name, suffice me when I am away, help me in my needs, and make them
loving toward me, affectionate, approaching, upright, obedient, never
disobedient, disrespectful, opposed, or offenders! Help me in their
education, and my devotion toward them, give me among them from Yourself
male children, make that a good for me, and make them a help for me in
that which I ask from You!

Give me and my progeny refuge from the accursed Satan, for You have
created us, commanded us, prohibited us, and made us desire the reward
of what You have commanded, and fear its punishment! You assigned to us
an enemy who schemes against us, gave him an authority over us in a way
You did not give us an authority over him, allowed him to dwell in our
breasts and let him run in our blood vessels; he is not heedless, though
we be heedless, he does not forget, though we forget; he makes us feel
secure from Your punishment and fills us with fear toward other than
You. If we are about to commit an indecency, he gives us courage to do
so, and if we are about to perform a righteous act, he holds us back
from it. He opposes us through passions, and sets up for us doubts. If
he promises us, he lies, and if he raises our hopes, he fails to fulfill
them. If You do not turn his trickery away from us, he will misguide us,
and if You do not protect us from his corruption, he will cause us to
slip. O Allah, so defeat his authority over us through Your authority
such that You hold him back from us through the frequency of our
supplication to You and we leave his trickery and rise up among those
preserved by You from sin!”

This wonderful paragraph has two important matters, which are:

First, the Imam asked Allah, the Glorified, to help him achieve what he
hoped in respect to his pure children. He hoped that:

1. Allah would strengthen his arm through them, for a good child is
strength for his father.

2. He would straighten his burdened back.

3. He would multiply their number, so that they would be a notable
family before the people.

4. He would adorn his presence and keep alive his name, that was through
the high standards of his children.

5. He would suffice him when he was away, that was when his children
carried out his affairs.

6. He would make his children help him in his needs and not leave him
alone.

7. He would make his children loving toward him, affectionate,
approaching, upright, obedient, never disobedient, disrespectful,
opposed, or offenders!

When children are righteous and obedient to their parents, their parents
will enjoy them during the time of their old age which is the center of
weakness.

Second, the Imam asked Allah, the Glorified, to protect him and his
children from the evil of the accursed Satan, who is the first enemy of
man; he tempts man to be disobedient to Allah through committing sins
and vices. The Imam has mentioned the authority and domination of Satan
over man as follows:

1. Satan tempts man to commit sins, makes easy the punishment Allah has
prepared for his disobedient servants, and makes man afraid of those
other than Allah, so he makes him afraid of them more than they are
afraid of Allah.

2. If man is about to commit an indecency, he gives him courage to do
so.

3. If man is about to perform a righteous act, he holds him back from
it.

4. Satan opposes man through passions.

5. He sets up doubts for man to make him far from his Lord.

The Imam mentioned all the ways Satan uses to entice man such as lying
and deception, and then he warned all the believers from the trickery of
Satan. Now, lets listen to the last paragraph of this holy supplication.

“O Allah, grant me every request, accomplish for me my needs, withhold
not from me Your response when You have made Yourself accountable for it
to me, veil not my supplication from Yourself, when you have commanded
me to make it, and be kind to me through everything that will set me
right in this world and the next, in everything that I remember or
forget, display or conceal, make public or keep secret! In all of this,
place me through my asking You among those who set things right, those
who are answered favorably when they request from You and from whom is
not withheld when they put their trust in You, those who always seek
refuge in You, those who profit through commerce with You, those granted
sanctuary through Your might, those given lawful provision in plenty
from Your plentiful bounties through Your munificence and generosity,
those who reach exaltation after abasement through You, those granted
sanctuary from wrong through Your justice, those released from
affliction through Your mercy, those delivered from need after poverty
through Your riches, those preserved from sins, slips, offenses through
reverential fear toward You, those successful in goodness, right
conduct, and propriety through obeying You, those walled off from sins
through your power, the refrainers from every act of disobedience toward
You, the dwellers in Your neighborhood!

O Allah, give me all of that through Your granting of success and Your
mercy, grant us refuge from the chastisement of burning, and to give to
all the Muslims, male and female, and all the faithful, male and female,
the like of what I have asked for myself and my children, in the
immediate of this world and the deferred of the next! Verily You are the
Near, the Responder, the All-hearing, the All-knowing, the Pardoner, the
Forgiving, the Clement, the Merciful! And *give us in this world good,
and in the next world good, and protect us from the chastisement of the
Fire!* [^15]*”*

Peace be on you, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, you were given wisdom and sound
judgment of which no one of the people was given except your children,
who created the rules of eloquence in the world of Islam.

In the above-mentioned paragraph, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
showed his great loyalty, his turning to Allah, his obedience, and his
cleaving to Allah. He asked Allah, the Almighty, to grant him every
request, to accomplish for him his needs, to withhold not from him His
response when He has made Himself accountable for it to him, to veil not
his supplication from Himself, when He has commanded him to make it, and
to be kind to him through everything that will set him right in this
world and the next. He humbly supplicated to Allah, and then he asked
Him to give to all the Muslims, male and female, and all the faithful,
male and female, the like of what he had asked for himself and his
children, in the immediate of this world and the deferred of the next.

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, brought up his children according
to these manners, which represented the essence of Islam and true faith,
so his children were the most pious of the children of all the Muslims
in religion.

His Behavior toward his Retainers
---------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, treated his retainers with
kindness and mercy; he treated them as he treated his own children. The
narrators said that he did not punish any of his retainers for the
mistakes they made against him.[^16] One day the Imam called a retainer
of his twice, but the retainer did not answer him. At the third time he
answered, so the Imam asked him kindly:

“Didn’t you hear my voice, my little son?”

“Yes,” was the reply.

“What was on your mind so that you did not answer me?” asked the Imam.

“I was safe (from any harm) from you,” answered the retainer.

The Imam praised Allah and went out, saying: “Praise be to Allah, Who
has caused my slave to be safe (from any harm) from me.[^17]” The Imam
was happy, for he was neither rude nor tyrannical, so the people were
not afraid of him nor were they careful of him.

His Behavior toward his Neighbors
---------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was the kindest of all the people
to his neighbors. He treated them as he treated his family, maintained
their weak and poor, visited their sick, escorted their deceased to
their final resting place. He did a lot of good for them. He took water
to his neighbors in the dark night, as al-Zuhri reported[^18] In the
history of mankind, there is nothing like this kindness and charity.

His Supplication for his Neighbors
----------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was not satisfied with the
kindness and charity he did for his Neighbors, rather he supplicated for
them. He asked Allah to grant them success, good final results, and
correctness, as he prayed for himself and the members of his House. This
supplication was among his tasks. He singled out his neighbors with one
of his holy supplications. The following is the text of this
supplication:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household and attend to me with Your
best attending in my neighbors and friends who recognize our right and
war against our enemies! Give (neighbors and friends) success in
performing Your prescriptions and taking on the beauties of Your
courtesy through acting gently with their weak, remedying their lacks,
visiting their sick, guiding their seeker of right guidance, giving good
counsel to their seeker of advice, attending to the one among them who
returns from travel, hiding their secrets, covering their shameful
things, helping their wronged, sharing kindly with them in goods,
turning towards them with wealth and bestowal of bounty, and giving what
is due to them before they ask!”

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, supplicated for his neighbors
with this blessed supplication. He singled out with his supplication the
believers and those who knew the right of the members of the House *(ahl
al-Bayt),* peace be on them, whose love Allah made obligatory, and whom
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, made life-boats,
security for mankind, and the ones who guided men to pleasure and
obedience to Allah. In the above-mentioned supplication, the Imam asked
Allah:

To grant his neighbors success in performing the sunna of Islam and to
enliven its duties and teachings.

To grant his neighbors success in taking on the beauties of Allah’s
courtesy, through:

(A) Acting gently with their weak and having mercy on them.

(B) Meeting the needs of their neighbors and helping them with the
affairs of this world.

(C) Visiting their ill brothers.

(D) Guiding their seeker of right guidance.

(E) Giving good counsel to their seeker of advice.

(F) Attending to the one among them who returns from travel.

(G) Hiding their secrets.

(H) Covering their shameful things.

(I) Helping their wronged.

(J) Sharing kindly with them in goods.

(K) Turning towards them with wealth and bestowal of bounty.

These are among the most important issues in the social regulation aimed
at spreading love, friendship, and cooperation among people, and aimed
at ending all kinds of differences that corrupt social life. Now, let’s
listen to the last words of this holy supplication.

“Let me, O Allah, repay their evildoer with good doing, turn away from
their wrongdoer with forbearance, have a good opinion of every one of
them, attend to all of them with devotion, lower my eyes before them in
continence, make mild my side toward them in humility, be tender toward
the afflicted among them in mercy, make them happy in absence through
affection, love that they continue to receive favor through good will,
grant them what I grant my next of kin, and observe for them what I
observe for my special friends! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his
Household, provide me the like of that from them, appoint for them the
fullest share of what is with them, increase them in insight toward my
right and knowledge of my excellence so that they will be fortunate
through me and I fortunate through them! Amen, Lord of the worlds![^19]”

The most important thing which the Imam wished was that he wanted to do
a lot of good for his neighbors. He wanted to:

1. Repay their evildoer with good doing.

2. Turn away from their wrongdoer with forbearance, this was the
behavior of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, who turned away with forbearance from those who wronged him.

3. Have a good opinion of every one of them, for having a good opinion
of people spreads love, friendship, and cooperation among them.

4. Attend to all of them with devotion, the weak, the poor, the enemy,
and the friend.

5. Make mild his side toward them in humility.

6. Be tender toward the afflicted among them in mercy.

7. Make them happy in absence through affection and mercy.

8. Receive favor continuously.

9. Treat them kindly as he treated his next of kin.

10. Observe for them what he observed for his special friends.

These exalted morals represent the essence and reality of Islam. They
aim at forming a perfect society with united feelings and firm passions.

After the Imam, peace be on him, had made public these noble feelings
toward his neighbors, he wanted them to have the same feelings toward
him. Then he asked Allah, the Glorified, to provide him the like of that
from them, appoint for them the fullest share of what was with them,
increase them in insight toward his right and knowledge of his
excellence so that they would be fortunate through him and he fortunate
through them.

His Behavior toward his Friends

As for the behavior of the Imam, peace be on him, with his friends, it
was distinguished by high standards and great Islamic manners. The Imam,
peace be on him, respected and honored those who sat with him, thus he
said: “I respected and honored those who sat with me.[^20]” One day,
Nasr b. Aws al-Ta’i came to the Imam and greeted him, so the Imam
returned his greeting and asked him:

“Where are you from?”

“From Tay,” replied Nasr.

“May Allah greet you! May He greet the people to whom you belong! The
best people are your people!” the Imam said.

Nasr turned to the Imam and asked him: “Who are you?”

“‘Ali b. al-Husayn.” was the answer.

“Wasn’t he killed with his father in Iraq?” asked Nasr.

The Imam smiled at him and said: “ My little son, if he was killed, you
won’t see him.[^21]”

The historians said that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, did not
allow any of his friends to transgress against those who mistreated him.
One of his enemies came to him and asked him: “Do you know how to
perform the ritual prayers?” Abu’ Hazim, one of the Imam’s companions,
tried to attack him, so the Imam held him back from doing that, saying:
“Abu’ Hazim, take it easy! Indeed, religious scholars should be clement
and merciful!” Then the Imam kindly turned to the man and said to him:
“Yes, I know how to perform them.”

The man asked the Imam about the peculiarities of the prayers, and the
Imam answered him, so the man became shy of the Imam, apologized to him
for that, and said to him: “You have refuted everyone’s proof.[^22]” The
Imam treated his friends with high moral standards. In this connection
he followed his grandfather, the greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, who was sent to complete the high moral standards.

His Behavior toward his Shi‘ites
--------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, wanted his Shi‘ites to be an
excellent example for mankind in their piety, devotion, and cleaving to
religion, so he did his best to educate them with high Islamic manners.
He preached to them, gave them commandments, and urged them to cling to
piety and good deeds, so he, peace be on him, said to one of his
Shi‘ites: “Inform our Shi‘ites that nothing will avail them before
Allah, and that no one will obtain our intercession but through
piety.[^23]”

Indeed, refraining from what Allah has prohibited is among the most
important ways that man is saved from the chastisement and punishment of
Allah, and it is also among the most successful ways that leads man to
obtain the intercession of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),*
peace be on them, which is one of Allah’s forts.

A group of people came to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and
told him that they belonged to his Shi‘ites, so the Imam considered
their faces carefully but did not see on them the marks of
righteousness, so he said to them: “Where are the marks of the faces?
Where are the marks of worship? Where are the marks of prostration (in
prayer)? Indeed our Shi‘ites are known by their worship and their shaggy
hair. Worship injures the inner corners of their eyes, their foreheads,
and their limbs of prostration. Their ‘Abdomens are hollow, and their
lips are withered. They glorify Allah when the people keep silent, and
they perform the prayers when the people sleep. They are sad when the
people are happy. They are known by asceticism. And Paradise distract
them (from this world) [^24]”

These qualities which the Imam, peace be on him, concern the special
Shi‘ites and the followers of the Imams, peace be on them, such as
‘Ammar b. Yasir, Abu’ Dharr, Salman al-Farisi, Maytham al-Tammar, and
the like, whose souls were full of piety and righteousness, and who
understood the message of Islam. As for the overwhelming majority of the
Shi‘ites, they are the lovers and followers of the members of the House
*(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them. It is worth mentioning that following
the Imams, peace be on them, brings about forgiveness. This can be
indicated through the following tradition which has been reported on his
authority. When he became ill, a group of the Companions of the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, came to visit him and asked him:
“Son of the Apostle of Allah, may our souls be ransom for you, how are
you?” “I am very well,” replied the Imam, “I am grateful to Allah for
that, and how are you?” “We are very well,” they answered, “Son of the
Apostle of Allah, we love you and follow you.” So the Imam gave them
good news of Heaven because they loved and followed the members of the
House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them, saying: “Whoever loves us for
Allah, Allah will make him dwell in a very shady place on the Day of
Resurrection, the day when there will be no shade except His shade.
Whoever loves to reward us, Allah will give him Heaven as a reward.
Whoever loves us for this world, Allah will give him his livelihood from
where he does not expect.[^25]”

A Fabricated Narration
----------------------

Among the fabricated narrations is what Ibn ‘Asakir reported when he
said that a group of the Iraqis came to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be
on him, who said to them: “Love us with love of Islam, and do not love
us with the love of idols. You have loved us to the extent that your
love has disgraced us.[^26]” This narration was fabricated to defame the
Shi‘a, to indicate that they went too far in loving and following the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, and that they
raised them to the level of the Almighty Creator. This narration is a
baseless accusation, for the love of the Shi‘a for their pure Imams,
peace be on them, depends on thought, awareness, the Holy Book of Allah,
and the authentic Sunna, in addition to that, there is no defect of
exaggeration in such a kind of love. The most important factor in the
love of the Shi‘a for the Imams of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, is that they take the teachings of their
doctrine from them and conform to what was narrated on their authority
in respect to religious life. Without doubt, it is enough for someone to
put into effect the jurisprudence of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, and to depend on it. Is there in this
exaggeration and deviation from the truth?

The same narration was reported in another way in which there was no
slander against the Shi‘a. This narration was reported by Yahya b.
Sa’eed, who said: [I was sitting with ‘Ali b. al-Husayn when a number of
the Kufans came to him and he said to them:] “People of Iraq, love us
with the love of Islam, for I heard my father say: ‘Allah’s Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘O Men, do not raise me more than
my right, for Allah, the Glorified, had adopted me as a servant before
he adopted me as a prophet.’[^27]” There is nothing in this narration to
urge us to doubt it.

His enjoining the Shi‘ites to practice
--------------------------------------

Precautionary Dissimulation

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, made it incumbent on his Shi‘ites
to conform to precautionary dissimulation because they witnessed
critical conditions during the rule of the Umayyads, who spared no
effort to look for the followers of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, and to kill them, thus the Imam enjoined his
followers to practice precautionary dissimulation and to conceal their
belonging to him. This order of the Imam, peace be on him, agreed with
wisdom and the spirituality and essence of Islam. In this connection,
he, peace be on him, said: “Allah forgives the believer every sin and
purifies him from it in here and the hereafter except two sins, namely
leaving precautionary dissimulation and losing his brothers
(friends).[^28]”

Indeed precautionary dissimulation prevented the blood of the members of
the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them, from being shed during
those black times when the Umayyads sought them everywhere and killed a
great number of them to the extent that they (the Shi‘ites) preferred
belonging to the Jews and Christians to belonging to the followers of
the Household of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family. Those who
have no awareness from among those who harbor malice against the members
of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them, condemned the Shi‘a for
precautionary dissimulation, for they did not know that it was an
important Islamic measure for the Shi‘ites to save themselves from being
killed. Were it not for that the Shi‘ites cleaved to precautionary
dissimulation, no one would adopt the doctrine of the pure Imams.

His Asking Forgiveness for

the Shi‘ite Sinners

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, loved his Shi‘ites and followers
to the extent that he supplicated for them every day, so he, peace be on
him, said to Umm Farwa, daughter of al-Qasim b. Muhammad b. Abu’ Bakr:
“I supplicate for the Shi‘ite sinners a hundred times a day, for we are
patient toward what we know, and they are patient toward what they do
not know.[^29]” This tradition shows that the Imam was kind to his
Shi‘ites, for he asked Allah, the Glorified, to forgive the Shi‘ites and
to be pleased with them. Therefore which kindness is better than this
kindness?

His Behavior toward his Enemies
-------------------------------

As for the behavior of the Imam toward his enemies, those who harbored
malice against him, and those who wronged him, it was distinguished by
kindness to them. The historians said: “Isma‘il b. Hisham al-Makhzu’mi,
the governor of Medina, harbored malice against the members of the House
(ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, hurt Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, and cursed
his grandfathers on the pulpits in order to seek nearness to the rulers
of Damascus. When al-Walid b. ‘Abd al-Malik became caliph, he removed
Isma‘il b. Hisham al-Makhzu’mi from office because of a previous enmity
between them. He ordered him to be stood up before the people to take
their rights from him. Isma‘il b. Hisham al-Makhzu’mi was very afraid of
the Imam because he transgressed against him many times and mistreated
him, so he said: ‘I fear no one except ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, for he is a
righteous man, so the people will listen to his words concerning me.’ As
for the Imam, he asked his companions and followers not to mistreat
Isma‘il, and then he hurried to him smiled at him and said to him:
‘Cousin, may Allah make you prosperous, what was done against you has
displeased me and urged me to do what you love.’ Isma‘il b. Hisham was
astonished to hear these words of the Imam, thus he said with
admiration: ‘Allah knows better where to put His message.’[^30]”

Now, let’s carefully listen and consider to his holy supplication for
his enemies, and those who wronged him: “O Allah, if any of Your
servants should harm me in what You have forbidden or violated me in
what You have interdicted, and if he should pass into death with my
complaint or I come to have a complaint against him while he is alive,
forgive him what he did to me and pardon him that through which he
turned his back on me! Inquire not from him about what he committed
toward me and expose him not through what he earned by me! Make my
openhandedness in pardoning such servants and my contribution in charity
toward them the purest charity of the charitable and the highest gift of
those seeking nearness to You! Recompense me for my pardoning them with
Your pardon and for my supplicating for them with Your mercy so that
each one of us may gain felicity through Your bounty and each may attain
deliverance through Your kindness![^31]”

Indeed, there is no one in the history of mankind similar to Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, except his grandfathers. In his behavior he
represented a matchless world of honor, nobility, and humanity.

[^1]: Al-Bihar, vol. 46, p.66. Qutb al-Rawandi, al-Da‘wat.

[^2]: Al-Bihar, vol. 46, p.67.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p.105. AL-Mubrrad, al-Kamil, vol. 1,
p.302.

[^5]: Ibn Qutayba, ‘Uyyu\`n al-Akhbar, vol. 3, p.97.

[^6]: Ibn Kuthayr, al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, p.108.

[^7]: ‘Uyyu\`n Akhbar al-Rida, p.270.

[^8]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, supplication no. 24.

[^9]: Ghayat al-Ikhtisar, p.106.

[^10]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqu\`l, p.279. Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, p.105.
Wasa’il al-Shi‘a.

[^11]: Al-Bayan wa al-Tabbyyin, vol. 2, p.76. Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 3,
p.88.

[^12]: Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 3, p.89.

[^13]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p.421.

[^14]: Al-Kashi, Rijal, p.419.

[^15]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, supplication no. 25.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, vol. 103.

[^17]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p.155.

[^18]: Bahjat al-Abrar.

[^19]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, supplication no. 26.

[^20]: Yousif al-Qurtubi, Bahjat al-Majalis wa ’Unis al-Majalis, vol. 1,
p.46.

[^21]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p.145.

[^22]: Bahjat al-Abrar.

[^23]: Al-Durr al-Nazim, p.173.

[^24]: Sifat al-Shi‘a.

[^25]: Nu\`r al-Abbsar, p.127.

[^26]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p.157.

[^27]: Al-Dhurriya al-Tahira, p.29.

[^28]: Imam Zayn ‘al-Abidin, p.202. Quoted from al-Mahasin by al-Barqi.

[^29]: Al-Wafi, vol. 2, p.183. ‘Yyu\`n al-Mu‘jizat, p.76.

[^30]: Hayat al-Imam al-Baqir, vol. 1, p.35. Tabaqat b. Sa‘d, vol. 5,
p.220.

[^31]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, supplication no. 39.


