Chapter 4: His Psychological Qualities
======================================

All the noble virtues and gifts which Allah created to distinguish man
were found in the character of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him. No
one matched him in his inclinations and his psychological qualities such
as sublime manners, high moral standards, and adherence to religion.
When someone reads his noble behavior, he bows down in respect and
admiration for him. The great Muslim figures from among his
contemporaries belittled themselves because of the manifold of the
Imam’s virtues and abilities. Sa‘id b. al-Musayyab, one of the great
religious scholars of Medina, said: “I have never seen a person more
meritorious than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, and when I see him, I hate
myself.[^1]” His ideals raised him to the summit of honor and glory
which were ascended by his grandfathers, who sacrificed their lives for
social reform. Now, we will talk briefly about some of his psychological
qualities.

Clemency
--------

As for clemency, it was among the qualities of the prophets and the
messengers and is among the greatest and the most distinguished
qualities of man, for it means that man controls himself and does not
yield to the inclinations of anger and revenge. Al-Jahiz defined
clemency, saying: “Clemency means that you leave revenge during intense
anger while you are able to do that.[^2]” Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be
on him, was the greatest of all the people in clemency and the best of
them in restraining anger. The narrators and the historians mentioned
many examples of his clemency, the following are some of them:

1. A maid-servant of ‘Ali b. al-Husayn began to pour water for him so
that he might perform the ritual ablutions for prayer. The maid-servant
became faint and the jug dropped from her hand and struck him. He raised
his head towards her and the maid-servant said: “Allah, the Most High,
says: *Those who restrain from anger.”*

“I have restrained my anger,” he said.

*“And those who forgive the people,”* she went on.

“My Allah forgive you,” he said.

“*Allah loves those who do good*,” she said.

“Go, you are a free woman before the face of Allah, the Almighty and
High,[^3]” he answered.

2. A mean person received the Imam by abusing and cursing him,
nevertheless the Imam treated him kindly, saying: “Boy, there will be an
invincible obstacle before us. If I cross it I will pay no attention to
what you are saying. If I am perplexed with it, I will be more wicked
than what you are saying.[^4]”

The Imam was busy thinking of his sentiments and feelings toward Allah
and fear of the terrors of the hereafter from which no one will be safe
except the pious, and he was not annoyed by this nonsense, which issued
from a person void of morals and manners.

3. When the Imam went out of the mosque, a person abused him, so the
people hurried to punish the man, but the Imam prevented them from doing
that, saying: “What Allah has concealed from you is more than (this).
Shall I help you with your need?”

The person was ashamed of himself and wished that the earth would
swallow him up. When the Imam looked at him, he had mercy on him and
gave him a black shirt and a thousand dirhams. With that the Imam was
able to uproot from the man the evil inclination of aggression against
the people without any right and showed him the path of truth and
guidance, so when the person saw the Imam, he said to him: “Surely you
are among the children of the prophets.[^5]”

4. An ignoble person aggressed against the Imam and cursed him, but the
Imam turned his face away from him, so the ignoble person became angry
and said to him: “I mean you!” However, the Imam said to him: “Still, I
will forgive you!” Then the Imam left the ignoble person and went away.
He did not return the insult, thus the ignoble person burst into
anger[^6]

5. A mean person slandered the Imam and went too far in cursing him;
nevertheless the Imam said to him: “If I have what you say, I will ask
Allah to forgive me. If I do not have what you say, I will ask Allah to
forgive you.” The mean person became ashamed of himself and apologized
to the Imam for that, saying: “You do not have what I said, so pardon
me!” The Imam received him with smiles of satisfaction and forgiveness,
saying: “May Allah forgive you!” The mean person admired the Imam and
said: “Allah knows better where to place his message.[^7]”

6. A person was aggressive against a member of the family of al-Zubayr
and cursed him, but the latter did not return in degree. When the person
went away, al-Zubayri stood up and began cursing the Imam, but the
latter kept silent and did not answer him, so the former asked: “What
prevents you from answering me?” “What prevented you from answering the
man,” the Imam answered with kindness.[^8]

These are some of the examples the historians mentioned of the clemency
of the Imam, peace be on him. They show an endless ability of
outstanding merits which manifested them selves in the Imam and raised
him to the highest level of the human perfection.

Patience
--------

Among the psychological qualities of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him was patience during ordeals and tribulations. It is certain that no
one in this world has been afflicted by such ordeals and tribulations as
this great Imam was afflicted by them; he was liable to events and
misfortunes from the beginning of his life to his death, for he suffered
the loss of his mother when he was in the first stage of his childhood,
so he did not feel her pure affection and kindness. He witnessed in his
bloom of youth the sorrow of his family because of the loss of his
grandfather Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
whom ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Muljim killed.

He witnessed those days when his uncle, the pure Imam, al-Hasan, peace
be on him, was forced to make peace with Mu‘awiya b. Abu’ Sufyan, the
Umayyad ruler of Syria. It is worth mentioning that Mu‘awiya brought
disgrace on the Arab and Islamic world because of his pre-Islamic
inclinations and his malice against Islam and Muslims. When he took the
reins of authority, he used all the organs of his government to erase
Islam from the map of existence, and took the severest measures against
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. For example,
he ordered the people to curse them on the pulpits and the minarets (of
the mosques), meanwhile he ordered their followers to be killed
everywhere.

When Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, became a young man, he
suffered the loss of his uncle Imam al-Hasan, the plant of sweet basil
of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, whom the Kasra
of the Arabs (i.e., Mu‘awiya b. Hind) [^9] killed with poison. This
event saddened the Imam and the Prophet’s Household very much.

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was afflicted by the most
sorrowful event when he saw sinful swords cut off the heads of the
choice from among the members of the family of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, in a tragic way which the history of nations
and people had never seen. After the murder of that group from among the
supporters of justice and truth, the criminal Kufans surrounded Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and then they burnt his tent and the
tents of the womenfolk of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. After that they took the Imam as prisoner to the tyrannical
governor, b. Marjana, who received the Imam by cursing and abusing him,
while the Imam was patient and entrusted his affair to Allah. After
that, the Imam was taken to the tyrannical Caliph, Yazid b. Mu‘awiya.
There the Imam suffered from various kinds of ordeals and tribulations
but he was patient toward them showing satisfaction with Allah’s decree.
Therefore, what a great soul was his soul! What a pure conscience was
his conscience! As for his soul, it resorted to the Creator of the world
and Giver of life during all those terrible events. As for his
conscience, it was purer and stronger than everything.

Patient in the face of ordeals and tribulations was among the
psychological qualities of the Imam, peace be on him. It was reported on
his authority that he said: “Patience is the source of obedience to
Allah.[^10]”

Another example of his patience was that he heard a woman wailing in his
house, and there was a group of people with him, so he stood up to see
what happened. He was told that one of his children had died, but he
returned to his assembly and told his companions about the death of his
child and they admired his patience, so he said to them: “We, the
members of the House, obey Allah in what we like and praise Him in what
we dislike.[^11]” He thought that patience was among bounties and
impatience was an act of weakness.[^12]

As Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, had a strong character and did
not collapse before the terrible events, he is regarded as among the
rarest figures throughout history.

Glory and Self-esteem
---------------------

Among the qualities of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, were glory
and self-esteem. He inherited these qualities from his father, the Lord
of martyrs, peace be on him, who walked toward death with longing and
desire for his glory and self-esteem. That was when the mean people made
him choose between death and abasement, so he chose death and addressed
them, saying: “By Allah, I will never give you my hand like a man who
has been humiliated; nor will I flee like a slave.” This noble quality
appeared in Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin when he said: “I do not prefer
excellent bounties to myself.[^13]” Concerning self-esteem, he said:
“Whoever feels that he is respectable, the world is easy for him.[^14]”
When he was taken prisoner to Syria, he did not speak to any of those
who guarded him to make them feel that he disdained and belittled them.

The historians said: “One of his uncles took some of his rights
illegally. He, peace be on him, was in Mecca. Meanwhile al-Walid, the
king, was there to perform the ritual hajj, so it was said to him: ‘Ask
al-Walid to take you your rights.’ So he said to them with these words
which are immortal in the world of glory and self-esteem: ‘Shall I ask
in the House of Allah, the Great and Almighty, other than Allah, Great
and Almighty? Indeed, I refuse to ask the Creator of the world for the
world, then how shall I ask a creature similar to me for the
world?’[^15]” Anther example of his self-esteem was that he did not take
even a dirham through his nearness to Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family.[^16] The historians reported many examples of his
glory and self-esteem, which showed that he refused all kinds of
abasement and oppression.

Bravery
-------

Among his psychological qualities was bravery and courage; he was the
bravest of all the people, for he was the son of al-Husayn, who was the
most courageous of all the children of Adam. An example of his
outstanding bravery was when he was taken prisoner and taken to the
tyrannical governor, ‘Ubayd Allah b. Marjana, the latter received him
with words of glee at his misfortune. So the Imam answered him with
burning words whose effect on him was stronger than the clashing of
swords and the lashing of whips. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
paid no attention to ‘Ubayd Allah’s power and invincibility, so b.
Marjana (i.e., ‘Ubayd Allah) became so angry that he ordered the Imam to
be killed. However, the Imam was not afraid of death, rather he said to
him calmly: “Killing is a custom for us, and our miracle from Allah is
martyrdom.”

When Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was taken to Yazid b.
Mu‘awiya, he met him with boldness and reproached him for his great
crime and gave him no way to defend himself and to justify his crime.

The Imam inherited bravery from his grandfather ‘Ali and his father
al-Husayn, who were the bravest of all the creatures of Allah. There is
no one in the world of Islam similar to them in bravery, strong
determination, and firmness in defending the truth.

His Unselfish Nature
--------------------

Among his prominent qualities was his lack of all kinds of selfishness
which had no power over him. The historians mentioned many examples of
his lack of selfishness. Such as when he wanted to travel to a certain
place, he traveled with people who did not know him, so that he would
serve them and rather than they serve him. One day he traveled with some
people who did not know him, but one of them looked at him and
recognized him and shouted at the people, asking: “Woe unto you! Do you
know that man?”

“No, we don’t,” answered the people.

“That is ‘Ali b. al-Husayn,” explained the man.

The people hurried toward the Imam and began kissing his hands and feet,
asking: “Do you want Allah to make us enter the fire of Hell? What made
you do that?”

The Imam answered gently: “I traveled with some people who knew me and
they, because of Allah’s Apostle, rendered services for me which I was
unworthy of. I was afraid that you would render me the same services, so
I preferred concealing my affair to making it public.[^17]”

Another example of his lack of selfishness was that when he walked in a
street and saw the passers-by being harmed by things such as stones and
clods of mud, he dismounted his mount and took them away from the street
with his holy hand.[^18] When he mounted his mule and walked in the
street, he did not say to anyone: “Make room.” Moreover, he said: “The
street is for all people, and I have no right to push anyone away from
it.[^19]” All the qualities of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, such as high moral standards were embodied in this great soul.

Kindness to People
------------------

Another quality of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was kindness
to people; his holy heart overflowed with mercy and kindness toward
them. The historians said: “When he knew that someone was in debt and
loved him, he paid his debt.[^20] He hurried to meet the needs of the
people lest someone should meet them before him and he would be deprived
of reward.

In this respect he said: ‘My enemy sometimes came to me (and ask me) to
satisfy his need, so I hasten to satisfy it for fear that someone should
satisfy it before me or my enemy should be in no need of it; therefore I
would be deprived of the reward for it.[^21]” Al-Zuhri reported the
following concerning the kindness of the Imam to the people: “I was with
‘Ali b. al-Husayn when a person came and said him: “I owe four hundred
dinars and am unable to pay them and have a family. At that time the
Imam had no money on him to pay the person’s debt, so he wept and said:
‘It is difficult for a free and believing person to be unable to satisfy
the need of his believing brother.’[^22]”

Generosity
----------

As for generosity, it was among the qualities of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin,
peace be on him. The historians unanimously agreed that the Imam was the
most generous of all the people and the kindest of them to the poor and
the weak. They mentioned many examples of his generosity. The following
are some of them:

### Muhammad b. Usama

Muhammad b. Usama became ill, so the Imam visited him. When the Imam sat
down, Muhammad burst into tears, so the Imam asked him: “What makes you
weep?”

“What makes me weep,” answered Muhammad, “is the fact that I owe fifteen
thousand dinars and I have nothing left to fulfill the debt for them.”

“Do not weep,” the Imam told him, “they are my debts now and you are
free of them.” So he paid them for him.[^23]

His giving Food to the People
-----------------------------

An example of his abundant generosity was that he gave food to those
people who came to his house in Medina at noon every day.[^24]

His Maintaining a Hundred Families
----------------------------------

The Imam was very generous that he secretly maintained a hundred
families in Medina,[^25] and each family had a group of people.[^26]

The generosity of the Imam showed that he had a soul free from
miserliness, that he had mercy on the people, and that he was grateful
to Allah for His giving.

His Kindness to the Poor
------------------------

Among his qualities was kindness to the poor, the deprived, and the
miserable. We shall mention some examples of his kindness to them:

### A. His Honoring the Poor

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, looked after the poor and took
care of their feelings and sentiments. When he gave a beggar alms, he
kissed him lest he should see the mark of abasement and need on his
face.[^27] He greeted the beggars who came to him and said to them:
“Welcome to him who carries my provisions to the hereafter.[^28]”

Honoring the poor in this kind and merciful manner strengthens society
and spreads love and friendship among its members.

### B. His Kindness to the Poor

The Imam, peace be on him, was very kind and affectionate to the poor
and the needy. He asked the orphans, the blind, and the needy to eat
with him. He gave them food with his hand[^29] as well as he carried
food on his back and took it to their houses.[^30] He took great care of
the poor and was so kind to them that he prevented the people from
harvesting dates at night lest they should deprive the poor of them. So
he said to Qahramana, who reaped dates at night: “Do not do that. Don’t
you know that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
prevented (the people) from reaping at night, and he used to say: ‘You
should give a share to those who ask you for it on the day of
harvest.[^31]’”

His Preventing the People from Reproaching Beggars
--------------------------------------------------

The Imam, peace be on him, prevented the people from reproaching
beggars, for that would bring about bad results such as loss of bounties
and sudden adversities. In this respect Sa‘id b. al-Musayyab reported:
“One day I went to ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. After he had finished performing
the noon prayer, there was a beggar at the door, so he, peace be on him,
said: ‘Give to the beggar and do not reproach him.[^32]’”

The Imam, peace be on him, stressed the importance of this duty in many
of his traditions. In this connection, Abu’ Hamza al-Thumali reported:
“I performed the morning prayer with ‘Ali b. al-Husayn in Medina on
Friday. After he had finished performing his prayer, he went to his
house. I accompanied him. When he reached his house, he called his
maid-servant Sukayna and said to her: ‘When a beggar passes by the door
of my house, give him food, for today is Friday.’ So I (i.e., Abu’
Hamza) said to him: ‘Not all beggars are worthy of being given food.’
He, peace be on him said: ‘I am afraid that some of those who beg us are
worthy of being given food. If we do not give them food and reproach
them, what had befallen Ya‘qu’b and his family will befall us, the
members of the House. Give the beggars food! Give them food! Ya‘qu’b
sacrificed a ram every day. He gave some of its meat to the poor as
alms. He and the members of his family ate the rest of its meat.

At the time of breaking the fast, on Friday, a believing and fasting
beggar whose rank was high with Allah and who was worthy of being given
food passed by the door of Ya‘qu’b’s house and called out: ‘Give food
from the rest of your food to the strange and hungry beggar!’ Ya‘qu’b
and his family heard him but they neglected his right and did not
believe his words. When the beggar despaired of them and the night
overtook him, he went away and spent that night hungry complaining his
hunger to Allah, while Ya‘qu’b and his family spent that night full and
with extra food. In the morning of that night, Allah revealed to
Ya‘qu’b, saying: ‘You have abased my servant to the extent that you and
your children are worthy of my wrath and my punishment. Ya‘qu’b, the
most lovable of my prophets for Me and the most honorable with Me are
those who have mercy on the poor from among my servants, draw them near
to Me, give them food, and protect them. Ya‘qu’b, why did you not have
mercy on my servant, who has devoted his life to worshipping and is
secretly content with that which is beyond this material world? Ya‘qu’b,
by my might, I will impose my tribulation upon you and make you and your
sons a target for misfortunes.’

“I (i.e., Abu’ Hamza) asked: May I be ransom for you, when did Yousif
saw the vision?[^33] The Imam, peace be on him, replied: ‘When Ya‘qu’b
and his family spent that night full and the poor beggar spent it
hungry.’[^34]”

Indeed, depriving the needy and poor person of his right results in the
loss of bounties and brings down Allah’s wrath. In this respect many
traditions were successively reported on the authority of the Imams of
guidance, so those who want Allah’s blessing to continue should not
reproach the poor and deprive them of their rights.

His Alms
--------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, did his best throughout his life
to give alms to the poor in order to remove poverty from them. In the
meantime he urged the people to help them in order that they might get a
great reward from Allah, the Glorified. So he said: “If a person gives
alms to a poor person, the poor person will supplicated for him at that
hour and he will be answered.[^35]” Now, we will mention some of his
alms:

### A. He gave his Garments as Alms

The Imam, peace be on him, wore the most luxurious garment. In winter he
wore silk-like garments. When summer came, he gave them as alms or sold
them and gave their price as alms. In summer he wore two Egyptian
garments. When winter came, he gave them as alms.[^36] Thus, he said: “I
feel shame before my Lord when I take the price of the garment in which
I worship Him.[^37]”

### B. He gave as Alms what He loved

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, gave as alms what he loved. The
narrators said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn gave almonds and sugar as alms. He
was asked about that, and he recited the words of Him, the Exalted: ‘By
no means shall you attain to righteousness until you spend
(benevolently) out of what you love.[^38]’” The historians reported:
“‘Ali b. al-Husayn liked eating grapes. One day he was fast, so his
maid-servant gave him a bunch of grapes. At the time of breaking
fasting, a beggar came to him, and he ordered the bunch of grapes to be
given to the beggar. The maid-servant sent someone to buy a bunch of
grapes for the Imam, another beggar knocked on the door, and the Imam
ordered the bunch of grapes to be given to the beggar.

Again, the maid-servant sent someone to buy a bunch of grapes for the
Imam. When she offered the bunch of grapes to the Imam, another beggar
came, and the Imam ordered the bunch of grapes to be given to the
beggar.[^39]” In this manner the Imam followed the example of his
grandfathers, who gave their food for three days to a poor, an orphan,
and a captive, so Allah sent down concerning them the Su’ra of Hal Ata,
which will exist as a legion of honor for them throughout time till
Allah inherits the earth and what is on it.

### C. Dividing his Properties

The Imam divided his properties into two shares. He took one share and
gave the other as alms to the poor.[^40] In this manner the Imam
followed the example of his uncle, Imam al-Hasan, the plant of sweet
basil of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who
divided his properties into two or three shares.

His Giving Charity in Secret
----------------------------

The most lovable thing for the Imam, peace be on him, was giving charity
in secret. He did not want anyone to recognize him because he wanted to
make close relationships with the poor people he helped in order to seek
Allah’s good pleasure as well as urged the Muslims to adopt giving
charity secretly, so he said: “Giving charity secretly removes the wrath
of Allah.[^41]”

He went out veiled in the darkness and carried gifts to the poor who
stood at the doors of their house waiting for him. When they saw him,
they gave good news to each other and said to one another: “The owner of
the bag has just come.[^42]” The Imam went to his cousin at night and
gave him some dinars, but his cousin said to him: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn
does not give me anything.”

Moreover, his cousin invoked Allah against him. The Imam, peace be on
him, heard that and pardoned his cousin and did not let his cousin
recognize him. When the Imam, peace be on him, died, his cousin lost
those gifts and knew that it was the Imam who had brought them to him,
so he went to the Imam’s grave and wept over him and apologized to him
for slandering him.[^43]”

Ibn ‘A’isha said: [I heard the people of Medina say:] “When ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn died, we were deprived of being given charity secretly.[^44]”
The historians reported that a group of the people of Medina lived and
did not know the person who brought them their livelihood. When ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn died, they lost what they were given at night.[^45] The Imam,
peace be on him, was very serious with hiding his alms, to the extent
that he covered his face when he gave some alms.[^46] Al-Dhahabi said:
“‘Ali b. al-Husayn gave a lot of secret charity.[^47]”

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, put food in a bag; he carried the
bag on his back and divided the food among the poor. The bag made some
calluses on his back. Al-Ya‘qu’bi reported: “When the Imam, peace be on
him, died, the members of his family washed him and they found on his
back calluses similar to those of a camel. They people asked the members
of his family about those calluses and they answered: ‘They were made by
the bag which he carried on his back at night to divide food among the
poor.’[^48]”

Anyhow, the Imam’s secret charity was among the greatest deeds and the
most rewarded by Allah.

His Seeking Allah’s Pleasure
----------------------------

From his kindness to the poor, the Imam, peace be on him, wanted nothing
except Allah’s pleasure and the hereafter. He was the most prominent of
those whom Allah concerned with these words of His: “ (As for) those who
spend their property in the way of Allah, then do not follow up what
they have spent with reproach or injury, they shall have their reward
from their Lord, and shall have no fear nor shall they grieve.[^49]”

The gifts and alms of the Imam were for Allah’s pleasure only. They were
not mixed with any worldly purposes which would turn into earth sooner
or later. Al-Zuhri narrated: “During a cold night, I saw ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn carrying flour on his back, so I asked him: ‘Son of Allah’s
Apostle, what is that on your back?’”

The Imam hurried and said with a faint voice: “I am making preparations
for a journey. I am preparing provisions for it and carrying them to a
secure place.”

“Let this boy of mine carry the flour instead of you,” explained
al-Zuhri.

The Imam did not answer him. Al-Zuhri begged the Imam to let him carry
the flour in stead of him, but the Imam insisted on carrying it and
said: “ But I do not disdain what will save me during my journey and
makes good my going to Whom I will go. I ask you before Allah to go to
your need.”

So al-Zuhri left the Imam and went away. After some days he met him. He
did not understand what the Imam meant. He thought that the Imam would
go on a regular journey, so he asked him: “Son of Allah’s Apostle, I do
not see any mark of that journey which you ended?”

The Imam, peace be on him, told him about that journey for which he made
preparations: “Zuhri, I think that you did not understand what I meant.
I meant death. I made preparations for it through refraining from the
prohibited and doing good.[^50]”

The Imam, peace be on him, spent on the poor to seek Allah’s pleasure
and forgiveness.

Renouncing Worldly Pleasures
----------------------------

Among the qualities of the Imam was renouncing worldly pleasures. He did
not care for worldly vanities. He clung to asceticism and completely
renounced the world. The world did not tempt him nor did it deceive him,
for he knew its reality and essence. He knew that man would leave the
world no matter what he enjoyed in it, and that he would find nothing
before him except his good deeds. The Imam was the most ascetic of the
people of his time. This was underlined by al-Zuhri when he was asked
about the most ascetic of all the people and he answered: “The most
ascetic of all the people is ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^51]”

The Imam, peace be on him, saw a beggar weeping, so he had mercy on him
and said: “If the world was in the hand of this person and then it
dropped from it, he had not to weep for it.[^52]” The Imam, peace be on
him renounced worldly pleasures, but this does not mean that he yielded
to poverty and feebleness, rather he was pious with what Allah
prohibited, so he was similar to his father and grandfather, who
divorced the world and did not care for its affairs except truth and
virtue.

With the Sufis
--------------

As the Imam, peace be on him, was ascetic and completely turned away
from the world, the Sufis regarded him as one of their figures and wrote
a full biography about him.[^53] Al-Kalabazi regarded him as one of
those who talked about their sciences, spread their essays, and
described their conditions in word and action after the Companions of
the Prophet.[^54] I (i.e., the author) think that this view is not
objective, rather it is very shallow, for the Sufis completely renounced
the world, lived in dark caves, wore coarse garments, ate rough food,
and other matters which disagree with the reality of the religion and
which did not legislate any rule in which there was uneasiness or
limitations for men.

As for Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, he led a life completely
different from that of the Sufis because he wore the most luxurious
garments. The narrators said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn wore a silk-like long
outer garment, a silk-like cloak, and a silk-like turban.” A researcher
in Sufism refuted the view which said that the Imam was among the Sufis,
saying: “As for the asceticism of ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, it was
psychological, rational, and internal. Such asceticism is more useful
than that based on hunger and wearing wool, for perception accepts the
first kind of asceticism and it is that which deep innate nature of life
establishes; as for garment, it is pretense.[^55]”

The behavior of the Imams of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),*
peace be on them, clearly refuted the Sufi methods. The historians said:
“When Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, was appointed a successor (to
authority), a Sufi said to him: ‘The Imam should eat rough food and wear
coarse garments.’ The Imam was resting on his elbow, so he sat down and
refuted this cheap view, saying: ‘Yousif b. Ya‘qub was a prophet;
nevertheless he wore silk-like garments embroidered with gold. Allah did
not prohibit clothing nor did he prohibit food. However, He wanted the
Imam to be fair and just.’ Then he recited these words of Him, the
Exalted: ‘*Say: Who has prohibited the embellishment and the good
provisions which Allah has brought forth for His creatures*.[^56]’”

This noble behavior disagrees in all conditions with Sufism which has no
Islamic aspects.

He Hated Playing

Another quality of the Imam was that he hated playing. Throughout his
life no one saw him playing or laughing, so he, peace be on him, said:
“Whenever a man laughs one time he loses a bit of knowledge.” In Medina
there was an unemployed person at whom the people laughed. The
unemployed person said: “It is difficult for me to make this man (i.e.,
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin) laugh.” One day the Imam, followed by two
retainers, passed by the unemployed person and he took his cloak and ran
away. The Imam did not turn to him, but the two retainers chased the
unemployed person and took the cloak from him and brought it to the
Imam, who asked them: “Who is this person?” “He is an unemployed person
at whom the people of Medina laugh,” replied one of the two retainers.
So the Imam, peace be on him, said: “Say to him: Indeed Allah has a day
in which the liars will be losers.[^57]”

His Turning to Allah in Repentance

Among the most prominent qualities of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin was his
turning in repentance to Allah and his devotion to Him. This appeared in
the Imam’s whispered prayers, supplications, and words which showed his
strong dedication to Allah, the Creator of the world and Giver of life.

The Imam dedicated himself to Allah and entrusted all his affairs and
tasks to Him, the Exalted. When he faced a certain matter, he rushed to
Allah, for he thought that depending on other than Allah would bring
about disappointment and loss. The historians reported that the Imam
passed by a person sitting at the door of a rich person and asked him:
“What has made you sit at the door of this rich, tyrannical person?”

“Poverty and misery,” replied the person.

“Stand up,” ordered the Imam, “I will lead you to a door better than his
door and a Lord better for you than him.”

The person rose and went with the Imam till they reached the Mosque of
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family. There the Imam said
to the person: “Turn your face to the *qibla,* perform two *ruk‘as*,
raise your hands and supplicate Allah, the Glorified, (to help you). Ask
Him to bless His Prophet, recite the last verses of Surat al-Hashr, six
verses from the beginning of Surat al-Haddid, and the first two verses
of Surat Al ‘Umran, and then ask Allah, the Glorified, to meet your
need. If you ask Allah for a certain thing, He will give it to you.
Whoever seeks refuge in Allah seeks refuge in a strong fort. As for
seeking refuge in other than Allah, it is useless.[^58]”

Wonderful Examples of his Turning

in Repentance to Allah

Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, the Gospel of the Household of Muhammad, may
Allah bless him and his family, is full of the supplications which show
that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, turned to Allah in
repentance and was sincere to Him, and that he clung to Allah and
dedicated himself to Him. The following are some examples of his turning
to Allah in repentance:

### 1. His Seeking Asylum with Allah

The Imam, peace be on him, sought asylum with Allah through his heart
and feelings toward Him. He entrusted to Him all his small and big
affairs. He has mentioned that in the following supplication: “O Allah,
if You will, You will pardon us through Your bounty, and if You will,
You will chastise us through Your justice. So make our ways smooth to
Your pardon through Your kindness and grant us sanctuary from Your
chastisement through Your forbearance, for none of us has the endurance
for Your justice and none of us can reach deliverance without Your
pardon! O Richest of the Rich, here we are, Your servants, before You. I
am the neediest of the needy toward You, so redress our neediness
through Your abundance and cut us not off from our hopes through Your
withholding, lest You make wretched him who seeks felicity through You
and deprive him who seeks help from Your bounty! Then to whom would we
return after You? Where would we go from Your gate? Glory be to You! We
are the distressed, the response to whom You have made incumbent, the
people from whom You have promised to remove the evil. That thing most
resembling Your will and that affair most worthy for You in Your
mightiness is showing mercy to him who asks You for mercy and helping
him who seeks help from You. So show mercy upon our pleading with You
and free us from need when we throw ourselves before You! O Allah, Satan
will gloat over us if we follow him in disobeying You, so bless Muhammad
and his Household and let him not gloat over us after we have renounced
him for You and beseeched You against him![^59]”

In this holy supplication we feel that the Imam, peace be on him, sought
asylum with Allah and clung to Him. He, peace be on him, showed that he
was poor and in need of Allah’s pardon and bounty. He asked Allah not to
deprive him of His bounty and not to cut him off from his hopes through
His withholding, lest he (the Imam) should be wretched after his
felicity through Him. Besides, the Imam, peace be on him, showed
abasement and pleading before the Almighty Creator to the extent that he
became among the lords of the pious and those who turned in repentance
to Allah, the Glorified.

### 2. His Fleeing to Allah

The Imam, peace be on him, completely devoted himself to Allah. He
thought that Allah was the source of benefit and strength, and that
seeking asylum in other than Him was useless. Now let’s listen to his
supplication in this respect: “O Allah, I showed sincerity by cutting
myself off from everything but You. I approached You with my whole self.
I averted my face from everyone who needs Your support. I ceased to ask
from anyone who cannot do without Your bounty. I saw that the needy who
seeks from the needy is foolish in his opinion, and misguided in his
intellect. How many people have I seen, my Allah, who sought exaltation
through other than You and were abased, who wanted wealth from someone
else and became poor, who tried to rise high and fell down low!
Observing the likes of them corrects a prudent man; his taking heed
gives him success; his choosing the best guides him to the path of
right. So You, my Master, are the object of my asking to the exclusion
of all those who are asked and the patron of my need to the exclusion of
all those from whom requests are made. You are singled out for my call
before all who are called; none is associated with You in my hope, none
comes along with You in my supplication, nor does any join with You
within it, for to You is my appeal. To You, my Allah, belongs the Unity
of number, the property of eternal power, the excellence of force and
strength, the degree of sublimity and elevation. Everyone other than You
is the object of compassion in his lifetime, overcome in his affair,
overwhelmed in his situation, diverse in states, constantly changing in
attributes. So You are high exalted above likeness and opposites,
proudly magnified beyond similitudes and rivals! Glory be to You! There
is no Allah but You.[^60]”

In this masterpiece, we feel that the Imam completely dedicated himself
to Allah, the Glorified. He approached Him with his feelings and
sentiments. He averted his face and heart from other creatures who need
Allah’s support, for regarding them in hope and expectation is
foolishness in opinion and misguidance in intellect. The Imam, peace be
on him, attributed all sources of benefit and strength to Allah, the
Glorified. He criticized those who sought glory, wealth and exaltation
from other than Allah. He showed that they became poor and fell down
low. So those who seek good, exaltation, and dignity should devote
themselves to Allah, Who has power over everything. As for those other
than Allah, they are the object of compassion in their lifetime,
overcome in their affair, overwhelmed in their situation, diverse in
states, constantly changing in attributes. This supplication shows pure
faith and the essence of the Oneness of Allah.

### 3. His Seeking Needs from Allah

Another aspect of his turning to Allah in repentance was that he limited
seeking needs from Allah, the Almighty, for He is the source of bounty
and the fountain of mercy and kindness. The Imam, peace be on him,
turned his face to Allah and supplicated to Him with this holy
supplication: “O Allah, O ultimate object of my needs! O He through whom
requests are attained! O He whose favors are not bought by prices! O He
who does not stain His gifts by the imposition of obligations! O He
along with whom nothing is needed and without whom nothing can be done!
O He toward whom desire is ever directed and never turned away! O He
whose treasuries cannot be exhausted by demands! O He whose wisdom
cannot be altered by any means! O He from whom the needs of the needy
are never cut off! O He who is not distressed by the supplications of
the supplicators! You have lauded Yourself for having no need for Your
creatures, and it suits You to have no need for them, and You have
attributed to them poverty, and it suits to them to be poor toward You.
So he who strives to remedy his lack through what is with You and wishes
to turn poverty away from himself through You has sought his need in the
most likely place and come to his request from the right quarter.
However, he who turns in his need toward one of Your creatures or
assigns the cause of its being granted to other than You, has exposed
himself to deprivation and deserves to miss Your beneficence.

“ O Allah, I have a need of You: My exertion has fallen short of it and
my stratagems have been cut back before reaching it. My soul induced me
to present it to him who presents his need to You and can do nothing
without You in his requests, but this is one of the slips of the
offenders, one of the stumbles of the sinners! Then through Your
reminding me I was aroused from my heedlessness, through Your giving
success, I stood up from my slip, and through Your pointing the way, I
returned and withdrew from my stumble. I said: Glory to my Lord! How can
the needy ask from the needy? How can the destitute beseech the
destitute? So I went straight to You, my Lord in beseeching, and I sent
You my hope with trust in You. I came to know that the many I request
from You are few before Your wealth, the weighty I ask from You is vile
before your plenty; Your generosity is not constrained by anyone’s
asking. Your hand is higher in bestowing gifts than every hand!

“O Allah, so bless Muhammad and his Household, take me through Your
generosity to Your gratuitous bounty and take me not through Your
justice to what I deserve! I am not the first beseecher to beseech You
and You bestowed upon him while he deserved withholding, nor I am the
first to ask from You and You were bounteous toward him while he merited
deprivation.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, respond to my supplication,
come near my call, have mercy on my pleading, listen to my voice, cut
not short my hope for You, severe not my thread to You, turn not my face
in this my need, and other needs, away from You, attend for my sake to
the fulfillment of my request, the granting of my need, and the
attainment of what I have asked before I leave this place through Your
making easy for me the difficult and Your excellent ordainment for me in
all affairs! Bless Muhammad and his Household with a permanent,
ever-growing blessing, whose perpetuity has no cutting off and whose
term knows no limit, and make that a help to me and a cause for the
granting of my request! You are boundless, Generous![^61]”

After this supplication, the Imam, peace be on him, stated his need,
prostrated himself, and said in his supplication: “Your bounty has
comforted me and Your beneficence has shown me the way, so I ask You by
You and by Muhammad and his Household (Your blessing be upon them) that
You send me not back in disappointment!”

This holy supplication shows the firm clinging of the Imam, peace be on
him, to Allah and his great belief in Him. The Imam firmly believed that
Allah, the Glorified, was the only ultimate object whom servants asked
for their needs, that He bestowed on them His blessings and favors, and
that He did not sell these favors to them by prices, nor did He stain
them by the imposition of obligations. Man has no need of others through
Allah’s gifts. All the creatures are in need of Allah’s generosity while
He, the Exalted, is in no need of them. Indeed, the clever and
knowledgeable one is he who turns in his need to Allah only. As for the
one who turns in his need to other than Allah, he exposes himself to
deprivation and is worthy of missing beneficence. The Imam, peace be on
him, asked Allah, the Glorified, for forgiveness and good pleasure, and
then he came to know that the many favors he requested from Allah were
few before Him, the Exalted. Besides he came to know that Allah had
bounteous gifts and His hand was higher in bestowing gifts than every
hand.

Indeed this Imam is the lord of those who have knowledge of Allah and
Imam of the pious. His supplications and whispered prayers contain many
lessons which are necessary for purifying souls of disobedience and
wickedness.

### 4. His Pleading and Humbleness to Allah

The Imam also turned to Allah in repentance in such away that he
constantly pleaded and was humble before Him, the Exalted. He
supplicated with this holy supplication: “O Allah, I praise Youand You
are worthy of praisefor Your benefaction toward me, the lavishness of
Your favors toward me, Your plentiful bestowal upon me, and for showing
bounty toward me through Your mercy and lavishing Your favor upon me.
You have done well toward me and I am incapable of thanking You. Were it
not for Your beneficence toward me and the lavishness of Your favors
upon me, I would not have reached the taking of my share nor would my
soul have been set right, but You began with beneficence toward me,
provided me sufficiency in all my affairs, turned me away from the toil
of affliction, and held back from me the feared decree.

“My Allah, how many a toilsome affliction which You have turned away
from me! How many a lavish favor with which You gladdened my eye! How
many a generous benefaction of Yours which is present with me! It is You
who responded to my supplication at the time of distress, released me
from my slip in stumbling, and took my enemies to task for doing wrong
to me. My Allah, I did not find You a miser when I asked of You nor a
withholder when I desired form You. No, I found You a hearer of my
supplication and a bestower of my requests; I found Your favors toward
me lavish in my every situation and in my every time. So You are praised
by me and Your benefaction honored. My soul, my tongue, and my
intelligence praise You, a praise that reaches fulfillment and the
reality of thanksgiving, a praise that attains to Your good pleasure
with me - so deliver me from Your displeasure! O my cave when the ways
thwart me! O He who releases me from my stumble! Were it not for Your
covering my shameful defects, I would be one of the disgraced. O my
confirmer through help! Were it not for Your helping me, I would be one
of the overcome! O He before whom kings place the yoke of lowliness
around their necks, fearing his penalties! O worthy of reverential fear!
O He *to whom belong the names most beautiful!* I ask You to pardon me
and to forgive me, for I am not innocent that I should offer excuse, nor
a possessor of strength that I should gain victory, nor have I any place
of flight that I should flee! I ask You to release me from my stumbles,
and before You I disavow my sins, which have laid me waste, encompassed
me, and destroyed me! I flee from them to You, my Lord, turning
repentantly, so turn toward me, seeking refuge, so grant me refuge,
asking sanctuary, so abandon me not, requesting, so deprive me not,
holding fast, so leave me not, supplicating, so send me not back
disappointed! I have supplicated You, my Lord, as one miserable, abased,
apprehensive, fearful, quaking, poor, driven to have recourse to You! I
complain to You, my Lord, of my soul- which is too weak to hurry to that
which You have promised Your friends or to avoid that against which You
have cautioned Your enemies- and of the multitude of my concerns, and of
my soul’s confusing thoughts.

“My Allah, You have not disgraced me through my secret thoughts or
destroyed me because of my misdeeds! I call upon You, and You respond
even if I am slow when You call upon me. I ask You everything I want of
my needs, and I deposit with You my secret wherever I may be. I
supplicate to no one besides You, and I hope for no one other than You.
At Your service! At Your service! You hear him who complains to You! You
receive him who has confidence in You! You save him who holds fast to
You! You give relief to him who seeks shelter in You.

“My Allah, so deprive me not of the good of the last world and the first
because of the paucity of my thanksgiving and forgive me the sins of
mine which You know! If You chastise, I am the wrongdoer, the neglecter,
the derelict, the sluggard, the heedless of the share of my soul! And If
You forgive- You are the Most merciful of the merciful![^62]”

This holy supplication is full of pleading, humbleness, and submission
to the Almighty Creator. The Imam, peace be on him, praised Allah with
the praise that resulted from belief, knowledge, and sincerity. He
acknowledged his falling short of thanking Allah for His lavish
blessings and favors. After that he asked Allah for pardon and
forgiveness, seeking refuge in Him. He, peace be on him, showed great
fear and apprehension to the extent that the souls and hearts quiver.

### 5. His Humbling himself before Allah

The Imam, peace be on him, melted in love for Allah. He was very loyal
to Him and showed pleading, humbleness, and submission to Him. Among the
aspects of his humbleness before Allah was that he supplicated with this
supplication: “My Lord, my sins have silenced me, and my words have been
cut off. I have no argument, for I am the prisoner of my own affliction,
the hostage to my works, the frequenter of my own offense, the confused
in my intended way, the thwarted. I have brought myself in a halt in the
halting place of the abased sinners, the halting place of the wretched
and insolent, those who think lightly of Your promise. Glory be to You!
What insolence I have insolently shown toward You! What delusion with
which I have deluded myself! My Master, have mercy on my falling flat on
my face, the slipping of my foot, grant me my ignorance through Your
clemency, and my evildoing through Your beneficence, for I admit my sin
and I confess my offense: Here are my hand and my forelock! I am
resigned to retaliation against my soul! Have mercy on my white hair,
the depletion of my days, the nearing of my term, my frailty, my misery,
and the paucity of my stratagems! My Master, and have mercy upon me when
my trace is cut off from this world, my name is effaced among the
creatures, and I join the forgotten, like the forgotten ones! My Master,
and have mercy upon me at the change of my form and state when my body
decays, my limbs are scattered, and my joints are dismembered! O my
heedlessness toward what was wanted from me! My Master, have mercy upon
me at my mustering and uprising and on that day, appoint my standing
place with Your friends, my place of emergence with Your beloved ones,
and my dwelling in Your neighborhood! O Lord of the worlds![^63]”

Faith in Allah embraced the Imam’s heart, natural inclinations, bodily
movements, limbs, and behavior. With this tremendous amount of faith, he
was appropriate for the Imamate of the pious and mastership over those
who turned to Allah in repentance. With this, we will end our talk about
some of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s noble qualities.

[^1]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p.46.

[^2]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, p.19.

[^3]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, vol. 155. Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 21,
p.326.

[^4]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.96.

[^5]: Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, p.105.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Saffwat al-Saffwa, vol. 2, p.54.

[^8]: Al-Mubarrad, al-Kamil, vol. 3, p.805

[^9]: The Second Caliph gave him this surname.

[^10]: Al-Muqrim, Al-Imam Zayn ‘al-Abidin, p.19.

[^11]: Huliyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p.138.

[^12]: Al-Durr al-Nazim, p.173.

[^13]: Al-Khisal, p.24.

[^14]: Al-Bihar, vol. 78, 135.

[^15]: Ibid, vol. 46, p.64.

[^16]: Tha‘lab, al-Majalis, vol. 2, p.462.

[^17]: ‘Uyyu\`n Akhbar al-Rida, vol. 2, p.145. A similar report to this
has been mention in al-Kamil by al-Mubarrad, vol. 2, p.482.

[^18]: Al-Imam Zayn ‘al-Abidin, p.70.

[^19]: Siyar ‘Alam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p.240. Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36,
p.161.

[^20]: Abu\` Zahra, al-Imam Zayd, p.24.

[^21]: Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol., p.13.

[^22]: Al-Sadu\`q, al-Amali.

[^23]: Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, p.105. Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’,
vol. 4, p.239. Tarikh al-Islam, vol. 2, p.266. Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol.
3, p.141.

[^24]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p.6.

[^25]: Tahdhib al-Lughat wa al-Asma’, 343.

[^26]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.88.

[^27]: Hulyat al-Awliya‘, vol. 3, p.137.

[^28]: Safwat al-Safwa, vol. 2, p.53.

[^29]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.62.

[^30]: Ibid. A similar narration has been mentioned in Da’irat
al-Ma‘arif by al-Bustani, vol. 9, p.355.

[^31]: Wasa‘il al-Shi‘a, vol. 6, p.15.

[^32]: Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p.15.

[^33]: It was the night when he saw eleven stars, the sun, and the moon
prostrating themselves to him.

[^34]: Al-Nu\`ri, Dar al-Salam, vol. 2, p.141.

[^35]: Wasa’il al-Shi’a, vol. 6, p.296.

[^36]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p.161.

[^37]: Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol. 1, p.89.

[^38]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.89.

[^39]: Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin, p.547. Furu\`‘ al-Kafi, vol. 6, p.350.

[^40]: Khulasat Tahdhib al-Kamal, p.231. Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3,
p.140. Jamharat al-Awliya’, vol. 2, p.72. Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol.
9, p.105. Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat, vol. 5, p.19.

[^41]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. 1, p.75. Akhbar al-Diwal, p.110.
Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 21, p.326.

[^42]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.89.

[^43]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.100.

[^44]: Safwat al-Safwa, vol. 2, p.54. Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p.49.

[^45]: Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 15, p. 326.

[^46]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 62.

[^47]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. 1, p.75.

[^48]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p.45.

[^49]: Qur’an, 2, 262.

[^50]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai‘, p. 88. Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46,
pp. 65-66.

[^51]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.62.

[^52]: Al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p.192.

[^53]: Jamharat al-Awliya’, vol. 2, p.71. Hulyat al-Awliya, vol. 3,
p.133.

[^54]: Al-Ta‘arruf, p.11.

[^55]: Al-Sila bayna al-Tashayyi‘ wa al-Tasawuif, vol. 1, p.169.

[^56]: ‘Uyyu\`n Akhbar al-Rida.

[^57]: Al-Sadu\`q, al-Amali, p.220.

[^58]: Al-Kaf‘ami, al-Junna al-Waqiya wa al-Junna al-Baqiya, p.190.

[^59]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 10.

[^60]: Ibid, Supplication no. 28.

[^61]: Ibid, Supplication no. 13.

[^62]: Ibid, Supplication no. 51.

[^63]: Ibid, Supplication no. 54.


