Chapter 6: Impressions of His Character
=======================================

The Muslims have agreed that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was
great and meritorious, and that he was a unique being in this world.
None matched him in outstanding qualities, knowledge, and piety. So the
Muslims sought blessing through kissing the Imam’s hands and putting
them on their eyes.[^1] Glorifying the Imam was not confined to those
who accompanied and met him, rather it included all historians,
regardless of their different inclinations and desires.

They wrote with admiration about his conduct and gave him all noble
nick-names and holy qualities. I (the author) think that all those who
read about the Imam’s characteristics will admire him, for there is no
one similar to him in good inclinations and great qualities. He exists
in the mind of all those noble people who adopt ideals and respect their
humanity. Now, we will mention the impressions of his contemporaries and
of the historians about his character.

The Views of his Contemporaries
-------------------------------

The religious scholars and all other figures who were contemporary to
the Imam stated their impressions of his character. They all glorified
and admired him, whether they showed love toward him or harbored malice
against him. The following are their thoughts about him:

### 1. Jabir al-Ansari

Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari, the great companion of the Prophet,
devoted himself to the members of the House, peace be on them, and was
among their followers. He expressed his great admiration of the Imam,
peace be on him, saying: “None of the children of the prophets was like
‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^2]”

Indeed none of the children of the prophets was more meritorious than
‘Ali b. al-Husayn in devotion, piety, and intense turning to Allah in
repentance, and none of them was more liable to ordeals and misfortunes
than him.

### 2. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas

‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas, despite his eminence among the people and his old
age, respected Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin and bowed to him in submission and
glory. When he saw him, he stood up to glorify him and said at the top
of his voice: “Welcome dear and beloved one![^3]”

### 3. Al-Zuhri

Muhammad b. Muslim al-Qarashi, al-Zuhri, was a jurist, one of the
leading Imams and religious scholar of Syria and Saudi Arabia.[^4] He
was among those who were sincere to the Imam and loved him very much. He
said a group of valuable words in which he expressed the noble qualities
and the great ideals of the Imam, peace be on him. The following are
some of his words:

“I have never seen a Hashimi like ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^5]”

“I have never seen a Qarashi more pious and more meritorious than ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn.[^6]”

“I have never seen a Qarashi more meritorious than ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn.[^7]”

“I have never met in Medina a person more meritorious than him.[^8]”

“I have never met among the members of the House a person more
meritorious than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^9]”

“I sat with ‘Ali b. al-Husayn many times. I have never seen a person
more knowledgeable than him in jurisprudence.[^10]”

“‘Ali b. al-Husayn was the most meritorious of the people of his time
and the best of them in obedience.[^11]”

“A caller will call out on the Day of Judgment: Let the Lord of the
worshippers of his time stand up, so ‘Ali b. al-Husayn will stand
up.[^12]” He meant the famous prophetic tradition: “When the Day of
Judgment takes place, a caller will call out from inside the Throne: Let
the Lord of the worshippers stand up, so he will stand up.[^13]”

Al-Zuhri was asked about the most ascetic one of all the people in the
world and he replied: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^14]”

Sufyan b. ‘Ayyina said: “I asked al-Zuhri: Have you met ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn? ‘Yes,’ he replied, ‘I have met him. I have never met a person
more meritorious than him. By Allah, I have never known that he had a
friend in secret or an enemy in public.’ I asked him: ‘Why was that?’ He
answered: ‘Because all those who loved him envied him out of their
abundant knowledge of his outstanding merits, and all those who hated
him took care of him because he took great care of them.’[^15]”

It is certain that al-Zuhri said these words concerning the Imam because
there was a close relationship between the former and the latter.
Al-Zuhri had perfect knowledge of the Imam’s ideals and noble values. He
admired him to the extent that he wept and said: “‘Ali b.
al-Husayn![^16]”

4. Sa‘id bin al-Musayyab

Sa‘id bin al-Musayyab was among the prominent jurists in Medina. The
narrators said: “None of the next generation was more knowledgeable than
Sa‘id.[^17]” He made friends with Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin and knew of his
piety and his firm devotion to religion. He admired the Imam, so he said
the following words concerning him:

“I have never seen a person more pious than him, namely ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn.[^18]”

“I have never seen a person more meritorious than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.
When I saw him, I hated myself. I never saw him laugh.[^19]”

A person said to Sa‘id: “I have never seen a person more pious than
so-and-so.” Sa‘id asked him: “Have you seen ‘Ali b. al-Husayn?” “No,”
replied the person. “You have never seen a person more pious than
him,[^20]” explained Sa‘id.

Sa‘id was sitting and there was a young man from Quraysh beside him.
When Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin appeared, the Qarashi asked Sa‘id about him,
and Sa‘id replied: “That is the Lord of worshippers, ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn.[^21]”

“I have never seen a person gentler and more pious than Zayn al-‘Abidin,
‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^22]”

These words, which this jurist said, have included some of the Imam’s
qualities such as piety, obedience to Allah, and gentle conduct toward
the people.

### 5. Zayd bin Aslam

Zayd bin Aslam was among the leading jurists of Medina as well as he was
among the interpreters of the Holy Qur’an.[^23] He devoted himself to
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him. He admired the Imam’s outstanding
qualities such as, piety, Allah-fearingness, ideals, and values. He said
many words concerning him. The following are some of them:

“There is no one among the people of the Qibla like him, namely like
‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^24]”

“I have never seen a person like ‘Ali b. al-Husayn among them, namely
among the members of the House.[^25]”

“I have never seen a person better than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn in
understanding and memorizing (the Qur’an).[^26]”

This means that the Imam was the best Muslim and the best Hashimi of his
time and that Sa‘id b. al-Musayyab had never seen a person better then
him in understanding and memorizing (the Qur’an). Hence, the Shi‘ites
emphasize that the Imam should be the best of his time in merits and
gifts.

### 6. Hammad bin Zayd

As for Hammad bin Zayd al-Jahdi, he was among the most prominent jurists
in Basrah and was one of the Imams of the Muslims.[^27] He made friends
with Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and admired him, saying:
“‘Ali b. al-Husayn was the most meritorious Hashimi I met.[^28]”

Indeed the Imam was the best of the Hashimis of his time in high moral
standards.

### 7. Yahya bin Sa‘id

As for Yahya bin Sa‘id b. Qays al-Ansari al-Madani, he was among the
great figures of the next generation and among the most meritorious
jurists and religious scholars.[^29] He made friends with the Imam and
knew of his outstanding merits, so he said these valuable words
concerning him: “I heard ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, and he was the best Hashimi
I met.[^30]”

The Imam, peace be on him, became the lord of all the Hashimis through
his faith, his fear of Allah, his abundant knowledge, and other
outstanding qualities.

### 8. Malik

Malik said: “There was no person among the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt) like ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^31]”

### 9. Abu’ Bakr bin al-Barqi

Abu’ Bakr bin al-Barqi said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn was the most meritorious
one of his time.[^32]”

### 10. Abu’ Zar‘a

Abu’ Zar‘a said: “I have never seen a person more knowledgeable in
jurisprudence than him, meaning ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^33]”

### 11. Abu’ Hazim

Abu’ Hazim said: “I have never seen a Hashimi more meritorious than ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn.[^34]” He also said: “I have never seen a person more
knowledgeable than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn in jurisprudence.[^35]”

### 12. Abu’ Hatam al-A‘raji

Abu’ Hatam al-A‘raji said: “I have never seen a Hashimi more meritorious
than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^36]”

### 13. Abu’ Hamza al-Thumali

Thabit b. Safiya known as Abu’ Hamza, the trustworthy and trusted one,
said: “I have never heard that there is a person more ascetic than ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn except ‘Ali b. Abi Talib.[^37]” He said once: “I have never
heard that there is a person more ascetic than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, who
caused to weep all those who were in his presence when he talked about
asceticism and preaching.[^38]”

### 14. Imam al-Sadiq

His (Zayn al-‘Abidin’s) grandson said: “None of ‘Ali’s children or his
family was more like and nearer to him in manner of dress and
understanding than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^39]” Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin was the
most similar of all the people to his grandfather, Imam ‘Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, in worshipping, knowledge,
and all other characteristics. He was a picture of that great figure who
enlightened the world with his knowledge.

### 15. ‘Umar bin ‘Abd al-‘Aziz

‘Umar bin ‘Abd al-‘Aziz was among those who respected Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and knew of his high position. The Imam,
peace be on him, met ‘Umar bin ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, and when he left him, he
(‘Umar) turned to his companions and asked them: “Who is the noblest of
all the people?”

A mercenary from among his companions answered: “You are the noblest of
all the people.”

However, he told them the truth, saying: “No, the noblest of all the
people is the person who has just left me, meaning Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin,
who wants the people to be with him and does want to be with any of
them.[^40]”

This means that the Imam, peace be on him, attained a position of which
none of the people attained. The people liked making ties or relations
with the Imam because of his high social rank. For example, when the
Imam died, ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz praised him with these words: “The
lamp of this world, the beauty of Islam, and the adornment of the
worshippers (Zayn al-‘Abidin) passed away.[^41]”

### 16. Yazid bin Mu‘awiya

Acknowledging the excellent traits of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him, was not confined to his followers, rather it included his enemies
and those who harbored malice against him. For example, Yazid b.
Mu‘awiya, who was the mortal enemy of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them, confessed the Imam’s outstanding
characteristics. This was when the Syrians asked him to let him deliver
a speech, so Yazid, the tyrannical one, fearfully said: “He (Zayn
al-‘Abidin) is among the members of the House who were provided with
abundant knowledge. He will not come down (from the pulpit) until he
exposes me and the family of Abi Sufyan.”

With these words of his, Yazid b. Mu‘awiya demonstrated that the Imam
was a knowledgeable man and eloquent speaker, and that he had strong
explanations and wonderful deductions through which he would be able to
change the attitude against the Umayyad government.

### 17. ‘Abd al-Malik bin Marw’an

‘Abd al-Malik bin Marw’an was another enemy from among the enemies of
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them; nevertheless
he admitted the outstanding merits of the Imam. This was when he met him
and saw his weakness due to excessive worshipping. So he said to him
with astonishment: “Exertion has appeared on your face while Allah has
already promised to grant you good, you are part of Allah’s Messenger,
may Allah bless him and his family, your lineage is close to him, your
means is certain, you have outstanding merits over the people of your
House and time, and you are endowed with virtues, knowledge, religion,
and piety with which none before or after you has ever been endowed with
except your previous ancestors.[^42]”

### 18. Mansu’r al-Dawaniqi

Mansu’r al-Dawaniqi was another enemy from among the enemies of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them; nevertheless he
admitted to the outstanding qualities of the Imam. This was when he sent
a letter to Dhi al-Nafs al-Zakiya. In the letter he said: “None like him
(Zayn al-‘Abidin) was born among you (‘Ali’s grandsons) after the death
of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family.[^43]”

### 19. Al-Farazdaq

Al-Farazdaq, the Arab great poet, was among those who admired the values
of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and believed in his high and
holy character. He composed his immortal ode to show Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin’s outstanding qualities and inclinations. This was when
Hisham denied recognizing the Imam before the Syrians lest they should
admire him. So al-Farazdaq introduced the Imam to them, saying:

*This is he whose ability the valley (of Mecca)*

*recognizes, and whom the (Sacred) House*

*recognizes (as do) the sanctuary and the area*

*outside the sanctuary (al-hill).*

*This is the son of the best of all Allah’s*

*servants. This is the pure pious man, the pure*

*eminent man.*

*When he comes to touch the corner of the wall*

*of the Kaaba, it almost grasps the palm of his*

*hand.*

*He takes care to be modest and he is protected*

*from his error. He only speaks when he smiles.*

*None of mankind has within their souls such*

*primacy as he does nor such grace as he does.*

*Whoever knows Allah, knows His friend (wali)*

*Religion is from the House of this man.*

*When Quraysh saw him, their spokesmen told*

*of the outstanding qualities of this man which*

*indicate (his) nobility.*

The Imam was the greatest picture al-Farazdaq saw in the world of honor
and virtues, so he admired and adored him.

### 20. Al-Himyari

As for al-Himyari, he dedicated his talents to the members of the House,
who were the source of mercy and virtue on the earth. So he composed
poetry about their laudable deeds and outstanding merits, for example,
he praised Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, in this line of
poetry:

The fourth of them is ‘Ali, the possessor of

efforts, through whom the religion and the

world are established.[^44]

### 21. Ibn Shahab

Ibn Shahab said: “I have never seen a Qarashi more meritorious than ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn.[^45]”

### 22. Ibn Zayd

Ibn Zayd said: [My father said:] “I have never seen a person greater
than ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.[^46]”

These are some contemporaries of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
whether they loved him or harbored malice against him. They unanimously
agreed that the Imam was a man with piety and knowledge of Islam

The Historians
--------------

As for the historians, despite their different thoughts and
inclinations, they unanimously agreed that the Imam was a great man who
possessed many abilities and talents which raised him to the height of
honor to which his great fathers reached. The following are some of
their words concerning him:

### 1. Ibn ‘Asakir

Al-Hafiz Abu’ al-Qasim, ‘Ali b. al-Hasan al-Shafi‘i, known as bin
‘Asakir, said in the biography of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him:
“‘Ali b. al-Husayn was trustworthy and trusted. He had many traditions
and was high, lofty, and pious.[^47]” These are the most valuable
qualities in the world of Islam.

### 2. Ibn Sa‘d

Muhammad b. Sa‘d said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn was trustworthy and trusted.
He had many traditions and was high, lofty, and pious.[^48]” Ibn ‘Asakir
greed with b. Sa‘d on giving these outstanding qualities to Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him.

### 3. Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani

Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn, Zayn al-‘Abidin, b.
‘Ali b. Abi Talib was trustworthy, trusted, a worshiper, jurist, and
meritorious. Ibn ‘Ayyina reported on the authority of al-Zuhri, who
said: ‘I have never seen a Qarashi more meritorious than him.’[^49]”

### 4. Ibn Hajar al-Haythami

Shahab al-Din Ahmed b. Hajar al-Haythami said: “It was Zayn al-‘Abidin
who inherited knowledge, asceticism, and worshipping from his father. He
was great in forgiveness, pardon, and tolerance.[^50]” Zayn al-‘Abidin
was the successor of his father, so he inherited his father’s valuable
qualities such as knowledge, asceticism, worship, forgiveness, pardon,
and tolerance toward those who mistreated him.

### 5. Al-Dhahabi

Muhammad b. Ahmed b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi said: “He (Zayn al-‘Abidin) had
wonderful majesty. He was appropriate for the greatest Imamate because
of his honor, righteousness, knowledge, reverential fear, and perfect
intellect.[^51]”

Al-Dhahabi confessed that the Imam, peace be on him, possessed brilliant
qualities, that he was worthy of the greatest Imamate of this community,
the spiritual and temporal leadership which is the highest and most
important position in Islam.

### 6. Abu’ al-Fath

Abu’ al-Fath b. Sadaqa said: “Imam ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, known as Zayn
al-‘Abidin, b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with them, was
one of the twelve Imams and among the chiefs of the next
generation.[^52]”

### 7. Abu’ Na‘eem

Al-Hafiz Abu’ Na‘eem said: “Ali b. al-HusaynZayn al-‘Abidin and Manar
al-Qanitin (the signpost of the Allah-fearing)  b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib,
was a sincere, munificent worshipper.[^53]” Abu’ Na‘eem talked about
some outstanding qualities of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
such as worship, sincerity, and generosity.

### 8. Al-Ya‘qu’bi

Ahmed b. Abi Ya‘qu’b said: “He (Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin) was the most
meritorious of all the people in worshipping. He was called Zayn
al-‘Abidin (the ornament of the worshippers). He was also called Dhu’
al-Thafanat (the one with calluses) because there were marks of
prostration on his forehead.[^54]”

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin was the most meritorious of all the people in
worshipping and obeying Allah.

### 9. Al-Waqidi

Al-Waqidi said: “He (Zayn al-‘Abidin) was the most pious of all the
people and the most obedient of them to Allah. When he walked, he did
not brandish his hands.[^55]” Al-Waqidi mentioned the Imam outstanding
traits such as piety, worship, reverential fear, and humbleness. Because
of these qualities he was the most meritorious of all the people and the
greatest of them.

### 10. Safi al-Din

Safi al-Din said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin was (a person) with great guidance
and a righteous way. In his (book) al-Jami‘, al-Khatib reported on the
authority of b. ‘Abbas, on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, who said: ‘Guidance, righteousness, and moderation
are parts of twenty-five parts of prophethood.[^56]”

### 11. Al-Nawawi

Al-Nawawi said: “They (the historians) unanimously agreed on his (Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidin’s) greatness in everything.[^57]”

The Muslims have unanimously agreed on glorifying and admiring the Imam
because he was endowed with excellent qualities of which all the Muslims
boast.

### 12. ‘Imad al-Din

‘Imad al-Din Idris al-Qarashi said: “Imam ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, Zayn
al-‘Abidin, was the most meritorious of all the Household of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, the noblest of them after
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them, and the best of them in piety,
asceticism, and worshipping.[^58]”

### 13. Ibn ‘Anba

Ibn ‘Anba, a famous genealogist, said: “His (Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s)
outstanding merits are more than to be counted or to be encompassed by a
description.[^59]” Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s laudable deeds and outstanding
merits are countless, and no one can describe them, for they were a
natural extension to the conduct of his grandfathers, who enlightened
this world with their laudable deeds and outstanding merits.

### 14. Shaykh al-Mufeed

Shaykh al-Mufeed Said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn was the most meritorious of
Allah’s creatures after his father in knowledge and action. Non-Shi‘a
jurists (‘ama) report countless traditions in the religious sciences on
his authority. Sermons, prayers (details of) the merits of the Qur’an,
accounts of the laws of what is permitted and forbidden, and the raids
(maghazi) and battles (ayyam) (during the time of the Prophet) have been
recorded on his authority. He was famous among the religious
scholars.[^60]”

### 15. Al-Jahiz

Abu’ ‘Uthman ‘Umar b. Bahr al-Jahiz said: “The Kharijites, the Shi‘ites,
the Mu‘tazilites, and non-Shi‘a have unanimously agreed that ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn was meritorious and superior (to others).[^61]” This means
that all the Muslims, despite of their different thoughts and
inclinations, have unanimously agreed that the Imam was great and
meritorious, so they loved and followed him.

### 16. Al-Sharawi

Al-Sharawi said: “He (Zayn al-‘Abidin), may Allah be pleased with him,
was a devoted worshiper, ascetic, pious, humble, and polite.[^62]”

It was these qualities that raised the Imam to the zenith of glory and
made the people adore and obey him.

### 17. Al-Qulaybi

Ahmed Al-Qulaybi al-Shafi‘i said: “His (Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s)
outstanding merits are more than to be counted or to be encompassed by a
description.[^63]”

### 18. Ibn Taymiya

Ibn Taymiya, though he deviated from the Household and showed enmity
toward them, acknowledged the Imam’s outstanding merits and high
position. He said: “As for ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, he was among the leading
figures of the next generation in knowledge and religion. He had
humility, secret alms, and other qualities. He was famous.[^64]”

### 19. Al-Shaykhani

Al-Shaykhani al-Qadiri said: “As for our lord Zayn al-‘Abidin, ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, his hands (generosity) and laudable
deeds were famous. His beauties were well-known. He possessed a great
rank and was good-hearted. He had apparent miracles which the eyes have
seen and authentic traditions established.[^65]”

The passengers talked about Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s outstanding merits
and laudable deeds. His virtues and miracles were famous among the
people. Allah endowed him with qualities with which He endowed His
sincere servants.

### 20. Ibn Khullakan

Ibn Khullakan said: “H (Zayn al-‘Abidin) was one of the twelve Imams and
among the leading figures of the next generation. Al-Zuhri said: ‘I have
never seen a Qarashi more meritorious than him.’[^66]”

### 21. Ibn Shaddqam

Ibn Shaddqam said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn, Zayn al-‘Abidin, was an ascetic
religious scholar.[^67]”

### 22. Al-Manofi

Al-Sayyid al-Manofi said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin was worshipping, sincere,
generous, and pure. When he walked, his hand did not exceed his
thigh.[^68]”

### 23. Abu’ al-Futu’h

Abu’ al-Futu’h al-Husayni said: “The immortal reputation was for the
middle ‘Ali, Zayn al-‘Abidin. He was the first son of al-Huysayn’s sons,
the fourth infallible (Imam) according to the view of the twelve Imam
(Shi‘ites), and an ascetic (person) according to the view of other than
them.[^69]”

### 24. Al-Manawi

Al-Manawi said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin was a firm Imam. His hands (generosity)
and noble deeds were famous. His outstanding merits well-known. He had a
great position. He was good hearted. He was the head of the body of
presidency. He was the expected one for policy and ruling the
subjects.[^70]”

The Imam, peace be on him, was distinguished by great characteristics
which qualified him, according to the consensus of all the Muslims, for
undertaking the Imamate and general leadership and managing the affairs
of the Muslims, for there was no person during his time more meritorious
than him in good inclinations and great talents.

### 25. Muhammad bin Tallha

Kamal al-Din Muhammad bin Tallha al-Qarashi said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin was
the example of those who renounced the worldly pleasures, lord of the
Allah-fearing, and Imam of the believers. His outstanding qualities bear
witness that he was among the progeny of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family. His appearance shows his proximity to Allah. His
calluses record his prayers and spending the night in prayer. His
renouncing the worldly pleasures indicates his asceticism in this world.
The morals of devoutness streamed for him, so he surpassed them. The
lights of perpetuation shined for him, so he followed them. The litanies
of worship associated him, so he was intimate with them. The works of
obedience allied with him, so he adorned himself with their ornament. He
took night as a mount to cover the road to the next world. The thirst of
the midday heat was his guide through which he sought the right way to
the lighthouse. He had the miracles which the eyes saw and authentic
traditions established. He is among the kings of the hereafter.[^71]”

### 26. Muhammad bin Sa‘id

Muhammad bin Sa‘id said: “He ( Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin) was trustworthy,
trusted, high, lofty, pious, and had many traditions.[^72]”

### 27. Al-Sayyid ‘Abbas

Al-Sayyid ‘Abbas al-Mu’sawi said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin was the best of the
people in face, the sweetest of them in perfume, the noblest of the in
soul, the highest of them in lineage, and the greatest of them in
honor.[^73]”

### 28. Al-Sayyid Mohsin

Al-Sayyid Mohsin al-Amin al-‘Amili said: “He (Zayn al-‘Abidin) was the
most meritorious of the people of his time in knowledge, jurisprudence,
piety, worship, generosity, clemency, patience, eloquence, high moral
standards, alms, kindness to the poor, and loyalty to the Muslims. The
relatives, the people, the friends, and the enemies glorified him. Yazid
b. Mu‘awiya commanded the people of Medina to Pledge allegiance to him
as slaves except Zayn al-‘Abidin. He commanded him to pledge allegiance
to him as his brother and cousin.[^74]”

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin was distinguished by all the great qualities. All
the outstanding qualities by which man is distinguished and through
which he becomes noble were part of the Imam’s outstanding qualities and
merits. So he was as it was said:

You were created free from all defects

as if that you were created as you wished.

### 29. Al-Nuwayri

Shahab al-Din Ahmed b. ‘Abd al-Wahhab Al-Nuwayri said: “‘Ali b.
al-Husayn was reliable, pious, trusted, and had many traditions. He was
the most meritorious of the members of his family and the best of them
in obedience.[^75]”

### 30. Al-Shafi‘i

Imam Al-Shafi‘i said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn was the most meritorious of all
the people of Medina in jurisprudence.[^76]”

### 31. ‘Ali bin ‘Isa al-Arbali

Abu’ al-Hasan ‘Ali bin ‘Isa b. Abi al-Fath al-Arbali said: “The
outstanding qualities of ‘Ali b. al-Husayn are more than the stars. The
one who describes them goes to a boundless place. They appear in the sky
of outstanding qualities as the stars appear for those who seek guidance
through them. How is that not? He (Zayn al-‘Abidin) surpasses all the
world’s inhabitants with the exception of ‘Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan,
al-Husayn. (Of course, this rhymed prose has been advanced, so do not be
hesitant.) When you give the intellect its right, you will find whatever
you want of glory and rightness, for he is a divine Imam, luminous
temple, the substitute of the substitutes, the ascetic of the ascetics,
the pole of the poles, the worshipper of the worshippers, the light of
the lamp of the Message, the center of the circle of the Imamate, Ibn
al-Khiyaratayn (the son of the best two), the one with two generous
sides (father and mother), the peace of the heart, and the delight of
the eye. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, and what will make you comprehend what ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn is? (He was) repentant, the one who wept very much, the one
who put into effect the Sunna and the Book, said right words, devoted
himself to the mihrab, preferred (people) to himself, and became high
through the degrees of knowledge.

His day surpassed his yesterday. He was unique in knowledge. He was the
best of all creatures in inherited and newly acquired (qualities). He
resorted to honor, so he ascended to its top and became important in all
its affairs. He defeated (all the people) through what he had such as
good birthplace, noble origin, and pure descent. The tongues of those
who describe him are unable to depict him. He was unique in his privacy
during his whispered prayers. So the angels admired his attitudes. His
fear of his Lord made his tears flow. So he exceeded the heavy, pouring
rain. So, may Allah support you, carefully consider his traditions, take
into consideration his signs, think about his asceticism, his worship,
his humility, his night prayers, his punctual prayers, his preferring
(people to himself), his alms, his gifts, his pleading (to Allah), his
purity, and his eloquence which indicate his humility to his Lord, his
standing as the standing of the disobedient in spite of his firm
obedience, his confessing the sins in spite of his innocence, his
weeping, his wailing, the beating of his heart out of the fear of Allah,
his shaking all over, and his standing (for prayer).

When it got dark, he whispered to his Lord, may His names be holy,
addressed Him, the Exalted, cleaved to the Door of Him, the Great and
Almighty, imagined that he was before Him, turned away from everything
(other than Him), devoted himself to Him, he separated (himself) from
this mean world, and was free from the human corpse. So his body
prostrated on the earth while his soul was clinging to the world of
angels. He fidgeted when he passed by a threatening verse as if the
verse concerned him, while he was far from it. Thus, you find wonderful
affairs, strange conditions, and a soul close to Allah, the Glorified,
and you know with the knowledge of the one for whom the curtain was
disclosed and the doors were open that this fruit is from that tree, as
one is part of ten, this fresh drop from that noble fountain, this new
one from that old one, this pearl from that abundant sea, this star from
that bright moon, this growing branch from that firm origin, and this
result from that premise. So this one (Zayn al-‘Abidin) whose origin was
pure was the successor of Muhammad, ‘Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn, and
Fatima, the honored, the glorified.[^77]”

Al-Arbali, a scholar and researcher, has mentioned the most prominent
qualities of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, which are among the
places of pride for every Muslim, for his qualities are a natural
extension to the qualities and inclinations of his fathers, who changed
the course of human history and enlightened man’s way and guided him to
signposts of the truth when he had been straying in the remote
mysterious fields of this world.

Description cannot encompass the outstanding merits and laudable deeds
of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, nor can explanation meet them,
for he was a branch of the tree of prophethood and of the large tree of
the Imamate in which Allah has put absolute perfection in order to be a
signpost for the truth in the earth.

### 32. Al-Bustani

Al-Bustani said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin is Abu’ al-Hasan, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b.
‘Ali b. Abi Talib. He was given the nick-name of Zayn al-‘Abidin because
of his plentiful worship. He was also given the nick-name of Sayyid
al-‘Abidin (the Lord of worshippers), the pure, the trusted one, and the
one with calluses.[^78]”

### 33. Wajjdi

Muhammad Fareed Wajjdi said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin is Abu’ al-Hasan, ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, better known as Zayn al-‘Abidin. He was
also called al-Asghar (the younger). Al-Husayn b. ‘Ali had no
descendants except from the children of Zayn al-‘Abidin. He (Zayn
al-‘Abidin) is one of the twelve Imams according to the doctrine of the
Imami Shi‘ites, and he was also among the lords and chiefs of the next
generation.[^79]”

### 34. Agha Buzurg

The Chief of the researchers, Muhammad Hasan, better known as Agha
Buzurg al-Tahrani, said: “Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, the lord of those who
prostrated themselves in prayer, Ali b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib,
peace be on them, is the fourth Imam of the Imami Shi‘ites. The Muslim
historians have unanimously agreed that he was the most meritorious of
all the people in piety, asceticism, and worshipping.[^80]”

### 35. Ibn al-Jawzi

Ibn al-Jawzi said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin (the ornament of the worshippers),
is a model for the ascetics, and lord of the Allah-fearing. His
outstanding merits bear witness that he was from among the progeny of
Allah’s Apostle, his righteousness proves that he has nearness to Allah,
his calluses record for him that he prayed very much and that he spent
the night in praying, and his renouncing the worldly pleasures denotes
his asceticism.[^81]”

### 36. Tajj al-Din

Tajj al-Din b. Muhammad b. Hamza al-Husayni, the Chief of Halab, said:
“‘Ali b. al-Husayn was the lord of the Hashimites, the place of their
knowledge, and the most meritorious one of them.[^82]”

### 37. ‘Arif Tamir

‘Arif Tamir said: “He (Zayn al-‘Abidin) was famous for asceticism, and
worship. None was similar to him in these qualities, so he was given the
nick-name of Zayn al-‘Abidin and al-Sajjad(the one who prostrates
himself very much in prayer).[^83]”

### 38. Al-Zarkali

Khayr al-Din Al-Zarkali said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib
al-Hashimi, al-Qarashi, Abu’ al-Hasan, the one whose nick-name is Zayn
al-‘Abidin, is the fourth Imam of the Shi‘ites. He was one of those who
were examples for clemency and piety. He was called ‘Ali al-Asghar (the
younger) to distinguish him from his brother ‘Ali al-Akkbar (the
elder).[^84]”

### 39. Ahmed Mahmu’d Subhi

Dr. Ahmed Mahmu’d Subhi said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn inherited his Imamate
through his lineage to Fatima, the chaste. He drew for the Shi‘ites the
way of the spiritual Imamate, impressed Shiism with the impression of
everlasting sadness and continuous weeping over al-Husayn, and dedicated
himself to worshipping, so he was given the nick-name of al-Sajjad and
the Kunya of Zayn al-‘Abidin. He descended from the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, and from Kasra, so he was known as Ibn
al-Khiyaratayn (the son of the best two).[^85]”

Dr. Ahmed Subhi mentioned that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
inherited the Imamate through his descending from his grandmother,
Fatima the chaste, mistress of the women of the world. It is necessary
for us to discuss this matter with the Doctor. As for this claim, it is
untrue, for the Imamate does not depend on inheritance; rather it
depends on text (tradition), and it is in the hand of Allah, the
Exalted, Who chooses for it those who have good inclinations and
outstanding merits. This is what the Shi‘ites believe in, and it is
proven in their books of theology. It was not Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin,
peace be on him, who impressed Shiism with the impression of sadness for
Imam al-Husayn, lord of the youth of Heaven; rather it was the tragedy
of Karbala’, whose terrors melt the hearts, which impressed Shiism with
the world of sorrow and sadness. Zayn al-‘Abidin was in the foremost of
who were affected by it, for he saw all its sorrowful stages.

### 40. Ahmed Fahmi

Shaykh Ahmed Fahmi said: “He (Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin) was the most
meritorious of the people of his time in knowledge, jurisprudence,
piety, worship, generosity, clemency, eloquence, and noble lineage. He
helped the poor and the weak.[^86]”

### 41. Husayn ‘Ali Mahfu’z

Dr. Husayn ‘Ali Mahfu’z said: “Zayn al-‘Abidin was the best of Allah’s
creatures in knowledge and action. He was the most similar of the
members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, to the Commander
of the faithful in the manner of clothing, knowledge, and worship.[^87]”

Important Points
----------------

The words of the contemporaries concerning the Imam and of the
historians are full of important points. The following are some of them:

1. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was the most knowledge of the
people of his time in the affairs of the Islamic law and precepts of
religion.

2. He was the best of all the Hashimites and the Qarashis of his time,
this is because he was endowed with outstanding qualities and ideals
with which no one was endowed except his grandfathers.

3. He was the best of the people of his time and the greatest of the
them in importance and position, this is because of his noble lineage,
he was Ibn al-Khiyaratayn (the son of the best two) in addition to his
genius and great talents.

4. He was the most ascetic of all the people in turning away from the
worldly pleasures.

5. He was the best of all the people in piety, reverential fear, and
clinging to the religion.

6. He was the lamp of this world and beauty of Islam[^88], this is
because his outstanding conduct was among the qualities of the Prophet
and the Imams.

7. He was the best of the people in manners, the sweetest of them in
perfume, the most generous of them in soul, and the greatest of them in
honor.

8. He was the most eloquent of all the people, for his supplications,
his preaching, and his wise sayings are among the sources of Arab
literature and among the most valuable and cultural provisions in the
world of Islam.

9. He was the kindest of all the people to the poor and the most
merciful of them to the miserable and the deprived.

10. The was the best of all the people in worship and obedience to
Allah, for there was no one like him in worship and obedience to Allah
except his grandfathers.

11. He was the best of all the people in morals, for he was similar to
his grandfather, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, in
high moral standards.

12. He was appropriate for presidency, the spiritual and temporal
leadership of the community.

13. The Muslims unanimously agreed that he was great and virtuous, and
that none of his opponents was able to defame him.

These are some points concerning the words of the contemporaries to the
Imam and of the historians, despite their different inclinations and
doctrines. They establish the most sublime view of the Shi‘ites who are
of the opinion that it is necessary for the Imam to be the most
righteous and the most knowledgeable of the people of his time.

[^1]: Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 2, p. 251.

[^2]: Hayat al-Imam Mohammed al-Baqir.

[^3]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p. 147.

[^4]: Tadhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 9, p. 445.

[^5]: Khulasat Tahdhib al-Kamal, M 7/Q/2. Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani,
al-Aghani, vol. 15, p. 325.

[^6]: Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, p. 104.

[^7]: Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 37. Tarikh al-Islam, vol. 2, p.
266. Al-Kashif, vol. 2, p. 282. Tabaqat al-Fuqaha’, vol. 10, p. 34.

[^8]: Tahdhib al-Lughat wa al-Asma’, part 1, p. 343.

[^9]: Al-Jarh wa al-Ta‘dil, vol. 3, part 1, p. 178.

[^10]: Khulasat Tahdhib al-Kamal, M 7/Q2, p. 336. Tadhkirat al-Huffaz,
vol. 1, p. 75. Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p. 105. Al-‘Ibar fi Akhbar
men Ghabar, vol. 1, p. 111.

[^11]: Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 238. Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 12,
p. 19.

[^12]: Roudat al-Jinan, vol. 7, p. 248. Kashf al-Ghumma.

[^13]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p. 140.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar.

[^15]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai‘, p. 88. Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p. 541. Bihar
Al-Anwar, vol. 46. p. 64.

[^16]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 12, p. 19. Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 2, p. 288.
Roudat al-Jinan, vol. 7, p. 246.

[^17]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 4, p. 85.

[^18]: Al-‘Ibar fi Tarikh men Ghabar, vol. 1, p. 111. Kulasat Tahdhib
al-Kamal, p. 231.

[^19]: Tarikh al-Ya‘qu\`bi, vol. 3, p. 46.

[^20]: Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 38. Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 3,
p. 392.

[^21]: Al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p. 189.

[^22]: Jammharat al-Awliya’, vol. 2, p. 74.

[^23]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 3, p. 395.

[^24]: Tarikh Dimashq, 12/Q1/, p. 19.

[^25]: Ibid.

[^26]: Tabaqat al-Fuqaha’, vol. 2, p. 34.

[^27]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 3, p. 9.

[^28]: Tahdhib al-Lughat wa al-Asma’, part 1, p. 343.

[^29]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 81, p. 222.

[^30]: Tahdhib al-Kamal, M7/Q2, p. 336. Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, part 1, p.
343. Al-Tarikh al-Kabir, vol. 3, part 2, p. 266. Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat,
vol. 1, p. 214. Al-Jarh wa al-Ta‘dil, Q/1, vol. 3, p. 178.

[^31]: Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 238. In Tahdhib al-Tahdhib,
vol. 7, p. 305: “There was no person among the Household of Allah’s
Apostle like ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.”

[^32]: Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 238.

[^33]: Tarikh Dimashq, 12/Q1/p. 18.

[^34]: Ibid., p. 19.

[^35]: Tahdhib al-Kamal, M7/Q2/p. 336. Kashf al-Gumma.

[^36]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. 1, p. 75. Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. 1,
p. 105. Al-‘Ibar fi Khabar men Ghabar, vol. 1, p. 111. Tarikh al-Islam,
vol. 2, p. 16.

[^37]: Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 571.

[^38]: Al-Mufeed al-Amali, p. 117.

[^39]: Al-Himyari, Divan, p. 362.

[^40]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, PP. 3-4. A similar
narration has been mentioned in the book ‘Muhadarat al-Udaba’’ by
al-Raghib al-Asfahani, vol. 1, p. 166.

[^41]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, 48.

[^42]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 75.

[^43]: Al-Mubrrad, al-Kamil, vol. 2, p. 467. Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 5,
p. 310

[^44]: Al-Himyari, Divan, p. 36.

[^45]: Al-Basawi, al-Ma‘rifa wa al-Tarikh, vol. 1, p. 360.

[^46]: Ibid.

[^47]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p. 142.

[^48]: Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 5, p. 222.

[^49]: Tahdheeb al-Tahdheeb, vol. 2, p. 35.

[^50]: Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, vol. 119.

[^51]: Siyar ‘Alam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 240.

[^52]: Durarr al-Abkar, p. 70.

[^53]: Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 133.

[^54]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 104.

[^55]: Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, p. 104.

[^56]: Wasilat al-Mal fi ‘Add Manaqib al-Al, p. 208.

[^57]: Tahdhib al-Lughat wa al-Asma’, Q1/343.

[^58]: ‘Uyyu\`n al-Akhbar wa Funu\`n al-Athar, p. 144.

[^59]: ‘Umdat al-Talib, p. 193.

[^60]: Al-Mufeed, al-Irshad.

[^61]: ‘Umdat al-Talib, pp. 193-194.

[^62]: Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p. 49.

[^63]: Tuhfat al-Raghib, p. 13.

[^64]: Minhajj al-Sunna, vol. 2, p. 123, first edition.

[^65]: Al-Sirat al-Sawi, p. 19.

[^66]: Wafayat al-‘Ayan, vol. 2, p. 429.

[^67]: Zahrat al-Maqu\`l, p. 6.

[^68]: Jammharat al-Awliya’ wa A‘lam Ahl al-Tasawwif, vol. 2, p. 71.

[^69]: Al-Nafha al-‘Anbariya.

[^70]: Al-Kawakib al-Durriya, vol. 2, p. 139.

[^71]: Matalib al-Sa’u\`l, vol. 2, p. 41.

[^72]: Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, p. 104.

[^73]: Nazhat al-Jalees, vol. 2, p. 24.

[^74]: A‘yan al-Shi‘a, 4/Q1/308.

[^75]: Nihayat al-Irab fi Funu\`n al-Adab, vol. 21, p. 324.

[^76]: Rasa’il al-Jahiz, p. 106. Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 15, p. 274.

[^77]: Kashf al-Ghumma, the Biography of ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.

[^78]: Al-Bustani, Da’irat al-Ma‘arif, vol. 9, p. 355.

[^79]: Da’irat Ma‘arif al-Qarn al-‘Ishreen, vol. 4, p. 793.

[^80]: Al-Dhree‘a, vol. 13, p. 345.

[^81]: Tadhkirat al-Khawas.

[^82]: Ghayat al-Ikhtisar, p. 106.

[^83]: Al-Imama fi al-Islam, p. 116.

[^84]: Al-A‘lam, vol. 1, p. 86.

[^85]: Nazariyat al-Imama, p. 307.

[^86]: Al-Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 65.

[^87]: Al-Balagh Magazine, no. 7, first year, p. 54.

[^88]: ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz described him with that.


