Preface
=======

Some time ago, a Muslim youth had correspondence with a Christian
institution.

His aim was academic enquiry about the authen ticity of the \`Gospels'
and other Christian scriptures.

The correspondence continued for a long time; but the Muslim
correspondent did not get any satisfactory reply to his fundamental
questions.

The correspondence was brought to our notice; we found that it throws
light on some useful subjects, and decided to put these extracts in- the
hands of our readers. The original letters are preserved in our
office.

The only aim of publishing this booklet is to clearly present the facts
to all concerned, and especially to Christian youths, so that they may
build their lives on the foundation of truth.

We pray to Allah to give the educated Christian youths an urge to seek
the truth, and to make them free of prejudice.

We hope that they will read these questions with open mind, will
re-examine their faith and, like that Muslim youth, will think
independently, keeping them- selves free from the fetters of dogmas and
pre- conceived ideas.


Dar Rah-i Haq Publications

P. O. Box No. 5,
Qum - IRAN.


**Translator's Note**

This is the translation of a Persian booklet published by "Dar Rah-i
Haq "-Qum, Iran. I have translated it on the request of "World Organiz-
ation for Islamic Services, Tehran. "

it faithfully represents the original, al- though it is not a literal
translation. But I have made the following two changes:-

1.The original was published in a Muslim country; and the publishers
thought it enough, when giving any Qur'anic reference, to mention the
chapter and verse only, without quoting the actual words.

In this translation, I have quoted the verses, wherever necessary, to
make the meaning clear to those readers who do not know the Qur'an. 2.
In one letter, there was a reference to a Persian dictionary of the
Bible, to show the usage of the word \`Day' in Jewish literature.

I have substituted it with a relevant quotation from The Westminster
Dictionary of the Bible.

Lastly, I have taken the liberty of adding (as an Appendix) a few pages
from my own book "Qur'an and Iladith," which has been published by the
Bilal Muslim Mission of Tan- zania, Dar-es-Salaam.

This addition, I hope, will throw more light on the subjects discussed
in this booklet, and will, thus, enhance its value.


Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi
Dar-es-Salaam,
TANZANIA.
29th November,1974


