Supplement 1
============

MUSLIM: Who was the author of the Gospels, and when were they
written?

CHRISTIAN: About eight persons among those who believed in Christ, in
the first century of the Christian era, wrote twenty seven books and
letters which constitute the Gospel or New Testament; and the date of
their writing is from 45 A.D. to 90 A.D.

MUSLIM: Please let me know the names of the authors. Also, whether they
were trust- worthy and free from errors (so that we may have full trust
in them) or not.

CHRISTIAN: Four great personalities, who wrote the Gospels, were
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John. They wrote the Gospels in Greek language;
they were, very holy and pious, so much that we call them Saints and
Apostles of God.

MUSLIM: Obviously, they should be holy. But I would. like to know what
is the basis of your belief that they were, in fact, holy.

CHRISTIAN: I request you to keep your ques- tions confined to the
lessons (i.e. the lessons of correspondence course which the Christians
send to the Muslim youths . to convert them to Christianity); we cannot
reply to questions unrelated to the lessons.

MUSLIM: I am sorry to point put that in my previous letter a most
important question was asked, but you did not give it any importance.

Obviously, unless a man has trust and confidence in a speaker or,
author, he cannot have any trust or confidence in his sayings or
writing. Therefore, the question of the identity and character of the
writers of the New Testa- ment must be settled before all lessons and
every topic.

I hope you will reply to my previous questions as soon as possible.
CHRISTIAN: Sorry. I cannot remember that any of your letters has
remained unanswered. Anyhow, I would like you to write again the subject
matter of your question.

MUSLIM: Your avoidance of my enquiry about the identity and character
of the authors of the Gospel has made me more suspicious about them.

You very well understood the importance of my question. Still you did
not attend to it. Instead, you sent me some tracts which had no
connection at all with my enquiry.

If you have any proof concerning the identity and character of those
writers, please let me know.

CHRISTIAN: Our greatest proof is that today people, through the message
of this very Gospel (New Testament), come to know Jesus Christ, are
saved from their sins, and get the love of God, and find peace and joy.
In other words, effectiveness of the Gospel's words is our greatest
proof.

Although this book did not come to us from heaven, the people who wrote
it were guided by the Holy Ghost.

MUSLIM: So you think that effectiveness of a word is the greatest proof
of its truth and authenticity'. If we accept this argument, then you
will have to admit the truth of so many wrong religions and ideologies
which have en- chanted a vast multitude of people within a short
period.

We know that Buddhism is one of the major religions of the world, which
is being followed by such a large population since the sixth century
B.C.

The teachings of Buddha are accepted like divine revelation in East and
South-east Asia. Still you say that that religion is baseless and cannot
be accepted as a divine teaching.

If you truly believe that effectiveness of the word is the proof of its
truth, then why are you not coming within the fold of Islam, which has
attracted such a large number of people in every part of the world, and
has more than 750 million followers?

If this is your "greatest proof," then I wonder about the value of your
other proofs. When the Muslim scholars want to prove the truth of Islam,
they do not put forward its effectiveness as the proof; they bring other
arguments.

For example, they say: One of the proofs of the truth of Islam is the
miracle of the Qur'an. This book reveals so many secrets of the
universe; teaches the most perfect code of life, in the most miraculous
language.

For the last fourteen centuries it is challenging the mankind to bring,
if they can, even one chapter like it, but nobody has ever succeeded to
meet this challenge.

Dear friend! I have requested you several times to describe to me the
lives of the authors of the Gospels; unfortunately, I have not been
favoured with a satisfactory reply yet.

I repeat my request to explain to me, as you had promised earlier,
clear proofs of their reliability. CHRISTIAN: We mentioned earlier that
the best arguments is the "savings" which we have tasted. Now, if you
have any argument against it, please send it to us. We are awaiting for
it. MUSLIM: I am mentioning here some facts about some of the disciples
and companions of Christ - that is, Peter, Matthew, John and 15 Judah.
We may know from this sample, the character of "their" disciples. Please
refer to the following verses of the Gospel in this connection. Christ
Hated Peter:

Matthew writes:

"From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples, how that
he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and
chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third
day. Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far
from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee.

But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art
an offence unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God,
but those that be of men" (Matthew, 16:21-23).

Do you see how Christ calls Peter a'Satan' and \`offence unto Christ.'
In spite of this, Matthew, Luke and Mark have incorporated into their
Gospels the informations given by.


