Supplement 2
============

Peter. Strange, isn't it?

Peter and John were Disobedient to Christ: Mark writes about the events
of the night when Christ was to be arrested and had told his disciples
that one of them would betray him. Then:-

"And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and he saith to
his disciples, Sit ye here, while I shall pray.

And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be sore
amazed, and to be very heavy; And saith unto them, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch.

And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that,
if it were possible, the hour might pass from him. .... And he cometh,
and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto Peter, Simon, sleepest thou?
couldest not thou watch one hour?

Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation ...And again he went
away, and prayed, and spake the same words. And when he returned, he
found them asleep again, (for their eyes were heavy,) neither wist they
what to answer him" (Mark, 14:32-40).

Could such people (who did not obey the repeatedly-given order of
Christ in such a grave situation) give any importance to his words at
other times?

How can one be sure that they remained firmly on right path during the
bitter persecutions of the first century of Christian era? The Authors
Had No Faith:

The Gospels clearly show that Christ during the last days of his
earthly life had told his ,disciples that he would "be killed, and be
raised again the third day" (Matthew, 16:21). This is fully acknowledged
and accepted by the Christians.

Still, on the third day when they were informed by various persons that
Christ had arisen from his grave, they did not believe . it. At last,
Christ himself came to them and upbraided them on their faithlessness.
Here are the relevant verses from Mark:-

"And she (Mary Magdalene) went and told them that had been with him, as
they mourned and wept. And they, when they had heard that he was alive,
and had been seen of her, believed not.

After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they
walked, and went into the country. And they went and told it unto the
residue: neither believed they them.

Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they
believed not them which had seen him after he was risen" (Mark,
16:10-14).

It proves that the disciples had no faith in the words of Christ, in
spite of the declarations of Christ. If one believes in a prophet, he
must accept whatever he hears from him.

The quota- tions given above (from the New Testament) show clearly the
"faith" and character of the authors of the Gospel and disciples of
Christ.

It shows them being called \`Satan' by Christ; of very weak
determination and will, unfaithful and hard of heart. Naturally, one
cannot have faith in the words of such people.

CHRISTIAN: It is true that the disciples of Christ were from among the
sinner-most people of their time - one was a publican (collector of
taxes), others were illiterate and un-cultured fishermen, and so on.

But Christ cleansed them from sins. And they were human-beings like us,
and sometimes they slipped into faithlessness and doubts; and Christ
used to warn them and admonish them.

But the important point is that the disciples wrote their books after
they were filled with the Holy Ghost.

MUSLIM: We may say, as you have admitted that the New Testament shows
that the dis- ciples and the authors of the Gospels, in spite of their
constant company with Christ, some- times slipped into faithlessness,
doubts and worldly considerations.

But it cannot be said that "they were like us." Because we (the
Muslims) never have any doubt about the promises made by the Holy
Prophet of Islam in whom we believe.

In any case, one cannot have confidence in the authors of the Gospels,
as they sometimes slipped into doubts and faithlessness.

Regarding your assertion that they wrote the Gospels after being filled
with the Holy Ghost: It is just a claim; and its basis is the writing of
those very disciples and their compan- ions whose truthfulness and
trustworthiness is under discussion and dispute. Probably they made this
claim because of the worldly con- sideration and faithlessness!

Moreover, the following facts do not fit with this assertion:-

(1) Nearness to the Lord Creator is a thing which does not come to
sinful and unclean people. To reach near God, one must spend years and
years in piety, virtuousness and highest moral ethics.


