Supplement 3
============

How could it be possible for those dis- ciples (with such faith and
character as you have mentioned yourself) to reach such a high rank?

(2) The difference which they had about many important and fundamental
matter - like the question whether the Law of Moses was to be followed -
is an irrefutable proof that they did not receive any revelation, and
were not filled with the Holy Ghost.

Because it was impossible for the both parties of that dispute
(following or not following the Law of Moses) to be right and guided by
the Holy Ghost.

It must be admitted that at least one party was wrong and in error. And
it shows that they were not the recipient of divine revelation. Divine
revelation is all Truth and has no con- tradiction or discrepancy.

(3) The mistakes made by them prove that they were not free from
errors, and did not eceive divine guidance. For example-.-

Paul reviled the high priest Ananias. Then:- "And they that stood by
said, Revilest thou God's high priest'!

Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest: for
it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people"
(Acts, 23:4-5).

(4) Contradictions, baseless assertions and wrong narrations of the New
Testament are a clear proof that its writers were not guided by divine
revelation or the Holy Ghost. Obviously, contradictory statements and
baseless talks do not come from God.

CHRISTIAN: Do you know the Qur'an? Has not your prophet Muhammad told
you to honour Torah (Tawrat) and Gospel (Injil) and to believe in them
as they were word of God?

If the Gospel is full of baseless statements, then why Muhammad did not
tell you so?

What defects have you seen in the teachings of Jesus and in the sayings
mentioned in the Gospels?

MUSLIM: I have not seen any sentence in the Qur'an telling us to honour
the present Torah and Gospel. On the contrary, the fol- lowing verses
show that God had revealed a \`Book,' Gospel by name, to Jesus Christ
himself:-

"Say ye: We believe in God and the revelation given to us and to
Abraham, Ishmael, Issac, Jacob, and the tribes, and that given to Moses
and Jesus . . . " (Qur an, 2:136).

"It is He who sent down to thee in truth the Book, confirming what went
before it; and He sent down Torah and Gospel before it" (Quran, 3:3).

"And God will teach him (Jesus) the Book and wisdom and Torah and
Gospel" (Qur'an, 3:48).

As mentioned above, these verses of the Qur'an show that Gospel was a
Book revealed to Jesus Christ.

Now where is that Book? Obviously the manipulating hands did 'not keep
it intact. What is now presented to us as \`Gospel' is not the Gospel
revealed to Jesus. Even you say that these books were written not by
Jesus, but by his disciples.

Moreover, the New Testament describes the birth, arrest and "death" of
Christ; it also contains the letters, most of which were written by Paul
to various addresses.

(But not a single line is from the writing of Jesus.) The New Testament
is nothing more than a book of biography (or history), containing the
news of various events, beginning with words like \`it came to pass,'
\`Jesus said' or \`did' this or that.

It is not related in any way with the \`book' which was revealed by God
to Jesus. It is but a book of history written by the followers of Christ
in the first century of Christian era.

Also, the Qur'an with its brilliant and irrefutable logic criticizes
the beliefs of the Jews and Christians, concerning, among other things,
the Christians' belief of divinity of Jesus Christ and his being son of
God. For example, see the following verses:-

"Verily, they do blaspheme who say: \`God is Christ the son of Mary.'
But said Christ: \`O Children of Israel'. Worship God, My Lord and your
Lord.' . . . They do blaspheme who say \`God is one of three' For there
is no God except one God. . . . And Christ son of Mary was no more,than
an apostle; many were the apostles that passed away before him . . . "
(Qur an, 5: 72, 73, 75).

"And behold, God will say: \`O Jesus son of Mary! Didst thou say unto
men, \`Worship me and my mother as gods instead of God?' He will say:
\`Glory to Thee! Never could I say what I had no right (to say) ...
Never said I to them aught except what Thou didst command me to say
that, \`Worship . God, My Lord and Your Lord . ... " (Quran,
5:116-117).

"Verily, the similitude of Jesus before God is as that of Adam; He
created him from dust, then said to him \`Be' and he was." (Qur'an,.
3:59).

How could the Qur'an, which contains such refutations of the beliefs of
Christianity, tell the Muslims to respect the present Torah and
Gospel?

In view of the above, your objection, that why Muhammad
(p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) did not tell'us to remain aloof from Gospel and
Christianity, is off the mark.

Also, you have asked: "What defects have you seen in the sayings of
Gospel?" In reply I have to remind you of the contradictions and
baseless assertions of the Gospels, some of which may be mentioned, if
necessary.


