Supplement 5
============

CHRISTIAN: We invite you, if you like, to come to ... . Reading Room,
so that fruitful discussions may be held.

MUSLIM: If the arguments, which I have pre- viously put before you,
have any weakness, it is your duty (as a Christian missionary) to point
it out to me. Otherwise, you should admit that what I have written is
correct.

I prefer the written argument as it is done with more thoroughness (and
with full references); therefore, I am unable to come to the Reading
Room.

I am waiting for your reply concerning the contradiction of the Gospels
about the period during which Jesus remained buried.

CHRISTIAN: Our reply is the same which we had written to you earlier.
We find in ancient and historical books of Jews (like The Talmud) many
such reckonings of the "day" - that is, they have written the word "day
and night." while they actually mean only a small part of the day.

MUSLIM: I request you to let me have the full references of the Talmud
(with chapters and verses) where, as you claim, a part of day has been
written as a "day and night." I may check it with the help of a
Talmudist who comes to us from time to time.

CHRISTIAN: I do not have detailed information, at present, about the
chapters and verses of Talmud which have connection with the subject of
this discussion. I will inform you later on, after research.

Meanwhile, you may present other matters for discussion.

MUSLIM: Dear Sir? When you had no know- ledge of the Talmud, you should
not have written the following sentence in your previous letter: "We
find in ... books of Jews (like Talmud)."

As a friend, I advise you not to write any unverified statement;
otherwise, your words will lose their value.

CHRISTIAN: In fact, my information about the Talmud was very limited.
Therefore, I could not quote the relevant verses. I want some more time
to do further research on this subject.

MUSLIM: My Christian friend? It is more than one month\* that I am
waiting for your final answer about the contradiction of the Gospel on
the subject of "three days and three nights" and "one day and two
nights."

Regretfully, I note that I have not received any affirmative or
negative reply. I pray to God that this silence is not because of
prejudice and blind adherence to the beliefs of the ancients.

Anyhow, I do not propose to talk any more about that contradiction
(because you have taken refuge into silence). Now I am presenting to you
another contradiction and I hope you will discuss it truthfully.

\* Uptil now, i.e., 1972, many years after that letter no reply has
been received.

Abuse by the Thieves:

Matthew writes at the end of the story of the crucifixion of Christ:

"Then were there two thieves crucified with him, . . . And they that
passed by reviled him, . . . Likewise also the chief priests mock- ing
him, with the scribes and elders, said, He saved others; himself he
cannot save ... The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast
the same in his teeth" (Matthew, 27:38-44).

. But Luke says that only one of the thieves abused him, while the
other admonished him for that bad behaviour:-

"And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, If
thou be Christ, save thyself and us.

But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation?" (Luke, 23:39-40).

I request you to explain this contradiction. (Note: When no reply was
received, another letter was sent with the suggestion that they should
either give a logical reply or admit frankly that Gospels were wrong.

After a long time, the following reply was received.)


