Supplement 6
============

CHRISTIAN: You have asked us to admit frankly that Gospels were wrong.
Why?

The path trodden by Christ has not been trodden by anyone. It is quite
enough for you to know that Christ is alive and has eternal exist ence.
He is the only man having a wonderful life.
When you do not believe in the Gospel, how can we prove to you that
Christ is Truth?

In any case, we may pray for you; nothing is done by our own hands.

Concerning the contradiction mentioned by you, we must advise you that
from our point of view both versions are correct.

In the beginning both of them reviled Christ; afterwards, one of them
repented. For this reason, Luke ignored the one and mentioned the other
only.

MUSLIM: I am sorry to have to point out to you that there is no
evidence to support your claim, either in Matthew or in Luke. Both of
the writers purport to write the whole incident, not only a part.

Otherwise, they might have said that it was only a part of the story.
We may give an example about the two stories written by them.

Suppose there are two widely-circulated dailies in Tehran. One of them
writes, \`Yesterday two persons from the country \`X' abused the
president of U.S.A.

' The other writes: \`Yesterday one person from the country \`X' abused
the president of U.S.A., but his companion admon- ished him, and said
why was he reviling the president of U.S.A.'

The people, after reading these two versions, will surely say that the
two dailies have con- tradicted each other.

CHRISTIAN: It appears from your letters that you think that the present
Gospel has been altered, and its meanings are contradictory to each
other. Now, I would like to ask you the following questions:

1) When were these Gospels altered? Before Islam or after the advent of
Islam?

2) What was the aim behind those altera- tions?

MUSLIM: Your questions are not relevant to the subject of our
discussion. Because, alteration is not the. only cause of contradictions
in a writing.

Contradictory or wrong statements may be written by the original author
himself, because he did not properly understand his subject, or because
of faulty memory.

Therefore, even if we suppose that nothing was ever altered in the
Gospels, we cannot close our eyes from its contradictions. And in this
case it will be a proof that the writers of these books had
misunderstood the facts and were not guided by the Holy Ghost.

But I would not like to leave your questions unanswered; and,
therefore, I am writing a few sentences about alteration.

What is alteration? Alteration means that the original writing of a
book is changed by others and loses its authenticity.

Alteration of the Gospels:

I do not think that anyone who has studied the early history of
Christianity, can have any doubt about the Gospels having been
altered.

The condition at that time clearly shows that the institution of
Christianity was over-run and captured by new-comers and the Byzantine
emperors.

Miller, a Christian scholar, writes that a group of innovators took
their place in the churches as elites; and as a result different
teachings were invented.

The Byzantine emperors were trying hard to remove the traces of the
original Christianity. Religious leaders were killed, burnt or banished.
One may clearly see the effect of that environ- ment (which lasted for
three hundred years) on Christian scriptures and books.

A fresh proof of this claim of mine are the fragments of the
manuscripts of the old copies of the Gospels which were discovered not
long ago; they are different from present Gospels.

John Alder, a well-known American mis- sionary in Iran, writes that in
one place two papyrus writings have been found which contain sentences
attributed to Christ, but most of which differ from those which we read
in the New Testament." (Bastan-Shanasi Kitab-i Mugad- das, p.109).

In view of the above, we may easily find out the period and motive of
the alterations. And after the advent of Islam, more altera- tions have
been done; and changes are constantly made on the pretext of
\`correction.'


(END OF CORRESPONDENCE)


