Azadari of Husayn (a.s) from the Islamic Point of View
======================================================

In the 24th June issue of ‘Razakar’[^1] some Ahl al-Sunnah scholars have
posed seven questions regarding the Azadari of Husayn (a.s). Though it
is best to ignore foolish objections, we find it necessary here because
if we don’t rebut them they would be further emboldened to write
anything that comes to their feeble minds.

The following is the actual text of those questions:

(1) Is Azadari, in its present form obligatory, recommended or Bid’ah?

(2) If it is obligatory, please quote the verse of Qur’an with reference
and if it is Sunnah please state whether it is the Sunnah of the Prophet
or Sunnah of the Imams?

(3) If it is Sunnah of Prophet, is it practical Sunnah or verbal Sunnah?

(4) If it is verbal, please prove where the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
has ordered chest beating, flagellation, wearing black clothes and
taking out a horse?

(5) If it is practical Sunnah, did the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) ever
do Azadari in remembrance of the previous prophets?

(6) If it is the Sunnah of the Imams, prove that His Eminence, ‘Ali
(r.a.), after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) made a
Ta’ziyah or performed Ma’tam.

(7) Did any Imam perform such an act after the martyrdom of Sayyidna
(our master) Husayn? If it is so, prove it from your books and for every
tradition collect 100 as reward. Otherwise make an announcement that
Azadari in its present form is against Islamic law and is an innovation.

The most important of these is the first question but just for the
satisfaction of the questioner I say that all right I accept that
Azadari is an innovation. Now you must have become happy that a Shia has
accepted Azadari to be an innovation. But before becoming happy on it,
gather your senses and pay attention to the details of this reply:

What if Azadari is an Innovation?
---------------------------------

In fact, puppet Mullahs like you mislead the people only saying that
Azadari is Bid’ah (innovation), Ta’ziyah is innovation, Majlis is
innovation, weeping is innovation. This is innovation, that is
innovation. In other words after wearing the glasses of ignorance and
bigotry you people see innovation in everything and everywhere. And this
furor of innovation has made you so terrorized that you all start having
anxiety fits before Muharram and you leave to visit the countryside and
become tools of Satan in misleading gullible people. You present to them
the argument that since the rituals of Azadari started after the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) they are innovations and are indeed against the Law of
Shariah. This is the only proof you have, through which you fulfill the
plans of Yazid, Mutawakkil, Ghazzali and Ibn Arabi and try to destroy
the name of Husayn (a.s). And with the intention of the firm basis of
this same argument you have written the next six questions. So that if
the reply to the questions is in the negative you can announce that if
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) and the Imams had not performed those acts they
are indeed against Shariat and are innovations. This is what I want you
to remember; that even if we assume that the Azadari of Husayn (a.s) is
a later invention after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) even then it cannot be
taken out of the circle of ‘respect’ and put into the category of
‘prohibition’. And it cannot be said to be something against Shariat.

The dictionary meaning of ‘Bid’ah’ is ‘a new thing’. Thus it is
mentioned in the second volume of *Sarah* (Bab-ul-A’in, Faslul Baa) that
Bid’ah is an innovation introduced into religion after its perfection.

It is mentioned in the famous book of Ahl al-Sunnah, *Majmaul Bahrayn*
that: Whatever was not present in the time of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) is ‘innovation’.

The famous dictionary, *al-Qamus* says: Innovation is to bring something
new into religion after its perfection or the beliefs and rituals that
have started after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w).

I am ready to accept the above definitions of Bid’ah. But the problem
is, after accepting these definitions not only Azadari, all the
principles of Islam will have to be invalidated! Because:

The present sequence of the Holy Qur’an is one fixed by the third
caliph, Uthman. Therefore to read the Qur’an in this sequence is
innovation. The diacritic marks on the text of the Holy Qur’an were
added after the apparent caliphate of His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) and the
dots were placed during the time of Hajjaj bin Yusuf. Therefore to read
or to possess a Qur’an with diacritic marks or dots is an innovation.
During the period of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) the Holy Qur’an was
written in the Kufi script. Therefore it is an innovation to write and
read it in the Naskh and Nastaliq script (as it is done nowadays). The
30 parts and seven stages of Qur’an were determined by the reciters for
their own convenience much later. Therefore to follow the limits of
‘Juz’ (Part) or stages (Manzil) in printing the Qur’an or writing it or
reading it, or even giving reference by it is an innovation. The
translation of Qur’an into other languages came into vogue at a much
later period. Hence it is an innovation to translate the Qur’an, to read
a translation or appoint translators.

Since Umar etc. were dead against the compilation of traditions
(Hadith), the collecting of traditions in Ahl al-Sunnah began after the
Righteous Caliphate (Khilafat-e-Rashida) during the reign of the Banu
Umayyah. Therefore to compile books of traditions, or to arrange
traditions in parts, sections and chapters or to arrange them on the
basis of narrators and subjects is an innovation. The science of
biographies of narrators of traditions was formulated much later to
verify the authenticity of traditions. Therefore it is an innovation to
learn this science and to act upon it.

Commentaries of Qur’an were compiled even later than the books of
traditions, although prominent personalities like Ahmad bin Hanbal were
dead against it. Therefore both, writing a commentary of Qur’an and
reading it is an innovation.

The concoction of solution to legal problems according to ones personal
opinion came into vogue from the personality of Abu Hanifah during the
2nd century of Hijri. Therefore his complete jurisprudence and law is
innovation. During the beginning period of the reign of the Abbasids
when Greek philosophy entered Islamic lands and there was an upsurge in
apostasy and disbelief, scholars of Islam began to apply principles of
philosophy to justify Islamic beliefs and principles so as to defend the
religion of Islam. And the resultant science from the activity came to
be known as Ilme Kalam (Scholastic theology). Among the Islamic
sciences, it is the most modern science. Therefore to prove the validity
of Islamic principles through this method is indeed against Islamic Law.

Thus, Allamah Ibn Hajar Asqalani says in *Fathul Bari Sharh Sahih
Bukhari* (Bab-al-Iqtida Bi Sunnan ar-Rasool):

“Among the things that came into being after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)
are the collection and arrangement of Hadith (traditions). After that is
the Tafsir (Exegesis) of Qur’an. After that is the method of deriving
the laws of Shariah only through reason. After that is the collection of
the rituals of mysticism (Tasawwuf). Thus Umar, Abu Musa Ashari and a
group were against the collection of traditions. And most of the people
have permitted it. And Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal and a community was against
the Exegesis of Qur’an. In the same way Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal was also
dead against the derivation of religious laws through analogy (Qiyas).

Among the ‘new things’ is scholastic theology and the predecessors
(Salaf) were against it; like Imam Abu Hanifah, Abu Yusuf and Imam
Shafei etc.

Thus is the condition of Islamic sciences. Now let us see what happens
to the daily social relations (which no one considers needless of divine
(laws).

The Sherwani (long coat) and the different types of caps worn in India
and Pakistan were non-existent during the time of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w). Therefore to wear such things is an innovation. The various
dishes cooked by the people nowadays were never used by the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) in his time. Therefore it is an innovation to prepare such
dishes and to eat such foods. The use of paper currency did not exist
during the time of the Prophet. Therefore it is an innovation to use
paper currency. During the time of the Prophet no one used lifeless
objects to travel. Therefore it is an innovation to travel by rail, car
and bicycles etc.

However, this is not the end of the matter. Ahl al-Sunnah people say
that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) did not issue any command for caliphate
after him. That is why need was felt consensus (Ijma) etc. That is the
consensus through which the caliphate of Abu Bakr is proved. And that
nomination through which the caliphate of Umar is established. Also that
Shura (consultative committee) through which Uthman is considered a
caliph and the use of force and power, through which Muawiyah occupied
the throne of caliphate. In other words all the principles of caliphate
have come into being only after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w).
Therefore they are indeed against Shariah and they are nothing but
innovations. Thus the caliphate of those people is absolutely an
innovation. Hence, if Azadari is deemed to have started after the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) and therefore worthy to be shunned and considered
illegal and innovation, first of all you must consign to flames all the
Qur’ans in following the practice (Sunnah) of Uthman and in accordance
with the sequence of the time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) write it in
Kufi script and make it popular. And until the time such a Qur’an is not
arranged, leave the present one, which from arrangement to diacritics
and even in dotting is sunk in innovation. Throw away all the books of
exegesis, traditions and beliefs in the sea. Stop using the science of
biographies of narrators and scholastic theology. Make all types of
garments, except Arab dress as unlawful. Refrain from eating and
drinking all types of victuals and drinks that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)
had not used. Consider paper money as deadly snakes and scorpions and
keep them away from you. When you have accomplished all this and become
free from these Islamic sciences and worldly pleasures, uproot and
discard the garden of caliphate considering it to have been based on
innovation and exercise complete aloofness from those caliphs whose
caliphate was based on innovations.

And the parable of an evil word is as an evil tree pulled up from the
earth’s surface; it has no stability.[^2]

If you are really sincere about these things, first give up Sunnism in
this way and then you shall have the right to ask us to forgo Azadari.

Now pay attention to another aspect of the matter:

When any formula is formed, it is also checked whether its opposite is
also true or not. “If the sun is out it must be day.” This statement is
correct because its opposite is also correct, that is, “If the sun is
not out, it would not be day.” Therefore if it is established that,
“Everything that was not present during the time of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) is innovation and deviation,” it must be agreed that, “Anything
that was present in the time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) is not
innovation and deviation.” It implies that since disbelief and
polytheism were present in time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w), therefore
they are not innovation and deviation. Adultery and sodomy was committed
even during the time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w), so it is not
innovation and deviation. Alcoholism was also found in the time of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w), hence it is not innovation and deviation. Gambling
and chess existed during the time of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w),
therefore they cannot be considered innovations and deviations.

In the same way, theft, robbery, looting, hypocrisy, under-weighing,
lying, allegation making, falsely accusing, concealing testimony,
killing a believer, usurping the property of orphans, usury,
misappropriation of other people’s property, in other words all the
crimes mentioned in the Holy Qur’an were present in the time of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) otherwise there would have been no need to prohibit
them. Thus if being present in the time of the Prophet (s.a.w) is the
criterion of its justification or absence of justification, we would
have to agree that since all these things were present during the time
of the Prophet (s.a.w), they are not deviations, and apparently
understanding this from the above definition of ‘innovation’ and
accepting this logic:

(1) Imam Abu Hanifah issued a verdict that it is lawful to drink Nabidh
(barley wine), rather it is even permitted to perform Wuzu (ablution)
with it. And if wine is boiled a little both its impurity and
unlawfulness is removed. And they have also permitted use of
pistachio-sized hemp seed as mentioned in most books of Hanafite
jurisprudence.

(2) Imam Shafei has permitted chess to keep ones mind sharp and fresh.

(3) Imam Malik has allowed sodomy: If a person commits sodomy with his
slave or servant, it is lawful. Imam Shafei has also supported this
statement. Many Shafei scholars have agreed, notably Ya’fai, in his book
quotes the statement of Shafei that: from the viewpoint of analogy
(Qiyas), sodomy is lawful.

(4) Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, also, agreeing with Abu Hanifah, permitted
drinking of hemp-wine. Nasir Khusroo has versified this as follows:

*“Shafei has said that chess is forever lawful. Do not make a mistake
because the Imam has said correctly.*

*Ibn Hanbal has said that if in spite of this you are fed up of sorrow,
eat a pistachio-sized hemp seed and roam about in intoxication. Now if
you wish to follow the fourth Imam, Malik, he also makes sodomy lawful
for you. Enjoy hemp, gamble, drink wine and commit sodomy because being
a Muslim has ended with the four Imams.”*

Here one becomes desirous to congratulate the Ahl al-Sunnah people of
Pakistan and especially the Tanzeem Ahl al-Sunnah, that their Imams have
in no way discredited their views about innovation. And they have
legalized all those things that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had
denounced, because they existed during the time of the Prophet (s.a.w).
By doing this they have certified that the criterion of lawfulness or
unlawfulness of something is not the Qur’an and traditions, but it is
its presence or absence during the time of the Prophet. Hence, Azadari,
which started after the time of the Prophet is an innovation and
unlawful.

The real cause of all these incidents is only that the half-baked Ahl
al-Sunnah scholars began to think that everything that was not present
during the time of the Prophet is innovation. And according to the
famous statement: Every innovation is deviation and every innovation
leads to Hell fire.” Although this view is mostly untrue and invalid and
educated people of both the Shia and Sunni sects have criticized this
viewpoint.

All sensible people of the world are practically unanimous that in penal
laws only those things are mentioned that are unlawful and illegal. And
it is understood that except for these, everything is permissible. In
other words anything that is not specified to be illegal is considered
lawful. That is why you will not find any law book saying that it is
lawful to have your clothes washed by a washer man. But it is indeed
mentioned that if you do not pay for the labor, it is a wrongful act and
against law. And its remedies are mentioned. This method is followed
because it is impossible to list all the things/acts that would be
lawful in the world. While it is comparatively easy to mention all the
unlawful acts/things. That is why the law only informs about these
things and assumes silence and the rest of the things are considered
lawful.

Thus it is a universally accepted tradition of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) that: “Everything is lawful until its prohibition is not
mentioned.” In the same way there is another tradition that says:
“Everything is permissible until a command or prohibition regarding them
does not reach you.”[^3] The same book contains the third tradition of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) that: “Anything that has permissible and
prohibited mixed in it, is allowed for you until you specifically
recognize the prohibited in it. Under such circumstances you would have
to leave the prohibited.”

The statements of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) (Among whom the first
tradition is also present among the Shias) and the second and the third
tradition is specially recorded in Sunni books) clearly shows that the
Islamic Shariah is also like other laws of the world based on the
principle: Whatever is not prohibited, is allowed. However, those
half-Mullahs are saying that: “What is not clearly permitted, is
prohibited.”

Although there is a famous tradition of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) that:
“One who initiates a good practice would be rewarded for doing it
himself and also rewarded until, Qiyamat, equal to those who follow this
practice. And one who initiates an evil practice will earn a punishment
for doing it himself and also earn until Qiyamat punishment equal to
those who follow this practice.”

This tradition clearly shows that a new practice is not bad and sinful
merely because it is new. Rather if it is good, it would be rewarded and
if it is an evil practice it shall earn punishment. That is why its
explanation is provided in *Majmaul Bahrayn:*

“Innovation is of two types: (1) Innovations of guidance and (2)
Innovation of misguidance. Thus whatever innovation is against the
command of Allah and the Prophet, is condemnable and worth being damned.
And whatever is included among the general actions that Allah and the
Prophet have encouraged and made attractive, they are praiseworthy.”

In the same way Imam Shafei has said:

“Innovation is of two types. Praiseworthy innovation and condemnable
innovation. Thus whichever innovation is in accordance with Sunnah is
praiseworthy and whatever is against the Sunnah is condemnable.”

In the end we present the most detailed explanation provided by Ibn
Hajar Asqalani in *Fathul Bari Sharh Sahih Bukhari* as follows:

“The majority (Ahl al-Sunnah) believes that innovations are of all the
five types (obligatory, recommended, permissible, detestable and
unlawful). Thus for example in order to refute the apostates the framing
of scholastic arguments is an obligatory innovation. And writing Islamic
books and founding Madressas are recommended innovations. New types of
dishes are a permissible innovation. To spend excessively on food and
dress is detestable innovation provided it does not reach to the limit
of prohibited. And according to people of truth, to rebel against the
rightful Imam is an unlawful innovation. Apart from this all those are
against the Shariah and regarding whose unlawfulness there is proof.”

In the same way Shia scholar, Shahid Awwal writes in *Qawaid:*

“Matters that occur after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) are of many types and
we regard as innovation only that, which is also unlawful.”

And the Shahid Thani (a.r.), has written in *Sharh Lumah* under the
discussion of Azaan (call for prayer) that:

“It is said that every innovation does not become unlawful merely due to
its newness. Some scholars have even classified innovations into five
types (obligatory, recommended, detestable, permissible and unlawful).

From the unanimous opinion of Sunni and Shia scholars it has become
clear that lawfulness and unlawfulness of something does not depend on
whether it was present in the time of the Prophet (s.a.w) or not. Rather
it is whether it comes in the obligatory commands or recommended or
permissible proofs or it comes under the detestable or unlawful laws. In
other words, every new thing does not become unlawful merely due to its
novelty. It is possible that that new thing may be obligatory or
recommended or permissible or detestable. In the same way it is also
possible that it may be unlawful.

Lastly, I would like to state that it is beyond the scope of this
chapter to discuss in detail the lawfulness or otherwise of the
innovations mentioned by us. It would suffice just to state that the
system of deriving the laws of Shariah through analogy as practiced
during the time of Abu Hanifah and the appointment of caliphs through
nomination, Shura and force etc are all unlawful innovations. Apart from
this other innovations fall in either of the following categories (1)
Recommended (2) Detestable and (3) Permissible.

The foregone discussion has clearly established that Azadari cannot be
considered unlawful merely due to its newness, for it would be against
the principles of Islam. Rather it should be checked whether Azadari is
in accordance with divine permission and pleasure of Allah or not. After
that, depending upon the decision, the proper way would be to invite
people towards it. Any other course of action would lead to misguidance
and nothing else shall be achieved.

Azadari Rituals have divine sanction
------------------------------------

What is the meaning of Azadari? It is the commemoration of the events
related to Imam Husayn (a.s). Now lets see if commemoration of events
related to special ones of God is permitted by Divine law or not.

Every Muslim repeats the following sentence in his daily prayers:

Keep us on the right path. The path of those upon whom Thou hast
bestowed favors.[^4]

It is obvious that if we are not cognizant of the circumstances, events
and mode of life those people on whom divine blessings have descended,
how can we tread their path? Thus this prayer could only be fulfilled
when we participate in religious gatherings (Majalis) and learn about
the detailed accounts of the chosen ones of God. We must also know what
is the path of those on whom the wrath of God has descended and those
who are astray. So that we may avoid such a path. Otherwise we shall be
involved in ignorance and lack of knowledge. We would continue to chant
this prayer like parrots without gaining anything.

The great pillar of Islam is Hajj. From the beginning to the end, it is
based on reliving of the events associated with the lives of Prophet
Ibrahim, Prophet Ismail and Lady Hajrah (a.s). The 8th of Zilhajj is
known as the ‘Yaum Tarwiyah’ and there are special rituals for this day.
It is named thus because it was on that night that Prophet Ibrahim (a.s)
saw in dream that he was sacrificing his son, Ismail on the orders of
Allah, and the whole of next day he continued to reflect on his dream.
Rituals prescribed for this day are in commemoration of this only.

The 9th of Zilhajj is known as ‘Yaumul Arafah’. It is only because on
that night when Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) again saw that dream he became
convinced that it was a command of God for him to slaughter his son.
Rituals of this day are in remembrance of this realization and the
plains where these rituals are performed are also named as the ‘plains
of Arafat’.

The 10th Zilhajj is the most important day of the Hajj. Sacrifices are
performed on this day. These sacrifices, ordered by the Qur’an, are
reminders of the event of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) who tried to sacrifice
Ismail (a.s) and the Almighty Allah saved him and a ram was slaughtered
in his place. Now these sacrifices are reminders of this same event and
included among ‘signs of Allah’. The Almighty Allah says:

And (as for) the camels, We have made them of the signs of the religion
of Allah for you…[^5]

Performing ‘Sayy’ (jogging) between Mt. Safa and Mt. Marwah is an
important Hajj ritual. It is nothing but commemoration of the incident
when Ibrahim (a.s) left Lady Hajrah (s.a.) and Ismail (a.s) at Mecca and
the water bag was exhausted, Lady Hajrah ran seven times between these
two mountains in search of water. Today this ‘Sayy’ is included among
the rituals of Hajj and Mt. Safa and Marwah are included in ‘signs of
Allah’:

Surely the Safa and the Marwah are among the signs appointed by
Allah…[^6]

Today Zamzam water is considered as the greatest ‘Tabarruk’[^7] of Hajj
pilgrims. Why is this water blessed? Only due to the association of the
event when Lady Hajrah was running here and there in search of water and
Ismail (a.s) rubbed his heels on the ground in thirst and by the command
of God a spring burst forth and by being related to the fact of Ismail
(a.s) it became blessed and fortunate.

Place of Ibrahim
----------------

It is the stone on which Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) stood while raising the
walls of the Holy Ka’ba and by miracle, his footprints became etched on
this stone. Today that stone is having such significance that Almighty
Allah says:

Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing-place of
Ibrahim.[^8]

Thus it is said:

In it are clear signs, the standing place of Ibrahim…[^9]

The horns of the ram that was slaughtered in lieu of Ismail (a.s) were
treasured in the Holy Ka’ba with respect. They continued to remain there
during the time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) and the Righteous caliphs.
Until the time when Yazid ordered siege upon Abdullah Ibn Zubair and
forces of Yazid shot burning missiles on the Ka’ba as a result of which
the covering of the Ka’ba was burned down and a wall collapsed and all
relics including these horns were destroyed in the fire. In the past
communities also we see that the Bani Israel were in possession of the
casket by the command of Allah, called the ‘Ark of Tranquility’. It
contained relics of Prophet Musa and Prophet Harun (a.s) and their
descendants. The casket was considered a lucky charm for Bani Israel. So
much so, that it was placed in the forefront during armed
confrontations. Once the casket was seized by enemies and Bani Israel
had to undergo much degradations. In the second instance, under the
leadership of Talut, when Almighty Allah gave other glad tidings, He
also said:

And the prophet said to them: Surely the sign of His kingdom is, that
there shall come to you the chest in which there is tranquility from
your Lord and residue of the relics of what the children of Musa and the
children of Harun have left, the angels bearing it; most surely there is
a sign in this for those who believe.[^10]

All these events clearly prove that not only is it better to establish
the memory of the chosen ones of God, it is so important that most of
the time, the Almighty Allah has included it among obligatory rituals.
All things that became associated with the chosen ones of God were
included among the signs of Allah. For example Safa, Marwah, animals of
sacrifice etc, and reverence towards them is considered a sign of piety
and their disrespect is made unlawful. Thus it is said:

That (shall be so); and whoever respects the signs of Allah, this surely
is (the outcome) of the piety of hearts.[^11]

Again it is said,

O you who believe! Do not violate the signs appointed by Allah nor the
sacred month, nor (interfere with) the offerings…[^12]

Furthermore, it is also noteworthy that not only the remembrance of the
Prophets, rather His Eminence, Hajrah, (who indeed was not a prophet,
and she was also not infallible), her remembrance was also considered
worthy of commemoration. And that too such events, which apparently have
no relation to religion. For example, running in search for water for
her thirsty child. In addition to this, articles contained in the ‘Ark
of Tranquility’ from the relics of the progenies of Prophet Musa and
Prophet Harun (a.s), are the heavenly tablets, the turban of Harun
(a.s), and even his slippers, and that casket itself is the one in which
Prophet Musa’s mother had kept him and put him into the River Nile.

All these details clearly show that even the personal events of the
chosen ones of God, and their personal effects have such importance
before the Almighty that He has established their remembrance and made
it obligatory duty. And including them in the ‘signs of Allah’ made
respect towards them compulsory for all. Therefore we have to agree that
to establish the remembrance of the events of the God’s chosen ones, is
not against divine will. Rather it is actually in agreement with divine
will. Now just think upon it. When the remembrance of the incomplete
sacrifice is so much dear to God, that He made it incumbent, then what
would be the position of the ‘great sacrifice’ of the beloved one of
Allah (the Prophet Muhammad)? How can its commemoration be against
divine will? If Shias had were also experts in tampering with Shariah
after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), like Ahl al-Sunnah, keeping in
mind the significance of Azadari of Husayn (a.s) they would have made it
an obligatory religious duty for all. But even after agreeing that it is
a ‘new thing’ is there anybody who, after reading the above discussion
can say that Azadari is against divine will? Indeed, we have to agree
that the Azadari of Husayn (a.s) is in accordance with divine practice,
which He has always mentioned:

…there is no altering of Allah’s creation…[^13]

Hajj remains obligatory year after year and this itself is the reply to
those who say, what is the need to commemorate the martyrdom of Husayn
(a.s) even after so many years of its occurrence? This objection should
first be leveled against rituals of Hajj that why are they still
commemorated even after so many years?

Those who object against Shias for observing seasonal mourning, should
gain lesson from the specified timings of the remembrance of events of
Ibrahim and Ismail (a.s).

In the same way just as in remembrance of the proposed slaughter of
Ismail (a.s) millions of sacrificial animals are slaughtered, honoring
the mount of Husayn (a.s) and paying respect to the horse designated to
be a replica of that original mount cannot be against divine will,
rather it is a very much recommended deed. Especially when it was a
horse used in Jihad (Holy war). That too, such a horse which even though
was hungry and thirsty since three days, it continued to fulfill the
demands of loyalty and remained in the service of a rider like Husayn
(a.s) who had ridden on the shoulders of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w).
Although the significance of the horses used in Jihad is so much in the
view of Allah that He swears by them in the Holy Qur’an:

I swear by the runners breathing pantingly, then those that produce fire
striking, then those that make raids at morn, then thereby raise dust,
then rush thereby upon an assembly…[^14]

In the same way the commemoration of the struggle of Hajrah (s.a.) in
search of water proves that if the commemoration of the remembrance of
the thirst of the children of Husayn (a.s) is established and the
struggle of Abbas is commemorated by taking out the Mashk (water bag) of
Sakina and the Alam (standard) or in remembrance of ‘Ali Asghar and
other children, water, milk or Sherbet is distributed, it cannot be
against divine will. Rather it is in consonance with divine will and a
praiseworthy action. And according to:

…there is no altering of Allah’s creation…[^15]

It is a rewardable deed. In the same way it is seen that other relics
associated with great personalities are also worthy of reverence.

Azadari is Sunnah
-----------------

So far our discussion was based on the premise that Azadari is a ‘new
thing’ and inspite of this we have proved its legitimacy and its
rewardable nature. Now I shall say that Azadari is definitely not a ‘new
thing’. On the other hand it is from the established prophetic
practices. However to accept it as ‘Sunnah’ the other questions are
applicable that we reply as follows:

Q.2. If it is Sunnah, please let us know whether it is the Sunnah of the
Prophet or Sunnah of Imams?

Ans. Some rituals are Sunnah of Prophet and some are Sunnah of the
Imams.

Q.3. If it is prophetic Sunnah, is it practical or verbal?

Ans. Some things are practical and others, verbal.

Q.4. If it is verbal Sunnah, please prove that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) ordered ‘chest beating’, chain lashing, mourning processions,
black dresses and taking out horses.

Ans. Why have you limited the rituals of Azadari to these only? Azadari
also has Ta’ziyah, Majlis, Nauha, weeping etc. Apart from this, the
grief for Husayn (a.s) is itself unlawful according to you, however
limited it may be. As your Imam Ghazzali has given the true reason:

“It is prohibited to speak about the killing of al-Husayn because it
leads to the hatred of companions.”[^16]

Thus this verdict of Ghazzali clearly shows that the martyrdom of Husayn
(a.s) had some connection with the misdeeds of some companions of the
Prophet whom Ahl al-Sunnah consider more important that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) himself and his Holy progeny!

Anyway, most of the things in Azadari are verbal Sunnats, whose details
shall be presented in the forthcoming pages.

Q.5. If it is practical Sunnah, did the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
commemorate the remembrance of the past prophets?

Ans. What significance the calamities of the past prophets had in
comparison to the calamities of our Prophet and his Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)
that their commemoration should have been made incumbent on the Ummah?
You are probably still holding firmly to the practice of Umar, who used
to bring copies of Torah in the presence of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) and
read from them. Even though the Holy Prophet (s.a.w), was having the
most perfect manners he used to scold him severely for such behavior.

Respected Sirs! The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) himself performed most of
the Azadari rituals in remembrance of his relatives and of those the
greatest significance is that of Imam Husayn (a.s). That even before the
arrival of calamities, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) expressed sorrow and
grief as shall soon be explained and you would understand that most of
these rituals are from the practical Sunnah.

Q.6. If it is from the practice of the Imams, prove that His Eminence,
‘Ali (r.a.) after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had
constructed the replica of the Prophet’s tomb and performed Ma’tam.

Ans. What was the need for His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) to construct a
Ta’ziyah? Because a Ta’ziyah is a replica of the tomb; and what is the
need for replica when the actual tomb was always before him? Moreover
the condition imposed by you is that it should be exact replica of the
tomb. But even if ‘Ali (a.s) had made a replica it would not have had a
dome over it since at that time the tomb of the Prophet had no such
dome. Thus how could he have made it into a replica of a building? It
would have been different from the present Taziyahs. Very soon we shall
inform you that Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) himself had made the replica of
grave, please wait!

Now ‘Ma’tam’ remains. I would describe the sorrow and grief that the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s) suffered at the passing away of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) after I briefly reply to your objections.

Q.7. Did any Imam perform such an act after the martyrdom of Sayyidna
Husayn? If it is so, prove it from your books and for every tradition
collect 100 as reward. Otherwise make an announcement that Azadari in
its present form is against Islamic law and is an innovation.

Ans. Yes, indeed! After the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) all
succeeding Imams (a.s) always observed Azadari to keep the memory of the
oppressed Imam fresh. They tried their utmost to clarify the
significance of this grief inspite of the oppressive regimes of your
Bani Umayyad caliphs. But you should remember that in those times the
conditions of the Imams (a.s) was same as the circumstances of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) before Hijrat among the infidels of Mecca and the
seriousness of the circumstances was of the same level. Therefore, just
as absence of publicly held prayers during that time cannot disprove its
obligatory nature, in the same way absence of openly held mourning
ceremonies during Banu Umayyah and Bani Abbas period does not prove that
it is now against Shariah.

In connection with the style of our Holy Imams (a.s) you have clearly
written that we should furnish our proofs from our books. At least your
attachment to the Holy Imams (a.s) is merely verbal though you seem to
have accepted that the Twelve Imams are necessarily worth emulating. As
far as their sayings and actions are concerned, books of Ahl al-Sunnah
are completely blank about it and their claim of holding fast to the
‘Two weighty things’ is a claim without any proof.

Another sleight of hand that you have shown is by issuing the challenge:
“In lieu of each tradition take 100-100 rewards.” You have been clever
enough not to specify 100 what? That whether you would give 100-100
blessings or 100-100 abuses!

Now as far as your statement that if we ‘fail to present the traditions
we should declare that present Azadari is against the Shariah and an
innovation’ is concerned, I have already replied to this in the
beginning itself that even if just for the sake of argument we accept
that it is a ‘new thing’ it does not mean that it is unlawful. Rather,
it is a recommended and preferable deed and is according to divine will
and is a rewardable action. What can be said about you, even if all the
scholars of your community unite to refute it, they cannot succeed?

But if you do (it) not and never shall you do (it), then be on your
guard against the fire of which men and stones are the fuel; it is
prepared for the unbelievers.[^17]

A Brief Description of Azadari of Husayn (a.s)
----------------------------------------------

### (A) The Prophetic Sunnah is practical

Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal has mentioned a detailed narration in his
*Musnad*. It is quoted from Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s) as
follows:

(Sunni Tradition): His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) said: One day I came to the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w) and saw tears in his eyes. I asked, “Has someone
angered you?” Why are there tears in your eyes?” The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) said, “A little while ago Jibraeel told me that Husayn shall be
slain at the banks of Euphrates. Jibraeel asked me if I would like to
get the soil of that place so that I can smell it. I said, ‘Yes.’ Thus
Jibraeel extended his hands and then gave me a handful of soil, due to
which tears flow from my eyes.”

The Ahl al-Sunnah Imam, Shafei has also mentioned this narration. Two
points are noteworthy in this tradition:

Firstly: The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) wept on the incident of
martyrdom even before its actual occurrence and he often used to weep
upon it as seen in many traditions recorded in the Shia and Sunni
sources. This shows that if the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) had been alive
after the martyrdom how much more he would have been aggrieved? And from
this you can understand the rewardibility of mourning for Husayn (a.s).

Secondly: The love and affection the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had for
Imam Husayn (a.s) is known to all clearly. And Husayn (a.s) was present
before the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) at that time. Inspite of this, he did
not weep merely upon hearing the news of martyrdom. Rather, Jibraeel
gave him the soil of Karbala’. At that time his condition became such
that “tears flow from my eyes…” Thus when a sign was needed for the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) to take him to the point of weeping, it is all the more
needed for us to have such signs before us because indeed we are not
having the same affection for Imam Husayn (a.s) as the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w) had and we are also removed much further away in time.

Before the martyrdom there were only two things that could lead to
create the imagination of martyrdom. The personality of Husayn (a.s)
himself and the land of Karbala’ and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) gathered
them at one place and allowing his imagination a free rein, he wept upon
it. Therefore we also follow the verse:

…in the Apostle of Allah is an excellent exemplar…[^18]

We also keep all the things and signs connected with the tragedy of
Karbala’ before us and we visualize those events. And this action of
ours is exactly in accordance with the divine command:

…Whatever the Apostle gives you, accept it…[^19]

As I have already stated, the above narration clearly proves the
legality of various replicas (Ta’ziyah, Taboot, Alam, Cradle, Mashk,
Tauq, Zanjeer, Kafan,[^20] Zuljana[^21]). It is so because all those
things give impetus to the emotion of grief and they help in imagining
the events of Karbala’ like the soil of Karbala’ did for the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w).

### (B) The Practice of the Prophet is Verbal

Not only the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) only acted upon it he also
emphasize upon the community to act thus. Rather our traditions inform
us that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) also exhorted the people to observe the
Azadari of Husayn (a.s).

(Shia Tradition): When the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) informed Lady
Fatima (s.a.) about the impending martyrdom of Husayn (a.s) and told her
what calamities were to befall them, she wept severely and asked, “Dear
father! When shall this come to pass?” The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
replied, “At a time when neither I, nor you or ‘Ali shall be there.” So
Fatima (s.a.) wept more and asked, “Dear father! Then who shall mourn
for my son and who would establish his mourning?” The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) told her, “O Fatima! The ladies of the community shall weep upon
the ladies of my Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) and their men shall weep on the men
of my Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) and generation after generation, every year they
shall keep the grief and mourning fresh. Thus when the Day of Judgment
arrives, you Fatima, shall intercede for the ladies and I shall
intercede for the men. And for those who weep in the grief of Husayn
(a.s), we shall hold their hands and make them enter Paradise… and so
on.[^22]

### (C) It is the Sunnah of the Imams

The Holy Imams (a.s) have urged the people to establish the Azadari of
Husayn (a.s) and themselves also put it into practice.

(Shia Tradition): Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s) said: O Abu Harun! Recite an
elegy (Marsiya) of Husayn for me. Abu Harun says that he, obeying the
Imam’s command recited the Marsiya…[^23]

Hence, we also come to know that the Holy Imam (a.s) himself requested
for the recitation of Marsiya and himself listened to it. This is the
practice of the Imam and his verbal instruction also. After presenting
this brief justification, I present a tradition each for each of the
items associated with Azadari.

Weeping for the Dead
--------------------

### (A) The Prophetic Practice is Practical

Leave alone the narrations in which the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) is reported
to have wept on the demise of his son, Ibrahim, or the serious condition
of the son of Zainab, or at the time of the burial of Umme Kulthum or at
the illness of Saad bin Ubadah, and the Ahl al-Sunnah book of *Mishkatul
Masabih* is full of such traditions.[^24] The weeping of the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w) on the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) has already been
mentioned in the tradition of *Musnad Ahmad Hanbal.* In addition to all
this, please pay attention to the following tradition of *Mishkatul
Masabih:*

(Sunni Tradition): The aunt of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) (wife of
His Eminence, Abbas Ibn Abdul Muttalib), Ummul Fadl narrates (leaving
the beginning events): Thus one day I came to the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) and placed Husayn in his lap. Then I glanced elsewhere, and when
again I glanced at the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) I saw that a flood of tears
was flowing from his blessed eyes. When I asked him about it he said
that Jibraeel had arrived to him and informed him that: “My people shall
slay this son of mine.” Ummul Fadl asked, “This son?” “Yes,” he replied,
“then he brought to me the red soil of that place.”[^25]

Further discussion on this report is uncalled for, because it is
self-explanatory.

### (B) The Prophetic Practice is Verbal

In addition to this the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) has himself explained
that weeping on the dead is actual mercy and sign of the sorrow of the
heart. (Sunni Tradition): In connection with the events of the death of
Ibrahim the Prophet’s son, Anas is reported to have said that they
entered the house with the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)…and Ibrahim was on
the verge of death. Thus tears were flowing from the eyes of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). Abdur Rahman bin Auf said, “O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w)! You also weep?” The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) replied,
“O Ibn Auf! This is actual mercy, after which weeping also occurs.” Then
he said, “The eye weeps and the heart is aggrieved but we do not utter
anything against Divine will and O Ibrahim, we are indeed aggrieved of
your separation.”[^26]

### (C) It is the Practice of the Holy Imams

Let us see how, before the martyrdom, His Eminence, Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) wept for Imam Husayn (a.s).

(Biharul Anwar, Vol. 10, Chapter of What the Holy Prophet (s.a.w), Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) and Imam Hasan (a.s) informed about the martyrdom)

(Shia Tradition): Ibn Abbas is reported to have said that he was with
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) when he was departing for the Battle of Siffeen.
“When we reached Nainawa and descended to the banks of the Euphrates,
the Imam asked aloud: ‘O Ibn Abbas, do you recognize this place?’ ‘No,
O, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s),’ I replied. So he told me that, ‘If you had
been familiar with it like me you would not have passed through here
without weeping as I weep.’ Ibn Abbas says, ‘After saying thus Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) wept for a long time and his beard became wet with
tears and tears began to fall upon his chest and we also wept with him.
And the following words were on the tongue of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s):

Aah! Aah! What is the connection between me and the progeny of Abu
Sufyan? What is the connection between me and the progeny of Harb? The
group of Satan! The friends of the infidels! O Husayn! Be patient as it
befits to be; as your father has received the same difficulties from
these people as you shall receive…until the end.

The report of the weeping of Lady Fatima (s.a.) has already been
mentioned above. We can mention the accounts of other Imams also here,
but I refrain from it for the sake of brevity.

### A Strange View

A concocted view has been inculcated into Ahl al-Sunnah that weeping
causes the departed soul to receive divine punishment. That is why
Abdullah Ibn Umar has quoted a tradition:

“The weeping of the living for the dead causes the dead one to be
punished.” First of all it is against divine justice that if the living
weep the dead should be punished. And it is clearly against the Qur’anic
verse:

…and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another…[^27]

Secondly, Ayesha has clearly refuted this tradition of Ibn Umar and she
says that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) has definitely not said
thus.[^28]

(Sunni Tradition): The grand daughter of Abu Bakr, Umrah says that she
heard her paternal aunt, Ayesha say, when she was told that Abdullah Ibn
Umar says that the weeping of the living on the dead causes punishment
to the dead. Ayesha said, “May Allah forgive (Ibn Umar) as he has not
lied intentionally. He has forgotten or he has misunderstood. The fact
is that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) passed by from a place where some
Jews were weeping for a dead Jewess. So he said that these people are
weeping for her although she is being punished in her grave (it means
that weeping on a dead infidel does not decrease his or her punishment).
This narration is accepted by all.

A similar type of tradition is mentioned in this chapter from Abdullah
bin Abi Malika at the end of which it is stated that Umar had also
mentioned this report about the punishment. When Abdullah Ibn Abbas told
Ayesha about it she said:

(Sunni Tradition): May Allah have mercy on Umar. By Allah! The Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w) never said that due to the weeping of the living ones,
the dead are punished. Rather he said that Almighty Allah increases the
punishment of the disbelievers when the survivors weep upon them.[^29]
Then Ayesha said: The Qur’an is sufficient for you. Remember this verse:

…and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another…[^30]

Now after the unveiling of truth even if we don’t discuss the
authenticity of the reports of Umar and Abdullah Ibn Umar we would have
to agree that all this is nothing but a case of misunderstanding.

Although the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) had scolded Umar many times when he
restrained people from weeping. But to be true to his nature he did not
give up this habit. *Mishkat* has many traditions on this subject. But
we shall mention only a brief report here:

(Sunni Tradition): Someone died from the family of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w). So women gathered and began to weep on the death. Umar
stood up and restrained them and began to chase them away. The Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w) said, “Umar, leave them alone! Because the eye weeps
and the heart is sorrowful and the covenant is near.”[^31]

This report has been quoted by Ahmad bin Hanbal and Nasai.

These traditions show that weeping is from the practice of the Prophet
and to restrain people from weeping is from the practice of Umar. Now it
is upto you to leave the practices of the Prophet and follow the
practice of Umar.

Ta’ziyah, Zuljana and Replicas (Mock-ups)
-----------------------------------------

### A. How to Detect Polytheism?

Before I present traditions about Ta’ziyah and other representations I
feel it is necessary for me to clarify a misunderstanding of Ahl
al-Sunnah. These people often say that Ta’ziyah is polytheism and
idol-worship and one who respects a Ta’ziyah is a polytheist and
idol-worshipper. Therefore here we must understand what polytheism
denotes.

Most of the people have misunderstood the definition of idol and think
that it is replica of a living thing. Let us examine this view.

Are replicas of only living things idols? Definitely not. Otherwise
those Lings[^32] etc. that are kept in Hindu temples would not have been
called idols.

Is idol only a replica? Definitely not! If it had been so, those rounded
natural stones that they place in temples would not qualify.

Is idol among the things constructed by man? Definitely not! If it had
been so, the cow that is worshipped, that Peepal and Banyan tree that is
revered, and the river and the mountain that are considered deities
would not have been considered idols.

Then what, after all, is an idol? Is every replica made by human hands,
every river and mountain is an idol? When any limitation is not possible
in this way how can we define what an idol is? For this it is necessary
to find out what is the common point in them. You shall know the reason
why all the above things are called idols. You shall realize that all
the above things are referred to as idols because they are worshipped
either as equals to God or as media for reaching God. Thus this
deification is the only thing that makes the revered object an idol.
That is why until the round stone is kept as paperweight on my table it
is not an idol and from the day this stone begins to be worshipped, this
same harmless stone would become an idol.

Now let us examine the Ta’ziyah on this criterion. It is obvious that we
neither worship the Ta’ziyah nor any thought of deifying it has ever
entered the mind of any Shia person so far, because our monotheism is
firm and strong. That upto there even the doubt of those who consider
you neo-Muslims as leaders cannot reach because your leaders have even
legalized worship of their footwear as Abu Hanifah has said:

“If a person worships these slippers with the intention of gaining
proximity to God, there is no harm in it according to me.”[^33]

While our Imams, leave alone dirty objects like slippers, they have
prohibited us to even consider a great personality like the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) to be having divinity and they emphasized upon believing him to
be a servant of Allah. Anyway we thus come to know that Ta’ziyah is not
an idol.

Another objection that is leveled is that it is a replica and making a
replica is unlawful. Although, those who make such objections are not
familiar with Islam, neither are they aware of their own school of
thought. No sect of Islam has made it absolutely unlawful to make a
replica or a picture. Only making a replica of a living thing is made
unlawful. Now who would tell us what living thing a Ta’ziyah represents?
It is only a replica of a structure and making a replica of a structure
or building is not unlawful in any Shariat.

And if God forbid, even if it had been a replica of a living thing, only
we Shias would have been qualified to make it unlawful. Such
prohibitions from your side seem funny when your own school of thought
has made lawful making pictures and idols of living things. You people
report that such things existed even at the home of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w). See the following narrational report in *Mishkatul
Masabih,* Baab Ashratun Nisa:

(Sunni Tradition): Ayesha is reported to have said that she continued to
play with dolls even after entering the house of Allah’s Messenger
(after marriage). She says, “I had some friends who used to play with
me. When the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) arrived my friends hid
themselves. So the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) used to send them back to
me and they used to continue playing with me.” (A well-known tradition)

This report is also present in *Jame Bain as-Sahihain* and *Jameul
Usool*. Muhaddith Dehlavi, explaining this report says, “It is allowed
to make dolls.”

How funny it is that those who allow worship of sandals and consider
making dolls lawful, they should be so much against making harmless
replicas of buildings, that Taziyahs are.

We have also proved that it is lawful to make Taziyahs and other
replicas. Let us now move a step forward and see how it could be a
recommended and meritorious deed.

### (B) The Prophet’s Sunnah is Practical

The narrational report of *Musnad Ahmad Hanbal* that we quoted in the
beginning has proved that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) placed the soil of
Karbala’ before himself and wept. This action of his justifies all
symbols associated with Azadari.

(Sunni Tradition): After the mention about the arrival of the soil of
Karbala’, Umme Salma says: Then the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) smelled
the soil and said that it smelt of pain and calamities. Then he told
Umme Salma that when that soil turned into blood she must know that his
son has been martyred. So Umme Salma placed it in a bottle and observed
it everyday and said: The day you become blood shall be a day of great
tragedy. And it is reported that when Husayn was martyred, for seven
days the sky remained as if it were a mass of blood.[^34]

Before the martyrdom, only the soil of Karbala’ could be obtained for
Azadari and it was stored safely in the Prophet’s house. Therefore,
today when we are fully informed about the details of the actual event
we establish separate memory for each incident. Is it not a perfect
example for following the Prophet’s Sunnah?

### (C) The Prophet’s Practice is Verbal

However, if you are still doubtful whether it justifies the making of
replica of a grave, and think that making it is unlawful, please read on
the following traditional report for further reassurance:

A companion told the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) that he has vowed to
kiss the threshold of Paradise and the Hurul Ein. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) told him: Go and kiss the feet of your mother and the forehead
of your father. He asked what he should do if his parents were not alive
anymore? He was told to kiss their grave. Again he asked what he should
do if he didn’t know where their grave was? The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) told him to, “Draw two lines and consider one as the grave of
the mother and the other as the grave of the father and kiss them, and
do not break your vow.”

The above report is present in Imam Shafei’s *Kifayah*. In addition to
this it is also mentioned in the following books:

(2) *Kanzul Ibaad* (3) *Khazina Riwayat* (4) *Matalibul Momineen* (5)
*Fatawa Alamgiri*

This report also justifies kissing of graves. Praise be to Allah for
this.

### (D) It is the Sunnah of Imams

Now, as per my promise let me also inform you that Amir al-Mu’minin
(a.s) had also made replicas of graves and we emulate him in this matter
too. As we all know, when Lady Fatima (s.a.) passed away from the world
she was infuriated with Abu Bakr and Umar. Hence she had made a bequest
that these two must not be allowed to come near her bier, and that is
why Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) had her buried in the dead of the night.
Moreover, there was a strong possibility, as later events showed, that
the two Shaykhs may dig up her grave to recite the burial prayers on her
again, therefore Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) made seven mock-up graves in
different spots so none could tell which was the actual resting place of
Lady Fatima. Please read the following reports:

Asbagh bin Nubata asked Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) the wisdom behind
conducting the burial of Fatima (s.a.) in the dead of the night. He told
him that Lady Fatima (s.a.) was angry with a group of people and she
didn’t want them to attend her funeral…And people have narrated that
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) made seven duplicate graves around the actual
grave of Fatima so that no one could know which was her real grave.
Another report says that he sprinkled water on forty graves, so that her
real grave could not be distinguished…(Until the end of the
report).[^35]

Due to this, difference of opinion arose as to the location of the grave
of Fatima (s.a.). It is mentioned in *Manaqib Ibn Shahre Aashob* and
*Biharul Anwar* (ibid) that:

“The grave of Lady Fatima (s.a.) is in the Baqi cemetery while some
people say that she was buried at her own house, while yet others are of
the opinion that her grave is between the grave of the Messenger and his
pulpit.”

Anyway, we have proved that His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) had also
constructed replicas of graves. It would not be of any use if you say
that he made replicas of graves for one purpose and we make it for some
other aim. Hence how it could be emulation? Because the actual purpose
was to prove that if making replicas of graves had itself been an
unlawful act why the Holy Imam (a.s) had performed it? So when this act
was lawful and the Imam acted upon it also, what doubt remains in it
being the practice (Sunnah) of Imam? After this, justification of other
symbols of Azadari like the Alam, the Mashk and the cradle etc. is not
even needed because it is the Ta’ziyah which is mostly criticized since
it is the replica of grave. While other things are not even replicas of
grave!

The public display (taking out in procession) of Zuljana can be
justified as follows:

That neither is it our creation, that it may be called a replica of a
living thing and thus considered unlawful and nor does anyone worships
it, that it could be called an idol. Although if someone were to make a
replica of a horse, it is unlawful and if someone worships it, it is
indeed a prohibited act. But if it is not so, it is only a
representation of Imam Husayn’s horse and there is no unlawful aspect to
this representation. Rather it is a recommended and preferable deed,
which is also rewardable. Because it assists in intensifying the
mourning for Husayn (a.s) and the famous Sunni book, *Hasanut Tawassul
Fi Aadaab Ziyarat Afzalur Rosol*, that anything that assists in a
recommended deed is also recommended.[^36]

Therefore since Zuljana is a part of Azadari, it is also recommended.

Majlis (Mourning Assembly)
--------------------------

### (A) The Prophet’s Sunnah is Practical

Thus when the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) returned from the battle of
Uhad, and did not hear any wailing from the house of the Chief of the
Martyrs, Hamzah, while wails were audible from the houses of other
martyrs, he (s.a.w) said: “Are there no women to weep on Hamzah?”

When Saad bin Maaz, Usaid bin Hazeer and other Ansars (Helpers) heard
this, they went to their houses and told their ladies that first they
should go to Hamzah’s house and weep and then come back to mourn their
own martyrs. The ladies of Ansar, went to Hamzah’s place between the
Evening and the Night Prayer time and continued to weep and wail until
midnight. During this time the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) awoke and
asked what that wailing was. When he learnt the facts he was pleased and
he blessed the ladies who had performed this mourning for Hamzah saying:
May Allah be pleased with you. May He be pleased with your children.

The above incident is recorded in all books of Islamic history. Inspite
of this you may look up in *Rauzatus Safa,* Vol. 2 (Events following the
battle of Uhad). Also refer to *Madarijun Nubuwwah* and *Maarijun
Nubuwwah.*

In the incident quoted above, some women of different families gathered
to mourn a martyr who was not having any family relations with them.

And this assembly and this weeping was according to the will of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) and he had desired it. Majlis is also held for the same
type of mourning. It is also a gathering of people belonging to
different families. The noteworthy point here is that when the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w) made such elaborate arrangements for the mourning for
His Eminence, Hamzah, what he would have done had he been present after
the tragedy of Karbala’. The devotees of the Prophet should think upon
it and in accordance with his wishes make arrangements for holding
Majalis of Husayn (a.s).

### (B) The Prophet’s Sunnah is Verbal

The sad utterance of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w):

“But for Hamzah, there is none to weep on him!”

And after that his praying for those who wept on Hamzah shows that it is
the verbal Sunnah of the Prophet.

### (C) Sunnah of the Imams

Numerous incidents could be cited under the topic but I shall be content
to quote only two or three narrational reports. Though before the
martyrdom the prophets’ had held many mourning programs for Imam Husayn
(a.s), the first Majlis held after the martyrdom, that is recorded in
all histories was the one that was held when Yazid felt that the Syrian
people were becoming agitated due to the martyrdom of Husayn (a.s) and
the condition of the captivity of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s). Therefore he
summoned the people in the Jame Mosque and first his preacher narrated
the supposed defects of the Chief of the Martyrs and his ancestors. When
he concluded his speech, Imam ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s) sought permission
from Yazid to deliver an address and after due praise and exaltation of
the Almighty, began to introduce himself. He mentioned his merits then
began to describe his afflictions. It is written that at that time the
people of Syria began to wail in incontrollable grief. I am omitting the
details for the sake of brevity. What I would like to explain is that
our preachers today, following the footsteps of the first Zakir of Imam
Husayn (a.s) first speak about the merits and praiseworthy qualities of
Allah and Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) and then they describe their sorrowful
afflictions and tragedies. The Ahl al-Sunnah Imam, Awzai has quoted this
complete sermon of Imam ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s). We abstain from quoting
it in whole to maintain brevity. However, you may refer to the complete
text of this sermon in books like *Lohoof*, *Ihtijaj* of Tabarsi,
*Biharul* *Anwar* Vol. 10, *Manaqib Ibn Shahr Aashob* and other
innumerable books.

The second Majlis was held when Yazid freed the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) and
asked them whether they would like to proceed to Medina or prefer to
stay there in Damascus for sometime.

The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) said: “We would like to first mourn for Husayn
(a.s) and weep upon him.” Yazid told them that they were free to do so.
Then a number of houses were vacated in Damascus for Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)
and there was no Hashemite and Quraishi lady who did not don a black
dress in the grief of Imam Husayn (a.s) and the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) held
mourning rituals for Imam Husayn (a.s) for seven days.[^37]

The third Majlis was held at the time of their return to Medina. It was
when they arrived at the outskirts of Medina and the whole populace of
Medina gathered around their camp. On that juncture, Imam ‘Ali Ibn
Husayn (a.s) came out wiping his tears with a handkerchief. An attendant
placed a chair for the Holy Imam (a.s). Such a clamor and wailing arose
that the ears of the sky had never heard. The Imam (a.s) motioned the
people to silence and seating himself in the chair narrated his
tragedies their severity and significance. In this Majlis too, the
reciter was the Holy Imam (a.s). It is in emulation of these assemblies
that we place a pulpit or a chair for the reciter of Majlis (Zakir).
This complete episode with the text of the address of the Holy Imam
(a.s) is quoted by Sayyid Ibn Tawus in his book, *Lohoof*. Our
discussion is getting prolonged otherwise I would also have described
the assemblies organized and held by Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s) and Imam
‘Ali Reza (a.s) in which the ladies also assembled behind the curtains
to participate in the morning rituals and on which elegies were also
recited. However, it is sufficient to say that a word is enough for the
wise.

Nauha and Marsiya
-----------------

### (A) The Prophet’s Sunnah is Practical

It is narrated from the Prophet’s companion, Ibn Masud that when the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) arrived at the corpse of His Eminence, Hamzah
and found it mutilated, he wept so bitterly as he had never done before
and he recited the following elegy until he became unconscious:

“O Hamzah! O uncle of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)! O lion of Allah
and His Prophet! O one who performed the good deeds. O Hamzah, O one who
removed the sorrows, O Hamzah! O one who removed the enemies from the
face of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w).”

Since the above incident is recorded in all histories, we feel it
needless to provide specific reference for it.

### (B) The Sunnah of the Imam is Practical

Dirges and elegies of Imam ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s) are well-known. The
following are some couplets that the Holy Imam (a.s) said repeatedly
while weeping when he was entering Kufa in captivity:

*O evil people, may rain not water your fertile lands.*

*O people who did not care about our relationship with our grandfather.*

*When the Prophet and we come together on the Day of Judgment, what
would you say regarding us?*

*You make us travel on saddle-less camels as if we have not established
any religion for you.*

*Was our grandfather the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) not the one who
guided the humanity away from deviation?*

*O the tragedy of Karbala’, that you gave us in inheritance! And may God
destroy the honor of these people and expose their defects.*

### (C) It is the Sunnah of Ahl al-Bayt

Numerous elegies and dirges of Her Eminence, Zainab and Umme Kulthum are
famous. Here we quote two couplets of each of the ladies. Lady Zainab
recited the following in the bazaar of Kufa when a stone struck the
severed head of the holy Imam (a.s):

*O new moon! Your light has not been perfected yet.*

*That you have gone into eclipse and you set.*

*My dear brother, I have not imagined it. It was a matter destined.*

Lady Umme Kulthum recited the following couplets upon their return to
Medina:

*O city of our grandfather, do not accept us.*

*We have come with pain, sorrow and grief.*

*O Fatima if you could see the prisoners*

*That your daughters are taken out through the towns.*

### (D) The Sunnah of the Imam is Verbal

Shaykh Mufeed has on the authority of Ibn Quluwahy quoted the following
command of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s) that:

(Shia Tradition): Every weeping and lamentation is detestable (Makruh)
except the one on the tragedy of Husayn (a.s). (As it is
rewardable).[^38]

A similar tradition is present in *Kamiluz Ziyaraat* from another chain
of narrators also.

Ma’tam and Mourning Procession
------------------------------

**Ma’tam and Mourning Procession**[^39]

### (A) Ma’tam

Before quoting traditions regarding Ma’tam, I feel it is necessary to
mention an incident about Mutawakkil Billah the Ahl al-Sunnah caliph
whose merits are such that many Ahl al-Sunnah people give him the grade
of Righteous Caliph. He exhibited such zeal in the eradication of
innovations that he tried his best to destroy all traces of the tomb of
Imam Husayn (a.s). Such a prominent personality, ordered that Ma’tam be
performed on the passing away of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal.

“Mutawakkil ordered that Ma’tam should be held at the place where the
funeral prayer was recited on the bier of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal. Thus
2.5 million people gathered at that place and Muslims, Jews, Christians,
Zoroastrians and people of four schools performed Ma’tam there.”

Obviously when the caliph who is called as the ‘reviver of the Sunnah’
organized such Ma’tam who had the guts to call it an act of innovation
(Bid’ah)?

Apart from this let us now see some traditions that prove that Ma’tam is
Sunnah and lawful.

### (B) Ma’tam is Practical Sunnah of Imam

When the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) were released from Syria and en route to
Medina, they reached Karbala’ and found Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari and
some other prominent companions of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) and
some other people of Banu Hashim there, what occurred at that time is
described by Sayyid Ibn Tawus in *Lohoof:*

Thus all of them reached there at one and the same time. They met and
they wept. They slapped their faces and performed such Ma’tam as injures
the hearts. The ladies of the surrounding areas also gathered and joined
them in the mourning rituals and this continued for many days.

The above episode clearly shows that people of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s), Banu
Hashim and prominent companions like Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari and even
the ladies of the neighborhood all gathered at the place and took part
in the Ma’tam. They slapped their faces and did Ma’tam. And these
rituals continued for many days. During all this there is no report of
any restraint commanded by Imam ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s). Therefore we have
to accept that he also participated in the expression of their grief and
rituals of mourning. Therefore it is the practical Sunnah of the Imam.

### (C) It is the Silent Permission of Imam

The terminological meaning of ‘Taqreer’ is that if someone performs an
act in the presence of the Imam and the Prophet and they, inspite of
being capable, do not restrain him or her, it proves that, that act is
lawful in Islamic law. If someone is not prepared to accept that the
Ma’tam held in Karbala’ was the practical Sunnah of the Imam and says
that there is no mention the Imam (a.s) himself participated in it, he
or she would have to agree that those people did Ma’tam and slapped
their faces for many days in the presence of the Imam (a.s) and while
they were subservient to his command and the Imam did not restrain them.
Does this not prove that Ma’tam, face slapping and wailing and mourning
on Imam Husayn (a.s) is not only lawful, but also a practice of the
Imam?

### (D) If it is the Sunnah of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)

That Ma’tam is the Sunnah of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) has already been proved
by the previous narration report in this regard:

(Shia Tradition): Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s) said: “After the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s), Lady Rabab (wife of Imam Husayn) performed Ma’tam on
him.”[^40]

(Note: The account of the mourning and grief of Lady Rabab is present in
all books of history and biography)

### Act of the People of Medina

In the view of Ahl al-Sunnah Imam, Malik, the action of the people of
Medina is proof and obligatory action. Let us now see the action of
people of Medina regarding the mourning for Imam Husayn (a.s). When the
caravan of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) returned and halted on the outskirts of
Medina, Bashir bin Juzlam conveyed the news of their arrival to the
folks of Medina.[^41]

“Thus no veiled lady remained in Medina who did not come out in such a
condition that her hair was in disarray and she was slapping her face
and thrashing her cheeks. They were weeping and wailing. Thus I had
never seen such clamor ever before and such a crowd of mourners.”

It is obvious that after these explanations, no doubt remains for anyone
in the recommended nature of the Ma’tam for Imam Husayn (a.s). Now let
us see how the people of Medina reached the Holy Imam (a.s) in a
magnificent procession:

Bashir says, “I was in Medina itself and the people of Medina reached
Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) before me. Hence I turned my horse and reached there
to find the whole area filled with multitudes of people. There was such
a crowd that I had to alight from the horse and I walked over the necks
of the people to reach Ahl al-Bayt (a.s).”[^42]

From this took shape the present Ma’tam procession. But our Ma’tam
procession is actually not in commemoration of this procession of
Medinite folks. It is in remembrance of the plundered caravan of Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s) that was taken from Karbala’ to Kufa, Kufa to Syria and
from Syria to Medina. Which was taken through streets, lanes and by
lanes. Just as the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) used to weep and wail through the
ways, we also emulate them and try to keep their memory fresh.

Leaving embellishment, observing mourning and keeping hair disarranged
----------------------------------------------------------------------

### (A) The Prophet’s Sunnah is Practical

It is a practical Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) to keep hair
awry and to make a face of grief in mourning for Imam Husayn (a.s).
Before I present some traditional report in this connection please read
the following narration of *Mishkatul Masabih,* which is accepted by
all.

(Sunni Tradition): The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) said: One who sees me
in a dream has actually seen me because the Satan can never appear in my
form. This tradition is also universally accepted.

There are many traditions of the same topic and all are universally
accepted. It is related from Abu Qatadah Ansari and Abu Huraira in the
same chapter and the Shia also believe in it. Now see the following
narrational report that Ibn Abbas is reported to have said that one day
he was sleeping at home that the sound of weeping and lamentation from
the house of Umme Salma, the wife of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
awoke him. He went towards Umme Salma’s residence and all Medinite folks
also rushed there. Upon reaching there they asked her: ‘O Mother of
believers! Why are you lamenting so much? Umme Salma did not give any
reply. But she glanced towards the Hashemite ladies and said:

(Shia Tradition): “O daughters of Abdul Muttalib! Help me and join me in
lamentation. Because, by Allah, your chief and the leader of the youths
of Paradise has been martyred. The grandson of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) and his beloved one, Husayn, has been slain.”[^43]

Ibn Abbas says that he asked Umme Salma how she came to know it. Umme
Salma said: I have just seen the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) in my dream.
His face was covered with dust and he looked devastated. I asked him
what the matter was and he said that his son, Husayn and his family have
been massacred today. Hence, he has buried them and was just returning
from their burial. Umme Salma says that after receiving this reply she
arose and went inside the house and didn’t know what to do. ‘Suddenly I
looked at the soil of Karbala’ that Jibraeel had brought.’ (Then she
related the complete incident of Jibraeel). Thus when I looked at the
bottle, I saw that the soil had turned into fresh blood which was
boiling furiously.’ Ibn Abbas says that then Umme Salma took out some of
this blood and smeared it on her face and that she observed the day as
the day of mourning. She considered it a day for lamenting on Imam
Husayn (a.s). After that (days later) messengers brought the news that
Imam Husayn (a.s) had been martyred on that same day.

Such types of narrations are present in both Shia and Sunni books in
large numbers. Thus we have quoted the account of the soil turning to
blood from the marginal notes in our discussion about Ta’ziyah. In the
book of *Mishkat* the incident of Umme Salma’s dream is mentioned in a
report of Salma in brief on the authority of *Sahih Tirmidhi*. This
report mentions the observing of Ma’tam. However, our aim of presenting
this tradition is to prove that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had his
hair awry and his face was covered with dust due to his sorrow for Imam
Husayn (a.s). Hence if our ladies or we also make our appearance thus,
it is nothing but emulating the Sunnah of the Prophet. It could never be
termed as an innovation.

### (B) It is the Sunnah of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s) said:

(Shia Tradition): “Neither any Hashemite lady comb her hair nor apply
dye until Mukhtar sent the heads of the killers of Husayn (a.s) to
us.”[^44]

Black Clothes
-------------

Allamah Abu Ishaq Asfar Amini (renowned Sunni scholar) in his book,
*Noorul Ain Fi Mashhadil Husayn,* Published Cairo, 1366 A.H. has quoted
on Pg. 60 the report of the dream of Sakina. In this dream she saw the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) in the following condition:

(Sunni Tradition): Suddenly I decried a gentleman, who moved forward in
such a manner that the color of his face had changed and it was glowing.
And due to the severity of his grief he was stumbling like a woman whose
youthful son had died. He was holding his blessed beard, weeping and was
in an aggrieved mood. I asked the servant who this gentleman was,
dressed in mourning clothes and so much aggrieved? He said, “Didn’t you
recognize him?” I said, no. He told me that it was my grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w).

The condition in which she saw Lady Fatima (s.a.) is as follows:

“And among those ladies (Maryam and Asiya etc.) is a very prominent
lady, having her hairs in disarray. She is wearing black clothes and she
is holding a shirt smeared with blood.”

This clearly proves that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) was in mourning
dress and Lady Fatima also had the hair in disarray and wore black
clothes.

### Silent Sunnah is from the Imam

We have already mentioned how Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) stayed in Damascus for
seven days even after they were released and how they spent all this
time in performing various rituals in mourning and lamentation for Imam
Husayn (a.s).

(Shia Tradition): There was no Hashemite and Quraishi lady who did not
don a black dress in grief of Imam Husayn (a.s).[^45]

Mourning House (Azakhana)
-------------------------

### The Imam’s Sunnah is Practical

The first mourning house that was made for Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) was the
Baitul Ahzaan (House of lamentation) that Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s) had made for Lady Fatima who used to lament, day and night
at the passing away of her blessed father. The people of Medina told
Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) to ask Lady Sayyida Fatima to either lament
during the day or during the night. Lady Fatima said that she was going
to stay among them only for a few days and that very soon she was going
to say farewell to them. So, by Allah, she could neither remain silent
during the day nor during the night could she stop weeping. Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) said that she could lament whenever she desired.
However, keeping in mind the disturbance for the people of Medina he
made this arrangement.

(Shia Tradition): His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) constructed a house for
Fatima in Baqi on the outskirts of Medina, which became known as Baitul
Ahzaan (House of lamentation). In the morning, Lady Fatima used to go
weeping towards Baqi with Hasan and Husayn (a.s) and she used to sit in
that graveyard and lament. When night fell, Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) used
to go and bring her home...until the end of the tradition.[^46]

This incident is also mentioned in the books of Ahl al-Sunnah and books
of history. This shows that construction of Azakhanas is practice of
‘Ali (a.s).

Arena, drums and lashing with chains
------------------------------------

Under the tenth heading I would like to discuss about three things that
are sometimes a part of Muharram processions but regarding which there
is a difference of opinion among the Shia scholars that whether they
could be justified to be part of mourning rituals or not. Or whether
they fall under the lawful category of actions or not. If so, under what
justifications can they be considered lawful?

However, the most important point is that whatever may be the position
of the Shia scholars in this matter, traditions of Ahl al-Sunnah prove
beyond any doubt that all these things were permitted by the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w), hence neither the Ahl al-Sunnah people nor the officers
of Tanzeem Ahl al-Sunnah have any right to say anything against these
rituals.

### (A) Watching an Arena is Sunnah of the Prophet

Let us see the following tradition that Tirmidhi has judged to be
authentic and correct:

(Sunni Tradition): Ayesha is reported to have said that one day the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) was sitting when we heard a clamor and noise
of children. So the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) arose and we saw that a
black woman was dancing and children had gathered around her. So the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) said: Ayesha, come and see. I came and kept
my chin on the shoulder of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) and began to peep
through the gap between his blessed head and shoulder. Then the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) asked me: Are you not satisfied yet? I kept telling him
‘no’ to see how much he cared for me…(until the end of the report).[^47]

This tradition mentions dancing and the marginal notes on this on the
authority of *Lumah* say:

(Statement of Ahl al-Sunnah scholars): But it is not unlawful, because
if it had been so, how the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) would have watched
it and how he could have allowed Ayesha to watch it?

However, becoming helpless due to the objections of Shias they have
interpreted that it was not a dance; it was a display of the art of
warfare, that is a ‘wrestling ring’. That is why the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) watched it himself and also told Ayesha to watch it. If we
accept this interpretation it would clearly justify watching wrestling
matches because what it is except display of the art of warfare? And if
we don’t accept this interpretation, even then, in comparison to
dancing, a wrestling match is not a serious act and in some cases it
becomes a recommended thing. No objection can be directed against it.

### (B) Listening to drums is Sunnah of the Prophet

Now pay attention to the following tradition, which is exactly before
the report quoted above and Imam Tirmidhi says that it is a correct and
good report.

(Ahl al-Sunnah Tradition): Buraidah is reported to have said that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) led a war expedition and when he returned
from it, a black girl arrived to him and said that she had made a vow
that if the Almighty brings the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) back safe and
sound, she would play the drum in his presence. So the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w) said: If you have made a vow to play the drum, play it.
Otherwise do not. Thus she began to play the drum…(until the end of the
report).[^48]

The above-mentioned report shows that drum was played in the presence of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) and he listened to it being played. Now
what is the doubt in its being a verbal Sunnah?

### (C) Chain Ma’tam (lashing) is also Recommended

The Ahl al-Sunnah have got such a principle of traditional science that
after that, leave alone chain lashing, they do not have the right to
object to any ritual of any Muslim sect. Please pay attention to the
following tradition, which is related from the famous companion of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), Ibn Masud, who is reported to have said that
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) said:

“Whatever the Muslims consider good, it is good in the view of Allah
also.”[^49]

The refuge of this same tradition is taken when objections are made
against innovations started by caliphs. Support is taken by this same
tradition when the consensus of Saqifah is criticized. Why only chain
lashing, all the items that have become a part of mourning are
considered good by a category of Muslim people, therefore on the basis
of the tradition presented by Imam Hakim, they are good in the view of
Allah and recommended. The Tanzeem Ahl al-Sunnah may say whatever they
like, but in the view of Allah all these things are rewardable deeds.

However never should you say:

“So what if one sect likes it; until all the sects do not reach
unanimity this tradition cannot be applied.” Because if you say this,
the consensus of Saqifah and all the caliphates that are justified
through this tradition shall be rendered invalid.

Praise be to Allah that all the points raised by the question are
clarified and all rituals of Azadari have been proved to be a part of
Sunnah. It has also been elaborated that which particular ritual was a
part of which Sunnah also.

Now if our opponent, Maulana Dost Muhammad has any self-respect he
should, in exchange of each tradition presented by us, pay up ten
rupees, not to me but to the Razakar Association and Anjuman Wazifa
Sadat-o-Momineen.

Azadari is Obligatory
---------------------

When it is proved that rituals of Azadari are Sunnah of Prophet and
Sunnah of Imams, to further humiliate Dost Muhammad we would like to
call the attention of our readers to a phrase which we had so far kept
aside for this special occasion. He says in question no. 2: If it is
obligatory, please provide the verse, with ruku[^50] and Surah number.

Reply: Yes sir! Under some circumstances, Azadari is obligatory and it
is in this way that it is allowed to make a vow to perform any
recommended act. And one can also take an oath to perform that deed, as
all the sects of Islam believe and have faith in. Therefore if one makes
a vow to perform any of the above-mentioned rituals of Azadari, or takes
an oath, it would become obligatory on him or her to fulfill it. The
following verses are sufficient for this purpose:

(1) …and fulfill the promise; surely (every) promise shall be questioned
about.[^51]

(2) They fulfill vows and fear a day the evil of which shall be
spreading far and wide.[^52]

In addition to these, see the following verses also:

(1) Surah Baqarah, Ruku 36, Verse 270 (2) Surah Baqarah, Ruku 5, Verse
40 (3) Surah Anam, Ruku 19, Verse 53 (4) Surah Nahl, Ruku 13, Verse 91
(5) Surah Hajj, Ruku 4, Verse 29.

As far as possible I tried to be brief in this article. From the
multitudes of traditions I have chosen and presented only one tradition
for each topic. If inspite of this, the chapter has become so lengthy,
it was unavoidable and I hope it would prove beneficial to the readers.
And my efforts shall indeed be rewarded if the questioner gets some
faith by reading this chapter.

Allah is the guardian of those who believe. He brings them out of the
darkness into the light…[^53]

And our final word is that praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

[^1]: Pakistani Urdu Magazine

[^2]: Surah Ibrahim 14:26

[^3]: Asaasul Usool

[^4]: Surah Fatiha 1:6-7

[^5]: Surah Hajj 22:36

[^6]: Surah Baqarah 2:158

[^7]: Benedictory gift of a holy place or occasion

[^8]: Surah Baqarah 2:125

[^9]: Surah Aale Imran 3:97

[^10]: Surah Baqarah 2:248

[^11]: Surah Hajj 22:32

[^12]: Surah Maidah 5:2

[^13]: Surah Rum 30:30

[^14]: Surah Aadiyat 100:1-5

[^15]: Surah Rum 30:30

[^16]: Imam Ghazzali quoted in Sawaiqul Mohreqa, Ibne Hajar Makki

[^17]: Surah Baqarah 2:24

[^18]: Surah Ahzab 33:21

[^19]: Surah Hashr 59:7

[^20]: Shroud

[^21]: A horse taken out as a duplicate of the horse of Imam Husayn
(a.s.)

[^22]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 10, Reward of weeping on calamity

[^23]: Biharul Anwar, Ibid

[^24]: Chapter of Burial of the dead and weeping on the dead

[^25]: Mishkatul Masabih, Chapter on the virtues of Ahle Bayt (a.s.)

[^26]: Mishkatul Masabih, Chapter on Weeping for the dead

[^27]: Surah Anam 6:164

[^28]: Mishkatul Masabih, Chapter of Weeping for the Dead

[^29]: Mishkatul Masabih, Chapter of Weeping for the Dead

[^30]: Surah Anam 6:164

[^31]: Mishkatul Masabih, Chapter of Weeping for the Dead

[^32]: Phallus

[^33]: Tarikh Baghdad, Khatib

[^34]: Marginal notes of Mishkatul Masabih, Matba Farooqi, Delhi, 564

[^35]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 10

[^36]: Refer the above book on the margins of al-Ittihaf, Pg. 91, Egypt

[^37]: Tahzib, Biharul Anwar, Vol. 10

[^38]: Biharul Anwar Vol. 10

[^39]: Urdu=Juloos

[^40]: Al-Kafi, Biharul Anwar Vol. 10

[^41]: Lohoof, Biharul Anwar

[^42]: Ibid, op cit.

[^43]: Biharul Anwar

[^44]: Biharul Anwar Vol. 10

[^45]: Biharul Anwar, op cit

[^46]: Biharul Anwar Vol. 10

[^47]: Al Hadith, Mishkatul Masabih

[^48]: Mishkatul Masabih

[^49]: Mustadrak, Imam Hakim on the authority of Sawaiqul Mohreqa, Ibne
Hajar and Tarikhul Khulafa, Allamah Suyuti

[^50]: Section number

[^51]: Surah Bani Israel, Ruku 4, Verse no. 34

[^52]: Surah Dahr, Ruku 1, Verse no. 7

[^53]: Surah Baqarah 2:257


