Banu Umayyah in the View of the Holy Qur’an
===========================================

Seeing some present conditions that a detailed biography of Yazid should
be compiled so that true facts of his life and background may become
known to all, we plan to discuss the following points in this treatise:

(1) Name and genealogy

(2) Banu Umayyah in the light of the Holy Qur’an and traditions

(3) The initial lowliness of the Banu Umayyah and the causes of their
later prominence

(4) Character of Muawiyah

(5) Character of Yazid’s mother

(6) Upbringing of Yazid and his nature

(7) Events preceding the appointment as heir apparent

(8) Intrigues for heir apparency

(9) Coronation and

(10) Arrangement of the slaying of Imam Husayn (a.s) and its events in
brief

(11) The episode of Harrah (sack of Medina) – its causes and
consequences

(12) Siege of Mecca – its causes and consequences

(13) Death of Yazid

(14) Habits and traits of Yazid

Since a lot of time and leisure is required to write on all the above
topics, I have decided to write on each topic whenever there is
opportunity. And when all the topics are covered we can compile them
into a book. If Allah the High, wills.

First of all we intend to present and discuss the verses of Holy Qur’an
regarding Banu Umayyah. The exegesis and commentaries on these verses is
from the books of Ahl al-Sunnah themselves.

First Verse
-----------

…and We did not make the vision which We showed you but a trial for men
and the cursed tree in the Qur’an as well; and We cause them to fear,
but it only adds to their great inordinacy.[^1]

Under this blessed verse, following traditions are quoted in *Tafsir
Durre Manthur* of Allamah Jalaluddin Abdur Rahman Suyuti:[^2]

(1) Ibn Jarir has related from Sahl bin Saad that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) saw in his dream, so and so clan jumping on his pulpit like
monkeys. Thus he became so aggrieved by it that he never laughed as long
as he lived and the Almighty Allah revealed the following verse:

In this tradition the narrator has resorted to dissimulation and
refrained from mentioning the name of the tribe or clan but later
traditions clearly state the name of Banu Umayyah to be the ‘accursed
tree’.

(2) Ibn Abi Hatim has narrated from Ibn Umar that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) said: I have seen the progeny of Hakam bin al-Aas jumping on the
pulpits and the Almighty Allah revealed the verse in this connection:

…and We did not make the vision which We showed you but a trial for men
and the cursed tree in the Qur’an as well; and We cause them to fear,
but it only adds to their great inordinacy.[^3]

And the ‘accursed tree’ denotes Hakam and his progeny, which was a
prominent clan of Banu Umayyah.

(3) Ibn Abi Hatim has narrated from Ya’la bin Marrah that the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w) said: ‘I was shown in my dream Banu Umayyah on the
pulpits of the world. And very soon they would become your rulers. Then
you would find them bad rulers; and the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) was
very much aggrieved due to this dream. Thus Almighty Allah revealed this
verse.

(4) Ibn Marduyah has narrated from Imam Husayn (a.s) that one morning
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) was very much aggrieved. When the reason
for this was asked he said: I was shown in my dream that the Banu
Umayyah are barking from my pulpit. So he was told: O Allah’s Messenger,
do not be aggrieved by this dream because it is only the worldly things
that they shall be able to achieve. At that time the Almighty Allah
revealed this verse.

(5) Ibn Abi Hatim and Ibn Marduyah and in *Dalail* Baihaqi and Ibn
Asakir have narrated from Sa’eed bin Musayyab that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w) saw (in dream) Banu Umayyah on the pulpits. Therefore he
was aggrieved due to it. At that time the Almighty Allah revealed that
they shall only get the world and they shall remain alien to the
Hereafter. So the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) became content. And that
revelation is the following statement of Allah:

…and We did not make the vision which We showed you but a trial for men
and the cursed tree in the Qur’an as well; and We cause them to fear,
but it only adds to their great inordinacy.[^4]

(6) Ibn Marduyah has narrated from Ayesha that she told Marwan bin Hakam
that: I have heard the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) say to your father and
grandfather that: You people are the same (family) tree that is cursed
in the Holy Qur’an.

This verse and traditions recorded about this verse clearly show that
Banu Umayyah was a really evil and inauspicious family which the
Almighty Allah has cursed in the Holy Qur’an and whose kingdom is made a
test for the people that who would go to the side of Banu Umayyah for
obtaining worldly benefits and who remains aloof from them and keeps his
or her faith safe. As if both Banu Umayyah and Satan are same by way of
being tests for the people. That is why when the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) saw these Satans in human forms jumping on the pulpits he was so
shocked that he did not even laugh until the time he remained in the
world thereafter.

Now when it has been proved that this whole clan is accursed, if someone
yet is doubtful about the justification of cursing Yazid and his father,
it only proves his or her lack of understanding of the Holy Qur’an.

Shia commentator, Mulla Mohsin Faid has also in his *Tafsir Safi* quoted
the same traditions in the explanation of this verse and after that he
says:

The subject matter of these traditions is same among the Sunni as well
as the Shia.

In the end, the respected commentator has pointed out a very interesting
point in this verse that in it while the Almighty Allah described the
evil handiworks of this family, He has also mentioned in it by name the
greatest villain of this clan:

Famaa yaziiduhum illaa t’ughyaanan kabiiraa: …but it only adds to their
great inordinacy.[^5]

This statement contains the name of Yazid.

Second Verse
------------

The worldly pomp and grandeur of Banu Umayyah that is mentioned above
was not by the wish and will of the Almighty as in the case of Prophet
Yusuf and Prophet Sulaiman (a.s). But as clearly stated before, it was
by way of test of the people. The matter is further elaborated in the
following verse in which the Almighty Allah tells His Messenger to say
to them:

And I do not know if this may be a trial for you and a provision until a
time.[^6]

Please see the following two narrational reports in this connection:

(1) Ibn Saad and Ibn Abi Shayba and in *Dalail,* Baihaqi have related
from Imam Shobi that when Imam Hasan (a.s) made a treaty with Muawiyah,
Muawiyah asked him to arise and say a few words regarding the truce.
Thus after praise to the Almighty, Imam Hasan (a.s) said: I have given
up the kingdom only for the sake of the welfare of the Muslims and to
prevent their bloodshed. And I don’t know whether it could be a test for
you and a respite for a few days.” Then he sought the forgiveness of
Allah and descended from the pulpit.[^7]

It is wrong to think that Imam Hasan (a.s) merely recited this verse
here by way of quoting. The fact is that this verse was only revealed
about the kingdom of Banu Umayyah. Now please see this narration:

(2) Ibn Abi Shayba and Ibn Asakir have narrated from Rabi bin Anas that
when the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) went up to the heavens on the night
of Ascension (he saw there some things due to which) the Almighty Allah
revealed this verse that:

…and We did not make the vision which We showed you but a trial for men
and the cursed tree in the Qur’an as well; and We cause them to fear,
but it only adds to their great inordinacy.[^8]

And these things denote this very kingdom and rulership.”

All the intrigues and plots of Banu Umayyah to acquire this kingdom were
apparently conducted in the name of religion, while the fact was they
had done all this after ignoring and abandoning the commands of God.
Thus the third verse explains this matter in the same way.

Third Verse
-----------

And among men there is he who disputes about Allah without knowledge and
without guidance and without an illuminating book, Turning away
haughtily that he may lead (others) astray from the way of Allah; for
him is disgrace in this world, and on the day of resurrection We will
make him taste the punishment of burning: This is due to what your two
hands have sent before, and because Allah is not in the least unjust to
the servants.[^9]

Commenting on the verse, the late Maulana Farman ‘Ali Sahab says on the
margins:

“Hafiz bin Muhammad bin Musa Shirazi in *Tafsir Ithna Ashar* has related
from Anas Ibn Malik that: We were sitting with the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) and talking about the good points of a person. That how
steadfast he was in praying, fasting and charity. The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) said that he did not recognize him. Just then, the person in
question arrived there and we said that it was the same person. As soon
as the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) heard this, he told Abu Bakr to take
the sword and behead that man saying: “He is the first person of the
party of Satan.” Thus Abu Bakr took the sword and came to the Masjid but
found that the man was bowing down in prayers. Thinking that since the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w) has prohibited against killing of worshippers he
returned and reported that he had seen him praying and ‘you have
prohibited killing a worshipper’. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) said:
“Sit down, you are not worthy of this.” Then he commanded Umar to go to
the mosque and get the severed head of that man. When Umar came with the
sword he found the man in prostration. Hence he also returned and
described the situation. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) said, “You are
also not worthy of this. Sit down.” Then he (s.a.w) said: “‘Ali, get up.
And I know that if you find the man you would surely kill him. And if
you kill him right now there would never be disunity among the people of
this community of mine.” Thus ‘Ali (a.s) went in pursuit but did not
find the man there. He returned and reported the situation. At that time
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) said: “O ‘Ali the community of Musa (a.s)
was divided into 71 sects, one was delivered and the rest damned. And
the nation of Isa (a.s) became divided into 72 sects; one of whom was
delivered and all the rest were doomed. And my people shall be divided
into 73 sects. One shall go to Paradise and all others to Hell.” ‘Ali
(a.s) asked which the delivered sect was? The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
replied: “One who follows your way and the path of your companions.” At
that moment the captioned verse was revealed about that man.

Ibn Abbas says: “By Allah, His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) slew that man in the
battle of Siffeen.” Allamah Ibn Hajar in *Fathul Bari,* Hafiz Abu Naeem
in *Hilyah* and other Ahl al-Sunnah scholars have also quoted this
report.[^10]

When such was the condition of the followers of Banu Umayyah and for
them this verse was revealed in denouncement, the conditions of the Banu
Umayyah themselves could be estimated easily. In any case, Allah so much
liked to fight the supporters of Banu Umayyah that He issued a clear
command that just as the infidels were fought for the spread of Islam in
the same way the Banu Umayyah should be fought severely for the defense
of Islam as the fourth verse is clearly saying.

Fourth Verse
------------

And fight (in the way of) Allah, (such) a fighting as is due to
Him…[^11]

Umar has given the explanation of this verse as follows:

(1) Ibn Marduyah has narrated from Abdur Rahman bin Auf that he said
that Umar said: In whatever we used to read in the Qur’an, did it not
have the verse: “And perform Jihad in the last age for the sake of Allah
as it deserves to be fought like you used to perform Jihad in the
beginning period?” I said: “Indeed we used to read it. So, Chief of
believers, for what time this command is?” Umar replied, “When the Banu
Umayyah are the rulers and the Bani Mughaira are their ministers.”[^12]

(It is very astonishing, that in spite of knowing this Umar gave the
opportunity to Banu Umayyah to consolidate their position in Syria. And
he made such an arrangement for a person in the Shura committee that he
should be selected the caliph in any way. And in his caliphate Umar gave
an equal share to Abdur Rahman bin Auf.)

(2) Baihaqi has narrated from Musawwir bin Muhzama in *Dalail* that Umar
asked Abdur Rahman bin Auf…and after that is mentioned the whole
narrative of the above-mentioned report.

And according to the late Maulana Farman ‘Ali Sahab:

“It is clear that during the time of Yazid, the progeny of Mughaira were
in the ministries because the first one to take up the issue of Yazid’s
allegiance with Muawiyah and make the people give allegiance was
Mughaira, the governor of Kufa. He had sent forty men with his son to
Muawiyah to give the allegiance of Yazid. And after those people paid
the allegiance, Muawiyah asked his (Mughaira’s) son in private, “How
much did your father pay to purchase the faith and religion of these
people?” “Four hundred Dinars, “ he replied. “It is still cheap,”
remarked Muawiyah. How beautiful! Muawiyah was certain of his dishonesty
and falsehood. In any case, the time that the Almighty Allah indicates
is that of the time of the Jihad of Imam Husayn (a.s) and it is about
this magnificent Jihad that the Almighty Allah speaks about giving His
support.”[^13]

Now we have reached the period of Yazid and the battle of Karbala’ and
it has become clear that the Jihad Imam Husayn (a.s) performed against
Yazid, it was in compliance of this same verse. Such was the
significance of this Jihad in the view of the Almighty that He
considered these ten days of Muharram to be worthy of honor and He has
sworn by it as clearly mentioned in the fifth verse of our discussion:

Fifth Verse
-----------

I swear by the daybreak, and the ten nights…[^14]

The following traditional report is mentioned in its exegesis in *Tafsir
Durre Manthur*:[^15]

(1) Muhammad bin Nasr in *Kitabus Salaat* has narrated from Uthman that
people venerate three ‘Ashuras’ (ten-day periods). The first ten days of
Muharram, the first ten days of Zilhajj and the last ten days of the
month of Ramadan.

It is obvious that there is no apparent reason for the significance of
the first ten days of Muharram except that a magnificent confrontation
between truth and falsehood was to take place during these ten days in
which apparently falsehood shall be victorious but in fact it would be
badly vanquished. And it was in remembrance of this event that very much
before its actual occurrence these days were made sanctified and
venerable. It was when the actual event hadn’t even occurred. Thus among
the Jews also the 10th of Muharram was considered a holy day. In the
ancient age, the Jewish year began from the month of Rajab and Muharram
was the seventh month of their calendar. It is mentioned in the Old
Testament (Leviticus 23:26-32)

“And the Lord said to Moses, “Say to the people of Israel, in the
seventh month, on the first day of the month, you shall observe a day of
solemn rest, a memorial proclaimed with blast of trumpets, a holy
convocation. You shall do no laborious work; and you shall present an
offering by fire to the Lord.”

“And the Lord said to Moses, “On the tenth day of this seventh month is
the Day of Atonement; it shall be for you a holy convocation and you
shall afflict yourselves and present an offering by fire to the Lord.
And you shall do no work on this same day; for it is a day of atonement,
to make atonement for you before the Lord your God. For whoever is not
afflicted on this same day shall be cut off from his people. And whoever
does any work on this same day, that person I will destroy from among
his people. You shall do no work: it is a statute forever throughout
your generations in all your dwellings. It shall be to you a Sabbath of
solemn rest, and you shall afflict yourselves; on the ninth day of the
month beginning at evening, from evening to evening shall you keep your
Sabbath.”[^16]

In any case, the kingdom of Banu Umayyah and in it, the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s) and the news of other calamities and the knowledge of
the destruction of this religion of Islam the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) had
nurtured with his blood, made the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) so much
aggrieved that none could estimate his shock. Thus when the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) saw in dream, which was mentioned in the discussion of the first
verse, in which the Almighty Allah told that the kingdom of this
accursed tree shall be a test for the people, for further comfort of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), Allah also considered it necessary to inform
about the duration of the rule of Banu Umayyah and when it shall be
finished. So that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) may be comforted after
learning about its brief duration. Therefore the Surah Qadr was
revealed.

Last Verses
-----------

Surely We revealed it on the grand night. And what will make you
comprehend what the grand night is? The grand night is better than a
thousand months. The angels and the Spirit descend in it by the
permission of their Lord for every affair, Peace! It is until the break
of the morning.[^17]

Let us see the following narrations recorded in the commentaries of the
above chapter:

(1) Khatib has narrated in his *History of Baghdad* from Ibn Abbas that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) saw Banu Umayyah in dream on his pulpit
and he was aggrieved by it. Thus Allah revealed on him that it would be
only apparent rulership that those people shall achieve. And these
verses were revealed that:

Surely We revealed it on the grand night. And what will make you
comprehend what the grand night is? The grand night is better than a
thousand months. The angels and the Spirit descend in it by the
permission of their Lord for every affair, Peace! It is until the break
of the morning.[^18]

(2) Khatib has narrated from Ibn Musayyab that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) said: “I was shown in my dream that the Banu Umayyah are
climbing on my pulpit. Thus this matter was very shocking to me. So the
Almighty Allah revealed these verses.”

Imam Hasan (a.s) has indicated towards this same verse when a person
criticized him for signing truce with Muawiyah. The Imam said:

“May Allah have mercy on you, do not criticize me because the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) had seen in dream that the Banu Umayyah are reciting
sermon from his pulpit. Thus, he was very aggrieved due to this. At that
time this verse was revealed: ‘O Muhammad! We have bestowed Kauthar to
you.’ It denoted a stream of Paradise and the following verses were
revealed:

Surely We revealed it on the grand night. And what will make you
comprehend what the grand night is?[^19]

In which the Banu Umayyah shall be rulers after you.”

Qasim says that when we calculated the duration of the rule of Banu
Umayyah we concluded that indeed it lasted for a thousand months.
Neither a day more nor less.

The aim of the Holy Imam (a.s) was that by becoming aloof from
rulership, his kingdom has not separated from him. Rather their
domination remains like before on all the world and on all the things.
And in exchange of the difficulties of the brief reign of a thousand
months of Banu Umayyah the Almighty Allah has given them the Day of
Judgment. And in the Hereafter, He has bestowed them with the Pool of
Kauthar. That the kingdom of the Night of Power shall remain with Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s) until Day of Judgment means that the Imamate from the side
of Allah shall remain only in their family, though oppressors may usurp
the apparent rulership from them and may apparently defeat and vanquish
them and deprive them from apparent rulership. However, the magnificence
of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) shall endure forever.

The angels and the Spirit descend in it by the permission of their Lord
for every affair, Peace! It is until the break of the morning.[^20]

Then, praise be to Allah for this.

In the end let me explain how the reign of Banu Umayyah lasted for a
thousand months. The reign of Banu Umayyah commenced in Rajab 41 A.H.
after the truce of Imam Hasan (a.s) and it ended on 1st Shawwal 127
A.H., because it was on this date that the movement of Bani Abbas
reached its zenith. And the Bani Abbas demolished the kingdom of Marwan
al-Himar, the last Umayyad ruler in no time, though Marwan continued to
confront them in sporadic fighting upto 12th Rabi al-Awwal 132 A.H. But
it was the struggle of a defeated person that made no impact. In
comparison to Bani Abbas he was just a helpless foe.

(1) In this way the total period came to be 86 years and 3 months.

(2) But after Muawiyah the son of Yazid, there was no one on the throne
of Damascus for six months. Hence this period shall be deducted from the
above duration.

(3) The reign of Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz was a shade of security for Bani
Fatima and followers of Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s).
Contrary to the behavior of his predecessors he was kind to the progeny
of Fatima. Therefore his reign could not be said to be the period of the
opponents of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s). And he should be separated from the
reign of Banu Umayyah. The reign of Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz lasted for two
years and five months.

Hence the sum total of the period in which there was no ruler and when
the ruler was one who respected Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) comes to two years and
eleven months. If two years and eleven months are deducted from
eighty-six years and three months the remainder is 83 years and four
months of the reign of the oppressive Banu Umayyah. Eighty-three years
and four months is equal to a thousand months and it is this period of
rulership that the Qur’an has mentioned. The holy Imam (a.s), before the
end of this kingdom, informed about its tenure and applied this verse to
Banu Umayyah, thus proving that they (Ahl al-Bayt) were true successors
of the Prophet and the rightful bearers and explanators of Qur’an.

Anyway, these verses show that Qur’an is not devoid of statements about
Banu Umayyah. Rather it contains all their details and traits and
defects.

And the parable of an evil word is as an evil tree pulled up from the
earth’s surface; it has no stability.[^21]

Yazid’s Clan
------------

After my article “Banu Umayyah in the View of Holy Qur’an” was published
in al-Jawwad magazine last year, many brothers-in-faith from Pakistan
requested me to write on all the topics that I had mentioned and compile
a book. The following article is partly in compliance of their wishes
but since time is short for a detailed write up I shall try to cover as
many points as possible in the briefest manner.

Qusayy bin Kilab was the most prominent heir of the Bani Adnan. He lived
in the fifth century A.D. He gathered his clan and resettled them once
again in Mecca. That is why he is also known as Quraish (one who
gathers) and his descendants began to be referred by this name. For
details regarding this matter you may refer to *Siratun Nabi* of Shibli
Nomani, Vol. 2, Pg. 188 and *Tarikh* *Rauzatus Safa*, Vol. 2, Pg. 13. He
passed away in the year 480 A.D.[^22]

Abde Manaf was the son of Qusayy who became the chief of Quraish after
Qusayy. When the generation of Abde Manaf moved ahead, Hashim the
ancestor of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) was born, whose descendants
came to be called as Banu Hashim. Hashim was the great grandfather of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). In addition to Hashim, Abde Manaf had
three other sons, Abde Shams, Muttalib and Naufal.

Hashim and Abde Shams were twins and they were born in such a way that
the toes of Hashim were stuck at the forehead of Abde Shams in such a
way that it was not possible to separate them without causing loss of
blood. Thus the toes of Hashim were separated from Abde Sham’s forehead
by a sword and Abde Shams bled so much that his whole body was bathed in
blood. At that time soothsayers and astrologers predicted that very soon
there would be bloodshed between the descendants of these two as had
never been witnessed in history. And this was what happened.[^23]

Umayyah, the progenitor of Banu Umayyah is related to this same Abde
Shams. Some people say that Umayyah was not the legitimate son of Abde
Shams, he was just a slave boy, who became known as Abde Shams’s son as
per the Arab convention of that time as Abde Shams had adopted him. The
word Umayyah means ‘lowly maidservant’, which strengthens the above
view. However, he was generally known as Umayyah Ibn Abde Shams. The
second son of Abde Shams was called Rabi. After Abde Shams the family
tree proceeded as follows:

Abde Shams had three issues, Umayyah, Rabi and Abdul Izzi.

Umayyah had two sons, Harb and Abul Aas.

Rabi had two sons, Utbah and Shayba.

Harb had a daughter named Umme Jamil, the wife of Abu Jahl and a son
named Abu Sufyan. Abul Aas had three sons, Affan (Father of Uthman, the
third caliph), Sa’eed and Hakam. Utbah had a daughter named Hind and a
son named Walid.

Abu Sufyan had six children, Amr, Umme Habiba (a wife of the Holy
Prophet), Muawiyah, Yazid, Utbah (father of Walid, the governor of Kufa)
and Hanzala.

Hakam had three children, Harith, Marwan and Abdur Rahman. Muawiyah had
eight children, Abdur Rahman, Abdullah, Hind, Aaqila, Ayesha, Yazid the
accursed, Rehla and Safiya. Yazid the accursed had two sons, Muawiyah
and Khalid.

Apart from this, during the period of Umayyad domination of ignorance an
addition was made to this family tree. Zakwan, the slave of Umayyah
known by the agnomen of Abu Amr began to be accepted as the son of
Umayyah. And in this way in addition to Harb and Abul Aas, Umayyah got a
third son free of charge. Thus Abul Faraj Isfahani has written in
*Aghani* Vol. 1 the following episode: When Daghfal the expert of
genealogy went to the court of Muawiyah the following conversation took
place between them:

**Muawiyah:** Daghfal, tell me who all you have seen from the elders of
Quraish.

**Daghfal:** I have seen Abdul Muttalib bin Hashim and Umayyah bin Abde
Shams.

**Muawiyah:** Describe to me their appearance, please.

**Daghfal:** His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib was fair, tall and handsome.
The effulgence of prophethood and magnificence of rulership was apparent
from his forehead. His ten sons used to surround him from all sides and
they all seemed to be like awesome lions.

**Muawiyah:** okay, now describe the appearance of Umayyah.

**Daghfal:** He was short, frail, blind and thin old man, who was taken
around by his slave, Zakwan.

**Muawiyah:** Enough! Enough! He was not his slave, he was his son Abu
Umar.

**Daghfal:** Now you people have begun to say this and it is a later
invention. I have told the facts that I know about him.[^24]

Anyway, whatever may be the case, the progeny of Abu Umar had a branch,
which is interesting to note:

Abu Umar – Abu Muit – Uqbah – Walid.

After that in order to consolidate his ascendancy, Muawiyah in the
period of Islam made an addition of a branch to his family tree. That
is, he accepted Ziyad bin Sumaiyah as the son of Abu Sufyan. The details
of this are present in histories but here let me just explain in brief
the basic points of the event. Before accepting Islam, Abu Sufyan once
traveled to Taif and landed at a tavern owned by Abu Maryam. After
having some drinks he asked Abu Maryam to provide him with a woman. Abu
Maryam summoned Sumaiyah, who was the slave girl of Harith bin Kalda
Thaqafi and married to one of his slaves, Ubaidah. Thus she became
pregnant from Abu Sufyan and Ziyad was born. Initially he was called
Ziyad bin Ubaidah or Ziyad bin Sumaiyah and those aware of the truth
addressed him as Ziyad bin Abih (Ziyad, son of his father). Since Ziyad
was extremely cunning, Muawiyah called him to his side and tried to make
him his brother. All the Muslims were opposed to these tactics of
Muawiyah, because there is a universally accepted principle in Islam and
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) has clearly stated that: “The child shall
be related to the man whose wife has given him birth and there are only
stones for the fornicator.” (that is the punishment for adultery).
However, Muawiyah paid no heed to all this. He arranged witnesses for
the despicable act and made Ziyad the son of Abu Sufyan. Abu Maryam, the
wine seller was also among the witnesses. He described the episode in
such graphic detail that at last Ziyad had to say: “Enough! Abu Maryam!
You are here to testify about my genealogy and not to say abusive things
about my mother.” The people were so much shocked by this that poets
even composed satirical verses in this regard:

*“O man, convey this message to Muawiyah. That: ‘Are you angry if
someone says that your father was chaste and pious? And you are pleased
if someone says that your father was a fornicator?’”*

It is a strange way of nature that the most ancient couplet of the
Persian language discovered so far is also about this same matter. Thus
in the collection of the writings of Qazwini the famous researcher of
Iran, titled *Bast Maqalaat Qazwini.* It contains an article on this
topic that Ibn Ziyad punished an Iranian for no fault of his. So he
composed the following three lines and displayed them on the streets and
roads of Kufa and began to recite them:

*“There is water and there is date wine. There is grape juice and
Sumaiyah is a wanton.’*

Anyway, the son of this same Ziyad, Ubaidullah was appointed as the
governor of Kufa by Yazid and entrusted with the task of killing Imam
Husayn (a.s).

Now I would like to present in brief the account of some other
personalities from the Banu Umayyah clan.

Umayyah
-------

Umayyah bin Abde Shams was very envious of His Eminence, Hashim, that
why his generosity, charity and kindness was so renowned in the Arab
world. Therefore he also tried to spend much wealth and help the people
but failed to earn that same respect. At last he challenged His
Eminence, Hashim to participate in a contest of superiority with him. In
which both shall describe their virtues and high points and ask someone
else to judge which of them was superior. His Eminence, Hashim declined
the proposal of his unworthy nephew. However, in the end at the
insistence of others he agreed at last on the condition that whichever
of them was defeated, he shall have to give to the winner 50 black-eyed
she-camels and be exiled from Mecca for ten years. The soothsayer,
Khuzai who resided in Asfan was appointed as a judge. After listening to
the statements of both, he said:

“By the shining moon and the brilliant stars, by the rain clouds, by the
birds that live in the atmosphere and until the time those who go on a
height or a lowliness seeking directions from the sign. Until that time
Hashim is superior to Umayyah in every excellence and prominence. And
the father-in-law of Umayyah, Abu Hamimah is himself aware of this.”

Umayyah according to the terms of the contest handed over 50 she-camels
to His Eminence, Hashim and departed to Syria for ten years.[^25]

Harb
----

Harb bin Umayyah was the contemporary of His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib.
He wrongfully murdered a Jew and had his property seized. Then he gave
refuge to the killers in his house (one of whom was Sakhr bin Amr, the
grandfather of Abu Bakr). His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib told him to turn
out the killers so that retaliation may be taken with regard to them.
Harb refused to do so. The matters reached such a head that it was
decided to have a debate and like Hashim and Umayyah, and state their
excellences and merits in presence of a judge who would decide between
them. Both the parties went to Najjashi, the Abyssinian ruler, but he
refused to mediate in the matter. Therefore the two of them returned to
Mecca and Umar’s grandfather, Nufail bin Abdul Izzi was appointed as the
referee. After listening to both their claims he said, “Why Harb! Why
did you try to gain prominence over this honorable gentleman? The one
who is taller in stature than you and is more respectable. He is having
an awesome personality and is superior to you in elegance. He commands
much more respect than you and is very less in dishonor compared to you.
He has more children than you and he is more benevolent and generous
that you. He is much ahead of you in his awe and grandeur. I am saying
this but I am very much aware that far from anger and fury you are a
strong rope for the support of your clan. But justice says that you have
tried to compete with one before whom you are absolutely worthless and
lowly.”

Harb bin Umayyah was infuriated to hear this and he said: “It is but the
upheaval of this damned time that a person like you has become a judge
in this matter.”

Anyway, after this, His Eminence, Abdul Muttalib had him removed from
his circle. He was also made to pay a hundred she-camels for the murder
of the Jew and the property of the Jew that was allowed to be plundered
by Harb was restored to its owners. Whatever things could not be
returned were paid from his money.[^26]

Affan
-----

He was the father of Uthman. He was a professional traditional singer
and he used to play the drum etc. Affan literally means ‘bad smelling’
or ‘rotten’.

Uthman
------

He was the third caliph of the majority (Sunnis) whose caliphate was
established solely as a result of the opinion of Abdur Rahman bin Auf
and upon whose execution the whole Islamic community was unanimous. He
appointed Banu Umayyah everywhere over the Muslims. He appointed as the
governor of Egypt apostate like Abdullah bin Abi Sarah regarding whom
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) ordered that he should be executed even
if he is found in the Ka’ba. Uthman acted thus because Abdullah was his
foster brother. In place of Saad bin Abi Waqqas (who was included among
the Ashra Mubashera)[^27] and was the father of Umar Ibn Saad) he
appointed Walid bin Uqbah as the governor of Kufa, who in a state of
intoxication led the congregation to recite four instead of two units in
the Morning Prayers. Uthman called back Marwan bin al-Hakam to Medina
and made him his right hand. It was the same Marwan whom the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w) had expelled from Medina and Umar had exiled him out of
Hijaz to Yemen. Uthman entrusted the complete matter of caliphate to him
and gave him the total Khums money received from Africa. Uthman also
recalled to Medina, his uncle, Hakam, the father of Marwan who was
called ‘the one expelled by the Prophet’. And he gave him a place to
reside in Medina.

He (Uthman) showered the Banu Umayyah with money, although they were
deadly foes of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), on the other hand he
dishonored many respectable companions of the Prophet. He had Abu Zar
beaten up and exiled. Abdullah Ibn Masud was also beaten up so badly
that he got hernia. He burnt up copies of Holy Qur’an. He plotted the
murder of Muhammad bin Abi Bakr. He beat up a beloved companion of the
Prophet like Ammar in such a way that he lost consciousness. Contrary to
the prophetic practice, he recited complete four units of prayers
instead of the prescribed shortened two units in Mina plains on the
occasion of the Hajj, while the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) used to always
shorten them to two units. He took possession of the pastures on the
outskirts of Medina in the area of Baqi though it was public property.
He handed over Fadak to Marwan and made it his personal property. It was
the same Fadak that Umar and Abu Bakr had confiscated saying that it was
the property of Muslims.

At last people became so much fed up with his favoritism and despotism
that Muslims of Egypt, Kufa and Basra gathered at Medina and killed him.
The corpse could not be buried for three days and even when it was
buried, it was in the cemetery of Jews. A leg was devoured by the dogs
of Medina. In other words there was such a consensus on him being guilty
and fit to be executed that the consensus of Saqifah was nothing in
comparison to it.

Hakam bin Abil Aas
------------------

This gentleman was the uncle of Uthman. He was compelled to accept Islam
in the year of the conquest of Mecca, while his heart was yet full of
disbelief and hypocrisy. He came and settled down in Medina and passed
on confidential information about the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) to the
infidels. He used to spy on the activities of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w).
Shobi says that actually that was why he had made a show of accepting
Islam. One day the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) saw that he was mimicking
him behind his back. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) cursed him and he became
such that it seemed as if he was to fall down headlong while walking.
After that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had him exiled to Taif. The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w) invoked curse on him on three occasions and said:
“Very soon he would oppose the Book of Allah and the practice of the
Messenger and very soon such mischiefs will emerge from his loins that
their smoke shall reach upto the sky.” People asked, “O Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w), he is so lowly and degraded that such great acts cannot
be expected from him.” The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) said, “No, it
shall be as I have said and at that time some of you shall be his
helpers and supporters.” Abdullah bin Zubair while circumambulating the
Ka’ba said: “By the Lord of the Ka’ba, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
had invoked curse on Hakam and also cursed those who are born from him.”

This cursing is so famous that Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s), Imam Hasan (a.s), Imam Husayn (a.s), Ayesha and many other
companions of the Prophet mentioned it to Marwan bin Hakam directly.
Since the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had him exiled to Taif he came to
be known as ‘the one expelled by the Prophet’. When Uthman became the
caliph, he recalled him to Medina. When he died, Uthman prayed his
funeral prayer and accompanied his bier. Upon this, Muslims criticized
his saying: “You have recalled him. This itself was not enough that now
you are reciting prayer on a hypocrite and accursed man, whom the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had cursed and had him exiled?”[^28]

Uthman had appointed him as the collector of Zakat from the tribe of
Qazaya. He collected 30000 Dinars from them. Uthman told him to keep all
the money for himself. Upon this, Saad bin Abi Waqqas, the treasurer
came to the Masjid and threw down the key of the treasury saying, “If
Hakam is given 30000 Dinars, I would not remain the treasurer.”

Marwan bin Hakam
----------------

Marwan was the son of Hakam, cousin and son-in-law of Uthman. He was
born in the year 2 A.H., while his father was yet a disbeliever. When
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) saw him, he said, “The young one of a lizard is
also a lizard. The offspring of an accursed is accursed.” He was six or
seven years of age when Hakam became a Muslim and came to Medina and was
immediately expelled and the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) said: “Who would
save me from this lizard?” He also said, “He should not be allowed to be
with me at any place.” Thus at this same time he went to Taif with his
father and brothers. From there when the second caliph expelled him to
Yemen, he also went with them. He came back during the third caliphate
and became the vizier and the secretary of the caliph. He was the one
most responsible for the murder of Uthman. After Uthman, he became
Muawiyah’s adviser. During the time of Muawiyah he remained the governor
of Medina for some time. After the coronation of Yazid, he told Walid
bin Uqbah, the governor of Medina that if Husayn (a.s) did not pay
allegiance at that moment he would never pay it. So either you kill him
or take allegiance.” After the martyrdom of Husayn (a.s) when the people
of Medina rebelled against Yazid and began to expel selectively each
member of Banu Umayyah from Medina, and there was risk of being killed
and destroyed, Marwan sought the refuge of Imam ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s)
and the Imam gave him refuge. This was the magnanimity of the holy Imam.
When after the death of Yazid, his son Muawiyah became aloof from the
kingdom and because of this he was buried alive, the throne of Damascus
remained vacant for six months. At last, this same Marwan got the throne
and again the kingdom of Banu Umayyah remained in their own progeny. It
could be possible only for those who believe Muhammad as a prophet to
accord such honor to one who was cursed by the Prophet and whose progeny
was cursed by the Prophet and one who was externed by the Prophet! It
was not surprising that he married the wife of Yazid and mother of
Khalid. One day in the full court, Marwan abused Khalid and Khalid
complained to his mother. She obtained the assistance of her maids and
during the night smothered Marwan with a pillow and sat upon it until he
died of suffocation.

Harith bin al-Hakam
-------------------

He was the son of Hakam and the brother of Marwan. He was a partner of
his father in the Prophet’s curse. Uthman received in Zakat a train of
camels and gifted them all to Harith in fulfillment of his duties
towards the next of kin.

Sa’eed bin Abil Aas
-------------------

He was the paternal uncle of Uthman. Uthman gifted him a hundred
thousand Dinars from the public treasury at a single time. These very
generosities became the cause of ill will among the people.

Utbah bin Rabi, Shayba bin Rabi and Walid bin Utbah
---------------------------------------------------

Utbah bin Rabi was the maternal grandfather of Muawiyah and Walid bin
Utbah was the brother of Muawiyah’s mother. All of them were severe
infidels and leaders of the polytheists of Quraish. In the battle of
Badr they were the first to come out to fight. The Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) sent three men from Ansar (Helpers) to fight them. They were
named Maaz, Masud and Auf. When the three infidels asked their names and
genealogy and it was learnt that these youths were from the Helpers,
they said they had nothing to do with them. ‘We have enmity towards the
Quraish who have become Muslims.’ At last the three young men returned
and Utbah and his companions called out that someone who belonged to
their community should come out and fight them. At last the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w) sent His Eminence, Hamzah, His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) and
His Eminence, Ubaidah bin al-Harith to confront them. After names and
genealogies were mentioned, the battle started, Walid bin Utbah
(Muawiyah’s uncle) contested His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s), Utbah himself
fought with His Eminence, Hamzah and Shayba went to battle with Ubaidah.
His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) sent Walid to Hell with a single stroke of the
sword. His Eminence, Hamzah slew Utbah and dispatched him to the
Hellfire. However, Shayba slashed at the legs of His Eminence, Ubaidah
in such a way that he fell down and his heels began to bleed. Meanwhile
after finishing off their foes, His Eminence, Hamzah and His Eminence,
‘Ali (a.s) turned to help Ubaidah and killed Shayba. They carried
Ubaidah from the battlefield to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). He lived
until the battle continued but before reaching Medina, he passed away
from the world to Paradise at a place called Rad-ha or Wadi Sughra. He
was buried at the same place.

Umme Jamil – Carrier of Firewood
--------------------------------

She was the sister of Abu Sufyan and the maternal aunt of Muawiyah. She
was the wife of Abu Lahab, the enemy of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w). She
used to lay horns in the path of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). That is
why she is referred to as ‘the carrier of firewood’ in the Surah Lahab
and given the ‘good news’ that a rope of fire shall be around her neck.
Zakir Husayn Sahab in his *History of Islam,* Pg. 47 has written that,
“Abu Lahab’s opposition was mostly due to the opposition of his wife, as
he was very obedient to her.” When the Surah Lahab was revealed, she
came with a stone to kill the Prophet but the Almighty Allah put a
curtain on her sight and she could not see the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) even though he was sitting right before her.[^29]

One day His Eminence, Aqil went to the court of Muawiyah who in order to
ophumiliate him told the people, “This is Aqil whose uncle was Abu
Lahab.” Aqil at once retorted, “And this is Muawiyah whose aunt was the
carrier of firewood.” After that he said, “O Muawiyah! When you go to
Hell, look to your left, my uncle Abu Lahab would be upon your aunt
there also. At that time you must ponder that of the two whether the
subject is better or the object.”[^30]

Uqbah bin Abi Muit
------------------

He was in the forefront in harassing the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
before the migration (Hijrat). When the infidels forced Banu Hashim to
be confined in the Sheb-e-Abu Talib, it was this accursed man who went
accompanied with Abu Jahl outside Mecca and told all the traders and
foreigners not to have any dealings with Banu Hashim otherwise they
would have to face dire consequences. He used to think up a thousand
ways to kill the Prophet. According to the statement of the historian of
*Rauzatus Safa*, after the demise of Abu Talib, Abu Lahab had told the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), “You may continue your mission like you did
during the lifetime of Abu Talib, I shall defend you.” At that time it
was Abu Jahl who instigated Abu Lahab and he became a more severe enemy
of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). It was Uqbah who had once in the
vicinity of the Ka’ba, put a sheet around the Prophet’s neck and twisted
it so much that the Prophet was suffocated. At last Lady Fatima (s.a.)
was informed about it and she arrived to save the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w).

Uqbah was taken a captive in the Battle of Badr. Other captives were
released after paying Jizyah[^31] but Uqbah and another dangerous man,
Nadhr bin Harith were executed.

Walid bin Uqbah bin Abi Muit
----------------------------

He was the son of Uqbah mentioned above. He was the half brother of
Uthman. That is their mother was same. According to the unanimous
opinion of the Qur’anic exegesists, he was the person who is mentioned
as “evil-doer” in the following verses of Qur’an:

O you who believe! If an evil-doer comes to you with a report, look
carefully into it…[^32]

Uthman appointed him as the governor of Kufa. He used to drink from dusk
until dawn. One day after the call for Prayer he arrived in the Masjid
in a state of intoxication and led the people of Kufa to recite four
instead of the prescribed two units of the dawn prayers. During the
bowings and prostrations, instead of praising and glorifying Allah he
said: “You drink” and “Serve me the drink.” Then he vomited in the
prayer niche (Mihrab). After that he recited the salutation and said,
“Today I am in a very good mood. If you want, I can make you recite more
prayers.” At that moment, Ibn Masud cursed him and the one who had
appointed him as the governor. Turmoil and a clamor arose among the
people. Poets composed couplets on the episode. The couplets Abu Malika
Hatiya are very famous in this regard.

Abu Sufyan
----------

After writing briefly on the other branches of the family tree of Banu
Umayyah I begin with the family of Yazid himself. Abu Sufyan, father of
Muawiyah and grandfather of Yazid was the deadliest foe of Islam. In the
Battle of Badr, as we have stated above, the father-in-law and
brothers-in-law of Abu Sufyan were put to death. In addition to this,
Abu Sufyan’s son, Hanzala was also killed at the hands of Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s). Thus it is mentioned in *Rauzatus Safa* that Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) hit Hanzala with such a strike that Hanzala’s eyes
popped out. Another son of Abu Sufyan, Amr bin Abu Sufyan was also
arrested by Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s), and at the time of distribution of
war booty he fell in the share of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). Abu
Jahl was also killed in the Battle of Badr. And now the leadership of
the polytheists of Quraish fell on Abu Sufyan. He swore that until he
does not avenge those killed in the Battle of Badr, he would refrain
from sex and from oiling his hair. After the Battle of Badr and until
the Treaty of Hudaibiyah a period of four whole years passed. During
this period he fought altogether five battles against the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w): (1) Battle of Sawiq (2) Battle of Uhad (3) Humartul Asad
(4) Second Battle of Badr and (5) Battle of Khandaq (Ditch). Of these,
the Battles of Uhad and Khandaq were very significant. In the last
battle, Abu Sufyan even made a pact with the Jews to confront the
Prophet jointly and in addition to Quraish, Bani Nuzayr, Bani Ghaftan,
Bani Qais many other tribes came to his side. After the Treaty of
Hudaibiyah, direct confrontation came to an end. Again in 8 A.H. he
broke the terms of the truce and at last the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
was compelled to undertake the conquest of Mecca. Abu Sufyan and all
other polytheists were so much awed that without any bloodshed the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) and his army entered victorious in Mecca only by the
help of God and Mecca was conquered. At that time, Abu Sufyan and others
had to helplessly obey Islam. He is included among ‘Moallifatul Quloob’.
That is he is of those whom the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) used to pay now and
then from the war booty so that they may not oppose Islam in greed of
the money they were getting.

After the passing away of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), when instead
of His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s), Abu Bakr became the caliph, Abu Sufyan with
the intention of destroying the Muslims, tried to instigate Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) to fight against Abu Bakr. His Eminence, Amir
al-Mu’minin (a.s) understood his plans and he said to him, “You were an
enemy of Islam while being a disbeliever and still wish bad for Islam.”
After this Abu Sufyan went to Abu Bakr and threatened that he would put
his rulership to disintegration, and the caliph, in order to win him to
his side, offered the governorship of Syria to him. He said that since
he was aged, the position may be entrusted to his son, Yazid. Thus Yazid
bin Abu Sufyan became the governor of Syria. When he died, Muawiyah,
another son of Abu Sufyan took his place. In this way two birds were
killed with one stone. Abu Sufyan’s opposition was neutralized and a
force came into being against the Banu Hashim.

When Uthman became the caliph, Abu Sufyan told him, “O Banu Umayyah! I
don’t think that the affair (prophethood) is anything but rulership. Now
that you have become its masters, you turn it around like a ball and
play with it.” This statement informs us about the actual faith of this
man. The surprising fact is that Uthman did not even correct him. I
don’t know if the saying: “Silence is like complicity” is applicable
here.

Thus, from the early age until the end, Abu Sufyan remained an apostate
and the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) had cursed him and his progeny. Thus
Imam Razi has written that Imam Hasan (a.s) delivered a sermon in the
presence of Muawiyah and said:

“O Muawiyah, one day you were herding your father’s camel and your
brother was pulling at it. (This episode is after Abu Sufyan lost his
eyesight). The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) cursed the camel, its rider
and one who was pulling it and one who was herding it. And your father
was riding it, your brother was pulling it and you were herding it (from
behind).” Allamah Sibte Ibn Jauzi has written in *Tadkeratul Khawaas*
that Imam Hasan (a.s) said: “This episode of cursing is of the Battle of
Khandaq.” Anyway, whatever its occasion may be, it is proved that Abu
Sufyan was cursed by the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) himself.

Hind–The Liver Eater
--------------------

Her father, Utbah, uncle, Shayba, brother, Walid and son, Hanzala were
all killed in the Battle of Badr. And it was a coincidence that all of
them were killed at the hands of Banu Hashim. The fire of revenge was
raging in her heart. When preparations began for the Battle of Uhad,
Hind insisted that women should also be taken along. Thus along with
other people, Abu Sufyan also took his wives, Hind and Binte Saad. Hind
became the leader of the ladies group. At every halt the ladies used to
sing about memory of those slain in Badr. When the battle started, Hind
and other women, began to play tambourine and sing the famous song whose
opening lines were:

*We are the daughters of Tariq.*[^33]

*We walk upon the plush floorings.*

They began to encourage the people to fight fiercely. She told Wahshi
the slave of Jubair bin Motam that he would be rewarded very much if he
could succeed in killing the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), His Eminence,
‘Ali (a.s) or His Eminence, Hamzah. When Wahshi came to the battlefield,
he saw that it was impossible to reach the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
and His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) was very alert in fighting, but His
Eminence, Hamzah was fighting with such passion that now and then he
became oblivious of the surroundings. So Wahshi began to pursue him and
when he killed Sabbagh bin Abdul Izzi, Wahshi hid in an ambush and threw
his attack towards Hamzah. It cut through the navel and came out
breaking the back. In this condition also, His Eminence, Hamzah tried to
pursue him but he fell down and reached the mercy of Allah. Wahshi slit
open the belly of His Eminence, Hamzah, took out his liver, came to Hind
and said, “This is the liver of your father’s killer.” Hind put the
liver in her mouth and began to chew it. The Almighty Allah disliked
that the liver of the Chief of the Martyrs, His Eminence, Hamzah should
become a part of the body of an inmate of Hell. Therefore the liver
became stone hard and came out of her mouth. From that time Hind began
to be called, “The liver-eater.” Whatever dresses and jewellery Hind
had, she gave it all in reward to Wahshi and also promised that on
return to Mecca she would further give him ten Dinars. Then she
expressed the desire to visit the site of Hamzah’s martyrdom. When she
reached there, she mutilated the body of this holy martyr and she cut
off his ears, nose and private parts and took them to Mecca.

On the day of the conquest of Mecca when Abu Sufyan saw the might of the
Prophet’s army, and he came running to his people, to persuade the
infidels not to fight the Prophet, Hind pulled at his beard and said, “O
progeny of victors, kill this aged fool so that he may not talk of such
things.”

At last when the Meccans helplessly and detesting it, accepted Islam and
the points on which the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) took the allegiance of
Hind, one of them was that she would not commit fornication. Maybe some
people would feel it a strange promise. However, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) was compelled to take this type of undertaking because like Abu
Sufyan, Hind was also notorious for her wanton deeds that she committed
openly. She was specially attracted to black men and whenever she gave
birth to a black child she used to kill it. Allamah Sibte Ibn Jauzi’s
words in *Tadkeratul Khawaasul Ummah* are worthy of mention:

“Asmai and Hisham bin Muhammad Kalbi have written in Mathaleeb and from
that writing I understood this statement of Imam Hasan (a.s) that: ‘O
Muawiyah! You well know of the bed on which you were born.’ Asmai and
Kalbi say that Muawiyah was born of the seeds of four men of Quraish:
(1) Ammar bin Walid bin Mughaira (2) Musafir bin Abi Amr (3) Abu Sufyan
and (4) Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib. They were friends of Abu Sufyan and
each of them had relations with Hind. Ammar was the most handsome man of
Quraish. Regarding Musafir bin Amr, Kalbi says that Muawiyah was most
likely his son because Musafir was highly infatuated with Hind. When
Hind conceived Muawiyah, Musafir feared that the secret would be
revealed that it was by his seed. So he fled to the king of Hira, Hind
bin Amr and settled there. It so happened that Abu Sufyan arrived in
Hira on some business and met Musafir. At that time Musafir was lying
sick in the love and separation of Hind. Musafir asked about the
well-being of the Meccan folks and Abu Sufyan informed him accordingly.
People say that Abu Sufyan married Hind when Musafir left Mecca (Hence
before that, Abu Sufyan also had illicit relations with Hind). So Abu
Sufyan informed Musafir also about his marriage to Hind after he
(Musafir) had left Mecca. On hearing this, the illness of Musafir became
more serious and he began to waste away until he finally died in the
love of Hind.”

The Allamah has also said that Hind was among the most lustful women and
she was highly attracted towards black men. Whenever she gave birth to a
black child, she used to kill it.

The lustful behavior of Hind was so famous that when Hassaan bin Thabit
composed a panegyric in praise of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w), he
included therein some couplets openly describing the deeds of Hind. The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) also did not say anything against it, thus
permitting the denouncement of these foes of Islam. Hassaan says:

*“May Allah curse Hind and her husband Abu Sufyan. Hind, whose clitoris
is very long.*

*Her back and front have become injured,*

*Because they are again and again receiving hits.*

*O Hind, have you forgotten your unlawful deeds that you have done?*

*O Hind, The curse of the world be on you.*

*The women think that children born to Hind,*

*Have all come through fornication.”*

Muawiyah
--------

He was considered an expert in un-Islamic politics and this cunning and
deception was only due to the fact that he was a child of sin as proved
by statements of Ahl al-Sunnah scholars.

Thus the Sunni writer Qutubuddin Shirazi writes in his book, *Nazihatul
Quloob* that is quoted in *Ahqaqul Haqq* as follows:

“Allamah Qutubuddin Shirazi has said that the child born through
adultery is more ‘brilliant’ because man commits adultery with great joy
and delight, on the basis of which the child becomes perfect, while in
sex with wife, the man has to observe artificiality. And that is the
reason that Amr bin Aas and Muawiyah were the most cunning men. After
saying this he has given details of their genealogy. Then he says that
among those born by the grace of adultery was Ziyad bin Abih regarding
whom the poet says:

*“O man, convey this message to Muawiyah. That: ‘Are you angry if
someone says that your father was chaste and pious? And you are pleased
if someone says that your father was a fornicator?’”*[^34]

The evil traits and defects of Muawiyah are so numerous that if it is
not possible to discuss all of them in this brief chapter. However,
since the antics of his ancestors were not so well known I discussed
them in some detail. But as for the handiworks of Muawiyah, they are
common knowledge therefore I feel there is not much need to describe
them here. Before accepting Islam he was the right hand of Abu Sufyan in
every battle against Muslims and was always trying ways to finish the
Prophet. When he accepted Islam he continued to be included among
doubtful characters. On the day of the Conquest of Mecca the lives of
the polytheists were spared by the Prophet’s words that, “Go, I have
freed you.” According them freedom means that at that time they all had
become his slaves, but the benevolence of the Prophet emancipated them.
When his elder brother, Yazid, who was appointed the governor of Syria,
died, he succeeded to the seat of governorship. There he indulged in
such luxury and opulence that it even exceeded Choesroes and Caesars.
Thus Umar used to call him the Caesar of Arabs. It is mentioned in
*Tarikh* *Rauzatus Safa*, Pg. 34, that he was the first in Islam to
construct a prison. He was the first to take allegiance for his son. He
was the first one to make a hollow in the wall of Masjid for the prayer
leader. He was the first to employ eunuchs in his service. In his final
age he developed such a huge belly that he used to deliver the sermon in
the sitting position in prayers. He was the first to make a stranger his
blood relative. That is, he made Ziyad bin Abih as his brother. He took
up arms against Amir al-Mu’minin, His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s). He fought 19
battles with him and in this took the burden of the death of thousands
of people on his neck. He instigated Judah binte Ashath to poison Imam
Hasan (a.s). He had Abdur Rahman bin Khalid bin Walid poisoned. He had
Muhammad bin Abi Bakr put in a skin of a donkey and had him burnt alive.
In addition to these, there are numerous other misdeeds of Muawiyah
mentioned in *Rauzatus Safa*, but it is not possible to narrate all of
them here. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) cursed him that may his belly
never fills. Thus he used to get tired of eating but his appetite was
never satiated and he used to remain hungry. He had Ammar Ibn Yasir
killed and thus fulfilled the prophecy of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
that a rebellious group shall kill Ammar. He had Malik Ibn Ashtar
poisoned. He had Hujr bin Adi and Amr bin Hamaq Khuzai and his
companions killed. He promoted wine drinking. He permitted sensuality.
Thus what all traits could be described? His greatest ‘achievement’ was
that he hoisted Yazid as the ruler of Muslims and started dynastic rule
in Islam.

Yazid
-----

Yazid was the son of Muawiyah. Yazid naturally became such because he
was born and bred in a family in which not a single person could be said
to have any positive quality. On top of this, like Muawiyah he was also
a child of adultery and as per the statement of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) such people shall indeed be enemies of the saints of Allah. The
account of the mother of Yazid is given in *Nasikhut Tawarikh,*[^35] on
the authority of other books of history:

“The mother of Yazid was Maysun. She was the daughter of Bajdal bin
Ainaf Kalabi. They all were Bedouins. Muawiyah married her. It was the
second marriage for Maysun. But just before this marriage she had slept
with Saffah, a slave of her father and from whom she had become pregnant
with Yazid. After coming to Damascus, the secret remained a secret
because until that time the pregnancy had not become apparent. Muawiyah
thought that it was his own child and he named him Yazid.

Maysun, as we have stated, was a Bedouin woman and she was in love with
Saffah. She began to find the luxury of Damascus suffocating. One day
she was reciting the following couplets in her room, when Muawiyah
overheard her:

*“I prefer thick woolen garments to delicate fabrics as they please me
more.*

*And I like a house of wild winds blowing than a high palace.*

*I am more pleased with the sound of wind in caves and doors than sounds
of tambourine and musical instruments.*

*And a line of supple camels that could pursue an ostrich is better for
me than swift ponies.*

*The flesh of porpoise and rabbit is my staple diet and more delicious
to me than bread.*

*And any of my cousins of noble birth is better than this nasty
infidel.”*

As soon as Muawiyah heard this bitter satire, he divorced her and packed
her off back to her tribe. Yazid visited his mother frequently and
stayed with her. Her people were all Christians. The life of desert,
company of infidels, family impurity and natural illegitimacy were all
those things that came together to be seen in the nature of Yazid.

[^1]: Surah Bani Israel 17:60

[^2]: Vol. 4, Pg. 191, Egypt

[^3]: Surah Bani Israel 17:60

[^4]: Surah Bani Israel 17:60

[^5]: Surah Bani Israel 17:60

[^6]: Surah Anbiya 21:111

[^7]: Tafsir Durre Manthur, Vol. 4, Pg. 362, Egypt

[^8]: Surah Bani Israel 17:60

[^9]: Surah Hajj 22:8-10

[^10]: Marginal notes: Holy Qur’an, Translated by Maulana Farman ‘Ali

[^11]: Surah Hajj 22:78

[^12]: Tafsir Durre Manthur, Vol. 4, Pg. 371, Egypt

[^13]: Marginal notes: Holy Qur’an, Translated into Urdu by Maulana
Farman ‘Ali, Pg. 544

[^14]: Surah Fajr 89:1-2

[^15]: Vol. 4, Pg. 346, Egypt

[^16]: Leviticus 23:23-32

[^17]: Surah Qadr, 97

[^18]: Tafsir Durre Manthur, Vol. 6, Pg. 371, Egypt

[^19]: Surah Qadr, 97:1-2

[^20]: Surah Qadr, 97:4-5

[^21]: Surah Ibrahim 14:26

[^22]: Tarikh Aaimmah, Maulana Sayyid ‘Ali Haider, Pg. 48

[^23]: Ummahatul Ummah, Deputy Nazir Ahmad, Pg. 37, Tarikh Aaimma, Pg.
53, Rauzatus Safa, Vol. 2, Pg. 13

[^24]: Tarikh Aaimma, Pg. 88

[^25]: Tarikh Kamil, Vol. 2

[^26]: Tarikh Kamil, Vol. 2

[^27]: The ten people who were given good news of Paradise by the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) according to the belief of Ahle Sunnah

[^28]: Tadkeratul Khawaasul Ummah, Sibte Ibne Jauzi

[^29]: Tafsir Safi

[^30]: Tarikh Aaimma, Pg. 117, quoted from Thamaraatul Awraaq

[^31]: Tax on People of the Book who reside in Muslim dominions

[^32]: Surah Hujurat 49:6

[^33]: An ancestor of these people

[^34]: Quoted from Istisqaatul Afhaam, Vol. 2, Pg. 853

[^35]: Vol. 6, Pg. 153-154


