Appendix 1: Mischiefs of the Daily Hilal
========================================

Hafiz ‘Ali Bahadar Khan, editor of Hilal, Bombay has written an article
about Janabe Sakina in the issues dated 11, 13 and 15 May. This article
is having two characteristics. Firstly, from the beginning to the end it
is brimming with hatred for Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) which as per the tradition
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) is the easiest method of reaching to Hell.
Secondly, nowhere has he provided any reference.

There were two advantages of not giving any references. One is that due
to the mention of references there would have been no opportunity of
showing wit and it would have been impossible to publish fabricated
incidents. Secondly, it would have exposed the actual academic level of
the writer because the whole article is based on Shar Lakhnavi’s novel,
Sakina Binte Husayn and to give the reference of a novel would have
discredited the article. In addition to this, another fallout of this
would have been that the people’s mind would at once have been led to
the teeth-breaking rebuttal titled, *Jawabe Shar.* That is why the Hafiz
considered it best to write in this way so that the ignorant public
could be made to believe that whatever he has written is in fact the
truth.

All incidents mentioned in this article, as we have already stated,
(except for one) are taken from Shar’s novel and for the readers it is
necessary that to know that a refutation of this book, titled *Jawabe
Shar*[^1] by Maulana Sayyid ‘Ali Azhar*,* has already been published
from Islah Press, Khajwa, (Saran, India). I would like to briefly state
that Shar has taken his material from Abul Faraj Isfahani, the Umayyad’s
book, *Aghani*.

The position of *Aghani* in Arabic literature, as far as the
authenticity of its matter is concerned, is same as that of *Tilism
Hosharba, Dastan Amir Hamzah* etc. (They were fictions). Like these
books, *Aghani* was also written with a view to entertain the readers.
If *Dastan Mir Hamzah* could be made the basis of the biography of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w), the *Aghani* can be taken as a source on the life
history of Sakina and other personages. However, if the matter is judged
with perception and intelligence the worth of that book and that of its
writer becomes clear.

In addition to this, the writer of *Dastan Mir Hamzah* had no animosity
towards His Eminence, Hamzah. Therefore, at every place he has
attributed only courage and dignified aspects to his biography. On the
other hand Abul Faraj was the enemy of the family of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) and a supporter of Umayyad rulers. That is why he has associated
such incidents with Janabe Sakina that degrade her personality in every
way though later researches may prove all this to be baseless. If the
Hafiz had any shame he would not have taken from this novel anything
after its refutation has already been written. But he had to anyhow
create a controversy in order to boost the circulation of his paper even
though he may have to remain under the banner of Yazid on the Day of
Judgment.

Abul Faraj Isfahani who is the main source of all these calumnies was
the grandson of Marwan al-Himar (the donkey) the last ruler of the
Umayyad dynasty. He lived in Baghdad during the time of the Abbasids. In
the same period the Merwanid caliphs laid the foundation of their rule
in Andalusia. He was inclined towards them due to family relations but
due to the fear of the Abbasids he could not state anything openly. So
he used to disguise his malice in the veil of entertainment and write
all the degrading things about Ahl al-Bayt (a.s). Then he used to have
his writings secretly smuggled to his real patrons and receive rewards
and money from them. The volumes of *Aghani* are part of these series in
which he has associated useless and improper incidents to Sakina. The
Hafiz has quoted these same events in his article. His double-dealing is
obvious from the fact that in addition he also wrote books for Bani
Abbas that praised the Banu Hashim. Abul Faraj Isfahani was a prolific
liar, fiction maker and a drunkard. It is regrettable that right now I
could not obtain all the references that I needed from his writings, but
I present here whatever I have been able to obtain.

(1) Whatever Hujjatul Islam Maulana Sayyid Muhammad Baqir Khwansari has
said is as follows:

“I have briefly seen the book of *Aghani*. It is full of incidents and
accounts about the people involved in all types of vain pastimes and
lustful occupations and deviations from the sciences of Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s) and nothing else. In addition to this, this person was from the
family tree, which has been cursed in the Qur’an. That is, he was the
member of Banu Umayyah and progeny of Marwan. Then how is it possible
for a believer to be born in a group all of whose members are cursed and
that too by the one who is considered the most perfect (the Holy
Prophet)?[^2]

(2) Hujjatul Islam Maulana Sayyid Rahat Husayn Sahab Qibla Gopalpuri has
written in his book, *Rafaut Tabaas:*

“Ibn Dawood (a.r.) in his *Rijal* has categorized him as follows: ‘Abul
Faraj Isfahani; *Aghani* *Kabeer*, no tradition is taken from it. It is
written in *Fihrist* that he was a Zaidi. May Allah curse him.”[^3]

3) Allamah Hilli has also included him among the weak narrators.

4) One of our ancient scholars, Hasan bin Husayn has called him, ‘the
greatest liar’.

5) Sadr has said regarding the *Aghani* specially that: Even if the
above-mentioned point had not been mentioned against him, I still would
have considered him a forger and an accursed one due to his reports in
*Aghani*.[^4]

6) Allamah Sayyid Sibtul Hasan Hansavi writes in his journal, *Kashful
Dahiya* regarding *Aghani* that: The book of *Aghani* is absolutely
unreliable. Abul Faraj has written it in the style of traditionists and
historians but it is a collection of false and untrue things, which was
written to appease the Merwanid rulers of Andalusia.

7) Allamah Ibn Hajar Asqalani writes about him:

“Abul Faraj Isfahani was the greatest liar. He used to purchase a lot of
story books and base traditions on them.”

8) Now read the confession of Abul Faraj Isfahani, himself, about this
books:

“I have done this without any restraint although I detested that my
writings should contain such illogical things that would endure forever
and be associated with my name.”

But it is regrettable that due to his greed for pelf and position he
accepted all this for the sake of pleasing the Umayyads, and he has put
the collar of eternal humiliation around his neck. This can be
understood from the above statement as well as the confession of Abul
Faraj Isfahani himself. Shar[^5] Lakhnavi who has informed about his
original nature in his nom-de-plume itself has brought these sparks of
mischief from Arabic to Urdu world and Hafiz ‘Ali Bahadar is blowing to
make them into flames although the *Jawab Shar* has put such dew upon
them that they could never be ignited.

This was the historical value of those incidents, now let us apply logic
to them and see whether they don’t prove that:

“It seems Sakina had made her home a stage for dramatics and poetics.
Such a woman could never have any connection with religiosity. She must
have been deprived of all shame and dignity. Please ponder upon it that
the position of the family of the Prophet (s.a.w) is so much lofty while
even a lady of an ordinary household could not act in this way. Even if
it is proved that Sakina lived after the imprisonment, she had in
addition to the family honor and dignity some additional qualities. For
example she was an eyewitness to all that occurred in Karbala’ and
herself bore those difficulties. All her life she saw her brother, Imam
Sajjad (a.s) and her sisters and aunts weeping and lamenting. Did she
forget all these things so soon and said farewell to all the family
values and religious commands? She belonged to a family, which had
itself initiated the rules that a lady must not even let a stranger hear
her voice, except when it is absolutely necessary. They should remain in
their houses in such a way that strangers may not look at them and they
may not look at the strangers. They must not even wear jewellery in such
a way that others may hear the tinkles. In such circumstances, one who
is familiar with the family of Prophethood, can he ever even imagine
that Princess Sakina could commit such deeds? The aim of the Nasibi,
Abul Faraj Isfahani in writing such things was only to malign the family
of the Prophet (s.a.w) due to his (Abul Faraj Isfahani’s) affiliation
with the enemies of Islam.”[^6]

It is surprising that Imam ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s) continued to weep upon
Imam Husayn (a.s) all his life. When food was brought before him, he
wept. He wept when he wanted to drink water. He swooned when he saw the
severed head of a slaughtered goat. Lady Rabab (Sakina’s mother) had
recited the following dirge on Husayn (a.s) all her life as accepted
even by Abul Faraj Isfahani and Hafiz ‘Ali Bahadar:

*“Husayn who was such brilliance that people obtained light from him. He
is lying slain in Karbala’, unburied and un-shrouded.*

*O Prophet’s grandson, may God give you a good recompense and keep you
safe from the loss of the balance.*[^7]

*You are for me such a lofty mountain, which had given me strength and
refuge, and you lived with us with mercy and piety.*

*Now after you, who can fulfill the needs of orphans and beggars?*

*And who should the poor and the deprived people approach?*

*By Allah! In place of your relationship, I would not look for another
relationship, until I am hidden in the grave.”*

On one hand were such circumstances at home and on the other hand the
terrible calamity has befallen. Is it possible that Sakina could have
forgotten all this as if she has absolutely no connection with Husayn
(a.s)?

May Allah give us refuge:

…these are the words of their mouths…[^8]

Readers should pay attention to the following words of Lady Rabab:

“And you lived with us with mercy and piety.”

On the other hand see what nonsense the Hafiz writes: “Rabab was the
daughter of Imrul Qais. She was extremely beautiful and intelligent. She
gave birth to a daughter called Sakina. Imam Husayn (a.s) loved the two
of them so much that he used to remain careless of many necessary things
due to this love. One day the elder brother, Imam Hasan (a.s) scolded
Imam Husayn (a.s) for his excessive love for Sakina and Rabab. Instead
of correcting, the scolding of the brother made him recite the following
couplets:

*“I swear by your life, I love the house itself where Sakina and Rabab
reside.*

*I love both of them and am prepared to sacrifice all I own on them and
if someone punishes me for it, I would not care for that.*

*And if I am criticized, I cannot improve for my whole life until I am
concealed in the dust.”*

In *Aghani* these couplets are attributed to Imam Husayn (a.s) and they
are narrated from Sakina. Anyway whatever may be the case, the writing
of the incident, its style and choice of words all show the evil and
dirty nature of the writer and his inclination to the worship of Yazid.
He has tried to show Imam Husayn (a.s) as worse than an ordinary
religious person. Abul Faraj has taken the chain of narrators of these
couplets upto Malik bin Ayyin. First of all Allamah Ibn Hajar Asqalani
has exposed the value of Abul Faraj’s traditions that he has based his
writings on fictional works. On top of that it was the style of Arabic
literature of that time that even fictional incidents were written on
the authority of supposed reporters, though they had no external
existence. Thus merely because they had chain of narrators those reports
were not considered reliable. Now, you should know that this Malik bin
Ayyin was also an imaginative character. Allamah Ibn Hajar Asqalani has
written in *Lisanul Mizan*,[^9] that:

“He was unknown: Now who can trust a report of *Aghani*, penned by Abul
Faraj, the greatest liar and that too from a fictional character?
Especially, when the matter is against the dignity of the family of the
Prophet and also against the testimony of their infallibility and
purity. And in addition to this, you will also have to accept that this
character used to frequent Sakina’s place and she had contact with such
an enemy of Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)! All this is against logic and reason.

In such circumstances, the selection of these couplets is wrong and
artificial. And if for the sake of argument we accept them, the incident
mentioned in this connection is definitely fabricated.

…and they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning
they shall turn back.[^10]

Now see what he writes in the marginal notes: Her love made Imam Husayn
(a.s) compose some couplets that became famous in the Arab world and
they were sung in a special tune in various programs. Our poets would be
astonished to know that the famous Arab artist, Ibn Sarih had composed a
tune for those couplets on Imam Husayn (a.s) and it was sung in that
special tune mostly, though other tunes also existed for it.

Even if for the sake of argument it is agreed that these couplets were
composed by Imam Husayn (a.s), the matter of singing them in tune, which
is an unlawful act is not something that could be admired. Islam has
made music unlawful and the teachers of Islam never used to compose
couplets for people to sing. First of all their couplets had nothing but
morals and lessons. Even if for the sake of argument we accept them to
be couplets of Imam Husayn (a.s) we really pity the mentality of the
people of that time and Ibn Sarih.

Now I would like to present another passage of the Hafiz where he has
tried to display his common sense. He says:

“The whole family of Imam Husayn (a.s) was the center of knowledge,
literature and poetry. Very few people know that not only Rabab, the
wife of Imam Husayn (a.s) was the daughter of the famous poet Imrul
Qais…”

Here it seems that the Hafiz wants to say that Lady Rabab was the
daughter of the famous poet, Imrul Qais, whose ‘hanging poem’ is very
well-known and who was the best poet of the Arabs. By saying all this
the Hafiz wants to show on one hand that the poetical expertise of
Sakina was hereditary and secondly since all know that Imrul Qais was a
libertine and a man of vice, his daughter must also have been very
liberal minded. But it is a pity that by presenting this research the
Hafiz has provided the proof of his ignorance and foolishness. If a
blind man goes out unaided he would definitely stumble and fall. One who
has no information about Arabic literature would indeed commit such
blunders. Now please consider this:

The famous poet Imrul Qais bin Hujr Kandi was the king of the Kandi
tribe. This kingdom began with his father and ended on Imrul Qais. The
Caesar of Rome had him poisoned in 530 or 540 A.D. and the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w) was born at least thirty years after his death in 570 A.D.
Imam Husayn (a.s) was born at least 88 years after the death of Imrul
Qais in 628 A.D. corresponding to 4. A. H. His marriage to Lady Rabab
took place during the apparent caliphate of Amir al-Mu’minin (a.s) in 36
A.H. But according to the Ahl al-Sunnah traditions it was only during
the time of the second caliphate.

Even if we accept it to be true it could not be before 19 A.H. because
in that year Imam Husayn (a.s) became 15 and before that his marriage is
not logically acceptable. Thus at that time Imrul Qais had already been
dead for 103 years. Hence, if Rabab were really the daughter of Imrul
Qais. At the time of her marriage she must have been at least 103 years
old! What a beautiful invention indeed!

And also look at the coincidence that historians have said that Imrul
Qais following the custom of the period of ignorance used to bury his
daughters alive. His wives used to send away their daughters to other
tribes secretly to save their lives but he used to reach everywhere and
did not leave them alive. On daughter, Hind, by chance, survived and
later Imrul Qais also accepted her.

I am leaving the reference only because I want to test the Hafiz whether
he could locate such popular facts in the Arabic literature or not.

The only fact is that the name of the father of Lady Rabab was also
Imrul Qais and he is also referred to as Kandi in some places. Just this
much was sufficient for his imagination to fly and the Hafiz took to the
skies. Actually the genealogy of Lady Rabab is as follows: Rabab binte
Imrul Qais bin Adi bin Jabir bin Kaab bin ‘Ali bin Barra bin Thalaba bin
Imran bin al-Haaf bin Qazaat. Since he lived in the Kanda locality of
Kufa he was called Imrul Qais Kandi. He had no connection with the tribe
of Kanda.

Wrong association may not be considered improper by the Hafiz because
the elders of his faith and senior religious leaders have often been
victims of this with regard to the Holy family of the Prophet and he may
escape the divine chastisement applicable for such sins. The doors of
repentance are not closed yet.

And peace be upon those who follow the guidance.

[^1]: Reply to the ‘Shar’

[^2]: Rauzatul Jannaat, Chapter ‘Ghain’, Pg. 478

[^3]: Rijal Ibne Dawood, Handwritten Manuscript, Nasirul Millat Library

[^4]: Rafaut Tabaas

[^5]: Shar = mischief

[^6]: Rafaut Tabaas

[^7]: On the Day of Judgment

[^8]: Surah Taubah 9:30

[^9]: Vol. 5, Pg. 3, Line 4

[^10]: Shoara 26:227


