Appendix 2: A ‘Revolutionary’ Book: Caliphate of Muawiyah and Yazid
===================================================================

Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi, the writer of *Caliphate of Muawiyah and Yazid* has
created a strange type of friction in the Shia, Sunni Hindu and all
humanity-loving circles of India and Pakistan by his new slogan. Along
with the articles of the actual book, the attacks of Maulavi Abdul
Maajid Daryabadi and Maktaba Tajalli Deoband[^1] have also become the
subject of discussion that have introduced this book as ‘revolutionary’.
The following are the opening sentences of Maktaba Tajalli:

“By this letter we introduce you to a book which presents a
‘revolutionary’ view on the most delicate matter of the Muslim nation.”

Maulavi Abdul Maajid Daryabadi has also, commenting on this book in the
newspaper ‘Sidqe Jadeed’ referred to this book as ‘revolutionary’ and
compares this discussion to be an unbiased support.

The common Muslims and especially the Shias are highly disturbed by
these statements but I think even in enmity we must not leave justice.
The point of justice is that the book is really ‘revolutionary’ and my
article is supporting these statements in this matter.

Caliphate of Muawiyah and Yazid is a religious discussion and to
interpret this ‘revolution’ we must seek help from the Holy Qur’an. So
that we may come to know how the Qur’an views this upheaval.

The word of ‘revolution’ is used in eight places in the Holy Qur’an in
its various forms, that is to ‘turn’ ‘return’ or to ‘come back’ etc. For
example:

(1) They will swear to you by Allah when you return to them so that you
may turn aside from them; so do turn aside from them; surely they are
unclean and their abode is hell; a recompense for what they earned.[^2]

(2) And he said to his servants: Put their money into their bags that
they may recognize it when they go back to their family, so that they
may come back.[^3]

In the same way refer to (1) Surah Tatfeef, Ruku 1 (2) Surah Fath, Ruku
2 (3) Surah Mulk, Ruku 1 (4) Surah Inshiqaq, Ruku 1 (5) Surah Kahf, Ruku
5. All these examples denote ‘coming back from one place to another’ and
there is no mention whether the ‘return’ is for good or bad.

I am sure that Mr. Daryabadi and Maktaba Tajalli have not called this
book ‘revolutionary’ in the sense that by reading it, people on a trip
would come back to their hometowns because it is a Great Name of God
(Isme Aazam). Therefore we shall have to search for other verses in
order to understand the meaning of ‘revolutionary’.

In this search we find some verses where in addition to the word
‘revolution’ it is also mentioned whether it is for good or bad.

(1) Those to whom the people said: Surely men have gathered against you,
therefore fear them, but this increased their faith, and they said:
Allah is sufficient for us and most excellent is the Protector.[^4]

But Mr. Daryabadi and people of ‘Tajalli’ could not bear to have the
word ‘revolution’ interpreted in this sense because the circumstances of
the revelation of these verses is against their selfish desires.

The incident in brief is that after the battle of Uhad, the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w) took only his injured companions by the command of Allah
and went out in pursuit of Abu Sufyan and halted at a place called
Humratul Asad. Abu Sufyan was camping at a place called Rauha. Abu
Sa’eed Khuzai taking the leave of the Prophet went to Abu Sufyan and
told him, “The Prophet is coming in your pursuit with a large army.”
Hearing this, Abu Sufyan fled from there. Naeem bin Masud Ashjai met him
on way to Medina. Abu Sufyan told him, “If you go to Muhammad and tell
him that the infidels of Quraish have got a huge army I would reward you
with ten camel loads of dates and dried grapes.”

When Naeem brought this message to the Islamic army, His Eminence, ‘Ali
(a.s) at once said, “No problem! Allah is sufficient for us and most
excellent is the Protector.” The Almighty Allah liked this utterance of
His Eminence, ‘Ali (a.s) so much that He mentioned the same words in the
Holy Qur’an and this verse was revealed.[^5]

Among the Ahl al-Sunnah this matter is mentioned by Ibn Marduyah in his
book, and this episode is also recorded in *Manaqib Ibn Shahr Aashob*
from Abu Rafe (a Sunni).

However, Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi, Abdul Maajid Daryabadi and the officials
of ‘Tajalli’ could not be in favor of this Qur’anic revolution because
they themselves want to bring about a revolution.

Firstly, this verse of ‘revolution’ was revealed in praise of ‘Ali bin
Abi Talib (a.s) while the book *Caliphate of Muawiyah and Yazid* has
tried to show supposed weaknesses of this same ‘Ali.

Secondly, this verse indicated the cunning, deceit and enmity of Abu
Sufyan towards Islam. The same Abu Sufyan who is the father of Muawiyah,
is the hero of these people and the grandfather of Yazid, their idol. It
is the same family, which is called the ‘accursed tree’ in the Qur’an
but these people are trying their best to make it the center of truth.

Thirdly, this verse has praised those who were injured, less in number
and they were warned of the great number of their enemies but they did
not care for it and they relied on Allah. If you look for a parallel of
this verse in the events of Karbala’ you will see that the army of
Yazid, the Amir of Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi was having a huge army like Abu
Sufyan and the battalion of Husayn (a.s) was very small like that of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w), injured, afflicted with hunger and thirst but yet
having complete certainty in God and His favors. Because the qualities
that are praised in this verse are seen only in the army of Husayn (a.s)
while the book, *Caliphate of Muawiyah and Yazid* is mainly concerned
with degrading ‘Ali and Husayn and pointing out their ‘defects’ while on
the other hand it glorifies their enemies. Therefore we can be sure that
this book could not have been inspired by the type of ‘revolution’
mentioned in the above verse.

(2) Another verse where ‘revolution’ is mentioned in a positive sense is
as follows:

It was the occasion when sorcerers summoned by the Pharaoh were
over-awed by the miracle of Musa’s staff and they came to the right path
and said: “We believe in the Lord of Musa and Harun.” At that time
Pharaoh made many allegations, which included that: You want to spread
mischief in the land and wish to take over the kingdom. Then he made a
threat, which was immediately put into action:

I will certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides,
then will I crucify you all together. They said: Surely to our Lord
shall we go back:[^6]

(3) Their statement is mentioned in Surah Shoara in the following words:

They said: No harm; surely to our Lord we go back…[^7]

(4) The Surah Zukhruf is also having these words:

And surely to our Lord we must return.[^8]

But the revolution of the book, *Caliphate of Muawiyah and Yazid* could
not become a discussion of the ‘revolution’ of those believing magicians
because,

(1) Those believers were very much less in number and a great majority
was against them. This point cannot fit Yazid, the Amir of Mahmud Ahmad
Abbasi. It could only fit Husayn (a.s) and his companions. Though Yazid
could be seen in the role of Pharaoh.

(2) Those believers were deprived of worldly power and their opponent
was having a great power and might. This also fits Husayn and not Yazid
because according to Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi, consensus had already taken
place for Yazid and he also possessed force and domination while Husayn
had no share in any of these things.

(3) Pharaoh had leveled the allegation against those believers that they
wish to spread mischief in the lands and want to gain worldly rulership
and kingdom for themselves as the Holy Qur’an has mentioned this.

This also does not fit Yazid but Husayn because Yazid, Ibn Ziyad, their
caliphs and Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi also make the same allegation that
Husayn (a.s) wanted temporal rulership, that is why he made an armed
uprising and created mischief to take over the Islamic kingdom. (God
forbid!)

Pharaoh tortured those believers in the worst manner but they bore all
those calamities with patience and contentment. They were martyred but
they did not turn away from the right religion. This also fits Husayn
(a.s) and his companions and not Yazid and his militiamen who wrought
such terrible afflictions on Husayn (a.s), his companions, helpers and
women and children that the history of Islam is ashamed due to the
mention of those things.

Since the aim of this book is to highlight the weaknesses of Husayn
(a.s) and propagate the rightfulness and benevolence of Yazid, the
revolution indicated in the above verse is absolutely opposed to the
circumstances of Yazid and fits cent percent the conditions of Husayn
(a.s). Hence, I think neither the officials of ‘Tajalli’ nor Mr. Abdul
Maajid Daryabadi would like to associate the revolution of those
believers with the ‘revolution’ of this book.

But after reaching here no verse in Qur’an remains where the word of
‘revolution’ has a positive connotation.

Though we find many verses that indicate towards the Yazidite
revolution. We shall present some of them with brief comments here:

(1) And Muhammad is no more than an apostle; the apostles have already
passed away before him; if then he dies or is killed will you turn back
upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no
means do harm to Allah in the least…[^9]

Shah Abdul Aziz Dehlavi has written a famous book, *Sarrash
Shahadatain*. In this book he has discussed the martyrdoms of Imam Hasan
and Imam Husayn (a.s) in an esoteric way and explained that they were
based on the hidden wisdom of Almighty Allah. His premise is that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) being the greatest of all the divine prophets
possessed in entirety all the virtues and merits that all the previous
prophets had. However, the great honor of martyrdom was not found in his
share. Now martyrdom could either be in one of the two ways. One is that
a person could be poisoned and another is that he be killed in the
battlefield. Both these options were not appropriate for the Messenger
of Allah (s.a.w). For if he had died due to poison it would not have
served the purpose of making it a magnificent martyrdom, and if he had
been martyred on the battlefield it would have been a great insult to
the lofty nation of Islam and many weak faith people might even have
become demoralized and become apostates and religion would have been
destroyed. (As the above verse is indicating towards this same
condition). The author writes in this book as follows,

“Thus Divine wisdom decided to transfer this great position of martyrdom
and other perfections of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) to other members
of the holy Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) after the passing away of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w). To persons who were nearest in relations to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) and the most beloved among his children, rather who were
considered as his sons (equal to sons). So that these circumstances may
become the circumstances of the Prophet and their perfection may be
included in the list of the virtues of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w)…that is why Providence and Divine wisdom made Hasan and Husayn
(a.s) as representatives of their great grandfather, the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) and made them the cheek of the elegance of the Prophet (so that
through them the elegance and virtues of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) may
reach to perfection).”

And since martyrdom is of two types (1) secret martyrdom and (2) open
martyrdom, that is why of the two grandsons of the Prophet, Imam Hasan
(a.s) achieved martyrdom through poison and Imam Husayn (a.s) got open
martyrdom with all its severities so that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
may get the honor of both types of martyrdoms.”

These statements of Shah Abdul Aziz Dehlavi prove that the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s) was actually the martyrdom of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w). In the above verses the Almighty Allah has mentioned a
‘revolution’ in the people after the passing away of the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w):

If then he (Muhammad) dies or is killed, will you turn back upon your
heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no means do
harm to Allah in the least…[^10]

Anyway if not the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) himself, it was the mirror of the
elegance of the Prophet, the representative of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) who was martyred. Hence there definitely must be some revolution
after this. If not more some people must indeed have to turn to
ignorance (apostasy). Mr. Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi is the proclaimer of this
same revolution and he is inviting people towards the revolution of:
“you turn back upon your heels” and the editor of ‘Sidqe Jadeed’ is
harping upon ‘revolutionary points’ to announce the veracity of those
verses of Qur’an and the officials of ‘Tajalli’ are presenting examples
of:

…their guardians are Shaitans who take them out of the light into the
darkness…[^11]

(2) The Almighty Allah has warned the believers of such claimants of
revolution:

O you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve they will turn you
back upon your heels, so you will turn back losers.[^12]

(3) The Almighty Allah has warned the Muslims of the ‘revolution’ of
‘turning back on their heels’ in many verses of Qur’an. His Eminence,
Musa (a.s) is sermonizing the Bani Israel in Surah Maidah as follows:

…and turn not on your backs for then you will turn back losers.[^13]

(4) The Almighty Allah says:

…and We did not make the vision which We showed you but a trial for men
and the cursed tree in the Qur’an as well; and We cause them to fear,
but it only adds to their great inordinacy.[^14]

It is a well-known fact of Islamic history, Qur’anic exegesis and
biography that the above verse is talking about the dream of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) wherein he saw Banu Umayyah jumping on his
pulpit, like monkeys. The Prophet was disturbed at the sight of the
destruction of Islam and no one saw him smiling after that, as long as
he lived. The Almighty Allah explained to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w)
that, that period shall be a time of test for the people. That which of
them go towards falsehood after being attracted to worldly benefits and
which of them continue to remain on the side of Imam Husayn Ibn ‘Ali
(a.s) and his companions at any cost.

It is mentioned in *Tafsir Durre Manthur,* Vol. 4, Pg. 191, Egypt that:
Ibn Jarir has related from Sahl bin Saad, Ibn Abi Hatim narrates from
Ibn Umar and Ya’la bin Marrah, Ibn Marduyah from Imam Husayn (a.s), Ibn
Abbas and Ayesha from Saad bin Musayyab mention numerous traditions
whose basic conclusion is that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) saw a
dream wherein he saw that Banu Umayyah were jumping on his pulpit, like
monkeys. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) became so shocked due to this dream
that he never ever laughed as long as he lived.

It is also proved beyond any doubt that the ‘accursed tree’ denotes Banu
Umayyah and their period was a period of test of the people and their
evil deeds and rebellion is also mentioned in the following words:

…and We cause them to fear, but it only adds (YAZEED) to their great
inordinacy.[^15]

I think that Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi, Abdul Maajid Daryabadi and their
cohorts should be reminded that Allah has called other persons of Banu
Umayyah briefly as the ‘accursed tree’ but He has mentioned their
‘respected’ Amir, Yazid by name, due to his extremely evil deeds as the
‘great rebel’ and ‘great inordinacy’.

The name of Yazid is also mentioned in it.

This should be enough for their pride!

(For other verses on Banu Umayyah refer to the chapter, ‘Banu Umayyah in
the view of the Holy Qur’an’)

Anyway, it has become clear that the period of domination of Banu
Umayyah, which shall be based on oppression and injustice, would be a
period of trial for the people.

This period prophesied in the verse arrived and those whose faith was as
strong as the mountains, they put to risk all they had but under no
circumstances gave up truth and rightfulness. But some people whose
apparent Islam was based on force, domination, power and kingdom, their
reality was exposed. They called Yazid as ‘Amir al-Mu’minin’ and
‘Rahmatullah alaihe’[^16] etc. and got deviated from true Islam and they
named their deviation as ‘revolution’. I have already explained what
type of a revolution it was. Its actual meaning is that people leave the
rightful religion and turn back to disbelief and also invite others
towards this. Its proclaimer is Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi and ‘caller’ is
Maulavi Abdul Maajid Daryabadi and he is supported by some other people
also. The following verses perfectly fit these gentlemen:

And among men is he who serves Allah (standing) on the verge, so that if
good befalls him he is satisfied therewith, but if a trial afflict him
he turns back headlong; he loses this world as well as the hereafter;
that is a manifest loss.[^17]

(5) Quoting the statement of a disbeliever, the Almighty Allah says:

And I do not think the hour will come, and even if I am returned to my
Lord I will most certainly find a returning place better than this.[^18]

The disbeliever is debating with a believer and he says:

He was a denier of the Day of Judgment, yet he hoped for himself a good
‘revolution’ or you can say that he claimed thus.

This situation also perfectly fits Yazid who brought such a revolution
in the world that he planned to destroy the whole religion and uproot
the Islamic beliefs. His apostatic couplets shall remain on the pages of
history until the Day of Judgment:

*“The Banu Hashim had played a game to obtain rulership.*

*Neither an angel arrived nor a revelation descended.”*

How clearly his denial of Islam is mentioned in this one couplet! The
followers of Yazid are inviting the Ummah of Muhammad towards this
revolution of ‘turning back on the heels’. And inspite of this he hopes,
like that disbeliever, that even if there is Day of Judgment they shall
be better than how they were in the world. Thus pay attention to these
statements of Maktabe Tajalli:

“A study of this book is also necessary for the correction of religious
beliefs… it should not be that you reach the Great Creator having
misgivings about this great companion (Muawiyah) and be questioned about
it on Day of Judgment.”

These gentlemen think that they shall be rewarded for supporting Banu
Umayyah. Pray to Allah and say with a sincere heart that may Allah deal
with them in the same way as He deals with their leader, and as the
Qur’an says:

…the day when We will call every people with their Imam…[^19]

(6) The atrocities perpetrated by Yazid on Husayn, his helpers and Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s), their brief sketch could be estimated by the words of
Shah Abdul Aziz Dehlavi in *Sarrash Shahadatain* that the honor the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) received through the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s) was the most perfect honor:

“Since the highest grade of martyrdom is that a man is martyred while he
is in a strange land, in travel and with extreme pain and discomfort. He
should be rendered without a mount. His corpse should remain lying
graveless and un-shrouded, and a large number of his companions and
relatives should be killed before his eyes. His belongings should be
looted. His ladies and orphan children should be taken as prisoners and
he bears all these calamities only for the sake of God.”

Yazid and his army wrought all these oppressions on Husayn (a.s) and his
companions, even though they and their present day followers hope:

…and even if I am returned to my Lord I will most certainly find a
returning place better than this.[^20]

The Almighty Allah has delivered an instant verdict for them:

…and they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning
they shall turn back.[^21]

Almost every Zakir (preacher) recites this above verse at the conclusion
of Majlis and makes it his closing statement. Hence I also make it my
final word in this article.

Our choice of reciting this verse at the end of Majalis proves that we
also agree that Yazid is inviting towards a revolution and that
revolution encompasses from the world to the Hereafter as we have come
to know from the previous verses.

Its worldly face is that Muslims should ‘turn back on their heels’,
towards disbelief and become deniers of monotheism, prophethood and
resurrection and in the Hereafter the result of this ‘revolution’ would
be that these people would themselves see towards which end they are
being herded and where they are being returned. Indeed that place shall
be Hell and: ***…a bad place of return it is…***

Anyway, my article has clarified that the opinion of Tajalli and Mr.
Daryabadi is very much true that this book is ‘revolutionary’ – at the
most this revolution is not from lowliness to height or from darkness to
light, rather it takes one from height to lowliness and from religion to
disbelief. But if you remove the fear of God from your hearts it would
not make any difference to you!

[Note: here it is necessary to mention that when the scholar researchers
of Ahl al-Sunnah criticized the book of Mahmud Ahmad Abbasi to shreds
and the true face of Muawiyah and Yazid was exposed to a great extent,
the editor of ‘Tajalli’ issued an apology for their past misdemeanor and
acknowledged their own failure to defend Muawiyah and Yazid.]

[^1]: Name of a Sunni organization

[^2]: Surah Taubah 9:95

[^3]: Surah Yusuf 12:62

[^4]: Surah Aale Imran 3:173

[^5]: Surah Aale Imran 3:173

[^6]: Surah Araaf 7:124-125

[^7]: Surah Shoara 26:50

[^8]: Surah Zukhruf 43:14

[^9]: Surah Aale Imran 3:144

[^10]: Surah Aale Imran 3:144

[^11]: Surah Baqarah 2:257

[^12]: Surah Aale Imran 3:149

[^13]: Surah Maidah 5:21

[^14]: Surah Bani Israel 17:60

[^15]: Surah Bani Israel 17:60

[^16]: Translation: May Allah have mercy on him

[^17]: Surah Hajj 22:11

[^18]: Surah Kahf 18:36

[^19]: Surah Bani Israel 17:71

[^20]: Surah Kahf 18:36

[^21]: Surah Shoara 26:227


