Appendix 3: Martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) and the Muslim and Jewish Calendars
==============================================================================

*(Published in As-Serat Vol. VI No. 3 & 4, 1401)*

The 1400th year of the Hijri calendar is nearing its end. Since the last
two years or more a substantial amount of time, energy and money is
being spent on what has come to be known as the commemoration of the end
of the 14th century of Hijri and the welcome of the 15th. Seminars are
being held, articles written, booklets published, postage stamps issued
and a lot of trinkets designed, made and sold to honor this occasion.
Not even the ruling dynasty of Saudi Arabia seems to mind that all these
festivities—financed with petro-dollars and arranged with the active
blessings of their religious leaders—are innovations, which the Muslims
of even a century ago knew nothing about.

It is, of course, the natural offspring of a process started a few
decades ago when western imperialism established its hold in the Middle
East. The Muslims of Egypt and some other countries began celebrating
the (Muslim) New Year on 1st Muharram. By this act, they introduced a
new “festival” in Islam.

Of course, the justifications are many. It is claimed that these 14th
century functions are held “to assess the impact of Islam on humanity
and the contribution of Muslims to various branches of learning and in
the upliftment of human society”, “to probe into the past successes and
failures’ and “to hammer out new plans for the future.”

Noble ideas, indeed! And nobody—least of all, the present writer— would
deny their relevance and validity. But these rationalizations do not
alter the fact that this celebration is an innovation. If such
commendable goals may justify this innovation, then one has a right to
ask these Muslims as to why they condemn the commemoration of the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) as an unlawful act? Is not this mourning
justified on these very grounds? The remembrance of Imam Husayn’s
supreme sacrifice on the altar of truth strengthens the moral fiber of
the Muslims; keeps their feet firmly on the path of righteousness and
piety; and creates in them a willingness to sacrifice their all in the
way of Allah. It also helps the mourners in “probing their successes and
failures” of the past year, and in “chalking out a new plan” for their
religious, spiritual and social “upliftment for the future.”

The principle should always remain the same, shouldn’t it?

Lest there be any misunderstanding, it should be clarified here that the
mourning for Imam Husayn (a.s) is not innovation at all. It was started
by the Holy Prophet of Islam (s.a.w) himself, more than 50 years before
the event; and he was seen in a vision by the Mother of the believers,
Umme Salma, on the day of Husayn’s martyrdom, mourning for Husayn. And
Allah has ordered thousands of angels to weep on the grave of Imam
Husayn (a.s) until the day of resurrection. These traditions are
narrated in the Sunni books, and show that this particular mourning is
the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet and of the angels:

**1.** Some 50 years before the event of Karbala’, the Prophet wept when
he was told by the angel that Husayn would be killed by the army of
Yazid in Karbala’. Then Jibraeel asked, “O Prophet of God, do you want
me to give you some earth from his place of martyrdom?” The Prophet
said, “Yes.” Jibraeel gave him a handful of earth of Karbala’ and the
Prophet began weeping uncontrollably. This tradition is recorded in
*Mishkatul Masabih*, *Musnad* of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Sawaiqul
Mohreqa* of Allamah Ibn Hajar Makki and *Sirrul-’alamin* of Imam
Ghazzali; and has been narrated by Imam Sha’abi, Imam Baihaqi, Imam
Hakim and scores of other traditionalists. The Prophet gave that earth
to his wife, Ummul Momineen, Umme Salma, and told her, “When you see
this earth turned into blood, know that Husayn has been martyred.”

**2.** On the 10th Muharram, 61 A.H., Umme Salma was asleep in the
afternoon when she saw the Prophet in her dream: He stood there in a
tragic condition, his hair was dusty and disheveled, and in his hand was
a bottle full of blood. Umme Salma asked him what it was. The Prophet
said, “This is the blood of Husayn and his companions. I was collecting
it since this morning.” Umme Salma woke up and hurried towards the
bottle, which contained the earth of Karbala’; she saw red blood flowing
from it. Then she cried and called her relatives and started mourning
for Husayn. This tradition is narrated in *Musnad* of Imam Ahmad bin
Hanbal, *Sawaiqul Mohreqa*, *Mishkatul Masabih*, *Sahih* of Tirmidhi and
other books.

**3.** Shaykh Abdul Qadir Jilani writes in his book
*Ghunyatut-Talebeen*, Vol. 2 page 62: “70,000 angels came on the grave
of Husayn bin ‘Ali after his martyrdom and they are weeping on him and
will remain weeping unto the Day of Judgment.”

**4.** God says in the Qur’an about Pharaoh and his army:

…neither the Sky nor the Earth wept for them and they were not given
chance.[^1]

Imam Muslim records in explanation of this ayat, “When Husayn was
martyred, the Sky as well as the Earth wept on him and weeping of the
sky is its being red.”[^2]

It is a sign of the greatness of the 10th Muharram that Allah commanded
the Israelites to observe it as a day of mourning; it was accompanied by
a stern warning that anybody disobeying that law would be cut off from
his tribe. The following is the passage quoted from Leviticus:[^3]

“And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel, saying, in the seventh month, in the first day of the month,
shall ye have a Sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy
convocation. Ye shall do no servile work therein; but ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the Lord. And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying, Also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be a day
of atonement: it shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall
afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.
And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of atonement,
to make atonement for you before the Lord your God. For whatsoever soul
it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off
from among his people. And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in
that same day, the same soul will I destroy from among his people. Ye
shall do no manner of work; it shall be a stature forever throughout
your generations in all your dwellings. It shall be unto you a Sabbath
of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls: in the ninth day of the month
at even, from even unto even, shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.”

This command is also briefly mentioned in Leviticus.[^4] To understand
what is meant by the seventh month, the following facts should be kept
in mind:

1) The year of the Hebrews was based on lunar system. To make it
coincide with solar year, a thirteenth month, Veadar, was added 7 times
in a cycle of 19 years. The year began with the month of Abib (i.e.,
Nisan) with the new moon next before or next after the spring equinox.

2) The Arabs before Islam used to follow the same system. Thus their
months coincided with the Jewish months; and Rajab coincided with Abib
(i.e., Nisan) of the Jews. And the Jewish 7th month coincided with
Muharram of the Arabs. (In original Hebrew reckoning, this seventh month
was called Ethanim; now it is called Tishri I). As the original Jewish
year began near the spring equinox (i.e. 21st March of the Gregorian
calendar), the seventh month was bound to occur in September-October.

3) Some time after the Exile, the Jews changed the New Year from Nisan
to the day of the new moon of the 7th month. Now it is their first
month; except that the system of fasting and observing other laws
concerning the 1st, 9th and 10th days (of the 7th month) mentioned above
continues unchanged. Yom Hakippurim is faithfully observed with all due
solemnity on the 10th day of the original seventh (i.e. the present
first) month. (The Hebrew term, Yom Hakippurim, is rendered as
*Yaum-ul-Kaffarah* in Arabic and Day of Atonement in English. In 1973,
the world became familiar with the term ‘Yom Kippur’ when Egypt chose
that day to start war with Israel, and thus caught them unprepared—the
whole country was engaged in observing the fast and other rules of the
Day of Atonement).

4) In the 9th year of Hijra, Islam forbade intercalation of the
additional month every leap year. “Surely the number of months with
Allah is twelve…Postponing (of a month, i.e. by intercalation) is only
an addition in disbelief...”[^5] From then on, the parity between the
Jewish and the Muslim calendars disappeared.

5) In spite of that disparity, the Muharram of 61 A.H. began with Tishri
I; and 10th Muharram, the day when Imam Husayn (a.s) was martyred was
10th Tishri (Yom Hakippurim). See, for reference, the chart comparing
the Hijra and Christian calendars, given in the 21st edition of
*al-Munjid*. Thus the relationship of Yom Hakippurim with 10th Muharram
was true not only because originally Muharram used to coincide with
Tishri, but also because the martyrdom actually occurred on that very
day.

I once discussed this commandment with Professor N. Q. King, of
California University. I told him that, as apparently no significant
historical event had happened on that day in Jewish history, one might
safely say that it was a sort of prognosis of the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (a.s). The Professor wrote about it to his colleague, Dr. Mishael
Maswari-Caspi, who very kindly wrote to me on March 28, 1978. In this
letter, he writes, inter alia, on this subject as follows:

“If there is a link between the 10th of Al-Muharram and Yom Hakippurim,
it is not just a coincidence, but emphasizes that we are truly close to
each other.” He agreed that “in both places, Leviticus 23 and Leviticus
16, historicization is not emphasized. Nor is the historical connection
brought out in Tractate Yoms, the tractate dealing in many details of
the Day of Atonement.” He further writes: “Although no historical
correlation is found, the spiritual and religious aspects are of utmost
importance in both Bible and Talmud, whereas in the Midrashic literature
(Midrash Tanhuma, Tisa 31) they relate this holy day to the event of
bringing the tablets of the Covenant from Mount Sinai. It says: ‘The
first time he went down on the 17th of Tammuz (July). He saw the calf
and he broke the tablets. For two days he punished the people. He
remained there from the 20th of Tammuz through the whole month of Ab, 40
days. Then he went up on the first day of Elul, staying 40 days, being
the 10th of Tishri.’ This is why this holy day is devoted to atonement,
and this is why the High Priest entered the Holy of Holies not in his
fancy cloth with stripes of gold (reminiscent of the golden calf), but
in a purely white garment.”

In view of the fact that the original commandment of Leviticus, as well
as Tractate Yoms, does not refer to any historicization, one may safely
say that the event mentioned in Midrash Tanhulna, Tisa 31, had no
bearing, as a historical event, on this commandment. Rather it is the
spiritual and religious aspects that are of paramount importance. The
spiritual significance of bringing the tablets of the Covenant may be
one of those aspects. And so may be the prognosis of the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s) not as a historical event but as a spiritual guiding
light.

It is not uncommon about the early events of the Islamic history, and
especially so if they happened in Muharram or Safar, that a difference
of one year appears in their timing in various narrations. For example,
the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) is said to happen on 10th Muharram,
in the year 60, or the year 61, depending on various reports. But in
fact, in most cases, there is no material difference between the two.
Both speak of the same year—one calling it the 60th, and the other the
61st year after Hijrah. The reason for this confusing discrepancy is as
follows: As mentioned earlier, in pre-Islamic days the year of the Arabs
coincided with that of the Jews—Muharram was identical with the first
(i.e. the original seventh) month of the Jewish calendar. When the Holy
Prophet migrated to Medina in the month of Rabi’ul-awwal, the Muslims on
the order of the Prophet himself started the Muslim calendar. They said
that this or that event occurred in this or that month after Hijrah.
This continued “until a year was completed”, and then they began saying
that a certain event occurred in the first or second year of Hijrah; and
so on. And in this way the Hijra calendar was established.

Reports to this effect are given in the *Annals* of al-Tabari (Prima
series, E. J. Brill, Laden, ed. 1882-1885) Vol. III p. 1250 from Ibn
Shahab, Ibn ‘Abbas and ‘Amr b. Dinar; and in Vol. V, p. 2480, from Ibn
‘Abbas.)

It may be inferred from the words, “until a year was completed”, that
the year began with Rabi’ul-awwal and ended with Safar.

According to another narrative, the Hijrah calendar was established in
the reign of the 2nd Caliph, in 16th year after Hijrah. The reports to
this effect are found in the same two places of the *Annals* of
al-Tabari. According to this narrative (of Sa’id b. Al-Musayyab), Umar
gathered the people and asked them: From which day should we write (the
Calendar)? ‘Ali said: From the day the Apostle of Allah migrated and
left the land of polytheism. So Umar did so.”

The day when the Holy Prophet left Mecca was 1st Rabi’ul-awwal.[^6]

It appears from the first narrative that the Muslim year began with the
month of Rabi’ul-awwal; and that it was done by the order of the Prophet
himself. And if the second narrative is correct, then ‘Ali had advised
to start the year from Rabi’ul-awwal, an advice that according to this
report, the second caliph accepted.

But the Arabs were accustomed to count Muharram as the first month, and
old habits die hard; and that is why many people continued to follow
that custom. That is the only explanation why Muharram came to be
counted as first month of the Hijrah calendar. Obviously, this month had
nothing to do with the Hijrah, the event upon which the Muslim year is
based. There is a report in the same *Annals*, from Muhammad b. Sirin
that the people, after discussion, had unanimously agreed to begin the
year with Muharram. But obviously this report is an attempt to justify
the practice, which by the time of Ibn Sirin (d. 110 A.H.) had firmly
established itself in the Muslim society.

For those who, in early days, counted Rabi’ul-awwal as the first month,
Muharram was the 11th month of the old year; for others it was the 1st
month of the New Year. Thus by the former reckoning, Imam Husayn (a.s)
was martyred in Muharram that was the 11th month of the year 60 A.H.; by
the later reckoning, the same Muharram was the 1st month of the year 61
A.H.

[^1]: Surah Dukhan 44:29

[^2]: Sahih of Muslim

[^3]: Chapter 23, verses 23-32

[^4]: 16: 29-34

[^5]: Surah Taubah 9:37-38

[^6]: Safinatul-Bihar, Vol. 2, p. 696


