Appendix 4: Fasting on Ashura
=============================

*(Published in As-Serat Vol. VIII No. 3 & 4)*

Some traditions are found in Sunni books to the effect that the Prophet
(s.a.w) on migrating to Medina found the Jews fasting on the 10th of
Muharram. He asked them why, and was told: “It is an auspicious day; it
is the day when God delivered the children of Israel from their enemy
(i.e. Pharaoh); and, therefore, Moses fasted on that day.” The Prophet
(s.a.w) said, “I am worthier of Moses than you are.” Thereupon, he
fasted on that day and ordered (the Muslims) to fast.[^1]

It is noted by the commentator of *Mishkatul Masabih* that: “It was in
the second year, because in the first year the Prophet had arrived at
Medina after Ashura, in Rabi’ul-awwal.”

How much importance was this fast supposed to have may be judged from
another tradition narrated in *Sahih Bukhari:* “The Prophet (s.a.w)
ordered a man from the (tribe of) Aslam: Announce to the people that
whoever has eaten should fast the rest of the day, and whoever has not
eaten should fast (the whole day), because today is the Ashura (10th day
of Muharram).”

That very year the fast of Ramadan was ordained and the obligation to
fast on Ashura was abrogated, as has been claimed in other traditions
narrated in the same book. Still, reportedly, it carries much importance
as a voluntary fast.

Now let us look closely at these traditions:

***First:*** The Jews had their own calendar and months. There is no
logic in saying that they fasted on the 10th of Muharram - unless it
could be proved that this date always coincided with a Jewish day of
fast.

It was mentioned in my article, “*Martyrdom of Imam Husayn and the
Muslim and the Jewish Calendars*”[^2] that the first month of the Jews
(Abib, later named Nisan) coincided with Rajab of the Arabs. W. O. E.
Oesterley and Theodore H. Robinson have written that in Arabia, “the
most important of all the new-moon festivals was that which fell in the
month of Ragab (sic), equivalent to the Hebrew month Abib, for this was
the time when the ancient Arabs celebrated the Spring festival.”[^3]

Probably, in ancient times the two branches of Abraham’s house followed
the same system of intercalating an additional month 7 times in a cycle
of 19 years. And in this way the 7th Jewish month, Tishri I, coincided
with Muharram. And the Ashura of Muharram synchronized with 10th of
Tishri I, the Jewish Day of Atonement - a day of fast. In that article,
it was observed that the two calendars lost their synchronization when
Islam, in the 9th year of hijra, disallowed intercalation. But on deeper
consideration it transpired that that parity was lost long before the
advent of Islam, because the Arabs did not follow any mathematical
calculation in their intercalation. That was why the Muharram of the 2nd
year of Hijra began on 5th July, 623 C. E. (Al-Munjid, 21st ed.), months
before Tishri I (which always coincides with September-October).

Clearly, Ashura of Muharram in that year (or, for that matter, during
the Prophet’s whole life at Medina) had no significance whatsoever for
the Jews.

The question is: Why did they fast on that day?

***Second:*** The Jewish Midrashic literature relates the 10th day of
the 7th month (Yom Hakippurim - Day of Atonement) to the event of
bringing the tablets of the Covenant from Mount Sinai, as Dr. Mishael
Maswari-Caspi has written in his letter, quoted in my previous article,
mentioned above.

The question is: If the Jews had wanted to keep the long-lost
synchronization of Tishri I and Muharram in view, how was it that they
forgot to narrate this tradition to the Prophet?

**Third:** The month in which God delivered the Israelites from Pharaoh
was Abib (i.e. Rajab), as the Bible clearly says: “Observe the month of
Abib, and keep the Passover unto the Lord thy God: for in the month of
Abib the Lord thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.”[^4]

The question is: How could the Jews transfer an event of Abib
(originally coinciding with Rajab) to Muharram, in open defiance of
their Torah?

And ***lastly*** here is a point to ponder for the Muslims: The Prophet
(s.a.w) was sent with a religion to abrogate all previous religions and
Shariah. How was it that he deigned to imitate the custom of the Jews?

It is clear from above-mentioned facts that the Jews had no reason at
all to fast on Ashura of Muharram at that period; and this story, built
on that premise, is just that - a fiction. Obviously, it was invented by
a narrator who only knew that once upon a time Muharram coincided with
the Jews’ Tishri I; but was totally unaware of contemporary Jewish
religion and culture.

One feels constrained to mention here that this and other such
traditions were forged by camp followers of the Umayyads, after the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s), as a part of their campaign to turn the
10th of Muharram into a day of rejoicing. These traditions are of the
same genre as those which say that it was on the 10th of Muharram that
Noah’s ark rested on Mount Arafat, the fire became cool and safe for
Abraham, and Jesus ascended to the heaven. In the same category came the
traditions exhorting the Muslims to treat Ashura as a festival of joy,
and to store one’s food-grain on this very day as it would increase
one’s sustenance and bring the blessings of Allah to the household.

[^1]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, Vol. 3; Egypt ed.; Pg. 54, Mishkatul Masabih;
Delhi ed.; 1307 A.H.; Pg. l72

[^2]: Al-Serat, Vol. VI, No’s 3 & 4; Mohurrum 1401 Nov. 1980

[^3]: Hebrew Religion; S.P.C.K., London; 1955; Pg. 128

[^4]: Deuteronomy 16:1


