Preface to the First Edition
============================

*Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. And blessings and
salutations upon His best creature, Muhammad and his Purified Progeny.*

The present book is based on my articles on the various aspects of the
Karbala’ Tragedy. Most of these articles were written by me before
relocating to Africa, and were published in the periodicals of India and
Pakistan. When the Bilal Muslim Mission was established in Africa, it
became necessary to translate religious literature into English. An
important link of this chain is the Bi-monthly “The Light.”

I had also to write articles for the “As Serat” Journal of Muhammadi
Trust, London, on occasions related to Imam Husayn (a.s). Afterwards
many of these articles were translated into Urdu and published in Urdu
Magazines. These articles are also included in this collection.

The most respected Hujjatul Islam Maulana Sayyid Ahmad ‘Ali Abidi is
among those contemporary scholars who, keeping in mind the needs of the
present age, are performing unequalled services in the field of
religious propagation. The respected friend is one of the founders of
Noor-e-Islam Organization and the main driving force behind it. This
organization publishes books on important religious subjects. It has
also started correspondence course in Urdu in co-operation with Dar Rah
Haqq, Qom and Usool-e-Deen Organization, Qom.

This honorable friend had requested me to give a book of mine that can
be published from Noor-e-Islam. This collection is being published as
per this request.

The articles are arranged in such a manner that continuity of topics is
maintained. It is hoped that their study would illuminate the various
historical, religious and philosophical aspects of the tragedy of
Karbala’, and the readers would be able to understand, to a great
extent, this supreme sacrifice.

I had no idea that collecting old articles is such a tedious job. I am
thankful to the editors of Al-Jawwad (Benaras), Al-Waez (Lucknow),
Sarfaraz (Lucknow) and Razakar (Lahore) for providing me copies of the
articles from their archives; otherwise this collection would have been
incomplete. May Allah reward them with a good reward.

If this collection is liked by the literate people, the future editions
will also include articles on other topics, Insha Allah.

**Was Salaam**  
**Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi**  
**13 Rajab al-Murajjab 1401 AH**


