“And We Ransomed him with a Great Sacrifice”
============================================

His Eminence, Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) was already appointed at the post of
Messengership. He already donned the mantle of “divine friendship”
(Khalil), and seeking the vastness of his skirt the Beneficent Lord had
bestowed him with the pearls of merits and virtues. Today again,
providence wants to grant him a significant position but to achieve this
status he has to pass a strange test. He sees a dream for two
consecutive nights that he is slaughtering his one and only son in the
path of God. The scene of the third day is described in the following
words of the Holy Qur’an:

And when he attained to working with him, he said: O my son! surely I
have seen in a dream that I should sacrifice you; consider then what you
see. He said: O my father! Do what you are commanded; if Allah please,
you will find me of the patient ones.[^1]

This conversation clearly shows how steadfast these father and sons were
and how particular they were in obeying the command of Allah. The Holy
Qur’an is informing us that:

So when they both submitted and he threw him down upon his forehead, and
We called out to him saying: O Ibrahim! You have indeed shown the truth
of the vision; surely thus do We reward the doers of good:[^2]

Ibrahim (a.s) opened his eyes. My God! What is this? Ismail is standing
away from him and smiling; and in his place a ram is lying slaughtered.
Ibrahim (a.s) was perplexed. He though, “If I had seen my son rolling in
the dust and blood, and had been patient in obeying the command of
Allah, how great my status would have been in the court of Allah. It is
a pity that I could not scale those heights. May be this sacrifice is
not worthy of acceptance in the courts of the Almighty Lord and that is
why it has been neglected.” At that time the Holy Qur’an only tells us
that the statement of Almighty Allah supported him:

Most surely this is a manifest trial. And We ransomed him with a great
sacrifice.[^3]

In many commentaries of Qur’an the “great sacrifice” is said to denote
that same ram which was slaughtered in lieu of His Eminence, Ismail
(a.s).[^4] In the Shia commentary, *Tafsir Safi* a tradition of *Tafsir
Qummi* is also quoted on this topic: When Ibrahim (a.s) decided to
slaughter Ismail (a.s), the Almighty Allah made a beautiful ram its
ransom. It used to graze in Paradise since the last forty years prior to
this and it was not born of a female; the Almighty had created it with
His intention. All the animals that shall be slaughtered in Mina shall
all be ransom of Ismail. In this commentary many narrations on this
topic are quoted, however the Late Maulana Farman ‘Ali (t.s.) has
remarked under the translation of this verse that: “Though commentators
have construed a fat ram of Paradise by “the great sacrifice” this is
absolutely against reason, because even though it be of Paradise and no
matter how fattened it may be, in comparison to a prophet it cannot be
‘great’. In my view “the great sacrifice” could not be anything other
than the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s). That is why the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w) used to say: Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn.”[^5]

The respected Maulana has differed with the commentators in his writings
and with all due respect and reverence I also beg to differ with the
Maulana. No proof is required of the fact that the apparent explanation
of the Qur’anic verse is different from their hidden interpretation. It
is an established fact accepted by all sects of Islam that the Qur’an is
revealed with seven letters or seven layers of meanings. Thus it is
reported from Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari:

I asked the interpretation of some verse from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s)
and he informed me of it. Then I asked him about it again and he gave me
a different reply. So I told him: May I be sacrificed on you. Before
this day you had given a different reply to this question. He replied: O
Jabir! There is an interior of the Qur’an and an interior of the
interior. And it has an exterior and an exterior of the exterior. O
Jabir! Nothing is beyond the intellects of the people more than the
exegesis of Qur’an. Because for most of the verses the beginning portion
is about one thing and the last portion is about something else while
apparently the statement seems continuous and connected and different
meanings are construed from it.” Have you noted how clearly the Holy
Imam (a.s) has explained that there are multiple meanings of the Qur’an.
And if one believes in the apparent meaning it does not mean that one is
denying the inner interpretation. And neither does it mean that one who
believes in the inner meaning should reject the apparent explanation.
That is why Imam ‘Ali Reza (a.s) told one of his companions, “Do not
become like those who deny the apparent meanings of Qur’an.” After this
preface, I beg to state that when traditions have explained the “great
sacrifice” to also denote the ram that was slaughtered in lieu of Ismail
there is no reason that we should deny this apparent explanation only
because the esoteric interpretation says that the “great sacrifice”
denotes the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s). This denial cannot be
justified because on the basis of traditions and principles of faith we
are obliged to have faith and believe in both equally. The Maulana
himself had acted on the principle a little before the captioned verse.
Thus under the explanation of the verse:

…surely I have seen in a dream that…[^6]

He writes its interpretation:

A voice came, ‘You passed your test. Right now just offer the sacrifice
of this heavenly ram and We have ransomed it with a great sacrifice.’
Please note the underlined words on page 718 of the translation. Though
even I agree that of all the arguments that are presented to prove the
greatness of this ram not even one is valid and acceptable and none
proves the greatness of the ram over Ismail (a.s). For example let us
see the following justifications:

1 – Some people say that since the ram was slaughtered, it became great.
But I cannot as yet understand how merely being slaughtered endowed it
with greatness.

2 – Sometimes it is explained that its greatness is due to the fact that
Allah accepted it in lieu of the son of Ibrahim. But this argument
clearly shows that its greatness was based on the fact that it became
ransom of Ismail. Therefore it could not be superior to Ismail.

3 – It is also stated as a cause that since it was sent by the Almighty
God that is why it became great. Now the question is that if you are
asked who is greater, a ram sent by God or a Prophet sent by God, whom
would you select?

4 – The same question is applicable to those who say that it was the ram
of Habeel, which was alive in Paradise and it was sent at that time to
be the ransom of Ismail.

5 – It is a very significant thing to state that it had grazed in
Paradise for years and was fattened a great deal, therefore it was
“great.” If the aim of sacrifice is that the flesh and blood is used by
God for Himself then indeed the huge ram is “great” in comparison of
Ismail (a.s). But is not so, rather:

There does not reach Allah their flesh nor their blood, but to Him is
acceptable the guarding (against evil) on your part…[^7]

The Almighty Allah only sees sincerity and piety; thus indeed the
sacrifice of the one and only son had much more sincerity and piety than
slaughtering a ram. And a son who was born after 90 years of prayers and
was the justification of the words: “We give you the good news of a
boy…”[^8] and also the bearer of the effulgence of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w). The gist of the matter is that as far as the superiority of
Ismail to the ram is concerned I am in perfect agreement with the
honorable Maulana. Even though it be a ram of Paradise and however fat
it may be, but its superiority to prophets is impossible. Let us however
examine this matter from another angle. Is it not possible that in
tradition where the ram is said to be “great sacrifice” there is no
issue of its comparison with His Eminence, Ismail (a.s)? And this
comparison is only the product of our imagination? Is it necessary to
construe that it only means “greater than Ismail”? Can it not be
construed that it denotes “great in itself” or “greater than other
animals”? Would it be against eloquence? The fact is that no trace of
comparison with His Eminence, Ismail (a.s) is found in the traditions.
Rather they are content to just state the greatness of the ram itself
and they inform us that the ram was born without the medium of parents
by the command of God and grazed in Paradise for forty years and the
Almighty Allah had created it only to save the life of Ismail (a.s). In
this regard it possesses a superiority over all animals and that is why
it is called “great.” This was the apparent explanation and the inner
exegesis indeed says that it refers to the great martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (a.s). Allamah Abdullah Yusuf ‘Ali has also confessed this in his
translation and commentary of this verse. I am not quoting his writing
for the sake of brevity. In the same way whatever Maulana Farman ‘Ali
has written about this matter has already been quoted by us above. Even
our Zakireen[^9], when they see that the “great sacrifice” refers to the
martyrdom of Husayn (a.s) they become needless of more contemplation and
instantly translate that: We have made the sacrifice of Husayn as the
ransom of Ismail and on the basis of this translation they construct
their whole speech (Majlis). They discover such corners of virtues and
calamities that even the stoniest heart could not, but be affected by
it. Though only this much is correct in this translation that the great
sacrifice denotes the sacrifice of Husayn (a.s). The first objection
that applies to this translation is that a ransom is always of lesser
value and significance than the ransomed object/person. It does not
befit the people of reason that they sacrifice a thing of more value to
save something of lesser value. And here the sacrifice is said to be
ransomed by the “great sacrifice” or in his words Imam Husayn (a.s) is
taken as ransom of Ismail, which is not in any way acceptable because
the Infallible Imams (a.s) are universally believed to be superior to
all prophets except the Last Prophet (s.a.w). Therefore the translation
is absolutely wrong. The reply given to this objection is that at that
time Ismail (a.s) carried in his loins the seeds of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) and Lady Fatima Zahra (a.s) and also all the Infallible Imams
among whom Imam Husayn (a.s) was also included and were Ismail
slaughtered at that time, it would have destroyed the seeds of all the
Imams. Therefore Imam Husayn (a.s) did not become only the ransom of
Ismail (a.s), but he became the ransom of this whole chain of whom he
was also a part, and there is nothing wrong according to reason if a
part is sacrificed for the whole. The statement of Maulana Farman ‘Ali
in the margins that: That is why the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) used to remark
that ‘Husayn is from me and I am from Husayn’ also most probably denotes
the same thing and he has indicated towards this same reply. These
justifications indeed entertain a religious gathering but the actual
problem is not solved. Just suppose even if we ignore this question it
still remains unsolved that when the aim of the sacrifice was fulfilled
and the sincerity and steadfastness of Ibrahim and Ismail (a.s) passed
the test and the life of Ismail was also saved, then what was the need
of presenting a ransom? Apart from this, we should also note that the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) was destined much before the incident of
Ismail (a.s) and the Almighty Allah had also hinted it on different
occasions. Thus His Eminence, Adam (a.s), His Eminence, Nuh (a.s), and
His Eminence, Ibrahim (a.s) had already been informed about the event of
Karbala’ before the occurrence of this incident (of Ismail). Then
keeping in mind this point how far is it justified to say that the
martyrdom Imam Husayn (a.s) was made the ransom of Ismail’s slaughter?
Now I do not wish to keep the readers in further suspense. I present the
same narration according to which the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) is
said to denote the “great sacrifice.” (And indeed it denotes thus!) So
that it becomes clear what the intention of the narration is and what
the people have construed it to mean.

Fazl narrates that he heard Imam ‘Ali Reza (a.s) say: When the Almighty
Allah commanded Ibrahim (a.s) to slaughter the ram that was sent in
place of his son, Ismail, Ibrahim (a.s) wished he had not been commanded
to slaughter the ram and he had been allowed to slaughter Ismail with
his own hands so that he had experienced a grief a father feels on
slaughtering ones own beloved son and in this way he would have become
eligible for the rewards of such grief stricken people. Thus Allah
revealed to him: O Ibrahim! Who is most beloved to you among all the
creatures? Ibrahim (a.s) replied, “O my Lord! None among Your creatures
is as much beloved to me as Your beloved, Muhammad.” Thus revelation
came asking him: Is he more precious to you or your own self? He said
that he was more beloved to him than his own self. Then he was asked
whether he (Muhammad’s) son was more beloved to him or his own son
(Ismail)? Ibrahim (a.s) replied, “His (Muhammad’s) son is more beloved
to me. At that time the Almighty Allah informed, “Would you be more
aggrieved upon his oppressive slaughter or upon the slaughter of your
son by your hands under My orders?” Ibrahim (a.s) said that he would be
more aggrieved on the slaughter of the Prophet’s son at the hands of
enemies. Then the Almighty Allah informed him that a group would think
that they are from the nation of Muhammad and after Muhammad they would
unjustly slay his son like a ram is slaughtered. And those people would
become eligible for divine wrath due to this act. Hearing this incident,
Ibrahim (a.s) became restless and his heart became aggrieved and began
to weep.

At that time the Almighty Allah revealed: O Ibrahim! The grief you would
have suffered due to slaughtering Ismail with your own hands, We have
ransomed it with this restlessness that you experienced due to Husayn
and his slaying and I have bestowed you with the highest position of the
grief stricken people; and that is the aim of the divine saying:

And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice.[^10]

You must have noted what the tradition says. Read the narration and
think upon its explanation. Does it say that Allah made the sacrifice of
Husayn (a.s) as ransom of the slaughter of Ismail? After writing this
tradition, Allamah Majlisi has also explained it and first of all he has
mentioned the objection of the lesser value of the ransom and the
greatness of Imam Husayn (a.s). Then he has stated the same point, which
we have stated in our forgone discussion. However after that he says: It
is not stated in this tradition that the Almighty Allah made Husayn the
ransom of Ismail, therefore there is no scope of objection about ransom.
Rather it says that the Almighty Allah ransomed the grief of Ibrahim
(a.s) he would have experienced by slaughtering Ismail by his
restlessness and weeping upon Husayn (a.s). Then he says: Obviously on
the basis of this tradition the “ransom” here does not denote ransom in
the real sense. It only denotes giving something in exchange because His
Eminence, Ibrahim (a.s) was regretting that he had missed the reward of
grieving for his son. Therefore the Almighty gave him in its place a
thing that was more rewarding and superior, that is the grief on the
sufferings of Imam Husayn (a.s).

The gist of the matter is that the martyrdom of Husayn (a.s) was a
pre-destined event. It did not occur to save Ismail from slaughter.
Therefore the objection is not applicable that the ransom must be of
lesser value than the ransomed thing.

Towards the end I would also like to point out that if the ‘b’ in ‘bi
zibhin azeem’ is taken to be article of causation it would denote ransom
in the true sense. However, under such circumstances would it become the
cause of the ransom and not ransom itself. That is, it would mean that
due to the “great sacrifice” We have given the ransom of Ismail and
saved him because if Ismail had been slaughtered, Imam Husayn (a.s)
would not have come into existence. Therefore to save him, Ismail was
saved through the ram. Allamah Majlisi has also suggested this
interpretation in *Biharul Anwar*. The aim of the Allamah is that if the
ransom is taken in its actual connotation, we would have to consider
‘bi’ as the ‘bi’ of causation. And if it is not considered causative we
would have to accept that the pronoun of ‘ha’ contains a metaphor and
also the ransom would have to be considered synonymous to “replacement.”
Hopefully the inner interpretation of this verse has become clear for
the readers.

Now it remains to be seen why the Almighty Allah has honored the
martyrdom as a “great sacrifice.” By comparing it to other events from
the aspect of the loftiness of the aim, the importance of the events,
the comprehensiveness of the consequence and its effectiveness it could
be shown that a sacrifice greater than this had neither been offered
before nor is there any possibility that it shall be done even in the
future. But since all such discussion here would prolong the article so
much that no space would remain for other articles in al-Jawwad Journal,
I refrain from the same. However, it need not be mentioned that this is
just a preface to a deeper understanding of Karbala’ Tragedy.

The Great Sacrifice
-------------------

There are so many misunderstandings among the Muslims regarding the
verse: “And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice,” that no other verse
of Qur’an is equal in this aspect. I had written an article in al-Jawwad
Muharram Special Issue on the topic of this same verse. In that treatise
I had explained and investigated all the aspects of the verse in the
light of traditions and narrations and explained how the status and
position of Imam Husayn (a.s) is so high and lofty that he could not be
considered as a ransom of Prophet Ismail (a.s). According to the view of
Allamah Majlisi (vide *Biharul Anwar)* Imam Husayn (a.s), the Chief of
the Martyrs is the cause of the ransom itself. In his view the actual
connotations of the verse is that: Due to the great sacrifice We saved
Ismail by ransoming him. That is, because the Chief of the Martyrs was
supposed to appear in the progeny of Ismail (a.s) and if he had been
slaughtered, this effulgence would not have come into existence, the
Almighty God saved Ismail (a.s) and in his lieu the ram was slaughtered.
Hence the question arises that many innocent lives were taken and blood
spilled after Prophet Ismail (a.s). Many Prophets of Bani Israel were
killed at the hands of the oppressors and the verse of Qur’an proves it:

…and killed the prophets unjustly…[^11]

Then what is the reason that only Imam Husayn (a.s) should be taken as
the evidence of this verse? However by studying carefully the words of
the verse it becomes clears that here it does not merely denote the
killing of an innocent soul in the path of Allah. Rather it denotes that
special condition of killing that is referred to as “the Great
Sacrifice.” It is obvious that no proof could be given about those
honorable prophets that they were “slaughtered.” Only Prophet Yahya
(a.s) is able to fill the criterion and his similarity to Imam Husayn
(a.s) extends to the fact that that his severed head was also placed in
a tray and presented to a king. However first of all his circumstances
can hardly be compared to the incidents of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s), so how could it be greater than the sacrifice of Imam Husayn
(a.s)? Secondly the interpretation of Allamah Majlisi shows that the
great sacrifice was to occur in the progeny of Ismail (a.s) and it is
not connected to anyone from Bani Israel. Otherwise for its protection
there was no need to save the life of Ismail (a.s). Therefore, Prophet
Yahya (a.s) can never be the evidence of this verse. Let us now see
which murder in the progeny of Ismail (a.s) is such that it could be
called as “the great sacrifice” and its greatness should also be
absolutely proved.

In the progeny of Ismail (a.s) quite later on, we notice the incident of
Abdullah Ibn Abdul Muttalib, who was going to be slaughtered in the way
of Allah and Abdul Muttalib was fully prepared to slaughter him in order
to fulfill his vow. However his mother and other people of Mecca
objected to it and restrained him from such a course of action and thus
the question of a ransom arose. The drawing of lots started with ten
camels and always the name of Abdullah was drawn. Until the lots were
cast for 100 camels and Abdullah and then it was drawn for the 100
camels and in this way Abdullah was saved from being slaughtered at that
time, just as Prophet Ismail (a.s) had escaped the slaughtered. Due to
this event the Islamic religious law has stipulated 100 camels as the
penalty of willful murder.

In any case, Prophet Ismail and after him Abdullah, both were fully
prepared to be slaughtered but Providence saved them for divine wisdom.
That is why the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) used to say: I am the son of two
slaughtered ones (sacrifices). After this event if any incident in the
progeny could be termed as “the great sacrifice” and which is in its
fullest sense, is that of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s). This
divine wisdom is worth contemplation that even though Imam Husayn (a.s)
had suffered so many physical and emotional wounds that were alone
sufficient to cause death, the connection between him and life was not
severed until the prophecy was fulfilled to the letter. So much so, that
the accursed Shimr committed the heinous act that caused furor in the
earth and the heavens. And the trustworthy Jibraeel announced from the
skies: Know that! Husayn has been slaughtered in Karbala’!

In any case, in this essay, I would like to briefly describe the events
of Ismail (a.s) and Imam Husayn (a.s) and draw a comparison between them
to point out why the Almighty Allah has honored the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (a.s) by the lofty title of “the great sacrifice.” And also
whether the events of the martyrdom and the circumstances of the
slaughter of Imam Husayn (a.s) are really worthy of this title or not.
Although I know that if any scholar takes up the task of writing on this
topic, even after writing reams and reams he would confess that he has
not been able to do justice to the subject matter.

And inspite of this I have dared to write about it. I think that so what
if my writing could not show the “great sacrifice” in the true light. At
least it would be a proof of my daring of unbounded love. Anyway, I
would restrict this essay only to those topics that are common, if only
in name, to Prophet Ismail and Imam Husayn (a.s). It is obvious that as
much the causes of peace of the heart and leisure keep on decreasing and
as much they increase spiritual pain and physical discomfort as much the
greatness of the slaughtered one shall go on increasing. Slaughter is
itself the greatest pain and in addition to it the presence of other
pains enhances its greatness. Let us now, in the light of this view,
cast a brief glance on both the events from their beginning to the end.

### (1) Cause of the slaughter

Prophet Ismail (a.s) was being slaughtered by the command of Allah and
he was even aware of it. His words as recorded in Qur’an: “…do what you
are commanded…”[^12] prove my assertion that he himself had also given
the permission. Therefore his killing was not based on injustice and
neither could he be called an oppressed one. On the other hand the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) was such a great cruelty whose equal
could not be found since the inception of the created world until
Qiyamat. His Eminence, Ibrahim (a.s) was going to slaughter Ismail (a.s)
for the pleasure of God and the words: “Thus do We reward the doers of
good.”[^13] have given him the certificate of acceptance also. On the
other hand the killers of Husayn (a.s) were cutting off his parched
throat to gain the proximity of Yazid. They did not care that through
this deed they would become eligible for a painful chastisement. They
slaughtered Husayn (a.s) and earned the displeasure of Allah, they slit
the heart of the Prophet and injured the feelings of Lady Fatima (s.a.).
They made a crack in the foundation of Islam. They blemished the face of
humanity. They shattered the screens of civility and ethics and insulted
humanity. They proved true by spilling innocent blood, the fear of the
angels when they had said:

What! Wilt Thou place in it such as shall make mischief in it and shed
blood…[^14]

### (2) The Slaughtered One

The one who was slaughtering Ismail (a.s) was his own respected father
whose love and affection for his son could be gauged even if we ignore
his perfect humanity, prophethood and friendship of God, just by the
fact that Ismail (a.s) was fruit of his prayers of 99 years. Until that
time Ismail (a.s) was his only child and all his future hopes were
connected to him alone. He was supposed to be his support in his old
age. He was the light of his eyes. He was the strength of his heart and
the achievement of his life. In such circumstances, how gentle he would
have been in using the knife could be understood by any sensible person.
On the other hand, the killers of Imam Husayn (a.s) were such that
instead of mercy and gentleness their hearts were filled with cruelty
and mercilessness. Instead of any love and regard in their eyes they
were having utter shamelessness and their tongues, instead of softness
and kindness had hardness and sharpness. They were deadly enemies and
were utterly shameless. They were enemies of ethics. In their view the
meaning of humanity was only limited to the glitter of gold and silver.
And this glitter had perplexed their eyes so much that they did not
flinch in making a six-month infant a target for arrows. How can any
mercy and caution be expected from such people? The events testify that
they did not rest content only to slaughter Husayn (a.s). They put into
practice all the atrocities that a human mind can imagine. Apparently
from this aspect also the greatness of the sacrifice of Husayn
increases.

### (3) Tools of Slaughter

Religious law commands that before slaughter the instrument should be
sharpened adequately so that the slaughtered one has to undergo minimum
pain. Apart from this, His Eminence, Ibrahim (a.s) was an affectionate
father as mentioned above therefore it goes without saying that he must
have sharpened the knife as much as possible. However in Karbala’, where
other rules of human behavior were ignored, the sword used to severe his
holy head was so blunt that according to famous traditional reports, it
took twelve slashes before it could complete its job. In addition to
this, another aspect of the greatness of Husayn (a.s) is that even if
Ismail (a.s) had been slaughtered, only a single stroke would have been
used for it and his body would have received only a single wound.
However, for the killing of Husayn (a.s), which attack was such that it
had not been used hundreds of times? Swords, daggers, arrows, spears,
maces, stones, burning pieces of wood, ridicules. In other words, every
instrument that had been invented to injure the body and soul until that
time, all were employed for Imam Husayn (a.s). Such was the propensity
of the injuries inflicted upon the purified body of the Holy Imam that
according to famous traditions only the front portion of his body had
1951 wounds.

### (4) Method of Slaughter

Regarding Ismail (a.s) the Holy Qur’an says:

…he threw him down upon his forehead…[^15]

It means that Ibrahim (a.s) made Ismail (a.s) lie down sideways so that
his cheek touched the earth in the same way as a ram is laid for
slaughter. This is done in such a way so that there is ease in cutting
the neck and it is least painful way of severing the head. Mulla Mohsin
Faiz has explained it in the above way. On the other hand the manner in
which Imam Husayn (a.s) was beheaded was such that no tongue has the
strength to speak about it and no pen could summon the courage to
describe it. It is sufficient to say that Imam Husayn (a.s) is given the
special title of: ‘One slaughtered at the nape.’ and how painfully the
head is severed from the body by this method cannot be imagined by
anyone.

### (5) Condition of welcoming death

Ismail (a.s) accepted the command of slaughter, which even though it
would have granted a lofty position to him and his respected father, he
still considered it a calamity and trouble; that is why he said:

…if Allah please, you will find me of the patient ones.[^16]

Saying so he announced his patience, which is restricted to troublesome
circumstances. On the other hand, Imam Husayn (a.s) and his companions
considered their killing and slaughter, which was neither under the
command of Allah nor due to some retaliation or penalty, as solely for
the pleasure of God and on the basis of the steadfastness of their truth
a mercy, as the following tradition indicates:

“The condition of Husayn (a.s) and some of his special companions was
such that as calamities continued to befall them, their countenances
shone more and more and their limbs and organs expressed absolute peace
and comfort and the soul continued to proceed on the stages of
peace.[^17] This is regarding some special companions, if the general
condition of all the companions and relatives is to be seen one could
read the following words of another traditional report, which describes
the conversation on the eve of Ashura day:

The Holy Imam said, “All of you shall be killed tomorrow and none shall
be spared.” All said, “Thanks be to Allah, that He bestowed us the honor
to be slain with you.”

On the basis of such steadfastness and daring in being killed we are
compelled to say that the incident of Husayn (a.s) is not only great but
it is the “greatest” such that the history of the world has failed to
provide us with its equal.

### (6) Condition of the slaughtered one

It is the command of the religious law that before the slaughter the
beast of slaughter must be fed and watered adequately. Apart from this
Ibrahim (a.s) himself wanted to provide every sort of comfort as much as
was in his power, for the last time for his son. That is why at the time
of leaving the house he had him fed to satiation. He asked Her Eminence,
Hajrah to give him a bath and dress him in nice clothes and to comb his
hair and apply kohl to his eyes. In other words before the supposed
slaughtered, Ismail (a.s) got the opportunity to become content by way
of personal appearance and comfort. However, what a pity! The
slaughtered one of Nainawa (Husayn), his children, relatives,
companions, ladies and guests; leave alone comfort and satiation, they
were even deprived of the basic necessities of life, like water. In what
a nice way the Kufans hosted their guests? Not even a drop of water was
allowed for three days and the sound of “Thirst, thirst” used to emanate
from the tents.

An Urdu poet has described this in the following lines:

*The king had commanded that people may drink the water*

*As also the horses, riders and camels.*

*Do not prevent them even if the infidels drink it.*

*But do not allow any water to the beloved of Fatima.*

Although the Almighty Lord has given the river (of Paradise) in the
dower of the mother of this same thirsty one.

There Her Eminence, Hajrah had combed the hair and here the hair that
Sayyida had arranged at some time were now filled with desert sand.
There special clothes were used to dress Ismail (a.s) and here at the
time of departure, Imam Husayn (a.s) requested his sister to get the old
tattered dress so that it may remain safe from the hands of the
plunderers after his martyrdom.

### (7) Circumstances surrounding the slaughter

Prophet Ismail (a.s) went for the slaughter in an absolutely peaceful
mood. He was not suffering from the shock of separation of the helpers
and relatives. He was not aggrieved that he had been unable to bury the
last remains of his companions. He was not dreading whether after he was
dead he would be buried or not. He was not surrounded by enemies from
all sides from whom there could be any chance of disrespect after
getting killed. He had no apprehension as to how the ladies of his
family would be dealt with. He was yet a child. He neither had family
nor children, neither siblings nor any companions and friends. He was
absolutely alien to those relationships. He was at peace that he had
come from home with his father and only his mother remained at home;
regarding whom he was certain that his father was present to comfort
her. He also was sure that his dead body would be buried with all
respect and honor. But did Imam (a.s) also have this assurance? Did his
preceding circumstances make him also so assured and content? Was he
also calm regarding the events that were to follow his martyrdom? Before
his eyes lay his relatives and helpers, his beloved ones, his supports
and his assistance and he had laid them down in a tent to sleep forever.
Now, who knew what would happen to those corpses? Who knew he would be
buried? The knowledge of the unseen (Ilme Ghaib) which is supposed to be
a meritorious qualification of Imamate, let me say without any intention
of causing disrespect that in those circumstances it was the cause of
great torture. He must be seeing that after him the tents shall be put
to fire. Coverings would be snatched away from the heads of Zainab and
Umme Kulthum. A thorny collar shall be put around the neck of his ailing
son. This leader of the world would be given the post of a camel driver.
Twelve necks shall be tied up in a single rope. The ladies of his house
shall be taken around from town to town with heads uncovered on camels
without saddles. In the bazaars of Kufa and Syria they would be
exhibited in public. They shall be presented in a gathering where wine
was drunk. They shall be kept in prisons. If they wept they shall be
punished with canes. If they tried to remove thorns they shall be
pricked with spear points. They shall be made targets of ridicule. They
shall be scolded and spoken to in acerbic words. And in addition to all
this there are many other calamities that just their imagination is
sufficient to make any sensible person shiver. However, Husayn (a.s), in
spite of knowing all this, neither he feared death nor he hesitated to
move towards it. There is no doubt that in such circumstances it was
only Husayn (a.s) who could have welcomed death with a smiling
countenance. Actually there is no similarity at all between the
circumstances of Ismail (a.s) and Imam Husayn (a.s) that a comparison
could be drawn between them.

### (8) Consequences of the Slaughter

After these prefaces and events, if we contemplate upon this matter that
from the aspects of consequences, which of the two events was having
more importance, we would realize that even if the incomplete slaughter
of Ismail (a.s) had reached completion it would not have served any
other purpose except increasing the personal honor and status of Ibrahim
and Ismail (a.s). And in the court of the Almighty their honor would
have scaled heights beyond imagination. That is the scope of the effect
of its benefits would have remained limited only to two persons. On the
other hand, the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) was having a great and
magnificent effect. There is no doubt that due to this martyrdom, the
status of Imam Husayn (a.s) also increased but it is only one aspect. If
you consider the second aspect, the beneficial effects of this sacrifice
were for all humanity and the whole world has gained from its
consequences. This sacrifice was like the harkening to the plaintive
call of Islam in distress. The barge of Islam was about to sink in dry
land. Husayn (a.s) conveyed it to safety with the gush of his blood. The
tree of humanity had begun to dry up with the heat of satanic
handiworks. Husayn (a.s) watered it with his own blood and the blood of
his companions so that it may not wither away. He watered it so well
that there is no possibility of its extinction until the Day of
Judgment. The benefits gained from the sacrifice of Husayn (a.s) are not
restricted to Husayn and his companions. Rather they have encompassed
all humanity.

Apart from this, the benefit derived from the slaughter of Ismail (a.s)
was achieved merely through the readiness for slaughter. Both father and
son, agreed respectively, to slaughter and be slaughtered. All the
preparations were made and it was certain that they would practically do
it the way it was supposed to be done. All this became very much clear
even before the actual action. That is why, the Almighty Allah abrogated
the slaughter after their intention became obvious, saying:

You have indeed shown the truth of the vision…[^18]

He declared that He had achieved what He intended. Now if the slaughter
were really to be taken to completion, it would be a useless act. It
means that looking closely, no benefit was related to the slaughter in a
way that it could only be achieved by its completion. In other words you
can say that the slaughter itself was of no use. Whatever benefit was
desired it was only related to the willingness of slaughter. On the
other hand, the benefits of the great sacrifice of Karbala’ could not
have been obtained without the completion of this sacrifice. Benefits
and consequences of the sacrifice of Imam Husayn (a.s) that are
mentioned above, all of them depended on the sacrifice of Husayn (a.s).
In any case if the worth of a thing is estimated through its
consequences and effects, if the actual status of deeds and actions
depends on their results we would have to agree that ignoring other
previous effects if you only consider the end results you have to say
that the sacrifice of Imam Husayn (a.s) was indeed the reality and
truth. It is not even remotely connected to exaggeration and poetry.
Indeed this event is deserving from all angles that it should be given
the certificate of perfection and along with the “great morals” of the
paternal grandfather (the Prophet) the “great sacrifice” of the grandson
(Husayn) should be recorded in Qur’an until the Day of Judgment because:

…Surely thus do We reward the doers of good.[^19]

Communal Sacrifice
------------------

Prior to Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) there was no concept of determination to
bear difficulties with cooperation, to say farewell to comfort and
luxury in a communal manner for the sake of religious propagation and to
sacrifice ones honor; there was no such thing in the world of religion.
An impartial glance at the history of religions shows that the sacrifice
of Ismail was the first incident when the family members of a Prophet
helped him shoulder to shoulder to fulfill his aims according to his
directions. Only three famous prophets had passed before this: (1)
Prophet Adam (2) Prophet Idris and (3) Prophet Nuh (a.s). Apart from
this we find the name of Prophet Lut (a.s) among the contemporaries.

There was no question of sacrifice before Prophet Adam (a.s). Although
he had to try his best to impart training for his children. But in this
aspect also he was all alone. His children also did not cooperate with
him to the extent that could be expected in that simple age. The blatant
murder committed by Qabeel is a clear proof of the absence of such
cooperation. Lady Hawwa (Eve) also is not recorded to have presented any
extraordinary efforts or sacrifice worthy of mention. At least we have
no sources for such information.

Prophet Idris was also alone in the Herculean task of religious
propagation. No clear or unclear proof can be presented of the
cooperation of his family members.

Now the age of Prophet Nuh (a.s) arrived. He was faced with the task of
reforming a community that was absolutely wayward. He expended all his
powers for a period of 950 years to correct his nation and in lieu of
the labors of inviting towards good he was given all sorts of
calamities. Even stones were showered on him. He was targeted with
malicious taunts and ridicules. However, all these things were aimed at
Prophet Nuh (a.s) alone. His family members were absolutely unrelated
with all this. Leave alone the mention of his “unrighteous son” who no
more remained from his family. I am talking about his believer sons,
Saam, Haam and Yafith. The list of their virtues is only limited to the
fact that they had only brought faith. They were also similar to those
eighty sincere people who had brought faith. It cannot however be said
that the sons of Nuh (a.s) cooperated in his work and shared his
difficulties. He had a wife who spied for the infidels and was a
confidant of the enemies. The Holy Qur’an says:

Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve the wife of Nuh and
the wife of Lut: they were both under two of Our righteous servants, but
they acted treacherously towards them so they availed them naught
against Allah, and it was said: Enter both the fire with those who
enter.[^20]

This verse also provides the judgment about the family of Prophet Lut
(a.s). He had no male issue, so no help could be expected from this
quarter and the Holy Qur’an has already told us about the condition of
his spouse. In other words, he was also alone in the field of religious
propagation. That is why he had uttered in a sad tone:

Ah! That I had power to suppress you, rather I shall have recourse to a
strong support.[^21]

Keeping these circumstances in mind, we can add to the merits and
superiorities to Prophet Ibrahim (a.s), the fact that he was the first
Prophet who received total cooperation to fulfill a divine mission. The
first display of this was at the time of the sacrifice of Ismail. The
Almighty Allah says:

And when he attained to working with him, he said: O my son! Surely I
have seen in a dream that I should sacrifice you; consider then what you
see.[^22]

By saying, “consider then what you see” and by finding out the opinion
of Ismail (a.s), Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) made his achievement a joint
achievement of himself and his son. Otherwise it would have remained an
achievement of only Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) and Prophet Ismail (a.s) would
not have got any credit for it.

In the present form just as this incident shows the high divine
recognition of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) in the same way it is a mirror of
the self-discipline, high character, patience and forbearance of Ismail
(a.s).

Anyway, this event was the foundation stone of cooperation and help of
family members of a prophetic household with the prophets in the path of
God, which was placed at the hands of Ismail (a.s). Those who succeeded
him after this, continued to build upon this.

The helpers of Prophet Musa (a.s) from his relatives did not remain
confined to the four walls of his house. The whole tribe of Bani Israel
assembled under his leadership. Historical events and Qur’anic
statements prove this fact.

No progress worth the mention took place in this regard during the
period of Prophet Isa (a.s) because he was sent only as a Prophet for
Bani Israel. His job, according to the New Testament was only that he
brings back to the flock “the lost sheep of Bani Israel.” That is why
his helpers and companions remained limited to the Bani Israel. During
the holy period of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) the building of cooperation
and partnership arose one more level, and not only do we find the family
members of the Prophet among helpers in religion and only his tribes
people but many people of other tribes are also seen. Except for Banu
Umayyah, Bani Teem and Bani Adi there was hardly any tribe whose
representatives did not cooperate and help in spreading the Islamic
faith and strengthening it with their lives and property even though
they may have been less in number.

However the aim of this writing is not to prove that every person who
sat in the company of the Prophet was a helper. Indeed it would have
been an occasion of great pride for me if the incidents had given me the
chance to do so. I would have boasted to all the religions of the world
that my Prophet was such that those who benefited from his company,
those who obtained light from the effulgence of his guidance and those
who saw the miracle of his leadership were such people that each was the
devotee of truth, an ardent follower of Divine Recognition and one who
considered every material thing inferior in the path of Allah and one
who was ready to sacrifice his life and property over the command of
God. But if I claim thus, my conscience would falsify me and there would
be no solution for me except to bow down my head in shame.

Indeed, as far as the Prophet had raised the edifice of sacrifices,
after that the only destination remained was that all the supporters
that were there and all the friends he was having, all of them should be
having the same opinion and same caliber. But for this purpose another
half a century was required after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) and
there was need for the plains of Karbala’.

At last that day also arrived when the actual and perfect meaning of
“Communal Sacrifice” was going to be presented to the world with all its
fine points. Husayn (a.s) came to the plains of Karbala’ and along with
him brought the aged, the young, the middle aged, children, women, men
his relatives and strangers, Arabs and non-Arabs. He brought with him
people of all ages and gender. Fathers, sons, uncles, nephews, maternal
uncles, brothers, sisters, husband-wife, people of the family,
tribesmen, co-religionists. In other words, people of every relationship
were represented in Karbala’. All came carrying the same feelings in the
heart. All came carrying the same longing for sacrifice. The companions
of Husayn (a.s) had attached their hearts to the heart of Husayn (a.s)
with some unknown magnetism, and that is why every heartbeat of Husayn
(a.s) was creating turmoil in their hearts. They had made their vision
the mirror of the vision of Husayn. That is why the center of their view
was the point of view of Husayn (a.s). They had given the rein of their
thoughts in the hands of Husayn (a.s), and they used to think only that
which was according to the wish of Husayn (a.s). They had entrusted
their actions and character under the actions and character of Husayn
(a.s) and they did only what Husayn (a.s) did.

Ibrahim had given the opportunity to think and contemplate. Husayn (a.s)
had also presented the details of the consequences of the confrontation
to his companions. However, the responses were different. Saying: “You
will find me of the patient ones,” Ismail (a.s) gave opportunity for the
possibility that he considered the sacrifice a calamity for himself. But
if you read the responses of the companions of Husayn (a.s) you will
realize that they considered this sacrifice a welcome bounty. They were
eager to die in the path of God. They had an ardent desire to have
themselves beheaded for truth.

Imam Husayn (a.s) had reached a stage during his journey when slumber
overtook him. When he awoke, he was uttering the words: Indeed we are
for Allah and indeed we shall return to Him. His Eminence, ‘Ali Akbar
asked the reason for reciting the Qur’anic verse. He replied, “I have
heard a caller say: You are hastening forward and your death is
hastening to take you towards Paradise.” His Eminence, ‘Ali Akbar asked,
“O father! Are we not on truth?” The Imam replied, “Yes, son, by Allah,
we are on the truth.” Now ‘Ali Akbar replied with such a great certainty
and poise that his reply is sufficient to inculcate valor even in the
dead hearts. He said, “Dear father, then we are not in the least worried
of dying for the truth.”

On the eve of Ashura, Imam Husayn (a.s) released all his companions from
his oath of allegiance and Zuhair Qayn, His Eminence, Abbas, Muslim bin
Ausaja and many other companions and relatives representing all those
present over there expressed the firmness of their intention to help and
support the Imam (a.s). They emphatically declared this in forceful
words. Imam Husayn (a.s) had told them, “All of you are going to be
killed and none shall survive.” They replied happily, “Praise be to
Allah, Who bestowed us the honor to be martyred with you.” Such an
example has no equal in history of death. Anyway, this was a reply of
the elders and grown-ups. Now I would like to mention about that lad who
was more or less the same age of Ismail (a.s). That is, His Eminence,
Qasim, who was hardly thirteen at that time. When on the eve of Ashura,
Imam Husayn (a.s) prophesied the martyrdom of each person individually
and but intentionally omitted the name of His Eminence, Qasim, he became
restless and disconcerted and asked the Imam about it. Instead of
replying Imam (a.s) asked him, “How do you regard death?” Now compare
the response of this lad to that of Ismail (a.s). He replied
immediately, “Dear uncle, (I regard death) sweeter than honey.” Only
those who have taste could gauge the sweetness of the reply of this
young boy. We would have to agree that just as the sacrifice of Karbala’
had a wide scope of communal participation, in the same way the level of
enthusiasm of the participants was so high that its equal is not found
anywhere and it is beyond imagination.

In any case, Imam Husayn (a.s) and his companions came with zeal and a
united enthusiasm to the plains of Karbala’ to present their sacrifices.
All of them showed such unity and similarity in words and deeds that
Imam Husayn (a.s) had to confess this fact. Please recall that famous
statement of the Holy Imam on the Ashura eve. “Indeed, I do not know
whose companions were more loyal and better than mine. Or whose Ahl
al-Bayt were more righteous and kind. So, may Allah give you a good
recompense.”

Does this statement not announce that of all the buildings of sacrifice
that had been constructed so far, this one was the loftiest of them? And
events show that it was the last stage. The preface of sacrifice that
Ismail (a.s) had written on the plains of Mina by his submission and
will, it was concluded on the deserts of Karbala’ by Imam Husayn (a.s)
and his companions with their own blood. This was the brilliant and
effective end of that which had started with Ismail (a.s) and it was
absolutely astonishing and magnificent. The whole world feels those
facts and is compelled to confess its greatness. The world famous
Persian and Urdu poet of the Indian Peninsula, Allamah Iqbal Lahori says
regarding the ardent love for Almighty, which brought about this
communal sacrifice in the following words:

*“The end of it was Husayn*

*While its beginning was Ismail.”*

[^1]: Surah Saffat 37:102

[^2]: Surah Saffat 37:103-105

[^3]: Surah Saffat 37:106-107

[^4]: Tafsir Kabir, Vol. 7, Pg. 160, Malimut Tanzil, Pg. 759, Durre
Manthur, Vol. 5, Pg. 284

[^5]: Pg. 719, Urdu Translation of Holy Qur’an by Late Maulana Farman
‘Ali

[^6]: Surah Saffat 37:102

[^7]: Surah Hajj 22:37

[^8]: Surah Hijr 15:53

[^9]: Plural of Zakir, Speakers about the virtues of Ahle Bayt (a.s.)
and their afflictions, especially the Tragedy of Karbala’

[^10]: Surah Saffat 37:107

[^11]: Surah Baqarah 2:61

[^12]: Surah Saffat 37:102

[^13]: Surah Saffat 37:110

[^14]: Surah Baqarah 2:30

[^15]: Surah Saffat 37:103

[^16]: Surah Saffat 37:102

[^17]: Maniul Akhbar, quoted in Biharul Anwar

[^18]: Surah Saffat 37:105

[^19]: Surah Saffat 37:105

[^20]: Surah Tahrim 66:10

[^21]: Surah Hud 11:80

[^22]: Surah Saffat 37:102


