Prophecies Regarding the Tragedy of Karbala’ from Ancient Books
===============================================================

As much great an event is, as much it is worthy of mention. A great
proof of the importance of the tragedy of Karbala’ is also that not only
the humans, jinns and angels have kept its remembrance alive, the Lord
Creator of the Universe has continuously mentioned it in every time
period. And not only the remembrance remained established after the
event, it existed even before the event actually occurred and even
before the birth of the Chief of the Martyrs (a.s). And not only that,
it was present even before the creation of Adam. The Almighty mentioned
about it to His chosen servants and informed them of those terrible
events. The result derived from it is that the martyrdom of Husayn (a.s)
is so magnificent and significant in the view of the Lord that He likes
to mention it time and again. Under such circumstances, those who keep
this calamity fresh are actually acting in consonance with the desire
and will of the Almighty and walking the straight path. And one who
opposes its remembrance is acting against the divine practice.

In this article, I am going to quote in brief, prophecies present in the
books of Hindus, Zoroastrians, Jews and Christians regarding the events
of Karbala’. And since the future events have proved the veracity of
those prophecies there is no scope of doubt in their authenticity. This
is also an example of Divine Power that even though the people who came
later have made as much distortion in these books as they could, such
that their form has completely changed and at last originality remains
only in name, therefore abrogating these books, it became necessary for
God to send the last book whose protection He Himself guaranteed. In
spite of all those distortions, the prophecies regarding the last
Prophet and his progeny still survived in those books so that if anyone
contemplates upon these books with an unbiased mind he could reach the
Last Guide of Humanity.

Mention of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) in Hindu Scriptures
-----------------------------------------------------------------

*Bhaunik Puran* is a very ancient book of the Hindu religion. Its
translation was accomplished into Urdu by Maulavi Abdur Rahman Chishti
under the title of *Miratul Makhlooqaat.* This scholar was a prominent
Sunni intellectual, well versed with the Sanskrit language. He writes in
the preface to this book:

“I have read many of the Hindu books containing future events that were
written during the times of Jinns and terrestrial angels. I conducted
deep research into those books and found a book containing things in the
tongue of “Bashast.” In its “Uttarkhand” it clearly mentions about the
greatness and birth of His Eminence, Adam (a.s), our Prophet (s.a.w) and
his Purified Progeny. Mahadev had related those things to his wife
Parbati on Mount Kailash. And the saint “Bashast” Muni was engrossed in
prayers below that same mountain. Since he was greatly devoted to
Mahadev, he used to write down some of the things he heard from him.

This book contains all the events from the creation of Adam and the
incident of Cain and Abel upto the events surrounding the life of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). He has described the nobility of His
Eminence, Abdullah and even presented a detailed physical description of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w). After that Mahadevi says:

“After six thousand years, the Almighty (God) will create a wonderful
person among the children of Adam in Mundarne, which is between the
seas.[^1]…O Parbati, he will be from the loin of ‘Kant Bunjh’;[^2] and
he (Abdullah) will have the piety and knowledge of God like a river; so
(from that river) will emerge a pearl. And the name of his wife will be
‘Sank Rakhiya’[^3] And he (i.e. Abdullah) will have read three books;
and he will leave the fourth book after reading only: ‘Alif Lam Mim’…O
Parbati, he (i.e. Abdullah) will be a chief in his tribe; people from
all villages will come to his door and will follow him. (Abdullah’s son)
will have no fear of the creatures; he will be very brave and having the
knowledge of Allah, and his name will be ‘MAHAMAT’. People will be
astonished to see his style…And he will not worship as the people of his
tribe will be worshipping and he will tell the people that, “I have been
told by that Almighty and Only One (God) not to indulge in such
senseless worship; and I am not turning but to Allah; therefore, you
should follow me.”[^4] O Parbati, Mahamat will teach his own Shariat to
all the creatures, by abrogating all ways of worship and all previous
Shariats; and he will try to make all people follow him. Gradually,
countless people will come into his religion, and many of them will
reach God. And as people use our Sakh era, likewise, upto the end of
Kaljug (the last era) people will use the era of Mahamat.[^5]…O Parbati,
after him (after the death of Muhammad’s son) the Almighty who has none
like Him, will give a daughter[^6] to Mahamat who will be better than
1000 sons, and she will be very beautiful and matchless, and very
perfect in the worship of God. Never shall she utter any wrong, and she
will be protected from every sin—big or small; and through her father
she will reach nearer to God. That Almighty (God) will give two sons[^7]
to the daughter of Mahamat, both will be handsome and beloved of God,
strong, having the knowledge of God, courageous, brave and matchless in
the deeds of virtue. And the Almighty will not create, after them, any
human being having such perfection in hidden and known virtues.

The same two sons of Mahamat will be his successors; and they will have
numerous children; and they will bring people into the religion of
Mahamat day by day by their true arguments; and they will illuminate the
religion of Mahamat. And Mahamat will love them more than all his
people, even more than his own daughter. And these two sons will be
perfect in the religion of Mahamat; they will not do anything for their
own pleasure, and all their utterances and deeds would be for the
pleasure of the Almighty.

O Parbati, a few years after the death of Mahamat, some evil man will
unjustly murder these grandsons of Mahamat without any cause; just for
the sake of worldly greed; the whole world will become ‘headless’ by
their death. Their killers will be ‘Maliksh’ atheists, cursed in both
worlds; they will have no love for Mahamat and will never get
deliverance from ‘Nark’ (i.e. Hell). But in appearance, they will remain
in the religion of Mahamat, and gradually others also will follow them,
and stubbornly will do many deeds against the way of Mahamat and his
sons. Only a few people will remain on the path of Mahamat. Majority
will follow the path of those who killed the sons of Mahamat; yet in
appearance they will be called the followers of Mahamat; and in the last
days of ‘kaljug’ (last era) there will be many of those hypocrites and
they will create disturbance in the whole world.”

After that Mahadewji explains the appearance of Imam Mahdi; coming of
Qiyamat and arrival into Paradise of Lady Fatima together with her
followers.

The complete text of this portion is quoted by Maulana Rahat Husayn
Gopalpuri in his *Tafsir Anwarul Qur’an.*

The Karbala’ Tragedy in Zoroastrian Books
-----------------------------------------

Zoroaster or Zarathusht had been a Prophet of the Magians or Fire
Worshippers. His successor was Hakim Jamasp. He was a contemporary of
King Gustasp. This king had requested him to write in brief about the
happenings of the future. Thus the book that he compiled is famous as
*Jamasp Nama.* It was translated into Urdu by Mulla Wahidi, editor of
Nizamul Mashayakh, Delhi. Jamasp says, “Then some stars would gather
among whom from the children of Hashim, a young man shall be born. He
shall be of medium stature. He shall neither be fair complexioned nor
dark. He would be handsome, of pleasing speech and magical voice. He
would claim prophethood, the proof shall be established with the sword’s
edge. He shall put the chain of his religion around the necks of many
people. His religion shall spread to all the seven continents. He shall
be very fond of the fairer sex. None of his male children shall survive.
However, his progeny shall continue through his daughter.”

After that he describes the dominance of the Islamic faith. Then he
says:

“Some days after his demise, the Almighty God shall reach into the fifth
constellation. Due to the effect of this, there shall be disturbance in
his religion. His children shall be slain. His followers shall be made
to suffer terrible losses.”

After the above discourse he goes on to describe the signs of the birth
of the Last Prophet. The extinguishing of the fire in the fire temples,
the drying up of the river, etc. Then he further says,

“After the passing away of this Prophet, the stars shall assemble in the
terrestrial house of the constellation of Taurus. And the Lord shall
arise in Venus and the conjunction of Jupiter and Venus and the man
shall be in the eighth house. Venus along with the Sun shall be in the
eleventh house. At that time there shall be discord in this community.
Religion shall become a step-stone to rulership. People shall wage war
against his son-in-law and there shall be great bloodshed. This
son-in-law shall have two sons. One of whom shall be martyred by poison.
The second one would be martyred along with his best companions in a
desert. The opponent of the Prophet’s Progeny and the leader of those
transgressors shall be a man of low morals, weak body and aged. This
time is the period of the rule of the Saturn. Its effect is that whoever
supports the truth or tries to restore the rights of the deprived
people, would himself be destroyed and killed.”

Command of Old Testament to Commemorate Ashura Day
--------------------------------------------------

After the time of His Eminence, Musa (a.s) for many years the Jewish
calendar began from the month of Rajab, and Moharram was their seventh
month. Keeping in mind this point let us read the following verses of
Leviticus 23:

“And the Lord said to Moses, “Say to the people of Israel, In the
seventh month, on the first day of the month, you shall observe a day of
solemn rest, a memorial proclaimed with blast of trumpets, a holy
convocation. You shall do no laborious work; and you shall present an
offering by fire to the Lord.”

“And the Lord said to Moses, “On the tenth day of this seventh month is
the Day of Atonement; it shall be for you a holy convocation and you
shall afflict yourselves and present an offering by fire to the Lord.
And you shall do no work on this same day; for it is a day of atonement,
to make atonement for you before the Lord your God. For whoever is not
afflicted on this same day shall be cut off from his people. And whoever
does any work on this same day, that person I will destroy from among
his people. You shall do no work: it is a statute forever throughout
your generations in all your dwellings. It shall be to you a Sabbath of
solemn rest, and you shall afflict yourselves; on the ninth day of the
month beginning at evening, from evening to evening shall you keep your
Sabbath.”[^8]

Now we should contemplate upon this and decide that when before the
occurrence of the event the Almighty God had even commanded the Jews to
observe mourning from the evening of 9th of Muharram to the evening of
the 10th, and also warned them that one who did not follow this advice
shall be as if he has left their religion. Now that the event has
actually occurred is it not incumbent on the Muslim community more than
the Jewish community to observe the mourning? And if one fails to act
upon this, would he not be as if he has left this religion? Except for
those who in the words of Mahadewji: “Even though they pretend to be
friends of Mahamat.”

References in New Testament regarding the Martyrdom of Husayn (a.s)
-------------------------------------------------------------------

In the parlance of Christians, “New Testament” means “Injeel.” However,
it is not “Injeel” that was revealed to Prophet Jesus (a.s). It is a
collection of books and letters compiled by Christian scholars and
companions of Prophet Jesus. The last book of this collection is “The
Revelation to John” which is attributed to John the companion of Jesus.
It begins with the following words:

“The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show to his
servants what must soon take place; and he made it known by sending his
angel to his servant John.”[^9]

This book contains only allegories and similes. Christian scholars have
tried to write commentaries on this and offered explanations but some
points yet remain unexplained in their writings. Our scholars have also
interpreted it and it shows that the twelfth and thirteenth chapter
deals with the history of Islam from the birth of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w) to the end of the reign of Bani Umayyads. Hujjatul Islam,
Maulana Sayyid Rahat Husayn (t.s.) has explained it in the 15th preface
of his prefaces in his *Tafsir Anwarul Qur’an*. He has mentioned the
text of ‘revelations’ in the book and written its interpretation in the
margins. I have depended upon the author’s writings a great deal but
mentioned the interpretations of the revelations in brackets. Because it
would have been very inconvenient for the readers to read the text and
the interpretations separately. Thus, John says in the beginning of the
twelfth chapter of Revelations:

“And a great portent appeared in heaven, a woman (prophethood) clothed
with the sun (divine help was covering it), with the moon under her feet
(Lady Fatima), and on her head a crown of twelve stars (meaning the
twelve Imams would have authority in religion); she was with a child
(waiting for advent) and she cried out in her pangs of birth (the time
of advent was near), in anguish for delivery. And another portent
appeared in heaven; behold, a great red dragon (infidels of Quraish),
with seven heads and ten horns, and seven diadems upon his heads.[^10]
His tail swept down a third of the stars of heaven, and cast them to the
earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was about to bear a
child, that he might devour her child when she brought it forth; she
brought forth a male child, one who is to rule all the nations with a
rod of iron, but her child was caught up to God and to his throne, and
the woman fled into wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God,
in which to be nourished for one thousand two hundred and sixty days.

Now war arose in heaven, Michael and his angels fighting against the
dragon; and the dragon and his angels fought, but they were defeated and
there was no longer any place for them in heaven. And the great dragon
was thrown down, that ancient serpent, who is called the Devil and
Satan, the deceiver of the whole world – he was thrown down to the
earth, and his angels were thrown down with him. And I heard a loud
voice in heaven, saying, “Now the salvation and the power and the
kingdom of our God and the authority of Christ have come, for the
accuser of our brethren has been thrown down, who accuses them day and
night before our God. And they have conquered him by the blood of the
Lamb and by the word of their testimony, for they loved not their lives
even unto death (they got martyred in the propagation of faith).”[^11]

After more prophecies, the twelfth chapter comes to an end and the
thirteenth chapter begins with an account of Bani Umayyads. In this
portion, Abdul Malik Ibn Marwan who consolidated the Umayyad rule for
the second time is compared to a beast having ten horns and seven heads.
Explaining this in the seventeenth chapter, it is said that the seven
heads signify seven kings and the ten horns are also ten kings. Thus
altogether it adds upto seventeen rulers. And that beast is the eighth
ruler, who is born from the seventh one. Now please note that seven
rulers passed before Abdul Malik and the kingdom of Abdul Malik was a
result of their past kingdoms, otherwise he would not have been able to
achieve anything. Apart from this, he was born from the seventh ruler,
that is Marwan bin Hakam and thus he himself was the eighth ruler. And
after Marwan there were ten kings including Abdul Malik Ibn Marwan as
follows: (1) Abdul Malik Ibn Marwan (2) Walid bin Abdul Malik (3)
Sulaiman bin Abdul Malik (4) Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz (5) Yazid Ibn Abdul
Malik (6) Hisham Ibn Abdul Malik (7) Walid Ibn Yazid Ibn Abdul Malik (8)
Yazid Ibn Walid Ibn Abdul Malik (9) Ibrahim Ibn Walid Ibn Abdul Malik
(10) Marwan al-Himar. Thus this allegory and comparison perfectly fits
this clan. In addition to this at the end of this same thirteenth
chapter is the following sentence, “This calls for wisdom: Let him who
has understanding reckon the number of the beast, for it is a human
number, its number is six hundred and sixty-six (666).”

The following would show that the number 666 stands for the name of
Abdul Malik:

Abdul (76) Malik (121) Bin (52) Marwan (297) Bin (52) Hakam (68) = 666.

Anyway, I am quoting the relevant portions of the thirteenth chapter of
Revelation to John 13:

“And I saw a beast (Abdul Malik) rising out of the sea (of disbelief),
with ten horns (ten successors) and seven heads (predecessors), with ten
diadems upon its horns (all were kings) and a blasphemous name upon its
heads. And the beast that I saw was like a leopard, its feet were like a
bear’s and its mouth was like a lion’s mouth. And to it the dragon
(Quraish) gave his power and his throne and great authority. One of its
heads seemed to have a mortal wound (that is the third caliph was
killed), but its mortal wound was healed (the kingdom again returned to
them and Muawiyah became the king), and the whole earth followed the
beast with wonder. Men worshipped the dragon (they returned to the
customs of the period of Ignorance), for he had given his authority to
the beast, and they worshipped the beast, saying, “Who is like the
beast, and who can fight against it?”

And the beast was given a mouth uttering haughty and blasphemous words
(abusing ‘Ali was well known activity of the Umayyads), and it was
allowed to exercise authority for forty-two months; it opened its mouth
to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his name and his dwelling,
that is, those who dwell in heaven (Ahl al-Bayt). Also it was allowed to
make war on the saints and to conquer them. And authority was given it
over every tribe and people and tongue and nation, and all who dwell on
earth will worship it, every one whose name has not been written before
the foundation of the world in the book of life (faith) of the Lamb
(Imam Husayn) that was slain. (All those who do not have faith in Imam
Husayn would follow Abdul Malik) If any one has an ear, let him hear:

*If any one is to be taken captive,*

*to captivity he goes;*

*If any one slays with the sword,*

*with the sword must he be slain.*

*Here is a call for the endurance and faith of the saints.*

After this, there is detailed explanation of Hajjaj Bin Yusuf and his
atrocities. But this much is sufficient for our purpose. In all these
four books the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) is mentioned in a way that
acknowledges its greatness and expresses love towards him while the
enemies and killers of the Holy Imam (a.s) are mentioned with disdain
and malice. A noteworthy point is that wherever there is mention of
prophethood and advent of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) it is
invariably accompanied by the mention of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s). And according to the statements of both Mahadewji and St. John,
it was this martyrdom, which has secured and strengthened the religion
of Muhammad. And this was not a poetic composition but the actual
expression of the truth and facts that these great religious leaders
have perfectly done in a way that was deserving for it. If only their
followers had followed their teachings and adopted the Straight Path.
And if only the Muslims had recognized the significance of the martyrdom
of Imam Husayn (a.s) in the true sense.

[^1]: Arab is surrounded on three sides by the sea.

[^2]: ‘Kant Bunjh’ means ‘Servant of God’, which, in Arabic becomes
“Abdullah” Abdullah was the name of the father of the Holy Prophet.

[^3]: ‘Sank Rakhiya’ means ‘Peaceful’ which in Arabic is ‘Amina.’ Name
of the mother of the Holy Prophet was ‘Amina.’

[^4]: Compare it with the ayat of the Qur’an: “Say: I am commanded to
worship God, and not to join partners with Him. Unto Him do I call, and
unto Him is my return.” (13:36)

[^5]: i.e. era of Hijra

[^6]: Fatima, the lady of Paradise, the Chief of all the women.

[^7]: Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (a.s.)

[^8]: Leviticus 23:23-32

[^9]: The Revelation to John: 1

[^10]: Signifying the very first three enemies of Ahle Bayt (a.s.) and
Muawiyah, Yazid, Abdullah bin Zubair and Marwan bin al-Hakam.

[^11]: Revelation 12:1-11


