Why the Martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s) became Immortal?
=======================================================

[This speech was broadcast from the Nairobi (Kenya) Radio on the eve of
Ashura, 1383 A.H.]

Since the beginning of creation until date, innumerable tragic incidents
have occurred in the world. But in these tales of sorrows and tragedies
the events of Karbala’ are seen to be as prominent as the moon among the
cluster of stars. Human nature demands that happy remembrances should
always be retold and tragic reminders be obliterated from the memory as
soon as possible. However, this law of nature had no control on the
tragedy of Karbala’. Today, even after a passage of thirteen centuries
every year this tragedy is remembered with such fervor as if it has just
happened yesterday.

Indeed this is an astonishing fact. But if we ponder upon it we would be
able to realize how the control of human nature became ineffective in
this case. The significance and endurance of a sacrifice depends upon
the significance and firmness of its aims. Some sacrifices are presented
for worldly aims and such sacrifices take man towards decadence. The
Almighty Allah says:

“Who created for you all that is in the earth…[^1]

Now if instead of considering these worldly things as our servants, we
destroy our life in their service, such a sacrifice, instead of carrying
any greatness would be eligible for denouncement because we have
considered our life inferior to those things that were created for our
service. The greatness of man demands that he should consider worldly
things as means of life and not that he should make it the aim of his
life. In the Islamic parlance it is the stage of, “There is no god
except Allah.” And reaching this point man thinks that the whole
universe collectively cannot become equal to the value of a single human
being. The aim of the life of man should be higher than the universe and
such a being is only the Creator of the Universe. After, “There is no
god” it is the stage of “except Allah.” To put it in a different way,

“Say: Surely my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are
(all) for Allah, the Lord of the worlds…”[^2]

The purpose is to imply that you must make the principle of your life
such that all your worship acts, rituals, life and death etc. should be
for Allah, Who is the Lord of the worlds. In other words, the entire
universe is for man and man is for the Lord of the worlds.

The world is transient. Everything here is going to be destroyed. If a
sacrifice is made for these things that also shall be transient and not
eternal. Its remembrance would be finished in a few days. Contrary to
this, the Creator of the world is eternal. He is from eternity and He
shall be there forever. Therefore whatever sacrifice is presented on His
path, that too shall don the raiments of eternality and its remembrance
would also endure forever. Its remembrance shall also remain fresh in
the minds of all. That is why the Almighty Allah says:

And do not speak of those who are slain in Allah’s way as dead; nay,
(they are) alive, but you do not perceive.[^3]

That is why the sacrifice of Imam Husayn (a.s) is always fresh. Husayn
(a.s) made Allah as the aim of his life and presented incomparable
sacrifices in the path of Allah. In recompense, the Almighty Allah also
crowned the remembrance of Husayn with the crown of eternality.

Why had Husayn (a.s) presented this sacrifice? Let us see what Husayn
(a.s) himself says about it. At the time when he was departing from
Medina, he wrote a bequest to his brother, Muhammad Hanafiyyah. Some of
the sentences of this testament were as follows:

“…I am not taking up arms in order to make merry, or be ecstatic over
what I possess. I am not making mischief, nor exercising oppression. But
I am ready to fight for the sole goal of seeking reform of the Ummah of
my grandfather, the Apostle of Allah (s.a.w). I want to enjoin good and
forbid evil and guide the affairs of the people as my grandfather and
father were doing.”

This event began in the year 60 A.H. when Yazid ascended to the throne.
The enthroning of Yazid was a terrible calamity for humanity and Islam.
Historians are unanimous that no aspect of Yazid’s character conformed
to humanity or Islam. He neither believed in Allah nor had faith in the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). He also denied faith in the Day of Judgment
and Hereafter. He used to ridicule Prayer and those who recited Prayer.
Wine was served openly in his court. Chess and gambling were obligatory
acts in his view. Stepmothers and sisters were sexually legitimate for
him. He remained on the throne for three or three and a half years.
During this brief rule, in the first year he wreaked havoc on the family
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) and slaughtered them with utter
mercilessness. He wrought a carnage for which we are mourning these
days. It was such a terrible carnage that human history had never
witnessed. In the second year, he had Medina attacked and allowed his
soldiers to plunder and ransack, kill the inhabitants and rape their
ladies. Hundreds of companions of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w) and
memorizers of Qur’an were put under the sword. Prayer was not conducted
in the Prophet’s mosque for three days at a stretch as Yazid’s soldiers
had converted it into a stable for their horses. Thousands of women lost
their honor and the Medinites were compelled to pay oath of allegiance
to Yazid in the words, “We are slaves of Yazid. If he likes he can sell
us and if he wants he can release us.” In the third year of his rule,
Yazid’s forces attacked Mecca and laid siege to it. Catapults were
employed to throw fireballs on the Holy Ka’ba, which was consequently
damaged. The siege was in process when Yazid died in Damascus.

This was a brief sketch of Yazid’s biography. How the times had changed
and how the circumstances became inverted that such a person should
demand allegiance from Husayn (a.s)!

Who was Husayn? The beloved one of ‘Ali and Fatima (a.s) and in the
words of Qur’an, the son of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). He was
absolutely sinless and had scaled the heights of purity of self and the
best of deeds. Love and regard towards him is made obligatory for the
Muslims. According to the sayings of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) Husayn was
from the Prophet and the Prophet was from Husayn (a.s). In other words,
every saying of Husayn was the saying of the Prophet and every action of
Husayn was the action of the Prophet. That is why Yazid was so keen to
obtain the allegiance of Husayn. Because he felt that if Husayn gave him
allegiance, each of his acts, beliefs and policies would get the seal of
approval of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w). Husayn was also aware of
this fact and thus he refused to give allegiance, and as a result bore
with absolute resignation and tranquility, the mountains of calamities
that befell him.

He had to leave Medina. He had to bid farewell to the shrine of his
maternal grandfather, the grave of his mother and the tomb of his
brother. Then he took refuge in the Holy city of Mecca. Here also no
security was found, because Yazid sent 30 militants in the garb of
pilgrims to assassinate Imam Husayn (a.s) in Mecca. They were ordered to
kill Husayn (a.s) even if he was found circumambulating the Ka’ba.
Husayn (a.s) was compelled to leave Mecca along with his family members
one day before the Hajj and he headed for Iraq. On the way his path was
blocked by the forces of Yazid. This army consisted of a thousand men.
When they reached the caravan of Husayn (a.s) they were dying of thirst
as their water supply had been exhausted. The riders’ condition was
serious due to the thirst. The horses were hanging out their tongues. It
was the army of foes but the son of the great Prophet of Mercy could
never allow them to perish of thirst. He ordered that not only the men
buts their beasts also be provided ample water. Husayn (a.s) himself
organized the distribution of water.

Followed by these enemy forces, Imam Husayn (a.s) reached the plains of
Karbala’ on the 2nd of Muharram. Forces dispatched by Yazid’s governor,
Ibn Ziyad began to assemble in this area one after the other. In a few
days, their numbers rose to 32000, who had gathered to slay a few
oppressed people, among whom were aged men, children and women, totaling
not more than 100-150 persons. The tents of Husayn’s group were
initially removed to a point far away from the riverbanks. From the 7th
Muharram onwards water supply was completely cut off for them. From the
8th of Muharram the cries of “Thirst! Thirst!” from the children of
Husayn’s camp began to echo in the deserts of Karbala’. The same Husayn
(a.s) who had provided drinking water to even the enemy forces was not
unable to procure any water for his children and companions.

The next day was the 9th of Muharram. During the afternoon, Umar Ibn
Saad, the commander of Yazidite forces prepared his army to attack the
entourage of Husayn (a.s). Imam Husayn (a.s) asked for a night’s respite
to enable them to engage in the worship of Almighty. The eve of Ashura
arrived. The camp of Husayn (a.s) buzzed with the recital of the Holy
Qur’an, the chanting of invocations, ritual prayers and worship acts.
People who have recorded those incidents say that such murmur arose from
the tents of Husayn (a.s) as if bees were humming around the beehives.

In between these adorations and worships, Imam Husayn (a.s) assembled
all his companions and relatives and recited a sermon, which, in brief
said that Yazid did not have anything to do with them except the Holy
Imam (a.s). Thus they must not endanger their lives. Husayn (a.s)
released them from his allegiance and told them that all of them could
leave him and go away wherever they liked so that their lives could be
saved. The Imam explained to them in various ways so that they may leave
him and obtain their survival. In the end he even extinguished the lamp
so that they could leave in the cover of darkness if they are
embarrassed otherwise. In reply to this, a wail arose from the gathering
and different people stood up and reiterated their faith and loyalty to
the Imam. Their wordings were different, their voices were various. But
the aim of all of them was one and the same, that, “O Master! This is
dying only once and achieving eternal success. Even if we are killed
seventy times and our corpses are burnt and ashes scattered in the wind
and after that again we are enlivened, we would not leave you ever.”

By according freedom of action to his companions and relatives, Imam
Husayn (a.s) performed the same duty that Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) had
performed by seeking the opinion of Ismail (a.s). Ibrahim (a.s) could
have sacrificed his son without informing him about it. But in that case
it would have been only the achievement of Ibrahim (a.s) and it would
not have been shared by Ismail (a.s). Ibrahim (a.s), by taking the
opinion of his son and the son by expressing his willingness for
slaughter, made it a model of partnership between the Friend (of God)
and the slaughtered one (Ismail). Exactly in the same manner, Imam
Husayn (a.s) also, by according permission to them all to leave
Karbala’, and the companions by expressing their determination to
voluntarily lay down their lives, made this event a model of a shared
sacrifice. That is why Iqbal the bard of the orient says:

“The end of it is Husayn and the beginning, Ismail.”

The morning of Ashura was the day of terrible turmoil. By shooting the
first arrow, Umar Ibn Saad initiated the battle. Initially the
companions of Imam Husayn (a.s) laid down their lives one after the
other. In the afternoon, it was the turn of Banu Hashim (or more
precisely the progeny of Abu Talib). The progeny of Aqil became extinct
from the world. The beloved sons of Zainab were smeared in their blood.
The last remains of Qasim were trampled under horses. The sons of ‘Ali
(a.s) praised the bravery. Abbas lost both his arms in his struggle to
get drinking water for children and the lion of ‘Ali (a.s) after
capturing the Euphrates went to sleep on the riverbanks. The image of
the Prophet, ‘Ali Akbar, arrived in the battlefield. The people
witnessed the same valor of ‘Ali (a.s). At last a dagger pierced the
chest and the shattered facsimile of the Holy Prophet, after being
smeared with blood, mixed into the sands of Karbala’.

Now ‘Ali Asghar heard the call of his father for help and made himself
fall off the cradle. Husayn (a.s) could not bear to see the thirst of
the six-month old infant. He brought the child to the fields shading him
with the tails of his cloak and asked for water for the child. Instead
of giving water, Hurmula quenched the baby’s thirst with an arrow. This
arrow not only pierced the neck of ‘Ali Asghar and the shoulder of
Husayn (a.s), it also pierced the heart of Fatima (s.a.).

Now Husayn (a.s) pounced upon the forces of Yazid like a heavy flood. He
launched three such deadly attacks that the enemy forces began to feel
helpless. The time of Asr (late afternoon) approached. Husayn (a.s) was
covered with wounds from the head to the toe. Incessant bleeding made
him feel physically weak. He restrained his sword for a moment and the
enemies began to shower him with arrows and stones from all sides. At
last the moment arrived that a poet says,

*The rider of the Prophet’s shoulders has come down from the saddle.*

*If I am not wrong, it is as if the sky has fallen to the earth.*

Shimr exhibited such heartlessness that the heavens and the earth were
in turmoil. A call echoed in the atmosphere:

*Know that Husayn is slain in Karbala’!*

*Know that Husayn is slaughtered in Karbala’!*

*The world became empty of Husayn (a.s).*

After the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s), the enemies began to plunder
his camp and his women and children. The tents were burnt down. Head
coverings were snatched from the heads of the Prophet’s daughters. The
ailing son of Husayn (a.s) was arrested and tied up in chains and
iron-collars.

Now the terrible night fell, which is called “Shaam-e-Ghariba” (the
night of the homeless). Yesterday, Husayn (a.s) had been present to
protect the folks of Harem.[^4] There was Abbas and ‘Ali Akbar. The
companions and helpers were also present. Today none remained. After
Husayn (a.s), the responsibility of this plundered group and the defense
of Islam fell upon Zainab. Zainab fulfilled her role in such a beautiful
way that the world gave her the title of “Partner of Husayn.”

This apparent defeat of Husayn (a.s) was actually a magnificent victory.
See, Yazid was demanding allegiance from Husayn (a.s) and his
companions. Though Imam Husayn (a.s) was martyred, when his successor,
the ailing Imam ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s) was brought chained before Yazid,
Yazid could not summon the courage to demand allegiance from him. Yazid
and his cohorts had to give up their demands. Husayn and his supporters
remained firm on their stance. What can be a better proof than this of
the victory of Husayn (a.s) and the defeat of Yazid? That is probably
why Mir Anees said about the holy Imam:

*“He suppressed Byzantine and Syria with such ferocity*

*That Jihad was not required from the remaining nine Imams.”*

[^1]: Surah Baqarah 2:29

[^2]: Surah Anam 6:162

[^3]: Surah Baqarah 2:154

[^4]: Ladies and children


