Preface
=======

In this short preface, we intend to draw the attention of the readers to
a few important points:

(1) We are Muslims, but is it enough for us to be Muslims and should we
feel pride in it without knowing that Islam, more than anything else,
stresses upon knowledge and action?

Islam means knowledge of a specific conception of the cosmos for the
intellectual and moral reform of mankind, of a superbly calculated
program put forth as a dynamic school of thought. It is knowledge of
articles of belief and articles of action.

Unfortunately many people consider themselves to be Muslims simply
because they were born in a Muslim family or in a Muslim country, or
because it was Islam which came to their minds first and they accepted
it. However, it is obvious that a true Muslim cannot be content with
such things, because Islam is not a thing to be received in inheritance,
nor is it a product of environments.

It is, therefore, necessary for a Muslim to have a true understanding of
Islam, both of its articles of belief and articles of action so as to be
able to give a convincing answer, howsoever brief and simple, to the
following two questions:

(i) What is Islam and how is it a blessing to humanity?

(ii) Why have you accepted Islam?

After learning the precepts and principles of Islam, it is equally
necessary to apply them in one's individual and social life.

(2) The book "Rationality of Islam" aims at a comprehensive presentation
of the basic teachings of Islam in a concise form. Subjects dealt with
in lengthy chapters, in voluminous books, have sometimes been crammed
into a few lines. Anyhow, an effort has been made to present facts in a
simple diction and yet to preserve the rational spirit of the book.

(3) It has also been our consistent effort that, in discussing doctrines
and tenets of Islam, the relevant authority should always be quoted and
nothing should be mentioned without a proof. As for articles of action,
reference has been made, as far as possible, to their instructional and
social philosophy, so that the reader may be encouraged to act according
to them.

(4) Though Qur'anic verses, sayings of the Holy Prophet and Holy Imams
have been extensively quoted, yet their Arabic texts have been omitted
for the sake of brevity and simplicity. Quotations from Western scholars
have been cited in only the first few chapters.

It is hoped that this book will enlighten the minds of our conscientious
young men and women, and will serve as an introduction to a wider study
of Islam. It will induce them to recognize Islam as a great and creative
school of thought, help them in shaping out their lives and preparing
them for great sacrifices. It will most certainly inspire the young
people to form a much better, healthier and happier society.

The Publishers


