Belief in Allah
===============

It is worth emphasizing that among human thinkers there exists no
difference of opinion on the point that this universe has a
self-sustaining First Cause. At the most, materialists call it matter,
while the religious philosophers call it Allah.

It is essential to acknowledge the existence of the First Cause, for a
sequence of causes and effects cannot go on indefinitely and we must
reach a point where we should come to a cause which is not the effect of
any other cause, i.e. the ultimate cause or the Unmoved Mover, which is
self-existing and which has always been and shall always be.

It is this Self-Sustaining First Cause which not only makes our
intellectual life possible but also quite meaningful. Suppose for a
moment that there is no such First Cause. Where does this lead us?
Surely this cause and effect pursuit lands us in what is known in
Philosophy as a continuum ad infinitum. This brings our investigation to
a blind alley.

It marks the beginning of intellectual wilderness, a wild goose chase.
You go on piling cause upon cause and effect upon effect only to find
still another cause and effect staring you in the face. Of what earthly
use is it to put zero after zero when the result is zero or to place nil
after nil when the result is nil? Such is the deception of a certain
mental activity and such is its misguidance.

It will thus be seen that the only way to get out of this mire is the
acknowledgement of the Self- Sustaining First Cause.

Belief in the existence of an Eternal and First Cause is the common
ground between the believers in God and the materialists. The only
controversial point is whether the First Cause has knowledge and
intellect or not. That is the real point of difference.

The materialists deny that the First Cause has any intellect. They hold
that the first cause is matter, which lacks any intellect or knowledge;
whereas the believers in God maintain that the First Source of the
universe has limitless knowledge, wisdom and rationality.

How to Recognize God
--------------------

### The Universe

Now let us cast an eye on the various phenomena of the universe to find
out which one supports which of these two theories and to see whether
the things existing in the universe indicate that the First Cause has
intellect.

It will be better to begin with our own body. Does not the construction
of the human eye and the way the lenses, retina and various layers of it
have been fixed, testify that its maker is fully conversant with the
physical laws concerning the reflection of light and the working of
lenses and mirrors ?

Does not the composition of human blood of plasma and various types of
corpuscles with such a fixed proportion that the slightest change in it
disturbs the whole biological system, clearly show that the maker of the
blood knew the chemical composition and properties of all the
ingredients of blood fully well?

Does not the construction of the living human, animal and plant cells in
such a complex and mysterious and at the same time elegant and accurate
way manifest that the job has been performed by a Being who had full
knowledge of all the laws connected with the human, animal and plant
physiology?

Does not the special construction of the solar system and the particular
proportion between the size, distance and speed of each planet of this
system prove that the maker of this machine is fully aware of all the
details of the law of gravitation and the effects of the rotatory motion
in producing centrifugal forces?

In short, the special construction of all that exists n the universe
from the smallest particles or sub atoms to the biggest galaxies and the
accurate and wonderfully arranged systems of their working bear witness
to the fact that the First source has full knowledge of all the
connected laws and systems.

In principle all human sciences are nothing more than a partial
knowledge of a minute part of the secrets and laws of the universe.

How can it ever be that we, with such a partial knowledge, should become
scholars and scientists but the First Source who brought the whole
universe into existence should have no knowledge and intellect?
Transplantation of a human heart by Dr. Bernard r required millions of
scientists for thousands of years to put in their efforts for the
development of medicine and surgery. Is it conceivable that the very
maker of the heart should have no knowledge?

In short, the interpretation of creation of all the well-calculated and
well-conceived systems, as chance events and product of unplanned and
aimless causes is as illogical as to say that the transplantation of
heart performed by Dr. Bernard and his team was not the result of any
knowledge and study, and it was just by chance that grafting took place.

Such an interpretation is totally unacceptable. But to say that the
entire universe has come into existence just by chance is far more
illogical. Hence the materialistic interpretation of the genesis of the
universe and all that exists in it is totally unscientific.

Thus, every book of our natural sciences like physics, chemistry,
physiology, anatomy, medicine, surgery etc. may be used as book of
natural theology, for all these books discuss the secrets and laws of
the marvelous systems of creation, whose logical and correct
interpretation is not possible without acknowledging the existence of
God.

This very line of argument has been mostly followed by the Holy Qur’an
while adducing arguments for the unity of Allah.

As Kepler, the famous scientist and founder of modern Astronomy has
said, "The more we know about the creation and grandeur of heavenly
bodies, the deeper should be our faith."

Thus there exists a close relationship between the progress of sciences
and the firmness of faith in God. The more the scientific knowledge
expands, the firmer will the faith grow in the One Source of knowledge
and power.

Mr. McCombs, a biologist, who has been the head of the Academy of
Sciences, Florida, says that every new discovery in the world of science
increases the firmness of our faith hundreds of times, dispels the
hidden doubts which more or less lurk inside our hearts, and replaces
them with the nobler ideas of the acknowledgement of God and His unity.

### Motion, Evolution and Life

Science of Physics tells us that if the lifeless matter is static, it
tends to remain static unless it is moved by some external force, and if
it is in motion it continues to move unless it is stopped by some
external factor.

Yet another scientific law tells us that the matter forming the universe
tends to disintegrate and assume simpler form with the passage of time.
Mechanized matter changes into simpler matter; atoms if they remain as
they are, automatically disintegrate; bright stars tend to lose their
brightness.

Thus within the lifeless matter there exists no factor which may push it
forward to evolution. On the other hand, it tends to disintegrate
automatically.

In such circumstances, it must be admitted that evolution and life have
come from outside, for, within the matter, there exists no such
tendency.

A philosopher says that you cannot think of that attraction to life
which pervades from simple ameoba to human beings (like Einstein, Edison
and Anatole France) without seeing the world in a divine garb. In other
words it is not possible to interpret attraction to life and inclination
to evolution except through a belief in God.

### Transience of the Universe

Science tells us that in accordance with the second law of
thermodynamics, all the energy available in the world is proceeding
towards uniformity and neutrality, and a day will come when it, having
become uniform, will be neutralized.

And then a state of indifference will prevail in the whole world. This
is just like the case of interconnected vessels of the liquid, we
observe motion, but this state does not continue forever. Sooner or
later all the levels become uniform and everything becomes motionless
and quiet.

According to this law, the universe must have a history .It cannot be
eternal. Had it always existed, it would have become uniform and neutral
long, long ago.

On this ground, we must admit that this material world has not always
existed. It is not eternal and must have a history.

Now the big question is what the origin of the universe is. What event
disturbed the first day tranquility and became the source of the
creation of all the phenomena?

The first explosion or the Big Bang? Then what was the source of the
explosion of the uniform atoms of primary matter? How is it possible
that in a state of complete tranquility and indifference such an
explosion should occur automatically?

Here it must be admitted that some outside factor was the source of the
disturbance of the first indifference, emergence of a wave in the
uniform of lifeless matter and the subsequent creation of the diverse
phenomena of the world. We call this supernatural factor, Allah.

The above mentioned three ways of proving the existence of Allah are the
subject of detailed books compiled by philosophers of divinity. We have
given only a brief summary.

The Qur’an and Acknowledgement of Allah
---------------------------------------

It is interesting that in our sacred book, the Holy Qur’an, a large
number of whose verses are meant to strengthen the belief in Allah,
reliance has invariably been put on scientific arguments.

The Holy Qur’an in most of its verses concerning the unity of Allah
refers to the first method, i.e. the study of the system of the
universe. It calls upon all to study this marvelous system. Sometimes it
refers to the secrets of the creation of the heavens. It says: "In the
creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alteration of night
and day, there are many signs for the people of good sense."

Sometimes it refers to other methods. It cites the Champion of Unity,
Prophet Abraham (A) as saying:

***"My Lord is He who causes life and who causes death." (Surah
al-Baarah, 2:258)***

Here reference has been made to life and death for they definitely
indicate the existence of the Creator. This is the second way of proving
the existence of Allah as mentioned earlier. In the Holy Qur’an there
are hundreds of verses on the subject of divine unity and
acknowledgement of Allah, in which attention has been drawn to the
marvels of creation and grandeur of the universe. Study of these verses
can be the subject of an independent book, in which wonders of science
and secrets of the Holy Qur’an can be discussed side by side.

Atheism Does Not Exist
----------------------

In view of the scientific arguments mentioned above to prove the
existence of Allah, it may be asked why most of the scientists and
founders of physical sciences still adhere to atheism. The answer to
this question is simple. There is hardly any scientist who does not
explicitly or implicitly profess the existence of the First Cause or the
Source of Knowledge and Power.

It does not make any difference if he does use the word, God or Allah.
In the words of a well-known philosopher there exists no atheism.
Everybody thinks of Him and acknowledges Him in his own way.

If anybody, in the course of discussion on heart, states that Nature has
put up a septum between the right and left chambers of the heart so that
the pure and the impure blood may not be mixed, does it not mean that he
concedes that Nature has aim, intention, program and intellect ? In this
case is it possible to say that by Nature he means factors lacking
consciousness? Obviously he means Allah though he uses the word, Nature.

Such expressions which are an evidence of faith in the existence of a
First Cause are found in the discourses of most scientists. That shows
that they all hold that Nature has aim, will, intention and program.
Evidently by the word. 'Nature' they do not mean factors having no
consciousness or will. Hence, obviously they use this word as a name for
Allah.

Attributes of Allah
-------------------

It is not surprising that it is easy to prove the existence of Allah,
but it is difficult fully to understand His real Being and His
attributes. First of all we must know that Allah is Ever-existing and
Limitless.

He is limitless in respect of knowledge, power, time and space, whereas
our knowledge and power, howsoever vast they may be, are still limited
and have an end. As such, how can a limited being completely grasp the
very essence of an Unlimited Being? It is not possible for a chick which
has grown inside the shell of an egg to know what happens inside the
limitless space of the far-off galaxies.

But that does not mean that we cannot understand the attributes of Allah
to the extent of our powers of thinking, knowing and understanding.

From the study of the phenomena of the universe we can find out that He
is :

All-Knowing and All-wise: This is evidenced by the extra-ordinarily
marvelous diversity of life and all that exists on the earth and in the
heavens.

Ever-living : Life in the real sense is nothing but a combination of
knowledge and power. Allah is All-knowing and All-powerful. Hence He is
All-living.

For the same reason, He has will and comprehension also. He sees
everything and hears every sound and every voice. He is All-pervading
and All-aware. He is Eternal and Ever-existing. He has always existed
and shall always exist.

These are some of His attributes, known as Positive Attributes. for they
have positive aspects. There are Negative Attributes also, which have a
negative aspect.

Being Limitless and Perfect in every sense, He is free from ignorance,
inability, need and defect.

He can have no associate and none can be like Him. It is not possible to
imagine the existence of two beings, limitless in every respect, for
each of them will be lacking in the essence of the other

From this it is also evident that Allah has no physical body, for all
bodies sooner or later disintegrate. As such, an ever existing Being
cannot have a body, which is liable to disintegration, decomposition and
every sort of change.

Divine Unity
------------

Divine unity is the Infrastructure of all religious Teachings. The
question of divine unity has supreme importance in Islam. In one way or
the other it forms a part of all Islamic tenets and teachings. Islam
rejects every kind of polytheism, dualism and trinity. According to it,
Allah is one. He has no components and none is like Him. This stage is
known as Unity of Being.

Unity of Attributes
-------------------

A number of qualities like knowledge, power, eternity and ever-existence
are attributed to Allah. They all are the very essence of His Being and
are in no way separate from Him. He is a Limitless Being and a limitless
being can be nothing but a Reality. All His attributes turn to one
attribute, viz. limitlessness. This stage is called Unity of Attributes.

Unity of Worship
----------------

Further, according to the teachings of Islam, only Allah is Adorable.
Islam does not allow in any form the worship of anyone or anything else.
Neither the sun or the stars nor any human being is adorable, because
all things have been created by Him and He has sovereign control over
all of them. Hence only He is adorable. This stage is called Unity of
Worship.

Unity of Action
---------------

A careful study of all that happens in the world will show that Allah is
the Creator and the real source of all power. If we accomplish any job,
it is He who provides the necessary power. In view of this, it may be
said that all our actions are accomplished with His help. Nobody has
power independent of His power. Absolute and independent power pertains
only to him. This is called Unity of Actions.

Anyhow, this should not be misconstrued to mean that we have no free
will or responsibility. He himself has bestowed freedom on us. He wants
us freely to choose our way to better life in this world and hereafter.
He has done us a favor and put at our disposal all the necessary means
to reach this goal.

Our freedom is a gift from Him and because we have free will we are held
responsible for our actions.

Man and Freedom of Will
-----------------------

Let us discuss the subject of free will a little further.

We can dearly see that we are not predestined in our actions. We have
liberty of action and freedom of will. A simple proof of human volition
is that we blame the offenders for their offences. We lodge complaints
with the courts against transgressors and ask for their trial and
punishment.

Even those who claim to believe in predestination take the action in
their practical life. If man has no free will and every- thing is
appointed and foreordained by Allah or if man is really helpless in the
face of his physical or spiritual up-bringing and environment, then
prosecution trial, courts and punishment have no meaning.

Neither a good and dutiful worker deserves any appreciation nor is an
evil-doer liable to any prosecution and punishment, because both of them
are helpless in their action. Prosecution of a person who has no choice
of action is far from justice. The way we and all reasonable persons
behave in our daily life testifies that our conscience recognizes that
man possesses freedom of will. Hence belief in predestination has no
basis.

Allah has granted us freedom, but it is our duty not to misuse it and to
direct all our energies to the achievement of our own happiness as well
as that of society.

We are neither allowed to follow any false ideas or doctrines nor to
take any incorrect action in the name of freedom of thought or freedom
of action, for that will amount to chaos and anarchy, and not freedom.


