Towards Eternal Life
====================

Death
-----

Death means separation of soul from the body; Islam tells us that man is
not annihilated as the result of death. He is only transferred from one
world to another, where he begins a new life. The Holy Prophet has said:
"You have not been created for annihilation. You have been created for
everlasting life. The only thing is that you are moved from one world to
another."

According to Islam, separation of soul from the body does not take place
in a uniform manner in the case of all individuals. The souls of the
sinners and of those who are too much attached to this world are
separated with violence and force, but the souls of the virtuous and
those who love Allah and are in communion with the next world are
separated with ease and gentleness.

The Hereafter
-------------

All prophets and sacred books unanimously agree that with death human
life does not come to an end, and after this world, there exists another
world where human beings will be rewarded or punished according to their
deeds.

The virtuous will lead a happy and pleasant life, and the evil-doers
will be punished and tormented. Belief in resurrection and the next
world is one of the fundamentals of all religions and a believer in
prophets has to believe in resurrection, too.

The idea that with death everything comes to an end and man is
completely annihilated is not only appalling but appears to be odd and
illogical also. Especially after the acceptance of the doctrine of
divine unity and acknowledgement of the existence of Allah, it is
totally incomprehensible.

It is unbelievable that the aim of all the complex laws of evolution is
simply to first transform a simple and invaluable being into a highly
developed intellectual being like Avicenna (lbn-Sina) or Einstein and
then to annihilate him altogether.

It does not stand to reason that annihilation should be the fate of the
entire human race and its culture. Such a theory is incredible,
unreasonable and incompatible with the knowledge, wisdom and skill of
the Creator. This looks as if a vainglorious person builds a carefully
designed and well-executed magnificent workshop or factory and then
blows it into pieces.

Will it not be more logical if we admit that life continues in another
form after death and the process of evolution does not come to an end?
Here we can give a beautiful example. Our life in this world is like
that of a fetus which after passing through several evolutionary stages,
is transferred to a wider and more perfect environment of which it could
not even have imagined (if it had any power of imagination).

Had human life been limited to a fetus period and every fetus died
immediately after birth. Would such a life not have been illogical and
unreasonable? It would be more logical if human life in this world after
passing through intricate and difficult routes of physical, intellectual
and moral evolution is a prelude to the beginning of a higher and wider
life in the next world. The life of that world should bear the same
relation to the life of this world as the life of this world to the
fetal life.

That is why all those who believe in Allah also believe that with death
man is not annihilated, but is transferred to another world whose full
details and characteristics are beyond our comprehension, for we are
confined to the four walls of this world. Anyhow; we know this much that
leaving this world does not mean the end of life and that another world
does exist.

Study of the laws of the Universe, of the forces which push man forward
along the path of evolution and of the systematic grandeur of this world
convincingly testify to this truth.

The Holy Qurâ€™an says; "Did you think that we had made you in vain and
that you were not going to return to us?" It also says: "And surely you
have known the first evolution then why do you not mind?" In other words
it says you have seen the life of this world, then why do you not
conclude that there is another world also, for the study of this world
and the laws concerning the evolution of human life here show that there
is another world where the process of evolution will continue.

Scientific Laws and Resurrection
--------------------------------

It is remarkable that Science with its modern discoveries has taken a
long step forward towards proving the possibility of resurrection and
life hereafter, and with the enunciation of the doctrine of the
imperishability of matter and energy, the resurrection which previously
appeared to be impossible, has now become logical and comprehensible.

The doctrine of the imperishability of matter which was first discovered
by Lavoisier has rendered the question of complete annihilation totally
unscientific. According to it, the particles of man, howsoever,
decomposed and scattered they may become, still exist in this very
world, and it is possible that one day they are recollected.

This is the first step forward towards the possibility of the
resurrection of man and his return to life after death.

This doctrine was further reinforced by the discovery of radio-active
bodies by Marie Curie. Her discovery confirmed that not only matter but
energy is also everlasting and that there is no duality between matter
and energy, for they are convertible with each other.

On this basis, we should admit that our ideas, our deeds and all our
movements which are all produced by the transformation of our various
bodily energies, continue to exist in this world.

Our vocal waves are not obliterated and their traces always exist in the
air and the objects which surround us. Only their form is changed. The
same is the case with all our works and deeds.

This is another step forward towards the possibility of resurrection and
even physically seeing the deeds themselves.

Anyhow, with the progress of science the question of resurrection is no
longer as complicated as once it was. Now it is comprehensible and from
a scientific stand-point fully admissible.

Faith in Resurrection and Human Development
-------------------------------------------

Faith in resurrection besides logically interpreting and revolving the
puzzle of life and death and besides being a truth which must be
accepted, produces diverse effects on human life, the most important of
them being the following two:

The picture of death which had always been appalling and the thought of
which had always disturbed the peace of mind has undergone a complete
change. With the acknowledgement of resurrection and "life after death"
in a world where all the gifts of life will exist eternally and on a
higher and bigger scale the picture of death is no longer as dreadful
and appalling as it was, and the scenes of death and old age no longer
disturb the peace of mind.

The unrest and anxiety caused by the thought of death is not as painful
to us as to the materialists, and thus we can lead a more comfortable
and satisfied life.

The believers in life hereafter welcome sacrifice and martyrdom for a
sacred cause, for they regard them as a prelude to a new life in a
higher and wider world.

2. The realization that human thought and deeds continue to exist, that
they after going through a process of development and growth come back
in a magnified form in the next world, that all good and bad deeds are
to be minutely accounted for and that one has to receive reward or
punishment, as the case may be, certainly exerts a healthy effect on
human conduct and behavior. Thus the belief in the next world creates a
favorable atmosphere for the promotion of good deeds and keeping the
out- burst of passions under a check.

Independent Existence and Imperishibility of Soul
-------------------------------------------------

Though the materialists try to describe thought, understanding and other
psychological phenomena as the physical and chemical properties of brain
and nervous system and hence proclaim them to be material, yet the
inadequacy of their interpretation clearly indicates the independent
existence and non-material nature of soul, because in spiritual
phenomena like thinking, imagination and memory, we find characteristics
which are not the general properties of matter.

We can embody in our minds huge planets, galaxies and solar systems or
mountains, deserts and large rivers, though in their external existence
they are so enormous. Obviously, in such cases, a huge picture, even as
large as the heaven and earth is drawn in our minds and we feel the
existence of the mental picture within ourselves.

Now the question is where is the location of this picture? Certainly, it
cannot be located in our brain cells, because our mental pictures may be
millions of times larger than our brain. Can you ever, on paper, draw a
map of Japan to the actual and physical scale of that country? Certainly
not.

Hence, we must believe in the existence of meta-physical forces to be
able to interpret this phenomenon without being confronted with the
dilemma of correspondence of a big object to a small object.

One of the general properties of matter is constant change,
transformation and disintegration with the passage of time, whereas, our
mental picture, remain firm and stable and do not undergo a change.

For example, I saw a young friend of mine some years ago at a meeting.
If I recollect that meeting even after fifty years, the same mental
picture, which is still firm in my memory, will reappear without, the
slightest change. This shows that mental pictures remain stable and are
not affected by general properties of matter, and hence they cannot be
material.

Non-correspondence of a large object with a small object and
unchangeability of mental pictures are two out of many arguments
advanced by the philosophers to prove the independent existence of human
soul or spirit. There are other arguments also, for which a reference
may be made to the books of philosophy.

From the above, it may be concluded that soul and spiritual phenomena do
not have general properties of matter, they do not come to an end with
physical death, and continue to exist even after having separated from
the body. This clearly indicates the possibility of resurrection after
death.

Barzakh (Purgatory)
-------------------

Life hereafter and resurrection after death are proved by reason, but
reason cannot guide us as to the nature and character of the next life.
For that we have to refer to the sayings of the prophets and religious
leaders (Imams). The Holy Qurâ€™an and the traditions of the Holy Prophet
tell us that there exists a world named Barzakh where the dead will be
kept till the Day of Judgment and general resurrection. It is an
intermediate stage between this world and the next.

When a man dies, he comes first to this world, where he passes a special
kind of spiritual life. At the start of this life which begins from the
grave, a brief interrogation is carried out, and the beliefs and acts of
the individual are checked. If his beliefs are found in order of his
acts and deeds good, a door of paradise is opened to him and he stays on
the way leading to paradise, where he enjoys heavenly blessings.

There he waits for the Day of Judgment and final attainment of eternal
favors. On the other hand, if he is found wicked and his beliefs false,
he is placed on the way leading to hell and the door of hell is opened
in his face. There he leads a bitter and unpleasant life. He is
tormented and remains in constant fear of the Day of Judgment and severe
punishment.

Allah says in the Holy Qurâ€™an:

***"And do not say of those who are slain in the way of Allah that they
are dead. In fact, they are alive, but you do not perceive that life."
(Sura al-Baqarah, 2:155)***

***"Do not regard as dead those who have been slain in the way of Allah;
nay they are really alive and are well-provided by their Lord." (Sura
â€˜Ali-Imran, 3:169)***

The Holy Prophet said: "The grave is the first stage of the next life.
If one is saved from its rigors, the next stages are easy. If one is not
saved, then what follows is not easier."

Imam â€˜Ali Ibn Husayn (A) said: "The grave is either a garden out of the
gardens of paradise or a pit out of the pits of hell."

General Resurrection
--------------------

The Holy Qurâ€™an and the traditions of the Holy Prophet and the Imams
describe resurrection as under:

The sun and the moon will become dark and lightless. The mountains will
be cleaved and torn as under. The planets will collide with each other.
The rivers will become dry and will be ablaze. The heaven and earth will
be deformed. At that time all the dead will be raised. They will be
assembled for giving account of their deeds.

Allah has the record of all acts and deeds of the people. Nothing has
been left out or missed. On the Day of Judgment the veil will be lifted
from the eyes of the people and they will be able to see their deeds
with their eyes physically. Then the process of accountability will
begin.

Everything will be checked most carefully and minutely. The infidels and
the unpardonable sinners will be sent to hell. The sinners who will be
eligible for pardon. having already undergone a part of punishment
during their stay in the Purgatory, will be pardoned as a result of an
intercession by the prophets and the Imams. They will eventually be sent
to paradise.

The accountability process in respect of the good and virtuous will be
completed speedily and with ease. But the infidels and many sinners will
have a rough time. Even the minutest details of their conduct will be
checked and they will be asked to explain all their acts. This will take
a long time, and they will pass through various stages of accountability
in great discomfort and anguish.

Paradise
--------

Paradise is the place where the good and the virtuous will be sent.
There exist all means of comfort, ease and happiness and all that one
may enjoy. Everything which one wishes will be available there. The Holy
Qurâ€™an says:

***"There shall be what the soul desires and what delights the eye."
(43:71)***

The blessings of Paradise are higher and better than those of this
world. None has heard of nor seen anything like them. There will be no
discomfort there. He who enters paradise will have eternal life and will
stay there forever.

Paradise has various divisions, and everyone will be accommodated in
them according to the degree of his good deeds and virtues.

Hell
----

Hell is the place where infidels and the wicked will be kept, and there
they will be punished, tormented and subjected to most severe pain. The
punishment meted out in hell will be indescribably harsh and severe. The
fire in the hell not only burns the body, but it also burns the heart
and soul. It erupts from within and inflames the very existence of the
individual. "The fire of Allah that has been lighted, rises over the
hearts," says the Holy Qurâ€™an.

Those who will be consigned to hell will be divided into two groups:

The first group will consist of unbelievers who do not acknowledge
Allah. They will forever be tormented in hell and will have no escape.

The second group will consist of those who acknowledge Allah, but their
faith being weak, they commit sins and thus become liable to punishment.
They will be kept in hell temporarily. After they have been purged of
the darkness of the sins, they, through the direct mercy of Allah or
intercession of the prophet, will be forgiven and sent to paradise.

Hell also has various divisions where various types of chastisements
have been provided for. Everybody will be placed in the class which he
deserves according to the varying degree of his sins and will be
suitably punished.

Intercession
------------

The principle of intercession has been mentioned in the Holy Qurâ€™an and
the traditions of the Holy Prophet and the Imams. Hence, in principle,
intercession is undeniable. On the whole the traditions show that the
Holy Prophet and the Imams will intercede on behalf of some sinner.

They will say: "O Allah : Though this person is a sinner and deserves
punishment, yet for the sake of the certain quality which he possesses
because you are All-forgiving and for the sake of that consideration you
have for us. We beseech you to ignore his misdeeds and show mercy to
him." Their request will be acceded to and Allah will forgive the sinner
and will bestow his favor on him.

Though in view of the Qurâ€™anic passages and traditions, the principle of
intercession is undeniable, a few points must be borne in mind:

No interceder will intercede without prior permission of Allah.

Intercession will take place only on the Day of Judgment and after the
process of accountability is completed and all deed sheets have been
checked. Interceders will ask for mercy only. There will be no
intercession so long as a person is in ' barzakh ' where sinners must
undergo punishment according to their sins. Though it is possible that
there also on the recommendation of the Prophet or an Imam, punishment
is reduced or commuted, but that is not what is meant by intercession,

The interceders (Imams) themselves have said: "Be careful to come on the
Day of Judgment in the form of a man so that we may intercede on your
behalf." This shows that if sins and beastly acts of a person are so
heinous that he comes on the Day of Judgment in the shape of a beast, he
is not eligible to intercession. In any case, eligibility is the
essential condition.

The interceders have said that their intercession will not include
certain sins like not offering prescribed prayers.

In view of the above, one must not commit sins in the hope of
intercession. That will only amount to taking poison and relying on the
aid of physicians and medicines. Such a person is certainly liable to
perish.

Penitence
---------

The passages of the Holy Qurâ€™an and the traditions of the infallible
Imams tell us that if a sinner before his death repents and feels
penitence about his misdeeds; his sins are forgiven without further
questioning. Hence the door of penitence is open to all sinners and one
need not despair, for true penitence wipes all sins. But it is not
enough to repeat any formula of penitence or just to shed a tear. True
penitence has certain conditions to which â€˜Ali ibn Abi Talib (Peace be
on him) has referred. He has said: "Penitence has six conditions. One
must:

Really and sincerely repent his past misdeeds.

Be determined not to commit any sin in future.

Discharge all the rights which belong to others.

Fulfill all neglected obligatory acts.

Melt through self-mortification all the flesh that has grown on his body
through the use of unlawful foods.

Bear the bitterness of acts of worship in the same way as he had tasted
the pleasure of sin. Only then, he should utter the formula of
penitence."


