Islamic Teachings
=================

Islamic teachings cover the entire human life. On the whole, they are
divided into two parts :

1. Man's relation with Allah

2. Man's relation with man

Acts of Worship and Adoration
-----------------------------

In acts of worship, man, by turning his mind to Allah and praying to Him
with his heart, tries to make his soul transcend the material world. He
tries to purge it of the impurities of sin and to cultivate high human
qualities within himself.

He seeks the help of Allah, the Majestic and Almighty to overcome the
causes of despair and despondency, and keeps remembering Him to maintain
his own sense of responsibility towards Him. The Holy Qur’an says:

"And keep up prayer for my remembrance." Hence it is evident that it is
the worshipper himself whom the benefit of all acts of worship goes.

Instructional Effect of Worship
-------------------------------

Acts of worship are performed with particular attention and certain
formalities. Allah does not require our worship. It is we, who through
His worship and adoration obtain great moral and instructional benefits.

According to the well-known scientist, Alexis Carrel, when it is not
possible to find any logical words to infuse hope, it is worship and
prayer which generate a feeling of trust and enable man to face the
complex problems of life with confidence. This feeling can manifest
itself in everybody.

Worship leaves a definite mark on habits and manners, and for that
purpose we must perform acts of worship regularly.

The societies which have killed the spirit of worship, usually are not
safe from corruption and decay.

The effects of worship and adoration are so quick and wonderful that
their manifestation can be felt physically.

According to the same scientist, the result of adoration can be
established scientifically also. Acts of worship affect not only
emotional, but also physical conditions and sometimes even heal bodily
ailments in a few moments or a few days. Islamic acts of worship are
very simple and easy to perform. There are ample facilities for the sick
and the weak.

It is worth-noting that Islamic acts of worship, besides their
emotional, psychological and moral effects, which have an individual
aspect, produce remarkable social effects also.

Prayer
------

Prayer which is one of the most important Islamic acts of worship and is
performed five times every day and night with great simplicity and
devotion, produces very significant moral and practical effects in
strengthening the spirit of faith and purging worshippers' head and
heart of the impurities of sin. As one of its conditions is cleanliness,
it enjoins upon every Muslim to keep his body and dress always clean and
tidy.

As the dress of the person performing prayer and the place where he is
performing it must not have been acquired by unlawful means, it teaches
man not to wrongfully encroach upon other's property or to
misappropriate it. As prayer is to be performed at the appointed
timings, it teaches discipline and punctuality, and accustoms man to
early rising which is the secret of the success of many world
personalities.

We know that it is preferable to perform prayer in congregation at which
all stand in a row without any distinction before Allah and carry out
the significant and enthralling ritual in a brotherly manner.
Congregational prayer is a lesson in equality, fraternity, harmony and
unity.

Fast
----

Fasting is another Islamic act of worship, which teaches self-control
and resistance to passion.

From the social point of view, it induces people to show practical
sympathy to the deprived and the starving. Moreover, from the point of
view of health and hygiene, its curative and preventive value cannot be
denied.

It cleanses the bodily system internally and shakes off the unconsumed
food material which usually takes the form of surplus fat and
overweight, and become the cause of many diseases and discomforts.
Fasting is a good precautionary measure against the incidence of a
number of diseases. It has curative value too.

Pilgrimage (Hajj)
-----------------

The holding of a great conference of world Muslims is another
masterpiece of the Islamic teachings in respect of worship. The
ceremonies of pilgrimage are so exciting, pure and interwoven with
fraternity and equality that they deeply impress everyone without any
exception.

This gathering in which even now every year more than a million Muslims
from all quarters of the world take part, affords an opportunity to the
people of all races, color, languages and nationalities to meet on a
common ground without any discrimination. Its ceremonies take a man out
of his material shell which is marked with harshness and antagonism, and
lifts him to an atmosphere full of devotion and virtue. They soften the
emotions and enliven the feelings.

The Hajj gatherings also serve the purpose of a national conference on a
world level and contribute to Muslim homogeneity, both political and
economic. They serve as a unifying force and a common bond among the
Muslims belonging to diverse social segments, and provide them an
opportunity to meet together and exchange ideas. A study of all acts of
worship and devotion in Islam will show that every one of them has both
moral and social aspects. This confirms what we said earlier that the
benefit of all our acts of worship goes to ourselves.

Man's Relation with Other Men
-----------------------------

This part of Islamic teachings includes all social questions. Islam with
its distinctive system teaches its adherents what they should be, how
they should live and how they should discharge their duties to society.

The rights which a Muslim is enjoined upon to respect are very wide and
varied. They extend from the rights of the teachers, of parents, of
friends and neighbors, of brothers in religion, of fellow human beings,
to the rights of the animals etc.

From the Islamic point of view man, being an organ of the social body,
has so much importance that nothing can be equal to his life and blood.
The Holy Qur’an says: "He who killed any person, unless it be a person
guilty of man slaughter or of spreading chaos in the land, should be
looked upon as though he had slain all mankind, and he who saved the
life of any person, should be regarded as though he had given life to
all mankind."

There is no doubt that in view of the homogeneity of all the organs of
the body of a human society, the loss of one individual effects the
whole society and thus in a way, the individual and the society become
identical.

The Holy Prophet has said that all the faithful are the organs of one
body. If one organ suffers pain all other organs feel uneasy.

The celebrated poet, Saadi Shirazi, was inspired by this very Prophetic
saying when he said in. his well-known couplet that all human beings are
the organs of one another.

As we know, in Islam there is no problem of race, color or geographical
region. It is possible that all human societies on the basis of
adherence to a common ideology (Faith in Allah and the prophets and
adherence to good deeds) set up a world government with one law and one
policy in which all racial and geographical units may be submerged.

Relations of Muslims with Other People
--------------------------------------

Here again Islamic teachings have two aspects;

1. To preserve Muslim Identity.

2. To establish peaceful relation with the non- Muslims.

With a view to maintaining the independence and solidarity of the Muslim
society, arrangements have been made to save the Muslims from being
merged in non-Muslim societies and to protect them against all alien
influences in their vital affairs.

Hence instructions have been given that the Muslims must not completely
rely on non-Muslims and must not disclose their secrets to them. The
Holy Qur’an says:

***"O Believers, do not take into your confidence any other than the
people of your own community. For they never miss any opportunity for
exploiting any weakness of yours." (3:118).***

Islam instructs the Muslims not to make friends with those who are
hostile to Islam, unless they change their policy and give up their
hostile attitude.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***"You will not find people who believe in Allah and the Last Day,
making love with those who fight Allah and His Messenger. Even though
the latter be their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their
relations."***

At the same time, with a view to enabling the Muslims to live as a
powerful and active world unit and to be benefited by the positive
aspects of others in a healthy atmosphere of mutual respect, Islam
allows the Muslims to pursue a policy of peaceful co-existence with all
people of the book (followers of the previous prophets). It even enjoins
upon Muslims to protect them as a minority in Muslim countries and to
respect their rights so long as they do not commit a crime.

Such minorities are known in Islamic jurisprudence as Ahl al-Zimmah
(people of covenant). Anyhow, there are certain conditions which they
have to observe strictly.

If the interests of the Muslims so demand, they can enter into treaties
with the non-Muslims provided these treaties do not in any way endanger
their self respect, independence and interests. The Muslims are bound to
strictly adhere to the treaties concluded by them and are not allowed to
violate them unless they are violated first by the other party.

Adherence to treaties and agreements is a general rule of Islam. It is
equally applicable in respect of both Muslims and non-Muslims. Violation
of a treaty on the pretext that the other party is not Muslim is not
allowed.

Islam Enjoins Universal Vigil
-----------------------------

Every Muslim has two obligatory duties:

1. To invite others to do the right

2. To combat corruption

These two duties, which are known in Islamic jurisprudence as 'Amr
bil-Maruf'(exhortation to do good) and 'Nahy anil-Munkar' (restraint
from doing evil) enjoin upon all Muslims to keep a constant watch on the
society. If they find anybody deviating from the path of justice and
truth, they must invite him to the right path and if they find anybody
committing a crime or sin, they must restrain him from doing so.

This rule is considered to be an important law of Islam. In this
respect, the Holy Qur’an says:

"You are the best community which has been raised for the guidance of
mankind. You exhort the people to do good and restrain them from doing
evil."

Imam Sadiq (A) has said :

"He who does not fight corruption, neither with his hand nor with his
tongue or heart is pseudo alive."

In fact, the performances of these two important duties is one of the
obligations of collective life. In collective living, the happiness and
misery of each member of the society is shared by all others and hence
they cannot be indifferent to the conduct of fellow members.

Islam asks every Muslim to keep his social spirit fully alive and always
have an eye on collective interests. It wants every individual to be
responsible to all other members of the society and wants the society to
be responsible to all the individuals. All Muslims should criticize and
reform each other and play their role in the formation of a healthy
society.

Islamic Economy
---------------

As the prosperity and moral and material well-being of the community is
not possible without a rich and healthy economy, Islam, as a progressive
religious system, has included this question in its program.

Zakat
-----

Islam, in order to narrow the gap between the rich and the poor, has
legislated the law of zakat, and ordered the rich to pay a just share of
their money and individual income as zakat to the public treasury.

The money, so collected, constitutes a very large amount which can play
an important role in combating poverty, narrowing class gap and ensuring
an over-all development. The leaders of Islam have said that the amount
of zakat has been so precisely determined that if all those on whom
zakat is due, pay it honestly, poverty can be totally uprooted.

Poverty exists only because a large number of people evade the
obligation of this vital duty of theirs. The eight categories prescribed
for the expenditure of the zakat money fully illustrate the aim and
importance of this Islamic Law and throw light on its role in the
formation of a healthy society.

The details of these eight categories have been given in the Holy
Qur’an.

***"Zakat is only for the poor, the needy and the officials appointed
over them, those whose hearts are made to include (to truth) and the
ransoming of the captives and those in debt and in the way of Allah, and
the way farers; an ordinance from Allah and Allah is All knowing and All
wise."***

It is to be noted that the term, in the way of Allah is very wide and
covers all development projects as well as such items as education,
health and construction of bridges, roads, hospitals and schools.

Khums
-----

"Khums" means payment of 20 percent of surplus income in a year, i.e. 20
per cent of what is left of the total annual income after meeting all
expenses of that year. It is an Islamic tax which is levied to meet the
requirements of collective life such as help to the needy, eradication
of poverty, propagation of Islam and all other material and moral needs
of the Muslim society.

Khums is due only on the surplus and not the entire income. Hence, those
whose expenditure is more than or equal to their income do not have to
pay anything on this account. Only those whose income exceeds their
expenditure should pay 20 per cent of the surplus to the public treasury
.The money so realized comes to a considerable amount and enables the
Muslims to solve many of their religious, social and material problems.

Khums is not confined to the earned income only. It is also levied on
what is obtained from mines, what is extracted from the sea by means of
diving and on buried treasure dug out of the earth and not owned by
anybody. It is also due on spoils of war. In all these cases it is
levied on the total income. Only production expenses are deducted.

The details of the way how income derived from khums is to be
distributed and the categories of its expenditure are given in the
Islamic jurisprudence and are beyond the scope of this book.

Charity
-------

Spending in the way of Allah is not obligatory, but Islam has attached
much importance to it. There are many verses in the Holy Qur’an on this
subject.

Charity is one of the factors which help in the equitable distribution
of wealth and eradication of poverty. Alms may be given for individuals
or charitable objects. Distribution of alms through charitable
institutions according to a well-laid out program and under the
supervision of God-fearing people is an effective way of helping the
poor.

Wakf (Endowment)
----------------

Creation of endowments helps in the equitable distribution of wealth and
prevents its concentration in the hands of a few. There are two kinds of
endowments:

1. Public

2. Private

In the case of private endowments. the beneficiaries are only a few
individuals or a limited class such as the children or descendants of
the grantor.

In the case of public endowments, which are far more common, the corpus
of the donated property is transferred to the public or a large class of
society and becomes a part of public property. Islam has encouraged the
creation of endowments and the Imams themselves have set an example in
this respect.

Through endowments a large portion of Private property is turned into
public property and thus it becomes available for the service of the
masses. This in itself is a big step towards just and even distribution
of wealth.

How Wealth is Created?
----------------------

From the Islamic point of view the true and absolute ownership of all
things belongs to Allah alone.

He owns everything that exists in the universe. His ownership is real
and has creative aspect, because He is the Creator and Sustainer of
everything. "Whatever exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to
Him."

Hence others can become owners only with His permission and in
accordance with His laws and commands.

Private Ownership
-----------------

Islam respects private ownership and considers that everybody is the
owner of the fruits of his own labor. It recognizes labor as the basis
of ownership This is a natural law which has been endorsed by Islam.
Everybody is the natural owner of his self and his mental and physical
faculties. As his products are in reality only a crystallization of his
existing faculties, he is the owner of the products of his labor.

Rehabilitation and Acquisition
------------------------------

"He, who brings barren land under cultivation, is the owner of it." This
is a saying of the Holy Prophet.

Acquiring minerals and other natural resources before anybody else
discovers them is another cause of ownership. According to Islamic law,
he who acquires it, is the owner. As bringing barren land under
cultivation and acquiring natural resources involve labor, it is clear
that labor is the main factor in creating wealth.

Of course, the Islamic government has a right to arrange the cultivation
of barren land and the excavation of mineral resources on its own and to
utilize the return for the benefit of the general public.

Islam attaches great importance to the right of the workers. According
to Islamic traditions, ignoring the rights of a worker is an
unpardonable sin. A well-known tradition says that the Holy Prophet
raised a worker's hand which had swollen as the result of hard work and
said: "This is the hand which is liked by Allah and His Prophet."

Circulation of Wealth
---------------------

Islam has imposed special taxes on the stagnant wealth, which is not in
circulation (such as Zakat on coined gold and silver after the
completion of one year), and thus has taken a practical step to
encourage circulation of wealth. The Holy Qur’an has condemned the
hoarders and those who keep their wealth stagnant and do not utilize it
for the benefit of the people.

Further, the Islamic traditions much encourage commerce, agriculture,
cattle breeding and setting up of industries. In authentic books of
Hadith, many traditions are found which clearly show that Islam aims at
the maximum mobilization of all human and financial resources for the
benefit of the people on the whole.

Usury and Interest- Free Loan
-----------------------------

To stimulate productivity, Islam strictly forbids usury so that no body
may live on interest without doing any productive work.

Usury upsets the balance of wealth and widens the gap between the haves
and have-nots. It makes the rich richer and the poor poorer. Islam says
that usury is a mortal sin, and nobody and become the owner of the money
earned through practicing it. The money thus earned must be returned to
its rightful owner.

There are two kinds of usury and both of them are forbidden.

1. Loan Usury

2. Trade Usury

Lending money on the condition that it will be aid back with something
added to it, is called usury. It is immaterial whether the rate of
Interest is large or small, or whether it is paid in cash or in kind.
Anyhow, there is no harm if the debtor willingly pays anything out of
goodwill without any prior condition.

Trade means selling of a thing in exchange for another of the same kind,
but with a difference in quantity. For example to sell 10 kilograms of
good quality wheat in exchange for 12 kilograms of medium quality wheat
will constitute usury. Detailed conditions of such forbidden deals are
given in books of Islamic law.

Interest -Free Loan
-------------------

Islam exhorts people to give as much interest free Loan as is possible.
According to certain traditions, this is such an act of virtue that its
reward will be more than that of alms (free aid in the way of Allah).
Probably the reason is that many of those who seek loans are respectable
people who.

Even when they are badly in need of money, do not condescend to accept
free aid or alm, because they consider doing that, below their dignity
and position, whereas the persons who accept do not have such scruples.
For this reason, giving interest-free loan is considered more rewarding.

At the same time, Islam allows the creditors to require the deposit of
adequate security with them up to the full value of the loan. In case a
debtor fails to pay up the loan, the creditor is allowed to deduct an
equal amount from the security and return the remainder to its owner.

Giving interest-free loans is effective in the cultivation of friendship
and love and in removing complexes which often exist between high income
and low-income individuals. This is the simplest form of service which
the well- off people can render to the less fortunate.

Jihad and Defence in Islam
--------------------------

The question of Jihad occupies a special place in the Muslim law. In
fact, a progressive and compact system cannot be complete without such
provisions.

Owing to its misinterpretation by ill-informed persons, the inclusion of
the question of Jihad in Islamic teachings has given rise to much
hostile propaganda and has provided a pretext to its opponents to say
that Islam is a religion of sword and force. Even well-known writers
have been misled. Macdonald in his encyclopedia asserts that the
propagation of Islam by sword and force is one of the religious duties
of every Muslim.

As the nature and aim of Jihad become clear, not only the hollowness of
such criticism becomes obvious, but also the depth, purity and dynamism
of the teachings of Islam and their capacity to serve human society in
varying circumstances becomes evident. To prove this truth, we draw the
attention of the readers to the follow-points.

Pacifist Spirit of Islam is not Apposed to Fighting Imposed Wars
----------------------------------------------------------------

Jihad literally means effort and striving. In Islamic sources also, this
word has been used in the sense of every kind of intellectual, physical.
Financial and moral effort for the promotion of divine and human
objectives.

But technically it means an armed struggle for the protection and
progress of the Islamic system .

Now let us see what are the occasions on which such struggles become
unavoidable.

Fight against the mischievous elements that consider the spread of a
system of justice and truth a threat to their interests and take a stand
to exterminate it, is unavoidable. So long as such elements exist in the
world, supporters of truth and justice have no alternative but to defend
their objectives and their own existence.

In fact, war, in this case, is forced upon the believers in Allah and in
social justice against their will, Islam cannot avoid such situations.

Nevertheless, the pacifist spirit of Islam and its abstinence from using
force in dealing with those who do not resort to aggression, antagonism
and injustice, are evident from many passages of the Holy Qur’an.

***"Allah does not prohibit you, in respect of those who have not fought
you on account of the faith and who have not turned you out of your
homes from showing them goodness and being just towards them. Surely
Allah loves the just. He only orders you as against those who have
fought you on account of the faith and who have turned you out of your
homes and who have assisted others in your being turned out that you
should be friendly towards them. And whoever be friend them, they are
people who are unjust."***

At another place, the Holy Qur’an expressly says that if the enemy lays
down arms and shows peaceful intention, the Muslims have no right to be
hostile to them.

"If they leave you alone and desist from fighting against you and make
overtures for peace to you, in that case Allah has left you no cause for
aggression against them."

In another verse, the Holy Prophet is told:

***"If enemies incline to peace, you should also incline to it."***

Perhaps no other religion has expressed its peaceful disposition in such
clear terms. But Islam's pacifism must not be interpreted to mean that
the Muslims are allowed not to take action against those who force large
sections of the world people to live under colonial conditions or a
state of idolatry, or to watch aggression against their country as idle
spectators.

Jihad in the Way of Allah and its Aims
--------------------------------------

In Islamic sources, the word, 'Jihad' has mostly been used in
association with the phrase, in the way of Allah. This means that Jihad
cannot be waged for base desires, territorial expansion, imperialistic
aims, for obtaining spoils of war and the like. The aim of Jihad must
always be divine with no personal, material or selfish interest being
involved. On the whole, the aims of Islamic Jihad can be summarized in
the following few points, while dealing with them we will also try to
refute the objections of the opponents.

Defending the Existence of the True System
------------------------------------------

The most important aim of Islamic jihad is the defense of the divine
system of truth and justice and the preservation of its outstanding
features. During the time of the Prophet, most of the battles were
fought for this very purpose. The Holy Qur’an expressly says:

***"Permission to fight is given to those against whom war has been
declared, because they have been wronged and surely Allah is competent
of helping them; those who have been expelled from their homes without
just cause, but because they say that our Lord is Allah. And were not
Allah to repel some men by means of the others surely, the monasteries,
the synagogues, the temples of the Magians and the masjids in which
Allah's name is frequently mentioned, would have been ruined."***

Thus whenever the national sovereignty of the Muslims and their
independence and integrity are endangered, it is their duty to stand up
to the enemies and defend themselves to the last. It is interesting that
in this verse the defense of all places of worship has been given equal
importance, which is another sign of the peaceable spirit of Islam.

Anyhow, it should be noted that Islam shows neither tolerance towards
idol-worship, nor does it recognize idolatry as neither a religion, nor
the temples of idol- worshippers as place of worship. It regards
idolatry as a sort of superstition, falsehood, intellectual decadence
and a disease which must be remedied. That is why Islam has allowed the
destruction of the temples of idol - worshippers.

Fight With the Opposing Elements
--------------------------------

A heavenly system, as a new ideology, has a right to enjoy freedom of
propagation and be able to spread in a normal manner through preaching.
If certain elements such as idolaters, finding their unlawful interests
in danger, in order to prevent the spread of the new system, oppose it
and try to keep the people in ignorance and no peaceful solution of the
problem is found possible. Islam allows a fight against such elements.

Some of the early battles of Islam were of this nature, to which there
is a reference in the Qur’anic verse quoted above. Freedom of preaching
and logical spread of the true system is another aim of Islamic jihad.

Combating Injustice and Corruption
----------------------------------

Owing to the uncompromising hostility of Islam to injustice and
corruption, if no peaceful way is left, Jihad is allowed to put an end
to in justice and tyranny and to rescue the weak and the helpless from
the clutches of the tyrants such as were the usurers of Mecca.

Certain early battles of Islam were of this nature also. The Holy Qur’an
says:

***"Why should you not fight in the way of Allah for the sake of those
helpless men, women, and children, who being weak have been oppressed
and are crying out, "Our Lord, deliver us from this habitation whose
inhabitants are unjust oppressors and raise a protector for us by Your
grace and a helper from Yourself."***

Preparedness for Jihad
----------------------

So long as might and force rule over international relations and a
possibility of the Muslim society being subjected to aggression exists,
Islam enjoins up on the Muslims to maintain a state of complete
preparedness to be able to defend themselves.

The Holy Qur’an has given clear instructions in this respect and in a
short sentence has expressed all that was required, "***And to encounter
them (the enemies) provide whatever force you can afford."***

Though expenditure on armaments is considered least desirable and most
unproductive, Islam has considered it not only essential in the case of
need, but also has named it financial Jihad. Anyhow, it is not possible
to eradicate aggression and war in the world simply by strengthening
military organization and acquiring armaments.

Though to do so is also essential and has a security aspect, yet it
sometimes enhances the possibility of the out-break of war. Therefore;
Islam proposes that the basic way of securing permanent peace should be
to strengthen faith and morality***, “O Believers, enter all of you into
peace."***

This means that the only way to enjoy peace and security is that all
enter into the domain of faith, virtue and acknowledgement of Allah. It
is in this domain alone that every one regards the others as his
brethren respects them and believes that all are slaves of Allah and all
are loved by Him.

It is in this domain that everybody should look at others' interests as
his own. Everybody should like for others what he likes for himself and
dislike for others what he dislikes for himself. It is here that
toleration and sacrifice in the way of Allah and for the sake of Allah
are considered to be the most distinguished and prominent human
qualities.

Observance of Human Rules While Dealing With the Enemy
------------------------------------------------------

While many people think that the very word enemy is enough justification
for all kinds of excessive violence and inhuman acts, Islam with its
detailed fair and firm teachings leaves no doubt that even conflict with
the enemy must not go beyond the framework of the rules of human
morality, for every kind of violation of these rules amounts to
exceeding the limits prescribed by Allah.

The following precise instructions which the Prophet used to give to the
soldiers ,and mujahids before they proceeded to the battle field, fully
show Islam's peaceful disposition and the Prophet's deep insight.

***"March in the name of Allah and seek His help. Fight for His sake and
in accordance with His commands."***

***"Don't practice deceit or fraud. Don't embezzle the spoils of war.
Don't mutilate the body of an enemy after he is killed. Don't harm the
woman, the children and the aged. Don't interfere with the monks and
hermits who live in monasteries and caves.***

***Don't unnecessarily cut down trees. Don't burn the date-palm groves
of the enemy and don't submerge them in water. Don't destroy
fruit-bearing trees and don't put the enemy crops to fire. Don't kill
the useful animals except for your food. Don't poison the enemy water.
Don't resort to trickery and don't launch a surprise night assault."***

Islam forbids every resort to inhuman means of fighting such as night
assault, microbial warfare, incineration of cattle, crops and gardens
and killing and injuring unarmed personnel. In the Islamic rules of
warfare, instruction has been repeatedly given that the Muslims must not
shoot the first arrow and they must not launch the first attack. This
means that they should not attack unless they are attacked. Their war
should be defensive and not offensive.

We find that the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (A) used to give
instructions that every effort should be made that fighting did not
start before noon and if possible it was delayed till late afternoon so
that the sunset, the time when fighting normally stops, might not be
long in coming, and there be less bloodshed.

The directions given by the leaders of Islam (Imams) with regard to the
treatment to be meted out to the prisoners of war is yet another proof
of the necessity of the observance of rules of human morality even while
dealing with the enemy. The prisoners of war are to be treated with
kindness and are to be provided with the same food and drink as are
partaken of by the Muslims.

It is true that correct training and existence of the living spirit of
faith and human morality in any society forestalls many excesses and
vices. Nevertheless, the establishment and consolidation of social
justice is not possible without a strong judiciary .In every society
there exist some such miscreants and unruly persons that the light of
faith and morality alone cannot remove the darkness of their spirit.
They are not subdued without the existence of a strong and fair
judiciary

That is why Islam, in order to enforce its program of social justice,
has riot limited itself to moral counsels and spiritual training only
but has visualized the formation of a strong judiciary to back its
teachings.

Judicial System of Islam
------------------------

Among the qualities of a judge, two points are most important:

1. He should have complete knowledge of all the details of law.

2, He should possess the qualities of justice, virtue and honesty.

As or the equality of all before the court, Islam directs the Qazi
(judge or magistrate) to treat both the parties of a law suit equally.
The Qazi must observe complete equality even in acts of ordinary
courtesy such as speaking to the parties, looking at them or making them
sit or stand.

There must be no discrimination between the litigants on account of
their social status.

The leaders of Islam (Imam) have described the office of a Qazi as of
great importance and responsibility but at the same time, very risky.
Even the slightest lapse on his part is enough to degrade him from his
high position.

The Prophet of Islam has said that the tongue of a Qazi is between two
flames. This means that if he shows any bias towards one or the other
party, he will be burnt.

In Islam accepting a bribe and perverting judgment in favor of a briber
are deadly sins. The Holy Prophet has said: "He who gives bribe, he who
takes it and he who goes between them, all will go to hell."

The judicial system of Islam is very exact and detailed and occupies a
special position among judicial systems of the world today.

In the books of Islamic jurisprudence, there exists a special chapter on
judicature, which deals with all the principles and details of
administration of justice. and describes the qualifications of a Qazi,
qualifications of witnesses, the way to file a suit, the arguments which
the parties can advance in their favor and the like.

The instructions issued by Imam ‘Ali (A) and contained in his famous
letter addressed to Malik Ashtar, Governor of Egypt, throw light on some
of the above points and show the importance which Islam attaches to the
high office of the Qazi. This subject has been fully elucidated in
chapter VII of this book.

Criminal Laws
-------------

Punishment to be meted out to offenders must be just as well as
deterrent. At the same time, there should be a scope for reducing the
punishment in the case of repentant and those induced to commit crime in
ignorance or through inexperience. Punishments prescribed in Islam
satisfy all the three aspects.

For example, in the case of. willful murder, the prescribed punishment
is a death sentence. The Holy Qur’an says: "O men of the understanding,
there is security of life for you in the law of retribution." But at the
same time, the Holy Qur’an allows the heirs of the murdered person to
forgive the murderer and accept blood money (diyat).

Similarly in the case of certain crimes against chastity, if the
offender before being sentenced by the court genuinely repents and is
prepared to pay damages, he can be forgiven. According to Islamic
teachings, the best way to eradicate crimes is to concentrate efforts on
moral training so that the people may always be conscious of recompense
and retribution on the Day of Resurrection.

But, if in spite of such efforts, a crime is committed, then it should
severely dealt with. Islam is against those who succumb to false
emotions, and hesitate to accept the justification of death sentence in
the case of willful murderers and other punishment in the case of other
transgressors, such people practically give preference to the interests
of criminal over the interest of the society.

Experience shows that any leniency towards hard baked criminals helps in
spreading corruption, and is certainly detrimental to the security of
the society

Some people may criticize certain parts of Islamic criminal law and
regard them as unduly harsh, but fact is not so. Severe action is taken
only in the case of very serious crimes and only in cases where moral
and social security of the nation is endangered. Such instances are
found in other legal systems also.

At the most, some societies may not regard such questions as combating
unchastity as vital, whereas, Islam, with its subtle insight, attaches
to them utmost importance.

Other systems may consider some other questions vital.

Though some of the Islamic punishments sometimes look very harsh, the
proof of the connected crimes is so difficult and depends upon such
conditions that more than one or two convictions are hardly possible in
a year.

Thus though, the deterrent nature of these punishments produces good
moral effect and strikes terror among potential transgressors, yet
practically very few are affected by them.

It must be fully realized that Islamic laws and other Islamic teachings
which aim at protecting human rights and relations and preventing
corruption and aggression, form one homogenous unit and can be fully
effective only if they are all enforced simultaneously.

First of all an atmosphere should be created where Islamic teachings
concerning moral training and social welfare are implemented. In such an
atmosphere, the incidence of crimes and offences will be greatly
diminished and consequently there will be fewer occasions when it will
be necessary to inflict any punishment.

As is well-known, most of the crimes are the result of incorrect
upbringing and various material and social privations. With the
elimination of such factors, incidence of crimes will certainly be
reduced.

The result will be that the number of those, whom punishment is meted
out, will gradually go down, and with that the disgust which some people
feel at the idea of harsh punishment being inflicted on an apparently
large number of persons will also disappear.

But, of course, this does not mean that if in any particular atmosphere,
a part of Islamic program in the fields of moral training or eradication
of poverty is not being implemented, the rest should be totally ignored.
All we mean is to emphasize that all items of Islamic program are
closely interlinked, and if they are enforced simultaneously, they will
produce the best result.


