A Basic Guide in Islamic Administration
=======================================

The following instructions in the form of a letter were written by Imam
‘Ali (A) to Malik al-Ashtar, whom he had appointed as a Governor of
Egypt in the year 657 A.D. (approximately). There is a main central idea
running throughout these instructions, like one single thread out of
which a cloth is woven, and that is of Allah. The government is of
Allah. The governors and the governed are both creatures of Allah.

This letter is based on the principles of administration as taught by
the Holy Qur’an. It is a code to establish a kind and benevolent rule,
throwing light on various aspects of justice, benevolence and mercy, an
order based on the ethics of a benign and pious ruler ship, where
justice and mercy is shown to human beings irrespective of class, creed
and color, where poverty is neither a stigma nor a disqualification and
where justice is not tarred with nepotism, favoritism, provincialism or
religious fanaticism and on the other hand it is a thesis on the higher
values of morality.

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

Be it known to you, O Malik, that I am sending you as Governor to a
country which in the past has experienced both just and unjust rule. Men
will scrutinize your actions with a searching eye, even as you used to
scrutinize the actions of those before you and speak of you even as you
did speak of them.

The fact is that the public speak well of only those who do good. It is
they who furnish the proof of your actions. Hence the richest treasure
that you may covet should be the treasure of good deeds. Keep your
desires under control and deny yourself that which you have been
prohibited against. By such abstinence alone, you will be able to
distinguish between what is good and what is not.

Develop in your heart the feeling of love for your people and let it be
the source of kindliness and blessing to them. Do not behave with them
like a barbarian, and do not appropriate to yourself that which belongs
to them.

Remember that the citizens of the state are of two categories. They are
either your brethren in religion or your brethren in kind. They are
subject to infirmities and liable to commit mistakes. Some indeed do
commit mistakes, but forgive them even as you would like God to forgive
you.

Bear in mind that you are placed over them, even as I am placed over
you. And then there is God even above him who has given you the position
of a Governor in order that you may look after those under you and to be
sufficient unto them.

Remember! you will be judged by what you do for them.

Do not set yourself against God for neither do you possess the strength
to shield yourself against His displeasure, nor can you place yourself
outside the pale of His mercy and forgiveness. Do not feel sorry over
any act of forgiveness, nor rejoice over any punishment that you may
meet out to anyone. Do not rouse yourself to anger, for no good will
come out of it.

Do not say: "I am your overlord and dictator, and that you should
therefore, bow to my commands," as that will corrupt your heart, weaken
your faith in religion and create disorder in the state. Should you be
elated by power, or feel in your mind the slightest symptoms of pride
and arrogance, then look at the power and majesty of the Divine
Governance of the Universe over which you have absolutely no control.

It will restore the sense of balance to your wayward intelligence and
give you the sense of calmness and affability. Beware! Never put
yourself against the majesty and grandeur of God and never imitate His
omnipotence, for God has brought low every rebel of God and every tyrant
of man.

Let your mind respect through your actions the rights of God and the
rights of man, and likewise, persuade your companions and relations to
do the same. For, otherwise, you will be doing injustice to yourself and
injustice to humanity.

Thus both man and God will become your enemies. There is no hearing
anywhere for one who makes an enemy of God himself. He will be regarded
as one at war with God until he repents and seeks forgiveness. Nothing
deprives man of divine blessings nor excites divine wrath against him
more easily than oppression. Hence it is that God listens to the voice
of the oppressed and waylays the oppressor.

The Common Man
--------------

Maintain justice in administration and impose it on your own self and
seek the consent of the people, for, the discontent of the masses
sterilizes the contentment of the privileged few and the discontent of
the few loses itself in the contentment of the many. Remember! The
privileged few will not rally round you in moments of difficulty.

They will try to side-track justice. They will ask for more than what
they deserve and will show no gratitude for favors done to them. They
will feel restive in the face of trials and will offer no regret for
their short comings. It is the common man who is the strength of the
State and of Religion. It is he who fights the enemy. So live in close
contact with the masses and be mindful of their welfare.

Keep at a distance, he who exposes the weakness of others. After all,
the masses are not free from weaknesses. It is the duty of the ruler to
shield them. Do not bring to light that which is hidden, but try to
remove those weaknesses which have been brought to light. God is
watchful of everything that is hidden from you, and He alone will deal
with it.

Cover up the faults of the public to the best of your ability so that
God may cover up your faults which you want to keep hidden from the
public eye. Untie every knot of hatred for the people and cut asunder
every string of enmity between them. Protect yourself from every such
act as may not be quite correct for you. Do not make haste in seeking
confirmation of tale-telling, for the tale teller is a deceitful person
appearing in the garb of a friend.

The Counsellors
---------------

Never take counsel of a miser, for, he will vitiate your magnanimity and
frighten you of poverty. Do not take counsel of a coward also, for, he
will weaken your resolutions. Do not take counsel of the greedy too,
for, he will instill greed in you and turn you into a tyrant.
Miserliness, cowardice and greed deprive man of his trust in God.

The worst counselor is he who has served as a counselor to unjust rulers
and shared their crimes. So, never let men who have been companions of
tyrants or have shared their crimes be your counselors. You can get
better men than these.

Men gifted with intelligence and foresight, but unpolluted by sin, men
who have never aided a tyrant in his tyranny nor a criminal in his
crime. Such men will never be a burden to you. On the other hand, they
will be a source of help and strength to you at all times.

They will be friends to you and strangers to your enemies. Choose such
men alone for companionship both in private and in public. Even among
these, show preference to those who have a habitual regard for truth,
however, trying to you at times their truth may prove to be, and who
offer you no encouragement in the display of tendencies which God does
not like his friends to develop.

Keep close to you the upright and the God fearing, and make clear to
them that they are never to flatter you and never to give you credit for
any good that you may not have done, for, the tolerance of flattery and
unhealthy praise stimulates pride in man and makes him arrogant.

Do not treat the good and the bad alike. That will deter the good from
doing good, and encourage the bad in their bad pursuits. Recompense
every one according to his deserts. Remember that mutual trust and good
will between the ruler and the ruled are bred only through benevolence,
justice and service.

So, cultivate goodwill amongst the people; for, their goodwill alone
will save you from troubles. Your benevolence to them will be repaid by
the trust in you, and your ill-treatment by their ill will

Do not disregard the noble traditions set by our for bearers which have
promoted harmony and progress among the people; and do not initiate
anything which might minimize their usefulness. The men who had
established those noble traditions have had their reward; but
responsibility will be yours they are discarded.

Try always to learn something from the experience of the learned and
wise, and frequently consult them in state matters so that you might
maintain the peace and goodwill which your predecessors had established
in the land.

The Different Classes of People
-------------------------------

Remember that the people are composed of different classes. The progress
of one is dependent on the progress of every other; and none can afford
to independent of the other. We have the Army forced of the soldiers of
God. We have our civil office and their establishments, our judiciary,
our revenue collectors and our public relation officers.

The general public itself consists of Muslims and Zimmi and among them
are merchants and craftsmen, unemployed and the indigent. God has
prescribed for them their several rights, duties and obligations. They
are all defined and preserved in the Book of God and in the traditions
of His Prophet.

The Army, by the grace of God, is like a fortress to the people and
lends dignity to the state. It upholds the prestige of the Faith and
maintains the peace of the country. Without it the state cannot stand.
In its turn. it cannot stand without the support of the state.

Our soldiers have proved strong before the enemy because of the
privilege God has given them to fight for Him, but they have their
material needs to fulfill and have therefore to depend upon the income
provided for them from the state revenue.

The military and the civil population who pay revenue, both need the
cooperation of others--the judiciary, civil officers and their
establishment. The Qazi administers civil and criminal law ; the civil
officers collect revenue and attend to civil administration with the
assistance of their establishment.

And then there are the tradesmen and the merchants who add to the
revenue of the state. It is they who run the markets and are in a better
position than others to discharge social obligations. Then there is the
class of the poor and the needy, whose maintenance is an obligation on
the other classes.

God has given appropriate opportunity of service to one and all; then
there are the rights of all these classes over the administration which
the administrator has to meet with an eye to the good of the entire
population a duty which he cannot fulfill properly unless he takes
personal interest in its execution and seeks help from, God. Indeed, it
is obligatory on him to impose this duty on himself, and to bear with
patience the inconveniences and difficulties incidental to his task.

The Army
--------

Be particularly mindful of the welfare of those in the army, who in your
opinion, are staunchly faithful to their God and Prophet and loyal to
their chief, and who in the hour of passion can restrain themselves and
listen coolly to sensible remonstrance, and who can succour the weak and
smite the strong, whom violent provocation will not throw into violent
temper and who will not falter at any stage.

Keep yourself in close contact with families of established reputation
and integrity and with a glorious past, and draw to yourself men brave
and upright in character, generous and benevolent in disposition; for,
such are the select of the society.

Care for them with the tenderness with which you care for your children,
and do not talk before them of any good that you might have done to
them, nor disregard any expression of affection which they show in
return; for, such conduct inspires loyalty, devotion and goodwill.

Attend to every little want of theirs not resting content with what
general help that you might have given to them, for sometimes, timely
attention to a little want of theirs brings them immense relief. Surely
these people will not forget you in your own hour of need.

It behooves you to select for your Commander-in-chief one who imposes on
himself, as a duty, the task of rendering help to his men, and who can
excel in kindness every other officer who has to attend to the needs of
the men under him, and look after their families when they are away from
their homes; so much so, that the entire army should feel united in
their joys and in their sorrows. This unity of purpose will give them
added strength against the enemy.

Continue to maintain a kindly attitude towards them so that they might
feel ever attached to you. The fact is that the real happiness of the
administrators and their most pleasant comfort lies in establishing
justice in the state and maintaining affectionate relations with the
people. Their sincerity of feeling is expressed in the love and regard
they show to you, on which alone depends the safety of the
administrators.

Your advice to the army will be of no avail, unless and until you show
affection both men and officers, in order that they might not regard the
Government as an oppressive burden or contribute to its downfall.

Continue to satisfy their needs and praise them over and over again for
what services they have rendered. Such an attitude, God willing, will
inspire the brave to braver actions and induce the timid deeds of
bravery.

Try to enter into the feelings of others and do not foist the mistake of
one on another and do not grudge dispensing appropriate regards. See to
it, you do not show favours to one who has achieved nothing but merely
counts on his family position, and do not withholds proper reward from
one who has done great deeds simply because he holds a low position in
life.

The Real Guidance
-----------------

Turn to God and to His Prophet for guidance whenever you feel uncertain
regarding your actions. There is the commandment of God delivered to
those people whom He wishes to guide aright : "O people of the Faith!
Obey God and obey His Prophet and obey those from among you who hold
authority over you. And refer to God and His Prophet whenever there is
difference of opinion among you." To turn to God is in reality to
consult the Book of God; and turn to the Prophet is to follow his
universally accepted traditions.

Chief Judge
-----------

Select as your chief judge from the people one who is by far the best
among them one who is not obsessed with domestic worries, one who cannot
be intimidated, one who does not err too often, one who does not turn
back from right path once he finds it; one who is not self-centered or
avaricious, one who will not decide before knowing the full facts, one
who will weigh with care every attendant doubt and pronounce a clear
verdict after taking everything into full consideration ; one who will
not grow restive over the arguments of advocates and who will examine
with patience every new disclosure of fact and who will be strictly
impartial in his decision; one whom flattery cannot mislead; one who
does not exult over his position. But it is not easy to find such a man.

Once you have selected the right man for the office, pay him handsomely
enough, to let him live in comfort and in keeping with his position,
enough to keep him above temptations. Give him a position in your court
so high that none can even dream of coveting it and so high that neither
back biting nor intrigue can touch him.

Subordinate Judiciary
---------------------

Beware! The utmost carefulness is to be exercised in his selection: for
it is this high office which adventurous self-seekers aspire to secure
and exploit in their selfish interests. After the selection of your
chief judge, give careful consideration to the selection of other
officers. Confirm them in their appointments after approved
apprenticeship and probation.

Never select men for responsible posts either out of any regard for
personal connections or under any influence, for that might lead to
injustice and corruption.

Of these, select for higher posts, men of experience, men firm in faith
and belonging to good families. Such men will not fall an easy prey to
temptations and will discharge their duties with an eye on the abiding
good of others.

Increase their salaries to give them a contented life. A contented
living is a help to self-purification. They will not feel the urge to
tax the earnings of their subordinates for their own upkeep. They will
then have no excuse either to go against your instructions or
misappropriate state funds. Keep a watch over them without their
knowledge.

Perchance they may develop true honesty and true concern for the public
welfare. But whenever any of them is accused of dishonesty, and the
guilt is confirmed by the report of your secret service, then regard
this as sufficient to convict him. Let the punishment be corporal and
let that be dealt with in public at an appointed place of degradation.

Revenue Administration
----------------------

Great care is to be exercised in revenue administration, to ensure the
prosperity of those who pay the revenue to the state; for, on their
prosperity depends the prosperity of others, particularly the prosperity
of the masses. Indeed, the state exists on its revenue. You should
regard the proper un- keep of the land in cultivation as of greater
importance than the collection of revenue, for revenue cannot be derived
except by making the land productive.

He who demands revenue without helping the cultivator to improve his
land, inflicts unmerited hardship on the cultivator and ruins the State.
The rule of such a person does not last long. If the cultivators ask for
reduction of their land tax for having suffered from epidemics or
drought or excess of rains or the barrenness of the soil or floods
damaging their crops, then reduce the tax accordingly, so that their
condition might improve.

Do not mind the loss of revenue on that account for that will return to
you one day manifold in the hour of greater prosperity of the land and
enable you to improve the condition of your towns and to raise the
prestige of your state. You will be the object of universal praise.

The people will believe in your sense of justice. The confidence which
they will place in you in consequence will prove your strength, as they
will be found ready to share your burdens.

You may settle down on the land any number of people, but discontent
will overtake them if the land is not improved. The cause of the
cultivators' ruin is the rulers who are bent feverishly on accumulating
wealth at all costs, out of the fear that their rule might not last
long. Such are the people who do not learn from examples or precedents.

Clerical Establishment
----------------------

Keep an eye on your establishment and your scribes and select the best
among them for your confidential correspondence, such among these as
possess high character and deserve your full confidence, men Who may not
exploit their privileged position to go against you, and who may not
grow neglectful of their duties, and who in the drafting of treaties may
not succumb to eternal temptation and harm your interests, or fail to
render you proper assistance and to save you from trouble, and who in
carrying out their duties can realize their serious responsibilities,
for he who does not realize his own responsibilities can hardly appraise
the responsibilities of others.

Do not select men for such work merely on the strength of. your first
impressions of affection or good faith; for as a matter of fact, the
pretensions of a good many who are really devoid of honesty and good
breeding may cheat even the intelligence of the rulers. Selection should
be made after due probation -probation which should be the test of
righteousness.

In making direct appointments from people, see to it that those selected
possess influence with the people and who enjoy the reputation of being
honest; for such selection is agreeable both to God and the Ruler. For
every department of administration, let there be a head, which no trying
task might cause worry and no pressure of work annoy.

And remember that every weakness of anyone among your establishment and
scribe which you may overlook will be written down against you in your
scroll of deeds.

Trade and Industry
------------------

Adopt useful schemes placed before those engaged in trade and industry,
and help them with wise counsels. Some of them live in towns, and some
move from place to place with their ware and tools and earn their living
by manual labor.

Trade and Industry are sources of profit to the State. While the general
public are not inclined to bear the strain, those engaged in these
professions take the trouble to collect commodities from far and near,
from land and from across the sea, and from mountains and forests and
naturally derive benefits,

It is this class of peace-loving people from whom no disturbance need be
feared. They love peace and order. Indeed they are incapable of creating
discord. Visit every part of the country and establish personal contact
with this class, and enquire into their condition. But bear in mind that
a good many of them are intensely greedy and are inured to bad dealings.

They hoard grain and try to sell it at a high price and this is most
harmful to the public. It is a blot on the name of the ruler not to
light this evil. Prevent them from hoarding; for the Prophet of
God-Peace be on him- had prohibited it. See to it that trade is carried
on with the utmost ease, that the scales are evenly held and that prices
are so fixed that neither the seller nor the buyer is put to a loss. And
if, in spite of your warning, should anyone go against your commands and
commit the crime of hoarding, then inflict upon him a severe punishment.

The Poor
--------

Beware! Fear God when dealing with the problem of the poor who have none
to patronize them, who are forlorn, indigent and helpless and are
greatly torn in mind- victims to the vicissitudes of time. Among them
there are some who do not question their lot in life and who
notwithstanding their misery, do not go about seeking alms.

For God's sake, safeguard their rights; for on you rests the
responsibility of protecting their interest. Assign for their uplift a
portion of the state exchequer. (Baitul-mal), wherever they may be,
whether close at hand or far away from you.

The rights of the two should be equal in your eye. Do not let any
preoccupations slip them from your mind; for no excuse whatsoever for
the disregard of their rights will be acceptable to God. Do not treat
their interests as of less importance than your own, and never keep them
outside the purview of your important considerations, and mark the
persons who look down upon them and of whose condition they keep you in
ignorance.

Select from among your officers such men as are upright and God fearing
and who can keep you properly informed of the condition of the poor.

Make such provision for these poor people as shall not oblige you to
offer an excuse before God on the Day of Judgment; for, it is this
section of the people more than any other which deserves benevolent
treatment.

Seek your reward from God by giving to each of them what is due, to him
and enjoin on yourself as a sacred duty the task of meeting the needs of
such aged among them as have no independent means of livelihood and are
averse to seeking alms.

And it is the discharge of this duty that usually proves very trying to
rulers, but is very welcome to societies which are gifted with
foresight. It is only such societies or nations that truly carry out
with equanimity their covenant with God to discharge their duty to the
poor.

Open Conferences
----------------

Meet the oppressed and the lowly periodically in an open conference and,
conscious of the Divine Presence there, have a heart-to-heart talk with
them, and let none from your armed guard or civil officers or members of
the Police Department or the Intelligence Department be by your side, so
that the representative of the poor might state their grievances
fearlessly and without reserve.

For I have heard the Prophet of God say that no nation or society, in
which the strong do not discharge their duty to the weak, will occupy a
high position. Bear with composure any strong language which they may
use, and do not get annoyed if they cannot state their case lucidly.
Even so, God will open for you His door of blessings and rewards.

Whatever you can give to them, give it ungrudgingly, and whatever you
cannot afford to give, make that clear to them with utmost sincerity.

There are certain things which call for prompt action. Accept the
recommendations made by your officers for the redress of the grievances
of the clerical staff. See to it that petitions or applications
submitted for your consideration are brought to your notice the very day
they are submitted, however much your officers might try to intercept
them. Dispose of the day's work that very day, for the coming day will
bring with it its own task.

Communion With God
------------------

And then do not forget to set apart the best of your time for communion
with God, although every moment of yours is for Him only, provided it is
spent sincerely in the service of your people.

The special time that you give to prayer in the strict religious sense
is to be devoted to the performance of the prescribed daily prayers.
Keep yourself occupied with prayers during the day and in the night, and
to gain perfect communion, do not as far as possible, let your prayers
grow tiresome.

And when you lead in congregational prayer, do not let your prayer be so
lengthy as to cause discomfort to the congregation or raise in them the
feeling of dislike for it or liquidate its effect: for in the
congregation there may be invalids and also those who have to attend to
pressing affairs of their own.

When, on receiving an order to proceed to Yemen, I had asked to the
Prophet of God, how I should lead the people in prayer over there, he
said, "perform your prayers even as the weakest among you would offer;
and set an example of considerateness to the faithful."

Aloofness Not Desirable
-----------------------

Alongside of the observance of all that I have said, bear one thing in
mind. Never for any length of time keep yourself aloof from the people,
for to do so is to keep oneself ignorant of their affairs.

It develops in the ruler a wrong perspective and renders him unable to
distinguish between what is important and what is not, between right and
wrong, and between truth and falsehood. The ruler is after all human;
and he cannot form a correct view of anything which is out of sight.

There is no distinctive sign attached to truth which may enable one to
distinguish between the different varieties of truth and falsehood. The
fact is that you must be one of the two things. Either you are just or
unjust. If you are just, then you will not keep yourself away from the
people, but will listen to them and meet their requirements.

On the other hand, if you are unjust, the people themselves will keep
away from you. What virtue is there in your keeping aloof? At all events
aloofness is not desirable especially when it is your duty to attend to
the needs of the people. Complaints of oppression by your officers or
petitions for justice should not prove irksome to you.

Make this clear to yourself that those immediately about and around you,
will like to exploit their position to covet what belongs to others and
commit acts of injustice. Suppress such a tendency in them. Make a rule
of your conduct never to give even a small piece of land to any of your
relations. That will prevent them from causing harm to the interests of
others and save you from courting the disapprobation of both God and
man.

Deal justice squarely regardless of the fact whether one is a relation
or not. If any of your relations or companions violates the law, meet
out the punishment prescribed by law, however painful it might be to you
personally, for it will be all to the good of the State.

If at any time people suspect, that you have been unjust to them in any
respect, disclose your mind to them and remove their suspicions. In this
way, your mind will become attuned to the sense of justice and people
will begin to love you. It will also fulfill your wish that you should
enjoy their confidence.

Peace & Treaties
----------------

Bear in mind that you do not throwaway the offer of peace which your
enemy may himself make. Accept it, for that will please God. Peace is a
source of comfort to the army. It reduces your worries and promotes
order in the State. But beware! Be on your guard when the peace is
signed ; for, certain types of enemies propose terms of peace just to
lull you into a sense of security only to attack you again when you are
off your guard.

So you should exercise the utmost vigilance on your part, and place no
undue faith in their protestations. But, if under the peace treaty you
have accepted any obligations, discharge those obligations scrupulously.

It is a trust and must be faithfully upheld and whenever you have
promised anything, keep it with all the strength that you command, for
whatever difference of opinion might exist on other matters, there is
nothing so noble as the fulfillment of a promise.

This is recognized even among the non-Muslims, for they know the dire
consequences which follow from the breaking of covenants. So never make
excuses in discharging your responsibilities and never break a promise,
nor cheat your enemy. For, breach of promise is an act against God, and
none except the positively wicked acts against God.

Indeed divine promises are a blessing spread over all mankind. The
promise of God is a refuge sought after, even by the most powerful on
earth; for there is no risk of being cheated.

So, do not make any promise from which you may afterwards offer excuses
to retract; nor do you go back upon what you have confirmed to abide by;
nor do you break it, however galling it may at first prove to be. For,
it is far better to wait in patience for wholesome results to follow
than to break it out of any apprehensions.

Beware! Abstain from shedding blood without a valid cause. There is
nothing more harmful than this which brings about one's ruin. The blood
that is willfully shed shortens the life of a state. On the Day of
Judgment it is this crime for which one will have to answer first.

So, Beware! Do not wish to build the strength of your state on blood;
for it is this blood which ultimately weakens the stab and passes it on
to other hands. Before me and my God no excuse for willful killing can
be entertained.

Murder is a crime which is punishable by death. If on any account the
corporal punishment dealt by the state for any lesser crime results in
the death of the guilty, let not the prestige of the state stand in the
way of the deceased's relations claiming blood money.

Last Instructions
-----------------

Do not make haste to do a thing before its time, nor put it off when the
right moment arrives. Do not insist on doing a wrong thing, nor show
slackness in rectifying a wrong thing. Perform everything in its proper
time, and let everything occupy its proper place.

When the people as a whole agree upon a thing, do not impose your own
view on them and do not neglect to discharge the responsibility that
rests on you in consequence. For, the eyes of the people will be on you
and you are answerable for whatever you do to them.

The slightest dereliction of duty will bring its own retribution. Keep
your anger under control and keep your hands and tongue in check.
Whenever you become angry try to restrain yourself or else you will
simply increase your worries.

It is imperative that you study carefully the principles which have
inspired just and good rulers who have gone before you. Give close
thought to the example of our Holy Prophet (peace be on him), his
traditions, and the commandments of the Book of God and whatever you
might have assimilated from my own way of dealing with things Endeavor
to the best of your ability to carry out the instructions which I have
given here and you have solemnly undertaken to follow.

By means of this order. I enjoin on you not to succumb to the promptings
of your own heart nor to turn away from the discharge of duties
entrusted to you.

I seek the refuge in the Almighty and His unlimited sphere of blessings,
and invite you to pray with me that He may give us together the grace to
surrender willingly our will to His will, and to enable us to acquit
ourselves well before Him and His creation so that mankind might cherish
our memory and our work survives.

I seek of God the culmination of His blessings and pray that He may
grant you and me His grace and the honor of martyrdom in His cause.
Verily, we have to return to Him, I invoke His blessings on the Prophet
of God and his pure progeny.

Notes
-----

The famous Arab Christian scholar, jurist, poet and philosopher, Abdul
Maseeh-e-Antaki, who died some time in the early 20th century, whilst
discussing this letter writes that it is a far superior code than one
handed down by Moses or Hamurabi.

It explains what human administration should be and how it is to be
carried out, and is justifies the claims of Muslims that Islam wants to
introduce a Godly administration of the people, for the people and by
the people, and it wants that a ruler should rule not to please himself,
but to bring happiness to the ruled, and no religion before Islam tried
to achieve this end. ‘Ali (A) should be congratulated for having
introduced these principles in his government and for having written
them down for posterity.

According to a well known historian Masoodi (Murooj-uz- Zahab Vol. II,
page 33, Egypt), Imam ‘Ali (A) is credited with no fewer than 480
treaties, lectures, epistles on a variety of subjects dealing with
philosophy, religion, law and politics, as collected by Zaid Ibn Wahab
in the Imam's own lifetime.

So highly valued are these contributions both for their contents and
their intrinsic literary worth that some of his masterpieces have formed
throughout the course of Islamic history, subject of study in centers of
Muslim learning. Indeed, his reputation seems to have traveled into
Europe at the time of the Renaissance.

Edward Powcock, (1604-1691) a professor at the University of Oxford,
published the first English translation of his 'Sayings' and delivered
in 1639 a series of lectures on his 'Rhetoric'.

This letter according to Fehrist-i- Tusi (page 33) was first copied
during the time of Imam ‘Ali (A) by Asbigh Ibn Nabata and later on
reproduced and referred to in their writings by various Arab and
Egyptian scholars, chief of them being Nasr son of Mazahim (148 A.H.),
Jahiz Basari (255 A.H.), Syed Razi (404 A.H.), Ibn Abil Hadeed (655
A.H.), Ibn Abduh (the reformer of Egypt) and Allama Mustafa Bek Najib,
the great scholar of Egypt. The last named regards this letter as "A
basic guide in Islamic administration."

"But for his assassination", to quote the language of a French
historian, "the Moslem world might have witnessed the realisation of the
Holy Prophet's teachings, in the actual amalgamation of Reason with Law
and in the impersonation of the first principles of true philosophy in
positive action." The same passionate devotion to knowledge and learning
which distinguished Muhammad (S) breathed in every word of his Disciple.

With a liberality of mind-far beyond that of his age in which he lived
was joined a sincere devoutness of spirit and earnestness of faith. His
sermons, faithfully preserved by one of his descendants and his litanies
or psalms, portray a devout up looking towards the Source of All Good,
and an unbounded faith in humanity. "The Spirit of Islam" by Syed Ameer
‘Ali, page 363.


