Introduction: The Issue at Hand
===============================

In a concise chapter dealing with Shī'ism, Hamilton Alexander Rosskeen
Gibb echoes a persistent prejudice: the categorical affirmation that
Shī'ite Islām, with respect to Sunnī Islām, is “the other main sect of
Islām–the only important schismatic sect.”[^1]

To him, Shī'ism is the *ubi consistam* [essence] of the definition of
sect which, according to his understanding, embraces diverse “systems of
Islāmic doctrines and beliefs which are generally repudiated by the
orthodox…as heretical” (81). To speak of “heresy” in Islām, however,
requires a sufficiently clear understanding of its meaning.[^2]

When Gibb uses the word “heretical,” however, he does not use it as
descriptive adjective nor is he necessarily making a value judgment. For
him, it is merely a matter of fact which needs to be analyzed. The most
disturbing aspect of this conception of Shī'ism, however, is not the
simplistic explanation it gives to its historical development, but
rather its excessively broad scope. It does not say anything for want of
saying too much.

Gibb attempts to give a broad definition of “sect” and “heresy,”
applying it to everything in Islām that remotely resembles other Eastern
traditions. The evidence he provides, however, is far too scarce. He
insists on demonstrating, at any cost, that Shī'ism is inherently
schismatic and sectarian.

He uses the literary elasticity of the word “sect” [in English] to
explain that Shī'ite Islām, due to its minority status in the Muslim
world, must constitute a doctrinal off-shoot or a split from the Islāmic
majority. At the same time, he wishes to prove that true “orthodoxy” is
to be found almost exclusively in the Sunnī doctrinal tradition.[^3]

The erroneous application of the term “sect” to Shī'ite Islām, however,
does not resolve the problem of its historical origin. A true
understanding of Shī'ite Islām cannot be obtained through insufficient
scholarship. It can only be reached through a close analysis of its
religious and spiritual psychology as manifested in the Islāmic world.

The definition of Shī'ism as the only “sect” of Islām is due in part to
its more profound esoteric character which stands in contrast to the
essentially exoteric character of Sunnī Islām.[^4]Although there are no
substantial differences between the fundamentals of faith of Shī'ite and
Sunnī Islām, Shī'ism seems to possess something more profound in the
spiritual realm.

Despite this fact, Western scholars tend to view the differences between
Shī'ite and Sunnī Islām as the result a mere political dispute relating
to the succession of the Prophet Muhammad rather than a transcendental
metaphysical matter.[^5] However, it is only through an understanding of
the mystical dimension of Shī'ism that one can understand why it
appealed to Hindus and Persians while at the same time some of the Arabs
viewed it with reticence.

In fact, even when some scholars stubbornly persist on calling Shī'ism
an “Aryan Persian creation,[^6]” history is clear on the issue: Shī'ism
was introduced into Persia in the 16th century by a Turkish dynasty, the
Safavids, who were, as is well-known, a *tarīqah* or Sūfī
brotherhood.[^7]

Until then, the Persians were mainly Sunnis. Shī'ism was only
unanimously accepted among them ten centuries after the death of 'Alī
ibn Abī Tālib and the events that contributed to the creation of
Shī'ism.[^8]

We are not going to get down to details at this point. For now, what
needs to be stressed is the perfectly orthodox nature of Shī'ite Islām
and its reality as an integral part of the Islāmic revelation.[^9]

This fact is so clearly manifest that it cannot be overlooked on the
basis of tendentious historical arguments that insist on confining
Shī'ism within the imprecise bounds of concepts like “sect” or “heresy.”
In this aspect, modern Western criticism of Shī'ism is unjustified and
misguided. Contrary to the common views of Orientalists, Shī'ite Islām
is not a “sect,” a “heterodox” form of Islām or anything else that fits
into the definition made byGibb or any other specialist.[^10]

One of the most common mistakes made by Orientalists is the attempt to
study Shī'ite Islām on the basis of such simplified sectarian
parameters. It is all the worst when this approach reinforces the
argument that Shī'ism is the result of a separation, when this Western
concept of religious schism is totally alien to traditional Islāmic
thought.

If we wish to move beyond these objections against the orthodoxy of
Shī'ite Islām, we should first note that Westerners often consider
Islām, in contrast to the multifarious branches of Christianity,[^11] as
a conglomerate of mutually contradictory doctrines which is patently not
the case. We are not claiming that real differences never existed within
Islām.

They did indeed exist, particularly during its initial period between
the seventh and tenth centuries. It was then that a great variety of
philosophical, theological and theosophical theories started to manifest
themselves in all areas of Islāmic thought. These different ideological
currents that flourished were not “sects” in the true sense of the term
and are most adequately called “schools of thought.”[^12] While some of
them survived to the present, most of them have disappeared, leaving us
only their names.[^13]

In any case, we must not overlook the process of cultural and
ideological interaction which takes place when Islām comes into contact
with foreign cultures. Such contact is an important aspect of what
differentiates the Islāmic tradition from others. Although there are
many traditions within the tradition, Islām has always maintained its
cohesion and unity, a fact that often draws the attention of outside
observers.

Although Islām is united, it is not uniform. The sciences studied in any
traditional civilization–namely, a civilization based on divine
revelation–depend on the metaphysical principles and the religious
fundamentals of that revelation. Consequently, Islāmic doctrines,
regardless of their modes of expression, have always reflected and
echoed the central doctrine of divine unity [*tawhīd*]. It is due to the
centrality of *tawhīd* that Islām was capable of integrating various
systems of thought into its perspective and final objective.

The presence of diversity within the Islāmic tradition does not
undermine its transcendence and interior unity. Rather, as Seyyed
Hossein Nasr explains, it is the means that assures the spiritual unity
in a world composed of a conglomerate of diverse cultures, languages and
races (*Shī'ite Islām* 3-28). It is in this sense that it is appropriate
to speak of sects. In order avoid any possible misunderstandings,
however, it is essential to clarify the sense of the term.[^14]

[^1]: Editor's Note: The author quotes from the Spanish translation. For
the original English, see H.A.R. Gibb's Mohammedanism, especially
chapter 7 “Orthodoxy and Shī'ism.” Author's Note: The book is not very
favorable towards Islām. For starters, it defines Islām as
“Mohammedanism” when it is well-known that Islām does not demand a
personal adherence to the Prophet like that of Christianity towards
Jesus. Editor's Note: As Massignon explains: “If Christianity is
fundamentally the acceptance and imitation of Christ before the
acceptance of the Bible, Islām, on the contrary, is the acceptance of
the Qur'ān before the imitation of Muhammad, as the Prophet himself
explicitly declared” (94-95).

[^2]: Author's Note: Like some modern Muslim authors, the only thing
that Gibb retains from Shī'ite Islām is that it is a religious minority
whose historical development has been, to a certain extent, interpreted
as a “heresy,” although without the annoying nuance that word has
acquired in the West. Be that as it may, none of the many schools of
Islām are willing to accept such a label, particularly as it is
understood by Westerners, with all of its pejorative connotations. If,
under certain circumstances, anyone has labeled himself as a “heretic,”
it has been as an act of opposition against all “heretics,” those who
have made “order” out of their own “disorder,” considering it an
“orthodox” norm. Shī'ism is a reaction, if we can say so, against those
who have become “disordered.” It can thus be seen as a “disorder” which
attacks the previous “disorder” in order to reestablish the old original
order, from which the Muslim majority has become “separated.” On this
basis, it can be understood why Imām al-Shāfi'ī called himself a
“heretic” (rāfidī, from the Arabic “rejecter”) when he declared that “If
loving the Family of Muhammad is 'heresy'…May the Two Precious Treasures
testify that I am a 'heretic'!” (in kāna hubbu āli Muhammad rafdun fa
ushhidu al- thaqalayni annī rāfidī). One can be a “heretic” with respect
to another “heresy” as in the case of Prophet Abraham who, according to
Islāmic tradition, confessed to being a “heretic.” The same applies to
Muhammad with respect to the idolaters. Editor's Note: With its balance
between the exoteric and the esoteric, Shī'ism can also be viewed as the
true legacy of complete Islām which reestablishes its function in the
face of incomplete Islām which is either legalistic in the cases of
Sunnism or spiritual in the case of Sūfism.

[^3]: Editor's Note: Merely because Shī'ites are a minority does not
mean that Shī'ism is heterodox. Tījānī argues that the Shī'ites are
representatives of Islāmic orthodoxy and that they are followers of the
prophetic Sunnah [Tradition]. See, The Shī'ah: The Real Followers of the
Sunnah / al-Shī'ah hum ahl al-sunnah. In Shī'ite eyes, the Imāms are the
personification of the Sunnah. They are al-sirāt al-mustaqīm [the
straight path], al-'urwā al-wuthqā [the insoluble bond] nūr Allāh
al-hādī [the guiding light of Allāh] al-imān wa al-Islām [the faith,
Islām] wa al-sunnah wa al-salām [the prophetic tradition and peace]. The
author of this book, Luis Alberto Vittor, does not make an exclusive
claim to orthodoxy; rather, he recognizes the orthodox nature of
mainstream Sunnī and Shī'ah Islām. This is the same position taken by
Seyyed Hossein Nasr who writes that “Shī'ism and Sūfism are both, in
different ways and on different levels, intrinsic aspects of Islāmic
orthodoxy” (Sūfī Essays 104-105). According to Nasr, Sunnism and
Twelve-Imām Shī'ism stand in the middle of the spectrum of Islām as far
as orthodoxy and heterodoxy are concerned (The Heart of Islām 86). In
Western studies, however, “orthodoxy is limited to its exoteric aspect”
(86) which is inadequate as ”[t]here is an exoteric orthodoxy and
orthopraxy and there is an esoteric orthodoxy and orthopraxy” (86).
Exoterically, in practice, Wahhābis and Kharijites are orthodox.
Esoterically, in spirit, in scriptural interpretation, they might be
viewed as heterodox by mainstream Sunnis and Shī'ites. If they are
hostile towards the Ahlul Baytand their followers, Shī'ites would view
them as heretical. So long as they observe the sharī'ah, the Sūfis and
the Ismā'īlis are orthodox. In orthopraxy, there is no objection against
the Ahmadiyyah. It is in their 'aqīdah [creed], their belief in a
prophet after Muhammad ibn 'Abd Allāh, where their heresy lies. It
should be noted, however, that the followers of Mīrzā Ghulam Ahmed split
into two camps after his death: one who believed that he was indeed a
prophet, the Messiah and the Mahdī, and one who believed that he was not
a prophet, but a reformer (and the Messiah and the Mahdī based on a weak
tradition within the corpus of Bukhārī). The former are known as the
Ahmadī, and the later are known as the Lahori Group. Muhammad 'Alī, the
author of The Religion of Islām, was a member of the Lahori group, known
as the Lahori Ahmadis. The Moorish Science Temple, the Nation of Islām,
the Five Percenters, the Ansār, and other cults, are evidently outside
the fold of Islām in 'aqīdah [creed], orthodoxy, and orthopraxy.

[^4]: Editor's Note: As Nasr notes, “the esoteric dimension of Islām…in
the Sunnī climate is almost totally connected with Sūfism” (Sūfī Essays
105).

[^5]: Editor's Note: This is also the attitude of many Sunnī scholars.
As Sayyid Muhammad Rizvī summarizes: In the polemical writings of the
Sunnis, it is asserted that Sunnī Islām is “orthodox Islām” whereas
Shī'ism is a “heretical sect” that began with the purpose of subverting
Islām from within. This idea is sometimes expressed by saying that
Shī'ism began as a political movement and later on acquired religious
emphasis. (Chapter 1) As Jafrī explains, “It is…difficult to speak, at
any stage of its existence, about the 'political' Shī'ah as distinct
from the 'religious' one” (2). The historian Matti Moosa acknowledges
that “Shī'ism, or the support of 'Alī, grew in the early period of Islām
as a spiritual movement, based on the assumption that the leadership of
the Muslim community was a spiritual office and that 'Alī had been
singled out from among all Muslims to fill it” (xv). Moosa confirms
that: It was in the time of 'Uthmān that the term Shī'ite, which until
then had had only a spiritual connotation, began to assume a political
significance. Those supporting 'Alī became known as the Shī'ites
[partisans] of 'Alī, while those supporting 'Uthmān became known as the
Shī'ites [partisans] of 'Uthmān. (xv) The faction of 'Ā'ishah, Talhah
and Zubayr [called the “People of the Camel” or ashāb al-jamal] and the
Syrians [ahl al-Shām] were also known as the shī'at Mu'āwiyyah (Jafrī
95-96).

[^6]: Editor's Note: As Massignon explains, “the theorists deny the
authenticity of Islāmic mysticism, which is portrayed as a form of the
racial, linguistic, and national reaction by the Aryan peoples,
particularly the Iranians, against the Arab Islāmic conquest. Renan, P.
de Lagarde, and more recently Reitzenstein, Blochet, and E.G. Browne,
have helped to spread this theory” (46).

[^7]: Editor's Note: The Safavids were a dynasty that ruled Persia from
1501 to 1736. Founded by Ismā'īl, leader of the safawī Sūfī brotherhood,
they imposed Twelver Shī'ism as their state religion for political
purposes. At a time when various Muslim groups were vying for power,
each claiming the right to rule, the Twelvers did not present a
political threat since Imām Mahdī was in Occultation and would only
return towards the end of the world. The spread of Shī'ism also helped
protect the Safavīds from the Ottoman threat to the West and from the
Uzbeks from the East. The Safawī period was a golden age for Shī'ite
scholarship and produced such prolific scholars as 'Allāmah Majlisī,
author of Bihār al-anwār. While this work is monumental in size, it is
flawed in many aspects: 1) the author was unable to review it and
correct it; 2) it is an exceedingly late compilation of traditions; and
3) it contains an enormous quantity of false and fabricated traditions.
Despite the author's enormous and commendable effort, the work has been
given undue importance in recent times. Contemporary Iranian scholars
have warned readers about this work, reminding them that it should not
be placed on par with other more complete and reliable books of hadīth.
While Majlisī planned to subject the traditions to critical analysis and
due categorization, he died before being able to do so, and the
subsequent Editors of his work have left it as such, without the editing
it requires.

[^8]: Editor's Note: As Massignon explains, “In reality, Shī'ism, which
is presented to us as a specifically Persian Islāmic heresy, was
propagated in Persia by pure Arab colonists, who had come from Kūfah to
Qum” (46). All of the 3,000 tawwābūn were Arabs (Jafrī 232). For more on
the falsity of the Persian origin or Shī'ism, see Tījānī's Then I was
Guided 158-59.

[^9]: ] Editors' Note: As Nasr has observed, “The reality of Shī'ism and
Sūfism as integral aspects of the Islāmic revelation is too dazzlingly
clear to be ignored or explained away on the basis of a tendentious
historical argument” (Sūfī Essays 104).

[^10]: Editor's Note: Nasr is correct when he states that “One should
never refer to Shī'ism as a whole as sect, any more than one would call
the Greek Orthodox Church a sect” (Heart of Islām 87). As Jafrī
explains, “In the infant years of Islāmic history, one cannot speak of
the so-called 'orthodox' Sunnah and the 'heretical' Shī'ah, but rather
of two ill-defined points of view that were nevertheless drifting
steadily, and finally irreconcilably, further apart” (2).

[^11]: Editor's Note: Christianity is divided into three major branches:
Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy and Protestantism. There are
further subdivided into rites and sects which number in the thousands.
The Holy Qur'ān criticizes the schisms of the Jews and Christians (98:4;
10:93).

[^12]: Editor's Note: The Arabic term for “school” is madhhab. In Islām,
there are numerous schools of jurisprudence, schools of recitation of
the Qur'ān, schools of Qur'ānic commentary, schools of prophetic
traditions, and schools of philosophy, rendering the Wahhābī refutation
of madhāhibs senseless. The Islāmic intellectual tradition was one of
tolerance. The early Muslims argued with the best arguments, following
the commandment of Allāh: “Invite (all) to the Way of thy Lord with
wisdom and beautiful preaching; and argue with them in ways that are
best and most gracious: for thy Lord knoweth best, who have strayed from
His Path, and who receive guidance” (16:125). While there were thousands
of rays of reason, they all radiated from the same sun of tawhīd. The
Prophet and the Imāms debated and discussed in an atmosphere of respect
and tolerance with Christians, Jews, Zoroastrians, Manicheists,
polytheists, and atheists. As Nasr explains, “On the basis of the
Qur'ānic doctrine of religious universality and the vast historical
experiences of a global nature, Islāmic civilization developed a
cosmopolitan and worldwide religious perspective unmatched before the
modern period in any other religion” (The Heart of Islām 40). The
decline of Islāmic civilization and culture is, in part, the result of
the imposition of official orthodoxies. The exponential growth of
science and scholarship in the early days of Islām was cut short when
freedom of thought was suppressed and dogmas came to dominate. The
phenomenon of rapid evolution that came about through Islām applied to
exegesis, jurisprudence, grammar, and a whole host of sciences. W.F.
Albright's description of “cultural revolution” easily applies to Islām:
“When a culture is replaced by another culture we almost always note a
sudden change, a real mutation, with changes taking place in one
generation which under normal circumstances would take a millennium”
(88).

[^13]: Editor's Note: The existing schools of Sunnī jurisprudence
include the Hanafī, Shāfi'ī, Mālikī and Hanbalī. Other, no longer extant
Sunnī schools of fiqh, include the Zāhirī school from al-Andalus, the
Jarīrī school founded by Tabarī; and the schools of al-Azwā'ī, Hasan
al-Basrī, Abū 'Uyaynah, Ibn Abī Dhu'ayb, Sufyān al-Thawrī, Ibn Abī
Dāwūd, and Layth ibn Sa'd, among others.

[^14]: Editor's Note: The author is alluding to Descartes' statement: “I
will not argue with you unless you define your terms.”


