Chapter 9: The Imāmate: The Esoteric Inheritance or the Bātin of the Prophet
============================================================================

To sum up the political aspects of Islāmic history, it is clear that the
Caliphate is transmitted by way of *nass* through which the Prophet or
the Imām designates who will succeed him in the Imāmate.[^1]The Imām is
the sole expert of the inner sense of the Scripture and the Sunnah. This
exclusive knowledge was passed directly from the Prophet to 'Alī and
through him to his descendants.[^2]The Imām is thus the definitive
authority on religion obligations [*wājibāt/furūd*] and the esoteric
interpretation [*tafsīr/ta'wīl*] of the *sharī'ah* [Islāmic law].
Furthermore, the Imām possesses the quality of '*ismah*, infallibility
and impeccability.[^3]

The controversial and contentious issue of the succession of the
Prophet, disputed by Sunnis and Shī'ites for over a millennium, can
never be understood if the essentially esoteric function of the Imāmate,
as a prolongation and complement to the Prophethood, is overlooked. The
issue of the Imāmate is more than an abstract question. It is the
legitimate expression of Muhammadan spiritual authority and temporal
power.

It is a concrete existential reality which needed to manifest itself in
the world to continue expounding the *bātin* [esoteric aspect] of the
Prophethood.

For Shī'ites, the completion of the “Cycle of Prophethood” [*dā'irat
al-nubuwwah*] marks the beginning of the “Cycle of Initiation” [*dā'irat
al-wilāyah*]. For metaphysical and cosmological reasons, the Cycle of
*wilāyah* was to be opened through its own “door” [*al*-*bāb*], 'Alī ibn
Abī Tālib, due to his role as “spiritual successor” [*khalīfah rūhānī*]
and “executer” [*wasī*] of the Prophet's *bātin* [secrets] or initiator
into the Muhammadan mysteries.

This is why the Imāmate is not merely a question of blood ties to the
Prophet.[^4] The issue is not the degree of relation with him, be it
wives, daughters, grandchildren, sons-in-law or parents-in-law. On the
contrary, the worldly family union is the result of the pleromatic unity
of the *nubuwwah* [Prophethood] and the *wilāyah* [guardianship].

As Corbin senses, the concept of the Imāms can only be understood if one
considers them as divine luminaries and pre-cosmic entities.[^5]They
themselves affirmed so during the course of their worldly existence.
Many traditions to this effect were gathered by al-Kulaynī in his
voluminous compilation *al-Kāfī*.[^6]

They stress the fact that the Prophet and the Imām are from the same
essence and the same light[^7] and what is said of one is applicable to
any one of the twelve.[^8]

Shī'ite gnosis enables us to understand the importance of the situation
and exactly what was on the line with the Caliphate.[^9]By the political
substitution of Abū Bakr for 'Alī, the organic link between the *zāhir*
[exoteric] and the *bātin* [esoteric] was temporarily broken. In
Sunnism, this led to the development of a legalistic religion, based on
a purely juristic interpretation of Islām.[^10] It was thus left to Sūfī
and Shī'ite Islām to preserve, in their exoteric practices and
doctrines, the lost esoteric equilibrium.

[^1]: Editor's Note: The nass or appointment of 'Alī and the succeeding
Imāms is one of the issues stressed by Shaykh Mufīd in Kitāb al-irshād.

[^2]: Editor's Note: As Imām al-Sādiq explains, ”'Alī was a man of
knowledge, and knowledge is inherited. And a man of knowledge never dies
unless another one remains after him who knows his knowledge” (al-Kāfī,
156: hadīth 590). Imām al-Ridā wrote in a letter that “Muhammad was
Allāh's custodian over His creatures. When he was taken, we, the
Household, were his inheritors” (160, hadīth 598).

[^3]: Editor's Note: 'Ismah may also be translated as “a state of
sinlessness.”

[^4]: Editor's Note: There can be no monarchy in Islām as can be seen in
Imām Khumaynī's “The Incompatibility of Monarchy with Islām,” Islām and
Revolution (Berkely: Mizan P, 1981): 200-208. The Imāmate was given to
those appointed by Allāh, and was not necessarily from father to eldest
son. As Imām al-Sādiq explains “Do you think that he who appoints a
successor from among us, appoints anyone he wishes? No, by Allāh, indeed
it is a covenant from the Messenger of Allāh to one man after another,
until it comes down to the one who is entrusted with it” (Kulaynī 1:2,
IV, 320: hadīth 739). In another hadīth he explains that “The Imāmate is
a covenant from Allāh, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, which is
entrusted to men who are named” (320: hadīth 738).

[^5]: Editor's Note: As Nasr explains, “Shī'ism believes that there is a
'Primordial Light' passed from one prophet to another and after the
Prophet of Islām to the Imāms. This light protects the prophets and
Imāms from sin, making them inerrant [ma'sūm], and bestows upon them the
knowledge of divine mysteries” (Sūfī Essays 111). 'Allāmah Muhammad
Bāqir al-Majlisī lists numerous traditions concerning this “Primordial
Light” and how it was passed down from the prophets, to Muhammad and
then to the Imāms (see chapters 1 and 2 of Hayāt al-qulūb). According to
Imām Khumaynī: [T]he Most Noble Messenger and the Imāms existed before
the creation of the world in the form of lights situated beneath the
divine throne; they were superior even in the sperm from which they grew
and in their physical composition. Their exalted station is limited only
by the divine will, as indicated by the saying of Jibra'īl recorded in
the traditions on the mi'rāj: “Were I to draw closer by as much as the
breadth of a finger, surely I would burn.” The Prophet himself said: “We
have states with God that are beyond the reach of the cherubim and the
prophets.” It is part of our belief that the Imāms too enjoy similar
states… (Islām and Revolution 64-65) Concerning these attributes of the
Imāms, see Henry Corbin, Histoire de la philosophie Islāmique (Paris,
1964): 77 ff. It is recorded in al-Kāfī that Imām al-Sādiq was asked
about the verse: “Therefore, believe in Allāh and His Messenger and in
the Light which we have sent down” to which he responded: The Light, by
Allāh, is the Light of the Imāms from the Household of Muhammad till the
Day of Resurrection. They, by Allāh, are the Light which Allāh has sent
down, and they, by Allāh, are the Light of Allāh in the heavens and on
the earth.” (Kulaynī l80: hadīth 514) In Lantern of the Path, Imām
al-Sādiq relates a fascinating tradition on the authority of Salmān
al-Fārisī in which the Messenger of Allāh explains that: Allāh created
me from the quintessence of light, and called me, so I obeyed Him. Then
he created 'Alī from my light, and called him, and he obeyed. From my
light and the light of 'Alī He created Fātimah. He called her and she
obeyed. From me, 'Alī and Fātimah, He created al-Hasan and al-Husayn. He
called them and they obeyed Him. Allāh has named us with five of His
names: Allāh is al-Mahmūd [the Praised] and I am Muhammad [praisworthy];
Allāh is al-'Alī [the High], and this is 'Alī [the one of high rank];
Allāh is al-Fātir [Creator out of nothing], and this is Fātimah; Allāh
is the One with Ihsān [beneficence], and this is Hasan; Allāh is
Muhassin [the Beautiful] and this is Husayn [the beautiful one]. He
created nine Imāms from the light of al-Husayn and called them and they
obeyed Him, before Allāh created either Heaven on high, the
out-stretched earth, the air, the angels or man. We were lights who
glorified Him, listened to Him and obeyed Him. In The Origins and
Development of Shī'ah Islām, Jafrī questions the authenticity of the
traditions describing the Imāms as supernatural human beings and the
miracles attributed to them (300, 303). Miracles and mysticism are
clearly incompatible with his training as a historian. He holds that “a
great many traditions ascribing supernatural and superhuman
characteristics to the Imāms, propounded by semi-ghulāt circles in
Kufah, crept into Shī'ī literature” (303). He therefore dismisses the
traditions concerning the light of Allāh in 'Alī and the description of
the Imāms as the “shadows of light” and “luminous bodies” (302). Shī'ite
scholars, however, have always shown the greatest aversion towards
ghuluw [extremism] and would not have accepted traditions from ghulāt or
even semi-ghulāt sources. Shī'ite fuqahā' [jurists] are unanimous in
their takfīr [declaration of infidelity] of the ghulāt (Khu'ī 28;
Gulpāygānī 30 et al.). As Shaykh Sadūq says: Our belief concerning those
who exceed the bounds of belief [ghāl, pl. ghulāt] and those who believe
in delegation [al-mufawwidah] is that they are deniers [kuffār] of
Allāh, Glory be to His name. They are more wicked than the Jews, the
Christians, the Fire-Worshippers, the Qadarites or the Kharijites, or
any of the heretics [ahl al-bid'ah] or those who holds views which lead
astray [al-ahwā' al-mudillah]. (141-142) While Jafrī may believe that
excessively zealous Shī'ites exaggerated the status of the Imāms,
turning them into divine luminaries, what accounts for the presence of
similar traditions in Sunnī and Sūfī sources? In 'Abd al-Rahmān Sulamī's
(d. 1021) famous compilation of the Qur'ān titled Haqā'iq al-tafsīr, we
find an exegesis of Sūrah 2:37 which is startling for a Sunnī source. In
interpreting the verse “and Allāh taught Adam the names,” Sulamī quotes
a tradition from Imām Ja'far to the effect that: “Allāh existed before
His creation existed. He created five creatures from the light of His
Glory and gave each one a name from among His Names: Being the Praised
One [mahmūd], He called His Prophet, Muhammad; being the Most High
['alī], He called the Leader of the Believers, 'Alī; being the Creator
[fātir] of the heavens and the earth, he forged the name Fātimah; and
since he has the most beautiful names [husnā], He forged two names for
Hasan and Husayn. He then placed them to the right of His Throne…”The
traditions in question are numerous and widely recorded. We are not
dealing with isolated traditions with weak chains of narrations [sanad]
which can easily be dismissed.

[^6]: Author's Note: See al-Kulaynī, al-Kāfī (Karachi 1965). There is
also a more recent edition (Tehran 1400/1980). Editor's Note: al-Kāfī fī
'ilm al-dīn [The Sufficient in the Knowledge of Religion] is one of the
“Four (Fundamental) Books” of the Shī'ites. The others include Man lā
yahduruhu al-faqīh [For Him not in the Presence of a Jurist] by Shaykh
al-Sadūq Muhammad ibn Bābawayh al-Qummī (d. 381/991), Tahdhīb al-ahkām
(Rectification of the Statutes) by Shaykh Muhammad al-Tūsī (d. 460/1068)
and al-Istibsār fī mā ukhtulifa fīhi min al-akhbār (Reflection upon the
Disputed Traditions) also by al-Tūsī.

[^7]: Editor's Note: It is related that Imām Muhammad al-Bāqir said that
“The first beings that Allāh created were Muhammad and his family, the
rightly guided ones and the guides; they were the phantoms of light
before Allāh” (Kulaynī 1: 279).

[^8]: Editor's Note: The Messenger of Allāh said of his Holy Household:
“We are exactly the same as regards command, understanding, and what is
lawful and what is unlawful” (Kulaynī 314: hadīth 728). As Nasr
explains, The Imāms are like a chain of light issuing forth from the
“Sun of Prophecy” which is their origin, and yet they are never
separated from that Sun. Whatever is said by them emanates from the same
inviolable treasure of inspired wisdom. Since they are an extension of
the inner reality of the Blessed Prophet, their words really go back to
him. That is why their sayings are seen in the Shī'ite perspective as an
extension of the prophetic hadīth, just as the light of their being is
seen as a continuation of the prophetic light. In Shī'ite eyes, the
temporal separation of the Imāms from the Blessed Prophet does not at
all affect their essential and inner bond with him or the continuity of
the “prophetic light” which is the source of him as well as their
inspired knowledge. (A Shī'ite Anthology 6-7)

[^9]: Editor's Note: The office of the Imāmate and Caliphate was meant,
by divine design, to function as the Government of God on earth. The
Prophet has said that: “He, who denies 'Alī his Imāmate after me, verily
denies my Prophethood [nubuwwah]. And he who denies my Prophethood has
denied Allāh His divinity” (Sadūq 107). He also stated that “The Imāms
after me are twelve, the first of them is the Prince of Believers 'Alī
ibn Abī Tālib, and the last of them is the Mahdī [rightly-guided], the
Qā'im [the upholder of the true religion]; obedience to them is
obedience to me and disobedience to them is disobedience to me; and who
denies one of them has verily denied me” (108). Imām al-Sādiq has said
that: “He who denies the last among us is like him who denies the first
among us” (108). The following tradition from Imām al-Sādiq illustrates
what is at stake when the authority of Ahlul Baytis forsaken: We are
those obedience to whom Allāh has made an obligation. Nothing is proper
for the people except to know, nor are the people absolved from being
ignorant about us. He who knows us is a believer, and he who denies us
is an unbeliever. He who neither knows us nor denies us is misguided,
till he returns to the path of guidance, which Allāh has made an
obligation for him as a binding obligation to us. If he dies in
misguidance, Allāh will do with him whatever he pleases. (Kulaynī 60
hadīth 489) The Imām has also issued the following firm warning:
“Whoever dies without having known and acknowledged the Imām of his Age
dies as an infidel” (Kulaynī I 318). Recognition of the Imām is an
absolute duty of every believer. Loving the Household of the Prophet is
mandatory. As we read in the Holy Qur'ān: “No reward do I ask of you for
this except the love of those near of kin” (42:23) This is not to imply
that failure to recognize the Imāms is an act of disbelief. As Ayātullāh
Mutahharī clarifies in Islām and Religious Pluralism: The verses and
traditions that indicate that the actions of those who deny Prophethood
or Imāmate are not acceptable are with a view to denial out of obstinacy
and bias; however, denial that is merely a lack of confession out of
incapacity (qusūr)–rather than out ofculpability (taqsīr)–is not what
the verses and traditions are about.In the view of the Qur'ān, such
deniers are considered musta'af (powerless) and murjawn li'amr illah
(those whose affair is referred to God's command).

[^10]: Editor's Note: Sunnism is primarily ritualistic while Sūfism is
primarily spiritualistic. Shī'ism presents a balance between the ritual
and the spiritual. As Nasr explains, “Sūfism does not possess a
sharī'ah; it is only a spiritual way [tarīqah] attached to a particular
Sharī'ite rite such as the Mālikī or Shāfi'ī. Shī'ism possesses both a
sharī'ah and a tarīqah” (Sūfī Essays 107).


