About the Author
================

Professor Luis Alberto Vittor is a Professional Technical Support Person
for Scientific Research at the Center for Research into the Philosophy
and History of Religion (CIFHIRE) [*Centro de Investigaciones en
Filosofía e Historia de las Religiones*] which forms part of the
Department of Philosophy of the School of Graduate Studies at John F.
Kennedy Argentine University. He is a writer, research scholar,
lecturer, cultural journalist, and translator. His areas of expertise
include medieval literature, religious symbolism, and the philosophy of
Eastern religions, particularly with relation to Islām, the Middle East,
Asia, and the Far East. He has reading comprehension of classical and
Semitic languages.

From 1989 to the present, he has served as a Professional Technical
Support Person for Scientific Research. He has collaborated on the
Critical Spanish Edition Project of the Coptic Library of Nag Hammādī
under the direction of Dr. Francisco García Bazán. This project is
sponsored by the National Commission for Scientific and Technical
Research (CONICET), an organism dependent on the Secretary of Science
and Technology (SECYT) of the National Government of the Republic of
Argentina.

As part of his work as a Professional Technical Support Person for
Scientific Research, he edits and reviews work in his areas of
expertise, including graduate and post-graduate research projects. In
his role as Professional Technical Support Person for Scientific
Research, he has contributed to many different projects, including, Dr.
John A. Morrow's *Allāh Lexicon Project* at Northern State University's
Department of Modern Languages in South Dakota. From 1989 to the
present, Luis Alberto Vittor has been the Editorial Secretary for the
academic journal *Epimeleia: Revista sobre Estudios Tradicionales*, the
official organ of the CIFHIRE.

He is also the Director of the Mullā Sadrā Center for Islāmic Research
and Documentation (CEDIMS) and the Editorial Center for Digital Islāmic
Texts (CETEDI). These research centers function within the Department of
Social and Political Studies for Africa and the Middle East with offices
at the Universidad Católica Argentina de La Plata (Sede Bernal) as
entity associated in research projects, translation, and edition of
traditional Islāmic texts with the Center for Oriental Studies at the
Universidad Nacional de Rosario (Santa Fe, Argentina) and the Department
of Modern Languages at Northern State University in South Dakota in the
United States.

As textbook Editor, Luis Alberto Vittor has been also the Director of
Collections of Fraterna Publishers of Buenos Aires from 1989-1991;
Literary Director of the Cultural Supplement *Letras e ideas* from
1990-1992; Director of the Journal of Oriental Studies, *Atma-Jñana*,
from 1989-1992. As a cultural journalist he has published various
articles and essays dealing with Islāmic literature, thought, art,
culture, and spirituality.

As an author, he has published *Simbolismo e iniciación en la poesía de
Alberto Girri*, [*Symbolism and Initiation in the Poetry of Alberto
Girri*], Fraterna Publishers (Buenos Aires 1990) and *El Islām Šhi'ita:
¿ortodoxia o heterodoxia?* in digital format, prepared by the
*Biblioteca Islámica Ahlul Bayt* in Seville, Spain, in 1998.

His forthcoming books include: *Los templarios y el Islām: milicia
temporal y caballería espiritual* (2006) and *Arquitectura de luz y
edificación espiritual*: *el simbolismo antrópico del Imām en el arte
constructivodel Islām* [*Architecture of Light and Spiritual
Edification: The Anthropic Symbolism of the Imām in the Constructive Art
of Islām*] (2007), both of which will be published by Editorial Sotabur
in Soria, Spain. In collaboration with Dr. John A. Morrow and Barbara
Castleton, Professor Vittor has completed the book *Arabic, Islām, and
the Allāh Lexicon* (2006) which is published by the Edwin Mellen Press.


