Exordium
========

Luis Alberto Vittor's *Shī'ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy* addresses
many essential issues concerning the split between the followers of
*Ahlul Bayt* and the followers of *ahl al-sunnah*. Transcending the
historical, the author focuses on ahistorical aspects in the genesis of
adherence, stressing the esoteric foundation of Shī'ī Islām, as opposed
to the exoteric foundation of Sunnī Islām which forces it followers to
find spirituality in various Sūfī orders.

Vittor's book challenges the prevailing view among Western academics,
namely, the contention that Shī'ite Islām is “heterodox” while Sunnī
Islām is “orthodox.” He contends that there is nothing non-orthodox or
un-orthodox in Shī'ite Islām, since the very principles that give life
and identity to Shī'ite Muslims are deeply rooted in the Sunnah of the
Prophet and the Twelve Imāms.

According to Vittor, definitions such as “orthodox” and “heterodox” are
misnomers when applied to Islām: they are Western impositions on an
Islāmic construct which are entirely false. As the author explains, if
one respects the meaning of the word “orthodox,” which implies adherence
to a specific set of beliefs and instructions, Shī'ite Muslims are as
orthodox as Sunnī Muslims. The book challenges the common misconceptions
of Western academics, their bias towards Islām, and their tendency to
interpret Shī'ite Islām through Sunnī lenses.

Unlike polemical publications dealing with the Sunnī-Shī'ī debate, the
work does not belittle or put down the followers of *ahl al-sunnah*. The
author explores Shī'ite Islām from within and examines the religious
tradition on its own terms. As a result, he has produced a work of great
critical importance, revealing the spiritual depth of Shī'ism to which
many Shī'ites are oblivious.

As one reads the work, one develops a greater understanding of the inner
meaning of essential elements of Shī'ite faith and religious practice.
The work is sure to have great resonance during the month of *Muharram*,
a time whenShī'ism is more or less viewed through Sunnī lenses. When
Shī'ites commemorate the martyrdom of Imām Husayn, they are often
assaulted with questions and criticism.

Unless the spiritual foundations of Shī'ism are fully understood,
Shī'ite efforts are expended to rebuttal at best or attack of *ahl
al-sunnah* at worst. Both a defensive and an aggressive approach to
inter-Islāmic understanding are futile and reinforce the status quo. The
solution to any Sunnī confusion regarding '*Āshūrā'* will not be
resolved in the realm of the political, but in the sphere of the
spiritual. As Vittor's work reveals, the sweetness of Shī'ite Islām is
to be found in the inner meanings of the outer rituals.

The chapter on Mukhtār al-Thaqāfī is particularly revealing. Although
I.K.A. Howard has provided a good historical rendition of Mukhtār in
*al-Serat*, Vittor captures the sense of spirituality emanating from his
uprising. In the words of Howard Zinns, there is a certain moral and
spiritual outrage which is nurtured through the sort of awareness that
develops over time, a sense of indignation that is missing at least
today. As one reads Vittor's work, one senses the deep suffering and
empathy that Shī'ites feel for the suffering of *Ahlul Bayt.*

Although not a survey of the Shī'ite faith, Vittor's work covers the
spiritual foundation of the Imāmate to a sufficient degree. His work
also touches upon the treatment of the Shī'ite minority in the face of
oppression, and the role of silent and quietist revolution as a means of
protest, an approach which stands in stark contrast to the violent modes
of expression and opposition seen in the Muslim world today.

Rather than radicalize, Vittor's work helps to sensitize Shī'ites, an
achievement of incalculable importance in the aftermath of the Iraqi
quagmire. These are times of reconciliation, not revenge. These are
times of unity and not division. Despite the dark moments that Shī'ites
have suffered, and continue to suffer, the tide of time is changing in
the right direction, and many people are realizing the spiritual force
of Shī'ite Islām, made obvious through its supplications, prayers, and
salutations, as well as its Qur'ānic commentaries and scholarly works,
all of which are all grounded in spirituality.

Luis Alberto Vittor's *Shī'ite Islām*: *Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy* is a
very concise book, and the greater portion of the work consists of
highly informational scholarly notes making it an easy read for the
novice or even the beginner. Due to its academic value and
accessibility, its intellectual integrity, and its call for Islāmic
unity, we tremendously recommend this book, and hope it will be largely
disseminated for the purpose of *dawa'h* and *tablīgh*.

15th of *Sha'bān /* August 28, 2007  
 Ahlul Bayt Digital Islāmic Library Project  
**<http://www.al-islam.org>**


