Opening Remarks
===============

Considering the current Sunnī-Shī'ah conflict occurring in the Middle
East, Luis Alberto Vittor's *Shī'ite Islām: Orthodoxy or Heterodoxy*
could not come at a more opportune time. Radically departing from the
confrontational polemicist propaganda of the past, Vittor demonstrates
that the greatness of Shī'ite Islām does not reside in a denigration of
Sunnī Islām.

Shī'ite Islām is great in an of itself. One does not need to criticize
the Companions or the Caliphs to exalt the Twelve Imāms. The Imāms of
*Ahlul Bayt*are great in an of themselves. One does not need to
criticize the Imāms of the Sunnī schools of jurisprudence to exalt Imām
Ja'far al-Sādiq. The Sixth Imām is great in and of himself, having left
legions of scholars as a legacy.

Unlike some authors, who approach Shī'ite Islām from an apologetic
perspective which seeks to appease Sunnī Muslims, Vittor approaches
Shī'ism from a position of strength, examining the religious tradition
independently, in and of itself, from within, and on its own terms.

He makes no apologies for Shī'ite beliefs and practices and does not
compromise on questions of principle. Unlike some overly enthusiastic
authors, Vittor does not exalt Shī'ism at the expense of Sunnism. As an
honest, objective, and open-minded academic, he treats both of his
subjects with respect, viewing them in complement rather than
opposition: there would be no Shī'ism without Sunnism, and there would
be no Sunnism without Shī'ism.

Although the works of Muhammad Tījānī have their value, they are viewed
by many readers, both Sunnī and Shī'ī, as an example of negative
marketing, which focuses on belittling one's adversary, as opposed to
positive marketing, which focuses on the qualities of your candidate.

In our experience, works like *Then I was Guided*, *Ask those who Know*,
*To be with the Truthful*, and *The* *Shī'ah are (the real) Ahl
al-Sunnah* are not the most effective tools used in Shī'ite *da'wah*.
Although these books have brought many Sunnis into Shī'ite Islām, we
would argue that they have driven as many Sunnis away from Shī'ite
Islām.

Had the author spoken exclusively about the Prophet, citing the Qur'ānic
verses and *ahādīth* in favor of the *Ahlul Bayt*, his books would have
had an even greater resonance among Sunnī Muslims. Casting doubt on the
character of the Prophet's Companions in order to replace them with the
Twelve Imāms is a misguided effort of marketing. The Imāms themselves
criticized such comportment. Had Tijanī allowed the historical sources
to speak for themselves, that would have been enough to make his point.

In order to guide an interested Sunnī into Shī'ite Islām, all one has to
do is cite the Qur'ān, repeat the words of the Prophet, and demonstrate
the wisdom of the Imāms, and that will be sufficient. One must address
issues of faith, and the importance of the *imāmah* and *wilāyah*,
before tackling controversial issues from the early days of Islāmic
history. Once a person has accepted the divine authority, everything
else will fall into place, and then, and only then, are converts to
Shī'ism ready for the informative works of Tijanī. His works certainly
have an important place, but not necessarily in the first line of
*da'wah*.

Many Shī'ite Muslims seem to forget that *taqiyyah* is a form of tact
and every educational endeavor must proceed by stages. As Imām Ja'far
al-Sādiq has said: “This affair (*amr*) [the Imāmate and the esoteric
meaning of religion] is occult (*mastūr*) and veiled (*muqanna'*) by a
covenant (*mīthāq*), and whoever unveils it will be disgraced by Allāh”
(Kulaynī). Certain things are better left unsaid when dealing with
people who are potential enemies of *Ahlul Bayt*. As Imām Ja'far
al-Sādiq warned:

Keep our affair secret, and do not divulge it publicly, for whoever
keeps it secret and does not reveal it, Allāh will exalt him in this
world, and putlight between his eyes in the next, leading him to
Paradise…[W]hoever divulges our affair publicly, and does not keep it a
secret, Allāh will disgrace him in this world and will take away light
from between his eyesin the next, and will decrease for him darkness
that will lead him to the Fire…*Taqiyyah* is of my religion, and of the
religion of my father, and who does not observe *taqiyyah* has no
religion…[I]t is necessary toworship in secret and it is necessary to
worship openly…the one who reveals our affairs is the one who denies
them. (Kulaynī)

Imām Ja'far al-Sādiq also condemned those who spread the secrets of
*wilāyat Allāh* among the common people, saying: “Our secret continued
to be preserved until it came into the hands of the sons of Kaysān and
they spoke of it on the roads and in the villages of the Sawād”
(Kulaynī).

Imām Ja'far al-Sādiq warned his Shī'ites to: “Fear for your religion and
protect it (lit. veil it) with *taqiyyah*, for there is no faith in whom
there is no *taqiyyah*” (Kulaynī). He also advised his followers to:
“Mix with the people (ie., enemies) outwardly, but oppose them inwardly
so long as the Amirate is a matter of opinion” (Sadūq).

The Imām always avoided controversy and conflict, saying: “Verily, when
I hear a man abusing me in the mosque, I hide myself behind a pillar so
that he may not see me” (Sadūq). On one occasion, Zakarīya ibn Sābiq was
enumerating the Imāms in the presence of Imām Ja'far al-Sādiq. When the
Companion reached the name of Muhammad al-Bāqir, he was interrupted by
the Imām who said: “That is enough for you. Allāh has affirmed your
tongue and has guided your heart” (Kulaynī).

The Imām also said that “Verily, diplomacy (*al-ri'ā'*) with a true
believer is a form of *shirk* (polytheism); but with a hypocrite in his
own house, it is worship” (Sadūq). These traditions are not saying that
Shī'ite Muslims should not be sincere, and that they form some sort of
secret esoteric sect. They are simply saying that they should not be
stupid and that they should only share their beliefs with a receptive
audience so as to avoid provocation and enmity.

Rather than promote division and conflict, Imām Ja'far al-Sādiq urged
Shī'ites to pray with Sunnis: “He who prays with them standing in the
front row, it is as though he prayed with the Prophet in the first row”
(Sadūq). The Imām also encouraged Shī'ites to treat Sunnis as their
brethren: “Visit their sick, attend their funerals, and pray in their
mosques” (Sadūq). Since the improper behavior of followers reflects
poorly on their leader, the Imām told his followers to “Become an
ornament for us, and not a disgrace” (Sadūq).

He also called upon his Shī'ites to encourage good-will among all
Muslims, saying: “May Allāh have mercy on a person who inculcates
friendship towards us among men, and does not provoke ill-will among
them” (Sadūq). This Shī'ite spirit of Islāmic unity was shown by
'Allāmah Sharīf al-Dīn al-Musawī who ruled that the Shī'ites of Lebanon
should celebrate the birth of the Prophet on the same day as the Sunnis.
Imām Khumaynī took this one step further, declaring the entire week,
from the Monday to the Friday, as Islāmic Unity week.

In twenty years of Islāmic activism, we have observed that works like
*al-Muraja'āt* by 'Allāmah al-Mūsawī, which are calm, courteous, gentle,
and convincing, are far more effective than caustic criticism. We have
also found that the most effective tools in Shī'ite *dawah* are the
works of the Imāms themselves, *Nahj al-balāghah* by Imām 'Alī ibn Abī
Tālib, the *Sahīfah al-sajadiyyah* by Imām 'Alī Zayn al-'Abidīn, the
*Lantern of the Path* by Imām Ja'far al-Sādiq, as well as other
biographical books such as *The Book of Guidance* by Shaykh al-Mufīd,
which demonstrate the depth of knowledge of the Imāms, as well as their
profound wisdom, and piety.

Many Shī'ite Muslims would be well-advised to live what they learn, to
exhibit the true characteristics of followers of *Ahlul Bayt*, to live
according to Islām, and to lead by example. The best converts to Shī'ite
Islām never received a book. They were moved by the piety of Shī'ite
Muslims, and their devout love and attachment to the Prophet and his
family.

It should also be understood that spreading Islām is *wājib kifāyah*, it
is the obligation of certain members of the community, and should be
left to the knowledgeable, competent, and qualified. The Prophet and the
Imāms warned us to never argue with the ignorant. In order to ensure
that Islām was rightly represented, the Twelve Imāms trained Muslim
missionaries to propagate the faith properly.

As any business professor can explain, attacking a rival is never good
marketing. An advertiser should never point out the faults of others. It
is not permitted in the best of mediums and is never good policy. The
selfish purpose is always evident. It is unfair, impolite, unbefitting
of a Muslim, and counter-Qur'ānic. As Almighty Allāh says:

***“Call unto the way of thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and
reason with them in the better way” (16:125).***

The Most High has also said:

***“Revile not those who invoke other than Allāh, lest wrongfully they
revile Allāh through ignorance” (6:108).***

If Muslims are forbidden from making a mockery of the beliefs of
polytheists, the prohibition is even greater when it comes to the
beliefs of other Muslims.

While negative advertising has some advantages, it can evoke aggressive
responses towards the source of the advertising. While it can motivate
base support, verbal assaults against the opponent can alienate
non-sectarian Muslims and outrage committed Muslims from the other camp,
radicalizing rhetoric.

What is worse, negative advertising often produces a backlash, which can
result in violence, destruction, and death. While some Sunnis and
Shī'ites may pledge to refrain from negative marketing when discussing
their differences, the pledge is often soon abandoned when the opponent
is viewed as “going negative,” inciting a series of retaliatory remarks.

Negative advertising is also entirely un-academic as campaigners from
one camp present twisted or spun information under the guise of bringing
hidden negatives into the light. Such individuals have no place in the
Sunnī-Shī'ite debate as they have the wrong intention from the onset.
Their goal is not to unite, but to divide. They come to the table with a
closed mind.

They are not genuinely interested in inter-Islāmic dialogue. They
prepare their cases like lawyers. They are concerned with winning the
case, rather than searching for truth. They concentrate on being quick,
witty, and winning the argument, rather than analyzing the issues at
hand. They use rhetorical devices such as straw man or red herring
arguments to insinuate that an opponent holds a certain idea.

The Sixth Imām was highly critical of the superfluous debates of skilful
verbal gymnasts: “When you debate, the nearer you are to truth and
tradition on the authority of the Prophet, the further you are from it:
you mix up the truth with what is false. A little truth suffices for
what is false” (Mufīd). Without a judge or moderator to keep parties
disciplined, Sunnī-Shī'ite debates soon degenerate into slander, libel,
and defamation of character. Such efforts are of no benefit to the
Islāmic Ummah as they increase tension between the Sunnī and Shī'ite
communities.

The very idea of “debate” between Sunnis and Shī'ites is misguided as
“debate” implies opposition with each party trying to defeat the other.
It is foolish to believe that any party could actually “win” such a
debate considering that Muslims have been polarized into two camps for
over 1,400 years. The very idea of Sunnī-Shī'ah debate should be cast
aside and replaced by inter-Islāmic dialogue.

In order for Shī'ites and Sunnis to move towards reconciliation they
need to recognize that any extreme polar position is only going to
aggravate the conflict. For starters, all Muslims, Shī'ite, Sunnis, and
'Ibadīs, must cease cursing Companions of the Prophet and cursing one
another as such actions merely increase animosity. We have witnessed
Salafīs insult Fātimah, 'Alī, Hasan, and Husayn; Sunnī Muslims insult
the *Ahlul Bayt*, Twelver Shī'ites insult the Sunnī Caliphs, Ismā'īlis
insult Imām Mūsa al-Kazim, Sūfis insult Sunnis, and 'Ibādīs insult Imām
'Alī.

Surely such behavior must cease from all sides. As Imām Ja'far al-Sādiq
warned: “Do not revile them, lest they revile your 'Alī” (Sadūq). What
goes around comes around, and it is time for a truce if not a treaty of
perpetual peace.

As any historian of early Islām is aware, the Companions of the Prophet
had their differences, cursed each other, and killed each other. Surely,
the sound of mind do not seek to perpetuate such belligerent behavior
*ad-eternam*. Questions of who was right and who was wrong are a matter
of personal belief and need not be professed publicly in contexts which
arouse undue emotion. Muslims need to let differences die with those who
differed.

Over the course of 1,400 years of Sunnī and Shī'ite sectarianism,
positions have become polarized and differences have become deeply
entrenched. Muslims need to leave a little room for ambiguity. Despite
what most Muslims would like to believe, early Islāmic history was not
black and white, and not everything was cut and dry. Muslims need to
open up to uncertainty, move from the black areas into gray areas, and
creative processes will emerge.

If Shī'ites and Sunnis are sincere in seeking reconciliation, if they
are honest about starting a dialogue, then they must agree to talk with
respect. Both sides of the conflict must be recognized. Both have
wronged and both have been wronged. Muslims need refrain from
belligerence and leave room for forgiveness. They need to set emotion
aside or moderate it with intelligence. They need to stop trying to
prove each other wrong. They must unite on the basis of the values and
beliefs that they hold in common.

When outsiders look at Islām, all they see are Muslims. They do not
distinguish between various sects. If they were to examine issues of
'*aqīdah* between the various Muslim groups, they would be hard-pressed
to find grounds for division. The Sunnī Muslims believe in:

Tawhīd: Oneness of God

*Nubuwwah/Risālah*: Prophethood and Messengership

Kutub: Divinely Revealed Books

Malā‘ikah: Angels

Qiyyāmah: The Day of Judgment

*Qadar*: Predestination

They are also fond of combining both faith and belief in Five Pillars of
Islām, consisting of:

*Shahādah*: Profession of Faith

*Salāh*: Prayer

*Sawm*: Fasting in Ramadān

*Hajj*: Pilgrimage to Makkah

*Zakāh*: Alms

The Twelver Shī'ite theologians prefer to separate creed from practice,
presenting two lists, the Foundations of Faith, and the Branches of
Faith.

**Usūl al-dīn**

*Tawhīd*: Oneness of God

'*Adl*: Divine Justice

*Nubuwwah/Risālah*: Prophethood and Messengership

*Imāmah/Wilāyah*: Imāmate or Guardianship

*Qiyyāmah*: Day of Judgment

**Furū' al-dīn**

*Salāh*: Prayer

*Sawm*: Fasting in Ramadān

*Hajj*: Pilgrimage to Makkah

*Zakāh*: Alms

*Khums*: Alms

*Jihād*: Struggle

*Amr bi al-ma'rūf*: Promoting good

*Nahy 'an al-munkar*: Forbidding evil

*Tawallā*: Attachment to *Ahlul Bayt*

*Tabarrā*: Separation from the enemies of *Ahlul Bayt*

For all intents and purposes, the Zaydiyyah share the same beliefs of
the Ithnā 'Ashariyyah. The main difference between both groups is in
their concept of the Imāmate, and the fact that Zaydiyyah *fiqh* is
closer to Sunnī Hanafī and Sunnī Shāfi'ī *fiqh*, with some elements of
Shī'ah Ja'farī elements.

The Ismā'īliyyah theologians have organized their beliefs into Seven
Pillars of Islām, consisting of:

*Wilāyah*: Guardianship

*Tahārah*: Purity

*Salāh*: Prayer

*Zakāh*: Alms

*Sawm*: Fasting in Ramadān

*Hajj*: Pilgrimage to Makkah

*Jihād*: Struggle

'Ibādiyyah theologians have organized their beliefs into the following
Five Pillars:

*Tawhīd*: Oneness of God

'*Adl*: Divine Justice

*Qadar*: Predestination

*Wilāyah/Tabarrā*: Attachment to Muslims and separation from infidels

*Amr/Nahy*: Promoting good and forbidding evil; implementing the Imāmate
when possible

As can be appreciated from this overview, all Muslims believe in the
following articles of faith:

Tawhīd: Oneness of God

*Nubuwwah/Risālah*: Prophets and Messengers

Qiyyāmah: The Day of Judgment

Although non-Sunnis do not list the divinely revealed books (*kutub*) or
the angels (*malā'ikah*) in their creeds, these are fundamental aspects
of beliefs for all groups. If they are not cited as individual items it
is because they are assumed to form part of the belief in God and His
Prophets.

The 'Ibādiyyah and some of the Sunnis adds *qadar* or predestination to
their articles of faith while other groups insist on free will. The
'Ibādiyyah, along with the Shī'ite groups, focus on '*adl* or divine
justice whereas some of the Sunnī insist on *qādir* or omnipotence. This
difference is the result of philosophical differences in which the Sunnī
stress Allāh's Omnipotence over His Justice, while the Shī'ites stress
Allāh's Justice over his Omnipotence.

In practical matters, the hierarchical differences between divine
attributes are inconsequential and do not make or break a Muslim. In
fact, the majority of Muslims are completely unaware of such
philosophical subtleties. If a Muslim does not believe in *tawhīd*, he
is outside the fold of Islām.

If a Muslim does not believe that Muhammad is the Final Messenger of
Allāh, he is outside the fold of Islām. If a Muslim does not believe in
angels or in the Day of Judgment, he is outside the fold of Islām. If a
Muslim prioritizes the attributes of Allāh differently, he is a complete
and total Muslim: he merely follows a differently philosophical school.

The Shī'ah Ithnā 'Ashariyyah, the Shī'ah Zaydiyyah, the Shī'ah
Ismā'īliyyah, and the 'Ibadiyyah all believe in *imāmah* although their
chains of Imāms are different as are their qualities, attributes, and
qualifications. In many respects, the Shī'ite and 'Ibadī belief in
*imāmah* is similar to the Sunnī belief in *khilāfah*.

Whether it is an Imām or a Caliph, whether he inherits his title or is
elected, whether he is a righteous leader or an infallible Imām, Sunnī,
Shī'ite, and even Sūfī Muslims believe in some form of religious
authority, both spiritual and political, which should rule the Ummah an
establish the *sharī'ah*.

As can be seen, all Muslims share the same creedal concepts and
religious practices. They all believe in one God, the Prophethood, and
the Day of Judgment. They all believe in angels and revealed books. They
all pray, fast, make the pilgrimage to Makkah, and pay charity. Although
the Sunnis do not list *khums*, the 20% tithe, *jihād*, promoting the
good, and forbidding evil, in their creed, all Sunnis accept these as
religious obligations.

Although a Nasībī would reject the obligation to love the Prophet's
Family, and the prohibition of dealing with those who hate the Prophet's
family, every true Sunnī loves and blesses the Prophet and his Family.
And evidently, every true Muslim, follows the *shar'īah,* be he Sunnī,
'Ibādī, Shī'ī Ithnā 'Asharī, Shī'ī Ismā'īlī, Shī'ī Zaydī, or Sūfī.

Although most Sunnis and many Twelver Shī'ites consider the Ismā'īliyyah
outside the fold of Islām because they do not perform *salāh*, fast
during the month of Ramadan, or perform the *hajj*, the Ismā'īliyyah as
a whole cannot be condemned as *kuffār*. The Nizārī or followers of the
Āghā Khān, who are approximately 90% of Ismā'īlis, do indeed believe
that the *sharī'ah* has been abrogated.

Like some Sūfī sects which believe Islāmic law no longer applies, the
Nizārī are misguided and should be encouraged to mend their ways,
complete the five daily prayers, fast in Ramadān, and perform the
pilgrimage so as to integrate entirely into the Islāmic Ummah. It should
also be remembered that there are Twelver Shī'ites, Sunnis, and Sūfis
who do not pray, do not fast, do not eat *halāl*, and commit all sorts
of *harām*, insisting that faith is sufficient for their salvation.

Muslims should be careful to cast all Ismā'īlis in the same light as the
Musta'alī, and their off-chute the Dāwūdī Bohras, who follow the Fātimid
school of jurisprudence, all observe the *sharī'ah* and are very close
to Ja'farī jurisprudence in practice.

If there are any differences between Sunnī, Shī'ite, 'Ibadī, and Sūfī
Muslims, they are relatively minor and revolve around aspects of
religious practice. Muslims need to recognize and respect their tiny
technical differences, remembering that jurisprudence is not a goal in
and of itself but a means to a goal, namely, the remembrance of Almighty
Allāh. As important as proper observation of Islāmic practices may be,
far too many Muslims focus on the form of worship as opposed to the
essence of worship.

Islāmic unity certainly does not mean uniformity. It does not mean that
all schools of *fiqh* [jurisprudence] should merge into one. It merely
means that there is more than one “right way” to do things, that jurists
have differences of opinion, based on different interpretations of the
Qur'ān and Sunnah, and different methodologies. Every ruling is “right”
according to the jurist who derived it. Every opinion is “correct”
depending on one's point of view.

All jurists agree on the issue, but they view the issue from a different
perspective. One issue can be viewed as *harām*, *makrūh*, and *halāl*
[permissible / reprehensible / forbidden]. In Islām, every issue can be
seen from a 360 degree angle and there is ample room for a wide range of
opinion.

Take the issue of consuming the meat of *ahl al-kitāb* [People of the
Book]. According to most Sunnī scholars, it is permissible for a Muslim
to eat meat from animals slaughtered by Christians of Jews. They base
themselves on the Qur'ānic verse:

***“The food of the People of the Book is lawful unto you and yours is
lawful unto them” (5:5).***

Some Sunnī scholars say that while it is permissible to eat the meat of
Christians and Jews, it is preferable to eat *halāl* meat if available.
Yet other Sunnī scholars forbid the consumption of the meat of the
Christians and Jews. They argue that the Christians and Jews of today
are not truly “People of the Book,” that they no longer slaughter
animals in the name of Allāh, which is a condition for the meat to be
*halāl*, and that there is no guarantee that the meat in non-Muslim
countries was even slaughtered by a Christian or a Jew.

It could easily have been slaughtered by a secular liberal, an agnostic,
an atheist, a polytheist, a heathen, a Satanist, or other unbelievers.
Twelver Shī'ite scholars have always been unanimous that the meat of
Jews and Christians is *harām*. Their reason, however, is based on
lexical hermeneutics. As we read in Mir Ahmed 'Alī translation of the
Qur'ān:

According to Imām Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sādiq the word *ta'ām* implies
food made of grains not containing flesh of permitted animals. The Jews
and the Christians do not follow the prescribed method of slaughtering
the animals, nor do they seek Allāh's pleasure before killing the
animal, therefore, to eat flesh of any animal offered by them is not
lawful for the Muslims. “Whosoever denies the faith, his deeds will be
rendered useless” clearly lays down the principle that good deeds cannot
be of any use unless one believes in Allāh, His Messengers and guides
appointed by Him, and the Day of Judgment.

According to Ayātullāh Pooya Yazdī: “This verse gives permission to the
Muslims to eat the food (made of grains) offered by the people of the
book.”

As can be seen, the Islāmic attitude towards the meat of Christians and
Jews ranges from *halāl* to *makrūh* and *harām* opinions which are
equally valid. Muslims, as *muqallidīn* of *mujtahidīn* [followers of
jurists], are free to follow any of the rulings of their particularly
*madhhab* [school of law] with confidence that they have acted
correctly, complying with a valid interpretation of the Qur'ān and
Sunnah.

In many areas of Islāmic law differences of opinion are mainly
differences of degree. These differences are a mercy and a blessing from
Allāh. No Muslim is obliged to submit to one set of rulings. Each Muslim
is free to follow the rulings of the *mujtahid* [jurist] of his choice,
to leave the *taqlīd* [emulation] of one *faqīh* [jurist], and to
commence the *taqlīd* of another he deems to be more learned. Since all
people are different, they have different levels of *dīn* [religion],
different levels of faith, and different levels of understanding. No
Muslim is subjugated or coerced to act a certain way.

In the absence of *halāl* meat, a meat-loving Sunnī Muslim who cannot
find meaningful sustenance out of salad is free to feed himself the meat
of *ahl al-kitāb*. As Almighty Allāh says in the Holy Qur'ān:

***“No soul shall have a burden laid on it greater than it can bear”
(2:233).***

For another Sunnī Muslim, being a part-time vegetarian while traveling
in *dār al-kufr* [the land of the unbelievers] is not a hardship, and he
may wish to abstain from the meat of *ahl al-kitāb*. Merely because one
is stricter does not make one better as all actions are judged on
intention, and Allāh judges all people according to their intellectual
abilities.

As far as we are concerned, the arguments allowing the consumption of
*ahl al-kitāb* meat are weak and the Shī'ite argument is the strongest.
This does not mean that we wish to impose the Ja'farī ruling on others,
not does it imply disrespect to some of the Sunnī rulings. They are
opinions we respect, but opinions we do not share. When a Salafī Shaykh
was asked regarding Nūh Ha Mīm Keller's belief that the references to
the “hands” of Allāh mentioned in the Qur'ān (38:75; 48:10; 51:47) were
figurative, representing the power of God, the Shaykh said that Allāh
indeed has literal hands and anyone who said otherwise was a *kāfir*
[infidel].

This is exactly the type of outrageous behavior that is unacceptable in
Islām. If the Salafiyyah wish to follow the Qur'ān literally, they have
the freedom to do so. They do not, however, have the right to denounce
others as unbelievers because they believe the Qur'ān contains
allegorical and metaphorical meanings. It is clear that many Muslims
need a lesson not only in moderation and tolerance, but in basic
manners.

The role of Islāmic law is to set the limits of what is permitted and
what is prohibited. When differences of opinion exist among Muslim
jurists, it is the least restrictive ruling that becomes the law. If
some *fuqahā'* [jurists] believe that women can show their faces and
hands, and others believe that they must veil their faces, the most
accommodating ruling becomes the law of the land, and veiling the face
becomes an issue of personal choice.

Attempts of extremists in Afghanistan, Iraq, and abroad, to impose the
most severe interpretation of the *sharī'ah* have been detrimental to
the public image of Islām, alienating Muslims and non-Muslims from the
Islāmic religion. It should also be recalled that the implementation of
the *sharī'ah* by the Prophet was gradual and progressive, an example
which must be emulated by any Muslim state.

The punishment for theft cannot be enforced until unemployment and
poverty are eradicated. The punishment for adultery cannot be enforced
until temptation has been eradicated through modesty and marriage.
Proper conditions must exist for Islāmic punishments to be administered.
The creation of socio-economic and spiritual justice is a necessary
precursor to *sharī'ah* law.

In closing, we would like to encourage all Muslims to unite on the basis
of their common beliefs, remembering that unity does not imply
uniformity. Muslims may come from various legal, theological, and
philosophical traditions, but they are all one in the Oneness of God.
Muslims must reject absolutist literalist attitudes and embrace a
Universal Islām, becoming multi-dimensional Muslims far removed from the
fundamentalist fallacy.

They need to embrace Islāmic pluralism and Islāmic diversity in accord
with the Oneness of Allāh and the Qur'ānic message brought by the
Messenger of Allāh, an Islām which includes rather than excludes, an
Islām which enriches rather than impoverishes, a centrist, middle-road
Islām (2:143), which opposes extremism, for as Almighty Allāh says:

***“Do not be excessive in your belief” (4:165;5:81).***

While Islām rejects religious relativism and exoteric religious
pluralism, it does accept that all revealed religions share the same
esoteric spirit. Whether its Judaism, Christianity or Islām, all
revealed religions believe in One God, the Prophets, the Day of
Judgment, and the Ten Commandments.

However, before Muslims can unite with Jews and Christians, they must
unite with themselves, embracing Islām as a totality, accepting the
entire Islāmic pie rather than a single piece. If the Europeans say:
“All roads lead to Rome,” we say that “All roads lead to Allāh.” And
this is precisely what the Prophet said: “The numbers of paths to Allāh
is equal to the number of human souls.”

*15th of Sha'bān /* August 28, 2007  
 Dr. John A. Morrow, Ph.D.  
 Assistant Professor of Modern Languages  
 Northern State University  
 Aberdeen, South Dakota


