Commendatory Preface
====================

Luis Alberto Vittor's *Shī'ite Islām: Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy* provides
a privileged and sublime view into the core and essence of Shī'ism as
well as the early history and development of Islām. Written for a
Western audience, it restores Shī'ism to its rightful place as a fully
fledged aspect of Islām, rather than as a rebellious offshoot which does
not adhere to core Islāmic beliefs and standards. In this task, the
author's analysis of Islām and the meaning of sect and schism went the
full distance in establishing Shī'ism's complete legitimacy.

Further, the author takes the reader back to the birth of Islām and the
profound influence of the Prophet Muhammad to demonstrate the
partnership he intended to create between the secular and spiritual
lives of Muslims via the *wilāyah* or guardianship of the correctly
appointed Imām. While not a Muslim myself, I could sense the
generations' long frustration of those who believed that the very
trajectory of Islām was altered by the ego/tradition driven actions of a
few powerful men.

Analogy is perhaps the most eloquent means of describing what Shī'ah
Muslims believe happened with the appointment of Abū Bakr, instead of
'Alī, to the Caliphate. If a rocket is intended to land on a certain
lunar crater 238,856 miles from Earth, the calculations must be precise
to a ten-thousandth of a fraction.

Any slight variation will mean that not only will the space craft not
land on the right spot, but it may miss the moon entirely. I believe
that the Prophet Muhammad's designation of 'Alī as his successor was
based on just such infinitesimal calculations; a complete knowledge of
the Qur'ān and its divine message as well as a realization of human
frailty.

The appointment of 'Alī was meant to inhibit the incursion of human ego
into the burgeoning acceptance of the Qur'ānic message. When that did
not occur, the human manifestation of Islām altered. The message and
means remained pristine and perfect, but human interpretation was
clouded by personal interests and a reluctance to release power. This
volume offers a clear and rational look at events, ideas, and the
essence of Muhammad's intentions. For believers and non-believers, it is
an authoritative source of arguments rarely heard.As such, it is a gift
to a more complete understanding of this world-class religion and the
place of Shī'ism within it.

*Jumādā II* 1427 / July 2006  
 Barbara Castleton, M.A.  
 Ohio State University  
 Athens, Ohio, U.S.A.


