The Holy Prophet’s (S) Blessings
================================

As far as human beings are concerned, the standard for blessedness of a
birth is the effects that it produces, both directly and indirectly. If
this standard is correct and I believe it should be said that the most
blessed birth that has ever happened in history is the birth of the Holy
Prophet of Islam (S).

The blessings started from the moment he was born and this is not
surprising. When he was a newborn baby, Prophet Isa (peace and greetings
be upon him) said:

***“And*** ***He*** ***has*** ***made*** ***me*** ***blessed***
***wherever*** ***I*** ***may*** ***be.”*** [^1]

He announced his blessedness a few hours or a few days after he had been
born. The same is true of our Holy Prophet (S).

It has been recorded in different history books that the battlements of
the Persian king’s castle collapsed or that the fire in an ancient fire
temple went out. Other such signs have also been reported in history
books. All of these things were harbingers of the blessings of the Holy
Prophet (S). Whatever has existed in this world as a result of the rule
and domination of polytheism, Kufr, autocracy, injustice and discord
among human beings, should gradually be eliminated due to the existence
of that noble, chosen and unique human being. The responsibility that
the Holy Prophet (S) took on in the arena of action and struggle was the
most important portion of the work. Starting this path and this call to
Islam was the most important part of his work.
The problem with that era was that people from various social
backgrounds and in different parts of the world had become used to the
rule of Taghuts, to the domination of injustice and to class
distinctions. Who should stand up against such things? Naturally, those
who have been oppressed. When even oppressed people believe that
injustice should be established, there is no hope for improvement.
Awakening the people, the world and humanity was the great
responsibility of the Holy Prophet (S) and the purpose of his prophetic
call.

***“It*** ***is*** ***nothing*** ***but*** ***a*** ***reminder***
***to*** ***the*** ***nations.”*** [^2]

His call was a reminder and a warning to all humanity. Wherever the Holy
Prophet (S) became responsible for this awakening, everything became
extremely difficult for him. Prejudices, tribal attitudes and personal
matters would make it difficult for him to do his responsibility. The
Holy Prophet (S) made strenuous efforts to break this deadlock and open
a path for humanity. Since that time up until today, anybody who has
started a movement has followed the path of the Holy Prophet (S) and has
benefitted from his efforts.

Collective human knowledge and civilization have benefitted from the personality and teachings of the Holy Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is not just Muslims who have benefitted from the teachings of the
Holy Prophet (S). The knowledge and civilizations that exist in the
world and the progress that human beings have made are the result of the
Holy Prophet’s (S) existence. This is not just a claim that we Muslims
make. All historians and just individuals admit that the emergence of
scientific awakening in the world of Islam and the spread of this
awakening to other parts of the world, were the result of the
interactions that existed and even the efforts that were made to expand
Muslim territories through war.

Collective human knowledge and the things that are important to human
beings such as human rights, freedom, equality and sense of brotherhood
are the gifts that the Holy Prophet (S) gave to humanity. This great
Islamic movement finally led to the establishment of an Islamic system.
The purpose of Islamic teachings was not simply to give advice to
people, rather the purpose was to create a system that would facilitate
the movement towards these goals and to remove the obstacles. And this
system is Islamic government.

Thankfully, today Islamic communities have become aware of the
importance of establishing an Islamic system. Over the course of many
years, great writers and speakers and numerous hearts have become aware
of this issue. Islamic Awakening has already started and Muslim
communities have become aware of the importance of the asset that
belongs to them. Of course, the enmities of the enemies of Islam have
increased proportionally. They are making constant efforts to foment
discord among Muslim nations so that through provoking prejudices and
ethnic and nationalistic sentiments, they can encourage every Muslim
group to move ahead in a different direction.

This shows that the enemy has found out that Islamic awareness and
Islamic Awakening will prove effective in the regions that are populated
by Muslims. And this is a fact. Definitely, this awareness will
encourage Muslim nations to establish an Islamic system and form a
unified Islamic Ummah. This is something that will definitely happen,
and the enmities will prove futile.

The power of Islam is beyond these things. For example, it was the great
power of Islam that united the people in Islamic Iran, a place where
nobody would have believed such a Revolution would take place. The power
of Islam brought hearts closer to one another. It drew upon religious
faith of the people to start a movement and established an Islamic
system in our country. This has already happened. [^3]

Conditions of the world at the time of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Over the past years, our people have always considered their historic
revolutionary movement as the continuation of the Holy Prophet’s (S)
great Be’that. Similarly, at least our outstanding personalities and
intellectuals have wondered how Islam managed to spread in the era of
Jahiliyya, when the world was filled with ignorance. Jahiliyya was not
just limited to the Arabian Peninsula. It existed in the two great
empires of that time as well, namely the Sassanid Empire in Iran and the
Roman Empire. Justice was missing in those two empires as well. There
was discrimination in those two empires as well. For example, in Iran
formal instruction was the privilege of certain social classes and the
majority of the people did not have the right to receive formal
education. There was the worst form of slavery. Weak people used to be
treated in the worst possible way. Women used to be treated in the most
humiliating way. Jahiliyya was everywhere and the light of knowledge was
missing.

The Important factors behind the spread of Islam
------------------------------------------------

The emergence of Islam enlightened hearts and minds with the light of
Islamic knowledge. Despite widespread Jahiliyya in the world and despite
the bad conditions that existed at that time, the caravan of growth and
progress was moving ahead with speed. In less than half a century after
Be’that, more than half of the developed territories were under the rule
of Islam. This is not an insignificant point. Wherever Islam went,
ordinary citizens welcomed it and the seemingly powerful governments
that were standing in the way were easily pushed aside. What was the
force that pushed Islam forward like that and helped establish an
Islamic civilization, a civilization that remained at the peak of
brilliance and power even when the political power of Islam was
declining, a civilization that affected the cultures of the world, a
civilization that helped spread knowledge and promote Islamic culture.

These are amazing experiences in the history of mankind. What was the
force that gave rise to all those things? This requires a long
discussion. Researchers and writers have worked on this issue and there
is still a lot of work to be done in this regard. What I would like to
discuss in a few sentences today is only part of the issue.

Undoubtedly, one of the factors behind the spread of Islam was reliance
on God and divine rules.

***“The*** ***messenger*** ***believes*** ***in*** ***what has been***
***revealed*** ***to him*** ***from*** ***his*** ***Lord,*** ***and***
***(so do) the believers. They all believe*** ***in*** ***Allah***
***and*** ***His*** ***angels*** ***and*** ***His*** ***books***
***and*** ***His*** ***messengers.”*** [^4]

The Holy Prophet (S) and believers of the early Islamic era, believed in
the message of Islam from the bottom of their hearts. They truly
believed in Islamic slogans and truths. They truly believed that Islam
was enough to save humanity. This faith is a very important factor.
Another factor was that people did not act out of self-interest and they
truly disregarded anything that was related to their personal interests.
This is a very important factor. There are many recommendations in
Nahjul Balaghah and many narrations from the Holy Prophet (S), the
infallible Imams (a.s) and Islamic luminaries about the necessity of
disregarding worldly wealth.

The reason is that this factor is extremely important. Of course, the
enemies of Islam and those who do not understand Muslims think or
pretend that when Islam promotes simple lifestyles, what it means is
that people should not go after the manifestations of life and the
material world. This is while what is meant is that we should not go
after our personal interests in the world. And acting out of
self-interest is destructive and is the root of all afflictions and
problems.

God’s saints those who firmly held that flag in their hands and followed
this difficult path with ease and tireless efforts were the same people
who cleared these twists and turns. In the beginning of Dua Nudba,
gratitude is expressed to Allah the Exalted for what He ordained for His
saints. The first few sentences of Dua Nudba contain one of the most
beautiful and significant concepts. In this dua, it is said: “After You
had already stipulated on them to renounce all the ranks of this lowly
world along with all of its embellishments and ornaments, and they
accepted this stipulation.” It is said in this dua that Allah the
Exalted helped them achieve the highest positions and the highest
degrees of perfection and spiritual transcendence. He helped them
achieve blessings “that neither vanish nor diminish.” [^5]

Allah the Exalted bestowed these blessings on them and chose them, but
He also specified a condition for them. The Holy Prophet (S) achieved
the highest degree of transcendence. This is not possible without help
from Allah the Exalted, without Allah the Exalted preparing the way.
However, Allah the Exalted bestowed this privilege on them on the
condition that they “renounce all the ranks of this lowly world along
with all of its embellishments and ornaments.” This condition was
accepted and acted upon and for this reason, people like the Holy
Prophet (S) and the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) were built: solid
like steel and untiring, an inexhaustible source. They carried a burden
that was not particular to their own era. They started a movement that
did not end after their lives ended.

The Effects that Islam has had in the past and in the contemporary world
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This movement has continued to this day. Notice that after the passage
of fourteen centuries, Islam is still shining brightly. All these things
are pivoted on the Holy Prophet (S) and his selfless struggle.

It is the selfless efforts of the Holy Prophet (S) that help this
movement continue. Of course, what has been done by Muslims, faithful
people and luminaries has also been helpful.

What we expect is that luminaries of the world of Islam – both political
and religious luminaries – should not prioritize their personal
interests over other things. The expectation that we have of the people
and luminaries of our time is not one that was shaped in our minds as a
result of the Holy Prophet’s (S) behavior. No, such an expectation would
have been far greater. We have the same expectation of ourselves and of
others throughout the world of Islam. We expect that personal interests
should not be prioritized over other goals. Personal interests should
not take precedence over other things. Rather, people should prioritize
Islam and achieving Islamic power, transcendence and perfection over
their personal interests. If this happens, there is no doubt that a
major portion of the forces that belong to Islam will rejoin the Islamic
Ummah.

The person who managed to carry the great burden of people’s attention,
affection and movement and help it reach this point, was our magnanimous
Imam (r.a). The most important point about him is that he disregarded
himself and his personal interests. He made his responsibility the pivot
of his work and movement. It was for this reason that he succeeded. Of
course, he enjoyed many other advantages as well. This is the basis.
Over the past twenty years, wherever we have given precedence to our
responsibilities and goals in the Islamic Republic and wherever we have
disregarded ourselves and our human passions and personal interests, we
have managed to make progress.

But whenever we have done the opposite, we have been harmed. Those who
are aware of the details know that during the eight-year imposed war,
wherever sense of responsibility was dominant and wherever our officials
pushed aside their personal interests, we managed to make progress. But
wherever personal interests and egos entered the picture, we became
vulnerable. And today this is still the case.[^6]

[^1]: Sura Maryam, Ayah 31

[^2]: Sura Saad, Ayah 87

[^3]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on July 1, 1999 in a meeting
with government officials on the occasion of birthday anniversaries of
the Holy Prophet (S) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.)

[^4]: Sura al-Baqara, Ayah 285

[^5]: Iqbal al-A’mal, Vol. 1, P. 295

[^6]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on November 6, 1999 in a meeting
with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the occasion of the
Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that


