Wisdom in the actions of the Holy Prophet (S)
=============================================

Then he began to formulate policies on running the society. When one
takes a look and sees that the Holy Prophet (S) moved forward wisely
step by step, one realizes what brilliant ideas and calculations were
behind that firm determination. Naturally, this is not possible except
through divine revelations. Today when people study the events that took
place during those ten years, they do not understand anything. When one
studies each event by separating it from the others, one does not
understand anything. One should understand how these events were
interrelated and how all these things were carried out with wisdom and
with accurate calculation.

The first important thing that that the Holy Prophet (S) did was
creating unity. Not all the people of Medina became Muslims. The
majority of them became Muslims and a few of them did not become
Muslims. Besides, three important Jewish tribes Banu Qaynuqa, Banu Nadir
and Banu Qurayza were living in Medina. They were living in their own
fortifications which were attached to Medina.

They had moved to Medina 100, 200 years earlier. It is a long story why
they had moved to Medina. When the Holy Prophet (S) entered Medina,
these Jewish tribes were known for these two, three things: one was that
the main sources of wealth such as the best farms, the best businesses
and the most profitable industries such as gold-smithery and other such
things were in the hands of these tribes. The majority of the people of
Medina would go to these tribes when they needed something.

They would borrow money from them and pay back the money with interest.
That is to say, financially speaking, everything was in the hands of the
Jews. Another thing was that these Jews had cultural superiority over
the people of Medina because they had a scripture and they were familiar
with different religious concepts, concepts which were foreign to the
minds of the semi-barbarous people of Medina. Therefore, they had
intellectual domination over the people of Medina.

In modern terms, the Jews would be considered to be the intellectual
class. Therefore, they used to humiliate and ridicule the people of
Medina. Of course, whenever they felt that they were in danger and
whenever it was necessary, they showed humility.

However, they were superior to the people of Medina. The third
characteristic is that they were in touch with distant places. That is
to say, they did not confine themselves to Medina. The Jews were a
reality in Medina. Therefore, the Holy Prophet (S) had to take them into
consideration. He prepared a multilateral treaty. When he entered
Medina, it became clear that the leadership of this society belonged to
the Holy Prophet (S).

This happened without any formal agreements. He did not ask the people
for anything and the people did not have any negotiations about this
leadership. That is to say, the great character of the Holy Prophet (S)
naturally made everybody obey him. It became clear that he was the
leader and what he said was the pivot. The Holy Prophet (S) drew up a
treaty which was accepted by everybody. This treaty was about social
interactions, business transactions, conflicts, blood money and the
relations between the Holy Prophet (S) and his opponents, the Jews and
other non-Muslims. All these things were written down and recorded with
all the details. The details have perhaps taken up two, three pages in
great old history books.

The next important thing that he did was strengthening the spirit of
brotherhood. Aristocracy, the kind of prejudice which was based on
superstition, tribal arrogance and separation of different groups of
people from one another were the most important disasters for biased and
ignorant Arab societies of that time. By strengthening the spirit of
brotherhood, the Holy Prophet (S) trampled on these things.

He created the spirit of brotherhood between the head of such and such a
tribe and such a lower-class or middle-class individual. He said to them
that they were brothers and they most willingly accepted this
brotherhood. He established equality between the nobility or outstanding
personalities and slaves who had just become Muslims and who had just
been freed.

By doing this, he removed all obstacles in the way of social unity. When
they wanted to choose a muezzin for the mosque, there were many handsome
individuals with a pleasant voice. There were many outstanding and
knowledgeable personalities. But among all these people, the Holy
Prophet (S) chose Bilal al-Habashi. Beauty, good voice and family
reputation were not an issue. Only Islam, faith, Jihad in the way of God
and self-sacrifice were important. Notice how he practically specified
the values. His actions and his behavior influenced hearts more than his
words did.

The Three stages of establishing an Islamic Government
------------------------------------------------------

There were three stages to the task of organizing the affairs of the
Muslim community. Stage one was building the foundation of the
government. This duty was carried out by doing the things that I
discussed. Stage two was protecting this government. Naturally a nascent
and growing system which makes powerful leaders feel endangered if they
know what it is to have certain enemies. If the Holy Prophet (S) could
not have wisely protected this auspicious system against the enemy, it
would have been destroyed and all his efforts would have been futile.
Therefore, he had to protect it. Stage three was building the structure.

Building the foundation was not enough. It was the first step. These
three stages were done in parallel with one another. Primarily, building
the foundation was important. Even in building the foundation, he took
the enemies into consideration. After building the foundation,
protection began. In building the foundation, individual and social
structures were taken into consideration and this continued to be done
even after this.

The Holy Prophet (S) realized that five main enemies were threatening
this nascent society. The first enemy was a minor and insignificant one.
However, it must not have been ignored. It was possible that it would
cause a big danger. This enemy was the semi- barbarous tribes around
Medina. There were semi-barbarous tribes who lived 60, 90, 120
kilometers away from Medina. All their life was centered around waging
wars, shedding blood, plundering, killing and stealing from one another.

If the Holy Prophet (S) wanted to create a healthy, safe and peaceful
social structure in Medina, he had to take these tribes into
consideration, and he did so. He signed a treaty with the ones that
enjoyed a trace of guidance and salvation. In the beginning, he did not
tell them that they should definitely become Muslims. They were pagans
and unbelievers. But he signed a treaty with them so that they would not
carry out any attacks. The Holy Prophet (S) completely honored his
pledges and promises. I will speak about this point later on. Some of
these tribes were vicious and unreliable.

The Holy Prophet (S) cured them of their wrong behavior and he himself
established contact with them. As you have heard, the Holy Prophet (S)
used to send twenty, fifty people to different tribes and they tried to
establish contact with these tribes. They were not peaceful and one
could not direct them towards the right path. They could not live except
by shedding blood and using force. Therefore, the Holy Prophet (S) went
to them and put them in their place.

### 2. The arrogant and powerful aristocrats who were ruling Mecca

The second enemy was Mecca which played a central role. It is true that
there was not a government in common terms in Mecca. But an arrogant,
powerful, influential and aristocratic group of people ruled this city.
These people had certain disagreements, but they became united against
this nascent system. The Holy Prophet (S) knew that the main danger came
from these people. And the same thing happened in practice.

He felt that if he waited for them to come to him, they would have a
good opportunity. Therefore, he started to get involved with them. But
he did not move towards Mecca. There was a caravan from Mecca which had
to pass through a road near Medina. The Holy Prophet (S) began to attack
them. In the beginning, the Battle of Badr was the most important
attack. The Holy Prophet (S) began these attacks and these arrogant
tribes waged a war against him because of their prejudice and obstinacy.

For around four, five years, the situation was the same. That is to say,
the Holy Prophet (S) did not leave them alone. On the other hand, they
were hoping to root out this nascent system that is to say, the Islamic
government which threatened them. This was the reason behind the Battle
of Uhud and many other battles.

The last battle which they fought against the Holy Prophet (S) was the
Battle of the Trench which was one of the most important battles. They
gathered all their strength and they received help from others. They
said, "We will go and kill the Holy Prophet (S) and 200, 300, 500 of his
close companions. We will plunder Medina and we will return comfortably.
There will be no sign of them anymore." Before they arrived in Medina,
the Holy Prophet (S) became aware of the invasion and he dug that famous
trench.

Medina could be attacked from one side. Therefore, they dug a 40-meter
trench along that side. This happened during the month of Ramadan.
According to certain narrations, it was very cold. The rainfall was low
that year and the people did not have a source of income. So, there were
many problems. The Holy Prophet (S) worked harder than everybody. During
the time they were digging the trench, whenever he saw that somebody had
become tired and could not go on, he took the shovel from him and he did
his work.

That is to say, he did not only order things to be done. He was
physically active among the people. The unbelievers gathered on the
other side of the trench. But they realized that they could not pass
through it. Therefore, they had to return while they were humiliated,
hopeless and frustrated. The Holy Prophet (S) said, "It is over. This
was the last attack that Quraysh carried out against us. From now on, it
is our turn. We will move towards Mecca and we will confront them."

A year after that, the Holy Prophet (S) announced that the Muslims
wanted to go to Mecca for Umrah. The event of Hudaybiyyah which is a
very significant event happened during this time. The Holy Prophet (S)
moved towards Mecca to perform Umrah. They saw that the Holy Prophet (S)
was coming to Mecca during a Haraam month a month in which fighting is
forbidden and the people of Mecca as well as the Muslims respected
Haraam months. What should they do? Should they clear the way for him to
enter Mecca? What will Muslims do after this success? How can they
confront the Holy Prophet (S)? Should they fight with him? How should
they fight?

Finally, they decided to prevent him from coming to Mecca. They said,
"We will massacre them if we find a good pretext." By relying on his
wisdom, the Holy Prophet (S) acted in a way that they had to sign a
treaty with him in order to make him return. Under this treaty, he could
return to Mecca a year after that and perform Umrah. Throughout the
region, the ground was prepared for him to promote Islam. This treaty is
referred to as a peace treaty. But Allah the Exalted says in the Holy
Quran,

***"Verily*** ***We*** ***have*** ***granted you*** ***a***
***manifest*** ***victory."*** [^1]

If people refer to reliable history books, they will see how amazing the
event of Hudaybiyyah is. A year after that, the Holy Prophet (S) went to
Mecca for Umrah and unlike them, the power of this great personality
began to increase. A year after that is to say, in the eighth year after
the migration the Holy Prophet (S) went and conquered Mecca after the
unbelievers had breached the treaty. It was a great victory and it
showed the power of the Holy Prophet (S). So, he treated this enemy with
wisdom, strength and patience and without becoming frantic and
retreating even one single step. He continued moving forward every day.

### 3. The three Jewish tribes

The third enemy was the Jews that is to say, the unreliable outsiders
who temporarily agreed to live with the Holy Prophet (S) in Medina. But
they did not stop being deceitful and creating problems. If you take a
look at the Holy Quran, you will see that an important part of Sura
al-Baqara and other suras in the Holy Quran is about the behavior of the
Holy Prophet (S) towards the Jews and his cultural battle against them.

Since as I said they had a rich cultural background, they were
knowledgeable in certain areas and they deeply influenced the minds of
people who did not have a strong faith. These Jews hatched plots, made
the people hopeless and they pitted them against one another. They were
an organized enemy. The Holy Prophet (S) tolerated them as much as he
could. But when he saw that they could not be tolerated, he punished
them. The Holy Prophet (S) did not get involved with them without any
reason. Each of these three tribes did something and the Holy Prophet
(S) punished them based on their actions.

First, it was Banu Qaynuqa who betrayed the Holy Prophet (S). He went to
them and announced that they should leave. He made them move out of
Medina and all their things remained for the Muslims to use. The second
tribe was Banu Nadir. They also betrayed the Holy Prophet (S) – the
story of their betrayal is important. The Holy Prophet (S) told them
that they should take some of their things and leave. And they had to
leave.

The third tribe was Banu Qurayza whom the Holy Prophet (S) allowed to
stay. He did not make them leave Medina. He signed a treaty with them so
that during the Battle of the Trench these Jews would not let the enemy
enter Medina through their settlements. But they betrayed the Holy
Prophet (S) and they allied themselves with the enemy so that they could
attack the Holy Prophet (S) alongside the enemy.

That is to say, not only did they not adhere to their treaty with the
Holy Prophet (S), but they also went and negotiated with the enemy so
that they together with the enemy could enter Medina through their
settlements and stab the Holy Prophet (S) in the back. This happened
while the Holy Prophet (S) was digging a trench in a part of Medina
which could be penetrated. The settlements of the Jews were on the other
side of Medina where they were supposed to prevent the enemy from
entering Medina.

In the middle of their plots, the Holy Prophet (S) became aware of the
situation. The siege of Medina lasted for almost one month. It was in
the middle of this month that the Jews began to commit this act of
betrayal. The Holy Prophet (S) found out about their decision. By
adopting a very wise measure, he did something to make these Jews and
Quraysh break off their relations, which has been recorded in history
books. He acted in a way that the Jews and Quraysh lost their trust in
one another. This was one of the most beautiful tricks that the Holy
Prophet (S) used in wars. That is to say, he temporarily held the Jews
at bay so that they could not inflict any harm.

After Quraysh and its allies were defeated and after they drifted away
from the trench to return to Mecca, the Holy Prophet (S) returned to
Medina. On the same day that he returned, he performed noon prayers and
then he said, "We will be saying afternoon prayers in front of Banu
Qurayza castles. We should move towards them." He did not even delay it
for one night. He went there and besieged them.

The Holy Prophet (S) besieged and fought with them for 25 days. Then he
killed all the Jewish men who were able to fight because their betrayal
was greater than the other ones and they were irredeemable. The Holy
Prophet (S) treated them in such a way.

That is to say, he foiled the attempts of the hostile Jews mainly in the
issue of the Banu Qurayza and, before that, in the issue of the Banu
Nadir and, later on, in the issue of the Jews involved in the Battle of
Khaybar - against the Muslims with his wisdom, strength and persistence
while observing his noble and humane principles. In none of these
events, the Holy Prophet (S) broke his pledges. Even the enemies of
Islam agree that the Holy Prophet (S) did not break his pledges in any
of these events. It was them who broke their pledges.

### 4. The Hypocrites

The fourth enemy was the hypocrites. The hypocrites were among the
people. They were the people who did not believe in Islam from the
bottom of their heart. They were mean and hostile people who were
prepared to cooperate with the enemy. But they were not organized. This
was the difference between them and the Jews. The Holy Prophet (S)
behaved towards an organized enemy, which was ready to attack and
inflict harm, in the same way as he treated the Jews and he did not give
them any opportunity. But he tolerated enemies who were not organized,
who did not believe in Islam and whose obstinacy, hostility and
wickedness were based on individual actions.

Abdullah ibn Abi was one of the chief enemies of the Holy Prophet (S).
He was alive almost until the last year of the Holy Prophet's (S) life.
But the Holy Prophet (S) did not treat him badly. Although everybody
knew that he was a hypocrite, the Holy Prophet (S) tolerated him and he
treated him the way he treated other Muslims. He paid him his share
through Beyt al-Mal, provided him with security and treated him with
respect. He did so although hypocrites hatched many vicious plots. In
Sura al-Baqara, a certain section is about these hypocrites.

When a group of hypocrites, hatched organized plots, the Holy Prophet
(S) confronted them. On the issue of Zarar Mosque, they set out to build
a center for their activities. They established relations with people
outside the world of Islam with a people who resided in the Roman
territory such as Abu Amer Rahib and they prepared the ground to send
troops from Rome against the Holy Prophet (S). At this time, the Holy
Prophet (S) confronted them and he destroyed and burnt the mosque which
they had built. He said, "This is not a mosque. This is a place for
plotting against mosques, Allah and the people."

Similarly, when a group of hypocrites revealed that they were
unbelievers and moved out of Medina to raise an army, the Holy Prophet
(S) fought them. He said, "If they approach us, we will confront them
and we will fight them.” Although a group of hypocrites stayed in Mecca,
he did not do anything against them. So, the Holy Prophet (S) behaved
towards the third enemy in an organized and determined way. But he
behaved towards the fourth enemy in a lenient way because they were not
organized and their threats centered around individual actions. With his
behavior, the Holy Prophet (S) made them feel embarrassed.

### 5. Internal conflicts, inner human passions and the tendency towards deviation

And the fifth enemy was the enemy that existed in every Muslim and
religious person. And this was the most dangerous enemy. This enemy
exists within ourselves as well. It is our passions, selfishness and the
tendency towards deviation and wrongdoing. We ourselves prepare the
ground for them to grow. The Holy Prophet (S) also fought hard with this
enemy. But he did not fight this enemy with a sword.

He fought with it through education, promotion of piety and warning.
When the people returned from the war after going through a lot of
trouble, the Holy Prophet (S) said, "You have carried out the lesser
Jihad. Now you should engage in the greater Jihad." They said, "O
Messenger of Allah, what is the greater Jihad? We have engaged in such a
great and difficult Jihad. Is there a kind of Jihad which is greater
than this?" The Holy Prophet (S) said, "Yes, Jihad against your
passions." When the Holy Quran says,

***"Those*** ***in whose*** ***hearts*** ***is*** ***a***
***disease,"*** [^2]

It does not mean hypocrites. Of course, some hypocrites are among "those
in whose hearts is a disease". But anybody "in whose hearts is a
disease" is not a hypocrite. Sometimes, these people are believers, but
in their hearts, there is a disease. What does this disease mean? It
means moral weaknesses, debauchery and a tendency towards different
kinds of selfishness.

If you do not restrain these negative qualities and if you do not fight
with them, they will take faith away from you and you will be hollow on
the inside. When these qualities take faith away from you, your heart
will be empty of faith, but you appear to have it. In such conditions,
you are in fact a hypocrite. If, God forbid, our hearts become empty of
faith while we appear to have it and if we stop being committed to our
religious beliefs while our tongues say the same things as in the past,
this means hypocrisy. This is also dangerous. The Holy Quran says,

***"In*** ***the*** ***long*** ***run*** ***evil*** ***in*** ***the***
***extreme*** ***will*** ***be*** ***the*** ***end of*** ***those***
***who*** ***do*** ***evil,*** ***for*** ***they*** ***rejected***
***the*** ***Signs*** ***of*** ***Allah."*** [^3]

Those who committed evil acts, the worst thing will happen to them. What
is this worst thing? It is rejecting “the Signs of Allah”. Elsewhere in
the Holy Quran, God says that those who did not carry out this great
responsibility making charitable donations in the way of God.

***"So He*** ***made*** ***hypocrisy*** ***to*** ***follow*** ***as***
***a*** ***consequence*** ***into*** ***their*** ***hearts*** ***till***
***the day*** ***when*** ***they*** ***shall*** ***meet*** ***Him***
***because*** ***they*** ***failed*** ***to*** ***perform*** ***towards
Allah*** ***what*** ***they*** ***had*** ***promised*** ***with***
***Him."*** [^4]

Since they did not honor the promises to God, hypocrisy entered their
hearts. This is a big danger for the Islamic community. Whenever you
read in history that the Islamic community has deviated from its path,
this deviation is because of this. It is possible that a foreign enemy
comes and oppresses and defeats you and he may bring about a lot of
destruction.

But he cannot destroy you because there is faith in you and this faith
will show itself somewhere. But when our inner enemies attack us and
make us feel empty on the inside, we will deviate from our path.
Wherever there is deviation, it originates from this. The Holy Prophet
(S) fought with this enemy too.

The Holy Prophet (S) behaved wisely and he was quick to act. He did not
waste time on any issue. He was modest and pure and there were no
weaknesses in his auspicious life. He was infallible and pure. This is
the most important factor in influencing others. We should learn. Many
of these things should be said to me too. I should learn. Our government
officials should learn. Influencing others through action is much more
effective than trying to influence others through words.

The Holy Prophet (S) was decisive and he spoke explicitly. His
statements were never vaguely worded. Of course, whenever he confronted
the enemy, he carried out effective political actions and he confused
the enemy. In many cases, the Holy Prophet (S) surprised the enemy in
military or political arenas. But he spoke explicitly and clearly to
believers and his own people and he did not treat them like a
politician. Wherever necessary, he was lenient with certain people such
as Abdullah ibn Abi about whom there are many stories.

The Holy Prophet (S) never broke his promises to the people and the
groups with whom he had signed a treaty – even his enemies and the
unbelievers of Mecca. He did not break his promise to them. It was them
who broke their promises. The Holy Prophet (S) only responded
decisively. He never broke his promises to anybody. Therefore, everybody
knew that when they signed a treaty with him, they could rely on it.

On the other hand, the Holy Prophet (S) never stopped worshipping God
and he strengthened his relationship with God on a daily basis. In the
middle of wars, when he was engaged in organizing and encouraging his
army, when he himself was leading his army in a determined way or when
he was teaching his soldiers what to do, he would kneel down in
supplication, he would raise his hands and he would start to cry and
speak to God.

He said, "Dear God, help us. Dear God, support us. Dear God, You
Yourself defeat Your enemies." His praying did not make him stop being
active. And his activities did not make him stop praying and they did
not prevent him from preserving his relationship with God. He paid
attention to both issues. He never showed fear and he never hesitated in
the face of a hostile enemy. The Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) who is
the embodiment of courage says that whenever they were faced with
difficult conditions during different wars, they would go to the Holy
Prophet (S). Whenever, somebody felt weak in difficult situations, he
would go to the Holy Prophet (S). He led Muslims for ten years. But if
we had a group of active people do the things that he did during those
ten years, they would not be able to do all the things that he did even
if they were given 100 years.

If we compare our work with the things that the Holy Prophet (S) did,
then we realize what he has achieved. Managing that government, creating
such a society and being such a role model for others are among the
miracles the Holy Prophet (S) performed. The people lived with him day
and night. They used to go to his house and he used to go to their
houses. They went to mosque together. They used to travel together. They
used to go to sleep in one place. They starved together and they
rejoiced together.

The life of the Holy Prophet (S) also involved rejoicing and being
happy. He would make jokes with the people. He organized certain
competitions and he himself took part in them. The love of the people
who lived with the Holy Prophet (S) for ten years for him and their
belief in him became deeper on a daily basis. During the conquest of
Mecca, when Abu Sufyan came to the camp of the Holy Prophet (S) with the
support of Abbas, the Holy Prophet's (S) uncle, so that he could ask for
his mercy, he saw that the Holy Prophet (S) was performing Wudu. He saw
that the people had gathered around the Holy Prophet (S) to snatch the
drops of water that was trickling down his face and hands.

Abu Sufyan said, "I have seen Khosrau [king of Persia] and Caesar these
powerful and great kings in the world but I did not see such greatness
in them." Spiritual greatness is the true greatness.

***"Honor*** ***belongs*** ***to*** ***Allah*** ***and*** ***His
Messenger,*** ***and*** ***to*** ***the*** ***Believers."*** [^5]

If believers follow the same path, they will enjoy such greatness too.
On such a day on the 28th of Safar this heavenly light, this noble
person and this kind father passed away, which made everybody sad and
mournful. The day when the Holy Prophet (S) passed away and the days
before that when the Holy Prophet (S) was sick were difficult days for
the people of Medina, particularly because of the things that had
happened earlier.

The Holy Prophet (S) came to the mosque and he sat on the Minbar. Then
he said, "If I owe anybody anything, they can come forward and get it
from me." The people started to cry and they said, "O Messenger of
Allah, is it possible for you to owe us something?" He said, "Being
ashamed before God is more difficult than being ashamed before you. If I
owe you anything, you should come and get it from me so that it will not
be delayed until Judgment Day." Notice how he behaved. Notice who said
these things.

The kind of person whom Gabriel felt honored to speak to say these
things. And he was not joking. He was serious because he might have
violated somebody's right unknowingly.

The Holy Prophet (S) repeated this two or three times. Of course, there
are many narrations in history books regarding this event and I do not
know which is reliable and to what extent they can be trusted. But the
one which is often cited is this: somebody stood up and said, "O
Messenger of Allah, you owe me something. Once you were going past me
while you were riding a camel. I was riding a camel too.

My camel came near yours and you forced it to go with a stick. But the
stick hit my stomach and you owe me an apology." The Holy Prophet (S)
pulled his shirt up and he told him, "Right now you should do Qisas and
you should not let it be delayed until Judgment Day." The people were
astonished and they said, "Does this man really want to do Qisas? Is he
that cruel to do that?" They saw that the Holy Prophet (S) sent somebody
to his house to bring the same stick. Then he said, "Come and hit my
stomach with the same stick."

That man came forward. The people looked astonished and embarrassed,
thinking that the man might try to do that. But they saw that he knelt
at the Holy Prophet's (S) feet and he started to kiss his stomach. The
man said, "O Messenger of Allah, I will save myself from hell fire by
touching your stomach."

Dear God, by the blessedness of Muhammad (S) and his household and out
of Your generosity, bestow Your best blessings and greetings on the
immaculate soul of our Holy Prophet (S). Bestow on him all the blessings
because of what he did for Islam, Muslims and the entire humanity. Make
us a member of his Ummah. Make us follow the right path that he
followed. Make our society become like his society. Bestow on all of us
the determination to follow him. [^6]

The Importance and effects of the Holy Prophet’s (S) birth
----------------------------------------------------------

Definitely, the day when the Holy Prophet (S) was born and divine light
enlightened the world, should be considered the beginning of a new epoch
for humanity. As the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) said, “The world
was devoid of brightness, and full of open deceitfulness.” [^7]

The Holy Prophet’s (S) light revealed the signs of divine rule and the
reasons behind the presence of divine proofs among the people. The
astonishing things that happened at the time of the Holy Prophet’s (S)
birth are in fact a warning to humanity. For example, that battlements
of the Persian king’s castle collapsed or that the fire in certain fire
temples went out, had a symbolic meaning as well. The symbolic meaning
of those events is that after the birth of the Holy Prophet (S), a path
would be opened up in front of humanity and human beings would be saved
from the darkness of illusions and oppressive systems.

Choosing this path and following it vigorously or avoiding it and
depriving oneself of the blessings, are matters that depend on the
willpower and determination of those who make these decisions. It is
human beings themselves who choose their destiny and their future, but
this path has been opened up in front of them. Moreover, Allah the
Exalted has ordained that the general movement of humanity will be
towards these noble goals. Divine laws of nature have left human
communities with no choice but to move towards these goals, and this has
been proven by all historical events. Scientific progress of human
communities and the growth of collective human knowledge are in line
with the teachings of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) and with the final
goals of this path. And today human beings feel the need for the
teachings of the Holy Prophet (S) more than ever before. [^8]

[^1]: Sura al-Fath, Ayah 1

[^2]: Sura al-Anfal, Ayah 49

[^3]: Sura ar-Room, Ayah 10

[^4]: Sura at-Taubah, Ayah 77

[^5]: Sura al-Munafiqoon, Ayah 8

[^6]: Supreme Leader’s Friday prayer sermons delivered on May 18, 2001

[^7]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 89

[^8]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on June 10, 2001 in a meeting
with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the occasion of
birthday anniversaries of the Holy Prophet (S) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.)


