The Dimensions and goals of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that
==========================================================

In fact, Mab’ath was the day when the flag of a mission was raised, a
mission whose characteristics are outstanding and unique for humanity.
Mab’ath raised the flag of knowledge and understanding in the world.
Be’that started with the divine order, “Read”:

***“Read*** ***in*** ***the name*** ***of*** ***your*** ***Lord***
***Who*** ***created.”*** [^1]

And it continued with the following order:

***“Call*** ***to*** ***the*** ***way*** ***of*** ***your*** ***Lord***
***with*** ***wisdom*** ***and goodly*** ***exhortation.”*** [^2]

That is to say, the call was accompanied by wisdom. The Islamic call is
in fact an effort to promote and spread wisdom to different parts of the
world and to different historical eras. Be’that was an effort to raise
the flag of justice and to establish justice among believers, God’s
servants and all human beings. And the mission is to raise the flag of
noble human values. “I was appointed to complete moral virtues.” [^3]
Addressing the Holy Prophet (S), Allah the Exalted says:

***“And*** ***We*** ***have*** ***not*** ***sent*** ***you*** ***but***
***as*** ***a*** ***mercy*** ***to the*** ***worlds.”*** [^4]

That is to say, all the things that human beings need at all times, in
all conditions, in any part of the world have been included in Be’that,
namely knowledge and understanding, wisdom and mercy, justice and
brotherhood, and equality, which are the essential things that the
healthy course of life depends on.

Even though Islam has required its followers to engage in Jihad, it has
also announced:

***“If*** ***they*** ***incline*** ***to*** ***peace,*** ***then***
***incline*** ***to*** ***it*** ***and*** ***trust*** ***in
Allah.”***[^5]

That is to say, Islam prefers peace to war when the conditions are
appropriate. Of course, Jihad means standing up against bullying and
transgression, but some people maliciously announce that Islam is the
religion of war because it has required its followers to engage in
Jihad.

Today humanity is in need of these teachings. We Muslims are responsible
for certain shortcomings and we should admit this. First of all, we have
neglected our responsibility to promote genuine Islamic teachings
throughout the world. Second, we have failed to present appropriate
Islamic role models in the world. If Muslims regulated their actions,
their social and personal behavior and their political models on the
basis of these teachings, they would be promoting Islam in the best
possible way. Of course, there is no doubt that today complicated waves
of global propaganda campaigns have focused on Islam. [^6]

The Signs that signified the Holy Prophet’s (S) birth
-----------------------------------------------------

On a day like this, Allah the Exalted bestowed the greatest blessing on
creation, namely the Holy Prophet (S). This was the beginning of a
decisive stage in the destiny of mankind. Regarding the birth of the
Holy Prophet (S), it has been said that when he was born, the
battlements of the Persian king’s castle collapsed, the fire of the
Temple of Azargoshnasb which had been burning for centuries, went out,
that Saveh Lake which was considered sacred by some people at that time,
dried out and the idols which were hanging from the walls of Ka’bah,
collapsed.

These signs which are divine codes show that the Holy Prophet (S) was
about to be born. The meaning of these significant events was that the
birth of the Holy Prophet (S) would put an end to the humiliation which
had been imposed on mankind as a result of the actions of autocratic and
oppressive rulers such as those in Iran and Rome of that time and as a
result of worshipping things or people instead of God.

Human beings will be saved by the Holy Prophet (S). They will be saved
from the injustice that has been imposed by tyrannical rulers on
oppressed people over the course of history, and from humiliating
superstitions and wrong beliefs that forced human beings to bow to and
worship lowly creatures or other human beings. For this reason, there is
an Ayah regarding Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S) which says:

***“He*** ***it*** ***is*** ***Who*** ***sent*** ***His***
***Messenger*** ***with*** ***the*** ***guidance*** ***and the true***
***religion*** ***that*** ***He*** ***may*** ***make*** ***it***
***prevail over*** ***all*** ***the*** ***religions,*** ***and Allah***
***is*** ***enough*** ***for*** ***a*** ***witness.”*** [^7]

No time has been specified for “that He may make it prevail over all the
religions” and it only shows the direction. This event should cause
human beings to move towards spiritual, social, genuine and intellectual
freedom. This movement was started and we human beings are responsible
for continuing it. This is another law of creation.

If human beings make more determined efforts, they will achieve divine
goals faster, the goals that Allah the Exalted has specified for them.
But if they fail to do so and show that they are weak, they will waste
years on this path, just like the Children of Israel:

***“For*** ***forty years,*** ***they*** ***shall*** ***wander***
***about*** ***in*** ***the*** ***land.”*** [^8]

The Children of Israel caused such conditions that they were forced to
wander in the desert. They could have prevented that hardship and
bitterness. They could have made their journey shorter. The same is true
of our destiny as well.

The reason behind creation of man and the philosophy behind the sending
of divine prophets and scriptures have been announced to Muslims as
well. It is human beings themselves who can make this journey longer or
shorter. The time that it will take to reach the final destination
depends on human beings. [^9]

Be’that of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) was the beginning of a new path
for humanity. The atmosphere in which that prophetic message was
revealed was very bad and intolerable. That message was revealed in a
world of materialistic tendencies, a world of subhuman characteristics,
a world in which powerful and domineering people were not restricted, a
world of discrimination, corruption, oppression and immorality. These
conditions were not particular to the Hijaz region. The two powerful
governments around the Arabian Peninsula namely, the Sassanid dynasty in
Iran and the Roman Empire – were suffering from the same problems.

A Comparison between pre-Islam Jahiliyya and modern Jahiliyya
-------------------------------------------------------------

Comprehensive Jahiliyya had engulfed the lives of the people at the time
of the emergence of Islam. At that time, there were unbearable Fitnas in
all the regions around the Arabian Peninsula. Of course, there was
knowledge as well. There was some form of civilization as well. There
was law and order as well. There was discipline as well, which was the
result of the rule of absolute monarchies in those countries. However,
what was missing was the light of moral virtues and human values.

What was missing was exactly what humanity needs most, namely an
environment in which there are human values, an environment in which
there is mercy and forgiveness, an environment in which there is
justice. Justice was what the people of that time lacked, so powerful
people could be not prevented from trampling upon the rights of the weak
and it was not possible to prevent the advantages from concentrating in
the hands of a few powerful people. These were the great afflictions
that humanity was suffering from. The same was true of the areas that
were under the rule of the Sassanid dynasty as well as the areas that
were under the rule of the Roman Empire – only the form of injustice was
different.

Injustice also existed in another form in the Hijaz region, where people
were living in primitive communities. Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S)
started a movement in all those areas. The message of Be’that was not
particular to the Arabs. It belongs to all human beings.

***“It*** ***is*** ***naught*** ***but*** ***a*** ***reminder***
***for*** ***the*** ***nations.”*** [^10]

The Holy Prophet (S) managed to stand up against those bitter realities
and transform the conditions. He managed to pull down or undermine the
walls of injustice and discrimination that existed among human beings.
The Holy Prophet (S) was faced with the most difficult conditions. When
evil, chaos and corruption are coupled with power, swords, determination
and political power, they turn into great dangers for humanity.

Today in the 21st century, despite all their claims and as a result of
the weaknesses they have shown, human beings are moving towards such
conditions that centers of power stand up and create rights for
themselves by relying on their power and their iron fists and weapons.
These are the same conditions that existed at the time of Be’that. The
Holy Prophet (S) resisted. He did not say that those conditions were
reality and that he could not change them. There are some people who
justify their weaknesses and lack of determination by simply saying:
“This is reality. What can we do?”

This is not the kind of reality that one should surrender to. Natural
realities, realities that cannot be changed, realities that have not
been imposed on human beings these are the kind of realities that human
beings should try to live with. But it is necessary to stand up against
realities that have been imposed on people through the use of weapons
and coercion. It is not rational to say that the power of the arrogant
powers is reality and that we cannot do anything about it. This reality
has been imposed on us. Great human beings, divine religions and great
intellectuals stand up against such reality and try to change it. And it
is possible to change such realities. This was the essence of Be’that.

The day when this message entered the atmosphere of Mecca, the Holy
Prophet (S) said: “Say: there is no god but Allah to achieve salvation.”
[^11] Even those who were just did not think that it was likely for this
to come true one day because there was no ground. All those impressive
idols were hanging from the walls of Ka’bah and deep prejudices of the
Jahiliyya era were the support of those idols. The position of the
aristocrats and powerful families of Mecca were threatened by “there is
no god but Allah”.

There were also powerful governments such as the Sassanid dynasty and
the Roman Empire. In those conditions, who would have accepted that this
message could even be put forward and followed up? This is where weak
individuals back down. However, the Holy Prophet’s (S) mission and
responsibility helped him move forward. In twenty-something years,
Be’that in the sense of inspiration changed that atmosphere first in the
Hijaz region and then in the entire civilized world of that time.

Barely half a century had passed since the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that
and the emergence of Islam that more than half of the civilized world of
that time was under the influence of Islam. It is wrong to think that
powerful empires did not have knowledge, wisdom, organized military
forces and pride. However, when insightful religious faith that is
founded on a powerful rational basis is placed into the hearts of
determined, pure-hearted and selfless individuals, removing such
obstacles becomes possible. The same is true of today’s world. Islamic
faith is the kind of faith that is based on rationality and reasoning
and it guarantees happiness for humanity. [^12] The birth of the Holy
Prophet (S) was a divine blessing for mankind. In the Holy Quran, the
Holy Prophet (S) has been described as

***“a*** ***mercy*** ***to*** ***the*** ***worlds.”*** [^13]

This mercy is not limited. It includes education, purification, guidance
of human beings onto the right path and progress in both worldly and
spiritual aspects of life. This mercy is not limited to the people of a
particular era either. It belongs to all human beings throughout
history:

***“And*** ***others*** ***from among*** ***them*** ***who*** ***have***
***not*** ***yet*** ***joined*** ***them.”*** [^14]

Implementing the rules of Islam is the path to achieve that goal, and
this path has been specified for humanity.

### Islamic Awakening: Muslim’s return to the teachings of the Holy Prophet (S)

The great Islamic Ummah has been faced with certain challenges and
deviations over the course of many centuries. We distanced ourselves
from Islam and became busy with the things that Islam has warned us
against.

Over these centuries, we became busy with civil wars. We were kept busy
by Taghuti powers. As a result, after the first few centuries, the great
Islamic Ummah failed to reach the goals that the Holy Prophet (S) and
dear Islam had specified for it, even after the passage of many
centuries. Allah the Exalted has bestowed many sources of wealth on
Islamic countries and they could have used them to achieve progress.
However, as far as science, industry and many other standards of
progress are concerned, Muslim countries are among the backward parts of
the world. This was not what Islam had planned for us. This situation
was caused by our inappropriate actions and our negligence:

***“Whatever*** ***misfortune*** ***befalls*** ***you,*** ***it***
***is*** ***from*** ***yourself.”*** [^15]

It was we ourselves who caused these conditions over time as a result of
our negligence. Today the conditions have changed in the world of Islam.
Islamic Awakening is visible throughout the world of Islam. In different
parts of the Muslim world, one can witness a great movement which is at
different stages. There is a tendency to return to Islamic principles,
which are a source of dignity and progress. Intellectuals, religious
scholars and politicians of the world of Islam should strengthen this
movement.

It is wrong to think that the Islamic movement of Muslim youth will harm
Islamic governments. No, thanks to Islamic Awakening, Muslim governments
can restore the dignity that the arrogant powers have taken away from
them. One example is our country, our Revolution and our Imam (r.a.).
After we had suffered from many centuries of autocracy and two centuries
of foreign hegemony, we got awakened and our magnanimous Imam (r.a.)
managed to restore dignity to our people.

The English, the Russians and the Americans ruled our country,
respectively. On the surface of it, they were not in charge of
government, but all our national affairs were in their hands and they
had full control over everything in the country. Our people had been
deprived of their rights, their resources, their dignity and the true
taste of religious faith.

Our magnanimous Imam (r.a) managed to liberate our country from the
long-standing hegemony of autocratic and colonial powers by encouraging
the people to return and adhere to Islam. He managed to restore our
dignity. We managed to give our people a sense of Islamic identity and
made them feel that they were capable of standing on their own feet,
that they were capable of making independent decisions, that they could
say “yes” and “no” in the case of historic issues.

Our people had not experienced this for many centuries. It was Islam
that gave this to them. In any part of the world where the wave of
Islamic Awakening is strengthened and the people and youth are made to
feel that they are moving closer to Islam, their identity and dignity
will be revived and restored. [^16]

The Purpose of commemorating Mab’ath: Reviewing the great lessons of Be’that
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Commemorating Mab’ath is an effort to highlight the great lessons that
the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that contains, lessons that are needed by all
human beings, particularly by Muslim communities. It is not just an
effort to commemorate an event that is held in high regard. Today
humanity is suffering from the domination of Taghuti powers, from
oppression, from discrimination, from corruption and from the domination
of the passions of certain groups over the lives of people.

Today the lives of human beings are at the mercy of the passions of
individuals who have not even heard of spirituality, individuals who are
driven by their human passions. Today humanity needs the message of
Be’that more than ever before.

Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S): Calling human beings to adopt monotheism as their lifestyle
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S) was primarily a call to monotheism.
Monotheism is not just a philosophical and theoretical view, rather it
is a lifestyle. Monotheism is the establishment of the rule of God over
one’s life as well as elimination of different factors that control
one’s life. “There is no god but Allah” which is the main message of our
Prophet (S) and all other divine prophets – means that Taghuti powers
and satans should not interfere in the lives of human beings or in the
choice of path and lifestyle and that they should not try to take
control of the lives of human beings.

If monotheism in the Islamic sense and in the sense that was promoted by
all divine prophets is implemented in the social life of Muslims as well
as all human beings, it will be possible for human beings to achieve
genuine happiness and salvation in this world and in the next. Human
beings will be able to build their worldly life and put it at the
service of their perfection and transcendence. From an Islamic point of
view, this world is a prelude and a path to the next world. Islam does
not reject material life.

It does not condemn worldly joys. It asks human beings to be active in
the arena of worldly life with all their capacities. However, all of
these things should be at the service of spiritual transcendence and
happiness, so that worldly life becomes pleasant as well. In such a
world, there is no oppression, no ignorance and no brutality. It is very
difficult to build such a world and it requires selfless efforts. The
Holy Prophet (S) started these selfless efforts from the first day.

Be’that: The call to all the virtues that are needed by humanity
----------------------------------------------------------------

What the Holy Prophet (S) promoted are the same things that humanity has
needed in all historical eras. The Holy Prophet (S) called human beings
to knowledge. Knowledge has been praised in the Ayahs that were revealed
first.

***“Read*** ***in*** ***the*** ***name*** ***of*** ***your*** ***Lord***
***Who*** ***created.*** ***He*** ***created*** ***man*** ***from***
***a*** ***clot.*** ***Read*** ***and*** ***your*** ***Lord*** ***is***
***most honorable,*** ***Who*** ***taught*** ***(to*** ***write)***
***with*** ***the*** ***pen.”*** [^17]

The first thing that was put forward was educating mankind. Knowledge is
an instrument to help mankind achieve salvation. Knowledge is not
particular to a specific era or place. It is related to all eras. The
Holy Prophet (S) called on human beings to start a movement. In the
first Ayahs that were revealed to the Holy Prophet (S), Allah the
Exalted said,

***“Arise*** ***and*** ***warn”.*** [^18]

This shows the importance of starting a movement, taking action and
taking on responsibilities.

***“Say:*** ***I*** ***exhort you*** ***only*** ***to*** ***one***
***thing,*** ***that*** ***you*** ***rise*** ***up*** ***for***
***Allah's*** ***sake.”*** [^19]

Rising up for the sake of God is effective in all conditions and it is
not possible to start a movement and reach any noble goals without
rising up. The Holy Prophet (S) called human beings to spiritual
purification and self-education.

***“He*** ***it*** ***is*** ***Who*** ***raised*** ***among*** ***the
inhabitants*** ***of*** ***Mecca*** ***an Messenger from*** ***among
themselves,*** ***who recites*** ***to*** ***them*** ***His***
***communications*** ***and*** ***purifies*** ***them,*** ***and***
***teaches them*** ***the*** ***Book*** ***and*** ***the***
***Wisdom.”*** [^20]

Spiritual purification is the first condition. In the absence of
spiritual purification, knowledge will be used as an instrument to drag
human beings into corruption, degeneration, deviation and decline, just
as in today’s world, knowledge has become an instrument to drag human
beings into decline and it is being used as a tool to shackle nations,
distort realities and impose hunger on human beings.

Because of the hegemony of colonial powers that continued invading
nations of the world and spreading their domination through the use of
knowledge, there are many people around the world who have been deprived
of their natural resources and they are living in poverty, privation and
destitution.

The same is true of today’s world. Today global arrogance a new form of
colonialism is making human beings powerless through the use of
knowledge. They shackle people and give rise to death and destruction.
These are the consequences of knowledge that is not accompanied by
spiritual purification.

Piety: The Islamic standard for superiority
-------------------------------------------

Islam calls human beings to brotherhood and equality. It calls on human
beings to avoid discrimination, to avoid using racial differences to
discriminate among people, to avoid considering some nations as
inherently superior to other nations. Islam says that it is pious people
who are honorable. From an Islamic point of view, the standard for
superiority is piety. Piety means watching one’s behavior and actions.
It means watching one’s step and making plans for one’s life on the
basis of divine limits and principles.

These things are not limited to a particular era. Even today human
beings are in need of these things. Human beings will always need these
things to achieve happiness, regardless of the progress of science and
civilization. The Islamic Ummah should pay attention to these things and
make efforts to achieve them. This requires firm determination among
Muslim nations and among leaders and government officials of different
countries. According to the Dua that was recited in today’s meeting: “I
know well that the best provision for the followers of Your path is a
firm determination to choose You” [^21]

The best thing is to be determined to choose the path of God and to
follow it. Of course, this path is difficult, but following it will
become easy if there is determination. These are the lessons that Islam
has taught us and we have found them practical in our lives. That is to
say, our experiences show that these lessons can be implemented in our
lives.

During the early years after the introduction of Islam, thanks to these
principles and firm pillars, a small group of people who had been
distanced from civilization and knowledge and had been deprived of all
the blessings of life managed to build the biggest civilization in the
world over the course of a few centuries, and the world benefitted from
their civilization, knowledge and advances.

This is what we have experienced in the past. And in the Islamic
Republic, whenever we have relied on our willpower and on Allah the
Exalted, whenever we have deployed our forces, whenever we have
disregarded our human passions and given precedence to our goals, we
have managed to take successful steps.

It is obvious that it is not possible to build a society or a
civilization which is one of the biggest goals of Islam without being
faced with enmities in the process. During the early years after the
introduction of Islam, the efforts to establish an Islamic government
and society met with hostilities. The same is true today. Today in the
world of Islam, Muslim nations feel proud because of Islam. Islamic
Awakening is a truth that exists today, whether the enemies of the
Islamic Ummah like it or not. Following this path requires a firm
determination among government officials of different countries.

We ourselves are the primary audience of this message and we have to
shoulder heavy responsibilities. The Holy Prophet (S) said, “This Ummah
will not be reformed except through its outstanding personalities.”
[^22] Reforming ordinary people in a society depends on reforming
outstanding personalities of that society. The Holy Prophet (S) was
asked, “Who are outstanding personalities of your Ummah?” He answered,
“Outstanding personalities of my Ummah are religious scholars and
leaders.” He said outstanding personalities are scholars, intellectuals,
aware people, rulers and leaders.[^23]

The life of the Holy Prophet (S) which was spent for God, in the way of
God and on promoting divine teachings and his unique personality are a
lesson and a permanent role model for the entire history of Islam.

***“Certainly*** ***you*** ***have*** ***in*** ***the*** ***Messenger***
***of*** ***Allah*** ***an*** ***excellent*** ***example.”*** [^24]

Thanks to the selfless efforts of the Holy Prophet (S), Islamic
teachings spread to all times. These teachings are not for Muslims
alone. All human beings in all historical eras will benefit from the
teachings of Islam. If we Muslims appreciate the value of Islamic
teachings and pay attention to their depth, we will manage to build a
new world that is consistent with the genuine inner wishes of humanity.
Through adhering to Islam, the Islamic Ummah can save the world which is
immersed in lust, rage, ignorance, selfishness and narcissism.

The spirit of all Islamic teachings is that lust and rage should not
take control of one’s behavior in life, that human beings and human
communities should be driven by wisdom and piety rather than by
self-interest. Take a look at the afflictions that have plagued human
life. What are the causes of different kinds of poverty, privation,
discrimination, corruption, ignorance and prejudice? What causes
killings, wars, oppression, injustice and brutality in human
communities?

The root of all these afflictions is that there are human beings who do
not have control over their passions and are being controlled by lust,
rage, self-interest, ambitions and greed for wealth. And whenever such
individuals have taken control of the destiny of human beings in a
corner of the world, they have dragged humanity into poverty, war,
ignorance, discrimination, corruption and Fitna.

Islam wants to remedy these afflictions. Islam says that ignorance,
brutality, materialistic tendencies, self-interest and narcissism must
not take control of one’s free will, which is one of the greatest
blessings that Allah the Exalted has bestowed on humanity. Islam says
that one’s decisions should be driven by wisdom and piety. [^25]

First, I would like to congratulate the great Islamic Ummah, the
honorable Iranian nation and the esteemed people who have attended this
meeting particularly, the foreign guests and brothers on this auspicious
occasion. Second, as far as showing respect to the personality of the
Holy Prophet (S) is concerned, we Muslims have many things to say and
discuss among ourselves. This is because the Holy Prophet of Islam (S)
was the one who taught goodness, justice, human values, knowledge,
brotherhood, growth, perfection and everlasting progress to human
beings. Can human beings imagine a time when they will no longer need
these precious lessons? Today just like always humanity is in need of
the Holy Prophet’s (S) lessons and teachings.

[^1]: Sura al-Alaq, Ayah 1

[^2]: Sura an-Nahl, Ayah 125

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 67, P. 372

[^4]: Sura al-Anbiya, Ayah 107

[^5]: Sura al-Anfal, Ayah 6

[^6]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on October 15, 2001 in a meeting
with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the occasion of the
Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that

[^7]: Sura al-Fath, Ayah 28

[^8]: Sura al-Maeda, Ayah 26

[^9]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on May 30, 2002 in a meeting
with government officials and participants of the Islamic Unity
Conference on the occasion of birthday anniversaries of the Holy Prophet
(S) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.)

[^10]: Sura at-Takwir, Ayah 27

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 18, P. 202

[^12]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on October 5, 2002 in a meeting
with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the occasion of the
Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that

[^13]: Sura al-Anbiya, Ayah 107

[^14]: Sura al-Jumua, Ayah

[^15]: Sura an-Nisa, Ayah 79

[^16]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on May 19, 2003 in a meeting
with government officials on the occasion of the 17th of Rabi’ al-Awwal

[^17]: Sura al-Alaq, Ayahs 1-4

[^18]: Sura al-Muddaththir, Ayah 2

[^19]: Sura as-Saba, Ayah 46

[^20]: Sura al-Jumua, Ayah 2

[^21]: Iqbal al-A’mal, Vol. 2, P. 678

[^22]: Mawaidh al-Adadiyya, P. 124

[^23]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on September 24, 2003 in a
meeting with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the
occasion of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that

[^24]: 3.Sura al-Ahzab, Ayah 21

[^25]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on April 14, 2004 in a meeting
with ordinary citizens


