Delineating current conditions of Muslims and calling the
=========================================================

Islamic Ummah to unity
----------------------

The issue of Muslim unity is what I would like to discuss today with you
outstanding personalities of the Islamic Ummah. Today the world of Islam
and the Islamic Ummah are faced with great problems. Of course, many of
these problems have been caused by Muslims themselves. We were negligent
and lazy and because of our selfishness and greed for worldly wealth, we
failed to follow the path of the Islamic Ummah towards the peak of human
perfection.

We need to repent and follow this path. However, there is no doubt that
in the recent eras, a major portion of Muslims' backwardness,
afflictions and problems have been caused by the unjust global order.
The current global system is based on domination. It is a system that
relies on coercion. It is not a system that is suitable for human
beings. It is suitable for the jungle.

Take a look at the conditions of the world of Islam. For many years, we
have been remembering the issue of Palestine as a deep wound in the body
of the Islamic Ummah and today the issue of Iraq has been added to it.
Notice what powerful people are doing by relying on force and coercion.
They disguise all the irrational and wrong proposals as defendable and
reasonable proposals by resorting to coercion and to weapons and
financial power, and they promote and implement them in the world. They
openly do the things that are considered as crimes by all nations of the
world.

Sometimes they choose beautiful names for their actions in order to save
face, while they know that nobody will believe them. Some other times
they do not even choose beautiful names to disguise their actions. The
usurping Zionist regime openly announces that it is assassinating
outstanding Palestinian personalities, and the American government
supports it openly and officially. These are the conditions of the
current global system.

Fighting terror has become a pretext for the arrogant American
government to use force and coercion. However, acts of terror are openly
promoted as legitimate actions by the Americans, and leaders of the
Zionist regime are committing acts of terror openly. All of these things
are being done by relying on force and weapons. Military occupation of
Iraq and the humiliation of the great and cultured Iraqi nation is an
international crime, but they did it openly in the name of human rights
and defending democracy and freedom.

This is while nobody in the world believes them because the behavior of
the occupation forces in Iraq shows the opposite of what they are
claiming and it is obvious that they have no respect for the Iraqi
people’s right to elect a government. They choose whoever they want and
install them in positions of power. They pass laws and punish and even
execute those who break their laws, without trying them in a court of
law. Pay attention to what is happening in Iraq. These are the
conditions of the Islamic Ummah.

The Islamic Ummah is the target of transgression by the global powers
and they consider committing all kinds of crimes against us as justified
simply because the Islamic Ummah is located in a rich region, simply
because the wheels of civilization are powered by the numerous resources
that are located in this part of the world. These are the conditions of
the Islamic Ummah. Is the Islamic Ummah incapable of defending itself in
the face of this high-handed transgression? The answer is: we can defend
ourselves.

We have many instruments to defend our rights and our existence. We have
a massive population. We have great sources of wealth. We have
outstanding personalities and spiritual assets that enable us to stand
up against the domineering powers. We have a great cultural and
civilizational background which is exceptional in the world. We have
many facilities. Therefore, we are capable of defending ourselves. But
why do we fail to do so? Why do we fail to take action? The reason is
that we are not unified and we have been separated from each other under
different pretexts. The massive and well-equipped army of the Islamic
Ummah has been divided into small groups whose only concern is fighting,
intimidating, attacking and threatening other groups of Muslims. It is
obvious that this army will prove ineffective in such conditions.

Today it is time for the world of Islam to revise certain things and to
think seriously about the issue of unity. Today the danger that is posed
by America in our region does not just threaten one or two countries. It
threatens all countries in the region. The Zionist capitalists behind
the American government will not feel satisfied with occupying only one
part of our region. They openly announce that they want to occupy the
entire region. “The Greater Middle East” has no other meaning. From
fifty-something years ago when the usurping Zionist regime was
established and from around one hundred years ago when this idea formed
among westerners and Europeans, the intention has been to swallow up the
entire region. This is what they need to do.

They do not care about the people of this region. Everybody is exposed
to danger. When everybody is in danger, the wisest thing to do is to
join hands and counter the danger. We seriously demand and recommend
that Muslim governments and peoples think about and work on this issue.
Of course, this involves some trouble and there are certain requirements
that have to be met.

Of course, the enemy will not remain idle and they will use the old
instruments of fomenting discord. He will make use of ethnic, sectarian
and tribal differences and they will highlight the issues that Islam has
emphatically warned against highlighting. Islam has stressed that
ethnicity is not the standard for determining the identity of a person.

***“Surely*** ***the*** ***most*** ***honorable*** ***of*** ***you***
***with*** ***Allah*** ***is*** ***the*** ***one among you*** ***most***
***careful (of his duty).”*** [^1]

Islam has stressed that Muslims should treat each other in a brotherly
way. It has not referred to followers of a particular Islamic
denomination such as Shia or Sunni Islam, rather it has said that all
Muslims

***“are*** ***but*** ***brethren”.*** [^2]

Islam has said that anybody who has faith in this Book, in this religion
and in this Qiblah is a believer and that all the people who share this
faith are brothers. This is what Islam has told us. However, we hide
daggers behind our backs in order to sink them into the heart of our
religious brothers. And in all areas, there are people who are at fault.
It is necessary to confront and stop such people.

Today the Islamic Ummah requires unity in order to survive, achieve
glory and salvation, and raise the flag of Islam. What logical grounds
are there to put up a resistance against these issues in order to give
rise to discord? Unity is more important than all other necessities and
priorities. Why do we fail to understand the necessity of Muslim unity?
We are shouldering a heavy responsibility and this juncture is a
sensitive juncture.

If the enemies manage to use their power to occupy this region, the
world of Islam will be forced to regress another one hundred years, just
like what happened during the era of colonialism. If such a thing
happens, the gap between the Islamic Ummah and the modern industrial
world will widen by another one hundred years. Today we are responsible
in this regard. Today governments, outstanding personalities, experts
and cultural and religious personalities are responsible in this regard.

All of us are responsible as far as unity of the Islamic world is
concerned. Among the most important things that our magnanimous Imam
(r.a) used to stress from before the Islamic Revolution to the last days
of his life, was unity of the Islamic Ummah and the need to avoid
magnifying trivial issues. And today we see that his recommendations are
very wise and appropriate. [^3]

The formation of the Islamic Ummah with its special and unique
characteristics was one of the blessings of this divine appointment. The
Islamic Ummah is not defined as merely a group of Muslims gathering
around an ideological pivot, but the Ummah, as it was designed by the
Holy Prophet based on Quranic teachings, means a group of Muslims who
are endowed with knowledge, morality, wisdom and justness. The outcome
of such qualities is the attainment of mankind to the peak of
perfection. The Ummah, which is the manifestation of Islamic training
and upbringing, was founded by the Holy Prophet of Islam under the most
adverse circumstances.

Following his divine appointment, when Prophet Muhammad (peace and
greetings be upon him and his infallible household) voiced the call for
monotheism, the world had been plunged into oppression, immorality,
disbelief and all kinds of corruption. The Holy Prophet (S) performed
this great task in a miraculous manner over a period of thirteen years.
After that period, the first cornerstones of the Islamic Ummah were laid
in Medina.

The factors that turned this rather small Muslim community in Medina
into the great and powerful Islamic Ummah in the 4th and 5th century
A.H. were firm belief, clear and comprehensive teachings and precepts,
strong will and resolve as well as incessant striving and perseverance.
These were the main factors that changed the few-thousand strong Muslim
community in Medina during the first years after Hegira into a great and
powerful community and an abundant source of knowledge and wisdom in the
world in the 4th and 5th century A.H.

Later, in the course of its numerous ups and downs, whenever the Muslim
Ummah neglected the lofty Islamic teachings, it experienced defeat and
regression. Whenever it disregarded knowledge, morality, spirituality,
dignity, unity and, above all, justice, it failed to make progress and
suffered retrogression and decline, so much so that the aggressive and
expansionist powers managed to dismember the Muslim Ummah, pit Muslim
nations against one another, dominate them and plunder their resources.

The current wave of Islamic Awakening and the comprehensive attacks of the arrogant powers against Muslim nations
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the contemporary era, the return to Islamic teachings and awakening
of Muslim nations began some decades ago and the banner of monotheism
was once again raised. This movement culminated in the establishment of
the Islamic Republic in this sensitive part of the Islamic world.

Our Islamic government has infused Muslim nations with a sense of
dignity and Islamic identity.
Today we are facing the same challenge that was experienced by the
Muslim Ummah in the past. A full-scale war has currently been waged
against Muslim nations in order to suppress their Islamic movement and
awakening. The arrogant and aggressive powers, which are coveting the
vast natural resources of the Islamic world - this is even acknowledged
by themselves, have waged the war on the pretext of promoting freedom
and democracy, but they actually intend to subvert Islam, which is the
main factor contributing to the dignity of the Muslim Ummah, and conquer
all centers of resistance, so that there may be no obstacle to the
expansionist powers in the region.

Whenever Muslim nations showed weakness and did not act firmly, the
enemies were encouraged to move forward and gain ground. Today different
parts of the Islamic world like Palestine, Iraq and Afghanistan are
suffering from afflictions and disasters. Many Islamic countries are
being threatened by the arrogant and aggressive powers. By clinging to
Islam, Muslim nations will be able to overcome their weaknesses; they
will be able to resist their enemies. What the Islamic world urgently
needs today is unity.

The hearts of Muslims is filled with grief and sorrow over the crimes
and atrocities that are being committed by the arrogant powers and
enemies of Islam in Iraq, Palestine and Afghanistan. The Islamic states
should try to utilize this deep and bitter grief as a concentrated force
against the enemies of Islam. [^4]

I would like to express my congratulations on the auspicious birthday
anniversary of Seal of Prophets, Muhammad al-Mustafa (peace be upon him
and his household), and the auspicious birthday anniversary of Imam
Ja'far Sadiq (greetings be upon him) to you the esteemed audience, the
dear guests and ambassadors of Islamic countries, and to the entire
Iranian nation and members of the great Islamic Ummah throughout the
world.

This birthday anniversary has provided us with an occasion to promote
unity among Muslims. Therefore, the auspicious week spanning
Rabi'-ul-Awwal 12-17 has been named “Unity Week”. The main reason is
that unity among Muslim nations is one the most urgent necessities of
the Islamic Ummah at all times. Besides, the standard and pivot of
Islamic unity is the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) and his memory.

The rational responsibility of the Islamic Ummah to create Muslim unity
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Much has been said about unity. If only part of what we have said had
been put into practice, the fate of Muslim nations would be better than
it currently is. There are naturally certain elements such as ethnic and
tribal disputes, religious and political differences that are harmful to
unity and it is necessary to counter these elements. Efforts should be
made to overcome these differences by relying on the memory of the Holy
Prophet of Islam (S). However, it is more difficult to overcome the
causes of discord that are injected into the Islamic Ummah.

As a result of these ethnic, tribal and sectarian disputes, the enemies
of Islam pursue their usual policies and create discord among Muslims.
We can clearly see that the plots and machinations of the enemies are
behind most of these differences and disputes and it is necessary to do
something to resolve this problem. The scholars and intellectuals of all
Islamic sects and schools of thought are expected to prevent these waves
of Fitna which are fueled by the enemies of Islam from undermining
tranquility, affection and sense of brotherhood among Muslim nations.

The Holy Qur'an has called on us Muslims to remain united. It has warned
us that our honor, identity and power will be at stake if we lose our
unity and solidarity.

Unfortunately, today in the Islamic world certain problems exist which
stem from the lack of due attention to the issue of Islamic unity and
brotherhood. Today, the enemies of Islam are hatching various plots
against the Muslim Ummah. The Islamic awakening of Muslim nations has
alarmed the enemies, prompting them to increase their divisive
machinations and hatch more complicated plots aimed at fomenting rifts
and conflicts in the Islamic world. The arrogant powers that are casting
a covetous eye on Islamic countries and interfering in the internal
affairs of Islamic states are opposed to and worried about the unity of
the Muslim Ummah.

Muslims constitute nearly 1.5 billion of the world's population. The
abundant natural resources and great cultural heritage of Muslim nations
as well as their talented and efficient manpower, the vast market
created by their population for Western products and their precious oil
and gas have made the expansionist and domineering powers desirous of
dominating the Islamic world. But the Islamic unity poses an
insurmountable obstacle to the enemies of Islam and their machinations.
This is why the enemies are making every effort to remove this obstacle.

The establishment of an Islamic government in Iran and the raising of
the banner of monotheism in this country, which is located in an
important and sensitive region, infused other Muslim nations with a
sense of awakening and self-confidence and made them hopeful of their
fate and future. This awakening and self-confidence has prompted the
enemies to hatch intricate plots against Muslim nations.

Today, we are facing numerous plots and machinations. The enemies are
opposed to the entire Islamic world; they are opposed to the presence of
Islam on the global scene. They are opposed to Islamic teachings and
principles. The president of the United States has openly talked about a
crusade against Muslims. The propaganda machinery of the U.S. and
Zionists is constantly disseminating venomous propaganda with the
intention of creating divisions among Islamic countries.

The enemies of Islam are intellectually incapable of offering a school
of thought that will be able to present attractive and noble ideas, a
school of thought that will appeal to Muslim intellectuals and scholars.
Thus, in order to cover up this intellectual handicap and to attract
ignorant individuals, the enemies of Islam have raised the banner of
supporting human rights and countering terrorism. But the reality on the
ground indicates that the United States and Zionists are themselves in
the forefront of trampling on human rights, as they have committed the
most human rights violations and hurt the feelings of nations across the
world.

Which regime has treated a nation as brutally as the Zionist regime has
done? Which arrogant power has treated Muslim nations as arrogantly as
the United States is doing today? Presently, the enemies have focused
their negative propaganda on the Islamic Republic, since the most
valorous defenders of Islam are in this country, and the interests of
the arrogant powers are imperiled here more than anywhere else. However,
the ultimate goal of the enemies is not the Islamic Republic, as they
are seeking to dominate the entire Islamic world.

If Muslim nations do not take the threats posed by the arrogant powers
seriously and offer no resistance to their plots, no country in the
Islamic world, from Africa to the Middle East and to East Asia, will be
immune from their aggression and encroachment. This is a warning to the
Islamic world.

Today Muslim scholars, intellectuals, statesmen, writers and orators
shoulder a heavy responsibility for exposing and foiling the intricate
and malignant plots of the arrogant powers against Islam and Muslims.

The real might and strength of the arrogant powers is less than the
power that they pretend to have. Once they made every effort to prevent
the establishment of the Islamic Republic. But the Islamic Republic has
been thriving for the past twenty-six years. By the grace of Allah, we
have made steady progress over all these years.

The arrogant powers pretend to wield great might and strength in order
to terrorize other nations. But they wield no real power, and they
mostly exaggerate their might. Today, the United States has bogged down
in Iraq and also in Afghanistan.

The Islamic world is potentially powerful. The scholars, intellectuals
and statesmen of Islamic countries are entrusted with a heavy duty.

They should try to raise the morale of Muslims and make them confident
of their power, encourage them to boost their innate power with
knowledge, wisdom and prudence and to resist the bullying and
intimidation of the arrogant powers. Almighty Allah has promised: "Those
who are with God, God is with them.” [^5]

***“And*** ***(as*** ***for)*** ***those who*** ***strive*** ***hard***
***for*** ***Us,*** ***We*** ***will*** ***most*** ***certainly***
***guide*** ***them*** ***in*** ***Our ways,*** ***and*** ***Allah***
***is*** ***most*** ***surely*** ***with*** ***the*** ***doers***
***of*** ***good."*** [^6]

Almighty Allah will surely extend His guidance and assistance to those
who strive in His way. The late magnanimous Imam Khomeini taught this
lesson to the Iranian nation in words and in practice. The Iranian
people observed the results of this lesson, and the world witnessed the
triumph of our nation.

We have no doubt in the Quranic promise that:

***“Allah*** ***has promised*** ***to*** ***those*** ***of*** ***you***
***who*** ***believe*** ***and*** ***do*** ***good*** ***that***
***He*** ***will*** ***most certainly*** ***make*** ***them***
***rulers*** ***on*** ***the*** ***earth,*** ***as*** ***He***
***made*** ***rulers*** ***those before*** ***them,*** ***and***
***that*** ***He*** ***will*** ***most*** ***certainly***
***establish*** ***for*** ***them*** ***their religion,*** ***which***
***He*** ***has*** ***chosen*** ***for*** ***them."*** [^7]

We are sure the divine promise in the above verse is an inviolable
promise and will certainly be fulfilled, provided that Muslims show
perseverance and firmness, keep on the right path, adhere to their
goals, preserve their unity and trust in Almighty Allah. [^8]

The Day of Be’that: An Eid for the entire humanity
--------------------------------------------------

Mab'ath should be celebrated by all human beings, not just by Muslims.
The birthday of any prophet and the anniversary of the appointment of
any prophet as the messenger of Allah is a celebration for the entire
humanity. Each of the divine prophets guided mankind on the path to
human perfection, knowledge, morality and justice. The intellectual
progress of mankind in the course of history has resulted from the
teachings and instructions of prophets.

All divine prophets tried to promote moral values and virtues,
monotheism and servitude to the Almighty among human beings. They tried
to teach mankind how to live a pious life and tread the path to the peak
of human perfection.

The Holy Prophet of Islam, Muhammad (peace be upon him and his
infallible household), is the last one of divine prophets. His divine
message, which is the ultimate message, will be the beacon of guidance
for the entire humanity forever.

We Muslims should value this divine blessing highly. We should ponder
over and try to learn from the great event of Mab'ath. We should use our
bright and glorious past as a beacon to illuminate the difficult path
that extends before us into the future.

Realities of the contemporary world and the need to pay attention to them: Islamic Awakening
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Today, there are several undeniable realities in the world. The first
reality is the Islamic awakening of Muslim nations. Nobody can dispute
this reality. Muslims throughout the world, whether they live in Islamic
countries or in countries where they are in minority, are exhibiting a
strong inclination toward Islam. They are experiencing Islamic awakening
and the revival of their Islamic identity. The intellectuals of the
Islamic world, who have become disenchanted with socialism and Western
schools of thought and ideology, are presently studying Islam and trying
to find remedies for the afflictions of mankind in the Islamic
teachings.

The present tendency toward Islam in the Muslim Ummah has been
unprecedented for the past few centuries. Following the wide-scale
political and cultural domination of Islamic countries by Western and
Eastern blocs for several decades, Muslim youngsters are now turning to
Islam and its teachings and precepts. This is a reality which is even
acknowledged by Westerners and the world's arrogant powers. They have
often said that if free elections are held in any Islamic country, those
who believe in Islam and seek to promote Islamic values and principles
will be elected by the people.

Today, there is contradiction between the Western countries' claims of
supporting democracy and what they are doing in practice. On the one
hand, they have raised the flag of democracy and are claiming to support
democratic governments. On the other hand, they are expressing
unwillingness to raise the banner of democracy in the Islamic world in
its real sense and promote free elections.

The reason is that they know those supporting Islam and seeking to
enforce Islamic principles will be elected and take political power in
any Islamic country in which free elections are held.

Presently, Western countries, the United States and Western
policy-makers, Zionists and Western capitalists know very well that the
great movement of the Palestinian people has stemmed from their
inclination toward Islam. It is Islam which has formed the pivot of
Palestinian movement and infused courage and resistance in the
Palestinian nation. Whenever a nation is characterized by this spirit,
no power, however politically or militarily strong it may be, would be
able to crush and subdue that nation.

This is something which they have understood very well, and the events
of the Islamic world all bear witness to this reality. Today, the
Islamic awakening, or rather the Islamic movement, of Muslim nations is
a clear truth and an undeniable reality.

The second reality is that the arrogant powers are the enemies of the
Islamic awakening of Muslim nations and their pursuit of liberty, and
the reason is also quite clear. The reason is that Islam is opposed to
the submission of Muslims to domination, to the dependence of Muslims on
outside powers, to scientific and technological backwardness, which has
been imposed on Islamic countries for many years, and to blindly
imitating other nations. Islamic teachings and principles run counter to
the colonial and hegemonic policies of Western countries and arrogant
powers, the policies which have been enforced toward the Islamic world
over the past couple of centuries.

Today also, these powers are trying to further their self-defined
interests in this region. Islamic awakening is posing an obstacle to
their goals and aspirations. This is why they are making every effort to
suppress this Islamic awakening through various political and propaganda
means.

Presently, arrogant powers are applying all kinds of propaganda tools
and stratagems against Islam. You can see how intricate and extensive is
the campaign which Western countries have launched against Islam and
Muslims both in the United States and in Europe. They are also utilizing
all kinds of artistic means that are at their disposal to achieve this
evil objective. The intense enmity of arrogant powers toward Islam is
revealed by their hostile cultural, political and military acts against
Muslims. This is also another indisputable reality of the present world.

The third reality, which is known by all but denied by many, is that the
Islamic awakening of Muslim nations is not represented by those who are
engaged in acts of terrorism in the Islamic world. Those who are
committing crimes in Iraq, acting against Muslims in the Islamic world
in the name of Islam and making every effort to foment schism among
Muslims and pit the Shia and the Sunni against one another are not
representing Islamic Awakening.

The arrogant powers know this very well. Those who are trying to portray
these reactionary and terrorist groups to western nations as
representing Islam know that this is not the case. Islam is the religion
of thought, wisdom, contemplation, insight and new ideas. It is the
religion which has given rise to the present awakening of Muslim
nations, the religion which has offered remedies for the afflictions of
mankind.

Another reality of the present world is that Western countries, despite
all their attempts, have not been able to suppress the Islamic awakening
of Muslims. They have been spreading negative propaganda in various
Islamic regions against Islam, the Islamic Republic of Iran, prominent
Islamic leaders and reformists and against Islamic tenets and precepts.
They have hired so many mercenaries to insult Islam and cast aspersions
on Islamic principles. They have utilized their propaganda apparatus and
mass media in an amazing manner.

They have also applied military and economic levers against Muslim
nations. But so far, they have achieved no success. Muslim youngsters in
Islamic countries have expressed the greatest inclination toward Islamic
thought and ideology. This strong enthusiasm for and devotion to Islam
is getting deeper and stronger in the hearts of Muslims as time goes by.

Muslim nations should become completely aware of these realities. They
should realize that the Islamic world can protect its interests only
through unity pivoting on Islam and by putting up strong resistance to
the hegemonic goals and colonial objectives of the enemies and arrogant
powers. The main objective pursued by arrogant powers is to obliterate
the national and religious identity of Muslims in the Islamic world,
especially in the Middle East. Unity and solidarity among Muslim
nations, adhering to and promoting Islam and standing up to the bullying
and blackmail on the part of the United States and other arrogant powers
is the only way to foil the enemies. Today, the United States has a
dishonorable and stigmatized character in the eyes of the world public.

Through their actions, U.S. officials have trampled on their mottos and
slogans. Today, because of the insecurity in Iraq and U.S. pressure on
the Iraqi nation, blind and unconditional U.S. support for bloodthirsty
Zionists, crimes committed by U.S. forces in Afghanistan and U.S.
pressure on Islamic governments, the United States has an ugly and
abominable face in the eyes of Muslim nations. The Islamic world is
capable of standing up to this covetous power, and it should do so.
Today, in order to protect their interests, Muslim nations have no
alternative but to stand firm against the United States.

Islamic governments should rely on the deep-rooted identity of the
Muslim Ummah in order to be able to perform their historic duties and
safeguard the interests of their nations. They should explicitly defend
the Palestinian nation and call for the full independence of Iraq and
entrusting the affairs of that country to the Iraqi nation. They should
support the Afghan nation and other Muslim nations in Europe, Asia and
Africa, and they should try to enforce Islamic tenets and Qur'anic
precepts in their countries.

Islamic countries should consolidate their cordial ties, be honest with
each other, promote concord and cooperation among themselves and help
each other. If they do so, the Muslim Ummah will be able to free itself
from the arrogant powers' yoke and repel the threats posed by these
powers to the Islamic world. [^9]

At the present juncture, the memory and sacred name of the Holy Prophet
of Islam (S) is more alive than ever. This is one of the prudent
measures and hidden favors of Almighty Allah. Today, the Muslim Ummah
and the Iranian nation are, more than ever, in need of the guidance,
glad tidings, warnings, message and spirituality of their Holy Prophet
(S) and the mercy that he taught to human beings. Today, the Holy
Prophet's (S) lesson to his Ummah and the entire humanity is a lesson in
becoming knowledgeable and strong.

It is a lesson in morality, generosity, mercy, Jihad, honor and
resistance. Thus, this year's name is naturally the blessed name of the
Holy Prophet (S). In the light of this blessed name and memory, the
Iranian people are expected to review the Holy Prophet's (S) lessons and
apply them to their everyday lives.

The Iranian people feel proud of being disciples of Holy Prophet
Muhammad (peace be upon him and his immaculate household) and of acting
upon his lessons. Our nation has raised the flag of Islam in the Muslim
world with firmness and strength. It has tolerated hardships and
witnessed the success resulting from presence on this scene of dignity
and honor. By the grace of Allah, greater success is in store for the
Iranian nation.

We should try to be guided in our everyday lives by the Holy Prophet's
(S) lessons in morality, honor, mercy, generosity and unity and lesson
in obtaining knowledge. Today, a government determined to serve the
public, a nation full of hopes and ready to make great efforts and
talented and enthusiastic youngsters are present on the scene of our
homeland. This augurs very well for the future of our country and
nation.

I pray to Almighty Allah to make the immaculate soul of the Holy Prophet
(S) contented with us and bestow increased blessings on the prophet of
mercy and honor and on his Ummah, make the sacred heart of His Holiness
Imam of the Age - may our souls be sacrificed for his sake - pleased
with us, and assist us and confer success on us in treading this
difficult path. [^10]

This year has been imbued with the name of the Holy Prophet (S). What
can we say about the Holy Prophet of Islam (S)? The only thing that we
can say is: the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) was the embodiment of all the
virtues that all divine prophets and saints enjoyed – a complete and
perfect collection of all the virtues that have existed in all divine
prophets and saints throughout history. The name of Ahmad is the name of
all the prophets: When hundred comes (is counted), ninety is with us as
well. [^11]

When we mention the name of the Holy Prophet (S), it is as if we are
referring to the embodiment of the personality of Prophet Ibrahim, the
personality of Prophet Nuh, the personality of Prophet Musa, the
personality of Prophet Isa, the personality of Prophet Luqman, the
personality of all righteous and outstanding servants of God, and the
personality of the Commander of the Faithful and other infallible Imams
(a.s.). The Holy Prophet (S) can be likened to the brightest star in all
creation.

Why should we like him to the brightest star and not the sun? The reason
is that the sun is a heavenly body with a specific mass and weight. It
is bright and massive, but it is just one single heavenly body. Some of
the bright spots that you see in the sky are not stars: in fact, they
are galaxies. Some of them are thousands of times bigger than the
galaxies that we can see in the sky during summer nights. A galaxy
contains thousands of stars like the sun and thousands of solar systems.

The Holy Prophet (S) is like a galaxy and his personality contains
thousands of bright points, namely virtues. In the personality of the
Holy Prophet (S), knowledge is accompanied by ethics, government is
accompanied by wisdom, worship of God is accompanied by serving the
people, Jihad is accompanied by mercy, love for God is accompanied by
love for everything that God has created, honor is accompanied by
humility, daily activities are accompanied by foresight, honesty with
the people is accompanied by political complexity, being immersed in
divine remembrance is accompanied by efforts to improve physical health,
worldly life is accompanied by concern for the hereafter, noble divine
goals are accompanied by interesting human goals.

He is a perfect human being and Allah the Exalted has not created
anybody who is superior to him. He is a bearer of good news. He is a
warner. He is a witness to the entire history of mankind. He is the one
who has called all human beings to God. He is a brilliant beacon of
light for humanity.

***“O Prophet,*** ***surely*** ***We*** ***have*** ***sent*** ***you***
***as a witness, and as a bearer of good news*** ***and*** ***as***
***a*** ***warner,*** ***and*** ***as*** ***one*** ***inviting***
***to*** ***Allah*** ***by*** ***His*** ***permission, and*** ***as***
***a*** ***guiding*** ***beacon.”*** [^12]

For our government and people, “The Year of the Holy Prophet (S)” is the
year of the presence of this galaxy-like personality. Moreover, as far
as the international arena is concerned, the personality of the Holy
Prophet (S) is the point where all Islamic beliefs and feelings come
together. Among all Muslim groups and different Islamic denominations,
the personality of the Holy Prophet (S) is where all beliefs and
feelings of members of the Islamic Ummah come together.

Considering the name of this year, we have a heavy responsibility to
fulfill. This year, the actions of our people and government should be
in line with prophetic wisdom, prophetic knowledge, prophetic
government, prophetic justice, prophetic ethics and dignity, prophetic
humanity and pride, prophetic Jihad and mercy. Of course, these things
cannot be done in one year, just as the Holy Prophet (S) is not the
prophet of a particular year.

Every year is the year of the Holy Prophet (S) and the entire history
belongs to him. However, naming this year “The year of the Holy Prophet
(S)” means that this year we should start a great movement and take a
long step towards the building the kind of society that the Holy Prophet
(S) had in mind, towards building the kind of world and civilization
that the Holy Prophet (S) had in mind. The year of the Holy Prophet (S)
is the year of foresight, the year of hope, the year of hard work, the
year of selfless struggle, the year of serving the people, the year of
introducing clever initiatives for the future of the country, the year
of moving forward. [^13]

[^1]: Sura al-Hujraat, Ayah 13

[^2]: Sura al-Hujraat, Ayah 10

[^3]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on May 7, 2004 in a meeting with
government officials and participants of the Islamic Unity Conference

[^4]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on September 13, 2004 in a
meeting with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the
occasion of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that

[^5]: Sharh Usul al-Kafi, Vol. 1. P. 604

[^6]: Sura al-Ankabut, Ayah 69

[^7]: Sura an-Noor, Ayah 55

[^8]: Supreme Leader’s Speech delivered On April 26, 2005 in a meeting
With government Officials and ambassadors of Islamic Countries on the
occasion of birthday anniversaries of the Holy Prophet (S) and Imam
Sadiq (a.s.)

[^9]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on September 2, 2005 in a
meeting with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the
occasion of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that

[^10]: Supreme Leader’s New Year address delivered on March 21, 2006

[^11]: Masnavi-ye Ma’navi, Book 1

[^12]: Sura al-Ahzab, Ayahs 45-46

[^13]: Supreme Leader’s address delivered on March 21, 2006 at Imam
Ridha’s (a.s.) shrine in the holy city of Mashhad


