The personality of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S): The point where all Muslim affections come together
=====================================================================================================

I would say that the personality of the Holy Prophet (S) is the most
important factor that can give rise to Muslim unity. As I have said
previously, his personality is the point where the world of Islam can
come together and unite, the point where the feelings of all Muslims
come together, the focal point of the love and affection of the Muslim
world.

Notice that the writers who are bribed by the Zionists have focused
their insults on this point in order to gradually decrease sensitivity
to insulting the Islamic Ummah and humiliating the world of Islam.

This is the main point of unity. Our politicians, our outstanding
scientific and cultural personalities, our writers, our poets and our
artists should focus on this point and all Muslims should use it as a
slogan to move closer to one another. They should disregard their
differences. They should avoid leveling allegations against each other.
They should avoid excommunicating each other. They should not push one
another out of religion. The memory of the Holy Prophet (S) and Muslims'
love for him revitalize hearts throughout the world of Islam. All of us
truly love the Holy Prophet (S).

Indeed, this week is “Unity Week” and these days are the days of Muslim
unity. Officials in charge of political issues have a heavy
responsibility to shoulder. Officials in charge of cultural affairs,
writers and religious scholars should avoid raising divisive and
controversial issues. Both Shia and Sunni Muslims should stress this
point of unity. Also, religious scholars and outstanding political
personalities are expected to understand the importance of this juncture
and the importance of Muslim unity. They are expected to identify the
enemies’ machinations that are designed to shatter Muslim unity. This is
what I wanted to tell our people and the world of Islam. I ask Allah the
Exalted to make the world of Islam successful on this path. I pray to
Allah the Exalted to make the future of the Islamic Ummah better than
its current conditions. [^1]

In our country, this year is known as “The Year of the Holy Prophet (S)”
and today is the day when he was appointed as prophet. According to a
famous Mutawatir narration from the Holy Prophet (S), “I was appointed
as prophet in order to complete moral virtues.” [^2] The purpose of
Be’that was to promote and complete moral virtues among human beings.

The Capacities of the Holy Prophet (S) for the great mission of Be’that
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

If a person does not have the best moral virtues, Allah the Exalted will
not give him this great mission. Therefore, at the beginning of Be’that,
Allah the Exalted told His Messenger:

***“You*** ***are*** ***blessed*** ***with a*** ***great*** ***moral***
***character.”*** [^3]

Before Be’that, the Holy Prophet (S) was trained to develop the capacity
for divine revelations. It has been narrated that the Holy Prophet (S)
who was a merchant during his youth and had accumulated great wealth –
gave away all his wealth in the way of God. He divided all his wealth
among the poor. During the years before the Holy Prophet (S) had
developed the capacity for receiving divine revelations, he would climb
up Mount Hira and reflect upon divine signs.

He would reflect upon the sky, the stars, the earth and different
creatures that live on earth in different ways. As far as the Holy
Prophet (S) was concerned, all these things were divine signs. His heart
would become more submissive to God and His will and orders, on a daily
basis and his moral virtues would develop every day. It has been
narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) was “among the wisest and most
courageous people”. [^4]

Before Be’that, the Holy Prophet (S) would grow and develop on a daily
basis by reflecting upon divine signs and this continued until he was
forty years old. “And he had not developed completely until the age of
forty and when Allah the Exalted looked at his heart, he found the most
virtuous, the most beautiful, the most submissive and the most humble
heart.” [^5]
At the age of forty, his heart was the most enlightened and humble
heart with the highest capacity for receiving divine messages. “So the
doors of heaven opened and Muhammad looked through them.” [^6] When he
achieved this level of spirituality and perfection, Allah the Exalted
opened the doors of the unseen world to him. God opened the eyes of the
Holy Prophet (S) to the spiritual world, to the unseen world. “And so
angels came down and Muhammad saw them.” He could see God’s angels and
speak to them. He could hear their voice. This continued until
trustworthy Gabriel was sent down to tell him to “read” and this was the
beginning of Be’that.

From the first moment of Be’that, the Holy Prophet (S) that unique
person among all creation, that perfect human being who had reached that
level of perfection before having received divine revelations started a
comprehensive Jihad and continued it for twenty-three years in spite of
all the difficulties. His Jihad was against his inner passions, against
individuals who had no idea about truth and against absolute darkness of
that era.

In Nahjul Balaghah, the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) says: “Through
them Satan's emblems were flown and his standard was raised in vices
which trampled the people under their hoofs, and treaded upon them with
their feet.” [^7] People were being pressured by Fitnas from all sides:
materialistic tendencies, lust, oppression, transgression, moral vices
among people and transgression by powerful people who oppressed the weak
without facing any hurdles or problems.

This transgression existed not only in Mecca and the Arabian Peninsula
but also in the most advanced civilizations of the time, such as the
Roman Empire and the Persian Kingdom. If you read history books, you
will realize the lives of people had been dominated by different eras of
darkness. That strenuous struggle and those unbelievable and continuous
efforts started from the first few hours after Be’that. And divine
revelations would flow into the Holy Prophet’s (S) heart and they
invigorated him, just like fresh water that gives life to fertile land.
The Holy Prophet (S) did everything in his power in order to prepare
this world for a great change, and he was successful.

The first building blocks of the Islamic Ummah were created by the Holy
Prophet (S) during those difficult days in Mecca. He built the solid
foundations on which the Islamic Ummah should be based: the first
believers, the first people who developed faith in him, the first people
who developed the knowledge, courage and spiritual power to understand
and commit to the message of the Holy Prophet (S).

***“Therefore*** ***(for)*** ***whomsoever*** ***Allah*** ***intends***
***that*** ***He*** ***would guide*** ***him*** ***aright,*** ***He***
***expands*** ***his*** ***chest*** ***for*** ***Islam.”*** [^8]

The hearts that were open to divine teachings and commands were built by
the Holy Prophet (S). Minds were enlightened and wills were strengthened
on a daily basis. During the time they were living in Mecca, those few
believers whose number was growing on a daily basis faced such
difficulties that people like us cannot even imagine. These fresh trees
grew in an atmosphere in which all the values were Jahiliyya values, in
an atmosphere in which prejudice, deep spite, brutality, oppression and
lust were pressuring people. These fresh trees rose up from among such
hard and impenetrable rocks.

The Commander of the Faithful says: “But you must remember that hardy
trees which grow on the border of deserts have very strong timber.” [^9]
No storm could shake the trees that have their roots in rocks. Thirteen
years passed and a civilized Islamic society was built on these solid
foundations. It took another ten years to build an Islamic Ummah.
Building an Ummah was not about politics alone. Only part of it was
about politics. Another issue was educating each and every member of the
Islamic society.

***“He*** ***it*** ***is*** ***Who*** ***raised*** ***among*** ***the
inhabitants*** ***of*** ***Mecca*** ***a Messenger from*** ***among
themselves,*** ***who recites*** ***to*** ***them*** ***His***
***communications*** ***and*** ***purifies*** ***them,*** ***and***
***teaches them*** ***the*** ***Book*** ***and*** ***the***
***Wisdom.”*** [^10]

The Holy Prophet (S) purified them. Each and every heart was educated by
the Holy Prophet (S). He used to fill each and every mind with
knowledge. “… and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom.” Wisdom is at a
higher level. The Holy Prophet (S) would not just teach divine laws and
commands to the people, rather he would teach them wisdom. He would open
their eyes to realities of the world.

This was how the Holy Prophet (S) spent the first ten years in Medina:
on one hand, he would run the affairs of the Islamic society, he would
safeguard its foundations, he would spread Islam, he would prepare the
way for the people who were living outside Medina to gradually turn to
the enlightened world of Islamic teachings and on the other hand, he
would educate members of his society. Dear brothers and sisters, these
two parts cannot be separated from one another.

Separation of Islam from politics: Promoted by the arrogant and colonial powers
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some people announced that Islamic faith is a personal matter and that
politics should be separated from Islam. This is promoted in many
Islamic societies and in the teachings of the aggressive, arrogant and
colonial western world. They promote the idea that Islam is separate
from politics.

They have taken politics away from Islam. This is while politics was the
first thing that the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) paid attention to
immediately after migrating to Medina and saving the Muslims from the
hardships of Mecca. Building an Islamic society, establishing an Islamic
government, forming an Islamic army, sending letters to great leaders
throughout the world and entering the great political arena of the time
all of these things were political in nature.

How is it possible to separate Islam from politics? How is it possible
to interpret and shape politics with anything other than the hand of
Islamic guidance?

***“Those*** ***who*** ***have*** ***made*** ***the*** ***Quran***
***into*** ***shreds.”*** [^11]

Some people shred the Holy Quran to pieces.

***“We*** ***believe*** ***in*** ***some and*** ***disbelieve*** ***in
others.”*** [^12]

They have faith in the kind of worship that the Holy Quran promotes, but
not in the kind of politics that it contains.

***“Certainly*** ***We*** ***sent*** ***Our*** ***messengers***
***with*** ***clear*** ***arguments, and*** ***sent*** ***down***
***with*** ***them*** ***the*** ***Book*** ***and*** ***the***
***balance*** ***that*** ***men*** ***may conduct*** ***themselves***
***with*** ***equity.”*** [^13]

What is equity? Equity means establishing social justice in society. Who
can do this? Establishing an Islamic society in which there is justice
and equity is a political undertaking, one that can be done by those who
run a country. This is the goal of divine prophets. Not only the Holy
Prophet of Islam (S), but also Isa, Musa, Ibrahim and other divine
prophets were sent to fulfill a political purpose, to establish an
Islamic system. But then some people act pious and say: “We do not want
to have anything to do with politics.” Is religion separate from
politics?

And the malicious propaganda campaigns by the west constantly promote
the idea that religion should be separated from politics, that religion
should be separated from government. If we are true Muslims, we should
accept that religion and government are inseparable. Religion and
politics are not two things that have been attached to each other: they
are one and the same.

In Islam, religion and government originate from the same source, and
that source is divine revelations. This is the essence of Islam and the
Holy Quran. On the one hand, some people separate politics from Islam
and on the other hand, some other people reduce Islam to politics, to a
political game. They ignore ethics, spirituality, affection, moral
virtues and human dignity, which are the main goal of the Holy Prophet’s
(S) Be’that. They are examples of

***“those*** ***who*** ***have*** ***made*** ***the*** ***Quran***
***into*** ***shreds”.*** [^14]

They are examples of those who

***“believe*** ***in*** ***some*** ***and*** ***disbelieve*** ***in***
***others”.*** [^15]

Reducing Islam to brilliant political quotes, disregarding humility of
hearts, disregarding divine remembrance, purity and spirituality,
failing to kneel before Allah the Exalted, failing to pray for what one
needs, disregarding emotional attachment to Allah the Exalted, failing
to shed tears when faced with God’s greatness, failing to pray for
divine mercy, disregarding patience, forbearance, generosity,
forgiveness, brotherhood and mercy, clinging to politics alone in the
name of Islam– these things would lead to the same deviation. There is
no difference.

***“…*** ***and*** ***purifies*** ***them*** ***and*** ***teaches***
***them*** ***the*** ***Book*** ***and*** ***the*** ***Wisdom.”*** [^16]

There is both purification and instruction. The scope of religious
instruction is our hearts, our minds and our hands and arms.

***“O Prophet, strive hard against*** ***the unbelievers and the
hypocrites,*** ***and be*** ***hard*** ***against*** ***them.***
***And*** ***their*** ***abode*** ***is*** ***hell*** ***and***
***evil*** ***is*** ***the*** ***resort.”*** [^17]

When faced with the enemy, when faced with an aggressor, when faced with
a person who stands against spreading the light of spirituality and
divine revelations, you need to take action with your hands.

***“We*** ***have*** ***made*** ***the*** ***iron,*** ***wherein***
***is*** ***great*** ***violence*** ***and advantages*** ***to***
***men.”*** [^18]

It is necessary to rise up with an iron-fist and with unbreakable
determination. These are the remedies for the problems that the Islamic
Ummah is suffering from.

The Islamic Ummah is in need of true Islamic rule
-------------------------------------------------

Today the Islamic Ummah needs genuine Islamic government. Islamic
government is the kind of government that is concerned about the hearts
of human beings and nations, the kind of government that is concerned
about the minds, knowledge and scientific progress of human beings, the
kind of government that is concerned about what human beings can do with
their powerful hands and arms, a kind of government that is concerned
about implementing the right policies among human beings. This is what
the Islamic Ummah needs today.

[^1]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on April 16, 2006 on the
occasion of birthday anniversaries of the Holy Prophet (S) and Imam
Sadiq (a.s.)

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 68, P. 382

[^3]: Sura al-Qalam, Ayah 4

[^4]: Mukhtasar al-Basa’ir, P. 60

[^5]: Commentary attributed to Imam Hassan al-Askari (a.s.), P. 156

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 17, P. 309

[^7]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 2

[^8]: Sura al-Anam, Ayah 125

[^9]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 45

[^10]: .Sura al-Jumua, Ayah 2

[^11]: Sura al-Hijr, Ayah 91

[^12]: Sura an-Nisa, Ayah 150

[^13]: Sura al-Hadid, Ayah, 25

[^14]: Sura al-Hijr, Ayah 91

[^15]: Sura an-Nisa, Ayah 150

[^16]: Sura al-Jumua, Ayah 2

[^17]: Sura at-Tahrim, Ayah 9

[^18]: Sura al-Hadid, Ayah 25


