The roots and causes of the Islamic Ummah’s decline
===================================================

The Islamic Ummah started to suffer from serious problems when it
decided to separate religion from government, and ethics from
management. The ground was prepared for the decline of the world of
Islam the day when certain kings proclaimed themselves “caliphs” in
Baghdad and Levant and in different other parts of the world. The ground
was prepared for the decline of the Muslim world when these
self-proclaimed caliphs raised the flag of Islam but became busy with
their human passions, their carnal desires, their ulterior motives,
their arrogance, their kingly pride and their love for accumulation of
wealth under the flag of Islam.

The movement that was started by the Holy Prophet (S) and his honorable
companions and brave followers was pushing Islam forward at a high
speed. Until the 4th and 5th centuries on the Islamic calendar, it was
the Holy Prophet’s (S) original efforts that were the driving force
behind the political and scientific progress of Islam. This was while
the seeds of weakness, decline, corruption and hypocrisy were being
sowed in courts and among the ruling families.

It was the same seeds that grew and crippled the Islamic Ummah, and
Muslims felt the consequences with all their heart and soul after the
passage of many centuries. After Muslim nations had suffered from
colonialism and the hegemony of the enemies in the 18th and 19th
centuries, they fell behind in science.

Our enemies became more powerful and we grew weaker on a daily basis.
They sucked our blood and became stronger, and we lost blood and became
weaker, so much so that the destiny of the Islamic Ummah and the destiny
of Muslim nations of the Middle East region in particular, fell into the
hands of oppressive and tyrannical rulers. Our destiny fell into the
hands of England at one point and later on England passed on this legacy
to the Great Satan of the contemporary era, namely the regime of the
United States of America. In any case, they took advantage of the
weakness of the Muslim world.

Imam Khomeini’s (r.a) role in Islamic Awakening and restoring Muslim dignity
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

May God bestow His mercy on our magnanimous Imam (r.a.) who awakened our
people and helped them bring their power into the arena. Our conditions
used to be the same: we used to be trampled upon. For example, the
biggest sins used to be committed in the city of Tehran and nobody would
even frown upon them. The most hostile enemies of Islam used to come to
Tehran and live in perfect security as if they were living in their own
homes. They used to plunder the wealth of our country. They used to
plunder our oil resources. They used to stand in the way of our
progress.

They used to impose their treacherous and oppressive plans on the people
of this country as well as its managers namely, Mohammad Reza Shah and
the people who were close to him who would treat them as their masters.
Of course, on the face of it, there was some show of power as well, but
they used to obtain permission from foreigners for everything they did.
Iran’s court officials used to ask permission from American and English
ambassadors whenever they wanted to make decisions about the most
important issues of the country. We have specific documents that prove
this. Unfortunately, today the same problems exist in many of the
Islamic countries.

This talented nation, this intelligent nation, this nation with its
great history, this nation that is currently shining in the arena of
science, in the arena of Jihad, in the arena of technology and in the
arena of politics, used to be trampled upon before the Revolution. Imam
Khomeini (r.a.) encouraged the people to step into the arena. He trusted
the people and the people proved themselves. When he trusted the people,
the people decided to trust him. Iran, which was a source of hope for
Kufr, became the standard-bearer of pure Muhammadi Islam and by Allah’s
favor, the Iranian nation will continue moving forward on this straight
path.

Those who thought that after the demise of our magnanimous Imam (r.a.)
the people would gradually drift away from values, were wrong. They made
a mistake and you can see the mistake they made. We are committed to
these values. We believe that Islamic values are a source of national
dignity and pride for us. We believe that these values will cause the
capacities of our nation to develop. Thanks to Islam and divine grace
and power, we will manage to reach and conquer the peaks of scientific
progress at a speed that is higher than normal. We will overcome the
weakness that has been imposed on us for many years and we will
strengthen ourselves.

It is obvious that the arrogant powers are not satisfied with this. It
is obvious that powerful people are trying to stand in the way of this
movement through creating uproar, through propaganda campaigns, through
political work and through economic pressure. But they will fail. We are
standing firm. Our nation is standing firm and other Muslim nations have
awakened. Today the hearts of Muslim peoples are full of spite towards
the Zionists and America. Today throughout the Middle East, North Africa
and Asia, Muslim countries and youth are enthusiastic about restoring
their Islamic identity. This is what has developed in the hearts of
peoples. [^1]

Commemorating these days is a reminder for us, a reminder about the
greatness of the person who was born on this day although the human mind
is not capable of understanding that great truth and that noble and
brilliant soul. What is said by the likes of us is only about the
superficial outer aspects of the issue.

These are the things that the human mind can witness about the Holy
Prophet (S), thereby immersing human beings in the blessings that
emanate from his commands, principles and words.

We, as Muslims and as human beings, are in need of the Holy Prophet (S)
today because the Holy Prophet (S) is a blessing for the entire
humanity, not just for Muslims. The entire humanity is indebted to the
Holy Prophet (S) for the mercy and blessings he brought. What he gave to
mankind as a result of his prophetic mission whose details have been
discussed in the Holy Quran is available to us today and we can benefit
from it.

The Holy Prophet of Islam (peace be upon him and his household) led
mankind to salvation and happiness. He encouraged human beings to move
on a path that can lead to a solution for the problems facing mankind
and a remedy for the sufferings besetting human beings. Mankind has long
been suffering from chronic pains in the course of history. Humanity is
in need of justice, in need of guidance and noble human values. The
human mind requires the help of divine messengers.

The Holy Prophet (S) offered divine guidance to human beings. However,
what has caused and will continue to cause mankind not to benefit from
the blessings of this divine guidance and assistance is related to human
beings themselves.

It stems from our ignorance, our sloth and shortcomings and our hedonism
and pursuit of sensual pleasures. If human beings open their eyes and
use their wisdom and move forward with perseverance, it is possible to
find a solution to all the problems facing mankind and a remedy for the
chronic pains and old wounds of humanity.

Opposed to the invitation of divine prophets is the invitation of satan,
who has always mobilized his armies and friends and followers against
divine prophets. Human beings are standing at a junction and they should
choose between two paths.

Contemporary Islamic Awakening and awareness of Islamic teachings
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Today Muslim nations throughout the Islamic world have a new outlook on
the divine religion of Islam. After long periods of ignorance and lack
of due attention to pure Islamic truth over many centuries, Muslim
nations comprising the Islamic Ummah have now opened their eyes to
Islamic teachings and precepts, because man-made philosophies have
already displayed their failure and inadequacy in practice.

The Islamic world, by adhering to the divine religion of Islam and
Islamic teachings, can be the vanguard of human movement toward
prosperity and perfection. The world is ready to welcome an initiative
on the part of the Muslim Ummah. The scientific achievements of mankind
have mostly pushed morality, spirituality and the religious spirit into
the sidelines. However, human knowledge and man's new outlook on natural
realities of the world can help to set the stage for the Muslim Ummah's
initiative.
Muslim nations should benefit from Islamic knowledge and the teachings,
lifestyle and words of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
household). Above all, they should benefit from the Holy Quran. The
Islamic world is able to move forward. [^2]

Be’that of the Seal of Prophets (S) opened the door to liberation from
old and chronic pains that have afflicted human communities. Some people
responded to the call of the Holy Prophet (S) and they benefited from
it, and some others rejected this call and they suffered the
consequences.

In our opinion, today humanity is still in need of the message of
Be’that and the teachings of the great divine prophets. And all these
teachings have been included in the teachings of Islam and the Holy
Quran in a comprehensive way. At the top of the list of Islamic
teachings, there are three things which are more important than all the
other things. These three things have been mentioned in the Ayahs of the
Holy Quran: knowledge and wisdom, purity and ethics, and justice and
equity.

If we pay close attention, we will realize that even today humanity is
in need of these three things. Today humanity has made progress in terms
of knowledge, but this progress is confined to a specific area. Humanity
has made progress in the natural sciences which are related to the
materialistic aspect of life.

But humanity needs to learn spiritual teachings which broaden the mind
of human beings regarding the beginning of creation and monotheism and
guide the hearts of human beings towards the purpose for which they have
been created. Islam's call to acquiring knowledge is an all-embracing
call. Today the issue of morality and moral and spiritual purity is even
more important than this. The problems of humanity result from ignoring
the issue of moral purity.

Primarily, these statements are addressed to outstanding personalities
in different countries. If political, scientific and cultural
personalities, who stand on the peak of importance in human communities,
enjoy morality and purity, these blessings [morality and purity] will
reach the people and they will be blessed with morality as well.
Primarily, these statements are addressed to officials of Islamic
countries. Love of the world, pursuit of carnal desires, indulgence in
animal desires, the kinds of friendship and hostility which are rooted
in animal and materialistic desires, the kinds of warmongering which
result from seeking power and the desire to increase one's materialistic
power, the kinds of insecurity which result from the wickedness of
politicians in different countries – these are the main sources of
trouble for humanity.

Moral purity is really necessary for a country. Kindness, fairness,
understanding and mercy towards one another are the things which bring
peace to people's lives. If we see that the world is being destroyed
because of insecurity, this insecurity stems from developing weak
policies, seeking power, behaving in an immoral way and drifting away
from piety. Today insecurity is the biggest problem of humanity or, at
least, it is one of the biggest problems.

People are not secure inside their homes and in their social lives. They
do not have security inside their own countries. Islam invites us to
purify ourselves. This is one of the main teachings of Islam.

***"We*** ***have*** ***sent among*** ***you*** ***a*** ***Messenger***
***of*** ***your*** ***own,*** ***rehearsing*** ***to*** ***you***
***Our*** ***Signs, and*** ***sanctifying*** ***you,*** ***and***
***instructing*** ***you*** ***in*** ***Scripture*** ***and***
***Wisdom."*** [^3]

The Holy Prophet (S) recited the Holy Quran and he purified and
instructed people. Another issue is justice. Administration of justice
is the advice of all divine prophets. Allah the Exalted said that all
the prophets and the scriptures He sent and all the efforts that
prophets and their followers made, were for this purpose:

***"That*** ***men*** ***may*** ***stand*** ***forth*** ***in***
***justice."*** [^4]

The Holy Prophet (S) is the pivot of uniting all Islamic groups. The
hearts of all people are filled with the love of the Holy Prophet (S).
The entire Islamic Ummah loves this chosen servant of God, this noblest
person in all history. Muslims should unite by making the Holy Prophet
(S) the pivot of their unity and they should establish a close
relationship among themselves. [^5]

Remembering Be’that is not limited to remembering a historical event -
this is the point we should keep in mind when remembering this great
event, which is a precious memory for humanity. Rather, this glorious
memory is in fact like repeating and reviewing an unforgettable lesson
for the Islamic Ummah - the people, as well as outstanding personalities
of the Islamic Ummah, including politicians, scientists, and
intellectuals. Second, it is an important lesson for all human beings.
Remembering Be’that is like repeating a lesson, emphasizing a role model
and reviewing an instructive event.

There are many aspects to this event, and in fact one has to speak for
hours and write several books if one is to eloquently - though briefly –
discuss the different aspects of Be’that. However, even when one
considers this event superficially, there are many lessons to be learnt.
If you look at the event, you will see that the Holy Prophet (S), with a
message that included everything human beings needed for perfection,
emerged in community and began to promote Islam in a society that was
devoid of Islamic virtues.

The Holy Prophet (S) carried the message of knowledge, yet there was no
knowledge in that society. He carried the message of justice, yet there
was no trace of justice in that society and powerful people and bullying
rulers dominated people's lives and wealth. He was the messenger of
morality, lenience, forgiveness, justice and kindness, yet that society
was truly devoid of such characteristics. The society was full of
unkind, bullying, immoral, ignorant and prejudiced people who were
unjustifiably arrogant and who had their hearts attached to human
passions.

The Holy Prophet (S) grew up in such a difficult and prejudiced
atmosphere and in such a dry desert. He tolerated those conditions for
thirteen years and this thirteen-year period finally ended in the
establishment of a government. He formed a community on the basis of
monotheism, knowledge, justice, morality, ethics and generosity. He
transformed humiliation into pride and savagery into brotherhood. He
turned fanaticism into tolerance and reasoning.

He transformed ignorance into knowledge. He built a strong and logical
foundation on the basis of which Muslims could dominate the peaks of
global civilization for centuries and could rise to new heights which
were unprecedented in human history.

[^1]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on August 22, 2006 in a meeting
with government officials, Ambassadors of Islamic countries and
participants of the Islamic

[^2]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on April 6, 2007 in a meeting
with government officials

[^3]: Sura al-Baqara, Ayah 151

[^4]: Sura al-Hadid, Ayah 25

[^5]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on August 11, 2007 in a meeting
with government officials of the Islamic Republic and ordinary citizens
on the occasion of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that


