Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S): The only way to fulfill the wishes of humanity such as justice and peace
=========================================================================================================

Peace and tranquility is another essential need of humanity. In order to
achieve intellectual development, in order to move things forward, in
order to achieve peace of mind, human beings need tranquility and a
secure and peaceful atmosphere in their minds, in their family
environments, in their societies and in international environments.
Tranquility, security and peace are among the most essential needs of
humanity.

Islam is the harbinger of peace, security and well-being. This is why we
say that on the basis of Quranic teachings, Islam is a religion that is
compatible with innate human characteristics. The path that Islam has
opened up in front of humanity is the path of innate human
characteristics, the path of fulfilling innate human needs.

Allah the Exalted appointed the Holy Prophet (S) to fulfill this
comprehensive goal and He promised salvation to mankind.

***“Surely*** ***We*** ***have*** ***sent*** ***you*** ***with***
***the*** ***truth*** ***as*** ***a*** ***bearer*** ***of*** ***good***
***news*** ***and as*** ***a*** ***warner.”*** [^1]

Primarily, this good news is the promise of a peaceful life, a life that
is accompanied by justice, a life that is adjusted to the innate
characteristics of mankind. Of course, it is also the promise of divine
rewards, which is related to the eternal life of mankind. Therefore,
Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S) was in fact the beginning of mercy: God
bestowed His mercy on all human beings through Be’that.

This path was opened up in front of human beings. It introduced justice
as well as security and well-being.

***“Indeed*** ***there has*** ***come*** ***to*** ***you*** ***light***
***and*** ***a*** ***clear*** ***Book*** ***from*** ***Allah.***
***With*** ***it*** ***Allah guides*** ***him*** ***who*** ***will***
***follow*** ***His*** ***pleasure*** ***into*** ***the*** ***ways***
***of*** ***safety*** ***and brings*** ***them*** ***out*** ***of***
***utter*** ***darkness*** ***into*** ***light*** ***by*** ***His***
***will*** ***and*** ***guides them*** ***to*** ***the*** ***right***
***path.”*** [^2]

With these commands and teachings, the Holy Prophet (S) showed the path
to security and well-being. This path to peace and security is related
to all areas that are important to humanity – inner aspects of one’s
being, aspects relating to society, aspects relating to family
environments, aspects relating to business environments, aspects
relating to social environments, aspects relating to international
environments. This is what Islam is after.

The target of Islam’s attacks is exactly the areas that are not in tune
with the general outline of human life. Those who are opposed to
justice, those who are opposed to peace, security and tranquility, those
who are opposed to spiritual purity and transcendence of mankind – those
people are standing against the call of the Holy Prophet (S). It was
because of justice that Allah the Exalted made Jihad obligatory for
Muslims.

And Jihad is not limited to Islam: it exists in all divine religions.
Those who stand against the call of the Holy Prophet (S) are opposed to
peace, tranquility and transcendence in society and they are opposed to
the collective interests of human beings. This is the point that Islam
targets. From the beginning of Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S), Islam
targeted particular areas through the Quranic revelations.

The first few Ayahs of Sura al-Alaq appear to have been revealed to the
Holy Prophet (S) at the beginning of his Be’that. The other Ayahs of
this Sura were revealed later on, but they are related to Be’that of the
Holy Prophet (S). In this Sura, Allah the Exalted says,

***“If*** ***he*** ***desist*** ***not,*** ***We*** ***would***
***certainly*** ***smite*** ***his*** ***forehead,*** ***a*** ***lying,
sinful*** ***forehead.*** ***Then*** ***let*** ***him*** ***summon***
***his*** ***council.*** ***We*** ***too*** ***would summon*** ***the***
***braves*** ***of*** ***the*** ***army.”*** [^3]

Those who stood against the call to mercy, the call to tranquility and
security, are threatened in the Sura which was revealed first.

Similarly, in the blessed Sura al-Muddaththir, which was also among the
first Suras that were revealed to the Holy Prophet (S), emphasis is
placed on the elements that run against the daily life of people.

***“Leave*** ***Me*** ***and*** ***him*** ***whom*** ***I***
***created*** ***alone,*** ***and*** ***give*** ***him*** ***vast
riches,*** ***and*** ***sons*** ***dwelling*** ***in*** ***his***
***presence,*** ***and*** ***I*** ***adjusted*** ***affairs*** ***for
him*** ***adjustably,*** ***and*** ***yet*** ***he*** ***desires***
***that*** ***I*** ***should*** ***add*** ***more.*** ***By*** ***no***
***means!*** ***Surely*** ***he*** ***offers*** ***opposition***
***to*** ***Our*** ***communications.*** ***I*** ***will*** ***make***
***a*** ***distressing*** ***punishment*** ***overtake*** ***him.”***
[^4]

It is pointed out in these Ayahs that there will be resistance against
those who are opposed to the Holy Prophet (S), those who are opposed to
the collective interests of human communities, those who are opposed to
truth. Therefore, there is Jihad in Islam, but this Jihad is a battle
against those who are opposed to peace in human life, those who are
opposed to justice, and those who are opposed to salvation of human
beings.

For this reason, if you study the Holy Quran and the Sunnah of the Holy
Prophet (S), you will realize that from the day an Islamic government
was established, there were certain non-Muslim people who were leaving a
peaceful life thanks to the Holy Prophet (S).

The Holy Prophet (S) entered into an agreement with the Jews of Medina
and let them live a peaceful life next to Muslims, but they conspired
and fought the Muslims. They stabbed the Muslims in the back. As a
result, the Holy Prophet (S) stood against them. If the Jews of Medina
had not waged a war on the Muslims, if they had not shown hostility, if
they had not betrayed the Muslims, the Holy Prophet (S) would have never
attacked them. Therefore, the Islamic call is a spiritual call. It is
based on reasoning. It invites human beings to living a happy life.

Certain people might decide to stand in the way of this. Islam removes
them from its path. Islam does not adopt a passive position. If there
are people who are opposed to salvation of mankind, if there are people
who are opposed to the call to truth, Islam stands against them and
fights them. Compare this with the way aggressive powers of the world
have acted throughout history: they wage wars to increase their power,
to spread injustice.

Notice that today the domineering and arrogant powers of the world are
manufacturing weapons to threaten humanity, not to spread justice. They
produce weapons to spread injustice. They produce weapons to take
security away from those who refuse to surrender to them, not to bring
about security for mankind.

Today this is the issue of the world. This is why we refer to the kind
of jahaliyya that has been established in the modern world as “modern
jahaliyya”. The era of jahaliyya is not over. Jahaliyya means
confronting truth, confronting monotheism, confronting human rights,
confronting the path that Allah the Exalted has opening up for human
beings to achieve happiness.

This jahaliyya still exists in the world, but it has appeared in a
modern form and makes use of science, advanced technologies, nuclear
weapons and different kinds of weapons in order to fill the pockets of
the owners of industries that are detrimental to human life.

The story of manufacturing weapons and military expenditures is one of
the tragic stories in the modern world. Today weapons manufacturing
companies build various kinds of weapons in order to sell them.

They start wars in the world, turn people against each other, pit
governments against each other and create threats so that they can carry
out their treacherous thoughts and satisfy their greed.

As long as superpowers are in charge of global issues, there will be
wars in the world. War brings about material benefits for them. This
kind of war is not for the sake of justice. The Americas, who say that
they start wars in order to bring about security, are lying. What they
do is the opposite. Wherever they have military presence, they cause
insecurity and injustice and they make life difficult for the local
people. Since the time these modern tools were introduced, human beings
have been living under pressure.

According to official international reports, in forty five years from
the end of World War II to the year 1990 which is known as the “Cold
War” era, there were only three weeks in which there were no wars in the
world. Throughout this forty five year period, there were wars in
different corners of the world. Who caused those wars? The same people
who manufacture weapons. Military expenditures of the superpowers are
extremely high. According to their own statistics, last year the
military expenditures of the American government totaled more than six
hundred billion dollars.

Today we see that part of this money is being spent in the neighboring
countries. This money is being spent in Afghanistan in order to suppress
the Muslim people of Afghanistan. It is being spent in Iraq in order to
keep the people of Iraq under their hegemony. It is being spent on
helping the evil Zionist regime keep the Middle East volatile. Today
this is the orientation of the corrupt powers. Islam fights and opposes
these powers.

The people whose interests lie in the existence of wars among Muslim
peoples and governments, the people whose interests depend on the
existence of hatred and fear among Muslim peoples and governments they
are the same people whose arrogant and colonial power depends on the
existence of wars in the world. For them, war is an instrument for
plundering the resources of other nations. Why would so many people be
killed?

Why would so many national resources be spent on buying weapons? Why
would so many resources be spent on manufacturing expensive weapons? So
that owners of big companies make more money and enjoy their lives more.
This is the Taghuti, jahaliyya-based and dangerous system that has
unfortunately dominated the life of those who have drifted away from the
path of monotheism.

Definitely this system will not survive, because it is against truth,
because it is falsehood and it must vanish.

***“The*** ***truth*** ***has*** ***come*** ***and the***
***falsehood*** ***has*** ***vanished:*** ***surely*** ***falsehood***
***is*** ***a*** ***vanishing*** ***(thing).”*** [^5]

Falsehood is what goes against the laws of creation and it will decline
and vanish: it cannot survive. The signs of this decline can be
witnessed today. The conditions of the world show signs of this decline.

The conditions of the world have changed. The peoples of the world have
awakened. Fortunately this awakening is more prevalent among Muslim
peoples. Muslim peoples and governments are witnessing the importance of
Islam, the greatness of this reliable source of support. Today Islamic
Awakening in the world of Islam has caused the superpowers to lose their
power.

The situation of America is different today. The same is true of the
powers that emerged after America. This is clear. Muslim peoples should
appreciate the path of monotheism and they should consider divine
promises as truthful. Today happiness of Muslims depends on their unity,
centered on Islam.

Of course, Islamic Awakening is and will be faced with hostilities.
Wherever Islamic Awakening is more prevalent, the enemies of humanity
will feel more threatened and as a result they will show more hostility.
We are well aware of the significance of the hostilities that the
Islamic Republic is faced with. We are fully aware of the cause of these
hostilities. The Islamic Republic is carrying the flag of Islamic
Awakening among Muslim peoples, the Islamic Republic is calling Muslim
peoples and governments to unity and dignity, the Islamic Republic is
calling on Muslim peoples and governments to appreciate their Islamic
dignity: these are the causes of the hostilities and we know this.

We know that these hostilities will prove futile, just as they have so
far. They have been working against the Islamic Republic for thirty one
years and by Allah’s favor, the Islamic Republic has been growing more
powerful on a daily basis over the past thirty one years. This trend
will continue in the future. The more the hostilities continue, the more
our people and other Muslim people in the world of Islam will become
aware of their identity and the more they will appreciate their value.

We hope Allah the Exalted helps all Muslim governments and peoples to
develop confidence in themselves, to rely on themselves, to stand
against the arrogant powers without fear, to understand that the
arrogant powers are declining. The power of the arrogant powers is fake
and false, and this falsehood cannot survive. The only thing that will
survive is what benefits humanity:

***“That*** ***which*** ***is*** ***for*** ***the*** ***good*** ***of***
***mankind*** ***remains*** ***on*** ***the*** ***earth.”*** [^6]

Signs of human being’s tendency to return to benefitting from the existence of the Holy Prophet (S)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thanks to Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S), we hope Allah the Exalted
helps us move closer to the path of Islam, makes our heart more familiar
with divine commands and teachings, makes the hearts of Muslim peoples
grow closer to one another, and joins the hands of Muslim governments so
that the Islamic Ummah can restore its power, glory and pride. [^7]

The birth of the Holy Prophet (S) was the beginning of a brilliant dawn
in the life of humanity. His birth made the people of his time see the
divine warnings with their own eyes. The castles of oppressive kings
collapsed. The fire temples went out. Divine power put an end to
superstitious beliefs in different parts of the world. The birth of the
Holy Prophet (S) was a prelude to his Be’that. And this Be’that was a
blessing for all people throughout the world. As the Holy Quran says,

***"And*** ***We*** ***have*** ***not*** ***sent*** ***you*** ***but***
***as*** ***a*** ***mercy*** ***to*** ***the*** ***Worlds."*** [^8]

The entire world has benefited from his holy existence, and it will do
so in the future as well. The advances made by humanity, the scientific
advances, the different areas of knowledge and the great discoveries
that have been made in the world are all because of the emergence of the
light of Islam in that amazing historical era. And this blessing was
made available to people. If humanity had more knowledge, if humanity
enjoyed a deeper understanding, if humanity knew the Holy Prophet (S),
if humanity was familiar with Islam, if humanity knew the message of
Islam, today the scene of history would be a different scene.

The ignorance of human beings and their short-sightedness have made them
fall behind. Definitely the more time passes and the more human beings
increase their capacity for understanding, the more this brilliant sun
will reveal itself. Then human beings will benefit more from this light
of life. And today we can see the signs.

Today the world is frustrated at the heavy impositions of materialistic
civilization, and it is looking for a way out. Today the wave of Islamic
Awakening that you see in certain Islamic countries, such as Egypt and
Tunisia, is a sign that humanity is frustrated. When demons dominate the
life of people - human demons are more dangerous than Jinn demons - and
when the arrogant powers of the world mislead the people of the world by
interfering in the personal life of people, their economy, their
understanding and their ideologies, life enters a dark void. This
darkness goes against the nature of human beings, and it awakens the
human nature of people. This is what is happening in the world.

The western world, which is enslaved by the hegemony of material power,
is frustrated today. If we Muslims could present Islam appropriately and
if we could adjust our behavior according to Islam, the entire world
would definitely turn to Islam. The problem is with us. We are the first
people addressed by the Holy Quran and the message of the Holy Prophet
(S). We should reform ourselves. We should improve ourselves.

The signs of Islamic Awakening in the contemporary world
--------------------------------------------------------

Thanks to Islam, nations have awakened today. One can see this awakening
throughout the world of Islam. The first effect of this awakening is the
expression of hatred toward the presence of the arrogant powers in the
region. The Americans are trying to keep away from the great popular
movement which can be seen today in certain Islamic countries. But this
is not possible.

The primary purpose of these movements is to oppose the hegemony of the
arrogant powers over this region. It is the hegemony of the arrogant
powers that has humiliated the nations of the region. It is the
machinations and interference of the arrogant powers in the region that
have prevented Muslim nations from extending a hand of brotherhood
towards each other, from understanding each other, from pooling their
resources, from establishing a genuine Islamic Ummah. It is necessary to
put an end to this state of affairs.

Nations should get rid of the interference and hegemony of the arrogant
powers. This is the key to resolving the problems of the region. The
problems of the regional peoples and movements - governments which have
moved away from their people - are due to the presence of the arrogant
powers, especially America, in the region. The solution to the problems
of the region is that the peoples and governments should wake up to the
reality and prevent the Great Satan from dominating and interfering in
the destiny of their nations.

America's Middle Eastern policies have turned the peoples of the region
against their governments. These policies have created a chasm between
the peoples and governments of the region. If the people of a country
join their government, no foreign power will be able to dominate that
country. No foreign power can resist the power of the people. What we
see today in certain Islamic countries is the presence of the people on
the scene. When the people are present on the scene, the sword of the
superpowers becomes blunt.

Then the superpowers cannot bully the people. The superpowers help their
friends and mercenaries dominate the people - bully the people. When the
people step into the arena, their governments receive support, providing
that their governments join their people. This is the solution to the
problems of this region.

Today the fake Zionist regime is like a cancerous tumor in the region, a
tumor that has plagued the region. The arrogant powers have focused all
their efforts on safeguarding this cancerous tumor in the region. The
existence of this cancerous tumor in the region has caused war, discord
and wrong policies in the region. They are doing everything in their
power in order to safeguard this tumor and preserve their stronghold in
the region. Today we are witness to the signs and consequences of these
efforts: the reaction of the peoples of the region. When the people
awaken, they do not tolerate such conditions.

I believe that the movements which we see today in certain Islamic
countries are the reaction of the peoples to the long-standing
humiliation that the arrogant powers have imposed on them. Today they
have found an opportunity, and they have stepped into the arena.

The responsibility of political, scientific and religious personalities of the world of Islam to safeguard and continue Islamic Awakening
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Religious scholars and political, scientific and academic figures have a
very heavy responsibility to shoulder. Today the people of these
countries are in need of the guidance of these prominent figures -
political figures, scientific figures, academic figures, religious
figures. They have a heavy responsibility. They must not let the system
of arrogance use the different tools they enjoy and hijack this great
popular movement.

They must not let the system of arrogance steal this popular movement.
They must be vigilant. They should guide people towards the goals and
ideals which are lofty for all countries. If this happens, the region
will have a bright future the future of the Islamic Ummah will be
bright.

There are about 1.5 billion Muslims in the world. In terms of our
strategic position and our natural resources, we Muslims enjoy a very
sensitive position in the world. But it is others who are ruling us. It
is others who determine our destiny. They make decisions about our oil
and our governments. This state of affairs must be transformed, and
there is no doubt that it will be so. The signs of this transformation
are clearly visible today, and Islamic Awakening is one of these signs.

Islam tells its followers:

***"Muhammad*** ***is*** ***the*** ***Messenger*** ***of*** ***Allah,
and*** ***those*** ***with*** ***him*** ***are*** ***firm***
***against*** ***the*** ***disbelievers,*** ***compassionate among***
***themselves.*** ***You*** ***will*** ***see*** ***them*** ***bowing***
***down,*** ***prostrating themselves, seeking*** ***grace*** ***from***
***Allah and*** ***pleasure.*** ***Their*** ***marks*** ***are*** ***in
their*** ***faces*** ***because*** ***of*** ***the*** ***effect***
***of*** ***prostration."*** [^9]

These are the characteristics of the Islamic Ummah. Reliance on God,
remembrance of God, engaging in Dhikr, humility before God these are the
signs of the spirituality that members of the Islamic Ummah enjoy. Islam
educates such people. Its followers are humble before God and kind
towards their religious brothers, but they stand firm like a mountain
against oppressors and arrogant people.

***"That*** ***is*** ***their*** ***description*** ***in the***
***Torah*** ***and*** ***their*** ***description*** ***in*** ***the***
***Gospel*** ***-*** ***like*** ***sown*** ***corn*** ***that sends***
***forth*** ***its*** ***shoot*** ***and*** ***strengthens*** ***it***
***and*** ***rises*** ***firm*** ***upon*** ***its*** ***stalk,
delighting*** ***the*** ***sowers."*** [^10]

These are the developmental stages of the Islamic Ummah. It rises from
under the ground, grows, thrives and becomes strong, "delighting the
sowers". Even those who prepared the ground for its growth are
surprised. It is the hand of divine power that helps human beings grow
like this.

***"That*** ***He*** ***may*** ***enrage*** ***the disbelievers***
***with*** ***(the*** ***sight*** ***of) them."*** [^11]

When the arrogant enemy looks at the faithful individual educated by
Islam in this way, he is understandably enraged. This is how we should
act. We should reform ourselves. We should adjust our lives according to
the Holy Quran. We should adjust our behavior towards friends, enemies
and arrogant powers according to the Quranic plan. Allah the Exalted has
promised that He will reward those who act like this, and this reward
will be offered both in this world and in the hereafter.

In this world the reward includes glory and the divine beauties and
blessings which have been made available to human beings. And paradise
is the reward in the hereafter.

This is the path that you dear people of Iran are treading. By Allah's
favor, you will continue treading this path. Fortunately we see that
today Muslim nations from different parts of the world of Islam are
gradually moving towards this path. Allah the Exalted says:

***"And*** ***the*** ***end*** ***is*** ***for the***
***God-fearing."*** [^12]

If we practice fear of God as a principle in our actions, there is no
doubt that ultimate victory will belong to the Islamic Ummah. And by
Allah's favor, this future is not far away.

I hope Allah the Exalted will enable all Muslim nations and the Islamic
Ummah - particularly the elites and influential figures of the Islamic
Ummah - to benefit most from the teachings of the Holy Prophet (S) and
the Holy Quran.

I pray to Allah the Exalted to bestow His bountiful blessings on our
magnanimous Imam who opened up this path in front of us and on our dear
martyrs who sacrificed their lives on this path. [^13]

Mab’ath: The Most important, the greatest and most auspicious day of the year
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

If the importance of a particular day depends on whether or not Allah
the Exalted has bestowed a blessing on humanity on that day, then
Mab'ath is definitely the greatest and the most important day of the
year. This is because sending down the Holy Prophet (S) for humanity was
greater than all divine blessings throughout history. Therefore, one can
say with certainty that Mab'ath is the best, the greatest and the most
auspicious day of the year. We should commemorate the event that
happened on Mab'ath and we should visualize the greatness of that event.

The Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) said, "God sent the Prophet when
the mission of other prophets had stopped and the peoples were in
slumber for a long time." [^14] Be’that happened at a time when humanity
had been deprived of the presence of divine prophets for a long time. It
was about 600 years after Jesus Christ.

Humanity had not seen a divine messenger for hundreds of years. What was
the result? "The world was devoid of brightness, and full of open
deceitfulness." [^15]

The world was a dark place. Spirituality had left the world. Humanity
was living in ignorance, deviation and arrogance. Allah the Exalted sent
the Holy Prophet (S) in such a situation.

The Holy Prophet (S) was the person who had been prepared by Allah the
Exalted for such a great mission in the entire history of mankind.
Therefore, the Holy Prophet (S) managed to start a movement in 23 years,
and this movement has pushed human history forward in spite of all the
problems. Twenty three years is a short time, and thirteen years of it
were spent in unfair battles. It started in Mecca with five, ten, fifty
people. Only a small number of people managed to resist under the
unbearable pressure of prejudiced, blind and ignorant enemies of Islam.

Firm foundations were built so that Islamic society and Islamic
civilization could be based on them. Later on Allah the Exalted prepared
the way for the immigration of the Holy Prophet (S) to Medina, and he
managed to establish this Islamic system and this civilization in
Medina.

The Holy Prophet (S) organized, built and managed this system in only
ten years. It was a short time. Such events usually disappear in the
flood of other important events, and they are usually forgotten. Ten
years is a very short time. But the Holy Prophet (S) managed to plant,
water and nurture this sapling in that period of time. He managed to
start a movement that led to a civilization, and this civilization stood
at the peak of human civilization during a certain period. That is to
say, during the 3rd and 4th centuries of the Hijri calendar, Islamic
civilization was greater than all earlier civilizations. This is one of
the miracles of Islam.

This was while different bitter events happened to the Islamic Ummah
after the Holy Prophet (S) passed away. Problems, disagreements and
internal conflicts emerged. In spite of all these things, in spite of
the deviations that emerged over time, in spite of the impurities that
appeared and grew, the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) and the message of
Be’that managed to give rise to that greatness in 3, 4 centuries, and
the modern world and all civilizations of the modern world are indebted
to Islamic civilization of the 3rd and 4th Hijri centuries.

If humanity considered the issue in a fair way, it would acknowledge
that human beings' salvation and their movement towards perfection will
be possible only through Islam. We Muslims were ungrateful. We were
unappreciative. We failed to appreciate Islam. We failed to preserve the
foundations that had been developed by the Holy Prophet (S) for
prominent and advanced human societies.

We were ungrateful, and we paid the price. Islam has the capacity to
help humanity achieve prosperity and perfection. It has the capacity to
help humanity achieve material and spiritual growth. The foundations
that were established by the Holy Prophet (S) - faith, rationality,
struggle and dignity are the main foundations of an Islamic community.

We should strengthen our faith in our hearts and in our actions. We
should utilize human wisdom, which is the great gift of God to humanity.
We should engage in Jihad in the way of God in military, political,
economic or other arenas. We should appreciate our Islamic and human
sense of dignity.

When these things are revived in a society, that society will definitely
follow the path of Islam and the path of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S).
Thanks to the message of Islam and thanks to the call of our magnanimous
Imam, we Iranian people managed to practice part of these things in our
life, and we can see the positive results.

Today the world of Islam has awakened. The movements that we see today
in certain North African and Middle Eastern countries are the result of
using the light of Islam and following the guidance of the Holy Prophet
(S). Therefore, by Allah's grace, the future of this region and these
countries is bright.

Futile efforts of the arrogant powers to counter Islamic Awakening
------------------------------------------------------------------

The obstinacy of the westerners is futile. Their insistence on their
wrong positions is futile. What we see today in Egypt, Tunisia and
certain other countries tell us that a new chapter has begun in the
history of this region. The wrong and oppressive balance that western
arrogant and colonial powers established in this region 100-150 years
ago and imposed it on the destiny of this great and strategic region,
has been upset. A new chapter has begun.

Of course, today western arrogant powers are resisting. They do not want
to accept the great and undeniable fact that the regional nations have
awakened. They do not want to accept that the regional nations have
turned back to Islam. But this is a fact. The Islamic spirit has been
revived in Muslim countries. The puppets of America and the west did
something that these nations had no option but to rise up, start an
impressive popular movement and carry out a revolution. Therefore, they
started following this path. These movements will definitely achieve the
desired outcome. [^16]

[^1]: Sura al-Baghara, Ayah 119

[^2]: Sura al-Maeda, Ayahs 15-16

[^3]: Sura al-Alaq, Ayahs 15-18

[^4]: Sura al-Muddaththir, Ayahs 11-17

[^5]: Sura al-Isra, Ayah 81

[^6]: Sura ar-Ra’d, Ayah 17

[^7]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on July 10, 2010 in a meeting
with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the occasion of the
Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that

[^8]: .Sura al-Anbiya, Ayah 107

[^9]: Sura al-Fath, Ayah 29

[^10]: Sura al-Fath, Ayah 29

[^11]: Sura al-Fath, Ayah 29

[^12]: Sura al-Qisas, Ayah 83

[^13]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on February 21, 2011 in a
meeting with government officials of the Islamic Republic and
ambassadors of Islamic countries on the occasion of the Holy Prophet’s
(S) birthday anniversary

[^14]: Kafi, Vol. 1, P. 60

[^15]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 89

[^16]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on June 30, 2011 in a meeting
with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the occasion of the
Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that


