The Importance of delineating the dimensions of the Holy Prophet’s (S) personality and lifestyle
================================================================================================

No human being is able to fully delineate different dimensions of the
Holy Prophet’s (S) personality and to present a picture of his
personality that is close to reality. What we have learnt about the
select servant of the Creator and the commander of all prophets is only
a shadow of his personality. However, even this amount of knowledge is
enough for Muslims to guarantee their movement towards perfection and
provide them with a picture of the peaks of human virtues and human
perfection.

It is also enough to encourage Muslims to come together and create
Islamic unity. Therefore, my advice to all Muslims who live in different
parts of the world is that it is necessary to work on various dimensions
of the Holy Prophet’s (S) personality, lifestyle and conduct as well as
the teachings that have been recorded in writing.

After the Middle-Ages, widespread propaganda campaigns were launched by
westerners and Christians against the personality of the Holy Prophet of
Islam (S) and sworn enemies of Islam realized that one way to fight
Islam is to launch a smear campaign against the Holy Prophet (S).

Many things were done to achieve this goal. And today the enemy is using
different methods to erase the memory of the Holy Prophet’s (S)
personality from the minds of liberated people throughout the world.
From the Middle Ages to this day, many people in the world would have
definitely developed faith in Islam and Islamic spirituality if they had
known the Holy Prophet (S) to the same extent as Muslims and even less
than that – that is to say, if they had seen only a shadow of his
brilliant personality. It is necessary for us to work on this issue.

Maybe the most effective way to promote Islam is to present a picture of
the Holy Prophet’s (S) personality to people of the world. It behooves
artistic and aware Muslims throughout the world to delineate his
personality through scholarly, cultural, artistic and promotional
activities before the enemies and opponents of Islam use complex
cultural and artistic methods to distort the image of the Holy Prophet
(S) in the minds of unaware people throughout the world. These things
are necessary.

We need to work on introducing the personality of the Holy Prophet (S).
We need to focus on not just his lifestyle but on different dimensions
of his existence, such as his conduct, his method of government, the way
he treated the people, the way he worshipped God, his policies, his
Jihad and his teachings. And we should not just write books, rather we
should use new methods as well as the existing techniques and start
doing artistic and promotional work. Also, we should not limit ourselves
to the borders of the Islamic Republic, rather we should do these things
in the entire world of Islam. [^1]

As the followers of the Holy Prophet’s (S) path at least, this is what
we claim and what we are famous for in the world what is important is
that we should try to emulate different aspects of his divine
personality and create characteristics in ourselves that resemble the
characteristics of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S).

It is not enough for those who struggle in the way of God and fight for
Islamic rule to focus all their efforts on building an Islamic society
and government although this is a major obligation and perhaps the most
fundamental obligation that a Muslim has. Apart from the efforts that we
make to establish and develop an Islamic system and to help it achieve
success, it is necessary to make efforts to transform our hearts and
souls, efforts that may be even more difficult than building an Islamic
society and government. [^2]

The point that I have in mind regarding the life of the Holy Prophet (S)
is that in order to fully establish Islamic values and ethics in society
and in the souls, beliefs and lives of the people, the Holy Prophet of
Islam used to immerse the atmosphere of his society in Islamic values.

Sometimes people might be asked or ordered to behave well, be forgiving,
remain patient and steadfast in the way of God, avoid oppression or try
to administer justice, for example. This is a matter of teaching lessons
and giving advice or orders, which is necessary. The Holy Prophet (S)
used to do the same thing: he wouldwould

***“Instruct them*** ***in*** ***the*** ***Scripture*** ***and***
***in*** ***wisdom.”*** [^3]

He used to teach the people wisdom and how to live. But some other times
the issue is beyond the simple act of teaching. That is to say, the
teacher acts in a way that ethics and Islamic obligations are firmly
established in society. He confronts non-Islamic behaviors. He gives a
shock to the people and society. At appropriate points and junctures and
through using appropriate methods, he acts in a way that the general
atmosphere of his society is fully immersed in particular
characteristics and ethical values.

Examples of the techniques that the Holy Prophet (S.) would use to create an
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Islamic atmosphere in society
-----------------------------

If a society is determined to grow and to develop Islamic ethics within
itself, it has to adopt this method. In the Quranic Ayahs where
“purification” comes before or after ***“instruction”*** [^4]

it is possible that purification means purifying the people, just like a
doctor who does not just tell his patient what to do and what not to do,
rather he puts his patient in a special place and gives him whatever he
needs and keeps away whatever that is harmful to him. The Holy Prophet
of Islam (S) followed this method throughout his 23-year prophethood,
especially during the ten years that he was living in Medina and had
established an Islamic government.

There are a few examples that I would like to discuss. This is very
important for our current conditions in the Islamic Republic, both for
the people and particularly for government officials and those who can
speak to the people. The point that we should keep in mind is that if we
are determined to cleanse ourselves of the behaviors which have survived
from the time of Taghut and which are extremely harmful to our growth
and transcendence we have no choice but to courageously and decisively
follow the methods of the Holy Prophet (S).

One example is related to creating a healthy social atmosphere, an
atmosphere that is free from ignorant prejudices. Except for those who
are at very high levels in terms of knowledge and understanding, in many
cases the lives of people are ruled by prejudices, ulterior motives,
spite and other such things which prevent people from acting in a just
way and make the social environment unhealthy.

### 1. Promoting optimism and avoidance of slander and pessimism

It is necessary to make the social environment healthy. In order to
create a healthy social environment and make the people think
positively, the Holy Prophet (S) used to take certain actions besides
the recommendations that he would offer, particularly during the time
when this issue was very important in his society because there was a
lot of spite, suspicion and tribal prejudice among Arabs of the
Jahiliyya era, and the Holy Prophet (S) had to cleanse the hearts of
early Muslims off these things and to clear mistrust and suspicion.

There is a narration from the Holy Prophet (S) which says: “None of you
is allowed to speak to me behind the back of any of my companions
because I want to come to you while I have nothing against you in my
heart.” [^5] Some people would go to the Holy Prophet (S) and speak
behind other people’s back. Sometimes their statements were truthful and
some other times they were not. The Holy Prophet (S) asked everybody to
avoid speaking behind other people’s back. He told them to avoid going
to him and speaking behind each other’s back. He said that he wanted to
visit his companions without having any preconceptions or suspicions
about them.

This is a narration from the Holy Prophet (S), an order to Muslims about
how to behave as far as he was concerned. Notice how much this act by
the Holy Prophet (S) would help Muslims feel that they should have no
suspicion towards each other in an Islamic society. According to Islamic
narrations, when government is in the hands of evil and corrupt people,
one should view everything with suspicion, but when government is in the
hands of benevolent people, suspicions should be avoided and replaced
with trust, vices should be ignored and virtues should be highlighted.

Muslims would customarily go to the Holy Prophet (S) and whisper in his
ear. They would whisper certain matters in his ear. Then an Ayah was
revealed which prohibited people from whispering in the Holy Prophet’s
(S) ear. This was because whispering would create suspicion in the minds
of other Muslims.

#### Reference to the rumors about one of the Holy Prophet’s (S) wives

Spreading rumors against one of the Holy Prophet’s (S) wives was a very
important event. I have repeatedly reviewed it in my mind and I have
frequently referred to the Ayahs which are related to the event. In Sura
an-Nur, there are a few Ayahs which are related to this event. One of
the Holy Prophet’s (S) wives was left behind at a caravan stop in a
battle. She was accompanying the Holy Prophet (S) on his trip.

The caravan did not realize that she was missing. The reason is not
really important: she might have fallen asleep somewhere or she might
have been away to take care of a personal matter. It was only later on
that the caravan realized that the Holy Prophet’s (S) wife was missing.
Later on, she was found by a Muslim and accompanied to Medina.

Shia and Sunni Muslims do not agree which of the Holy Prophet’s (S)
wives she was. According to Shia narrations, she was Maria Al-Qibtiyya
and according to Sunni narrations, she was Aisha. It is not important to
debate who she was and about which of the Holy Prophet’s (S) wives these
Ayahs have been revealed. The point is that the story contains a very
important ethical rule for social life.

#### Strong reaction of the Holy Quran to those who Spread rumours

After she returned to Medina, certain people started rumors about where
she had been, why she had been left behind and who the person who found
her was. They started certain rumors among the people without being
clear and leveling a specific allegation against her.

The point is not that she was the Holy Prophet’s (S) wife and that she
deserved respect. The point that has been highlighted in the Holy Quran
is something else. The Ayahs in Sura an-Nur which are related to the
rumors that were spread by hypocrites and ill-wishers in the Holy
Prophet’s (S) society, strongly react to the rumors. In several Ayahs,
Muslims are strongly criticized for not silencing and reacting to those
rumors.

Two of the Ayahs start with the word “lawla”. Those who are familiar
with Arabic know that “lawla” is used when one wants to strongly
criticize somebody for not doing something.

***“Why*** ***did*** ***not the*** ***believing*** ***men*** ***and***
***the*** ***believing*** ***women,*** ***when*** ***you*** ***heard***
***it,*** ***think well*** ***of their own people, and*** ***say: This
is an evident*** ***falsehood?”***[^6]

And in another Ayah, Allah the Exalted says:

***“And*** ***why*** ***did*** ***you*** ***not,*** ***when you***
***heard*** ***it, say:*** ***It*** ***not*** ***does*** ***beseem***
***us*** ***that we*** ***should talk of it. Glory be*** ***to***
***You.*** ***This*** ***is*** ***a*** ***great*** ***slander.”*** [^7]

Allah the Exalted says:
***“When you*** ***heard*** ***this rumor,*** ***why*** ***did*** ***you
not*** ***say that we you do not have the right to spread it?*** ***This
is a gross slander.”***

And finally another Ayah says:

***“Allah*** ***admonishes*** ***you*** ***that*** ***you should***
***not*** ***return*** ***to*** ***the*** ***like*** ***of*** ***it***
***ever*** ***again*** ***if*** ***you*** ***are*** ***believers.”***
[^8]

That is to say,

***“Allah*** ***the*** ***Exalted*** ***advises*** ***you***
***against*** ***such*** ***rumors*** ***and against*** ***giving***
***rise*** ***to*** ***such*** ***events*** ***in*** ***the***
***Islamic*** ***community,*** ***if*** ***you*** ***are believers.”***

This means that avoiding rumors is a requirement for religious faith.

As I pointed out earlier, the point is not that she was the Holy
Prophet’s (S) wife. Even if she was not the Holy Prophet’s (S) wife,
Muslims would still have the same obligation. In Islam, if a person
accuses another person of certain things but fails to provide four
witnesses to prove his claims, he will have to take the punishment for
making unfounded accusations. One cannot just throw accusations at
another person, create doubts and concerns and get away with it even if
one fails to prove one’s claims. If a person who makes certain kinds of
accusations fails to prove his claims, he will have to take the
punishment for slander.

I believe that the event is a very significant event in the history of
Islam, one that helped counter efforts at spreading rumors about
personal affairs of people in Islamic communities. Such efforts create
suspicion among people and they make the general atmosphere unhealthy.
This is the attitude of Islam. Therefore, one of the things that the
Holy Prophet (S) did was that he filled the general atmosphere of his
society with affection and love so that everybody could treat each other
with affection and trust. And today this is an obligation that we should
observe.

Another example of the efforts that the Holy Prophet (S) made in order
to clear the general atmosphere was that he tried to cleanse Muslims'
hearts off spite and enmity. In the case of the previous example, the
Holy Prophet’s (S) efforts were focused on creating trust and promoting
a healthy atmosphere in society. But in this case, the issue is beyond
these things. That is to say, in an Islamic community, Muslims should be
encouraged to stop being indifferent to one another. Islam does not
approve of Muslims who live their lives and do not want to be involved
in the affairs of other Muslims. One chapter in the life of the Holy
Prophet (S) involves his efforts to turn this indifference into
affection, cooperation and brotherhood. And this is exactly what we need
in our system today.

Muslims should treat each other with affection and compassion and
without the slightest indifference. A Muslim must not be indifferent to
another Muslim who is suffering from a particular problem. One of the
great things that the Holy Prophet (S) did was that he created a sense
of support, compassion, sympathy and reciprocal affection among Muslims.
The Holy Prophet (S) would try his best to prevent Muslims from having
spite and malevolence against each other in the Islamic community. That
is to say, by relying on his wisdom and patience, the Holy Prophet (S)
tried to create enjoyable and wholesome conditions that were imbued with
affection.

It has been narrated that a Bedouin – who did not know anything about
civilization and ordinary social manners – travels to Medina to visit
the Holy Prophet (S). He finds the Holy Prophet (S) among his companions
in a mosque or on the road. He asks the Holy Prophet (S) for something
and the Holy Prophet (S) helps him by, for example, giving him money,
food and clothes. Afterwards, the Holy Prophet (S) asks the man: “I
tried to be kind to you. Are you happy?” Because of his background and
crude manners – which is typical of such people – that man who was not
happy with what he had received from the Holy Prophet (S), said: “No,
you did not do anything for me. You did not do me any favors. Basically,
what you gave me was nothing.”

His crude behavior towards the Holy Prophet (S) was understandably
unacceptable to his companions. Everybody became angry. Some of the Holy
Prophet’s (S) companions wanted to react to the Bedouin’s behavior, but
the Holy Prophet said: “No, do not say anything to him. I will handle
this issue myself.” He left his companions and took the man to his
house. Clearly, the Holy Prophet (S) did not have anything else with him
to give to the man, otherwise he would have done so. He took the man to
his house and gave him other things, such as food, clothes or money.
Then he asked the man: “Are you happy now?” The man said: “Yes.” He felt
ashamed by the generosity and patience of the Holy Prophet (S) and he
finally said that he was happy.

The Holy Prophet (S) told him: “Earlier you said certain things in front
of my companions and made them angry. Do you want to go to them and tell
them that you are happy now?” The man said: “Yes, I do.” The Holy
Prophet (S) took the man to his companions on the same day or the day
after. Addressing his companions, the Holy Prophet (S) said: “This Arab
brother feels that he is happy with me now. If you are happy, you may
say so.” The man started to praise the Holy Prophet (S) and said that he
was happy and grateful to the Holy Prophet (S) for his kindness. He said
what he wanted to say and left.

After the man had left, addressing his companions, the Holy Prophet (S)
said: “That Arab man is analogous to a camel that has strayed away from
its herd and shepherd and is running away into the desert. As my
friends, you run after him in order to bring him back to me. But this
move makes him more frightened and less likely to return. I did not let
you scare him away more than you already had. I went after him with love
and affection and I made him return to us.” This was the technique of
the Holy Prophet (S).

The existence of even the slightest spite and enmity in the Islamic
community was unacceptable to the Holy Prophet (S). He tried to create
affection and friendship among the people of his society. Even when
Islam spread to other areas and the Holy Prophet (S) managed to capture
Mecca, he granted a general amnesty for the people of Mecca. The people
of Mecca were the same people who had forced the Holy Prophet (S) out of
the city. The Holy Prophet (S), who used to live in Mecca, tolerated all
the sufferings in Mecca for 13 years.

And later on there were several battles between his army and the army of
Mecca. Many Muslims had been killed by the people of Mecca and Muslims
had also killed people from Mecca. If the Holy Prophet (S) had decided
to enter the city of Mecca with feelings of animosity, for many years it
would have been impossible to make peace with the people of Mecca.
Therefore, as soon as he arrived in Mecca, the Holy Prophet (S)
announced: “You are free.” [^9] He announced that he had granted a
general amnesty. He pardoned Quraysh and put an end to everything.

One of the things that the Holy Prophet (S) did during the early months
after he had settled in Medina was that he made Muslims take an oath of
brotherhood. When we call a person our brother, this is not ceremonial
gesture in Islam. That is to say, Muslims are like brothers to one
another and they have the same rights and obligations as brothers do.
Just as brothers have certain rights and obligations in their
relationship, so do religious brothers in Islam. The Holy Prophet (S)
translated this into action.

The Holy Prophet (S) created a sense of brotherhood among Muslims. He
did not pay attention to the previous social distinctions and
aristocratic backgrounds of the people of Medina and Quraysh. He made a
black slave the brother of a great personality and a slave that had been
freed, the brother of a famous aristocrat from Bani Hashim or Quraysh.
In any case, this brotherhood enjoyed various dimensions and one of the
most important purposes was to help Muslims feel like brothers.

### 2. Promoting the spirit of Gratitude

I would like to provide another example to illustrate how the Holy
Prophet (S) would imbue the general atmosphere of his society with
Islamic values. Apart from political beliefs and tendencies and other
such issues, in Islam what is important is the spirit of loyalty,
respecting each other’s rights and showing gratitude for the efforts and
services of other people. This is very important for the health of
society and the Holy Prophet (S) would repeatedly stress this point. He
would not just pay lip service to such things. For example, he would not
just advise the people to respect their promises and show their
gratitude, rather he would create the necessary conditions for the
people to do so.

According to a narration, a delegation had been sent by Najashi the king
of Abyssinia to meet with the Holy Prophet (S) in Medina and to deliver
a message, which was a common practice among different states. Najashi
was the king of Abyssinia and just like many other kings of his time, he
was Christian, but when the delegation came to visit the Holy Prophet
(S), he stood up to receive and serve them. His companions said:
“Messenger of God, we are here, so let us take care of serving the
guests.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “No, when Muslims migrated to
Abyssinia, their king showed a lot of respect and now I want to return
the favor.” This is an example of showing gratitude.

During his life, the Holy Prophet (S) fought many battles against
polytheists of Quraysh and he also fought a few battles against the
Byzantine Empire which was in control of the Levant region as well as
Palestine. He even took part in the Battle of Yarmouk, the Battle of
Mu’tah and the Battle of Tabouk, but he never fought a battle against
Abyssinia and he never deployed his army there.

It was not the case that the Holy Prophet (S) used to fight every king
who did not believe in Islam. Najashi’s commitment to his promises and
the Holy Prophet’s (S) gratitude for Najashi’s favor were not forgotten
even after the Holy Prophet (S) had established an Islamic government.
Many such examples can be provided from the life of the Holy Prophet
(S), but it would take too long to discuss every example.

### 3. Promoting the spirit of hard work in society

I would like to discuss another example. After the Holy Prophet (S) had
established an Islamic government, a woman came to visit him in Medina.
His companions saw that the Holy Prophet (S) had a lot of respect for
that woman. He welcomed her warmly and asked after her family members.
He treated her in the friendliest way. After the woman had left, in
order to clear confusion, the Holy Prophet (S) said: “That woman used to
visit us frequently when Khadijah was alive.”

She must have avoided visiting Hazrat Khadijah (sthe .a.) when the Holy
Prophet (S) was surrounded by his companions. This narration does not
mention that she had converted to Islam she probably had not converted
to Islam, but the Holy Prophet (S) treated her with respect many years
later simply because she used to have a friendly relationship with the
Holy Prophet’s (S) household.

Another example is the efforts by the Holy Prophet (S) to create an
appropriate atmosphere for hard work in society: he would not just order
the people to work hard, rather he would revive the spirit of hard work
among the people through different techniques and sometimes when he saw
a young person who was idle, he would tell him, “God does not like a
young person who is idle.”

According to a narration, whenever the Holy Prophet (S) saw a young
person who was healthy and strong, he would ask him two questions: “Are
you married? What do you do?” If that young person told him that he was
single and jobless, the Holy Prophet (S) would say: “In my eyes, that
youth fell from favor.” Through such techniques and behaviors, the Holy
Prophet (S) would draw the people’s attention to the importance of hard
work.

Once, a few people went to the Holy Prophet (S) and praised a particular
person. They said: “Messenger of God, we went on a trip with this man
and he is a very pure-hearted and pious person. He was praying
constantly and at every stop we made, he would immediately start
praying, reciting the Holy Quran and doing other such things.”

When they had finished speaking, the Holy Prophet (S) asked in
astonishment: “But who was taking care of what he had to do? If he was
constantly praying and reciting the Holy Quran at every stop, who was
cooking for him? Who was taking care of his stuff? Who was loading and
unloading them? Who was taking care of what he had to do during the
trip?” They answered: “Messenger of God, it was a pleasure for us to do
everything for him.” The Holy Prophet (S) said: “You are better than
him.” [^10]

The fact that he was not doing what he was supposed to do, the fact that
he was putting all the responsibility on your shoulders to start
worshipping God, does not make him a good person. You are the ones who
are good because you do not avoid your responsibilities and because you
even do another person’s duties.”

Through such techniques, it is possible to fill the general atmosphere
of an Islamic society with the spirit of hard work. Today we are in need
of all the lessons that I mentioned. [^11]

[^1]: Ayatollah Khamenei’s speech delivered on October 16, 1989 in a
meeting with participants of the Islamic Unity Conference, clerics,
government officials, Friday prayer leaders and a group of ordinary
citizens from different cities

[^2]: Ayatollah Khamenei’s speech delivered on October 18, 1989 in a
meeting with a group of Friday prayer leaders, government officials, MPs
and commanders on the on the occasion of birthday anniversaries of the
Holy Prophet (S) and Imam Sadiq

[^3]: Sura Baqara, Ayah 129

[^4]: Sura Baqara, Ayah 129

[^5]: Makarim al-Akhlaaq, P. 17

[^6]: Sura an-Noor, Ayah 12

[^7]: Sura an-Noor, Ayah 16

[^8]: Sura an-Noor, Ayah 17

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 97, P. 59

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 73, P. 274; Makarim al-Akhlaaq, P. 265

[^11]: Supreme Leader’s Friday prayer sermons delivered on October 20,
1989


