Be’that of the Holy prophet (S) The most important event in all History
=======================================================================

The issue of Be’that and the occurrence of this divine event is the most
important thing that has ever happened to humanity. In the history of
mankind, no other event has been more significant than Be’that and no
divine blessing has been greater than this blessing. We have the honor
of having accepted Be’that with all our heart and soul. We have
developed faith in it and we have become familiar with this path to
happiness.

This is a great divine blessing and every Muslim has a responsibility to
achieve the paradise of divine and spiritual happiness through building
faith, doing good deeds and moving towards the goals of the Holy Prophet
of Islam’s (S) Be’that. Of course, we cannot comment on the meaning and
essence of Be’that. The true essence of Be’that is beyond our limited
intellectual capabilities.

Two important points about Be’that
----------------------------------

Regarding the issue of Be’that, there are two things which are important
for Muslims of the world. First, Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S) is like
a flowing spring and it is a divine blessing that has been bestowed on
all humanity. As Allah the Exalted has repeatedly promised in the Holy
Quran, the purpose of Be’that is to imbue the life of human beings with
the essence of Be’that. And this will happen.

***“That*** ***He*** ***may*** ***make*** ***it*** ***prevail***
***over*** ***all*** ***the*** ***religions.”*** [^1]

### 1. Be’that: a definite truth for humanity

The issue of Be’that is a definite truth in the world. The purpose of
the kind of justice that is supposed to be administered in the world as
a result of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that was not to make a particular
group of people develop faith in it at a particular stage without the
majority of human beings developing faith in it throughout history,
rather the issue of Be’that was put forth in order to build a new world
and new human beings and to help all human beings achieve perfection.
And this will happen because if it does not, the original goal of
Be’that will not be achieved.

Of course, the movement towards this goal is one that has its own
conditions and requirements and we are moving towards this truth. Every
step that human beings take whether they want it or not, whether they
know it or not will bring them closer to the essence of Be’that.

Today the slogans that are proposed in the world are in line with the
issue of Be’that although these slogans are usually not accompanied by
action. Example of such slogans include slogans of social justice,
intellectual liberation, freedom, knowledge, progress, improvement of
living conditions and other slogans that are promoted by different
governments, peoples, intellectuals and schools of thought. The
existence of these slogans in the world is due to the introduction of
divine prophets and the last Be’that. Of course, these slogans exist in
a flawed form among the people as well, and some people are moving
towards them.

Today we as well as the entire humanity are moving towards developing
faith in the concepts and values that are associated with Be’that of the
Holy Prophet (S). In the Islamic Republic, we have the honor of being
among the nations that have implemented slogans of piety and acting
according to Quranic principles and we are moving towards perfection in
this regard. We have the honor of having identified this truth. We have
the honor of having witnessed this truth. We have the honor of loving
this truth. We have the honor of moving towards this truth and we have
made great progress on this path. The entire world and humanity should
and will follow the same path.

The second point concerns the Holy Prophet (S) himself. The memory of
the Holy Prophet (S) and the love and respect that Muslims have for him
are the main factors that unite Muslims in different eras. There are no
other factors in Islam that all Muslims from different countries and
denominations agree upon from rational, emotional, spiritual and ethical
aspects. The Holy Prophet (S) is the pivot of Muslim unity.

The Holy Quran, Ka’bah and Islamic obligations and beliefs are all
shared by Muslims and each of them is related to one aspect of human
personality such as faith, affection, spiritual tendencies and issues
relating to Taqlid and practical ethics. However, the majority of these
things are interpreted in different ways among Muslims. What all Muslims
agree upon intellectually, ideologically and emotionally is the Holy
Prophet (S). It is necessary to appreciate this. It is necessary to
increase this love for the Holy Prophet (S) and to strengthen this
spiritual tendency towards him in the hearts and minds of all Muslims.

Regarding the machinations and cultural invasions that have been
designed against Islam, one of the targets that the enemies have focused
on is the Holy Prophet (S). He was attacked in that satanic book, which
revealed the emotional and ideological target of the enemy’s
machinations. [^2]

### 2. Muslims’ faith in the Holy Prophet is accompanied by affection

The memory of the Holy Prophet (S) is one of the most attractive things
for all Muslims throughout the world because the issue is one that
involves both affection and faith. Thus, compared with other aspects of
Islam which are ideological in nature and do not involve emotions, the
memory of the Holy Prophet (S) plays a more important role in Muslim
affairs. For this reason, certain great intellectuals of the world of
Islam have rightly pointed out that the Holy

Prophet (S) and his memory and Muslims' faith in him can be the pivot of
Muslim unity. Fortunately, this year’s commemoration ceremonies have
coincided with the official inauguration of “The International Forum for
Proximity of Islamic Denominations”. Our brothers made efforts and
started this work and by Allah’s favor, the forum will promote the noble
goals of Islam.

Two fundamental points regarding Muslim unity
---------------------------------------------

Regarding the issue of unity, there are two essential orientations, each
of which is important in itself. When we shout slogans of unity, these
two essential points should be kept in mind and this will prove useful
in the lives of Muslims. One point is the necessity of clearing
differences, conflicts, disputes and obstructionism that has existed for
centuries among different Islamic groups and denominations.

And these problems have always harmed Muslims in the end. If we refer to
the history of Islam, we will see that origin of all these problems
originate from governments. If you read the history of Islam, you will
realize that the almost all of the disputes in different Islamic
countries originate from centers of materialistic power, including the
initial disputes namely, the issue of creating different versions of the
Holy Quran and other such issues and the other disputes that happened
over time among different Islamic denominations, particularly between
Shia and Sunni Muslims.

### 1. The Need to eliminate disputes which have been caused by enemies

Of course, ignorance of the people and different kinds of prejudice
which are not based on a rational foundation play a role in provoking
people against each other, but all of these things only prepare the
ground and none of them causes the violent events that have happened in
the past. Those great tragedies were caused by centers of power, centers
that were trying to take advantage of the disputes among Muslims. When
colonialism entered Islamic countries, it became clear that colonial
powers were after the same goal, some directly and some others
indirectly.

We can learn many lessons from the behavior of certain famous European
personalities both political and cultural personalities. They spoke in
one way when they were in Egypt. They spoke in another way when they
were in the Ottoman Empire. They spoke in yet another way when they were
in Shia Iran. Their goal was to undermine Muslim unity, an element which
European colonialists and leaders of industrial civilization were afraid
of. And they had every right to be afraid. Finally, they did what they
wanted and they created surprisingly deep discord among Muslims.

The kind of unity that we promote in our slogans, the kind of unity that
we are committed to, the kind of unity that we are after, the kind of
unity that we are working towards the first requirement for this unity
is to make efforts to resolve the existing conflicts, contradictions and
disputes. Allah the Exalted will be happy with such efforts, and
believers, sincere people, saints and wise people will be satisfied as
well. It is necessary to prepare the ground in this regard. Ideological
differences of opinion do not matter. Ethnic differences do not matter.
Racial differences do not matter.

But these differences should not cause discord and conflicts among
Muslims. Everybody should work hard in a sincere way. Great religious
scholars, intellectuals, writers, poets and artists should consider this
work as a divine obligation.

***“Hold*** ***fast*** ***by*** ***the*** ***covenant*** ***of***
***Allah*** ***all*** ***together.”*** [^3]

This holy Ayah as well as other Ayahs have been addressed to us and to
all Muslims who are faced with the enemies of Islam. We need to
translate these Ayahs into action.

### 2. Muslim unity at the service establishing the true of Islam

The second point is that this unity should be at the service of
establishing the rule of Islam and in line with Islamic rule, otherwise
it will be hollow and meaningless. If Muslim scholars accept that the
Holy Quran says

***“…and*** ***We*** ***did*** ***not*** ***send*** ***any***
***messenger*** ***but*** ***that*** ***he should*** ***be***
***obeyed*** ***by*** ***Allah's*** ***permission”*** [^4]

then they should accept that the Holy Prophet (S) did not come to simply
offer advice and speak to the people so that they respect him but
continue doing whatever they were doing previously. He came to be
obeyed. He came to guide societies and the people. He came to establish
an Islamic system and help human beings move towards the true goals of
life. If Muslim scholars believe that the Holy Quran says,

***“Certainly*** ***We*** ***sent*** ***Our*** ***messengers***
***with*** ***clear*** ***arguments,*** ***and*** ***sent*** ***down***
***with*** ***them*** ***the Book*** ***and*** ***the*** ***balance***
***that*** ***men*** ***may*** ***conduct*** ***themselves*** ***with***
***equity”*** [^5]

- then they should accept that administration of justice and fighting
injustice among human beings is the goal of divine religions and for
this reason, there should be a movement towards establishing the rule of
Islam. And it is possible to establish Islamic rule in Muslim countries
and societies. [^6]

Islam: An effective prescription for all eras
---------------------------------------------

Although many centuries have passed since Be’that and although many
intellectuals and religious scholars in the world of Islam have
expressed their opinions regarding that great event, Be’that is still
worthy of careful analysis from various perspectives. Be’that of the
Holy Prophet (S) was a great movement in the history of mankind and its
goal was to save human beings, purify human souls, improve ethical
conditions and confront the problems that human beings have been faced
with in all eras. All divine religions are opposed to evil and
corruption and all of them are straight paths towards noble goals. The
characteristic of Islam is that it is a prescription for all eras and
that it is effective.

The Holy Quran says,

***“He*** ***it*** ***is*** ***Who*** ***raised*** ***among***
***the*** ***inhabitants of*** ***Mecca*** ***a*** ***Messenger***
***from*** ***among*** ***themselves,*** ***who*** ***recites***
***to*** ***them His*** ***communications*** ***and*** ***purifies***
***them,*** ***and*** ***teaches*** ***them*** ***the*** ***Book and***
***the*** ***Wisdom.”*** [^7]

However, this does not mean that after the introduction of Islam and
after Be’that of the Seal of Prophets (S), all human souls were
purified. It does not mean that after the revelation of the Holy Quran,
human beings will no longer encounter injustice, discrimination,
brutality and shortcomings on their path to perfection. When we say that
the Holy Prophet (S) and Islam were introduced into the world in order
to establish justice, save the oppressed and break living and dead
idols, this does not mean that people will no longer suffer from
injustice, that there will no longer be any Taghut, that no idols will
dominate the life of humanity.

History shows that after the introduction of Islam, certain Taghuts
emerged in different parts of the world and even in Islamic
environments, of course after the passage of several decades.
Once again people were faced with injustice and the same problems that
human beings were grappling with previously started to emerge again.

Human failures: The result of failing to follow the Islamic prescription
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Therefore, when it is said that the goal of Be’that is to save human
beings, it means something else: it means that what the Holy Prophet (S)
and Islam gave to human beings is a prescription that is effective in
all eras, a prescription to counter ignorance of human beings, a
prescription to counter establishment of injustice, a prescription to
counter discrimination, a prescription to counter oppression of the weak
at the hands of powerful people, a prescription to counter all the
sufferings that have plagued human life since the beginning of creation.

Just like all other prescriptions, if this prescription is followed, it
will produce results and if it is ignored or misunderstood or if people
lack the courage to follow it, then it will be useless. If the best
doctor writes the best prescription for you, but you fail to read and
follow it or if you misread it, what effect will it have on your
illness? Can we blame the experienced doctor who wrote the prescription?

Centuries passed and Muslims forgot the Holy Quran. Quranic guidelines
disappeared from the lives of Muslims. Muslims either misunderstood the
Holy Quran or they intentionally distorted its messages. They either
understood the Holy Quran appropriately but did not have the courage to
take action or they took action and achieved certain achievements but
failed to make sacrifices to safeguard their achievements. Even when
they did not understand the Holy Prophet’s (S) messages during early
years after the introduction of Islam, they did not dare take action.
The Holy Quran has referred to such people:

***“And*** ***a*** ***party*** ***of*** ***them asked***
***permission*** ***of the*** ***prophet,*** ***saying:*** ***surely***
***our*** ***houses*** ***are*** ***exposed.*** ***And*** ***they***
***were*** ***not exposed:*** ***they only desired to run***
***away.”*** [^8]

They could not have preserved their achievements without making
sacrifices.

### Returning to the message of the Be’that: The only remedy for the afflictions of Muslims

The majority of the problems that had imposed ignorance and prejudices
on the lives of the people in the Arabian Peninsula, still dominate the
lives of Muslim nations. Islamic countries are still suffering from
poverty, illiteracy, scientific backwardness, domestic autocracy,
hegemony of the arrogant powers and domestic disputes. Today there are
more than one billion Muslims in the world and they can play a
significant role in major global developments, but with the basic
domestic problems that they are grappling with, the large population of
Muslims have become insignificant despite the fact that there are
outstanding personalities and religious scholars among them. What is the
reason? What can remedy these problems? Islam and faith in Be’that of
the Holy Prophet (S).

Muslim nations should return to Islam. Of course, the path has been
opened up already. The past century namely, the 13th century on the
Islamic calendar was the century of Muslim activists who claimed Muslim
rights. From the early 14th century when Mirza-e-Shirazi the great Marja
Taqlid issued that decisive Fatwa against the English company and caused
the people of Iran to start a movement, to the Constitutional Movement
in Iran, to the Islamic movements in India, to Islamic Awakening in the
Middle East and in North Africa – almost the entire century was the
century of struggle and protest. And the current century is the century
of taking action. The 14th century on the Islamic calendar was the
century of raising public awareness and the 15th century is the century
of taking action.

We see that Muslim nations have become experienced and that they are
taking action. One example was the Islamic Republic: it was the first
example. Because we were the first, we had to go through many
difficulties. Muslims should learn lessons from the Islamic Republic.
The nations that want to give rise to an Islamic movement in their
countries can take more comprehensive actions than the people of Iran.
And they can do so if God helps them and if they make determined
efforts. Muslims have no choice but to return to Islam. They have no
choice but to establish the rule of Islam and to implement Islamic
principles. The old and spiteful enemies of Islam should not be expected
to cooperate. They should not be expected to have tolerance either.[^9]

[^1]: Sura al-Fath, Ayah 28

[^2]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on February 23, 1990 in a
meeting with a group of qura from forty different countries on the
occasion of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that

[^3]: Sura Aal-e Imran, Ayah 103

[^4]: Sura an-Nisa, Ayah 64

[^5]: Sura al-Hadid, Ayah 25

[^6]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on October 8, 1990 in a meeting
with government officials and participants of the Islamic Unity
Conference

[^7]: Sura al-Jumua, Ayah 2

[^8]: Sura al-Ahzab, Ayah 13

[^9]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on February 2, 1992 on the
occasion of Mab’ath in a meeting with government officials and foreign
participants of the ten-day Fajr ceremonies


