Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S): The source of all virtues
==========================================================

The birth of the Holy Prophet (S) is a significant point in history for
any Muslim. Later on, this birth led to a great movement in the history
of mankind. Any virtue that exists in the world directly or indirectly
originates from Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S) and his efforts to
uphold moral virtues in society. Any Muslim knows that the existence of
the Holy Prophet (S) is the best factor that can bring together Muslim
emotions in the world of Islam, the emotions of followers of different
Islamic denominations. This is because Muslims love the Holy Prophet (S)
and he has been the pivot of the Islamic Ummah. Therefore, the birth of
the Holy Prophet (S) is very important for us.

Of course, the history of Islam shows that around one hundred years
after the Holy Prophet (S) had passed away, one of his descendants, Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.), opened a new door to achieving Islamic goals and
promoting Islamic teachings when he reached imamate. The Islamic
Republic attaches special importance to the birth and Be’that of the
Holy Prophet (S) and anything that is related to him.

Why? Because throughout the world, Islamic Iran is the only place where
Islamic rules are officially implemented, the only place where the laws
and regulations are formulated and implemented on the basis of the Holy
Quran and the Holy Prophet’s (S) Sunnah. In other words, Islamic Iran is
the most important place in the world in which such a great movement is
going on.

The government of Iran is Islamic and this puts a responsibility on the
shoulders of all Muslims throughout the world because if there is a
government in the world that is based on Islam, this means that Islam is
being implemented. However, if Islam exists in a society in the form of
personal beliefs and actions and not in the form of an Islamic
government, the Holy Quran and Islam will be sidelined in such a
society. An example of this has been mentioned in the Holy Quran, in
Sura al-Furqaan:

***“And*** ***the*** ***Messenger*** ***cried*** ***out:*** ***O***
***Lord,*** ***surely*** ***my people have*** ***treated*** ***this***
***Quran*** ***as*** ***a*** ***forsaken*** ***thing.”*** [^1]

The Holy Prophet (S) tells the Creator: “Surely my people have treated
this Quran as a forsaken thing.” What does “forsaken” mean? Undoubtedly,
it does not mean that Muslims completely distanced themselves from the
Holy Quran and Islamic characteristics. This is not the meaning of
“treated this Quran as a forsaken thing.” It means that the Holy
Prophet’s (S) people kept the Holy Quran, but at the same time they
treated it as a forsaken thing and they sidelined it, in the sense that
the Holy Quran would still be recited and respected in society, but its
teachings would not implemented and its rule would be prevented under
the pretext of separating religion from politics.

If Islam and the Holy Quran were supposed to be kept apart from
government, then what was the purpose of the Holy Prophet’s (S) battles?
If the Holy Prophet (S) believed that Islam should not interfere in
government, in managing the affairs of the people and in political power
in society, if he believed that personal faith in Islam was sufficient
and that people could practice religious rituals in their homes, he
would not have taken the trouble of carrying out all those battles.

The Holy Prophet (S) made those efforts for political power and for
putting the Holy Quran in charge. When the Holy Quran is forsaken, it
means that it exists in name only and does not have political power. In
the world of Islam, the Ayah “surely my people have treated this Quran
as a forsaken thing” is true of all the places where the Holy Quran is
not in charge. [^2]

According to the Holy Quran, hadith and Islamic Urf, the era of Be’that
is in contrast with the era of Jahiliyya. These terms have been used in
the Holy Quran and Islamic narrations. Similarly, in Islamic Urf, the
Islamic era is contrasted with the era of Jahiliyya. Of course, there
are certain boundaries and rules set these two eras apart. What are
these rules? There are a few rules that separate the Islamic era from
the era of Jahiliyya and these essential rules are the same as Islamic
values.

1. Pure Monotheism
------------------

The primary rule is pure monotheism, which means refusing to serve
anything or anybody other than God. This is pure monotheism. Monotheism
did not just mean that people had to stop worshipping their idols. It
has a broad meaning. After all, the idols in Mecca would not exist
forever. The idols that were made from wood and stone would not exist
forever.

The true meaning and the essence of monotheism is rejection of serving
anything or anybody other than God. It means refusing to bow to anything
or anybody other than God. This is the true meaning of complete and pure
servitude to God.

If you look at this issue with insight and with awareness of the
sciences that relate to the life of human beings – such as social
sciences and education – you will realize that the scope of servitude is
very broad. Each of the limitations that are imposed on human beings
forces them into a kind of servitude. Servitude to wrong social systems,
servitude to wrong rituals and customs, servitude to superstitions,
servitude to autocratic people and powers, servitude to human passions
which is the most common kind of servitude, servitude to money,
servitude to wealth, servitude to power – these are different kinds of
servitude.

Saying “there is no god but Allah, alone with no partner” [^3] is pure
monotheism. It means that all the different kinds of servitude should be
pushed aside, in which case it will be possible to achieve genuine
salvation. “Say no god but Allah and achieve salvation.” [^4]

This salvation is genuine. It is not just political salvation. It is not
just social salvation. It is not just spiritual salvation. It is just
salvation on the Day of Judgment. Rather, it is salvation both in this
world and in the hereafter. This is one point about Islamic teachings
and the Islamic call. It is possible to rephrase this as Islam of
surrendering to God, as Islam for the sake of God. And this is another
aspect of monotheism. This is another characteristic of the Islamic
call. Wherever this exists, Islam exists as well. Wherever the opposite
of this exists, Jahiliyya exists as well. Wherever these two opposites
exist at the same time, there is both Islam and Jahiliyya, and pure
Islam does not exist. However, there might be a flawed kind of Islam.

2. Establishment of justice
---------------------------

Another point about the Islamic call is the establishment of justice
among human beings. The characteristic of the era of Jahiliyya was the
existence of an oppressive system. Oppression was commonplace.
Oppression was not limited to certain people and certain times. The
social system had been built on oppression, discrimination, powerful
people bullying weak people, men bullying women, wealthy people bullying
the poor and slave owners bullying their slaves. And slave owners would
in turn surrender to the bullying of rulers and powerful people. It was
a complex system of bullying. The lives of the people were full of
oppression, discrimination and bullying. This was the characteristic of
the era of Jahiliyya. Wherever such things exist, Jahiliyya exists as
well. Islam introduced the opposite system. It introduced establishment
of justice.

***“Surely*** ***Allah enjoins*** ***the doing*** ***of justice***
***and*** ***the*** ***doing*** ***of*** ***good*** ***(to***
***others).”*** [^5]

This is one of the characteristics of an Islamic society. Justice is not
just a slogan. An Islamic society must go after justice. If justice does
not exist in an Islamic society, efforts must be made to create it. If
there were only two opposite camps in the world namely, the camp of
justice and the camp of oppression Islam would support the camp of
justice, even if it were non-Islamic.

It was the Holy Prophet himself who encouraged Muslims to migrate to
Abyssinia, thereby helping them achieve justice under a king who was not
a Muslim. In other words, the Holy Prophet (S) encouraged people to
leave their homes and their community because of the oppression that had
been imposed on them. And this is another point. That is to say, it is
necessary to establish and promote justice and to make selfless efforts
for administration of justice wherever possible, even in non-Islamic
territories.

It is also necessary to condemn injustice in every part of the world.
This is another characteristic of Islam. The best eras in the history of
Islam have been characterized with efforts to establish and administer
justice. And this is another characteristic of the Holy Prophet’s (S)
Be’that. All the things that I said were only examples to help us start
a movement in today’s world. The purpose of the examples was not to
discuss an Islamic teaching or part of the history of Islam in order to
enlighten minds.

3. Moral virtues
----------------

Again, if we imagine a third situation in which there is a movement
towards moral virtues, this would be different from the other two cases
I discussed earlier. Sometimes a society might have individuals who
enjoy moral virtues. The people of that society might be forgiving,
intellectual, wise, benevolent, cooperative, patient in the face of
problems and hardships, well-behaved and ready for self-sacrifice
wherever needed.

The opposite situation may also exist. That is to say, there might be a
society whose people might formulate their relationships on the basis of
self-interest, rather than on the basis of mercy, clemency, justice and
good behavior. In such a society, people tolerate each other only as
long as this is in line with their interests, otherwise they would be
prepared to annihilate each other. This is another kind of society.

Such a society would be a society of Jahiliyya and it is very different
from an Islamic society in which moral virtues are dominant. One
characteristic of the Holy Prophet’s (S) Be’that was that it called
people to moral virtues. And this is another point about the life and
Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S). Therefore, one can say that ethics is
in fact one of the boundaries and characteristics that sets apart Islam
and the era of Jahiliyya.

4. Not limiting one’s outlook to the material world
---------------------------------------------------

Another point, which is the last point, is that people should not limit
their outlook to their worldly life. This is an essential point. One of
the characteristics of a Jahiliyya society is that its people believe
that their worldly life is everything. If they manage to achieve certain
things in their lives such as food, comfort and whatever that is related
to one’s personal well-being they consider themselves winners. But if
they make an effort or do something that will not produce results in
this world, they believe that they have been deceived, that they have
failed, and that they have suffered a loss.

This is another characteristic of living in Jahiliyya. Doing something
for the sake of God, spirituality and the Day of Judgment does not make
sense in a Jahiliyya society. One of the characteristics of an Islamic
society is that one’s entire life and efforts is not limited to this
world. This is the characteristic of Be’that and the opposite point is
Jahiliyya. [^6]

The Importance of unity and the necessity of efforts to create it
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Thanks to the awareness of our magnanimous Imam (r.a.), one of the
blessings of the Islamic Revolution was that the birthday anniversary of
the Holy Prophet (S) motivated the introduction of “Unity Week”. This is
interesting because Islamic unity is an unfulfilled wish. Some people
truly cherish this wish and some others only pay lip service to it. In
any case, it is necessary to find a practical way to fulfill this wish.

It is not possible to fulfill any wish in the absence of selfless
efforts. And when we think about practical ways of fulfilling this wish
and this goal, one of the best ideas that comes to mind is building
everything around the greatest personality in all creation, namely the
Holy Prophet of Islam (S) who represents the point at which all Muslims'
emotions and beliefs come together. Among all Islamic truths and
teachings, there might not be another point that all Muslims agree on
both emotionally and ideologically. In Islam, emotions play an important
role as well. Except for certain groups who have separated from Muslims
and do not attach a lot of importance to emotions and affection, the
majority of Muslims have strong affection for the Holy Prophet (S).
Therefore, the Holy Prophet (S) can be the pivot of Muslim unity.

Characteristics of the enemies of Islam and Islamic Awakening
-------------------------------------------------------------

Today I would like to put special emphasis on the issue of unity in the
presence of high-ranking officials and outstanding personalities from
across the world of Islam. Dear brothers and sisters, today the issue of
unity is an absolute necessity for Muslims. Today the enemies of Islam
and Muslims have two characteristics which they never had throughout the
history of Islam. One characteristic is that they are well equipped with
money, political means, propaganda tools and various kinds of
instruments that they can use to influence others, to infiltrate and to
harm.

Who are the enemies of Islam? The camp of the arrogant powers including
Zionism, America, oil companies, mercenary writers and intellectuals who
work for them is well equipped. There has never been a time in the
history of Islam when the enemies of Islam were equipped with so many
instruments.

Another characteristic of the enemies of Islam is that this
well-equipped camp has become very sensitive to the threat that Islam
and Islamic Awakening poses to them. And this sensitivity is because
they see that Islam can go beyond the boundaries of moral
recommendations and appear in a position to create a new order. The
enemies of Islam saw that Islam gave rise to a revolution in Iran. They
saw that Islam established a firm and solid government. They saw that
Islam raised the awareness of a people and helped them recover from the
state of spiritual defeat and achieve stability, self-reliance and
confidence in themselves and in their religion. They saw that Islam made
a nation so powerful that all the instruments I discussed earlier proved
ineffective against it.

Around seventeen years after the victory of the Islamic Revolution and
the establishment of the Islamic Republic, the only superpower that
existed in the world was forced to retreat in its political and economic
confrontation with the Islamic Republic. Today this issue has become
visible to them. This issue is not hidden from the eyes of the analysts
who work for the arrogant powers. Islam has revealed its power.

They saw that in the world of Islam, any group of people who are after
reforming their society and their country, rely on Islam. Before Islam
had achieved victory in Iran, when certain groups of people in different
countries wanted to shout slogans of reforms, they would rely on Marxism
or on radical nationalism. However, today in Islamic countries,
intellectuals, youth, clerics, academics and different groups of people
who want to demand reforms, rely on Islam. This shows the high capacity
and potential that Islam enjoys. The enemy can see these things and
therefore has become sensitive.

The world of Islam is faced with enemies who have these two
characteristics: they have more instruments than ever before and they
have become more sensitive to Islam than they ever were. What will these
enemies do?

The best option that is available to the enemies of Islam is that they
can foment discord among Muslims, particularly among those who can be
inspirational to other Muslims. Notice how much money is spent in
different Islamic countries in order to write books and attribute
fanciful beliefs to Shia people. Once I gathered a large number of such
books and I realized that many books had been written in this regard.

The cleverest individuals are employed to try to prepare such books with
the aim of fomenting discord, with the aim of isolating portions of the
Islamic Ummah in which the flag of Islam has been raised. Islamic Iran
is the pioneer in this area and thanks to Islam, Muslims have managed to
gather their forces in certain other places to counter different events
against the arrogant powers.

Today there is a lot of money in the world of Islam. There are many
ideas. There is enormous manpower. There are a large number of religious
scholars, poets, writers, artists and competent political personalities
in Islamic countries. A major portion of financial and subterranean
resources belongs to Muslim countries. Notice what will happen in the
world if Muslims move in the same direction or at least avoid working
against each other.

The enemy is trying to pit all these human and financial resources of
the world of Islam against one another. They provoked the Iraqi regime
and gave rise to eight years of destructive war in this region. Then
they helped the Iraqi regime in the hope that it will manage to uproot
the young sapling of Revolution. Of course, they failed. “Have you not
considered how Allah sets forth a parable of a good word (being) like an
immaculate tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in heaven?”
This is the characteristic of the word of Islam: it cannot be uprooted.

***“…*** ***and whose*** ***branches*** ***are*** ***in*** ***heaven,***
***yielding*** ***its*** ***fruit*** ***in*** ***every*** ***season***
***by*** ***the permission*** ***of*** ***its*** ***Lord?”*** [^7]

And today they are doing everything in their power on the political
front. Therefore, as a servant of Islam, as a person who sees and feels
what machinations the enemy is designing, my conclusion, my
understanding, my interpretation and my recommendation to our Muslim
brothers is that today Islamic unity is a vital necessity for Muslims.
This is not a joke or a slogan. Islamic communities should seriously
look for ways of achieving unity and they should move forward in the
same direction. Of course, creating unity is a complex task.

Unity between different Muslim nations is possible despite the
differences that exist among Islamic denominations, among customs and
lifestyles of different Muslim nations, and among various approaches to
Islamic jurisprudence. Unity among Islamic nations means that in the
case of issues relating to the world of Islam, Muslim nations should
move ahead in the same direction, help each other and avoid using their
domestic resources against one another in their countries.

[^1]: Sura al-Furqaan, Ayah 30

[^2]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on August 26, 1994 to government
officials and participants of the Islamic Unity Conference

[^3]: Wasa’il al-Shia, Vol. 1, P. 15

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 18, P. 202

[^5]: Sura an-Nahl, Ayah 90

[^6]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on December 31, 1994 in a
meeting with government officials on the occasion of Mab’ath

[^7]: Sura Ibrahim, Ayahs 24-25


