The Role of the Holy Prophet’s (S) purity in the spread of the Islamic call
===========================================================================

***“Teach*** ***them*** ***the*** ***Book*** ***and*** ***the***
***wisdom.”*** [^1]

What can be inferred from this Ayah is that the Holy Prophet (S) enjoyed
complete knowledge of “the Book and the wisdom”.

***“…*** ***and*** ***purify*** ***them.”*** [^2]

Again what is understood is that the Holy Prophet (S) had been purified
as much as human beings can be purified. Having been equipped with this
power, the Holy Prophet (S) could lead the entire world to purification.
This is what is foreign to leaders of different schools of thought and
those who have introduced different philosophical, social, political and
other concepts. Certain ideas come to their minds and they pass on the
ideas to other people without taking action. And certain people learn
from them.

This is different from what divine prophets would do: from the
beginning, they would take action to translate their slogans into
action. This was exactly what happened in the life of the Holy Prophet
(S). Since the first moment, he took action to teach, to purify and to
start a movement to establish justice. For this reason, the battle
started from the first moment: from the time when the Holy Prophet (S)
started his call to Islam in response to-

***“warn*** ***your*** ***nearest*** ***relations”,*** [^3]

- to the time when he openly called everybody to Islam and made efforts
to establish social justice. Of course, as far as Be’that is concerned,
what we observe and describe is the surface of Be’that. That divine and
spiritual event which takes place between the Exalted Creator and a
chosen human being is beyond the reach of our minds and our
understanding. For this reason, the event is truly great and beyond our
imagination. We understand the things that we observe only to the extent
our understanding and wisdom allow us to, which affects human beings and
the world they live in.

Two clear goals of Be’that
--------------------------

### 1. Calling on people to develop faith in God

There were two clear goals behind Be’that of divine prophets. One goal
was to bring about spiritual transformation in order to attract hearts
to Allah the Exalted. This is the first point – namely, the issue of
religious faith, attention to the Creator or what is referred to as
divine remembrance in many Quranic Ayahs. The most important thing that
Allah the Exalted bestowed on humanity through Be’that was divine
remembrance, helping people become aware of spirituality. This is the
first step and as long as this step has not been taken, none of the
goals behind the sending of different prophets will be fulfilled.

***“You*** ***can*** ***only*** ***warn*** ***him*** ***who***
***follows*** ***the*** ***reminder.”*** [^4]

Those who pay attention to the divine reminder can be warned, reformed,
guided and led towards perfection and struggle for social goals. This is
the first step. When human beings disregard spirituality, all the doors
to reform and improvement will be slammed in their faces.

Take a look at the conditions of the materialistic world. Today the key
to all kinds of reform and happiness is to awaken human beings, warn
them and remind them to seek the purpose of creation by going beyond
these materialistic manifestations namely, food, sleep, human passions,
power, greed for wealth and other such things. Failing to pay attention
to the true nature of creation is the root of all corruption. This is
the true meaning of human life and the secret behind it: paying
attention to the Origin and divine obligations, waiting for divine
inspirations, waiting to receive orders from the hidden world. This is
the nature of the issue, which has been referred to in the Holy Quran as
faith in the unseen.

***“Those*** ***who*** ***believe*** ***in*** ***the unseen…”*** [^5]

Avoidance of being immersed in materialistic manifestations of life and
avoidance of seeing life as limited to eating, sleep, human passions and
tendencies, power and other such things: these are the primary blessings
of sending prophets and the first goal of the Holy Prophet (S). The
primary goal of divine prophets was to warn human beings and to develop
religious faith in them, faith in the unseen.

### 2. Building a healthy and just society

The second goal that the Holy Prophet (S) was pursuing from the
beginning was to create a healthy and appropriate environment for human
beings to live in. His goal was to build a world in which there is no
oppression, a world in which the rights of the weak are not trampled
upon by powerful people, a world in which the weak do not suffer from
complete failure and defeat, a world in which the law of the jungle is
not practiced namely, the same thing that has been referred to in the
Holy Quran, Islamic narrations and other religious sources as justice
and equity, which are the humanity’s greatest wish.

From the beginning of the history of mankind namely, from the time when
human beings developed an identity, started thinking and established
order in their life up until today, human beings have cherished the wish
of establishing justice in the world.

Some people are shouting slogans in support of peace. Of course, peace
is a good thing, but it is good as long as it is based on justice. Many
people choose to fight in order to achieve justice. They fight for the
sake of justice. Therefore, it is obvious that justice is more important
than peace. And this is the truth.

The absence of justice would give rise to the same events that happened
in the most hideous eras in human history, and today similar events are
witnessed in different parts of the world. All the afflictions that you
witness in different communities originate from oppression and
injustice. This might not be visible if we only consider the surface of
things, but if we go beyond the surface, we will see the truth. If you
see children starving to death in a corner of the world, on the surface,
the problem is that there has been a drought due to low rainfall.

However, the truth is something else. The truth is that there is
injustice. If justice had been established in that society and in all
human communities, human beings could have built such living conditions
that their children would never suffer from such afflictions thanks to
administration of justice and life would never become so hideous and
painful. It is because of injustice that humanity has been suffering
from these maladies and afflictions.

The primary goals of all divine prophets are to administer justice and
warn people of divine chastisement. These two goals are the primary
goals. Of course, warning people of divine chastisement is more
important than the other goal. It is the root and the essence. If there
is negligence and lack of vigilance, no achievements will be made and
justice will not be established. Therefore, the systems and individuals
that were claiming to promote social justice, were unable to present
their people with anything like justice.

They gave their people other things though. They gave their people space
science. They built intercontinental missiles for them. However, they
failed to establish social justice. Social justice will only be
established in the shade of reforming mankind and in the shade of
attention to Allah the Exalted and divine remembrance. These two goals
were what the Holy Prophet (S) was after and he managed to achieve these
goals, although the scope of his success was limited.

He built a society which enjoyed awareness and the highest degree of
social justice. Of course, it is possible that some people were still
exposed to injustice in certain parts of his society, but this does not
mean there was no social justice. In a society in which laws and
government are based on justice, in a society in which the ruler is a
just ruler, in a society in which the intention is to administer
justice, there is general progress towards social justice. It may take
such a society a long time to reach the end of this path and establish
social justice, but it is only a matter of time that justice is
established.

The Holy Prophet (S) established social justice. He did not tolerate
even the slightest injustice. He put forth a model. Of course, his
teachings revealed their effects in Islamic communities even after he
had passed away. And during the time of the Commander of the Faithful
(a.s.), pure justice was witnessed in the personality of the holy and
great leader of the world of Islam.

These are the two characteristics of Be’that. When we celebrate Be’that,
the purpose is to revive these characteristics. The purpose of
celebration is to keep alive the memory of personalities, paths and
events in order to learn lessons from them. [^6]

### The Holy Prophet’s (S) birth: A Permanent divine mercy on humanity

This great birth was the birth of the best divine blessing that has ever
been bestowed on humanity. The sending of the Holy Prophet (S) was a
blessing that Allah the Exalted bestowed on His servants. His birth was
the birth of a blessing. The world of Islam should understand the point
that this blessing is permanent and constant, not temporary.
At that time, many people fought this manifestation of light and
guidance because of their ignorance or their self-centered prejudices
although the Holy Prophet (S) had been sent in order to remove a burden
from the shoulders of humanity.

***“He will*** ***relieve*** ***them*** ***of*** ***their***
***burden*** ***and*** ***the*** ***fetters*** ***that*** ***they***
***used*** ***to wear.”*** [^7]

Human beings were carrying heavy burdens at that time. They were
carrying heavy millstones around their necks. And people are still
carrying the same burden. It is not extravagant to claim that humanity
is carrying heavy burdens today, burdens that are heavier than the
burdens that people were carrying in the Arabian Peninsula during the
time of Jahiliyya.

The oppression that human beings are currently suffering from, the
injustice that exists in human communities, the efforts to make
materialistic tendencies dominant over the life of humanity, the
different methods that are used to force spirituality out of the lives
of human beings these are the burdens that have been placed on the
shoulders of humanity.

What humanity feels today in the era of industrial civilization and
among the attractions of materialism, is more difficult and in certain
cases more bitter than what people were feeling in the darkness of
Jahiliyya at the time of the emergence of Islam – the burden is heavier
than the burden that humanity was carrying at that time.

The need for the teachings of Islam
-----------------------------------

If human beings pay attention to this blessing the blessing of Islam and
the Holy Prophet’s (S) teachings, which are a source of unity if human
beings try to discover this blessing, their greatest problem will be
resolved. Although the existing civilizations have undoubtedly
benefitted from the teachings of Islam, although there is no doubt that
the existing virtues and noble concepts among human beings have been
derived from divine religions and revelations and from the teachings of
prophets, the majority of which belong to Islam, today humanity is in
need of Islamic spirituality, Islamic purity and the correct and
pleasant teachings of Islam after all, any just heart would accept and
understand Islamic teachings.

It is for this reason that the Islamic call has gained ground in the
world and many non-Muslims have accepted the Islamic call. Accepting the
call of Islam does not mean official adoption of Islam, but it is one of
the stages.

Another stage is when the people of the world accept the message,
teachings, truths and proposals of Islam in this regard. Today when
nations of the world are presented with the message of Islam, they feel
that this message is beneficial for them and that it will fill the gaps
that exist in their lives. What Islam says about the value, importance
and goals of humanity, what Islam says about family, women, the goal of
science and the relations between different communities, what Islam says
about the social relationships between weak and powerful people when
people from different civilizations look at what Islam says about these
things, they feel that the problems in their lives can be resolved if
they make use of the proposals of Islam.

For this reason, the message of Islam is very attractive and this is why
the arrogant powers of the world and propaganda networks throughout the
world which are affiliated with the same centers of coercion, oppression
and anti-human activities are extremely hostile towards the message of
Islam.

Since the time the Islamic Republic which is the manifestation of
establishing the rule of Islam over the life of a nation and the
manifestation of implementing the political proposals of Islam was
established in Iran, the arrogant and oppressive powers of the world
increased their hostilities towards Islam and Islamic values throughout
the world.

As long as Islam is limited to mosques and hearts, as long as Islam does
not step into the arena of politics, resistance and government, as long
as Islam has not entered great international arenas, global centers of
oppression and injustice will not feel threatened and they will not be
motivated to fight and confront it. Since the day the Islamic Republic
was established in Iran and the flag of Islamic government was raised in
our country, since the time Muslims from different parts of the world
responded to the call of our magnanimous Imam (r.a) and developed a
tendency towards it, since the time many groups of people started moving
towards the slogan of reviving Islam, the enmities have been increased.
[^8]

A realistic evaluation would show that Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S)
was the greatest event in the history of mankind and it affected the
lives of all human beings in history. Be’that is an amazing, essential
and eventful issue and it is worthy of careful reflection and analysis.

Of course, this is true of Be’that of all divine prophets. All divine
prophets went through an important stage when they were being tested for
Be’that. Great events have happened when choosing Prophet Musa, Prophet
Isa, Prophet Ibrahim and other great prophets. However, Be’that of the
Seal of Prophets (S) has certain characteristics that are unique.

As we people of Iran have a great Islamic responsibility towards
humanity, I would like to discuss a point regarding Be’that. Hopefully,
this discussion will motivate us to start a good movement in this regard
and make appropriate efforts.

Be’that of the Holy Prophet (S), which took place on a day like today,
opened up an important path. That is to say, the issue of Be’that is not
limited to the fact that Allah the Exalted made a truth shine in the
heart of a chosen and exceptional human being. It was only the first
step. It was the beginning. Of course, it was also the most important
step. The shining of this truth in the holy heart of the Prophet of
Islam (S) and the responsibility for divine revelations which was
accepted by the Holy Prophet (S), is exactly what connects the
materialistic world and the existence of mankind to the unseen world. It
is the link that connects the two worlds to one another.

Although human beings will continue benefitting from divine blessings of
this path and this event, the moment of Be’that is the link that
connects the world to the unseen. At that moment, divine truths started
flowing from the unseen world into the holy heart and soul of Prophet
Muhammad (S). Therefore, Be’that was the first step.

A door was opened to divine truths and the Holy Prophet (S), who was
prepared to be tested and to shoulder the burden of this responsibility,
started his great movement from that moment. Therefore, the issue of
Be’that is different from the issue of learning divine truths. That is
to say, there is more to Be’that than learning divine truths. Of course,
the divine door to learning divine truths is always open to prophets and
saints.

***”And*** ***He*** ***taught*** ***Adam*** ***all*** ***the names.”***
[^9]

Allah the Exalted has always taught divine truths to His messengers, but
there is more to Be’that than teaching divine truths.

Human beings are inspired to make use of the assets that have been
bestowed on them in order to lead humanity towards the final
destination. That is to say, human beings are inspired to start a
movement. This is the meaning of Be’that. This first step was taken
after divine revelations descended into the holy heart of the Prophet
(S). Then it was time to implement the essence of Be’that in the world,
and this requires struggle. The essence of Be’that is new and signifies
building a new world and eliminating unjust, oppressive and hostile
systems.

Twenty three years of efforts to promote the divine message among the people
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Therefore, the first step after Be’that is to start a movement. No
divine prophet managed to follow this path, fulfill his responsibility
and announce his message to people without being forced to fight. It was
not the case that the people of their societies easily accepted the new
world that their Be’that was proposing. For this reason, they would
start fighting divine prophets. Among the people with a truthful
message, divine prophets have had the largest number of enemies.

Since the first day after his Be’that, the Holy Prophet (S) was faced
with different kinds of hostilities. The Holy Prophet (S) started
countering these hostilities from the first day and continued doing so
until the moment he passed away. He fought this battle for twenty-three
years.

Notice that those twenty-three years were very auspicious. Twenty-three
years is not a long period of time. You see many people who do not even
manage to do something that is presentable in twenty, twenty-three or
twenty-five years. Normally, people spend almost all their time on
personal matters. If you take a look at the biography of great
personalities including scientists, philosophers and politicians you
will see the amount of work they did in twenty- three years.

Depending on their capabilities, people may or may not be able to make
great achievements in twenty-three years. But notice how many blessings
originated from the twenty-three years of the Holy Prophet’s (S) life
after Be’that. At the heart of this Jahiliyya and at the heart of
Jahiliyya eras throughout the world, the Holy Prophet (S) managed to
build such a system and raise such a beacon of guidance which will
become more brilliant on a daily basis and will help and guide
increasing numbers of people.

The Holy Prophet (S) started following this path in the first thirteen
years of his prophethood and he gradually built an Islamic system.
Therefore, the next step is to establish a system that is based on this
idea and on the foundations of Be’that. These things clearly show that
what is claimed by those who try to draw a line between religion
particularly Islam and government, is wrong. Of course, all divine
religions are similar in this regard, but this claim is particularly
unbelievable in the case of Islam.

It is unbelievable that some people try to separate Islam from daily
life, from politics, from management of national affairs, from
government. It is unbelievable that some people try to push Islam out of
these areas. Since the first day when Islam was introduced, there was a
fierce battle to move towards establishing an Islamic society and
government. And after thirteen years of resistance, the Holy Prophet (S)
managed to establish this system, although this did not happen in his
birthplace and in the city where Be’that had taken place.

After that long-lasting resistance, this is the second step. It is on
the basis of this idea that an Islamic system is built. As long as
Islamic and divine ideas are not backed by this system and this source
of power, it is not possible to spread divine ideas, rules and concepts
into the lives of the people. This is the exact opposite of the
distorted view which is held by those who claim that religion becomes
corrupt when it achieves power.

On the contrary, if religion achieves political power, it will spread
and gain ground. It will be possible for religion to fulfill religious
goals and wishes. It will be possible for religion to implement the
values that are promoted by religion. These things are impossible in the
absence of power. It is through political power that these things can be
achieved. For example, do you think it is possible to establish justice
in society through advice and begging? In the absence of political
power, it is not possible to establish justice, eliminate discrimination
and help establish equity in one’s society and in the world.

When a word of justice is uttered in the world, global powers do not
hesitate to work against it unless they believe that it is not important
enough to take action. This has always been the case. Wherever in the
world the voice of Islam and Islamic thought is raised, the arrogant
powers, capitalists and company owners quickly become alert, fearing
that they might be threatened.

This has always been the case. Wherever a word of justice was uttered by
somebody, wherever great men decided to promote truth, suddenly they
were faced with the iron walls and fists of the enemies and opponents.
The enemies would deploy their forces against them. Of course, they
would be defeated. Falsehood is always defeated by truth. There is no
doubt in this regard. If truth resists, there is no doubt that falsehood
will be defeated.

However, the important point is that in the absence of resistance and
struggle and without political power, it is not possible to implement
religious ideas and values and to fulfill religious wishes or any other
wish for that matter. Of course, there are certain things that can be
done through reasoning and offering advice.

Therefore, even divine prophets were after establishing a government.
The Holy Prophet of Islam (S) is an obvious example in this regard. From
the first day, he started his struggle and he focused his efforts on
establishing an Islamic government. Later on, he managed to establish a
government in Medina and he defended it. He even extended the scope and
this movement continued for many years.

Thus, the next step is to establish a government. However, establishing
a government is not the goal and this is the essential point. The
purpose of establishing a government is to implement values. If an
Islamic government is established but it fails to move towards
implementing values, that government is corrupt. This is a general rule.
This is the standard. It may take years to implement values.

There may be obstacles and problems, but the Islamic government that has
been established should move towards the goals and values that it has
promoted, the goals and values that can be found in the Holy Quran and
in Islamic teachings. If the orientation is different, that government
is definitely corrupt. The goal is to establish social justice and order
that is based on the law. The goal is to establish divine laws
everywhere.

If divine laws are established in society, if Islamic order is resorted,
if social justice is established, only one of the stages has been
completed. Only one medium-level goal has been achieved. The next stage
is to encourage the people who are living comfortably in justice and
peace under this government to develop moral virtues in themselves. This
is the point that I would like to stress: after establishing a
government, the goal is to encourage the people to develop moral virtues
in themselves. This is the goal after a just government has been
established, after justice has been administered in society, after a
truly Islamic government has been built. This is the next goal.

People should try to develop moral virtues in themselves, which will of
course lead to transcendence, spiritual development and a noble
understanding. This is one of the stages of human perfection. We cannot
even understand this appropriately. Everything said is based on what has
been heard from the Islamic luminaries.

Developing moral virtues: The Ultimate goal of establishing an Islamic Government
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Developing moral virtues is the stage of perfection that is in our
hands. The Holy Prophet (S) correctly pointed out: “I was appointed as
prophet in order to complete moral virtues.” [^10] This hadith has been
narrated by both Shia and Sunni people. Basically, the Holy Prophet (S)
is saying that he was appointed for this reason and that everything else
is just a prelude. The purpose is to “complete moral virtues.” The Holy
Prophet (S) says that he was appointed in order to help complete moral
virtues in human communities and among members of the Islamic Ummah so
that moral virtues develop and everybody benefits from them and becomes
a good human being.

We should develop and become good human beings. We should develop and
complete moral virtues in ourselves. This is the next step, which is
very important. If in a society that is built on Islamic pillars, people
drift away from divine virtues and go after human passions and
self-interest, if everybody tries to receive a bigger share and live a
better life, if everybody tries to steal from others and is prepared to
appropriate more than he deserves, if there is no forgiveness and self-
sacrifice, what kind of government would allow these things? What kind
of Islam and Islamic society would allow these things?

This is the basis of the issue. “I was appointed as prophet in order to
complete moral virtues.” 51 Dear people, you should know that the world
is in need of this. Unfortunately, the materialistic world lacks this
characteristic altogether.

Moral virtues have been explained in holy sharia, including the things
that are related to human beings such as patience, worship, purity and
simple lifestyles, the things that are related to other human beings
such as forgiveness, humility, self-sacrifice and respect for others,
and the things that are related to the Islamic community. The scope of
moral virtues is vast in Islam. These are the same things that the
efforts of all divine prophets, saints and religious luminaries and in
the case of Islam, the efforts of the Holy Prophet of Islam (S), the
infallible Imams and Islamic luminaries were focused on.

Of course, under an oppressive government, these things might appear to
be extremely difficult. As I said, in a system whose foundations are
falsehood, oppression and materialistic tendencies such as the
governments that have been established by Taghuts throughout the world
it is clear that these things cannot be achieved easily. However, in an
Islamic system, it is easier to achieve these things. And today the
world needs this.

As the main complement to our great Islamic Revolution, our society
should start a fundamental movement and there are two stages to such a
movement. One stage is establishing a system and promoting Islamic
virtues among ourselves, namely turning Islamic virtues into values
among the people of our own society. These Islamic virtues should be
turned into values. Under the Taghuts that were in power in our country,
these Islamic virtues had lost their position as values.

An honest person says whatever he has in mind, as opposed to individuals
who are narrow-minded, individuals whose outlook is flawed. In a society
that is filled with dishonest people, a sophisticated person is one who
is not honest, one who distorts reality, one who can trick and deceive.
This is an instance of transforming values. This happened under Taghuti
governments and under the rule of oppressive, corrupt and anti-ethics
kings, and unfortunately ethical institutions in our country were
seriously harmed.

Of course, the revolutionary movement helped and revived ethical
institutions and the spirit of ethics in our society. However, more
efforts are required. This is the first stage.

The second stage is to teach these things to the world. Today the world
needs these things. Human beings throughout the world suffer from lack
of ethics. Islam and Muslims can present nations of the world with the
best ethical gift. They can present the best gift to humanity.

The role of the arrogant powers in causing the pitiable conditions in the contemporary world
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unfortunately, today the biggest crime of the arrogant powers is that
through their behavior, they have been promoting lying, deception,
cheating and a tendency towards falsehood in the world. In the arrogant
governments of the world which are led by the government of America,
there are certain individuals who have carried out the largest number of
assassinations around the world. Recently it was announced that one of
the American politicians has claimed that the CIA was involved in the
killings and kidnappings in Guatemala,

The role of the arrogant powers in causing the pitiable conditions in
the contemporary world which had attracted the attention of the entire
world. America’s CIA has hunted down, kidnapped and killed each and
every one of America’s political opponents in Guatemala and the truth
has been discovered after all this time.

In every part of the world, particularly in Latin America and many other
parts of the world, these people have carried out assassinations. They
have plotted coups d'état. They have done illegal things. We witnessed
the same things in our country as well. The same is true of other
places. They have supported the most hideous terrorists in the world.
They have harbored them. They have had friendly relationships with them.
They have praised them. They have offered them financial support. And
they are still continuing these actions.

They have helped and supported the Israeli regime, which is a government
that is founded on terrorism, occupation and hostility. They have
supported and helped this regime more than others. They openly support
the Israeli regime. They do not even support their Arab friends as much
as they support Israel. Currently, the Americans do not help their
traditional friends in the region as much as they help Israel. In fact,
their real friend is Israel and they prefer it to all the other
governments. This is while Israel is a regime that is founded on
terrorism.

From the beginning, this regime was built on the foundations of terror,
killing opponents, lies, oppression, murder and massacres. This is the
same as supporting terror and assassination. This is while America is
carrying the flag of fighting terrorism in the world.

This is a clear case of lying and deception. This is a clear case of
depriving humanity of ethics, a clear case of drifting away from ethics.
Those who are claiming to support values and moral virtues in the world,
are the archenemy of moral virtues and this is more tragic than any
other crime that is committed in the world.

The world needs your message and your path. It needs the truth that you
have discovered, the truth that is in the Holy Quran and in Be’that of
the Holy Prophet (S). However, you will be able to teach these things to
the world only when you have internalized them and translated them into
action. [^11]

Regarding the Holy Prophet of Islam (S), first I would say that it is
not possible for people like us to achieve the brilliant understanding
that he had achieved. That most noble human being, that most honorable
being in the entire creation is beyond materialistic dimensions of the
world. Human beings use their wisdom and experience and five senses to
rank people on the basis of genius, wisdom, knowledge and experience.
The Holy Prophet of Islam (S) enjoys the highest rank in all these
areas.

Even if there were no narrations, no Quranic Ayahs and no religious
evidence, people could discover this truth through reasoning and the
proofs that exist in the world. Those who can make use of these things
are capable of achieving part of the brilliance that the Holy Prophet
(S) enjoyed. Using our five senses and despite the existing
restrictions, we can see, recognize and feel the greatness of the Holy
Prophet (S).

Even within the limits that restrict the understanding of human beings,
the Holy Prophet (S) is not comparable to any other luminary. For
example, Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) has always attracted the attention of
many luminaries throughout the world and they have described him as a
great personality and as a person who is more like a mythical character.
However, even that great man is considered small and insignificant
compared to the Holy Prophet (S). He himself considered his position far
lower than that of the Holy Prophet (S). Compared to the greatness of
the Holy Prophet (S), which is like a boundless ocean, the personality
of the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) fades into insignificance. This
shows the greatness of the Holy Prophet (S).

Love and respect for the Holy Prophet (S): The only things that Muslims agree about
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The point which is important in today’s world and which I emphasize
repeatedly is that there is one thing that all Islamic denominations
have in common and there is no disagreement as far as that one thing is
concerned. Today Muslims are suffering from numerous problems and
afflictions. They are all grappling with these problems and they should
use every instrument that is available to them in order to eliminate
these problems and afflictions. Even in the case of monotheism, which
all Muslims agree about unanimously, there might be certain people who
have their own interpretations and might not accept what others say.

However, as far as love and respect for the Holy Prophet of Islam (S) is
concerned, there is no disagreement among Muslims. This is a point of
unity and all Muslims should focus their efforts on it. I have
previously said that some determined people have made efforts to unite
different Islamic denominations on the basis of this point of unity. And
today those who are determined should try to attract the attention of
all Muslims to this point of unity.

Let us make a point about the issues that are related to the world of
Islam. Muslims should try to figure out their current conditions and
they should understand what horrible plans the enemies of Islam have for
the destiny of Muslims. Knowledge of the existing conditions alone
should be enough to awaken conscientious people to the fact that they
need a remedy. It is not easy to find a remedy. However, there are two,
three essential points in this regard that we should pay attention to.

[^1]: Sura al-Baqara, Ayah 129

[^2]: Sura al-Baqara, Ayah 129

[^3]: Sura ash-Shuara, Ayah 214

[^4]: Sura al-Yasin, Ayah 11

[^5]: Sura al-Baqara, Ayah 3

[^6]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on December 20, 1995 in a
meeting with government officials of the Islamic Republic on the
occasion of Mab’ath

[^7]: Sura al-Araf, Ayah 157

[^8]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on August 3, 1996 in a meeting
with government officials and participants of the Islamic Unity
Conference

[^9]: Sura al-Baqara, Ayah 31

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 68, P. 382

[^11]: Supreme Leader’s speech delivered on December 9, 1996 in a
meeting with government officials on the occasion of Mab’ath


