'Adl , Justice Of God
=====================

This was a short sketch of our belief in Allah. Now we come to the
second Root of Religion and that is "Justice of Allah." Frankly
speaking, this root of religion is the most important one to study, if
anybody wants to know the real and basic difference between Sunnis and
Shi'ah Ithna \`Asharis. So far as the existence and Unity of God is
concerned, it comes under the First Root \`tawhid," that is,

"The Unity of God." But the actions of Allah come under this second
root; and here the differences are vast and manifold: Here I propose to
show the differences in a few words:

i) First and foremost difference is that while certain Muslim sects hold
that nothing is good or evil by itself; and only what Allah has
commanded us to do, is good; what He has forbidden is evil. The Ithna
\`Asharis on the other hand, believe that irrespective of religious
commandments, there is real merit or demerit in different courses of
action, and it is because a certain thing is good that. God commands us
to do it; and because the other thing is bad that lie forbids it.

ii) Stemming from the above mentioned difference is the fact that the
Shiahs believe that Allah never acts aimlessly; i.e. without any purpose
or design. All His actions are based on wisdom and intelligent purpose,
though we may not know them. The Sunnis on the other hand, say that
there is no real demerit in acting aimlessly, and if Allah does anything
without purpose, the mere act of Allah will make that action good.

iii) The Shi'ah Ithna \`Asharis say that if a person can do good to any
other person and he does not do it, it is against the virtue. Likewise,
they say that if Allah can do anything beneficial to His creatures and
then, suppose that, He does not do it, it will be against Virtues of
Allah and not commendable. Therefore, the Ithna \`Asharis say that: "It
is morally incumbent upon Allah to do every act of Grace dealing with
mankind."

Here is a quotation from our book of beliefs:

"By Grace is understood that action on the part of Allah which would
help to bring His creatures nearer to His devotion and obedience and
facilitate their moral correction (which is) morally incumbent on Him
i.e. GOD. Allah has commanded us to be just, while He Himself treats us
with something better, namely Grace (tafaddul). Justice (al-adl), means
that He requites a good act with a good reward and an evil act with a
punishment. The Prophet said: \`No man ever enters Paradise by virtue of
his good actions alone except by the Mercy of Allah.' " (I\`tiqadatu
'l-Imamiyyah, by ash-Shaykh as-Saduq)

The Sunnis, on the other hand, do not believe that *lulf* i.e. Grace is
incumbent on Allah. They say that even *adl,* i.e. Justice, is not
incumbent on Allah, even if He sends good and virtuous persons to Hell,
it will be quite right.

iv) Then comes the most vital difference between Ithna \`Asharis and
Sunnis, i.e. the question of jabr' (compulsion) and \`ikhtiyar'
(choice). The position of Sunnis in this respect, according to general
belief, is that:

"No act of any individual, even though it be done purely for his
benefit, is independent of the will of Allah, for its existence; and
there does not occur in either the physical or the extraterrestrial
world the wink of an eye, the hint of a thought, or the most sudden
glance, except by the decree of Allah, of His power, desire and will.
This includes, evil and good, benefit and harm, success and failure, sin
and righteousness, obedience and disobedience, polytheism and true
belief." (al-Ghazzali).

We the Ithna \`Asharis on the other hand say that we know the difference
between falling down from a roof-top and coming down by ladders. The
second act is done by our power, will and intention; while the falling
down is not done so. And we know that our own actions are not like
falling down from a roof-top; but they are like climbing down with our
own will and power. Therefore, they are our acts and they cannot be
attributed to Allah.

Again we see that we are praised or blamed for some of our acts, while
for other acts we are neither praised nor condemned. It means that the
first category comes within our power and will; and the second is beyond
our power and will. We may be advised to treat our ailments in such and
such a way, but we cannot be advised to recover from the illness. It
means that getting treatments is within our power; but getting recovered
is not within our sphere of activities.

Therefore, we say that there are many things and aspects of life that
are within our own power and will, while some are not within our power.
Those things about which we can be ordered to do or not to do, for which
we can be advised, for which we can be praised or blamed, all those acts
are within our power and will. And as the commandments of religion come
under this category, therefore, it is wrong to say that our sins or
righteousness, our obedience or disobedience or polytheism or true
belief, are by the decree of Allah. Therefore it has been written in the
book of our creed that: "Allah possesses fore-knowledge of human
actions, but does not compel mankind to act in any particular manner.
When Allah will collect His servants on the Day of Resurrection, He will
ask them concerning what He had enjoined on them and will not question
them concerning what He had destined for them."[^1].

But it does not mean that man is quite independent of Allah. In fact,
the power and will to act as we like is given to us by God. Thus, Imam
Ja'far as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: "There is no compulsion (by
Allah); nor is there absolute delegation of power (from Allah to man);
but the real position is between these two extremes."[^2]

And at what point does our ability to do things start? Imam Musa
al-Kazim (p.b.u.h.) said: "A man acquires that ability when four
conditions are fulfilled: 1. When there is nothing to hinder his plans;
and his 2. health and 3. faculties (needed for that work) are up to the
required standard; 4. and God provides him the occasion of that work.
When all these conditions are fulfilled a man becomes able to act
according to his own free will."

When asked about an example, he said: "Let us suppose that there is a
man, without any hindrance, of good health and strength; yet he cannot
commit adultery unless he finds a woman. When (the 4th condition is
fulfilled, and) he gets a woman, then it is up to him to choose one of
the two alternatives - either he controls his evil emotions and saves
himself as Joseph did; or, on the other hand, commits adultery; if he
protects himself from that sin, it will not be by compulsion of Allah
(as some people think), and if he commits the sin, it does mean that he
was above the power of Allah (as others think)."

According to our point of view, if anybody believes in predestination,
he cannot, at the same time, believe in the Day of Judgment. Because, if
Allah decrees every act which is done on our hands, then it is gross
injustice to inflict punishment upon us for those sins and evils and
polytheism and disbelief and immoralities which were predestined by
Allah Himself.

Need for Religion
-----------------

As you are aware, man is a social animal, every man is- dependent on
millions of people for his life and its necessities. And you know that
every society needs some laws to prevent injustice and preserve the
rights of every member of the society. But who is the right person to
make the Laws? One man? (Be he a monarch or a dictator.) No! Because he,
instinctively, will look, first of all, after his own interest. A group
of people? (Be it an aristocracy or democracy.) No! Because every one of
them is capable of wrong judgment; and a lot of wrong decisions do not
add up to a right decision. Also, it is apparent that no group of people
can disengage itself from self interest.

Moreover, you will agree with me that no man or group of men is in a
position to make a comprehensive law based on perfect equity and
justice. So it is necessary that the laws should be made by someone who
is superior to man, who has nothing to loose or gain by that law and
with Whom every man has equal relation. And that one is "Allah."  
 Hence the need for religion.

Allah
-----

Allah can do no wrong. I do not use this phrase in the sense of "King
makes no mistake."

Because "King makes no mistake" means actually that he does nothing at
all; he just signs what is passed by the Parliament. So this tribute is
based upon 'in-action.' But "Allah does no wrong" means that He is
active and powerful but He can do no wrong. Anybody who commits wrong or
injustice does so either because he does not know that it is wrong, but
Allah knows every thing; or because he needs something which cannot be
obtained without wrong-doing, but Allah has no need; or because he has
been compelled by somebody else to commit that wrong, but Allah is
Omnipotent and nobody can compel Him to do anything. So, logically it is
impossible for Allah to do any wrong or commit any injustice.

We believe that Allah created man so that he may acquire those virtues
that may bring him nearer to Allah in the life hereafter. Man comes in
this world like a blank paper. During his life time, various designs
appear upon it by the effect of his works and deeds. Virtues acquired
are like beautiful designs; and the vices are like monstrous drawings.

We believe that Allah has given the man wisdom, will and power to
acquire the virtues. lie has shown the man the right path, and has
warned him against going astray. But fie has not compelled him to do
good works nor to commit vices. He has given him power to do as he
wishes.

We believe that the actions of Allah are intended for the benefit of His
creatures. May be, a man who is repairing his roof, feels annoyed
because of heavy torrents of rain. But rain is intended for the common
benefit; and even the person who at this particular time feels annoyed
by it, will derive benefits from it in the long run.

Even such so-called disasters as earthquakes and floods are for common
benefit. We deem it as disaster, because we do not know its ultimate
purpose. We are like a man who has never seen a house being built. He
comes to a city and sees earth being dug out, stones being cut and
broken, trees being felled, and he just wonders why all these
destructions!, In his eyes, it is destruction, because he does not know
its ultimate result. But in fact, it is construction and not
destruction. Likewise, we are unaware of the ultimate result of a
particular earthquake or flood.

So, we say it is disaster, but if we look backwards, we see that the
present good condition of the Earth is, mainly an outcome of the very
so-called disaster. Geography and Geology bear testimony to these
facts.[^3]

But now arises another question. There is no denying that these acts of
God, though intended for common benefit, cause inconvenience, hardship
and even death to hundreds and thousands of people. Is it not injustice
against those victims of those disasters? Why should they be sacrificed
for the benefit of others? To understand it clearly, we should remember
that death on this Earth is not the end of life. We die here to live
another life which we call "Life Hereafter." Every inconvenience in this
insignificant life will be rewarded for in the life hereafter. In fact,
the troubles in this world, like the World itself, are not lasting;
while their rewards in the form of the Grace of Allah in the life
hereafter are everlasting. As we believe in the life hereafter, in the
presence of Allah, we appreciate that the troubles and disasters of this
world are not \`Injustice.' Instead, they are Mercy of the greatest
magnitude.

It will not be out of place to mention here that most of the beliefs
(mentioned under this second root of religion) are specialities of
Shi'ah Ithna \`Ashari sect. Other sects in Islam differ from us in these
beliefs. In the past, they gave us (together with the Mu'tazilites) the
name "al\`adliyyah" that is "Believers in the Justice of God." For
instance, they say that human beings are not the actual doers of their
acts. They believe that their actions are done by Allah Himself. Man is
only an instrument to perform the actions of Allah. But even then he is
responsible for those actions which were performed by Allah upon his
hands. But we say that it is gross injustice to make a man commit
robbery and then inflict punishment for that felony to commit which he
was compelled by the Judge himself.

Now for some things which are more or less common in all the sects of
Islam and which are connected with this topic. We believe that Allah
does not give us any command which is beyond the limit of our power. We
believe that every instinct and desire has been created in the man for
some reasons. These instincts or desires should not be crushed but
harnessed for the general benefit of the mankind. For instance, sexual
desire has been embodied in human nature by Allah Himself. To crush that
instinct will be a protest against the Creator. It should not be, and
cannot be crushed but of course, its function should be regulated for
the benefit of mankind. And hence the necessity of marriage.

Likewise, fear and desire are natural instincts and should be utilized
for human upliftment. A Muslim is taught not to fear anybody or anything
except ALLAH, and not to desire anything in this world, but to be
anxious to receive the Grace of Allah.

Nubuwwah, Prophethood
---------------------

As I have said before, society needs rules and laws to preserve peace
and justice, that the law cannot be free from inequities unless it is
given by Allah. But I have told you earlier that Allah cannot be seen,
He cannot appear Himself before human beings to give them His law.

Therefore, Allah appoints somebody to represent Him on the earth. That
Viceregent of Allah is called "Prophet." As a mirror has a bright side
to receive light and another side to reflect that light, so a Prophet
has the highest spiritual purity which enables him to receive the divine
message and a human body which enables him to communicate that message
to his fellow human beings. The purpose of Prophethood is two-fold:
First to bring people nearer to Allah and the Second to bring peace and
happiness in the world.

According to our belief, all the Prophets were infallible and sinless.
Suppose that there is a man who, just like ourselves commits or can
commit sins or wrongs, and then such a man claims that he has been sent
by Allah as a Prophet to lead people on the right path. Naturally, the
people cannot believe that what he says is the truth, the whole truth
and nothing but the truth; because his every word is liable to be wrong.
So he cannot command unreserved respect and indubitable obedience from
his people. Therefore, to carry out the mission of Allah, it was
necessary that the Prophets be infallible and sinless.

The Prophets were given miracles as their credentials. Miracles,
according -to our belief, are such performances which are not
impossible, but which cannot be done without apparatus, medicine or
practice. But the Prophet performs them without any practice and without
any machinery. Curing the blind persons or lepers is not impossible. But
Jesus Christ cured them without any medicine, and that was his miracle.
Muhammad (peace be upon him and his progeny) had innumerable miracles,
but his greatest living miracle is the Qur'an.

When Prophet Muhammad (S) went to heaven in his lifetime and narrated
the happenings after his return, his enemies said, "How was it possible
to go to heaven with body?" But we believed from the beginning that if
an infallible Prophet says that he did go to heaven, it was not
impossible. Now the recent advent of science has proved that we were
right. Where scientists are trying to go by spaceships Muhammad (S) went
without any aid from any machine and that was his miracle.

The Qur'an says that Allah sent Prophets in every part of the world.
Their basic Faith was the same. According to common belief, one hundred
twenty-four thousand prophets were sent by Allah from time to time. Adam
was the First of them and Muhammad (S) was the Last.

Muhammad (S) brought Islam which is the last Divine Religion and which
cancels all previous religions. Islam is intended for all the world
without any distinction of colour or origin. Islamic teachings are
embodied in Qur'an which is the Book of Allah. It was revealed to
Muhammad (S) in the course of twenty-three years of his Prophethood.

Life Sketch of the Prophet (S)
------------------------------

A brief sketch of the life of the Prophet of Islam will not be out of
place here. Muhammad (S) was born in the year 570 A.D., at Mecca. He was
the only son of \`Abdullah and Aminah. His grandfather,\`Abd al-Muttalib
son of Hashim was a Chief of Quraysh. \`Abdullah, father of Muhammad
(S), died about four months before his birth and he lost his mother when
he was in his sixth year.

The charge of the orphan was undertaken by his grandfather, who also
passed away when Muhammad (p.b. u.h.a.h.p.) was eight years old. \`Abd
al-Muttalib at the time of his death, entrusted the boy to the care of
his son, Abu Talib, who was poor but very respected person. Abu Talib
and his wife, Fatimah hint Asad showered upon Muhammad (S) more love and
care than they ever did for their own children.

From his early childhood till the age of forty, Muhammad (S) showed all
the noble traits of highest human character that commanded respect from
everyone who knew him. The Arabs conferred on him the title "as-Siddiq
al-amin" (The Truthful and Trusted One). At the age of twenty-five he
married a noble lady, Khadijah, who gave birth to his only surviving
child, Fatimah, the Lady of Paradise.

At the age of forty he was called to the mission of Prophethood by
Allah. The first to accept his call were those who were nearest to him
in the daily life. Khadijah, his wife, was the first to accept Islam.
His cousin, \`Ali, son of Abu Talib, was his first male follower. Then
come the names of Zayd ibn Harith, Abu Bakr, Arqam and so on.

The propagation of Islam, at first was a secret mission. But three years
after the first revelation, came the command:

***"And warn your nearest relations"*** (26:214)

Having got this command, the Prophet ordered Ali to prepare a feast.
When all the members were assembled and the feast began, the Prophet
said, "I have been sent to you by Allah and I have brought to you the
good tiding for this world and for the life hereafter. Who among you
will help me in this great task? Whoever accepts this responsibility
will be my wazir (vizier), my brother and my successor."

No body came forward, only \`Ali stood up and said "O! Prophet of Allah!
I will help thee and I am ready to sacrifice everything on thy command."
Three times the Prophet asked them the same question and three times it
was only \`Ali who gave assurance to help him with all his power. At
last the Prophet declared: "O! People of Quraysh! Listen to me! Here is
\`Ali who is my wazir, my brother and my successor. Listen to him and
obey him." The people left the place cutting jokes with Abu Talib,
father of \`Ali, telling him he should obey his own child. The coming
years proved that it was not a laughing thing.

The hurling of open denunciation at the ancestral idols of Quraysh by
the Prophet set all Arabia ablaze. The resentment, at first, let them to
approach his uncle and guardian, Abu Talib, to persuade him to silence
his nephew. Abu Talib conveyed their message to Muhammad. Muhammad
replied: "Uncle dear, even if they place the Sun in my right hand and
the Moon in my left hand in order to turn me away from the work which I
have been entrusted by Allah to do, I will not listen to them." Saying
this he burst into tears. Abu Talib said: "Go in peace, my son! and do
what thou wilt for, by God! I will not abandon thee."

This decision of Abu Talib infuriated the Quraysh. As a last attempt
they approached Muhammad himself. They told him: "If your ambition is to
acquire wealth, we will amass wealth for you as much as you may ever
desire; and if you are aspiring for power and honour, we are prepared to
accept you as our King and overlord; and if you have any fancy for
beauty, you shall have the hand of the fairest maiden in the land."

Muhammad's reply was short and clear: "Neither I want wealth nor do I
want power or beauty. I have been commissioned by Allah as a warner to
the mankind, I am communicating His message to you. If you accept it,
you shall have facility in this life and the life hereafter and should
you reject it, verily, Allah will decide between you and me."

So began the bitterest persecution of Muslims in the first years of its
birth at the hands of the Meccans. Islam was making slow but steady
progress. At the same time, the persecution and the torture of the poor
Muslims was growing in its intensity day by day. The Prophet ordered
some eighty Muslims of both sexes to seek refuge in the Christian
country of Abyssinia. Ja'far, the third son of Abu Talib was the leader
of this caravan. Negus, the Ethopian King of that time received them
with honour, and as the history says, after a short period, he himself
became converted to Islam. Africa can be proud of the fact when Islam
was being persecuted in the land of its origin, Africa gave shelter to
the poor Muslims, and whenever any list of the Muslim Kings will be
prepared, the name of Negus, the African king, will be on the top.

After seven years of these atrocities, Quraysh decided to boycott Banu
Hashim, the Family of Muhammad, because they had persistently refused to
disown him. Three years of the most cruel hardships passed and Banu
Hashim suffered such tortures that were beyond human endurance. At last,
the Quraysh themselves were ashamed of their inhuman behaviour, but
still they did not lift the ban. Then a miracle occurred and the ban was
lifted after more than three years.

Shortly afterwards, as a direct result of these sufferings both Abu
Talib and Khadijah died. Just at the time when Muhammad stood sorely in
need of the protection of his loving uncle and the comfort of his wife,
the hand of death snatched them both away from him. Now Quraysh had a
free hand in dealing with Muhammad and his followers. And they lost no
time in deciding that Muhammad should be killed on a certain night.
Muhammad under the divine guidance, asked \`Ali to sleep in his bed to
keep Meecans unaware of his absence, and he left Mecca to Medina, 280
miles from Mecca. Abu Bakr accompanied him on his own accord. This
epoch-making event in the history of Islam marks the beginning of the
Muslim Era, called "Hijrah. "

The Meccans did not let Muhammad remain in peace even at Medina. They
waged war after war against him. After six years of continued anxieties,
Muhammad concluded a peace treaty with Meccans on apparently humiliating
terms, in order to keep peace in the land. But the Quraysh violated even
that treaty within two years. Now seeing that there was no alternative
left, Muhammad marched and made a bloodless entry into Mecca, from
which, eight years before, he had fled a hunted fugitive. The Meccans,
remembering fully well their own dark past and shameful record, were
apprehensive of him. But they were surprised to hear the Prophet
speaking: "There is no reproof against you. May Allah forgive you, for
He is Merciful and Loving; Go, you are free."

Three months before his death, the Prophet went for his last pilgrimage
to Mecca. In the return journey he ordered the caravan to halt at a
place named Khumm. It was a place where several routes met. It was
mid-day and the Sun of Arabia was pouring its full heat upon the parched
earth. A temporary platform was prepared for the Prophet and he
delivered a long Khutbah, (lecture) at the end of which he asked the
Muslims: "Have I not more authority upon you than you have got upon
yourselves?"

All of them responded by saying: "Surely O Messenger of Allah!" Then,
the Prophet took the arms of \`Ali, and showing him to the audience,
declared:  
 "Whomsoever I am master, \`Ali is his master too."

Saying it, he took the arms of 'Ali and showed to the audience. Then he
ordered them to go and greet 'Ali as their Amir (i.e. Leader and Guide).
Less than three months after this declaration the Prophet died at
Medina.

The announcement at Khumm: The detailed account is given in, besides
hundred of books, Kanz al-'Ummal, the famous book of traditions, (vo1.6,
pp.390, 397 & 399) and Khasa'is (by an-Nasa'i, p.48). From these
accounts the following words of the Prophet should be copied here:

"Remember! I am leaving behind among you two most precious things - One
of them is greater than the other - i) The Book of Allah, which is the
rope of Allah from the heaven up to the earth, and the other ii) My
Descendants who are my family-members. So look how you deal with them,
and verily, both will not be separated from each other until they come
to me (in Qiyamah) at the Kawthar. . . Verily, Allah is my Master and I
am Master of every believer." Then he took the hands of \`Ali in his
hands and said: "He whose Master am I, \`Ali is His Master. . ." This
tradition, jointly and severally, are narrated, in every book of
tradition which is worth its name.

There is no argument about the fact, though some Muslims try to
interpret it in some other way, but the fact is undisputed. The famous
Scholar of Ahl-i hadith (generally known as al- Wahabiyyah) Nawwab
Siddiq Hasan of Bhopal, says: "Hakim Abu Saeed says that the traditions
of "two most precious things" and "Whose Master am I, \`Ali is his
Master" is \`mutawatir' i.e. narrated by so many people that no doubt
can be entertained about its authenticity, because a great number of the
companions have narrated it, so much so that Muhammad ibn Jarir has
written these two traditions by 75 (seventy-five) different chains.[^4]

I have left many events in the life of the Prophet because most of them
are common knowledge. Here I have mentioned only those events which,
though commonly narrated in Arabic histories, traditions and
commentaries of Qur'an, are not known, for one reason or another, to
non-Arabic-speaking public.

[^1]: I\`tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyyah

[^2]: I\`tiqadatu 'l-Imamiyyah

[^3]: It is only one of the causes of these natural phenomena.
Sometimes, a hardship or disaster is intended as a warning to mankind or
a group or individual; at other times it may be just a test to a
person's spiritual virtues to see his submission to the will of Allah.
It might have been, in earlier times, a punishment to the mankind for
its unabated sins (like flood of Noah), but such punishments have been
expressly discontinued after the advent of the Holy Prophet of Islam.

[^4]: Minhdj al-wusul, page 13


