Branches of Religion
====================

Now allow me to give here a short list of some of the \`Branches of
Religion.' These are called \`ibadaat or \`Worship of God.' According to
Islam even alms-giving is an act of worship.  
 However, the most important branches of religion are ten in number:

First of them is \`**salat,**' that is, the prayers five times a day and
special prayer on Fridays and \`id (Islamic festivals) days and some
other occasions.

Second is \`**sawm**,' that is, fasting during Ramadan.

Thirdis \`**hajj**,' that is a special pilgrimage to Mecca once in
life-time.

Fourth is '**zakat,'** that is giving for the pleasure of Allah a
portion of gold, silver, cattle and farm produce.

Fifth is \`**khums,**' that is giving 20% of the net income of the year
after deducting the lawful expenses of the year.

Sixth is **jihad**,' that is the holy war. This topic requires some
explanation. Islam does not like to exterminate wrong-doers, it wants to
remove the wrong. Evil deeds are like disease. They need treatment and
every doctor wants to cure the ailments with medicines as far as
possible. But sometimes the ailment reaches a stage where no medicine
can do any good; he feels that surgical operation is necessary if the
life of the patient is to be saved.

Then he decides, not happily but reluctantly, to amputate one or more
limbs of the patient. It may cause hardest pain for the time being; but
it is not torture, it is mercy.

Likewise, suppose that this humanity is a compact body, some of its
parts become infected with spiritual disease and every medicine of
sympathetic persuasion and rational pleading has failed. And there is a
danger that their infection is causing and inflicting hardships upon
other parts, and the spiritual doctor, I mean the Prophet or Imam who is
guided by Allah, is confident that now the surgical operation is
essential to save other parts of mankind from trouble. Then, and only
then, he will order a Holy-War; and then also it will be limited to that
part which is most necessary to remove.

But even if you feel that there is necessity of a surgical operation you
will never entrust this most dangerous task to an unauthorized person.
It will be a very foolish and irresponsible action. You can never be
satisfied that the operation is essential unless a qualified doctor
tells you so. Therefore, according to Ithna\`Ashari law, a war cannot be
started unless specifically authorized by the Prophet or Imam himself,
and that also to the limits prescribed by that Representative of Allah.
After all, life is a creation of Allah and it should not be destroyed
unless it has been authorized to do so by a Representative of Allah.
Accordingly, the Holy-War is forbidden for the Shi'ah Ithna \`Ashari
during the period when our Imam is hidden from us.

The Prophet himself never started any war unless it was thrust upon him
by the enemies. A study of the map of Arabia will show the actual facts.
As I have mentioned earlier, when the Prophet took refuge in Medina, the
Meccans became infuriated because they could not satisfy their anger
against him. So they made repeated attacks on him. The battle places of
three important wars will tell the story. The first was \`Badr' was
fought at Badr in the second year of Hijrah. Badr is 30 miles from
Medina and 220 miles from Mecca. Is there any doubt that the Meccans
were the aggressors? The second war named \` Uhud' was fought next year
at Uhud.

Uhud is 3 miles from Medina and 247 miles from Mecca. Three years after
Uhud, Medina was surrounded by Meccans and Jews for about one month.
They had come 250 miles from Mecca to attack Medina. Is there anybody
who can say that the Prophet should not have fought in self-defence? The
first ayah of Qur'an permitting the war, after fourteen years of
continual oppressions, speaks for itself. Qur'an says:

***"Permission to fight is given to those upon whom war has been thrust,
because they are oppressed ... " (22:39).***

Regarding those wars that were fought after the death of the Prophet to
conquer neighbouring countries, everybody knows that our Imams had
nothing to do with them. Our Imams were the right authority to allow or
disallow those wars. But they had no political power. And all those wars
were fought without their authorization. So, according to the
Ithna\`Ashari law, all such wars were political manoeuvres; they were
not Holy-Wars or Religious Jihad.  
 And Islam is not responsible for them.

To discourage such unauthorized wars, it is laid down that any booty
obtained in such wars will not belong to the fighters. Instead, all of
it will vest in the Prophet or Imam, as his personal property; and he
may dispose it according to his own discretion. The Holy Prophet
sometimes in such circumstances used to return the booty to its former
owners. But if it appears to the Imam that the enemy might use that
returned booty against Islam, he will not return it at all and use it
according to his discretion. That is why it has been declared as his own
property to keep his hands free.

This is our law about the Holy-War, Self-defence is permitted at any
time. But to start a war is forbidden without specific authority of the
Prophet or Imams. Holy-Wars cannot be started for political or worldly
gains.

**Seventh and Eighth** of the branches of religion are  
 (i) To propagate good works and

(ii) To desist others from bad deeds and evil doings.

**Ninth and Tenth** are to love the Holy Prophet, his daughter Fatimah
and the Twelve Imams; and to remain aloof from their enemies.


