Introduction
============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Man - just like any other creation possessing both a body and a soul
(ruh) is in need of several things - each of which is essential for the
safeguard of one's survival and well-being. For example, the hunger
pains and desire for nourishment compel one to eat so as to build up
energy to live another day; the feelings of thirst make one drink water,
which is also essential for one's life. These and many other things
facilitate man to live a prosperous and healthy life.

Similarly, the sexual desires and the need to fulfill one's sexual
requirements and passions play a key role in the protection of mankind,
and continuation of the human race. Therefore, it is not sensible to
defy this necessity or try to suppress it.

Since man has been chosen as "the best of creations", Allah (SwT) has
laid down the foundation of marriage in order to allow this need of life
to be fulfilled in a legitimate manner. As well, the guidelines are very
much in accordance with the intellect since the laws are divine and the
specific conditions are befitting to the valuable souls of both men and
women alike.

Historically speaking, the very first relationship that was established
was that of marriage between a **male and female** not that of a
mother/daughter relationship, nor a father/son relationship. Thus, it
can be deduced that marriage is one of the most sacred bonds between a
man and a woman. In the book, *Etiquette of Marriage*, it mentions the
beautiful story of Prophet Adam (as), the first vicegerent of Allah
(SwT) on the earth and his marriage, which we narrate here.

After Adam (as) was created, he felt lonely and complained to the
Almighty about his solitude. Allah (SwT) put Adam (as) to sleep and then
created Hawwah (as) with the utmost beauty. He covered her with the
robes of paradise and brought her forth with other ornaments of
beautification.

At this time, He instructed Hawwah (as) to sit near the head of Prophet
Adam (as). When he awakened from his sleep and his eyes fell on Hawwah
(as), he was so obsessed and captivated by her charm that he wanted to
reach out and touch her. At this point, the angels forbid him from doing
so.

Adam (as) asked them, *'Did Allah (SwT) not create her for me?'* The
angels replied, *'Yes, but you have to approach her in the appropriate
manner. First you must propose to her (by asking her guardian for
permission to marry her), then you must grant her the Mahr (gift),
followed by the recitation of the aqd (marriage contract).'*

Prophet Adam (as) questioned*, 'Who do I have to ask for permission to
marry her?'* The angels replied, *'You must ask Allah (SwT).'* Then Adam
(as) asked, *'O' Allah (SwT)! What will her Mahr* *be?'* Allah (SwT)
replied, *'Teach her the rules of My religion and send blessings
(salawat) on Muhammad (S) and the family of Muhammad (S).'*

From the above historical event, we can see that when a man wants to
agree upon the Mahr with his wife, they should make an agreement that
(as a part of the Mahr), he will teach her the rules and regulations of
the religion of Allah (SwT). Details of the Mahr will come later on,
Insha-Allah. Therefore, from this narration, we see that the first
relationship that was created by our Creator for humanity was that of
marriage.

With this said, we must know the finer points and overall rulings of
this sacred foundation in order to have a fruitful and successful life
in this world and more importantly, in the life hereafter.

In this special issue of Al-Haqq Newsletter, we will be covering various
issues of the marriage that will be applicable to both the younger
couples getting married and also to those older men and women who are
either divorced or who have had to bear the death of their spouses due
to sickness or old age. All the information has been taken from the
original Islamic sources and Insha-Allah, will aid in the education and
enlightenment of our Muslim community.

Any questions or comments on the contents of the articles can be
forwarded to us at <ihs@primus.ca>.


