Marriage Helps In Spirituality
==============================

*Extracted from The Book Marriage & Morals In Islam by Hujjatul Islam
Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi*

In Islam, contrary to Christianity, marriage and sex are not
antipathetic to the love for and worship of God. Instead of an obstacle,
marriage is regarded as an asset in acquiring spiritual perfection.

The Prophet (S) said, *"One who marries has already guarded half of his
religion, therefore he should fear Allah (SwT) for the other half."* A
person who can fulfill his sexual urges lawfully is less distracted in
the spiritual journey. Love for women and faith are inter-related.

In one hadith, Umar bin Zayd quotes Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as) that, *"I
do not think that a person's faith can increase positively unless his
love for women has increased."*

The same Imam (as) said, *"Whenever a person's love for women increases,
his faith increases in quality."* He also said, *"Whosoever's love for
us increases, his love for women must also increase."*

The Prophet (S) said, *"If anyone likes to meet Allah (SwT) in purity,
then he should meet Him with a wife."*

A woman came to the Prophet's (S) house and her strong perfume soon
filled the house. When the Prophet (S) inquired about the visitor, the
woman said that she had tried everything to attract her husband but in
vain; he does not leave his meditation to pay any attention to her.

The Prophet (S) told her to inform her husband about the reward of
sexual intercourse which he described as follows: *"When a man
approaches his wife, he is guarded by two angels and [at that moment in
Allah's views] he is like a warrior fighting for the cause of Allah
(SwT). When he has intercourse with her, his sins fell like the leaves
of the tree [in* *fall season]. When he performs the major ablution, he
is* *cleansed from sins."*

These quotations from the Quran and the sayings of the Prophet (S) and
the Imams of Ahlul Bayt (as) show that the Islamic view on sex and
marriage is in complete harmony with human nature. It can easily be
concluded that in the Islamic sexual morality:

(a) marriage and sex is highly recommended and it is in no way
associated with evil, guilt or sin;

(b) monasticism and celibacy is unacceptable;

(c) marriage is considered a helping factor in attaining spiritual
perfection it prevents the Muslims from getting into sins and also
enhances the value of their acts of worship.

These teachings neutralize the need for a sexual revolution in a Muslim
society. Since there is no sexual suppression, the question of a sexual
revolution does not arise.


