The Beginning of Sexual Life: Bulugh and Rushd
==============================================

*Extracted from the book Marriage & Morals In Islam by Hujjatul Islam
Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi*

Sexual desire is aroused in human beings at the age of puberty. In
Islamic legal definition puberty (*bulugh*) is determined by one of the
following:

1. *Age:* fifteen lunar years for boys and nine lunar years for girls;

2. *Internal change (in boys only):* The first nocturnal emission. Semen
accumulates in the testicles from puberty onwards and more semen may be
formed than the system can assimilate; when this happens, semen is
expelled during the sleep. This is known as nocturnal emission wet dream
or *ihtlam* in Arabic.

3. *Physical change:* Growth of coarse hair on lower part of abdomen.

Since the sexual urge begins at puberty and as Islam says that sexual
urge should be fulfilled only through marriage, it has allowed marriage
as soon as the boy and the girl reach the age of puberty. In the case of
girls, it not only allows them to be married as soon as they become
mature, but also recommends such marriage. It is based on such teachings
that Islam discourages girls from postponing their marriage because of
education; instead, it says that girls should get married and then
continue their education if they wish to do so.

Physical maturity by itself, however, is not enough for a person to
handle the marriage responsibilities; *rushd* (maturity of mind) is
equally important. On the other hand, our present way of life has become
so much complicated that a considerable gap has appeared between puberty
and maturity both in financial and social affairs.

A recent article on the American youths says, "Young Americans entering
the 21st century are far less mature than their ancestors were at the
beginning of the 20th. The difference is evident in all areas of
youthful development: sex, love, marriage, education and work.
Physically, today's youths are maturing earlier than previous
generations, but emotionally they are taking much longer to develop
adult attachments." (*Newsweek,* Special Edition Spring 1990, p. 55)
Consequently, it is not easy for boys and girls of our atomic era to
marry as soon as they become physically mature.


