The Marriage Aqd (Contract)
===========================

*By Saleem Bhimji*

In keeping with the eternal tradition of our Prophet Muhammad (S) in the
style of the recitation of the marriage Aqd, as he had done during the
marriage of his daughter Fatimah binte Muhammad (as) to Ali ibn Abi
Talib (as), the ceremony is preceded by a Khutbah or introduction
extolling the Oneness of Allah (SwT) and His characteristics, and then
sending praise and prayers upon the Prophet of Islam (S) and his noble
family members. Once this has been recited, the actual Aqd or contract
is performed.

According to a majority of our Ulama, the contract MUST be recited in
the correct Arabic language however Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid
Ali al-Husaini as-Sistani, in his recent book, *A Code of Practice for
Muslims in the West*, states that if the man or woman can not read the
Arabic correctly, then they should take a representative who could read
the contract on their behalf. If this too is not possible, then they may
recite the contract in their own language (translation) as long as the
meaning remains the same as the original Arabic.

In the examples given below, we will assume that the brother and sister
will be reading their own Aqd (contrary to that of having a
Representative for each side).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعُوذُ بِاللهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطانِ الرَّجِيمِ. بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ
الرَّحِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I seek refuge in Allah (SwT) from the accursed Satan.*

*(I begin) in the Name of Allah (SwT), the Merciful, the Compassionate*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ الَّذي هَدانا لِهذَا وَما كُنَّا لِنَهْتَدِيَ لَوْ
لا أَنْ هَدانا اللهُ. وَصَلاةُ وَسَلامُ عَلى سَيَّدِنا وَنَبِيِنا
وَمَوْلانا وَحَبِيبِ قُلُوبِنا وَطَبِيبِ نُفُوسِنا أَبِي الْقاسِمِ
مُحَمَّدٍ. وَصَلاةُ وَسَلامُ عَلى أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ الطَّيِّبِينَ
الطّاهِرِينَ الْمَعْصُومِينَ الْمَظْلُومِينَ. وَلَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلى
أَعْدائِهِمْ مِنْ يَوْمِ أَوَّلِ ظُلْمِهِمْ إلى يُوْمَ الدِّينَ. أَمّا
بَعْدُ فَقَدْ قالَ اللهُ سُبْحانَهُ وَتَعالى فِي كِتابِهِ:
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All the praise belongs solely to Allah (SwT), the One who guided us to
this and we could not have been guided to this had it not been for the
direction of Allah (SwT). And prayers and salutations are sent upon our
Master and our Prophet and our Mawlana and the love of our hearts and
the spiritual physician of our souls Abil Qasim Muhammad (S). And may
prayers and salutations be upon his progeny, the Purified, Immaculate,
free from sin, oppressed (individuals). May the perpetual curse of Allah
(SwT) and removal of divine blessings overwhelm their enemies from the
first day they committed such oppression, until the Day of Judgement.
And after this, verily Allah (SwT), the Glorious and High has said in
His Book:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْكِحُوا الْأَيَامَىٰ مِنْكُمْ وَالصَّالِحِينَ مِنْ عِبَادِكُمْ
وَإِمَائِكُمْ ۚ إِنْ يَكُونُوا فُقَرَاءَ يُغْنِهِمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ
فَضْلِهِ ۗ وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Marry the single people among you and the righteous slaves and
slave-girls. If you are poor, Allah (SwT) will make you rich through His
favour; He is Bountiful and All-Knowing" (Surah 24, Verse 32)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ رَسُولُ اللهِ (صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلّمَ): مِنْ
سُنَّتِي أَلتَّزْوِيجُ فَمَنْ رَغِبَ عَنْ سُنَّتِي فَلَيْسَ مِنِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, "Of my tradition is to marry. So
then whosoever turns away from my tradition (Sunnah) is not from me (my
nation)."*

1a) The bride-to-be would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْكَحْتُ نَفْسِي لَكَ عَلى الْمَهْرِ الْمَعْلُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

1b) The husband-to-be would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبِلْتُ النِكاحَ لِنَفْسِي عَلى الْمَهْرِ الْمَعْلُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

2a) Then the bride-to-be would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَوَّجْتُ نَفْسِي عَلى الصِّداقِ المَعْلُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

2b) The, the husband-to-be would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبِلْتُ التَّزْوِيجَ لنَفْسِي عَلى الصِّداقِ المَعْلُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

3a) The bride-to-be would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْكَحْتُ وَزَوَّجْتُ نَفْسِي لَكَ عَلى الْمَهْرِ الْمَعْلُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

3b) The husband-to-be would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَبِلْتَ النِكاحَ وَالتَّزْوِيجَ لِنَفْسِي عَلى الْمَهْرِ
الْمَعْلُومِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

These lines are usually repeated two or three times over for the sake of
precaution to make sure they have been recited properly. After these few
lines have been said, the man and woman are then joined together in
marriage according to the laws of Islam. There is no other 'ceremony'
needed - a Walimah is Mustahab, but other things are part of our
cultural practices (some are permitted to do, but we have to be careful
so as to not perform anything haram).


