The Wedding Night And It's Etiquette
====================================

*By Saleem Bhimji*

The first night of the newlywed couple is one full of divine blessings
and mercy and it with this in mind that the new couple should start
their married life together. Instead of resorting to music and dance
parties to celebrate the happy occasion (as has unfortunately become
common place in our time), we must take lessons from the method of the
Ahlul Bait (as) and how they commemorated such an auspicious occasion.

The reason why we say night and not day, contrary to the way that most
marriages and ceremonies take place these days is that there are clear
ahadith from the Prophet (S) and his Ahlul Bait (as) instructing us to
have the ceremony at night and for the new wife to be taken to her new
home in the evening time (after sunset):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ الإِمامُ جَعْفَرَ بْنِ مُحَمَّدٍ الصّادِقُ (عَلَيهِ السَّلامُ):
زَفُّوا عَرائِسِكُمْ لَيْلاً وَاطْعِمُوا ضُحًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Imam Jafar ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq (as) has said, "Take your wife home at
night time and* *during the day, eat food."*

By eating food here, it is meant the customary and recommended Walimah
or ceremony that is usually kept after the recitation of the Aqd.

Since this is the beginning of a new life, we have been instructed by
the Ahlul Bait (as) to begin it in the name of Allah (SwT), and to seek
protection in Allah (SwT) from the accursed Shaitan. This is done by
performing the following acts which have been narrated in the various
books.

It has been recommended that the husband perform Wudhu, a two Rakat
Salat for the wedding night and then recite the following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّهُمَّ ارْزُقْنِي أُلْفَها وَوُدَّها وَرِضاها بِي وَارْضِنِي بِها
وَاجْمَعْ بَيْنَنا بِأَحْسَنِ إِجْتِماعٍ وَأَيْسَرَ ائَتِلافٍ
فِإِنَّكَ تُحِبُّ الْحَلالَ وَتَكْرَهُ الْحَرامَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allahummar zuqni ulfahaa wa wuddahaa wa ridhaahaa bi; war dhini bihaa
waj ma banyanaa bi ahsani ijtimaain wa aysara tilaafin. Fa innaka
tuhibbul halaala wa takrahul haraama.*

*"O' Allah (SwT)! Bless me with her affection, love and her acceptance
of me; and make me pleased with her, and bring us together in the best
form of a union and in absolute harmony; surely You like the lawful and
dislike the unlawful things."*

The husband should then request his wife to perform Wudhu and also
perform a two Rakat recommended Salat before you are ready to go to bed.

In the well-known book, Makarim al-Akhlaq, it has been narrated from
Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as) that when the new wife enters the room where
her husband is, they should both face the Qiblah and he should place his
hand on her forehead and recite the following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللّهُمَّ بِأَمانَتِكَ أَخَذْتُها وَبِكَلِماتِكَ إِسْتَحْلَلْتُ
فَرْجَها فَإنْ قَضَيْتَ لِي مِنْها وَلَداً فَاجْعَلْهُ مُبارَكاً
سَوِيًّا وَلا تَجْعَلْ لِلشَّيْطانِ فِيْهِ شِرْكاً وَلا نَصِيباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allaahumma bi amaanatika akhadhtuhaa wa bi kalimaatika istahlalatu
farjahaa. Fa in Qadhayta li minhaa waladan, faj-alhu mubaarakan sawiyyan
wa laa tajal lish\_shaytaani feehi shirkan wa la naseeba.*

*"O' Allah (SwT)! I have taken her through Your trust and have made her
lawful for myself by Your words. Therefore, if You have decreed for me a
male child from her, then make him blessed and pious and do not let the
Satan have any part in him."*

In another narration from Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as), it has been
mentioned that when a man intends to have intercourse with his wife, he
should start in the name of Allah (SwT) by saying بِسْمِ اللَّهِ
الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ . If this is not done, then Shaitan puts his
hand in the conception of the child.
When the Imam (as) was asked as to how we could know if this had
happened, he replied that we should look at the child and how his love
or hate is for the Ahlul Bait (as) - if Shaitan had a role to play in
the conception, then that child will have enmity for the Ahlul Bait
(as), while the child who loves the Ahlul Bait (as) was protected by
Allah (SwT) from the accursed Shaitan.

Another recommended act is that when the bride enters the room, the
husband should greet her and take off her shoes and socks. He should
then wash her feet in a basin and sprinkle this water around the house.

It is through this act, according to the Prophet of Islam (S), that
70,000 types of poverty will be removed and 70,000 types of desires
(that the inhabitants need) will enter into the house. The Prophet (S)
went on to mention that 70 blessings and mercies would be showered upon
the bride such that each of these will fill the house with mercy and as
long as the wife is alive, she will never be afflicted with madness or
leprosy.


