Opinion of The Ulama In Relation To Marriage
============================================

The issue of an early marriage for the youth and the re-marriage for the
widowed or divorced is of such importance that we could not neglect
asking our leaders, the Maraja Taqlid for their advice and guidance.
During the ghaybah of our 12th Imam, the Maraja are our link to the true
teachings of Islam and thus, we have requested four of them to provide
us with valuable spiritual guidance in this area.

We have requested Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ali al-Husaini
as-Sistani, Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ali al-Husaini Khamenei,
Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Lutfullah as-Safi al-Gulpaygani,
and Ayatullah al- Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Nasir al-Makarim ash-Shirazi
(may Allah keep them all under His protection) to guide the Shia Muslim
community of the 'West' by answering the following questions:

*"May the Peace, Mercy and Blessings of Allah (SwT) be upon you. With
greetings to your Eminence and the hope that your obedience to Allah
(SwT) and your worship of the Most High Truth are all accepted, please
guide us in the below mentioned issues:*

***Question 1:*** *In your humble opinion, please explain how important
is it for the young person living (in particular) in the West to get
married at an early age (according to the society they are living in and
their own individual needs and financial capabilities). In addition to
this, for that person who has lost his or her spouse (through death) or
is separated from his spouse (through divorce) - please explain to us
the importance of these two groups of people remarrying.*

***Question 2:*** *Are there any Islamic legislations from the Noble
Prophet (S) and the Infallible Leaders (as) by way of the noble ahadith
or verses of the Quran in which we have been recommended to marry at an
early age? Or is there anything in the hadith in which we have been
advised to remarry after either divorce or the death of our spouse?*

***Question 3:*** *If it is possible, can you please cite some
historical events in which the Prophets, Aimmah or their great
Companions encouraged widows or divorcees to remarry?*

*In closing, please remember the brothers and sisters of Canada and
America in your supplications, especially the dear, valuable youth."*

Opinion of Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ali al-Husaini as-Sistani
------------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

**Answer 1:** Marriage in itself is a highly recommended act such that
if a person fears that he/she will fall into a forbidden (haram) act,
and the only way that he can prevent himself from committing that
(forbidden) act is to get married, then it becomes obligatory (wajib) to
get married.

**Answer 2:** It has been narrated from the Noble Prophet of Islam (S)
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ تَزَوَّجَ أَحْرَزَ نَصْفَ دِيَنِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The person who marries safeguards half of his religion."*

And he (S) has also stated that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما اسْتَفادَ امْرَءٌ مُسْلِمٌ فائِدَةً بَعْدَ الإِسْلامِ أَفْضَلَ مِنْ
زَوْجَةٍ مُسْلِمَةٍ تَسٌرُّهُ إِذا نَظَرَ إِلَيْها وَتُطِيعُهُ إِذا
أَمَرَها وَتَحْفَظُهُ إِذا غابَ عَنْها فِي نَفْسِها وَمالِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"There is nothing that has benefited the Muslim after (accepting the
religion of) al-Islam greater than marrying a Muslim woman. He becomes
elated when he looks at her and she obeys him when he directs her to do
something and she protects him (her husband) when he is not there in
relation to her self and his wealth."*

It has been narrated from Imam Jafar ibn Muhammad as- Sadiq (as) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَكْعَتانِ يُصَلِّيها الْمُتَزَوِّجُ أَفْضَلُ مِنْ سَبْعِينَ رَكْعَةٍ
يُصَلِّيها أَعْزَبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The two Rakat that a married person prays of his Salat is better than
seventy Rakat that a bachelor performs."*

**Answer 3:** It is sufficient to look at the code of conduct of the
Noble Prophet of Islam (S) after the death of Khadijah (as) and the code
of conduct of Amir al-Mominin Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) after the death of
Siddiqatul Kubra (as).

Office of Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ali al-Husaini as-Sistani
[25th of Safar, 1423 (April 28, 2003)]

Opinion of Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ali al-Husaini Khamenei
----------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

Salam Alaikum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuh,

**Answer (to Questions 1, 2, & 3):** Marriage is one of the highly
recommended acts (in Islam) and that which has been mentioned by way of
encouragement in getting married and the perils of not getting married
are too much to enumerate (in the ahadith). From our master, Imam
al-Baqir (as), it has been related that he said:

*"The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, "There is no structure in Islam
which is more loved by Allah (SwT) that that of marriage."*

In addition, our master, Imam Jafar as-Sadiq (as) has said, *"Two Rakat
of Salat of a married person is better than seventy Rakat of Salat of a
bachelor and it is not good that marriage should be delayed due to
poverty or other (material) needs…"*

It has been narrated from the Noble Prophet (S) that, *"The person who
delays marriage due to fear of poverty, or other such reasons has had
negative thoughts about Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)."*

May you all be successful and assisted (by Him).

Office of Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ali al-Husaini Khamenei

Opinion of Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Lutfullah as-Safi al-Gulpaygani
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

Wa Alaikum Salam wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuh,

**Answer (to Questions 1, 2 & 3):** Nikah (marriage) is one of the
highly recommended acts in Islam which we have been commanded to observe
in the Noble Quran and according to the noble ahadith of the Messenger,
marriage is counted as being from the Sunnah of the Noble Prophet (S),
which Muslims must not turn away from. It has been narrated from the
Infallibles (as) that if a person marries, he has safe-guarded half of
his religion and in other narrations, he has safe-guarded one-third of
his religion.

In this regards, there is no difference if this happens to be a person's
first marriage or after separation from his spouse, he or she remarries.
In addition, if a person fears that by not getting married, one will
fall into sin and transgression (of the laws of Allah), then it becomes
obligatory upon one to get married. *And Allah (SwT) knows best.*

*May you all be successful,*
Lutfullah Safi 
[ SEAL ]

9th Dhul Qadah, 1423
11th of January, 2003

Office of Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Lutfullah as-Safi
al-Gulpaygani

Opinion of Ayatullah al- Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Nasir al-Makarim ash-Shirazi
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

After greetings and salutations to you all,

**Answer (to Questions 1 & 2):** There are various verses within the
Noble Quran, and in addition, countless ahadith from all of the
respected Masumin (as) in which they have recommended and encouraged
those who are single to keep alive the Sunnah (tradition) of the Noble
Prophet (S) and to get married as this act safeguards half of a person's
faith.

These sorts of verses of the Quran and ahadith are in both in relation
to those youth who have not yet gotten married (for the first time), and
even those men and women who were married in the past however at the
present time, are once again single (for whatever reasons).

**Answer (to Question 3):** This issue has taken place many, many times
during the lifetime of the Prophet of Islam (S) and the Pure and Sinless
Aimmah (as).

And may the peace and blessings of Allah (SwT) be upon all of you.

Office of Ayatullah al- Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Nasir al-Makarim
ash-Shirazi


