WILL YOU PAY ATTENTION?
=======================

It has always been considered dangerous to swim against the current
especially during a flood, but I am compelled to do so when I see many
people around me who are drowning or are desperately trying to stay
afloat. I want to swim over and try to save them. This book is a small
part of that effort of mine.

It is but natural for certain questions to arise in the human mind. Why
is it so that the human being will be questioned and be subject to
rewards and punishment? Why was it considered necessary for him to be
given good news as well as warnings? Why was he given more importance
than the other creations? There is only one answer to all these
questions and that is because he has been endowed with intellect. He has
been given the power to decide and having been left free in his
intentions.

Intellect is that valuable commodity due to which man has been given
exalted status over other creation and, without which, man would follow
their physical desires and emotional needs, like an animal; in fact he
is lower than animals in some of these aspects. It is due to this
intellect that he has been granted a superior status over the others.

And when I refer to his intellect, I am not referring to something
extraordinary, but rather, I am referring to the common sense which
every human being possesses. It is possible that a person of low
intellect may not comprehend the words of one with a higher intellect,
or some words may also not be understood by one of higher intellect.
Although it is due to these different levels of intellect that different
statii exist, it is common sense which is the first proof of Allah
(s.w.t.) for the human being, and this is to be found in all of them, a
fact which no one can deny. For example, if one were to look at a
constructed building then one will conclude that there has to be someone
who has constructed it. And when one looks as its mode of construction
and its design then one will also conclude that this is not the result
of mere physical effort, rather there is wisdom and intelligence behind
it as well. These conclusions will be reached by all except the madman.

The common sense of people has been addressed in many places in the
Glorious Quran so that people may ponder and reflect upon it. Allah
(s.w.t.) has addressed all the people wherever He (s.w.t.) says ‘O you
people’, and not only certain people of a particular level of
intelligence. It is this very common sense that I am appealing to so
that my message can reach and be understood by even those with the
lowest intelligence.

Now this matter is not dependent upon proof that, since by the usage of
his intellect the human being has achieved high status, therefore his
degradation will also be a result of him not making use of his
intellect. He will be rewarded due to the usage of his intellect and be
subject to punishment due to his not using of it. This is the reason why
my Master, Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) has said:

#### AL KAFI - Ch. 1, H30

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated in a marfu‘manner from Amir al- Mu’minin
Ali, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following:

*“If one guarantees for me to firmly establish in himself one good
quality I will credit him for it and forgive his other shortcomings. But
I will not forgive him for his losing Intelligence and religion;
abandoning religion is departing peace and security. Thus, life with
fear and insecurity is unpleasant. Loss of Intelligence is loss of life.
A person without Intelligence can be compared with no other thing but
the dead.”*

So it has been proven from the above traditions that there are two
groups of people who will be destroyed:-

The first type of person is one who follows the crowd blindly, and if
the crowd were to walk towards a pit and fall into it, he will close his
eyes, follow the crowd and fall into the same pit.

The second is one who is unaware to religion and has placed his affairs
into the hands of others.

Let me narrate to you another tradition: -

#### AL KAFI - Ch. 1, H32

####

Abu ‘Abd Allah al-‘Asimiy has narrated from Ali ibn al-Hassan from Ali
ibn Asbat from al-Hassan ibn al-Jahm from abu al-Hassan al-Rida,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following:

*“Our people mentioned Intelligence and spoke about it in the presence
of Imam al-Rida, recipient of divine supreme covenant, and he said, ‘Of
the religious people, those who have no Intelligence deserve no credit.’
I then asked, ‘May Allah keep my soul in your service, of the people who
support this cause (al-walayah) we know a group who are considered
acceptable in our opinion but they do not have such Intelligence.’ The
Imam then said, ‘They are not of the people whom Allah has addressed
when He created Intelligence and said to it, “Come forward.” It came
forward. He then said, ‘Go back.’ It went back. Then Allah said, “I
swear by My Honor and Glory that I have not created anything better and
more beloved to Me than you. I will grant blessings (rewards) to you
only and will hold only you responsible for the consequences (of your
deeds).’”*

The questioner here is talking about those that can be referred to as
Shia by virtue of their beliefs and their deeds. Apparently their deeds
are not bad, but their beliefs are not based upon their intellect nor
are their religious instructions by the use of their intellect. The Imam
(a.s.) is neither classifying them as Shia or as believers.

When Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) was asked about the definition of
intellect, he replied “Intellect is that by which the Beneficent can be
recognized”. This book cannot be an explanation for this tradition,
therefore I will only write that which is relevant to the topic. What I
mean is that worship is only that which is done by the use of intellect,
otherwise it can only be classified as physical exercise.

This has been explained in a Prophetic tradition: -

#### AL KAFI - H 9, Ch. 1, h9

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from al-Nawfali from
al-Sakuni rom abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme Covenant, who
has said:  “The Holy Prophet has said, ‘If you hear good things about a
man, you should examine how good his Intelligence is; he will be
rewarded according to his Intelligence.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 23, Ch. 1, h23

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad in a mursal
manner from abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who
has said the following: “Intelligence is the support for man. From
Intelligence comes insightfulness, understanding, memory and knowledge;
and with Intelligence he gains perfection. Intelligence is his guide,
his instructor and the key to his affairs. When his Intelligence is
supported with light, he becomes a scholar, a keeper (of knowledge), an
intelligent recaller and a man of understanding. Through Intelligence he
learns the answer to how, why, where or when. He learns who helps and
who harms him. When he learns these (facts) he learns the channels, the
connections and the differentiating factors. He then establishes pure
belief in the oneness of Allah and acknowledges the need to obey Him.
When he does so he finds the proper remedy for what he has lost and the
right approach to whatever may confront him. He knows well his present
involvement, why he is here, where he has come from and to what end he
is headed. He will have all these because of Intelligence.”

And in the end I am quoting such a tradition that anyone who has even an
inkling of faith in the hereafter will be compelled to give his own life
a second glance.

#### AL KAFI - Ch. 1, H33

####

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid from
his father from certain persons of our people from abu ‘Abd Allah,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following: “The
only thing (standing) between belief and disbelief is lack of
Intelligence. People asked the Imam, ‘How is that, O great-great-
great-great grandson of the Holy Prophet?’ The Imam replied: ‘Human
beings centre their expectations on other creatures. If they become
sincere to Allah He will grant their wish and fulfill their expectations
more quickly.’”

The Imam (a.s.) has given the decision that non-usage of intelligence
takes a person to the boundaries of disbelief.

If you have understood the importance of intelligence and its use in the
light of the instructions of the Infallibles (a.s.) then it will not be
very difficult for me to move forward in my discussion, and I shall be
in a position to ask you to leave aside all your prejudices and personal
bias when you browse through this book, and evaluate my arguments on the
basis of intellect. Then you will understand the reality of my message,
that this book has neither been written in condemnation of any person
nor in refutation of any viewpoints, but only to present to you true
realities based on the Holy Quran and commentaries of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and you have been invited to use your intellect. So
now, if sunrise brings an end to the night of darkness then all shall
benefit from it.

I have tried to present arguments either from the Holy Quran or the
traditions of the Infallibles (a.s.). As far as the Holy Quran is
concerned I have only made use of the explanations of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) for it is the unanimous view of the Shias that only
they (a.s.) have the right to explain the Holy Verses as not only are
they (a.s.) fully aware of the Desires of the Almighty Allah (s.w.t.),
but in fact are His Desires themselves. Commentaries based on personal
opinions are forbidden in our religion.

As far as traditions are concerned, I have taken these only from those
books which are regarded as the fundamental books of traditions of the
Shiite religion and around which the whole of the Shiite religion
revolves. For example, Nahj Ul Balagah, Nahj Ul Israar, Sahifa E Kamila,
Usool E Kafi, Man La Yahzur Ul Faqih, Kitab Sulaim Bin Qais Hilali Etc.
I have made all this effort so that the possibility of refutation does
not remain.

Only two situations arise when confronted with a proof. Either it has to
be refuted by a proof that is more decisive or stronger than the first
one and not making use of conjecture, analogy and references from non
infallibles, and if it cannot be refuted and it should be accepted.
There is no third situation. As far as stubbornness, mischief making,
and giving preference to the words of non infallibles over the words of
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) is concerned, then the people of intellect
will always find this repulsive. I hope that I am only addressing the
people of intellect.

READING OF BOOKS IS AN ART
--------------------------

Writing a book is no doubt a difficult and arduous task, but it is even
more difficult to read one. A book is a tool for sending a message
across but it is a monologue. It is up to the reader to understand the
reality of what the author is trying to convey, and that requires
concentration and the book has to be read in an organized and systematic
manner. In order to fully understand the book, no comment or page of a
book can be ignored, for it may contain a message. Therefore even the
title of a page may contain a particular Holy Verse and a message would
be embodied therein.

Thereafter the references of a book have to be looked at on which the
arguments of a book are based so that the strength of the arguments can
be gauged. When you look at the contents page, you would have an
indication of the subject matters discussed in the book. The preface of
the book needs to be read so that the purpose of the book can be
understood. After this, one needs to read the book from its first page
to its last which is the way it has been written.

It is only after having done all this that one achieves the purpose of
reading the book and gets to be in a position to either refute or accept
what has been said in the book. Reading a book from the middle or from
its various parts haphazardly only leads to confusion and
misunderstanding. This is the manner of reading of those whose intention
is not to read the book but to pick up bits and pieces of information
from it so that he can debate against people of low intellect and show
off their intelligence within their circle of friends.

I have conviction that my readers are those that will read this book in
a manner that will give them the true and complete knowledge of it.


