CHAPTER 9: CLAIMS
=================

There has never been a period in history where somebody or other has not
declared himself to be God; and there has never been a shortage of
people who not only believed in him but have actually done the
propagation of this belief. And then there were those that worshipped
him as such.

Some people declared themselves as prophets and people followed them and
created a religion out of this. Some people declared themselves as Imams
and people created their own sects out of this. And some people made
claim on Wilayah (Mastership) and people started begging for their
desires to be fulfilled by him.

If you were to survey all these people who made these claims you will
notice the common denominator which is worldly profit. But, it is a fact
that making a claim and following the claimant and creating a new group
out of it cannot be proven by proofs or logic or by virtue of principles
to be based on truth. What I mean to say is that you cannot say that
just because someone makes a claim and huge multitudes of people have
gathered around him, therefore it is the truth. The majority is never
the proof of truth, but the proof of truth is truth itself, and the
claim is dependent upon proofs. Belief in a person’s claim does not
prove it to be correct. Therefore, every claim needs proof and every
proof is subject to a measure of evaluation. For example if someone were
to make a claim in poetry, then it will be evaluated in the background
of the rules of poems. If someone were to make a scientific claim then
it will be evaluated according to the rules of science. And in the same
way if a person were to make a claim about religion then it should also
be evaluated according to the principles of religion. Accepting
somebody’s claim based on rumours is stupidity and does not befit the
honour of a human being. Allah (s.w.t.) has compared these kinds of
people to four-footed animals.

WHAT IS NECESSARY TO MAKE A CLAIM
---------------------------------

It has not been left up to the people to determine the status of a
claimant, otherwise every other person would make some sort of a claim,
and there is not a shortage of stupid people who would fall for these
false claims. There may also come a time when there would only be
claimants in this world and no followers. And so, we first have to
decide as to who has the right to make a claim. In order to eliminate
this problem, Allah (s.w.t.) has given us the decision in this manner:

<p dir="rtl">
وَرَبُّكَ يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاء وَيَخْتَارُ مَا كَانَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ
سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 28:68] And your Lord creates and chooses whom He pleases; to
choose is not theirs; glory be to Allah, and exalted be He above what
they associate (with Him).

This verse has decisively stated that people have no right to chose or
make their own claims. This right belongs to Allah (s.w.t.) and whoever
does this then he would be committing ‘Shirk’ (Polytheism). If someone
were to make a claim then we will have to see whether he has got the
divine authorisation in order to do so. If he does, then we will bow
down our heads and accept his claim even if no one else does, but, if he
does not, then we will reject him even if the whole world were to accept
him. If you were to browse through the Holy Quran you will see that
whenever Allah (s.w.t.) chose a Prophet, then He (s.a.w.) did not
whisper it into his ears, rather he was told to make a general
announcement of it.

Let us now look at some verses.

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ لَيْسَتِ النَّصَارَى عَلَىَ شَيْءٍ وَقَالَتِ
النَّصَارَى لَيْسَتِ الْيَهُودُ عَلَى شَيْءٍ وَهُمْ يَتْلُونَ الْكِتَابَ
كَذَلِكَ قَالَ الَّذِينَ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ مِثْلَ قَوْلِهِمْ فَاللّهُ
يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُواْ فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:113] And the Jews say: The Christians do not follow anything
(good) and the Christians say: The Jews do not follow anything (good)
while they recite the (same) Book. Even thus say those who have no
knowledge, like to what they say; so Allah shall judge between them on
the day of resurrection in what they differ.

<p dir="rtl">
لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَأَنزَلْنَا مَعَهُمُ
الْكِتَابَ وَالْمِيزَانَ لِيَقُومَ النَّاسُ بِالْقِسْطِ وَأَنزَلْنَا
الْحَدِيدَ فِيهِ بَأْسٌ شَدِيدٌ وَمَنَافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ وَلِيَعْلَمَ
اللَّهُ مَن يَنصُرُهُ وَرُسُلَهُ بِالْغَيْبِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَوِيٌّ
عَزِيزٌ
</p>

[Shakir 57:25] Certainly We sent Our messengers with clear arguments,
and sent down with them the Book and the balance that men may conduct
themselves with equity; and We have made the iron, wherein is great
violence and advantages to men, and that Allah may know who helps Him
and His messengers in the secret; surely Allah is Strong, Mighty.

This means that whenever Allah (s.w.t.) sent someone then it was
accompanied with clear proofs and arguments. When someone was sent as a
‘Wali’ (Master) then:

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 5:55] Only Allah is your Vali and His Messenger and those who
believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow.

And if He (s.w.t.) wanted someone to be obeyed then:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُواْ
الرَّسُولَ وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنكُمْ فَإِن تَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي شَيْءٍ
فَرُدُّوهُ إِلَى اللّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ إِن كُنتُمْ تُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللّهِ
وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَحْسَنُ تَأْوِيلاً
</p>

[Shakir 4:59] O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Messenger and
those in authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything,
refer it to Allah and the Messenger, if you believe in Allah and the
last day; this is better and very good in the end

All this initial groundwork has been laid so that it would become easier
to understand the claims that have been made by the jurists; claims that
have been accepted by a great multitude of people. Those who do not
accept their claims have either been declared faithless or irreligious.
There is a long list of these claims which they keep making time and
again, and this list is getting longer by the day. I shall discuss some
of these claims in the light of the guidance from the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) so that no blame shall rest on me.

Their claims can be divided into two categories - claim to their titles
and claim to their status.  Before I discuss this in detail, let me
clarify one point.

There are some words which have two meanings - one linguistic and one
allegorical. For example the Arabic word ‘Dharb’ has a linguistic
meaning which is to ‘hit’. But, when it comes to mathematics it is used
to mean ‘multiplication’. The Sufis actually use it to mean their chants
of ‘Allah Hu, Allah Hu’. In the same way the Holy Quran has also used
certain words in two meanings. The words that have been used in the Holy
Quran in its linguistic meanings, we can also only use them in the same
manner. For example, the word ‘Rasool’ (Messenger). This word has been
used for Prophets, ordinary people, angels and even for a crow.
Therefore we can use this word in its linguistic form. In Arab countries
this is also used for someone who brings you news.

There are some words that the Holy Quran has not used in its linguistic
for but in its allegorical meaning, and so whenever we use this word in
religious affairs it will be used in this manner. No one has the
audacity to use it differently. For example the linguistic meaning of
the word ‘Nabi’ is ‘one who gives news’. Now if you were to take into
the account the radio presenters, T.V. newscasters, newspapers etc. are
all giving us news and in fact we also give each other lots of news.
But, is there anyone who has the courage to call himself a ‘Nabi’? Of
course not! This is because the Holy Quran has already used this word to
denote a news carrier to humanity, and so no one can use it in its
linguistic form.

Let me now discuss the claims that the Jurists have made to the titles
of the Holy Infallibles.

HUJJAT UL ISLAM (PROOF OF ISLAM)
--------------------------------

This word is being used for every Mujtahid, and if you do not use this
word before his name then he considers it to be an insult. Let us now
look at this great word which is being used for people who are erroneous
and prone to error. Hujjat means proof. When this word is used for
someone then it means that that person is proof of Islam from head to
toe. Meaning, that his person is sufficient to prove Islam as the
religion of truth. By looking at him, at his blessed face, listening to
his speech, his actions, and his character, the truth of Islam would
dawn upon the people. There would be no need to provide any intellectual
argument or proofs. If you were to now use your common sense a little
bit you will realise the gravity of the situation when someone uses this
title for himself as the whole of the building of religion is based on
this foundation and would eventually collapse if the claim is false.

Forget about the other Sects. The Shiite Sect itself would be
invalidated as it is based on the concept of the infallibility of its
Holy Imams (a.s.). There can be no room for suspicion and doubt about
it. According to our belief the religion of Allah (s.w.t.) is infallible
and He (s.w.t.) Himself has (s.w.t.) made it. There is no room for
mistakes, errors or forgetfulness, and those that believe in this are
attributing these to Allah (s.w.t.). This religion is on such a level of
infallibility that Allah (s.w.t.) did not let even a shadow of a normal
person to fall on it. The religion was sent down by Allah (s.w.t.) who
is pure from any deficiencies. The Archangel that carried the Message
was himself trustworthy and beyond errors. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) who
was the recipient was also an infallible person. Those that were handed
over this religion and became the inheritors of it, and were made
responsible for it explanations were all infallibles. This religion is
so infallible that Allah (s.w.t.) has not left any room for a non
infallible in it. Now that has become established that Islam is
infallible and complete, then, the proof of this can only be an
infallible and not a normal person. The proof of a complete can only be
a complete, and not incomplete. If a normal person were to be regarded
as proof of Islam then all his deficiencies will have to be regarded as
the deficiencies of Islam, and in this way the whole religion would
become unreliable. The person who is accepted as the proof of Islam
would then be regarded as one who is above any mistakes or disagreements
for this is the way of the people from day one. If you were now to
reflect upon my points then you will see that it does not befit any
ordinary person to make the claim to the proof of Islam.

AYATULLAH (SIGN OF ALLAH (S.W.T.))
----------------------------------

The word Ayatullah is such a glorious word in the Holy Quran that the
perception of its glory cannot be imagined. This is not merely a
viewpoint, but I will produce evidence for it. A man of limited
knowledge like myself has extracted fifty six verses of the Holy Quran
where the term Ayatullah has been used. Wherever the term Ayatullah has
been used, it has been immediately followed by a  judgement from Allah
(s.w.t.) that whoever rejects, falsifies, does not place his faith in
them, mocks them, is unaware of them, turns his face away from them, or
fights against them has been referred to as either an unbeliever, a
hypocrite, person of Hell, one on whom is Divine Wrath, sinner, one
whose deeds have been confiscated, unjust, the most unjust, blind, deaf,
dumb, mischief maker, criminal, a drowned person, one without posterity,
dog, accursed, loss maker, evil doer or unthankful.

I have tried in this whole book of mine to be concise, but this is such
an important issue that I have to quote at least eighteen Verses out of
fifty six so that you can understand what an Ayatullah actually is. Then
I shall show you from the Hadeeth what is meant by an Ayatullah. Firstly
you should seek refuge in Allah (s.w.t.) from Satan the accursed, only
then you should go through the Verses.

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرواْ وَكَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا أُولَـئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:39] And (as to) those who disbelieve in and reject My
communications, they are the inmates of the fire, in it they shall
abide.

<p dir="rtl">
وَبَآؤُوْاْ بِغَضَبٍ مِّنَ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ
يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ النَّبِيِّينَ بِغَيْرِ
الْحَقِّ ذَلِكَ بِمَا عَصَواْ وَّكَانُواْ يَعْتَدُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:61] And abasement and humiliation were brought down upon them,
and they became deserving of Allah's wrath; this was so because they
disbelieved in the communications of Allah and killed the prophets
unjustly; this was so because they disobeyed and exceeded the limits.

<p dir="rtl">
مِن قَبْلُ هُدًى لِّلنَّاسِ وَأَنزَلَ الْفُرْقَانَ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُواْ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ وَاللّهُ عَزِيزٌ ذُو
انتِقَامٍ
</p>

[Shakir 3:4] Surely they who disbelieve in the communications of Allah
they shall have a severe chastisement; and Allah is Mighty, the Lord of
retribution.

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ النَّبِيِّينَ
بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ وَيَقْتُلُونَ الِّذِينَ يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْقِسْطِ مِنَ
النَّاسِ فَبَشِّرْهُم بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
</p>

[Shakir 3:21] Surely (as for) those who disbelieve in the communications
of Allah and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those among men who
enjoin justice, announce to them a painful chastisement.

<p dir="rtl">
أُولَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ
وَمَا لَهُم مِّن نَّاصِرِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 3:22] Those are they whose works shall become null in this world
as well as the hereafter, and they shall have no helpers

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا صُمٌّ وَبُكْمٌ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ مَن
يَشَإِ اللّهُ يُضْلِلْهُ وَمَن يَشَأْ يَجْعَلْهُ عَلَى صِرَاطٍ
مُّسْتَقِيمٍ
</p>

[Shakir 6:39] And they who reject our communications are deaf and dumb,
in utter darkness; whom Allah pleases He causes to err and whom He
pleases He puts on the right way.

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا يَمَسُّهُمُ الْعَذَابُ بِمَا كَانُواْ
يَفْسُقُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 6:49] And (as for) those who reject Our communications,
chastisement shall afflict them because they transgressed.

<p dir="rtl">
أَوْ تَقُولُواْ لَوْ أَنَّا أُنزِلَ عَلَيْنَا الْكِتَابُ لَكُنَّا
أَهْدَى مِنْهُمْ فَقَدْ جَاءكُم بَيِّنَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَهُدًى
وَرَحْمَةٌ فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّن كَذَّبَ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ وَصَدَفَ
عَنْهَا سَنَجْزِي الَّذِينَ يَصْدِفُونَ عَنْ آيَاتِنَا سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ
بِمَا كَانُواْ يَصْدِفُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 6:157] Or lest you should say: If the Book had been revealed to
us, we would certainly have been better guided than they, so indeed
there has come to you clear proof from your Lord, and guidance and
mercy. Who then is more unjust than he who rejects Allah's
communications and turns away from them? We will reward those who turn
away from our communications with an evil chastisement because they
turned away.

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا وَاسْتَكْبَرُواْ عَنْهَا لاَ
تُفَتَّحُ لَهُمْ أَبْوَابُ السَّمَاء وَلاَ يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ حَتَّى
يَلِجَ الْجَمَلُ فِي سَمِّ الْخِيَاطِ وَكَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي الْمُجْرِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 7:40] Surely (as for) those who reject our communications and
turn away from them haughtily, the doors of heaven shall not be opened
for them, nor shall they enter the garden until the camel pass through
the eye of the needle; and thus do We reward the guilty.

<p dir="rtl">
فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَنجَيْنَاهُ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ
وَأَغْرَقْنَا الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا إِنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ
قَوْماً عَمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 7:64] But they called him a liar, so We delivered him and those
with him in the ark, and We drowned those who rejected our
communications; surely they were a blind people.

<p dir="rtl">
فَأَنجَيْنَاهُ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ بِرَحْمَةٍ مِّنَّا وَقَطَعْنَا دَابِرَ
الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ بِآيَاتِنَا وَمَا كَانُواْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 7:72] So We delivered him and those with him by mercy from Us,
and We cut off the last of those who rejected our communications and
were not believers.

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا لَمْ تَأْتِهِم بِآيَةٍ قَالُواْ لَوْلاَ اجْتَبَيْتَهَا قُلْ
إِنَّمَا أَتَّبِعُ مَا يِوحَى إِلَيَّ مِن رَّبِّي هَـذَا بَصَآئِرُ مِن
رَّبِّكُمْ وَهُدًى وَرَحْمَةٌ لِّقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 7:203] And when you bring them not a revelation they say: Why do
you not forge it? Say: I only follow what is revealed to me from my
Lord; these are clear proofs from your Lord and a guidance and a mercy
for a people who believe.

<p dir="rtl">
فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللّهِ كَذِبًا أَوْ كَذَّبَ
بِآيَاتِهِ إِنَّهُ لاَ يُفْلِحُ الْمُجْرِمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 10:17] Who is then more unjust than who forges a lie against
Allah or (who) gives the lie to His communications? Surely the guilty
shall not be successful.

<p dir="rtl">
وَتِلْكَ عَادٌ جَحَدُواْ بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَعَصَوْاْ رُسُلَهُ
وَاتَّبَعُواْ أَمْرَ كُلِّ جَبَّارٍ عَنِيدٍ
</p>

[Shakir 11:59] And this was Ad; they denied the communications of their
Lord, and disobeyed His messengers and followed the bidding of every
insolent opposer (of truth).

<p dir="rtl">
وَأُتْبِعُواْ فِي هَـذِهِ الدُّنْيَا لَعْنَةً وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَلا
إِنَّ عَادًا كَفَرُواْ رَبَّهُمْ أَلاَ بُعْدًا لِّعَادٍ قَوْمِ هُودٍ
</p>

[Shakir 11:60] And they were overtaken by curse in this world and on the
resurrection day; now surely Ad disbelieved in their Lord; now surely,
away with Ad, the people of Hud.

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ رَبِّ لِمَ حَشَرْتَنِي أَعْمَى وَقَدْ كُنتُ بَصِيرًا
</p>

[Shakir 20:125] He shall say: My Lord! Why hast Thou raised me blind and
I was a seeing one indeed?

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ كَذَلِكَ أَتَتْكَ آيَاتُنَا فَنَسِيتَهَا وَكَذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ
تُنسَى
</p>

[Shakir 20:126] He will say: Even so, our communications came to you but
you neglected them; even thus shall you be forsaken this day.

<p dir="rtl">
وَكَذَلِكَ نَجْزِي مَنْ أَسْرَفَ وَلَمْ يُؤْمِن بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِ
وَلَعَذَابُ الْآخِرَةِ أَشَدُّ وَأَبْقَى
</p>

[Shakir 20:127] And thus do We recompense him who is extravagant and
does not believe in the communications of his Lord, and certainly the
chastisement of the hereafter is severer and more lasting.

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا غَشِيَهُم مَّوْجٌ كَالظُّلَلِ دَعَوُا اللَّهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ
الدِّينَ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاهُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ فَمِنْهُم مُّقْتَصِدٌ وَمَا
يَجْحَدُ بِآيَاتِنَا إِلَّا كُلُّ خَتَّارٍ كَفُورٍ
</p>

[Shakir 31:32] And when a wave like mountains covers them they call upon
Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience, but when He brings them safe
to the land, some of them follow the middle course; and none denies Our
signs but every perfidious, ungrateful one.

<p dir="rtl">
لَهُ مَقَالِيدُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآيَاتِ
اللَّهِ أُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 39:63] His are the treasures of the heavens and the earth; and
(as for) those who disbelieve in the communications of Allah, these it
is that are the losers.

You have now seen the verses about the Ayatullahs and the Fatwas of
Allah (s.w.t.) that has been issued to those that reject them. Can now
someone please tell me whether there is any one on the face of this
earth who can make the claim that if anyone were to oppose him or
falsify him would become an unbeliever? As well as deserving of all the
other divine verdicts issued against him? And if there is no one who can
make this claim also cannot make the claim of being an Ayatullah, then
he is opposing Allah (s.w.t.).

Let us look at this from another angle. Say there are two Mujtahids who
call themselves Ayatullahs. One of them has declared something
permissible while the other one has made it forbidden. Can you now tell
me whether they are verifying each other or falsifying each other? You
will have to admit that they are actually falsifying each other. And
they are both Ayatullahs. And you have seen above the result of the one
who falsifies or opposes an Ayatullah. Don’t these two people come under
the divine verdicts? The amusing part is that not only have they claimed
to be Ayatullahs, but they have gone further to claim to be Ayatullah
Uzmas (Grand Ayatullahs) and Ayatullah Kubra (Great Ayaatullah). Now
what can I say about that?

I think it would be appropriate here if I were to explain what the
Ayatullah Kubra is, the Great Sign of Allah (s.w.t.).

In order to understand this you will have to understand the Me’raj
(Night Ascension) of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). This is part of
religious beliefs which according to the Holy Imams (a.s.), anyone who
does not believe in the physical ascension of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
is an unbeliever. Me’raj denotes somebody’s high status. Now understand
that the pinnacle of the status of one hundred and twenty three thousand
nine hundred and ninety nine Prophets is the station of the seal of the
Prophets (s.a.w.). Now let us see what the pinnacle of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) is, and the story of Me’raj that we refer to, what it actually
is and what its actual purpose was. For this I present to you thirteen
Verses of the Holy Quran.

<p dir="rtl">
سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَى بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلاً مِّنَ الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ إِلَى الْمَسْجِدِ الأَقْصَى الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ
لِنُرِيَهُ مِنْ آيَاتِنَا إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ البَصِيرُ
</p>

[Shakir 17:1] Glory be to Him Who made His servant to go on a night from
the Sacred Mosque to the remote mosque of which We have blessed the
precincts, so that We may show to him some of Our signs; surely He is
the Hearing, the Seeing.

<p dir="rtl">
وَهُوَ بِالْأُفُقِ الْأَعْلَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:7] And he is in the highest part of the horizon.

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ دَنَا فَتَدَلَّى
</p>

[Shakir 53:8] Then he drew near, then he bowed

<p dir="rtl">
فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:9] So he was the measure of two bows or closer still.

<p dir="rtl">
فَأَوْحَى إِلَى عَبْدِهِ مَا أَوْحَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:10] And He revealed to His servant what He revealed.

<p dir="rtl">
مَا كَذَبَ الْفُؤَادُ مَا رَأَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:11] The heart was not untrue in (making him see) what he saw.

<p dir="rtl">
أَفَتُمَارُونَهُ عَلَى مَا يَرَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:12] What! do you then dispute with him as to what he saw?

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَقَدْ رَآهُ نَزْلَةً أُخْرَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:13] And certainly he saw him in another descent,

<p dir="rtl">
عِندَ سِدْرَةِ الْمُنْتَهَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:14] At the farthest lote-tree;

<p dir="rtl">
عِندَهَا جَنَّةُ الْمَأْوَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:15] Near which is the garden, the place to be resorted to.

<p dir="rtl">
إِذْ يَغْشَى السِّدْرَةَ مَا يَغْشَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:16] When that which covers covered the lote-tree;

<p dir="rtl">
مَا زَاغَ الْبَصَرُ وَمَا طَغَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:17] The eye did not turn aside, nor did it exceed the limit.

<p dir="rtl">
لَقَدْ رَأَى مِنْ آيَاتِ رَبِّهِ الْكُبْرَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:18] Certainly he saw of the greatest signs of his Lord.

The claimants should have the fear of Allah (s.w.t.). And if they do
not, then at least my readers should fear the divine wrath. Was there
anyone sitting there wearing a turban and a cloak that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) went to see?  If you are curious to find out who or what this
Ayatullah Kubra was then don’t use your imagination, but ask those that
know.

#### AL KAFI - H 528, Ch. 18, h1

####

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu’alla ibn Muhammad from Ahmad
ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Abd Allah from Ahmad ibn Hilal from ’Umayya ibn Ali
from Dawud al-Riqqi who has said the following: “Once, I asked abu ‘Abd
Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, about the meaning of the
words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, ‘The signs and warnings
are of no avail to the disbelieving people.’ (10:101) The Imam said,
‘Signs are ‘A’immah, and warnings are the Prophets, recipient of divine
supreme covenant. ’”

#### AL KAFI - H 529, Ch. 18, h2

####

Ahmad ibn Mahran has narrated from 'Abd al-'Azim ibn ‘Abd Allah
al-Hassani from Musa ibn Muhammad al-‘Ijli from Yunus ibn Ya‘qub in a
marfu‘ manner from abu Ja'far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who
has said the following: “In the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, ‘However, they rejected all Our signs. . .’ (54:42) ‘The signs’
are all the successors (of the Prophets, recipient of divine supreme
covenant).’”

#### AL KAFI - H 530, Ch. 18, h3

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn abu ‘Umayr or someone other than him from Muhammad ibn al-Fudayl
from abu Hamza who has said the following: “Once I said to abu Ja'far,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, ‘May Allah keep my soul in service
for your cause, the Shi‘a (your followers) ask about the meaning of the
words of Allah, ‘Of what do they ask one another? (78:1). Do they ask
about the great news?’ The Imam, recipient of divine supreme covenant,
said, ‘It is up to my decision. I may tell them or may not tell them.’
Then he said: ‘I want, however, to tell you the meaning thereof.’ I then
asked what is the meaning of, ‘Of what do they ask one another?’ The
Imam said, ‘It refers to (Amir al- Mu’minin) Ali, recipient of divine
supreme covenant. (Amir al- Mu’minin) Ali would often say, “None of the
signs of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, is bigger than I and none
of the news of Allah is greater than I.’”

The claimants know that from among their followers are many of those
that read the Holy Quran. They may also be keeping an eye on some
commentaries as well. And so they say that they are not using this term
in the same manner that is being used in the Holy Quran, rather they are
using it to denote a degree of achievement. Meaning that when one
ascends to a certain degree of religious education then he becomes an
Ayatullah. This explanation of theirs is even amusing than their claim.

First of all, I have already explained before that when the Holy Quran
uses a term in a particular form then that is the form it is to be used
in. Secondly, if their logic were to be accepted then religion would
become a laughing stock. This is like a big Mullah were to open a
Madressa and allocates his degrees in this manner:

1.Whoever completes the first level his title would be ‘Muslim’.

2.After completion of the second level he becomes ‘Pious’.

3.After the third - ‘Believer’.

4.Fourth - ‘Prophet’.

5.Fifth - Seal of the Prophets.

6.Sixth - ‘Imam’.

7.Seventh - ‘Wali’.

8.Eighth - ‘Allah’.

Now, if this Mullah were to tell you that these degree names are not in
the same meaning as they are being used in the Holy Quran, but in
another meaning, will you accept these degrees with these names? And if
you will not, then how can you accept the degrees of ‘Ayatullah’,
‘Ayatul Uzma’ and ‘Ayatul Kubra’? In reality this is a mockery of the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and the Holy Quran.

<p dir="rtl">
وَقِيلَ الْيَوْمَ نَنسَاكُمْ كَمَا نَسِيتُمْ لِقَاء يَوْمِكُمْ هَذَا
وَمَأْوَاكُمْ النَّارُ وَمَا لَكُم مِّن نَّاصِرِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 45:34] And it shall be said: Today We forsake you as you
neglected the meeting of this day of yours and your abode is the fire,
and there are not for you any helpers:

<p dir="rtl">
ذَلِكُم بِأَنَّكُمُ اتَّخَذْتُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ هُزُوًا وَغَرَّتْكُمُ
الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا فَالْيَوْمَ لَا يُخْرَجُونَ مِنْهَا وَلَا هُمْ
يُسْتَعْتَبُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 45:35] That is because you took the communications of Allah for
a jest and the life of this world deceived you. So on that day they
shall not be brought forth from it, nor shall they be granted goodwill.

In Tafseer Safi and Tafseer Qummi, this has been explained in this
manner: ‘The ‘Ayaat of Allah’ in this Verse is a reference to the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and those that mocked them will be told that these
are the ones you used to falsify and mock’.

The reality is that these claims of theirs to the titles of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and showing arrogance in opposition to them (a.s.) is
to try and equate to them. No one from the olden times up until recently
has ever used these titles or even plucked up the courage for it. Sheykh
Mufeed and Sheykh Tusi that they revere so much remained as just
Sheykhs, whilst they have become Hujjatullah, Ayatullah and I don’t know
what else. We have to see where this innovation came from. This title of
Ayatullah was first used by Mullah Muhammad Qasim Nanotovi the founder
of the Madressa of the Deobandis.

We have no complaints about him as he does not believe in either the
Ayatullahs (a.s.) of Hujjatullahs (a.s.). The strange part is that our
people thought: ‘Why should we be left behind the Deobandis.  Why not
attach some wings to our turbans as well’. And this is where this
mischief started from. Allah (s.w.t.) is the One Who knows what the
intentions were and I do not wish to say more about this. Anyhow, their
attempts to equate themselves to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) has been
proven. I am only inviting you to ponder over this. If you can, then
well and good otherwise let this car run as it is and worry about the
hereafter later on.

After having discussed the claims against the titles, I now turn my
attention to the claims against the status of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.).

NA’IB E IMAM (REPRESENTATIVE OF THE IMAM)
-----------------------------------------

Earlier on I had explained that this term was used to denote the four
representatives of the Twelfth Holy Imam (a.s.) centuries later so that
it would be easier to use this term for themselves. All the Holy Imams
(a.s.) from the first Holy Imam (a.s.) to the eleventh Holy Imam (a.s.)
had their own representatives in different areas but they have never
used this title for themselves. What was the reason for labelling these
four as such when they themselves never used this title nor did anyone
else ever used it for them during their time and there is no reference
for this in history books.

Yes, the only one who claimed to be the representative was Shamalghani,
who was immediately reprimanded by way of a letter in the Holy Nahiya.
The Shiites then used to go in front of his house and send curses upon
him. He is being referred to as the accursed one even today. (Maybe the
Shiites of that time comprehended the weight of this title). There is
only one reason comes to the fore as to why this label was stuck to the
four representatives, and that is to profit from it during the time of
occultation so that a parallel system of rule can be established. They
then classified the four as special representatives and themselves as
general representatives. But this is an invalid act as the special
representation has yet to be proven and so how can you prove general
representation. Even if the special representation is somehow proven,
that still does not prove their general representation because:-

1.None of the four representatives were mujtahids which these people
have now become.

2.None of these ever used the weapon invented by the sunnis (Usool E
Fiqh) in order to refute the hadeeth of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

3.None of them has ever issued a fatwa.

4.None of them had ever considered the people to be ignorant, placed a
collar of taqleed on their necks, published any of their tawzeehs, or
created their own respective group of emulators.

5.None of them tried to equate themselves with the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.).

6.None of them ever played the drum that: ‘Without their taqleed none of
your deeds are acceptable’.

7.All of them were just contact points between the people and the Holy
Imam (a.s.). Their job was just to take questions to the Holy Imam
(a.s.) and bring back the answers from him (a.s.).

8.The system of representation was ended by the Holy Imam (a.s.) is his
last letter to the fourth of them which has been recorded in Bihar Ul
Anwaar.

‘In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. You are going to
die in six days, may Allah grant patience to your brother’s in faith on
your departure. So, be prepared, but appoint no one in your place,
because from the day of your death the period of my major occultation
(Ghaibat e Kubra) will begin. Hence forth, no one will see me, unless
and until Allah (s.w.t.) makes me appear. My reappearance will take
place after a very long time when people will have grown tired of
waiting and those who are weak in there faith will say: What! Is he
still alive? When will men become cruel and inconsiderate, and the world
will be full of injustice and violence. Very soon some men will claim to
have seen me. Beware! Anyone who makes such a claim before the coming
out of Sufyani and the sound from heaven announcing my reappearance, is
a liar and imposter. There is no Might nor Strength except in Allah’.

In this letter, the Holy Imam (a.s.) has advised him to wrap up his
affairs and not to appoint anyone else. This proves two things. The
appointee is of the appointer and not of the Holy Imam (a.s.) and his
appointment is also made by the representative and not the Holy Imam
(a.s.). The Holy Imam (a.s.) put an end to this chain of contact points
once and for all did not differentiate between the special and the
general representatives nor did he say that, if,  from now on anyone
wearing a turban on his head were to come to you then you should accept
him. He also said that from now on if anyone claims to have seen me is a
liar and an imposter. Therefore, today, if someone makes the claim that
the Holy Imam (a.s.) comes to him and explains the solutions to the
problems has surely forged a lie against the Holy Imam (a.s.). How can
it be when there is no contact.

The main reason for making the claim of being the Holy Imam (a.s.)’s
representative is so that all his (a.s.) affairs should get transferred
unto him and no one would be able to challenge him as the Holy Imam
(a.s.) will no longer be reprimanding him by way of a letter. People
should consider their orders to be the orders of the Holy Imams (a.s.).
Since, without being in the Taqleed of the Holy Imams (a.s.) none of our
deeds are acceptable, the same is the case for them as they now
represent him. They are now handling the affairs of religion and there
is no real need for the Holy Imam (a.s.) to be here. And now if he
(a.s.) were not to make his (a.s.) appearance then there is no problem
as all the affairs are taken care of. Why should we not wait for his
(a.s.) reappearance? After all, he (a.s.) will only indulge in killing.
They are doing the same and a large portion of the budget has been
allocated for weaponry even if the general populace remains hungry and
unclothed.

IMAM
----

My ears perked up the day I heard that they had started claiming to be
the Ayatullah Kubra (Great Sign of Allah) and I thought, surely now the
Naib E Imam is going to get promoted. I was right because soon after,
the cry of ‘Imam - Imam’ was heard everywhere. Radio, T.V., Newspapers
and even the organisations under them were all at it. All their efforts
were diverted to ensure that those Shiites who had not even thought that
Imams could be more than twelve and that an ordinary person could also
be called an Imam, should somehow be made to swallow this. As Hitler had
said before, ‘Tell lies consistently so that it would become the truth’;
they managed to do this. At first some people were reluctant to accept
it but now they have no problems with it as they have been told that
this term is being used in its linguistic form and not in the form used
by the Holy Quran. I have dealt with this lame excuse before. They did
have recourse to other words in their language, for instance, leader,
representative, guide etc. But they decided not to use any of them and
to take the word ‘Imam’ from the Arabic language which itself proves the
invalidity of their argument. It has been proven that this word is being
used in its real meaning, the same meaning that the Holy Quran has made
us of it. I have already established that if the Holy Quran were to us a
word in a particular form then no one else has the right to use it in a
different form. Therefore there is no way out but to accept that this
word is being used in the same form that it has been used in the Holy
Quran.

This is not an ordinary word that we can conclude the discussion
superficially. We shall now see what is the verdict for these kinds of
people from the Holy Quran and the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) so that this
non-serious behaviour can be terminated. For God’s sake! Think about the
seriousness of the situation. We do not call them Imam (a.s.) out of
love for them. We do so because our gathering will take place behind the
Imam (a.s.) on the day of judgement, whichever meaning that we use it
in.

One day Imam Ali (a.s.) was with some people, when eight of them asked
to leave as they had something urgent to do. They agreed to meet him
(a.s.) again on Friday. When they walked away they saw a crow and they
jokingly said to each other, ‘Let us pay allegiance to this hedgehog’.
So they caught it and placed their hands on it as a symbol of allegiance
and then they let it go. When they went to the Mosque on Friday, Imam
Ali (a.s.) was delivering a speech in which he (a.s.) was explaining the
verse:

<p dir="rtl">
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ فَمَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ
بِيَمِينِهِ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ يَقْرَؤُونَ كِتَابَهُمْ وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ
فَتِيلاً
</p>

[Shakir 17:71] (Remember) the day when We will call every people with
their Imam; then whoever is given his book in his right hand, these
shall read their book; and they shall not be dealt with a whit unjustly.

When he (a.s.) saw them he stopped and said: ‘I am currently looking at
eight people who will be called on the Day of Judgment with a hedgehog
as that is their Imam’.

Now stop worrying about ‘this meaning’ and ‘that meaning’. Let us ask
the Holy Quran and the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) about this.

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تَرَى الَّذِينَ كَذَبُواْ عَلَى اللَّهِ وُجُوهُهُم
مُّسْوَدَّةٌ أَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًى لِّلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 39:60] And on the day of resurrection you shall see those who
lied against Allah; their faces shall be blackened. Is there not in hell
an abode for the proud?

#### AL KAFI - H 951, Ch. 85, h 1

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from abu Salam from Sawra ibn kulayb who has said the
following: “Once I asked abu Ja‘far, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, about the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most
Gracious: ‘On the day of judgement you will see the faces of those who
had invented falsehood against Allah blackened. . .’ (39:60) The Imam
said, ‘It refers to those who claim to be the Imam but in fact, are not
the Imam.’ “I then asked, ‘Even if he is of the descendents of Ali,
recipient of divine supreme covenant?’ He replied, ‘Yes, even if he is
of the descendents of Ali, recipient of divine supreme covenant.’ I then
asked, ‘Even if he is of the sons of Ali ibn abu Talib, recipient of
divine supreme covenant?’ He said, ‘Yes, even if he is as such.’”

This is also found in Tafseer Qummi, Tafseer Ayyashi and Tafseer Saafi.

<p dir="rtl">
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَدْعُونَ إِلَى النَّارِ وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
لَا يُنصَرُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 28:41] And we made them Imams who call to the fire, and on the
day of resurrection they shall not be assisted.

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَتْبَعْنَاهُمْ فِي هَذِهِ الدُّنْيَا لَعْنَةً وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
هُم مِّنَ الْمَقْبُوحِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 28:42] And We caused a curse to follow them in this world, and
on the day of resurrection they shall be of those made to appear
hideous.

#### AL KAFI - H 562, Ch. 25, h2

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn
al-Husayn from Muhammad ibn Yahya from Talha ibn Zayd from abu ‘Abd
Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following:
“‘A’immah mentioned in the book of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High,
are of two kinds. Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High has said, (1) ‘We
appointed them as ‘A’immah (leaders) to guide the people through Our
command . .’ (21:73) They do so but not because of the commands of the
people. They allow Our command to come first and before their own
orders, and Our laws before their own laws and judgment. (2) Allah has
also said, ‘We made them the kinds of Imams (leaders) who invite people
to the fire . .’ (28:41) They (this kind of Imam) make their own
commands to come before the commands of Allah and their laws before the
laws of Allah. They follow their desires against what the book of Allah,
the Most Holy, and the Most High, requires.’”

For more details on this kindly refer back to the chapter on ‘Usool E
Fiqh’ under the heading of ‘Ijma’.

Some easy conclusions can be drawn from the above: -

1.The Holy Quran has not used the word Imam in its linguistic meaning.

2.In the whole of the Holy Quran only two kinds of Imams are mentioned.
There is no third kind. One kind is that which have been appointed by
Allah (s.w.t.) and guide according to divine commands and do not allow
interference of personal opinions in this. The second kind is that which
have declared themselves as Imams and call people to the Fire. They
consider their own opinions and orders to supersede those of Allah
(s.w.t.). These are that forge lie against Allah (s.w.t.). These are the
arrogant people. On the Day of Judgment their faces will be blackened.
Their place is in Hell whether they be the children of Ali (a.s.) and
Fatima (a.s.).

3.Since there is no third category of Imams, those that claim to be
Imams can only be classified into one of the two. It is meaningless to
claim to be of any other kind. Since the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) until
today, whoever has claimed to be an Imam has done so in the meaning of
being a leader and never has anyone claimed to be Divinely Guided. But
we have still rejected them. How is it possible then we are showing
great respect to those that are making the claims today?

Let us now see what the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have to say about this.

#### AL KAFI - H 952, Ch. 85, h 2

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa
from Ali ibn al-Hakam from Aban from al-Fudayl from abu ‘Abd Allah,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following:
“Whoever claims to be the Imam and, in fact, is not the Imam is
considered an unbeliever.”

#### AL KAFI - H 955, Ch. 85, h 5

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Sinan
from Yahya brother of ’Udaym from al-Walid ibn Sabih who has said the
following: “I heard abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, say, ‘No one, other than the actual Imam, claims this
(Leadership with Divine Authority) except that Allah will cut his life
short.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 966, Ch. 86, h 4

####

He has narrated from Hisham ibn Salim from Habib al-Sajistani from abu
Ja‘far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the
following: “Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, ‘I will cause
to suffer punishment all those (citizens) who live a religious life in
Islam with belief in and acknowledgement of the guardianship of unjust
'A'immah (leaders without Divine Authority) who do not possess authority
from Allah, even though such followers are (apparently) virtuous and
pious in their deeds. I will forgive all those (citizens) who live a
religious life in Islam with belief in and acknowledgement of the
guardianship of an Imam who is just in his dealings and possesses
authority from Allah, even though such followers in their dealings are
unjust sinners.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 956, Ch. 85, h 6

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Hassan from
Muhammad ibn Sinan from Talha ibn Yazid from abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following: “Whoever
considers someone who has no divine authority as a partner in the
leadership of a leader with divine authority, is considered a
polytheist.”

#### AL KAFI - H 962, Ch. 85, h 12

####

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu‘alla ibn Muhammad from abu
Dawud al-Mustariqq from Ali ibn Maymun from ibn abu Ya‘fur who has said
the following: “Once I heard abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, say, ‘There will be three kinds of people to whom Allah will
not look on the Day of Judgment. He will not purify them and they will
suffer painful punishments. They are those who claim to be the Imam but
without authority from Allah, those who reject the Imam (Leader with
divine authority), and those who think that for the ‘two’ there is a
share in Islam.’”

I am convinced that you have now understood the importance of the word
Imam, and also recognised the true nature of the claimants to this
title. This is sufficient for those of you who are serious about your
hereafter. I have no concern with people who have no interest in their
hereafter and are only engrossed in their worldly affairs.

CALIPH OF THE HOLY PROPHET (S.A.W.)
-----------------------------------

There are many matters which most people are unaware of. When someone
makes them aware of these, they find it hard to believe and start
arguing with that person. In this chapter you will come across a few
things which would be difficult for some people to accept. And so I
thought that in order to escape from any blame I should only tell you
things from their own statements rather than my opinion. I will only
quote from well known Mujtahids, especially Agha Khomeini so that there
would be no room for any counter arguments.

It would seem that there is a personality clash between me and my
opponents, but when you look at it carefully you will see that the
difference is on the subject matter and not the person. The Shiite
understanding is that we cannot follow one who is not an infallible. The
others do not have this and so they have left room for other people to
make certain claims. The Shiite Jurists then decided to adopt the
definitions of the others so that they may be able to make room for
themselves to make their claims. One of these is the caliph of the Holy
prophet (s.a.w.). For the Shiites this has always been:-

1.Only an infallible can be the caliph of an infallible.

2.The appointment of a caliph is not for the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) to
appoint, but is done by Allah (s.w.t.).

3.The caliph of a Prophet has to do with guidance and not with
establishment of a government. Governance only forms part of it and you
will see that apart from a few number prophets got to rule, and that did
not mean that they were not caliphs. There is no doubt that the right of
being a leader is in the hands of a caliph of Allah (s.w.t.), but this
cannot be limited just to this task alone.

In opposition to all this the others adopted the following view:-

1.Infallibility is not a pre-condition to be the caliph; being just is
sufficient. (This condition was also set aside later on). In order to be
in agreement with this, they came to regard all the companions to be
just.

2.The caliphate is not from Allah (s.w.t.).

3.The caliphate is for governance and the safeguarding of the affairs of
the Muslims. This then led to the declaration of even a person like
Yazeed to be a caliph.

Let us now see how Agha Khomeini has defined the appointment of the
caliph:

When the Prophet (s) appointed a successor, it was not only for the
purpose of expounding articles of faith and law; it was for the
implementation of law and the execution of God’s ordinances. We believe
in government and believe that the Prophet (s) was bound to appoint a
successor, as he indeed did. Was a successor designated purely for the
sake of expounding law? The expounding of law did not require a
successor to the Prophet. He himself, after all, had expounded the laws;
it would have been enough for the laws to be written down in a book and
put into people’s hands to guide them in their actions. It was logically
necessary for a successor to be appointed for the sake of exercising
government. Law requires a person to execute it.

Did you see how big a blow has been struck on the beliefs of the Shiite
sect? He says that there is no need of a successor to expound the laws
and that it would have been enough for the laws to be written down in a
book, and only to execute it. Do you understand how many blows have been
dealt to the beliefs of the Shiites? The only reason was to pave the way
for himself to make the claims and there would be no objections raised
against it.

He then goes on to say: Here is a narration totally without ambiguity.
The Commander of the Faithful (‘a) relates that the Most Noble Messenger
(s) said: “O God! Have mercy on those that succeed me.” He repeated this
thrice and was then asked: “O Messenger of God, who are those that
succeed you?” He replied: “They are those that come after me, transmit
my traditions and practice, and teach them to the people after me.”

There cannot be the least doubt that the tradition we have been
discussing refers to the governance of the faqih, for to be a successor
means to succeed to all the functions of prophethood.

These are some of the points that come out of the above discussion:

1.Whatever status is for the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and Imam Ali (a.s.)
is the status of the jurists.

2.The caliphate of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) is not restricted to the
Holy Imam (a.s.).

3.It cannot be so that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) would establish his
rule and the Jurists should just explain solutions to the problems.

4.According to his fatwa the Jurist should be the caliph then it follows
that the Holy Imams (a.s.) were also Jurists. Here I would like to
narrate to you the statement of Sheykh Khalsi a Mujtahid who said: ‘In
my view Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) was also a Mujtahid, and Mujtahids
are prone to error’.

Let us now consider what ugliness comes out of this claim.

1.If we were to accept the claim that the caliph of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) is a Jurist, then they would all queue up for it. In every age
there have been thousands of jurists, and according to him they are all
deserving of being caliphs. Therefore in the presence of so many caliphs
at any one time will result in nothing but chaos and mischief.

2.And if they say that by ‘jurists’ they mean only the elite of them,
then sometimes there are six of them.

3.This whole claims falsifies the universally accepted Hadeeth of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) that after him (s.a.w.) there will be twelve
caliphs.

4.This claim also falsifies the Verse:

<p dir="rtl">
سُنَّةَ اللَّهِ فِي الَّذِينَ خَلَوْا مِن قَبْلُ وَلَن تَجِدَ لِسُنَّةِ
اللَّهِ تَبْدِيلًا
</p>

[Shakir 33:62] (Such has been) the course of Allah with respect to those
who have gone before; and you shall not find any change in the course of
Allah.

It is also clearly proven that a caliph of an infallible would be an
infallible person. From the time of Prophet Adam (a.s.) up to the time
of prophet Isa (a.s.) their caliphs have always been infallibles (a.s.).
How is it then possible that the caliph of the Holy prophet (s.a.w.)
would be ordinary people?

BEING FROM ALLAH (S.A.W.) - (MIN JAANIB ALLAH)
----------------------------------------------

Agha khomeini then goes on to say: Now that this much has been
demonstrated, it is necessary that the fuqahâ proceed, collectively or
individually, to establish a government in order to implement the laws
of Islam and protect its territory. If this task falls within the
capabilities of a single person, he has personally incumbent upon him
the duty to fulfill it; otherwise, it is a duty that devolves upon the
fuqahâ as a whole. Even if it is impossible to fulfill the task, the
authority vested in the fuqahâ is not voided, because it has been vested
in them by God.

If you have not understood by the term ‘vested’ then try and understand
it from these Verses:

<p dir="rtl">
فَإِذَا فَرَغْتَ فَانصَبْ
</p>

[Shakir 94:7] So when you are free, nominate.

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِلَى رَبِّكَ فَارْغَبْ
</p>

[Shakir 94:8] And make your Lord your exclusive object.

What he is saying is that the Jurists are nominated in the same way that
the Imam (a.s.) has been nominated. As imamate forms part of the beliefs
of religion then why can’t the Wilayah of Faqih. And so it has been
proven that the Shiite beliefs are incomplete and they need to be
completed and so the Jurist can now establish a government even though
Allah (s.w.t.) may not have authorised it.

TRUSTEE OF ALLAH (S.W.T.)
-------------------------

Agha Khomeini then goes on to present a hadeeth from Man La Yahdhurul
Faqih, which actually goes against what he says and this is: The
Commander of the Faithful (‘a) said to Shurayh: “The seat [of judge] you
are occupying is filled by someone who is a Prophet (‘a), the legatee of
a Prophet, or else a sinful wretch.”

He then uses this Hadeeth to prove his claim and says: It is clear from
the foregoing tradition that the position of judgement may be exercised
only by a prophet (‘a) or by the legatee of a Prophet. No one would
dispute the fact that the function of judge belongs to the just fuqahâ,
in accordance with their appointment by the Imâms (‘a). Considering the
fact that the fuqahâ do not have the rank of prophethood, and they are
indubitably not “wretched sinners,” we conclude that, in the light of
the tradition quoted above, they must be the legatees or successors of
the Most Noble Messenger(s). In any event, we deduce from the tradition
quoted above that the fuqahâ are the legatees, at one remove, of the
Most Noble Messenger (s) and that all the tasks he entrusted to the
Imâms (‘a) are also incumbent on the fuqahâ; all the tasks that
Messenger (s) performed, they too must perform, just as the Commander of
the Faithful (‘a) did.

Have you noticed his proof? You tell me honestly, does this Hadeeth go
in his favour or does it prove his crime? The sentence Considering the
fact that the fuqahâ do not have the rank of Prophethood, and they are
indubitably not “wretched sinners,” we conclude that, in the light of
the tradition quoted above, they must be the legatees or successors of
the Most Noble Messenger (s) involves very strange logic. Even if we
were to accept this logic, then why restrict this to only Jurists? By
this proof whosoever is not “wretched sinners,” would end up being a
trustee of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

PROOF OF ALLAH (S.W.T.) - HUJJAT ALLAH (S.W.T.)
-----------------------------------------------

Agha Khomeini then says: A “proof of God” is one whom God has designated
to conduct affairs; all his deeds, actions, and sayings constitute a
proof for the Muslims.

Today, the fuqahâ of Islam are proof to the people. Just as the Most
Noble Messenger (‘a) was the proof of God---the conduct of all affairs
was entrusted to him so that whoever disobeyed him had a proof advanced
against him---so, too, the fuqahâ are the proof of the Imâm (‘a) to the
people. All the affairs of the Muslims have been entrusted to them. God
will advance a proof and argument against anyone who disobeys them in
anything concerning government, the conduct of Muslim affairs, or the
gathering and expenditure of public funds.

There can be no doubt concerning the meaning of the tradition we have
quoted, although it is possible to have certain reservations about its
chain of transmission. Nonetheless, even if one does regard the
tradition as being in its own right, a proof of the thesis we have
advanced, it serves to support the other proofs we have mentioned.

WILAYAH - WILAYAT E FAQIH
-------------------------

What is Wilayah (Mastership)? What is its standing in religion? Who is
the Wali? What is his authority? All these matters concern beliefs and
God Willing I shall discuss in some other time. Just understand this
much that apart from Wilayah, there is no religion. This is why the Holy
Infallible (a.s.) said ‘Religion is Wilayah’. All our beliefs and all
our actions, all of Allah (s.w.t.)’s Attributes and His Created
universe, whatsoever there is, it is under the Wilayah. This is why
Allah (s.w.t.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
اللّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ يُخْرِجُهُم مِّنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى
النُّوُرِ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَوْلِيَآؤُهُمُ الطَّاغُوتُ
يُخْرِجُونَهُم مِّنَ النُّورِ إِلَى الظُّلُمَاتِ أُوْلَـئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:257] Allah is the guardian of those who believe. He brings
them out of the darkness into the light; and (as to) those who
disbelieve, their guardians are Shaitans who take them out of the light
into the darkness; they are the inmates of the fire, in it they shall
abide.

He (s.w.t.) made sure that no one else can make this claim.

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 5:55] Only Allah is your Vali and His Messenger and those who
believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow.

Even those who are not well versed in Arabic will have understood from
the speakers from the pulpits that the word ‘Innama’ is a word like a
fortress. It does not let the insiders out nor does it let the outsiders
in. This means that ‘those and only those’, when the word is used. So,
for the verse above, the word ‘innama’ has been used to denote only
those that are mentioned to the exclusion of others. It does not matter
how great a scholar comes by, even if he has read mountains of books,
the usage of the word ‘Innama’ has ensured that the door to this claims
remains shut.

The ugly methods that others have used in matters of religion have been
presented to you before. They reduced the status of Prophethood, Imamate
and Wilayah so much that every Tom, Dick and Harry had the courage to
make these claims without feeling any remorse. It was due to the beliefs
of the Shiites being based on infallibility which safeguarded it from
these goings-on. But the love of space and status is a big thing from
which no ordinary person is safe. This desire was subdued among the
people so long as the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) were among them. The
occultation of the Holy Imam (a.s.) gave these type of people an
opportunity to make the claims against his titles.

They could not make that claim to Prophethood for fear of all the people
as this was a very high station among all. This would have shocked the
world. But Imam and Wali, had been degraded so much in the eyes of the
other muslims that any leader could make that claim. The Shiites,
however, had reserved these terms in their hearts for only the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.). After centuries of brain washing, the Shiites were
made to accept these claims from ordinary people, partially at least, if
not fully. Some people did object openly about this, but the
governmental networks and their propaganda machinery subdued them and
slowly over time they came to accept these terms for ordinary people.
This situation has deteriorated to such an extent today that if one of
them was to declare himself to be god then the people would happily
accept this claims, ‘if not in this meaning then the other’.

This is the situation of the term ‘Wali’. Allah (s.w.t.) has used the
word specifically for the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). The jurists however,
in order to further their aims, divided this term into different
categories, of which these two are fundamental.

1.Wilayah Takwini - Authority over everything in the universe.

2.Wilayah Tashri’ee - Authority over the Sharia and its implementation.

Although it is wrong to divide the Wilayah into categories, the meaning
that they derive from Wilayah Tashri’ee is definitely incorrect. I shall
deal with this in my next book.

They could not have possibly made a claim on Wilayah Takwini, otherwise
their followers would have asked them to perform such miracles like
returning the sun, rendering the moon asunder into two pieces, turning a
person into an animal etc. And so they decided to choose for themselves
Wilayah Tashri’ee, the explanation of which they gave themselves to the
people.

And so today, the people have begun using the terms ‘Wali Ul Amr’ and
‘Wali Ul Asr’ for them and still consider themselves to be Shiites.

As time went by, these people started establishing themselves under this
category of Wilayah and slowly but surely started equating themselves
with the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). This was done in such a subtle way
that people did not even realise it. I am now presenting to you some
examples of this so that you can believe in what I am saying. These are
from Agha Khomeini’s book Islamic Government and the Rule of the Jurist.

He says: The idea that the governmental power of the Most Noble
Messenger (s) were greater than those of the Commander of the Faithful
(‘a), or that those of the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) were greater
than those of the faqîh, is false and erroneous.

He had said this in his third speech, and there was a commotion over
this, and so in his next speech he clarified this: ‘It is as if the Imâm
were to appoint someone to the guardianship of a minor, to the
governorship of a province, or to some other post. In cases like these,
it is not reasonable that there would be a difference between the
Prophet and the Imâms (‘a), on the one hand, and the just faqîh, on the
other. Now, the penalty for the fornicator is one hundred lashes. If the
Prophet (s) applies the penalty, is he to inflict one hundred fifty
lashes, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) one hundred, and, the faqîh
fifty? The ruler supervises the executive power and has the duty of
implementing God’s laws; it makes no difference if he is the Most Noble
Messenger (s), the Commander of the Faithful (‘a) or the representative
or judge he appointed to Basrah or Kûfah, or a faqîh in the present
age’.

Have you seen how the concept of Wilayah has been polluted? Anyone who
raises a claim in the name of Islam would end up being in government.
(Just like the family of Al Saud). In this government the police
officer, the deputy commissioner or even a normal magistrate will also
be eligible for Wilayah as they all issue orders. On top of this is the
claim that this is the Wilayah that was given to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) and Imam Ali (a.s.). Even an enemy will not be able to insult
these Holy personalities in this manner. This is something nobody has
observed.

In order to establish their own Wilayah, they have established that the
purpose of Wilayah is the establishment of orders. O servant of God!
This work of the implementation of orders was done by their (a.s.)
servants, governors and judges. Does this now mean that they are equal
in Wilayah to these divine personalities? This incomplete picture of
Wilayah is based on the lack of understanding of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.). The Holy Infallibles (a.s.) were not obedient to the Sharia, but
rather the Sharia was obedient to them (a.s.). What is Sharia? Sharia is
the statements that they made. This is the true and original Sharia. To
equate their authority to that of the magistrate of the deputy
commissioner is to make a mockery of Sharia. This was justified by
saying that if the punishment of fornication is one hundred lashes then
this is what the Jurists will apply, no less no more. They do not have
the authority to even forgive this. Take a look at the two Hadeeth that
I have taken from Illul Sharai in order to understand the truth behind
all this.

Someone asked Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) about his friend’s punishment
who had committed bestiality, and he replied: ‘He should be flogged but
of a reduced number to what is in Sharia’.

You tell me now, has not the Holy Imam (a.s.) reduced the punishment
that is prescribed in the Sharia or not? Has the Jurist got this right?
(It would not surprise me that in the near future this right will be
allocated to the Jurist. These days the general conception is that the
Holy Imam (a.s.) has gone into occultation and it is free for all.
Whoever can take whatever he can and run away with it).

Hamid Ibn Muslim narrates that once he asked the Holy Imam (a.s.) about
a drunkard, and he replied: ‘If he has drunk it by mistake then I issue
reduced punishment for him, but if he is a habitual drunkard then I deal
with him harshly so that he would not permit himself of what is
forbidden’.

Now the punishment for drinking is fixed in Sharia, and according to
this Mujtahid, the Jurist has no right to either increase or decrease
it. Can someone now tell me how is it that the Holy Imam (a.s.) has
issued different penalties on different people?

I presented the two Hadeeth above regarding the reduction of punishment.
I will now present examples from Hadeeth about the increment of
punishment from the same book.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) has narrated that one day Imam Ali (a.s.)
decided about a man who had married another man’s wife that she should
be stoned to death and the man should be lashed. He (a.s.) then turned
towards the man and said that ‘had I known that you had deliberately
married this woman when she was already married to someone else then I
would have crushed your head with a stone’. Can someone tell me whether
the Sharia has prescribed the punishment of adultery to be crushing the
head with a stone?

Musa Bin Bijli has narrated from Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) that Imam
Ali (a.s.) saw a couple in the same house and had them lashed less than
one hundred times. The narrator then asked, ‘Without evidence?’ He
(a.s.) replied, ‘Leave him now, if there was evidence then I would have
issued the complete punishment’.

Has any Jurist got the right to issue punishment without any evidence?

I am now quoting below two Hadeeth from Manaqib Ibn Sher Ashob where the
punishment was withdrawn.

A man who had committed sodomy with his slave was brought to Imam Ali
(a.s.) for punishment. The Holy Imam (a.s.) gave him three options -
death by sword, by fire or by being crushed under a wall. He chose to be
burnt in the fire. He then requested that he be allowed to pray two
cycles of prayer. After praying he raised his head towards the sky and
said: ‘O Allah! I committed one sin and have come to your Wali as a
repentant and I have chosen to be burnt in the fire for it so that you
may forgive me and save me from the fire of Hell’. Imam Ali (a.s.) wept
and so did the people surrounding him. He (a.s.) then said: ‘Go, Allah
(s.w.t.) has forgiven you’. One person asked whether he (a.s.) had
cancelled one of the punishment from the Sharia. He (a.s.) replied: ‘Woe
be to you. When a person repents in front of Allah (s.w.t.) and an Imam
appointed by Allah (s.w.t.), then Allah (s.w.t.) forgives him.

Does anyone have the courage now to cancel any punishment which is in
Sharia? Then where is the equation between the two.

Hatim has narrated from his teacher Ibn Abbas that one day a black man
came to Imam Ali (a.s.) having been accused of theft. The Holy Imam
(a.s.) asked questioned and he accepted his guilt three times. He said:
‘O Ali! I have indeed committed theft, so please cleanse me’. He (a.s.)
ordered that his hand should be cut off. When Ibn Qawa saw him in this
state, he wanted to know who had cut his hand off. In reply to this the
thief started extolling the virtues of Imam Ali (a.s.) and praising him.
Ibn Qawa was surprised at this and said: ‘You are praising one who has
had your hand cut off?’ He replied that if Imam Ali (a.s.) had even cut
him into pieces his love for him (a.s.) would have actually increased.
Ibn Qawa then rushed to Imam Ali (a.s.) and described to him what had
transpired to which he (a.s.) said, ‘O Ibn Qawa! As for those that love
us, if we were to even cut them into pieces, their love for us would
increase, whereas as for those who hate us, even if we were to give them
honey and food their enmity towards us would increase’. Then he (a.s.)
turned towards his son Imam Hasan (a.s.) and instructed him to go and
bring him back. The he (a.s.) put the cut hand back in its place,
covered it with his cloth, and recited some words. His hand got restored
back and he spent his life alongside Imam Ali (a.s.) and fought in
battles with him. He was martyred in the battle of Nahrwan. His name was
Aflah.

Does any Jurist have the authority and the ability to restore a man’s
hand after having had it cut off? Once the hand is restored then where
is the punishment?

Now, let me return back to Agha Khomeini’s book, Islamic Government
where he quotes the Hadeeth of the time of Muawiya “The rank of the
faqîh in the present age is like that of the prophets of the Children of
Israel.” And then quoting the Verse “The Prophet has higher claims on
the believers than their own selves,” and concludes that Wilayah is
proven for the scholars.

This tradition does not require much thought. Anyone with a little bit
of common sense would realise that is a fake. Let us now think over it.

1.The Prophets of Bani Israel include the prophets Musa (a.s.) and Isa
(a.s.) who are among the great Prophets, who were given the Law as well
as the Book. Which Law was revealed to the Jurists and which Book was
given to them? And who testifies to them?

2.The Prophets are infallible whereas the Jurists are not.

3.The knowledge of the Prophets is of celestial origin and acquired
through revelation whereas the knowledge of the Jurists is doubtful and
acquired through books.

4.The birth of the Prophets is pure whereas the normal person, including
the Jurist, is born from impurity.

It is clear from the above points that no one in his right mind would
rely on this Hadeeth and wash his faith away. But this claim of theirs
does not surprise me because if they can equate themselves to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) and Imam Ali (a.s.), then they would not stop at other
prophets. What surprises me is the usage of the Verse “The Prophet has
higher claims on the believers than their own selves” to consider
themselves higher than others. The Hadeeth that has been quoted above,
Allah (s.w.t.) is witness that it is not for the prophets of Bani Israel
but for the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). This is because the word used is ‘Al
Nabi’ and not ‘Nabi’. If one were to include all the Prophets under this
Verse then one will have to include them again in the Verse of
salutation where the same word has been used. But this is not so.
Secondly, this Verse has to do with the permanent Wilayah and not only
for the implementation of orders. The sermon of Ghadeer by the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) bears testimony to this.

Wilayah of Faqih is such a subject that much can be written about it,
but whatever has been written so far is sufficient to prove my point.
You will read more about it later on in this book which will enlighten
you even more. Let us now look at another one of their claims.

AHL UL ZIKR - (PEOPLE OF REMEMBRANCE)
-------------------------------------

This claim is made on the basis of the Verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ إِلاَّ رِجَالاً نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ
فَاسْأَلُواْ أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِن كُنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 16:43] And We did not send before you any but men to whom We
sent revelation- so ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not know

Allama Haeri in his book Al Risala, has done Instambaat from this Verse
and claimed to have proven Ijtihad from this.

I have discussed this Verse in detail before in this book and presented
numerous Hadeeth to explain that ‘the people of remembrance’ denotes
none other than the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.). There is no room for someone to
go to school and come out with whatever qualifications that he may have
acquired and make these Divine claims. He can only be referred to as one
who has refuted the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) and no one else. There is no
point in discussing this further as any claim that is based on
refutation of the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) proves itself false anyhow. I shall
discuss more about this in the next chapter; however, I shall now quote
from Allamah Haeri’s book: ‘The Ahl Ul Zikr here are the scholars of the
Holy Quran. They are those who are immersed in knowledge’.

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ أَوْرَثْنَا الْكِتَابَ الَّذِينَ اصْطَفَيْنَا مِنْ عِبَادِنَا
فَمِنْهُمْ ظَالِمٌ لِّنَفْسِهِ وَمِنْهُم مُّقْتَصِدٌ وَمِنْهُمْ سَابِقٌ
بِالْخَيْرَاتِ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَضْلُ الْكَبِيرُ
</p>

[Shakir 35:32] Then we gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom we
chose from among our servants; but of them is he who makes his soul to
suffer a loss, and of them is he who takes a middle course, and of them
is he who is foremost in deeds of goodness by Allah's permission; this
is the great excellence

There are numerous commentaries that the inheritors are the Holy Imam
(a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَسْتَ مُرْسَلاً قُلْ كَفَى بِاللّهِ
شَهِيدًا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَمَنْ عِندَهُ عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ
</p>

[Shakir 13:43] And those who disbelieve say: You are not a messenger.
Say: Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you and whoever has
knowledge of the Book.

The commentaries of Sunnis as well as Shiites are unanimous that the
words ‘whoever has knowledge of the Book’ denote Imam Ali (a.s.). Only a
few commentaries of the Sunnis have declared Abdullah Ibn Salam, a Jew,
as the one who has the knowledge of the Book. Now, I don’t know whether
the claimants are making the claim of Imam Ali (a.s.) or Abdullah Ibn
Salam. I leave this to you to decide.

<p dir="rtl">
هُوَ الَّذِيَ أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ مِنْهُ آيَاتٌ مُّحْكَمَاتٌ
هُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ وَأُخَرُ مُتَشَابِهَاتٌ فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ في
قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَابَهَ مِنْهُ ابْتِغَاء
الْفِتْنَةِ وَابْتِغَاء تَأْوِيلِهِ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلاَّ
اللّهُ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ يَقُولُونَ آمَنَّا بِهِ كُلٌّ مِّنْ
عِندِ رَبِّنَا وَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ إِلاَّ أُوْلُواْ الألْبَابِ
</p>

[Shakir 3:7] He it is Who has revealed the Book to you; some of its
verses are decisive, they are the basis of the Book, and others are
allegorical; then as for those in whose hearts there is perversity they
follow the part of it which is allegorical, seeking to mislead and
seeking to give it (their own) interpretation. But none knows its
interpretation except Allah, and those who are firmly rooted in
knowledge say: We believe in it, it is all from our Lord; and none do
mind except those having understanding.

In other words, these people who are firmly rooted in knowledge know the
same interpretation that Allah (s.w.t.) Knows. To be a partner in their
knowledge means to be a partner in Allah (s.w.t.)’s Knowledge. I will
not say anything more than this.

There have been so many claims that if we were to take these claims to
court then the Judges would abandon their chairs and run away. You must
be getting fed up with all these claims, although there are many more
yet. I will now deal with one final claim and leave its exposition to
you. You should also do some good deeds.

UL LIL AMR - ONE WITH AUTHORITY
-------------------------------

All I will say here is that they should first understand ‘Amr’ (command)
before they make this claim, if possible. The ugliness we see here is
the same as the one we saw in the claim of ‘Caliph of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.). The Shiites, based on the Holy Quran and the statements of the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.), believe that ‘Amr’ stands for every thing that
The Pen (Qalam) has written on The Guarded Tablet (Lawh Mahfooz). This
includes everything in the universe, spirit and body, life and death,
sustenance and children, sickness and health. Everything that is a
‘thing’ comes under this. The Ul Lil Amr, therefore, will be that person
who has control over everything and whose obedience has been made
obligatory upon one and all. Not a single atom of the universe would be
outside his Wilayah and he (a.s.) would be a manifestation of Allah
(s.w.t.)’s Attribute of being ‘Master of the Kingdom’ (Maalik Ul Mulk).
According to Shiite beliefs, he would be the Master of everything
regardless of whether the apparent authority has been vested unto him or
not. It is another matter that, due to him (a.s.) being the Caliph of
the Merciful, gives enough rope to the criminals, so that sufficient
proof can be established over him. He, nevertheless, is the real person
of authority with his strength as well as his deeds. In contrast the
Sunnis are of the opinion that the Ul Il Amr is one who established
himself in authority in any corner of the world. The only condition is
that he should be a Muslim. Now we have to see, between the two, as to
which one have the Jurists made the claim for. They have mixed these
issues so much that a person would be utterly perplexed. The purpose is
to get themselves recognised and accepted.

I am now going to present to you the statements made by Allamah Haeri in
his book Al Risala. The problem is, when I started looking at his claim,
I then came across a few more. I don’t know which claim to deal with and
which ones to leave out. Anyhow, you go through this and decide for
yourself what claims have been made.

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا جَاءهُمْ أَمْرٌ مِّنَ الأَمْنِ أَوِ الْخَوْفِ أَذَاعُواْ بِهِ
وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَى أُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ
لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللّهِ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لاَتَّبَعْتُمُ الشَّيْطَانَ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
</p>

[Shakir 4:83] And when there comes to them news of security or fear they
spread it abroad; and if they had referred it to the Messenger and to
those in authority among them, those among them who can search out the
knowledge of it would have known it, and were it not for the grace of
Allah upon you and His mercy, you would have certainly followed the
Shaitan save a few

He says that: ‘The word ‘Ul Lil Amri’ here means that there is more than
one of them. The linguistic meaning of this is ‘Masters or governors of
the kingdom’. Those who wish to debate this point will take this to be
the authority of a Prophet, or in his place to be the ruler of all of
mankind. The Mujtahid is a ruler in the same meaning that a king would
be, as he represents the Imam (a.s.) in religion and the world, and
covers the same territory that the imam (a.s.) does. Those people that
are ignorant about these matters should refer to the Mujtahid as he,
despite his angelic characteristics and authority as well as experience
is one of them.  This is because the Mujtahid does istambaat and
extracts the knowledge of Allah (s.w.t.)’s commands and knows His
(s.w.t.) desires, and then he conveys them to the people so that they
would follow them’.

1.The Mujtahid has used that particular meaning of the word Ul Lil Amr
that Allah (s.w.t.) has used it for the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the
Holy Imams (a.s.). For this he has neither presented any divine verse,
any statement of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) nor any intellectual
argument for it. But Agha Khomeini restricted himself to only partial
commands. What this means is that each Mujtahid is using this word in a
different meaning. It is true that falsehood does not have any legs to
stand on.

2.The claim is that they are the rulers of all mankind and not only the
Shiites. But, according to their own statements, they only have
authority over their own followers (Muqallideen) only; meaning that if a
person was to be a follower of one Mujtahid, then the authority of the
other Mujtahids lapse on him and he does not have to follow them. Look
at the Divine Plan here that He (s.w.t.) has made them falsify their own
claims from their own statements although they made such big claims.

3.Then they change direction and restrict their authority to that of a
King in power.

4.Then they remember their previous claims and so they include religion
along with the world and become masters of the territory of the Holy
Imams (a.s.). If only my readers would understand this phrase ‘become
masters of the territory of the Holy Imams (a.s.)’ then they would seek
refuge from these people who make such enormous claims. Imam Muhammad
Taqi (a.s.) said: ‘Initially Allah (s.w.t.) created us and then created
everything else. Then he (s.w.t.) made obedience to us obligatory on
everything’. This is the extent of the territory of the Holy Imams
(a.s.). Even this is limited to our imagination, otherwise only Allah
(s.w.t.) is aware of this extent.

5.He makes the claim that the Mutahid has angelic characteristics and
has the same authority as them. Let us now look at the characteristics
of angels and then we will talk about their authority.

•The angels are creatures of light.

•The angels are sinless.

•The angels do not disobey Allah (s.w.t.) even for a moment.

•The angels get their knowledge from Allah (s.w.t.) directly.

Are these people entitled to make such claims as they do? Now let us
look at the authority of angels;

•They bring about rainfall.

•They give out sustenance.

•They move the winds.

•They sort out the affairs of the world.

•They shape the foetus in the mother’s womb.

•They take the souls out of the bodies.

Are these people making these claims? It is for sure though that they do
interfere in the last deed. They may not take the soul out of the bodies
but they surely take the faith out of us. If they say that they have
used these words ‘angelic characteristics and has the same authority as
them’ metaphorically, then I cannot accept this defence of theirs. No
sane person of integrity would ever use these words for a start, nor
would he make himself a laughing stock in a gathering. And then they say
that despite these characteristics they are still one of the people.
This clearly shows that they expected to be of a different species.

Then the claim that ‘This is because the Mujtahid does istambaat and
extracts the knowledge of Allah (s.w.t.)’s Commands and knows His
(s.w.t.) Desires’ means that they are the ones referred to in the Verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا تَشَاؤُونَ إِلَّا أَن يَشَاء اللَّهُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا
حَكِيمًا
</p>

[Shakir 76:30] And you do not desire except that Allah desires, surely
Allah is Knowing, Wise;

I am not going to say anything at all about this, except that I seek
justice from you.


