CHAPTER 10: TAQLEED
===================

I have now come to the topic which is the main reason for the production
of this book. As I have explained before, in every age there have been
people who have called others to themselves and there has never been a
shortage of people who heeded their calls and followed them. Imam Ali
(a.s.) have condemned people of this type who act like a flock of sheep
and placed them at the bottom rung of the ladder of humanity. I have
already quoted a hadeeth about this before and there is no need to do it
again. What he (a.s.) said that the one who heeds every call is not a
believer. A believer is one who is surrounded by the light of his
intelligence by which he achieves guidance, safeguards his faith and
stops him from going astray. In actual fact people did not understand
intelligence and so got entangled and ended up with differences. The
logician defines intellect in one way while the man of ethics defines it
differently. The businessman understands it differently to the
politician. This is the reason why every person considers himself to be
clever and takes others to be as idiots.  But Allah (s.w.t.), the One
Who created intellect in the first place also has the right to define
intellect and so the ‘Speech of Allah (s.w.t.)’, Imam Ali (a.s.) has
defined it as: ‘Intellect is that which makes a person recognise his
Guide. That much intellect is sufficient for a man that enables him to
recognise his Guide’. Now that intellect has been defined thus, there is
no need to give any evidence to prove that the purpose of intellect is
not to interfere in religious ordinances but to recognise them.

Now, every part wishes to associate itself with the whole and be with
it, in the same way our partial intellect also desires to be with the
total intellect and when it does so, then its work is done. It then only
has to follow the orders of the total intellect without any questions or
doubts. This is because the partial intellect has already been through
that stage and so if the total intellect orders the partial intellect to
jump in a well then it should do so as the matter of knowledge, wisdom
and infallibility is proven for the total intellect. All mistakes,
faltering and delusions are its opposites and necessarily do not exist
in the total intellect.

It therefore follows that blind following of total intellect is the
correct use of intellect and this is Taqleed. This is the Taqleed which
is an individual obligation without which none of his deeds are
acceptable. A deed performed without use of intellect is not acceptable
anyhow.

#### AL KAFI - H 155, Ch. 18, h2

####

Ali ibn Muhammad has narrated from Sahl ibn Ziyad from Ibrahim ibn
Muhammad al-Hamdani from Muhammad ibn ‘Ubayda who has said the
following: “Abu al-Hassan, recipient of divine supreme covenant, once
said, ‘O Muhammad, do you observe Taqlid more strictly than the group of
Murji’a’ does? I replied, ‘They observe Taqlid and we observe Taqlid.’
The Imam then said, ‘I did not ask you about this.’ I did not have any
answer other than the first one. The Imam then said, ‘The group of
Murji’a chose a man to whom obedience was not obligatory (according to
the commands of Allah) but they obeyed and followed him strictly. You
chose a man and considered obedience to him necessary (according to the
commands of Allah) and then you did not follow him strictly. Therefore,
they are stricter in Taqlid (following) than you are.’”

As I have said before that Taqleed can only be done of total intellect
so that there is no room for error and delusions and that all actions
can be performed with certainty. And this conclusion on the basis of
intellect means that the Taqleed of non infallible will be proof of lack
of intellect because they will always be prone to error and delusions.
All actions would therefore be subject to doubt and conjecture.
Intellect demands infallibility.

Certain points come out of the hadeeth above.

1.Taqleed is only of that infallible on whom Allah (s.w.t.) has made it
obligatory.

2.The one whose obedience is not made obligatory by Allah (s.w.t.), his
Taqleed is prohibited.

3.The one who does the Taqleed of such an Imam cannot be a Shia.

4.The follower of such an Imam is very staunch in his Taqleed.

When the Taqleed of an Infallible (a.s.) is proven then automatically
the Taqleed of a non infallible becomes prohibited. Look at what
horrific results are gained from this.

#### AL KAFI - H 154, Ch. 18, h1

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from 'Abd Allah ibn Yahya from ibn Muskan from abu Basir who has said
the following: “Once I asked Imam abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine
supreme covenant, about the verse of the Holy Quran that says, ‘People
(unconditionally) obeyed the rabbis and the monks and worshipped the
Messiah, son of Mary, as they (people) should have obeyed Allah . .’
(9:31) The Imam replied, ‘By Allah they (rabbis) did not call people to
worship them. If they had done so people would not have accepted it. The
rabbis and monks made unlawful things lawful for them and the lawful
things as unlawful. In this way they (people) worshipped (obeyed) them
unintentionally.’”

#### H 156 Ch. 18, h3

####

Muhammad ibn ‘Isma’il has narrated from al-Fadl ibn Shadhan from Hammed
ibn ‘Isa from Rib’i ibn ‘Abd Allah from abu Basir from abu ‘Abd Allah,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following about
the words of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Glorious: “People
(unconditionally) obeyed the rabbis and the monks and worshipped the
Messiah, son of Mary, as they should have obeyed Allah . .” (9:31) The
Imam said, ‘By Allah, they (the people) did not pray or fast for them
(rabbis and monks) but they (rabbis and monks) made lawful for the
people what was unlawful and unlawful what was lawful and people
followed them accordingly.’”

This can also be proven from the two Verses:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاتَّخَذُوا مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ آلِهَةً لِّيَكُونُوا لَهُمْ عِزًّا
</p>

[Shakir 19:81] And they have taken gods besides Allah, that they should
be to them a source of strength;

<p dir="rtl">
كَلَّا سَيَكْفُرُونَ بِعِبَادَتِهِمْ وَيَكُونُونَ عَلَيْهِمْ ضِدًّا
</p>

[Shakir 19:82] By no means! They shall soon deny their worshipping them,
and they shall be adversaries to them

In the explanation of these Verses, it has been narrated in Tafseer
Saafi and Tafseer Qummi that Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) explained: ‘Any
person who disobeyed Allah (s.w.t.) and was obedient to a person then he
has indeed made him to be his god. On the day of judgement these ‘gods’
would then disassociate themselves from their worshippers (followers)’.
I have already explained the differences in Fatwas of the Mujtahids in
the chapter on differences before. You have just read two verses and one
hadeeth where Taqleed of a non infallible has been categorised as ‘Shak
fil Ibaad’ (Doubt in worship) and these have been described as
polytheists. Polytheism has a brother called Disbelief who remains with
him all the time. It is only better that I should now discuss this
brother of Polytheism.

I am now quoting from the Book of Suleym Bin Qays Hilali a hadeeth of
Imam Ali (a.s.): ‘The smallest thing which makes a person to be an
unbeliever is that when a person adopts a religious act thinking it to
be the command of Allah (s.w.t.) and He (s.w.t.) has not forbidden it.
Then he makes a religious practise out of it. Instead of staying away
from such people he actually loves them. In his mind he thinks that he
is acting according to the commands of Allah (s.w.t.)’.

Certain points come out of this hadeeth;

1.These people do not have conviction about the religious ordinances.
They depend upon their presumptions and analogies to extract the law and
presume them to be the orders of Allah (s.w.t.). They do not even
consider that Allah (s.w.t.) may have forbidden them to depend on
conjectures.

2.They then collect these presumptuous orders and make a religion out of
it.

3.They love people who do this. Obvious they would be considering the
others as their enemies.

4.They worship their priests thinking that they are worshipping Allah
(s.w.t.).

This has now been clarified by this hadeeth. Keep this Hadeeth in mind,
so that when I discuss the issue of Taqleed later on and describe to you
the definitions given to it by the Mujtahids, then it will come in
handy. I have already defined Taqleed above. Its obligation and its
necessity for the acceptability of the deeds has been clarified. I have
also explained the people whose Taqleed is obligatory upon us and whose
is forbidden, the disastrous consequences of this has also been
explained so that no doubt should remain now. It is up to you now to
think as to where this Taqleed of non infallibles has started from. Imam
Ali (a.s.) said: ‘When you are in doubt about a matter, you can
understand its ending by looking at its beginning’. We will now have to
look at the history of the previous people to understand our position.
We see that whenever a Prophet came, propagated a Religion, presented a
Law, gave a Book and when he died, his religion was changed, his Law was
derided and his Book was altered. Then Allah (s.w.t.) sent another
Prophet. And the whole cycle repeated itself. This is what happened from
Adam (a.s.) up to Isa (a.s.).

Now my question is this. Who made these amendments to the religions, the
people or the priests? Obviously,the priests. The people simply did not
have the knowledge to do all these amendments. If this is what has
happened since Adam (a.s.) then how can we say that this did not happen
after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)? At least in the time of the previous
Prophets there was hope that another Prophet will come and sort things
out again. But this hope was not there after the last one. And so
immediately after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) the other people started
acting upon the ‘Sunnah’ of the previous people. The Shiites were saved
from this by the presence of the Holy Imams (a.s.) who put a stop to all
the innovations, which was part of their purpose. But despite their
presence the Ismailis started their own sect and after the seventh Holy
Imam (a.s.) the Waqifiyya made their own sect. Allamah Majlisi writes
that as soon as the eleventh Imam Hasan Al Askari (a.s.) passed away,
and his body was still in the veranda of his house, the Shiites had
divided themselves into sixteen sects. Can you imagine that if the
Shiites can do this during the physical presence of the Holy Imams
(a.s.), what they are capable of during the occultation?

The Shiite priests then had the golden opportunity to establish
themselves as the leaders of religion. You have read in the chapter on
Ijtihad that they had started taking parts out of religion during the
occultation. The work had already begun to classify as doubtful the
Hadeeth whilst taking the principles of jurisprudence from the
adversaries and cause confusion among the Shiites. Complicated problems
were being presented to the Shiites and slowly they were being
brainwashed into believing that religion is too complicated for them. In
the seventh and the eight century Hijra, their efforts bore fruit when
they declared themselves worthy of Taqleed and invited the Shiites for
it. Some Shiites of strong beliefs always opposed them, but they were in
a minority, and the more medicine the religion got, the more critical
its condition became.

When this matter was started among the Sunnis their four sects became
well known, a lot of them became marja’s and built their own mosques.
The government of the time was alarmed that if they keep going at this
rate the Muslims would be split into thousands of sects. They then
passed a law that whichever sect has been formed should pay a sum of one
hundred thousand dirhams as a registration fee to the government
treasury. This effectively closed the door of Ijtihad among them for
good. The four sects paid over this sum and got their sects registered.
But the Shiite sect could not get registered - why? You will realise
this in a moment. At that time both the jurists, Sheykh Mufid as well as
Syed Murtaza were present, and both used to receive government stipends,
and both were financially well off, and it was not beyond their means to
get hold of the money in order to register the Shiite sect. Against them
was Syed Razi, who was not a jurist and was a ‘malang’ type fellow, ran
around collecting the money by donations from the people but could not
meet the government deadline. The question that should be in every one’s
mind is that how come these two jurists kept quiet whilst a non jurist
ran around making great efforts. As a matter of principle these two
jurists should be making the efforts. The harder you think the more you
will realise that had the Shiite sect got registered then the doors
would have been shut on Ijtihad for these two people rendering them
incapable of calling the people to their Taqleed. This is why they kept
this door open, and considering the Shiites to be like sheep, kept them
ignorant of their religion and established their Taqleed on them. Now,
if the Shiites do not accept their Taqleed and do not pay them their
Khums, neither can their deeds be accepted nor can they achieve
forgiveness. Now the people are at the mercy of the Mujtahids. If they
want they can send them to Paradise or if they want they can get them
flung into Hell. If you can understand this beginning, then you shall
come to know its ending. The only conditions are, of being just and have
a pure intention.

If you were to go thorough the Holy Quran with concentration you will
see that whenever Allah (s.w.t.) has ordered us to follow someone it has
been an Infallible (a.s.). When you look at Allamah Hilli’s book
‘Alfeyn’ and Allamah Majlisi’s book ‘Haq Ul Yaqeen’ in the first volume
you will see that these two great Sheykhs has dicussed the concept of
Imamate in great lengths and have concluded that Infallibility is a
necessity. They have made a Verse of the Holy Quran as their basis that
since an ordinary person is prone to error, therefore he may give a
correct decision and sometimes he may not. And so obedience to a non
infallible is an ugly thing and Allah (s.w.t.) cannot give an ugly
order. As far as obedience to a non infallible is concerned, this has
been condemned time an again in the Holy Quran. In the time all the
prophets, the people who have done this have been referred to as
following the way of the unbelievers and the polytheists.

<p dir="rtl">
بَلْ قَالُوا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءنَا عَلَى أُمَّةٍ وَإِنَّا عَلَى
آثَارِهِم مُّهْتَدُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 43:22] Nay! they say: We found our fathers on a course, and
surely we are guided by their footsteps.

If now someone were to tell you that this is to do with beliefs whereas
the Mujtahids are telling you to follow them in actions, then this is
just an attempt to lead you astray. It was not so that the unbelievers
were following their fathers in their beliefs but used to follow the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) in actions. Therefore the condemnation is for both
the following in beliefs as well as actions. Anyhow, Taqleed has gone
vey far in this day and age. At first they used to say that there is no
Taqleed in beliefs, but only in actions. Nowadays this is slowly
changing. Whatever beliefs they teach you is what they expect you to
have and no more. If any Shiite were to speak on matters of beliefs any
more that what they have taught him, then they straight away issue a
fatwa on him of being an extremist (Ghali). If they have no right to
interfere in beliefs then why these fatwas on matters of belief?

They have now included Taqleed in matters of Principles of Religions
(Usool E Deen) and they make the claim that without this none of our
deeds are acceptable. It is obvious that the acceptability of deeds is
based on beliefs.

I am now coming to the issue of Taqleed as explained by Allamah Haeiri
in his book ‘Al Risala’ and give you its refutation accordingly. He has
defined Taqleed as: ‘In its linguistic form the root word of Taqleed is
‘Qaladah’. This is the collar worn on the neck, just like when a rope is
tied around the neck of an animal. In this way the ignorant people put
the Mujtahid’s collar around its neck and follow him accordingly, and
cannot go against his will. In its general usage Taqleed is the adoption
of a Mujtahid’s statements and act upon it without asking for any
proofs’. Is this because the general populace is ignorant and they do
not need any proofs?  They should now consider the statements of the
Mujtahids as the Commands of Allah (s.w.t.) and act on them.

In the previous pages there was a discussion about the hadeeth of Imam
Ali (a.s.) where he (a.s.) was asked as to what is the minimum that
turns one to disbelief. I hereby request you to read that again and in
its background survey the above definitions.

Allamah Haeri then goes on to say: ‘In the absence of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.) there are two types of people on whom the
ordinances of religion are obligatory -knowledgeable and ignorant’. It
is obvious that since the emulator has given his leash in the hands of
the Mujtahid then he does not have the right to any proof, but if he
does pluck up the courage to ask for proofs then he should be ready to
hear the answer: ‘You should go and give your leash in the hands of some
other Mujtahids if you do not accept what I say’.

I am now going to present to you the proofs of Taqleed as given by
Allamah Haeri and other Mujtahids which they have presented.

1st PROOF
---------

They present this Verse:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ إِلاَّ رِجَالاً نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ
فَاسْأَلُواْ أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِن كُنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 16:43] And We did not send before you any but men to whom We
sent revelation-- so ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not
know

‘The order ‘so ask’ is applicable to on whom religion has been made
obligatory’. I say that this is applicable to the Mujtahids as well as
religion has also been made obligatory for them.

‘This order to ask is valid till the day of judgement as people will
always have the need to ask’. What this means is that the existence of
the Mujtahids will also be there until the day of judgement, even after
the appearance of the Holy Imam (a.s.)?

‘The Taqleed can only be done of the Ahl Ul Zikr who are alive as a dead
person does not have the capability to answer questions’. Glory is to
Allah (s.w.t.)! These days even the Taqleed of the dead Mujtahid is
being done. Therefore they will either have to refute this proof of
theirs or make the claim that a dead Mujtahid does have the capability
of answering questions.

‘It is established from consensus and traditions of the Muslims that the
Holy Quran is the ‘Zikr’ and that the people of the ‘Zikr’ are the
people of the Holy Quran.

<p dir="rtl">
أَعَدَّ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا شَدِيدًا فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَا أُوْلِي
الْأَلْبَابِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قَدْ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا
</p>

[Shakir 65:10] Allah has prepared for them severe chastisement,
therefore be careful of (your duty to) Allah, O men of understanding who
believe! Allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder,

This claim can only be made by those who are immersed in the knowledge
of the Holy Quran, are experts of it, experienced, have oceans of
knowledge, they know its Verse e.g. abrogated, allegorical, general or
special, and they know its revelation and exposition. The first category
is of the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.). After that is that of the scholars who are
of two types. The first is of those companions like Ibn Abbas and Ibn
Mas’ud. The next category is of the scholars from the type of the
repentants ‘Tawwabeen’ until the scholars of today’. I now present to
you my critique of the above.

Firstly, there is no doubt that this verse is a command and that is has
been made obligatory to ask. But this is divine speech, and for someone
to interfere in this with his opinion is to argue against it. Now that
it has been agreed that it is obligatory to ask, then we have to see who
the questioner is and who is to be questioned. The Verse is clear that
the ones to be questioned are the ‘Ahl Ul Zikr’ and that everyone apart
from them are the questioners. It is also obligatory for the Ahl Ul Zikr
to exist until the day of judgement for people to question them. This is
the same as in the Verse:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَكُونُواْ مَعَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 9:119] O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and
be with the true ones.

This means that in every day and age there must be at least one ‘true
one’ in existence. These both Verses actually prove Imamate.  How is it
possible that Allah (s.w.t.) tells us to ask the Ahl Ul Zikr but does
not tell us who they are, and for us to be with the truthful without
letting us know who the true ones are? Even a normal person would
realise it cannot be so that Allah (s.w.t.) gave the order to question
the Ahl Ul Zikr but leaves it to the people to chose whosoever they want
to question. In this way every sect would be on the right that they
question whoever that they consider to be knowledgeable. If this were to
be accepted then there would be no distinction between right and wrong
resulting in the Holy Quran and religious ordinances being toys in the
hands of the people.

This is because the word ‘scholar’ is a word with a very wide meaning.
The one who has read ten books is also a scholar and one who has read
one hundred books is also a scholar. If we were to say that only one who
has studied in a religious Madressa is denoted here then the scholars of
Al Azhar University of Cairo would be the most eligible to make this
claim of being the Ahl Ul Zikr as this is an internationally recognised
university.  This is making a mockery of the Holy Quran and religion. So
every person of intellect will realise that Allah (s.w.t.) must have
informed us as to whom the Ahl Ul Zikr are so that the Ummah does not
get involved in differences. I have already discussed this verse before
and presented to you the Hadeeth which have clearly established that
these are none other that the Holy Imams (a.s.).

The occultation of the Holy Imam (a.s.) does not mean that all of his
(a.s.) rights have now been transferred to non infallibles. Questioning
someone does not necessarily mean that it must be done in front of him.
When we say that ‘let us ask what the Holy Quran has to say about this’,
does not mean that we speak to it and it speaks back at us. In the same
way during the occultation of our Imam (a.s.), we cannot ask him
directly and so we have to refer to his statements already made, because
the ‘one to be questioned’ is only the Holy Imam (a.s.) and no one else.
If we cannot find the answer in their (a.s.) statements, then remember,
it is obligatory upon us to ask but their no obligation upon them to
answer, and at this juncture it becomes obligatory to refrain as that is
the order of the Holy Imam (a.s.).

#### AL KAFI - H 198, Ch. 21, h10 - (PART)

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Muhammad ibn al-Husayn from
Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from Safwan ibn Yahya from Dawud ibn al-Husayn from
‘Umar ibn Hanzala who has said the following: Restraint in confusing
cases is better than indulging in destruction.’”

There are nine Hadeeth in Al Kafi - Book of Divine Proof which clearly
state that the Ahl Ul Zikr are the Imams (a.s.) of the Ahl Ul Bayt
(a.s.), I will only be quoting three of them here for brevity.

#### AL KAFI - H 540, Ch. 20, h3

####

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu‘alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' who has said the following: “Once I said to Imam al-Rida,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, ‘May Allah keep my soul in service
for your cause, what is the meaning of the words of Allah, “Ask the
people of Dhikr if you do not know”? (16:43, 21: 7) The Imam, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, said, ‘Dhikr is Prophet Muhammad, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, and we are his family (people) who must be
asked (for guidance).’ I further asked, ‘Are you the ones who must be
asked (for guidance) and we will be the one to ask questions?’ The Imam,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, said, ‘Yes, that is true.’ I then
asked, ‘Will it be a right (obligation) on us to ask you?’ The Imam,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, said, ‘Yes, it is so.’ I then
asked, ‘Will it be a right on you to answer us?’ The Imam, recipient of
divine supreme covenant, said, ‘No, we will decide. We may or may not
answer. Have you not heard the words of Allah, the Most Holy, and the
Most High that say, “This is a gift from us. You may (give to others
and) oblige or keep without being held accountable.’” (38:39)

#### AL KAFI - H 539, Ch. 20, h2

####

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu‘alla ibn Muhammad from
Muhammad ibn ’Uwarma from Ali ibn Hassa’n from his uncle ‘Abd al-Rahman
ibn Kathir who has said the following:“I asked Imam abu ‘Abd Allah,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, about the meaning of the words of
Allah, ‘Ask the people of Dhikr if you do not know.’ (16:43, 21: 7) The
Imam, recipient of divine supreme covenant, said, ‘Prophet Muhammad,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, is Dhikr and we are the people of
Dhikr who must be asked (for guidance).’ I also asked about, ‘It is a
Dhikr for you and for your people and you all must be asked (for
guidance).’ (43:44) The Imam, recipient of divine supreme covenant,
said, ‘It is a reference to us. We are the people of Dhikr and we must
be asked (for guidance).’”

#### AL KAFI - H 545, Ch. 20, h8

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' who has said that he heard Imam al-Rida say the following:
“Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn, recipient of divine supreme covenant, has said,
‘Certain obligations for ‘A’immah are not obligatory for their followers
and certain obligations of our followers are not obligatory for us.
Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has commanded them to ask us their
questions saying, “Ask the people of Dhikr if you do not know,” thus,
Allah has commanded them to ask us their questions (for Guidance) but it
is not obligatory for us to answer them. We may answer them or may not
answer them if we may so decide.’”

After all this there should not remain any doubt that what is meant by
Ahl Ul Zikr are the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and no one else. Whosoever
were to make a claim for anyone else to be so is falsifying the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and thus falsifying Allah (s.w.t.). I leave it to you
to decide what the verdict should be of one such a claimant.

Allamah Haeri has gone even further but not only making this claim for
himself but has included Ibn Abbas and Ibn Masu’d and the Tabeiin as
well. The time period of these people was that of the Holy Imam (a.s.).
What I am saying is that forget about the period ofoccultation, he is
saying that even during the presence of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
there were some people who were the Ahl Ul Zikr as well. Can it be
imagined that these people are the ones that the people have been
commanded to question?

Another weak point in their argument is that alongside the Hadeeth of
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) they have also included the consensus of the
Muslims. It may be that according to them the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
may not be giving the complete explanation of the Holy Quran and that
the consensus of the Muslims therefore became necessary for them. This
just goes to show what value they have placed on the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) and their statements.

Then he goes on to claim that according to the Verse it is established
that the Holy Quran is Zikr and that the people of Zikr are the people
of the Holy Quran. This is an invalid point to make. Take a look at the
Verses:

<p dir="rtl">
أَعَدَّ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا شَدِيدًا فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَا أُوْلِي
الْأَلْبَابِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قَدْ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْرًا
</p>

[Shakir 65:10] Allah has prepared for them severe chastisement,
therefore be careful of (your duty to) Allah, O men of understanding who
believe! Allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder,

<p dir="rtl">
رَّسُولًا يَتْلُو عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ مُبَيِّنَاتٍ لِّيُخْرِجَ
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى
النُّورِ وَمَن يُؤْمِن بِاللَّهِ وَيَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا يُدْخِلْهُ جَنَّاتٍ
تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا قَدْ
أَحْسَنَ اللَّهُ لَهُ رِزْقًا
</p>

[Shakir 65:11] A Messenger who recites to you the clear communications
of Allah so that he may bring forth those who believe and do good deeds
from darkness into light; and whoever believes in Allah and does good
deeds, He will cause him to enter gardens beneath which rivers now, to
abide therein forever, Allah has indeed given him a goodly sustenance.

These clearly state that the ’Zikr’ is the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and it
follows that the Ahl Ul Zikr would be the Holy Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) and
not himself or Ibn Abbas or Ibn Mas’ud etc. It would be another matter
if they consider themselves and these persons to be part of the Ahl Ul
Bayt (a.s.).

Finally, the questioners have been obligated to do Taqleed, which has
not been proven anywhere. There is no mention of either Taqleed, or
Mujtahid or Ijtihad anywhere in the Verse. Whatever has been said by him
has been based on his own analogy which has actually ended up falsifying
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

And so the first proof of Allamah Haeri has hereby been refuted.

2nd PROOF
---------

Allamah Haeri then presents his second proof of Taqleed based on a
Hadeeth. When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) designated Sa’ad Bin Muadh Bin
Jabal as a judge in Yemen he (s.a.w.) asked him: ‘O Sa’ad! How will you
pass judgement among these people?’ He replied: ‘From the Book of Allah
(s.w.t.)’. He (s.a.w.) asked:’ And if you cannot find it in the Book of
Allah (s.w.t.)?’ He said: ‘From your statements’. He (s.a.w.) then
asked: ‘And if you cannot find it there either then how will you pass
judgment?’ He then replied: ‘I shall do Ijtihad with my own opinion’.
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) then performed a prostration of thanking Allah
(s.w.t.) that He (s.w.t.) has endowed his (s.a.w.) companion with that
which is beloved to Allah (s.w.t.) and also liked by His prophet
(s.a.w.).

By presenting this proof Allamah Haeri has broken all limits. He also
forgot the well known Hadeeth that even children are aware of that the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: ‘If my Hadeeth is according to the Holy
Quran then accept it otherwise fling it at the wall’. The Hadeeth that
he has presented not only contradicts one but many a verse in the Holy
Quran.

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ يَحْكُمُ بِهَا
النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُواْ لِلَّذِينَ هَادُواْ
وَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالأَحْبَارُ بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُواْ مِن كِتَابِ
اللّهِ وَكَانُواْ عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاء فَلاَ تَخْشَوُاْ النَّاسَ
وَاخْشَوْنِ وَلاَ تَشْتَرُواْ بِآيَاتِي ثَمَنًا قَلِيلاً وَمَن لَّمْ
يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 5:44] Surely We revealed the Taurat in which was guidance and
light; with it the prophets who submitted themselves (to Allah) judged
(matters) for those who were Jews, and the masters of Divine knowledge
and the doctors, because they were required to guard (part) of the Book
of Allah, and they were witnesses thereof; therefore fear not the people
and fear Me, and do not take a small price for My communications; and
whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they that are
the unbelievers.

<p dir="rtl">
وَكَتَبْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ فِيهَا أَنَّ النَّفْسَ بِالنَّفْسِ وَالْعَيْنَ
بِالْعَيْنِ وَالأَنفَ بِالأَنفِ وَالأُذُنَ بِالأُذُنِ وَالسِّنَّ
بِالسِّنِّ وَالْجُرُوحَ قِصَاصٌ فَمَن تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ فَهُوَ كَفَّارَةٌ
لَّهُ وَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أنزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ
الظَّالِمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 5:45] And We prescribed to them in it that life is for life, and
eye for eye, and nose for nose, and ear for ear, and tooth for tooth,
and (that there is) reprisal in wounds; but he who foregoes it, it shall
be an expiation for him; and whoever did not judge by what Allah
revealed, those are they that are the unjust

<p dir="rtl">
وَلْيَحْكُمْ أَهْلُ الإِنجِيلِ بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ فِيهِ وَمَن لَّمْ
يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 5:47] And the followers of the Injeel should have judged by what
Allah revealed in it; and whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed,
those are they that are the transgressors.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمِنَ الإِبْلِ اثْنَيْنِ وَمِنَ الْبَقَرِ اثْنَيْنِ قُلْ آلذَّكَرَيْنِ
حَرَّمَ أَمِ الأُنثَيَيْنِ أَمَّا اشْتَمَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ أَرْحَامُ
الأُنثَيَيْنِ أَمْ كُنتُمْ شُهَدَاء إِذْ وَصَّاكُمُ اللّهُ بِهَـذَا
فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللّهِ كَذِبًا لِيُضِلَّ النَّاسَ
بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 6:144] And two of camels and two of cows. Say: Has He forbidden
the two males or the two females or that which the wombs of the two
females contain? Or were you witnesses when Allah enjoined you this?
Who, then, is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah that he
should lead astray men without knowledge? Surely Allah does not guide
the unjust people.

According to the above verse one who does not judge according to what
Allah (s.w.t.) has revealed is a transgressor, unjust and an unbeliever.
And if I were to rely on the hadeeth that has been presented by Allamah
Haeri then it would mean that (God forbid) Allah (s.w.t.) and the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) regard the transgressors, the unjust and the
unbelievers to be beloved.

Now what do you say? Shall we accept this hadeeth? Now that this false
tradition has been made the basis of Taqleed, then not only is proof
invalid but the claim as well.

For the refutation of this Hadeeth, whatever has been said so far is
sufficient. To the Mujtahid worshippers I say that this Hadeeth does not
even meet the standards of their own criteria. The famous traditionist
Al Tirmidhi has commented on this Hadeeth that not only is it extremely
weak but it has a broken chain of its narrators, but it contradicts the
Hadeeth whereby the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) told Sa’ad Bin Muadh to write
to him (s.a.w.) for an explanation of things he does not know about and
he shall receive a written reply.

3rd PROOF
---------

Allamah Haeri then presents his third proof of Taqleed based on the
Hadeeth that all of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) said that: ‘It is upon
us to give you the principles of the Commandments of Allah (s.w.t.) and
its exposition is upon you’.

Well, first of all there has never been any traditionist who lived among
all the holy infallibles (a.s.) to be able to make this statement. This
is sufficient as a proof of its invalidity.

Secondly, this Hadeeth neither contains the words ‘Ijtihad’, or
‘istambaat’ or ‘Taqleed’, and so how can this be a proof of all these?

Thirdly, there is nothing in this Hadeeth to suggest that the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) have addressed only the Mujtahids. This Hadeeth is
addressed to one and all.

Fourthly, if they are saying that it was the responsibility of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) to give the principles to the Mujtahids only then did
they do it or not? If so, when and to which ones and to which Mujtahid?
And what are those principles?

What is more ridiculous that they have taken the principles of
jurisprudence from the enemies and based the whole of Ijtihad on this
and on the other hand they are claiming to have taken these from the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.). They are therefore forging lies against them
(a.s.).

Fifthly, there is no time limit indicated in this hadeeth that for how
long will the Holy Imam (a.s.) give us the principles and from when will
they stop. There is also no indication to suggest what will happen to
this during the occultation period as it is not necessary for the Holy
Imam (a.s.) be present in front of us to give us these principles. This
can also be given to us into our hearts if we were to incline our hearts
to the Holy Imam (a.s.). How is it possible for these to be inspired
into the hearts which contain the principles of the enemies of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.)? Therefore, if on the basis of this Hadeeth, these
principles are being given, then on whom are they being given. What
method isbeing used and at which place are they being given? In
refutation of their claim, their own differences of opinion are
sufficient. It is not possible that a Holy Infallible (a.s.) would
inspire one thing to one Mujtahid and an opposite thing to another
Mujtahid. Neither is a Holy Infallible part of their differences nor is
his (a.s.) purpose to create conflicts.

Sixthly, if the Holy Imams (a.s.) can inspire principles they can also
explain them. Was it lack of time that stopped them?  They were present
among us for over three hundred years. Is this not sufficient for the
explanations of these principles? Are they telling me that the
explanations of these principles was left to these people of deficient
intellects?

It has been proven from the above discussion that this forged Hadeeth is
a falsification of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

4th PROOF
---------

For his fourth proof Allamah Haeri presents this Hadeeth narrated from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that: ‘O Aban Bin Taghlub! You should sit in
the Mosque of the Prophet (s.a.w.) and issue fatwas as I like it that
the world should see a Shiite Mufti like you’.

The time of Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was a period of taqayyah as the
rule was of the Banu Umayyah. This is why I cannot understand how a
Shiite Mufti can sit in the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)’s mosque (Which was in
governmental control and was the centre of their affairs) and openly
issue fatwas in such a repressive time. But, even then, neither Taqleed
can be proven from this nor can Ijtihad. The concept that someone can
issue fatwas based on his own opinion in the presence of a Holy Imam
(a.s.) is no more than a dream. At the utmost you can see is that Aban
Bin Taghlub would be using the verses of the Holy Quran and the
available hadeeth for his fatwas and no more. Neither was he allowed to
use his analogies nor invite people to do his Taqleed towards his
opinion. This is what I am saying that if a Mujtahid was to issue a
fatwa based on a hadeeth then it is acceptable otherwise anything based
on analogy is to be refuted. This Hadeeth, instead of proving Taqleed,
is actually proving my point.

5th PROOF
---------

Allamah Haeri presented his fifth proof based on an incomplete Hadeeth.

The Holy imam (a.s.) said: ‘I forbid you to give fatwas to the people on
matters which you know not’.

But this hadeeth is completely against the mujtahid as he really does
not know the matter on which he issues fatwas. This was testified by
Mufti Ja’far Husayn when he said that a mujtahid’s fatwa is based on
analogy and conjecture and that consensus and analogy are two important
pillars of Ijtihad. Imam Ali (a.s.) has said about this: ‘Even when he
issues a fatwa he has doubt whether the fatwa he has gives is correct or
not. And when he gives an incorrect fatwa he doubts that maybe it was
correct’. And so this hadeeth has no bearing whatsoever on Taqleed and
the whole foundation of Ijtihad crumbles based on this.

I have no idea why he has used this hadeeth for his proof, or was it
divine providence that made him do it so that his own pen would bear
witness against himself. It’s like he has cut his own foot with his own
axe.

6th PROOF
---------

For his sixth proof he presents the hadeeth of the Holy Imam (a.s.): ‘I
hereby forbid you to issue fatwas based on your opinion and analogy’.

This hadeeth is actually cutting off the branch on which all the
mujtahids have built their houses and their whole businesses are being
invalidated with this. This is completely contradicting the hadeeth he
presented before for his second proof whereby the Holy prophet (s.a.w.)
congratulated Sa’ad Bin Muadh for using his opinions and fell into
prostration to thank Allah (s.w.t.). You can see for yourself the state
of their proofs.

7th PROOF
---------

For his seventh proof he present the Hadeeth: ‘Whosoever issues Fatwas
without knowledge gets cursed by the angels of Mercy’. This is an
incomplete hadeeth. I have given this complete Hadeeth before.

The hadeeth has actually broken the back of Ijtihad and made it the
target of the curses from the angels of mercy and punishment. All this
misappropriation is happening because they have taken the principles of
ijtihad, like analogy and consensus, from the enemies and are going
around wearing the Hadeeth of Thaqalayn like an amulet around their
necks.

8th PROOF
---------

For his eighth proof he presents the Hadeeth: ‘Whosoever issues Fatwa
without knowing the abrogated and the unabrogated Verses is in
destruction and will remain in punishment eternally’.

First of all tell me, has anyone else apart from the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) ever made a claim to know all these various verse of the Holy
Quran?

Now let us look at their high claims and the extent of their knowledge.

Remember that in order to become a mujtahid, his course does not contain
any more than five hundred Verses of the Holy Quran from the abrogated
and the unabrogated, the clear and the allegorical Verses. The other
verses are outside his course. Before someone objects to what I have
said, I will quote from Allamah Hilli’s book ‘Mabadi Al Wusool Ala Ilm
Ul Usool’.

‘A Mujtahid should have the capability to enable him to implement Sharia
law based on evidence. This is only possible when he understands the
meanings of the words and the Divine Pleasure and the infallibility of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). In this it should achieve a standard whereby
he can understand the Divine Intention and the apparent meaning of the
words in their solitary form as well as the context in which they have
been used. He should be able to maintain the sequence of the words as
well as preserve their apparent and inner meanings. Along with this he
should be aware of the abrogated and the unabrogated Verses. He should
also be in the know of which Hadeeth are solitary and which are
multiple. He should also know the basis of giving preference to a
Hadeeth or a verse and how to apply the proofs on these. This can only
be gains from the understanding of the Holy Quran. The whole of the Holy
Quran is not necessary for this; only five hundred of its verses need be
know which are related to commands. There is also no need to memorise
all the hadeeth; The knowledge of only those hadeeth related to those
five hundred verses is sufficient. Arrangements should be made so that
the necessary Verse or hadeeth should be brought to the fore. Then he
should also understand the concept of consensus (Ijma) so that he does
not end up issuing Fatwa against the consensus. He should also know the
limits of proofs (Burhan). He should also know the Arabic grammar and
syntax and also have an eye on the narrators of Hadeeth. When he comes
to know all this then he is, without doubt, a Mujtahid, except those
that do not complete all this.

Did you see that the claims are that the mujtahid should:

1.Be aware of Divine Pleasure.

2.Know the Intentions of Allah (s.w.t.).

3.Know all the abrogated and the unabrogated verses.

4.Know all the apparent and the hidden meanings of the verses.

5.Know the clear and the allegorical Verses.

And how is this going to be achieved? By referring to only five hundred
verses of the Holy Quran which pertain to the ordinances, and only those
Hadeeth. The funny part is that despite having the knowledge of the
whole Quran, his knowledge would still remain deficient unless he has
the knowledge of consensus. Was there any deficiency in the Holy Quran
which this consensus will complete it?

9th PROOF
---------

Allamah Haeri then gives five questions as his ninth proof of Taqleed.

1.Do you not make use of your intellect?

2.Do you not utilise analysis?

3.Do you not ponder?

4.O people of vision, take lesson from this.

5.O people of heart and wisdom, take lesson from this.

All these five points are actually translations of the verses of the
Holy Quran. Look at these points again and then tell me whether there is
any mention here of a Mujtahid, or Taqleed or Ijtihad anywhere? The more
you ponder over these the more you will realise that these points in
actual fact are contradicting the concept of Taqleed. Do not mortgage
your vision and intellect to others and use your own thinking. This will
lead you to conclude that since your intellects are deficient, therefore
it is necessary to seek refuge in an Infallible Imam (a.s.) to remove
any possibility of stumbling. This will give us conviction in our
actions to be correct whereas if we refer to people of deficient
intellect then we will end up spending all our lives in doubt and
confusion. But Allamah Haeri is using these very Verses to prove Taqleed
which are against it. What can I say now? Everything is allowable for
him now, I suppose, since he is aware of divine pleasure.

He says: ‘The Verses which have been quoted above have a very wide and
general meaning. They not only prove the following of a live Mujtahid
but also prove Marja’iat. He then goes on to present four Hadeeth to
prove the system of representatives of the Imam (a.s.).

10th PROOF
----------

He uses the Hadeeth of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.): ‘My scholars are like
the Prophets of Bani Israeel’, as his tenth proof of Taqleed.

The reason for using this hadeeth is to safeguard the people from
ignorance and stop them from straying from the Holy Quran and religious
ordinances. These scholars are therefore to be given the same status as
Prophets and that it be made obligatory upon the people to take
religious ordinances from them.

I have already dealt with this hadeeth in the chapter on CLAIMS before
and there is no need to repeat the discussion again here. Just as a
reminder, please note that this hadeeth is not to be found in Shiite
books, but it has been taken from the books of the Sunnis and also that
by them as well this hadeeth has been classified as doubtful. This is in
clear contradiction to the Holy Quran and so should be left aside.
Forget about making claims to be equal to the Prophet Suleyman (a.s.)
and Prophet Musa (a.s.), we cannot even imagine any such thing.

11th PROOF
----------

And for his eleventh proof of Taqleed he uses the tradition of Umar Ibn
Hunzala from Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) which is accepted by all as
being correct. Only part of the tradition is quoted here:

‘They must look for one among you who has narrated our Hadith and has
studied what is lawful and unlawful according to our teachings and has
learned our laws. They must agree to settle their dispute by his
judgement; I have given him authority to settle your disputes. If he
issues a judgement according to our commands but then it is not
accepted, the dissenting party has ignored the commands of Allah and it
is a rejection of us. Rejecting us is rejecting Allah and that is up to
the level of paganism and considering things equal to Allah.’

I don’t understand whether Allamah Haeri is presenting proofs of his
argument or making a charge sheet against himself. How does this hadeeth
prove Ijtihad and Taqleed? But this Hadeeth is entitling him to be a
pagan and a polytheist. Let us now see what conclusions can be drawn
from this hadeeth;

1.There is no mention of Ijtihad, or Taqleed of a Mujtahid.

2.The judge is one to narrates hadeeth and judges according to their
(a.s.) teachings and not base them on his own conjectures and analogies.

3.He knows what is lawful and unlawful and passes judgements based on
them. Ijtihad is only done when one does not know what is lawful and
unlawful.

4.The judge knows the teachings of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). If the
Mujtahids knew these then they would not have taken principles of
jurisprudence from the enemies and start Ijtihad.

5.The only judge acceptable is one who judges according to the teachings
of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and not on his own opinion.

6.Not accepting the orders of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) is to degrade
the commands of Allah (s.w.t.)

7.Whosoever rejects the commands of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) is
actually rejecting the commands of Allah (s.w.t.).

8.The crime of rejecting the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
is so great that it amounts to polytheism. Allah (s.w.t.) has already
given the verdict on this that He (s.w.t.) will never forgive this
crime.

And so Allamah Haeri, instead of planting the flag of Taqleed should try
and save his skin.

12th PROOF
----------

For his twelfth proof Allamah Haeri uses Hadeeth: ‘Imam Ja’far (a.s.)
sent me to his companions to tell them that when you have any dispute in
your dealings and if you need to consult these judges, then instead you
should chose among you one person who understands what we have made
lawful and unlawful, then I appoint such a person to be a judge over
you’. Once again we are talking about people who narrate hadeeth. There
is no mention here about Ijtihad or Mujtahid or Taqleed.

13th PROOF
----------

For this he has quoted a hadeeth from Al Ihtijaj Tabarsi of Imam Hasan
Al Askari (a.s.) that: ‘Whoever among the jurists who is free from
personal bias, safeguards his religion, contradicts his own self desires
and is obedient to his master, the people are allowed to do his
Taqleed’.

The explanation of this hadeeth is extremely necessary as they have used
it as a weapon to establish their businesses and deceived the people
into falling into their trap of Taqleed.

The first thing is that in this Hadeeth the Holy Imam (a.s.) has not
used the word Ijtihad or Mujtahid but Faqih (jurist) has been used.
Therefore it becomes necessary first of all to understand who a Faqih
actually is. I have explained before in the chapter of IJTIHAD that this
word has never been used in the Holy Quran or by the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) for the purposes of ‘Furoo’, but that this version is the
invention of the offices of the Mujtahids. The Holy Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s
reference to Habib Ibn Mazahir as a ‘Faqih’ proves the point. I will now
quote again one Hadeeth and then another one so that you can understand
who a Faqih actually is, because it has been implanted in your brains
that Faqih means a Mujtahid.

Imam Ja’far AL Sadiq (a.s.) said: ‘A person who is a Faqih has two
characteristics - He has no greed and is not even concerned with what he
is wearing or eaten’ - Al Khisal Hadeeth No. 22.

Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) said: Know the position of our Shiites
through their good reports from us because we do not consider the faqih
from among them to be faqih unless he becomes a Muhaddith (Narrator of
traditions).

It is clear that at the time of Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) the word
Faqih was being used in the same meaning that it is being used today
i.e. Mujtahid. The process of making hadeeth to be doubtful and the
process of opinions and analogies were in full swing. In this context,
the hadeeth above assumes even more importance that a faqih is not
someone who issues fatwas based on his opinion but one who narrates
traditions. They do not say anything from themselves but just deliver
the message to the people in its pure form. Therefore it follows that in
the hadeeth quoted as proof by Allamah Haeri we will have to take the
faqih to mean the narrator of traditions not those for whom the hadeeth
takes second place and their whole business is being run on opinions and
analogies. There is no way we can use the term faqih to mean a mujtahid
in this hadeeth. Even the narrators of hadeeth are not all to be taken
as faqihs as the Holy Imam (a.s.) has placed certain conditions on them.
And so we have certain points from this discussion so far about this
hadeeth.

1.The term faqih denotes a Muhaddith and not a Mujtahid.

2.The faqih is one who keeps himself clean from the impurity of personal
bias. (Does not issue Fatwas based on opinions or enriches himself from
religion).

3.The faqih who safeguards his religion. (How can a person, who adopts
other people’s views and depends on only part of the Holy Quran, be one
of these? In fact he is a double criminal - one to spoil his own
religion and destroying the faith of his followers as well).

4.The faqih who goes against his own desires. (A person who struggles
for government and considers this as his religion, and sacrifices
millions of people for it will not be one of these)

5.A faqih who is obedient to his master (Imam (a.s.)). This condition is
so clear that there is no need for further explanation. I would like you
to refer to the chapter on the OPPOSITION TO THE HOLY INFALLIBLES (A.S.)
for this context. The opponent as well as his follower, both are
criminals here.

6.Therefore only one who meets all these conditions will be found to be
deserving to be followed. No one else. He will only give out narrations
and nothing personal from himself. His adherance will in fact be the
Taqleed of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) as only their (a.s.) orders are
being followed and no one else’s. This Taqleed is the obligatory one
without which no deeds are acceptable.

Based on the above discussion, to associate the Mujtahids to be the ones
to be followed is to deceive one self. There is nothing of Ijtihad in
this hadeeth here, nor is there anything to accept the Taqleed of one
who, instead of the hadeeth of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), makes people
follow his own fatwas.

Allmah Haeri’s proofs are now complete. However, a book was published by
the ‘Jamiat Ta’alimaat Islami of Karachi’, run under the supervision of
Mujtahid Agha Al Khoie, named ‘Ijtihad and Taqleed’. In this book they
not only gave Allamah Haeri’s arguments discussed above, but some more
as well. I would now like to go through those so that no point does not
remain unresolved. I shall now present two proofs of theirs and then
discuss them, as they are both similar.

14th PROOF
----------

Sheykh Muhammad Bin Hassan Amili in Wasaail Us Shia has a Hadeeth that
Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) said to Muadh: ‘O Muadh! I have hear that
you sit in the Mosque and issue Fatwas?’ He replied: ‘Yes master. This
is how it is. Whatever I have got from you I relate it to your Shiites
and your friends’. He (a.s.) replied: ‘Keep doing that’.

15th PROOF
----------

In Wasail Us Shia there is a narration that one day a man called Abdul
Aziz came to Imam Al Ridha (a.s.) and told him that he lives far away
and cannot come to him (a.s.) to solve any problems, and so will he
allow him to ask Yunus Ibn Abdul Rahman? The Imam (a.s.) replied: ‘Yes’.

Five conclusions can be derived from the two proofs presented above.

1.Both the persons i.e. Muadh as well as Abdul Aziz were companions of
the Holy Imam (a.s.).

2.Both of them are deriving the ordinances from the Holy Imams (a.s.).

3.Both of them are narrators of hadeeth and not mujtahids.

4.Both of them consider personal opinions and anlogies to be prohibited.

5.Both of them are under the Wilayah of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).
Neither have they been thrown out of the Wilayah nor did they make claim
to be Walis.

And so both these proofs have been refuted.

16th PROOF
----------

Tradition from Imam Al-Mahdi (a.s.) in a reply to Ishaq ibn Ya'qub:

"As far as newly occurring circumstances are concerned, you should turn
(for guidance) to the narrators of our ahadith, for they are my proof
over you just as I am Allah's proof." - Shaykh at-Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj,
vo. 2, Najaf 1966, p. 283

The institution that presented this proof translated it correctly into
urdu, however, the scholars of them fooled the people by explaining it
as thus: ‘It is clear from this hadeeth that during the major
occultation the Shiites should refer to the Mujtahids for the answers to
their problems’.

Now, the hadeeth above neither mentions neither Ijtihad nor Mujtahid.
Everyone is not ignorant that they would all fall into this trap. The
reference is clearly to the narrators of hadeeth and not to Mujtahids.
This is because the basis of the Fatwa of the Mujtahid is on opinion and
analogy, whereas the Muhaddith simply relates the Holy Imam (a.s.)’s
words exactly as they are. Fatwa has been defined as the ‘Personal
opinion of the Mujtahid after the performance of Istambaat’.

17th PROOF
----------

‘We hereby present to you the statement of the great scholar, narrator
and special representative of our Imam (a.s.), Uthman Bin Sa’eed Umari.
When he gave the reply prohibiting something, to one of the questioners,
he made an addition to it. He said: ‘I am not giving you this decision
from myself. I am not allowed under any circumstances to make lawful
anything. I am just giving you the statement of the Holy Imam (a.s.).’’

It is completely useless to comment upon this proof as this has
completely uprooted the foundations of ijtihad and made fatwas to be
prohibited.

I have already given you the proof against Ijtihad and Taqleed from
which these points were established:

1.The sect of the Mujtahids is completely opposite to the sect of Ahl Ul
Bayt (a.s.).

2.The Mujtahids have taken all the tools of Ijtihad from the Sunnis,
which have nothing to do with the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

3.The Mujtahids have established a worldly and religious order against
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). They have made obedience to themselves
obligatory upon the Shiites and do not permit them to ask whether their
Fatwas are according to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) or not.

4.The Mujtahids have made claims of Imamate and Wilayah and their slogan
is ‘Death to the opponents of Wilayat of Faqih’ (marg bar munkire
wilayate Faqih).

5.The Mujtahids have usurped the titles and positions of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and allocated it for themselves.

6.The beliefs of the Mujtahids are in contradiction to the beliefs of
the Shiites and the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). They even reject those
virtues of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) which they (a.s.) themselves have
related to us, and those that believe in these are termed as extremists
(Ghali).

7.They consider themselves to be replacements of the Prophets (a.s.) and
the Holy Imams (a.s.).

8.The Mujtahids in their oppositions to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) do
not refrain from even insulting them (a.s.).

9.The Mujtahids in their enmity to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) leave no
stone unturned as has explained by Imam Hasan Al Askari (a.s.).

10.The Mujtahids do and make others to do certain acts that entitle them
and their followers to be cursed by the Holy Imams (a.s.).

11.The Mujtahids, instead of getting people to follow the Holy Imams
(a.s.) make them follow a non infallible (Mujtahid), according to the
statement of the Holy Imam (a.s.) are outside of their Wilayah.

12.The leadership of the Mujtahids based on analogy and errors has been
condemned by the Holy Quran.

13.The Mujtahids have insulted the people by considering them to be
ignorant and stupid, to the extent that they have been likened to
animals with a collar round their necks, the leash of which is in the
hands of the Mujtahid.

14.The verses and the hadeeth that the Mujtahids have used to prove
their Ijtihad and Taqleed in actual fact are condemning them.

These conclusions have been derived from the previous discussions that I
have made. I have deliberately kept this topic of Taqleed at the end so
that you can first understand the definition, history and the principles
of Ijtihad. You can also come to know the beliefs of the Mujtahids and
their claims. This would then make it easier to understand the reality
of Taqleed and you can also come to the same conclusions that have been
listed above. Even now if someone were to dilly dally and argue then
there is no treatment for his illness. Allah (s.w.t.) has said about
these types of people:

<p dir="rtl">
وَسَوَاء عَلَيْهِمْ أَأَنذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ تُنذِرْهُمْ لاَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 36:10] And it is alike to them whether you warn them or warn
them not: they do not believe.

Lastly I would like to clarify two weapons that they use to lead people
astray away from the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and towards themselves by
claiming that obedience to them is the obedience to the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.).

The first weapon they use is the occultation period. This has given them
ample time to usurp all the titles and assume all the responsibilities
of the Holy Imam (a.s.).

The second weapon they have used is that they have mixed up the two
terms ‘Muhaddith’ and ‘Mujtahid’. They then endowed themselves with
those Hadeeth that was for the Muhaddith (Narrators of Hadeeth) only.

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A MUHADDITH AND A MUJTAHID
---------------------------------------------

If you understand the difference between the two terms then God willing
you will neither get confused nor will you get trapped with a noose
round your neck.

A narrator is one who narrates a Hadeeth word for word exactly, and says
that these are not his words but from the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

A Mujtahid is one who uses the four tools of Ijtihad and does istinbaat
with it and establishes his opinion based on that by giving his fatwa.

The conditions that the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have set are for the
narrators of Hadeeth. The Mujtahids have nothing to do with these
conditions.

If these people can show me Ijtihad, and the Taqleed of a Mujtahid from
the Verses of the Holy Quran and the Hadeeth, then I will not only
abrogate this book of mine, but I will beg for forgiveness from them.

And if they cannot do this, then I will not say anything to them as it
is to do with their stomachs. I will say this much to you though, that
do not reject the truth after having seen it and recognised it as such
otherwise you will get into trouble. Otherwise your worldly life may
pass in happiness but in the hereafter, you know very well what will
happen to the one who reject the truth after having seen it.


