CHAPTER 12: KHUMS
=================

Khums is such a blessed thing which unites people, mends broken hearts,
and all those jurists who have difference between them whether small or
big become one. If there is any perfect example of Ijma (consensus) then
this is it.

Although this is not a very lengthy subject, nevertheless its importance
has made me deal with it in a separate chapter altogether. It will be my
effort to deal with various points of it so that the believers can
escape from the quicksand which they have been pushed into. In this
chapter I have tried to deal with various aspects of it including Jizya
(tax). All this effort of mine is so that instead of debating about this
issue we should try and get to its reality. I am not trying to refute or
compliment anyone, but this is a matter of understanding the issue. It
is also your duty not to read this chapter from a debating point of view
but rather as an investigation into the matter. If you were then to see
reality in this then your faith dictates that you should immediately
accept it, because if there is faith then there is everything, if there
is no faith then there is nothing. I have looked at this problem of
Khums from an investigative point of view and surveyed it various
aspects so that you may not come under pressure from anyone, but you
will act according to the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and
sort out both your world as well as the hereafter.

Allah (s.w.t.) has made some provisions for the life of the Muslims and
has divided them into two groups - Ummah and the Family of the Holy
prophet (s.a.w.). For the Ummah he has made Zakaat which is charity, and
in this there is no share of the family/progeny of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.). For the progeny of the Holy Prophet He (s.w.t.) has made
‘Anfaal’ (Spoils of war) and Khums in which the Ummah has no share. The
whole of the Anfaal is for the progeny of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
whereas Khums is a fifth. Allah (s.w.t.) has kept the progeny of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) separate from the rest of the Ummah so that they
should be kept away from the dirt and filth of the people and that no
one would have the audacity to equate himself to them (a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الأَنفَالِ قُلِ الأَنفَالُ لِلّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ
فَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَأَصْلِحُواْ ذَاتَ بِيْنِكُمْ وَأَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 8:1] They ask you about the windfalls. Say: The windfalls are
for Allah and the Messenger. So be careful of (your duty to) Allah and
set aright matters of your difference, and obey Allah and His Messenger
if you are believers.

In Tafseer Saafi, Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) is reported to have said:
‘Anfaal is that which is gained from the land on which no blood has been
shed. i.e. land which has been gained without war. Either the people
make a peace treaty or give it of their own accord. Uninhabited land and
valleys will all be classified as Anfaal, and this is all the kingdom of
Allah (s.w.t.). And so whatever is Allah (s.w.t.)’s belongs to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.). It is up to him (s.a.w.) how he (s.a.w.) distributes
it. After him (s.a.w.) it belongs to the Holy Imams (a.s.)’. It has also
been narrated in Al Kafi that when a person dies without inheritors then
his wealth is also Anfaal.

<p dir="rtl">
وَاعْلَمُواْ أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُم مِّن شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلّهِ خُمُسَهُ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَابْنِ
السَّبِيلِ إِن كُنتُمْ آمَنتُمْ بِاللّهِ وَمَا أَنزَلْنَا عَلَى
عَبْدِنَا يَوْمَ الْفُرْقَانِ يَوْمَ الْتَقَى الْجَمْعَانِ وَاللّهُ
عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

[Shakir 8:41] And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is
for Allah and for the Messenger and for the near of kin and the orphans
and the needy and the wayfarer, if you believe in Allah and in that
which We revealed to Our servant, on the day of distinction, the day on
which the two parties met; and Allah has power over all things.

In Tafseer Saafi it is narrated that one of the meaning of this is that
wealth which is gained by subduing the unbelievers. In Al Kafi there is
a narration from Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) that this is the daily
profit. In Tafseer Saafi there is a reference from Al kafi that Imam Ali
(a.s.) said: ‘What Allah (s.w.t.) has meant by Zil Qurba here are those
that He (s.w.t.) has regard as near to Him (s.w.t.) and the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) and so the orphans and the poor and the travellers are our
orphans and our poor and our travellers. This is because he (s.w.t.) has
kept no share for us in the charity and he has honoured us and the Holy
prophet (s.a.w.) by keeping away from eating people’s dirt and filth. In
Al Tahzeeb Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) has been reported to have said:
‘Allah (s.w.t.)’s Khums is the Imam’s right and the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.)’s Khums as well as the near ones’ khums’. The orphans, poor and
travellers are the ones from the progeny of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).
And so khums cannot reach anyone apart from these’.

<p dir="rtl">
وَآتِ ذَا الْقُرْبَى حَقَّهُ وَالْمِسْكِينَ وَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ وَلاَ
تُبَذِّرْ تَبْذِيرًا
</p>

[Shakir 17:26] And give to the near of kin his due and (to) the needy
and the wayfarer, and do not squander wastefully.

In Tafseer Saafi it has been reported that the ‘near ones’ referred to
in this Verse are those near to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and this verse
has specially been revealed for Lady Fatimah Zahra (a.s.). The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) had reserved the garden of Fidak for her (a.s.). The
poor and travellers mentioned here are the one from her (a.s.) progeny.

<p dir="rtl">
فَآتِ ذَا الْقُرْبَى حَقَّهُ وَالْمِسْكِينَ وَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ ذَلِكَ
خَيْرٌ لِّلَّذِينَ يُرِيدُونَ وَجْهَ اللَّهِ وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 30:38] Then give to the near of kin his due, and to the needy
and the wayfarer; this is best for those who desire Allah's pleasure,
and these it is who are successful.

In Tafseer Saafi it has been reported from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.)
and Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) that when this verse was revealed, the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) gave the garden of fidak to Lady Fatima Zahra
(a.s.) and gave her the control of it.

<p dir="rtl">
مَّا أَفَاء اللَّهُ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَى فَلِلَّهِ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَابْنِ
السَّبِيلِ كَيْ لَا يَكُونَ دُولَةً بَيْنَ الْأَغْنِيَاء مِنكُمْ وَمَا
آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانتَهُوا
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ
</p>

[Shakir 59:7] Whatever Allah has restored to His Messenger from the
people of the towns, it is for Allah and for the Messenger, and for the
near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, so that it
may not be a thing taken by turns among the rich of you, and whatever
the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever he forbids you,
keep back, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is
severe in retributing (evil):

It has been mentioned in Tafseer Saafi quoting from Al Kafi that Imam
Ali (a.s.) said: ‘The near ones mentioned here are us and the orphans
and the needy and the wayfarer are the ones from us. This is why Allah
(s.w.t.) has kept no share for us in charity and made it prohibited to
us. Allah (s.w.t.) has honoured us and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) by not
letting us eat the dirt and filth of the people.

These points come out of these verses:

1.Anfaal is that which comes without war.

2.Fey is that which is acquired through warfare.

3.Khums is a fifth of Fey.

4.Both these things are especially for the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) because
the right of Allah (s.w.t.) and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) is their
(a.s.) right. They (a.s.) are the one referred to as the near of kin.
The orphans, the travellers and the needy are also from the children of
Lady Fatimah Zahra (a.s.). The distribution of this will also be in the
hands of the Holy Imams (a.s.). Meaning, that the only rightful owner of
Khums is the Holy Imam (a.s.).

The purpose of Khums, according to the above evidence, is to strengthen
the economic situation of the Aal e Muhammad (a.s.) so that they do not
have to depend on the dirt of others. These verses have confirmed that
the taxpayers are those of the Ummah who are not from the progeny of the
Holy prophet (s.a.w.) and that the recipients are from the children of
Lady Fatimah Zahra (a.s.). Furthermore, this is an individual obligation
and not a collective one.

Applicability of Khums
----------------------

In relation to these verses the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have guided us
to those things on which this tax is applicable.

#### AL KAFI - H 1413, Ch. 130, h 4

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn
‘Isa from certain persons of our people from the virtuous servant of
Allah who has said the following: “Al-Khums (one fifth tax) is due on
five categories of properties. It is due on (1) spoils of war or general
net income, (2) properties acquired from diving deep waters, (3) the
treasures found, (4) the mines and (5) salt mines.

#### AL KAFI - H 1417, Ch. 130, h 8

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim ibn Hashim has narrated from his father from ibn abu
‘Umayr from Jamil ibn Darraj from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the
following: “Abu Ja‘far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, was asked
about the minerals such as gold, silver, iron, lead and zinc. He said,
‘They all are subject to al-Khums.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 1420, Ch. 130, h 11

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu ‘Umayr from
al- Husayn ibn ‘Uthman from Sama‘a who has said the following: “I asked
abu al-Hassan, recipient of divine supreme covenant, about al-Khums. He
said, ‘It is due on all small and large gains that people make.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 1421, Ch. 130, h 12

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa
ibn Yazid who has said the following: “Once I wrote to the Imam,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, ‘May Allah, keep my soul in
service for your cause, explain to me what is gain and profit? What is
its limit? What is your opinion? May Allah, the Most High, grant you
long life. I will be grateful for your explanation so I will not
continue in unlawful activities with invalid prayer and fasting.’ “He
wrote to me, ‘gain and profit is the income from trade from its net
profit or from farming after the deduction of expenses and prizes.’”

#### MAN LA YAHZUR AL FAQIH - H 1642

####

Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) said: ‘Khums is not on anything but on the
wealth of Ghanimat (spoils of war)’.

#### MAN LA YAHZUR AL FAQIH - H 1653

####

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: ‘Whenever a protected (Dhimmi)
unbeliever buys land from a Muslim, there will be Khums on it’.

It is clear from the above statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
that Khums is payable on the following:

1.Minerals like god, silver, brass, aluminium, petrol, gas etc.

2.Treasures acquired by deep sea diving like pearls etc.

3.Profits from a business.

4.Profits from farming.

5.Spoils of war.

6.Land sold to a protected unbeliever.

From what we have seen above, is Khums being explained today exactly as
the Holy Infallibles (a.s) have defined it or is it being portrayed as
something else. Let us now look at one aspect at a time.

### First Aspect - The only rightful owner of Khums is the Holy Imam (a.s.)

###

As this matter has been clarified in the light of the commentaries of
the Holy Quran and the Hadeeth, it now becomes necessary for the Khums
payer to make sure that the Khums that he is paying does reach the Holy
Imam (a.s.). There are only two ways of ensuring this. Either we go and
personally deliver this tax to the Holy Imam (a.s.) himself or else we
should have on us his (a.s.) specific instructions, either oral or
written, to hand it over to his agent, and thus become free of
responsibility. During the minor occultation the people had written
instructions from the Holy Imam (a.s.) to hand over their Khums to named
agents. Hence in this period the matter was clear and people had no
doubts whom to give their Khums to.

The situation in the major occultation period is completely different.
The system of direct representation and ambassadorship was cut off at
the inception of the major occultation, and those that claim to be these
have been branded as liars and fabricators by the Holy Imam (a.s.).
There has never been a single statement of the Holy Imams (a.s.) whereby
they have instructed us that during the major occultation, any person
who claims to be a scholar whom a few regard as their teacher or one who
achieves a degree from a university of Qum, the Shiites should hand over
their Khums to him. Not a single Mujtahid has ever made the claim that
he hands over the Khums monies to the Holy Imam (a.s.), and if he were
to do that then he would be included in the label of a liar and a
fabricator. And if the Mujtahid is not capable of delivering the Khums
to the Holy Imam (a.s.) then how can the Khums payer rest assured that
his Khums money has reached the Holy Imam (a.s.)? And if he were to
deliberately hand over his Khums money to someone who has not been
specifically named by the Holy Imam (a.s.) but has declared himself to
be one, then the payer is also as much a usurper of the rights of the
Holy Imam (a.s.) as the recipient is. God Willing I shall discuss the
state of the usurpers of the rights of the Holy Imam (a.s.) later on.

### Second Aspect - The purpose of Khums is to strengthen economic status of the Family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

###

This has been clarified by the hadeeth and that the purpose is to honour
and keep away the Aal e Muhammad (a.s.) from the dirt and filth of the
people. Therefore to conceive of Khums to be of a purpose other than
this is to oppose the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and to falsify their
claim.

The point is that Allah (s.w.t.) had made Khums to be only for the
Family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) but some people then assumed the
responsibilities of religion. When the burden of the state and religious
affairs became heavy on them, they took it upon themselves for the
distribution of Khums and established the notion that Khums and Anfaal
is the right of the government. The claim of Lady Fatima (a.s.) for her
right of the garden of fidak was also refuted on the basis that, ‘If we
give this to you then how will we feed the army?’ The spoils of wars
from all the battles was also regarded as the right of the government
which will also decide how to spend it. This view had such pull over the
Shiites that even they made it their basic principle.

And so, Agha e Khomeini wrote in his book ‘Islamic Government’: the
purpose for the imposition of such a tax is not merely the upkeep of the
Sayyids or the religious scholars, but on the contrary, something far
more significant - namely, meeting the financial needs of the great
organs and institutions of government. How could the sayyids ever need
so vast a budget? It was established with the aim of providing for the
needs of the people, for public services relating to health, education,
defense, and economic development.

If you wish to applaud this audacious statement then do so, for I can
only weep over it and beseech Allah (s.w.t.) for justice. The invalidity
of this claim is obvious that there is no need for detailed refutation.
I am only giving you some indications.

1.Khums has been regarded as the right of the government of the time.

2.In contradiction to the Commands of Allah (s.w.t.) and the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.), Khums has been regarded as being for the betterment
of general people regardless of whether they are from the progeny of
Lady Fatimah Zahra (a.s.) or not.

3.It has been assumed that all those from the progeny of Lady Fatima
Zahra (a.s.) are leading a happy and contented life.

4.When khums is the right of the progeny of Lady Fatimah Zahra (a.s.),
then it does not matter how much it is, it will always remain their
right. How can someone have the right to say ‘how can they need so
much?’ It is like when someone comes to your house and says to you,
‘What is your need for such a big house, keep one room for yourself and
give the rest over to me’.

5.If Khums is for the betterment of all people then does it apply only
to the people of Iran? Then tell me what has been done for the
betterment of other people? Are the Shiites paying Khums so that only
the people of Iran should benefit from it while the other Shiites keep
dying of hunger?

6.If Khums is the right of the government of the jurist (Faqih), then on
what basis was Khums being collected before they achieved the
government? And if they were collecting it then how much did they do for
the betterment of the Shiites of the world? These works for the
betterment of the Shiites can also be done without being in government.

### Third Aspect - Khums is the right of the Sadaat

###

When the Holy Quran and the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have clearly
indicated the identities of the tax payer and the recipient then a non
Sadaat cannot take even a penny from khums and Sadaat cannot be made to
pay it. This is their right whether they are rich or poor. It is another
matter that the needy and the orphans and the travellers among them will
get priority. From the revelation of Khums until today you will not find
a single incident in history where the Sadaat have been made to pay it.
The Sadaat have always been the recipients and never the payers. Today
the situation is such that even if the Mujtahid is a non-Sadaat, he
still collects Khums from everyone. In whose obedience is this being
done? Whatever the case may be, they are both unjust.

### Fourth Aspect - No Mujtahid has even declared it to be a collective obligation

###

The fact that Khums is an individual obligation is so established that
no one will ever dispute it. Not a single person is free from this
obligation. For example, Namaaz is an individual obligation and so it is
obligatory upon the Mujtahid as well as his followers. The same goes for
other acts of worship, and since it has been established that khums is
an individual obligation, then it is so on the Mujtahid as well as all
his followers. Now it is up to you to find out which Mujtahid is paying
Khums and to whom. If you say that they are paying to an ‘Aalam’ (the
most knowledgeable), then who is he paying it to, as it would be
obligatory on him as well. The more you think about this the more you
will realise that this is not a religious matter but it is just an
excuse to collect money from the people. If this was a religious issue
then they would not have placed the whole burden on the people but they
would have borne some of it themselves. But the strange thing is that on
one hand Khums has been declared as an individual obligation and on the
other hand they have excused the Mujtahids from it and made it a
collective obligation.

If after all this you still cannot get to the bottom of this then it is
not my fault. You have seen from the statements of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) the things on which Khums has been made obligatory - Minerals,
Sea treasures, Business Profits, Agricultural Profits etc. Why don’t you
now go and collect all the Fatwas of the Mujtahids and take a tour of
all the mosques and see for yourself. You will see a very long list off
all the items on which they want you to pay Khums including things like
unused food items, cosmetics, clothes etc. Virtually nothing has been
left out from this list. The purpose is that whatsoever they can get
their hands on give it. No one in his right mind will not be able to
tolerate this in his religion, while every one with clear intellect will
be able to see through this misappropriation.

When did the problem of Khums start?

Those of you who are interested in history will know that when the Verse
of Khums was revealed, the Holy prophet (s.a.w.) distributed it among
the Banu Hashim and this continued during his (s.a.w.) time. After this
the government of the time decided that it is their right and a fifth of
the spoils of war began to be sent to the Caliph of the time who used to
spend it on the affairs of his government. The Banu Hashim only got the
same share as everyone else until it was the time for the caliphate of
Imam Ali (a.s.). He (a.s.) did not make any changes to this matter just
as he let go of the matter of the garden of Fidak. I cannot find any
incident during this caliphate that anyone had come and given Khums to
Imam Ali (a.s.). This was the also the case for Imam Hasan (a.s.) and
Husayn (a.s.) to the extent that whenever there was any delay of the
payment from the government then their condition became very difficult.
After this was the period of Imam Zayn Ul Abideen (a.s.) and Imam
Muhammad Baqir (a.s.). I cannot see any incident of anyone paying Khums
to them (a.s.).

However, there are certain incidents during the time of Imam Ja’far Al
Sadiq (a.s.) where some people used to bring some wealth to them but we
should be careful not to misunderstand this. Sometimes the Shiites used
to bring presents and gifts to him (a.s.) and not in the name of Khums.

#### MAN LA YAHZUR AL FAQIH - H 1659

####

Younis bin Yaqoub has said that: ‘One day when I went to Imam Ja’far Al
Sadiq (a.s.), a toymaker came to see him (a.s.) and said, ‘I have made
good profit from my business and we know that your share in this is
established but are not able to give you your share’. He (a.s.) replied:
‘If these days I were to ask you for my share then it would not be
justice’.

In the book ‘Superman in Islam’, a debate has been given between Imam
Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) and an atheist by the name of Abu Shakir. In a
reply to Abu Shakir’s accusation that he (a.s.) was collecting money
from people in the name of religion, he (a.s.) replied: ‘O Abu SHakir!
You are saying that I aim to collect wealth in the name of worshipping
God, by deceiving people. I tell you that ever since I have invited
people to worship God until today I have only accepted small gifts like
fruit etc. Like a friend of mine has a date farm, and in the autumn when
the dates ripen then he sends me a crate of them through his servant and
I only accept this gift from him so that he may not get annoyed by my
refusal. I also have another friend who has a garden of pomegranates in
Taif and he sends me a crate with the caravan which comes to Medina and
I only accept this because I do not want him to be annoyed with me due
to my refusal. Will you testify that a person will not disseminate
religion until such time as he does not get some dates and
pomegranates?’

The period of the Imams (a.s.) after Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) was
even more difficult as they used to be under the scrutiny of the hostile
government of the time. In this period it cannot even be imagined that
they would instruct their Shiites to bring the Khums to them and thus
endanger all their lives nor has any such incident probably ever been
recorded. The hullaballoo of Khums started in the time of the tenth Imam
Ali Naqi (a.s.). The enemies were counting the numbers of the Imams so
that they can kill the twelfth Imam (a.s.) and cut off the system of
guidance altogether. Among the Shiites also were those who were greedy
for the worldly things were also counting the numbers so that they can
profit from the twelfth Imam (a.s.) going into occultation. After Imam
Musa Kazim (a.s.) a sect by the name of Waqifiyya had come into being
who claimed that he (a.s.) had not died but had gone into occultation.
They then claimed that until such time as he (a.s.) reappears they will
handle the affairs and so usurped all the wealth and refused to hand it
over to Imam Al Ridha (a.s.) who cursed them in return. What I would
like to ask is that if the Imam (a.s.) were to make his appearance today
and asks for his Khums that has been collected over the years, is there
anyone who will be able to give it back to him? How will this be
returned when it has already been digested?

Anyway, at the time of Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) the people had realised that
the time of occultation is near and so a whole machinery was put into
place and a web of narrations was spun in such a way that gave the
impression that the Holy Imams (a.s.) had only come into the world for
two purposes only - to explain the ordinances and collect Khums. As time
went on the situation got worse, until we come to the time of the minor
occultation. This gave the worshippers of the world a golden
opportunity. If you were to survey the history of this period you will
see that apart from playing around with Fatwas and cries of ‘Khums,
Khums’, you will see nothing else. You think for yourself, in this
difficult time period when the hostile government was severely
suppressing the Shiites, and was raiding many places in search of the
twelfth Imam (a.s.), who could have thought of only Khums. Imam Ja’far
Al Sadiq (a.s.) himself stated in the above Hadeeth that it would not be
fair for him to ask for this from his Shiites in these times.

The reason why the fraud of the representation of the Imam (a.s.) was
enacted was because it would make it easier for them to collect the
khums from the people, and whatever is happening today is the direct
result from all this. This will only come to an end when the Holy Imam
(a.s.) makes his appearance and then people’s food items, cosmetics,
clothes etc. will be safe, or when people use their clear intellects and
get to the bottom of all this. All this looting will not be stopped by
blind Taqleed.

THE RIGHT OF THE IMAM (A.S.)
----------------------------

It has been proven from the Verse of the Holy Quran and the statements
of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) that khums is the right of the Holy Imam
(a.s.) and no one else. No one else has the right to have this right
vested in himself.

<p dir="rtl">
مَن ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا فَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ
وَلَهُ أَجْرٌ كَرِيمٌ
</p>

[Shakir 57:11] Who is there that will offer to Allah a good gift so He
will double it for him, and he shall have an excellent reward.

It has been narrated in Tafseer Saafi and Tafseer Qummi that Imam Musa
Kazim (a.s.) has said that this verse was revealed about the right of
the Imam (a.s.) and Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) that the rights of Allah
(s.w.t.) reaches his ‘Wali’.

Now there should not be any doubt or confusion that Khums and the Anfaal
are the rights of Allah (s.w.t.)’s Wali. No one else can even cast an
eye on it. It is another matter if someone were to declare himself as
Wali just to grab hold of this right, and this would be nothing new
anyhow. The Holy Quran also testifies that in history in the period of
the olden people it has been the custom that the priests have taken
control of the wealth of the people.

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ إِنَّ كَثِيراً مِّنَ الأَحْبَارِ
وَالرُّهْبَانِ لَيَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَالَ النَّاسِ بِالْبَاطِلِ
وَيَصُدُّونَ عَن سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَالَّذِينَ يَكْنِزُونَ الذَّهَبَ
وَالْفِضَّةَ وَلاَ يُنفِقُونَهَا فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ فَبَشِّرْهُم
بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
</p>

[Shakir 9:34] O you who believe! most surely many of the doctors of law
and the monks eat away the property of men falsely, and turn (them) from
Allah's way; and (as for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not
spend it in Allah's way, announce to them a painful chastisement.

I am not surprised at the devourers of the wealth, but at those that
feed them, who without thinking, give the right of the Holy Imam (a.s.)
to someone else and end up being in the list of the usurpers of the
rights of the Imams (a.s.). They have confused the people by dividing
Khums into ‘Sehme Imam’ (Portion of Imam (a.s.)), ‘Sehme Sadaat, ‘Sehme
Yatama’ etc. Remember that the division of this and the distribution of
it are for the Holy Imam (a.s.) to do. We have to hand over the whole of
it to him (a.s.).

#### AL KAFI - H 1418, Ch. 130, h 9

####

Ali has narrated from his father from ibn abu ‘Umayr from Jamil from
Zurara who has said the following: “The Imam, recipient of divine
supreme covenant, has the right, before the distribution, to spend from
(booties of war), to give as gifts, grants and other causes. The
Messenger of Allah had a confrontation with a people and he did not
leave anything for them from al-Fay’. He may have given them a share if
he wanted.”

Therefore do not get diverted by this division of Khums, the whole of it
belongs to the Holy Imam (a.s.) and it is up to him who to give it to
and who to withhold it from.

After all this discussion you should also consider what will be the fate
of those that usurp the rights of the Imams (a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
سَمَّاعُونَ لِلْكَذِبِ أَكَّالُونَ لِلسُّحْتِ فَإِن جَآؤُوكَ فَاحْكُم
بَيْنَهُم أَوْ أَعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ وَإِن تُعْرِضْ عَنْهُمْ فَلَن
يَضُرُّوكَ شَيْئًا وَإِنْ حَكَمْتَ فَاحْكُم بَيْنَهُمْ بِالْقِسْطِ إِنَّ
اللّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 5:42] (They are) listeners of a lie, devourers of what is
forbidden; therefore if they come to you, judge between them or turn
aside from them, and if you turn aside from them, they shall not harm
you in any way; and if you judge, judge between them with equity; surely
Allah loves those who judge equitably.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) has commented upon this verse that the
‘devourers of what is forbidden’ are those that take the Imam (a.s.)’s
wealth fraudulently.

Let me now present to you four hadeeth from Imam al Mahdi (a.s.) which
were in the form of written replies, taken from Bihar Ul Anwaar, Vol 12.

1.‘Those people who are aware of our rights and eats even a little bit
from it, then he has eaten fire’.

2.‘Any person who permits for himself even one Dirham from our right
which is prohibited for him, then he is cursed by Allah (s.w.t.), His
angels and all the people’.

3.‘Whoever eats anything from our right then he is filling his stomach
with fire and will burn in Hell’.

4.‘And the person in whose control is our wealth which he has made it
permissible upon himself, and he distributes it without our
authorisation, as if he is distributing his own wealth, is an accursed
one and on the day of judgement we will be claimants against him. And so
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has said: ‘Whoever permits himself this wealth
which belongs to my family and Allah (s.w.t.) has forbidden it, then he
is cursed by mine as well as the tongues of all the Prophets (a.s.).
Whoever is unjust to us he will be with those who have done injustice to
us in the past and they have been cursed by Allah (s.w.t.). And so Allah
(s.w.t.) has said: ‘The curse of Allah is on the unjust’’.

<p dir="rtl">
وَنَادَى أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ أَصْحَابَ النَّارِ أَن قَدْ وَجَدْنَا مَا
وَعَدَنَا رَبُّنَا حَقًّا فَهَلْ وَجَدتُّم مَّا وَعَدَ رَبُّكُمْ حَقًّا
قَالُواْ نَعَمْ فَأَذَّنَ مُؤَذِّنٌ بَيْنَهُمْ أَن لَّعْنَةُ اللّهِ
عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 7:44] And the dwellers of the garden will call out to the
inmates of the fire: Surely we have found what our Lord promised us to
be true; have you too found what your Lord promised to be true? They
will say: Yes. Then a crier will cry out among them that the curse of
Allah is on the unjust.

Even after going through these statements of Imam Al Mahdi (a.s.)
somebody is still in doubt then he should give a second glance at his
faith.

CONCLUSIVE ORDERS
-----------------

I can see my readers to be of three categories. The first is that group
which closes its eyes from reality and without even going through any of
the proofs I have provided, they will be angrily asking why I have
written against them.

The second group would be of those that are thinking about the proofs
that I have provided and evaluating their level of reliability.

The third group is of those who understand the situation and are
surveying the whole of the matter in the background of what is around
them very thoroughly and have got respect for the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) in them.

I have nothing to do with the first group of readers and they are
welcome to curse me if they so wish for it would only increase my
virtues in the hereafter, for which I would like to thank them. I am
addressing the last two types of readers who are evaluating what I have
said. They are thinking with their minds and not getting emotional about
religion and will not waste any time in accepting the truth when they
see it.  I am making an obligation of mine to remove their confusion.
And they will surely be in confusion as the question still remains that
in the period of occultation, who should the Khums be paid to? The
importance of Khums cannot be denied and refutation of viewpoints is not
sufficient. More proofs need to be given so that the believers can
achieve conviction and that their actions can then be based on this. You
will have noticed in this book of mine that I have not raised an issue
but that I have concluded it. God willing, in the matter of khums as
well I shall not leave you halfway. I will now give such clear
statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) which no one will refute
except a hypocrite.

The point is that the one (a.s.) whose right is this Khums is also the
sole in charge of it. He (a.s.) decided who to give it to who not to
give it to. It is up to him to waive this tax or not to forgive it. You
should know it properly that the Holy Imams (a.s.) have forgave this tax
on their Shiites and have not forgiven their enemies. I am concerned
that the Shiites are the ones going around worrying about Khums when it
has been forgiven to them, although it should be the enemies of the Ahl
Ul Bayt (a.s.) who should be running around worrying about this for it
has not been forgiven to them. You may be getting worried about the
enormity of the claim I have just made, but do not be worried. I have
not made this claim of my own accord but I shall be presenting my proofs
for it from the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) to back it up.
I will do this in the conviction that a Shia will never give preference
to the statements of other people over and above those of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.).

OUR FIRST ONE IS MUHAMMAD, OUR LAST ONE IS MUHAMMAD, OUR MIDDLE ONE IS MUHAMMAD, ALL OF US ARE MUHAMMAD.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is such a well known Hadeeth that there will be no one among the
Shiites who will not know about it regardless of the level of his faith.
I have now chosen for you two Hadeeth from the first Imam (a.s.), three
from the fifth and sixth Imam (a.s.) and one letter from the twelfth
Imam (a.s.) so that the above Hadeeth can have the backing of all the
fourteen Holy Infallibles (a.s.). And if someone has the courage to
reject any of these then he will reject all fourteen of them (a.s.) and
ensure his place in Hell.

Imam Ali (a.s.)’s Orders

Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.) has narrated that Imam Ali (a.s.) has waived
al-Khums for his Shias so that their children are born
clean/legitimate - Allul Sharaia, pp. 289

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: People are being punished and killed because they
do not pay our rights, through suffering from what they eat and
involving in disrespectful acts. But be aware, we have lifted our rights
on our shias and their children - Allul Sharaia, pp. 289

Imam Baqir (a.s.) and Imam Sadiq (a.s.)’s orders

Imam Jafar al Sadiq (a.s.) said: Every one is living off what they have
usurped from us but we have made is permissible for our Shias -Allul
Sharaia, pp. 289

#### AL KAFI - H 1064, Ch. 105, h 3

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Mahbub
from ‘Umar ibn Yazid who has said the following: “I saw Misma’ in
Madina. In that year he had tried to deliver a certain amount of
property to abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who
returned the property to him. I (‘Uram) asked him (Mism’a) about the
reason for the return. He (Mism’a) said, “When I took the property to
him (the Imam) I said, ‘I had become the person in charge of the pearls
in Bahrayn and I have made a four hundred thousand Dirham profit. I have
brought eighty thousand Dinars as your share. I did not want to keep
your share and disregard what Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has
decreed to be for you in our properties.’ The Imam said, ‘Is there no
more from earth and what Allah takes out of it besides one fifth (of
people’s net savings) for us, O abu Sayyar? The whole earth belongs to
us. Whatever Allah causes to come out therefrom belongs to us.’ I then
said, ‘I will bring all the property to you.’ He said, ‘O abu Sayyar, we
have made it a gift for you and relieved you of its liabilities. Take
your property with you. Whatever land is in the hands of our Shi‘a, it
is lawful for them until al-Qa’im will rise with Divine Authority and
power. He will make an agreement with them about whatever land is in
their hands and will give them permission to use. Whatever land is in
the hands of others, their earning from it is not lawful until al-Qa’im
will rise with Divine Authority and power. He will take such lands away
from them and will remove them humiliated.’ “‘Umar ibn Yazid has said,
‘Abu Sayyar said to me, “I do not find anyone doing business or people
as in charge persons of certain tasks, who earn their living lawfully
except myself and those for whom they ('A'immah) have made it lawful.”’”

#### AL KAFI - H 1429, Ch. 130, h 20

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from Sabbah al-Azraq from Muhammad ibn Muslim from one of them
(abu Ja‘far or abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who
has said the following: “Abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, has said, ‘The most serious trouble that one may face on the
day of judgement is when a person with the right to receive al-Khums
will stand up and say, ‘Lord, my al-Khums (was not paid).’ However, we
have gifted it to our Shi’a to cleanse and purify their birth.”

Imam Al Mahdi (a.s.)’s orders

In reply to a letter sent to Imam-e-Zamana (a.s.), The Holy Imam (a.s.)
says: ‘About Khums, I waive my rights for our Shias and make is
permissible for our Shias until the time of my reappearance so that
their children are born clean and pious and remain legitimate’.
Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol 12, pp. 778, Wasail Al Shia, vol. 6, pp. 327,
chapter 4, tradition 16.

The solution to the problem has now been clarified for you and the
statements of ‘All the Muhammads’ have been presented to you above. If
somebody has a hobby of disobeying the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and waste
his wealth, then he is welcome to participate in this hobby of his.


