CHAPTER 13: REVOLUTION
======================

Apparently this topic appears to be unrelated to the subject of this
book. I would not have picked up my pen for this, but since this is
being considered as part of religion nowadays, and those who oppose it
are regarded as the enemies of religion, I consider it my duty to get
rid of this misunderstanding as well. This would sort out the truth from
falsehood and remove uncertainty and doubt.

Revolution means to turn, revolve, etc. and this can be applied to
everything. The major ones are:

1.Governmental revolution.

2.Political revolution - change of system.

3.Revolution in life - Change is lifestyles.

4.Intellectual and spiritual revolution - Change of mind.

5.Religious revolution - Diverting people towards one religion away from
others.

Let us now see what kind of revolution it is that has happened today and
what is behind all this. It has generally been portrayed as a Shiite
revolution whose purpose is the spread of religion all over the world.
This is so that the work about which Allah (s.w.t.) Says ‘You wait and
We too are waiting’ and for which He (s.w.t.) has kept the Imam Al Mahdi
(a.s.) in occultation for, should get done before its time. It is
another matter that based on the principle of ‘All deeds are based upon
intentions’ completely opposite results seem to be coming out.

It is a habit of mine that whenever I need to find out about any matter
then I refer to imam Ali (a.s.)’s saying in Nahj Ul Balagah ‘Whenever
you are suspicious about a matter then you come to kow its result by
looking at its inception’. I have been thinking about this revolution in
Iran for a long time now and suddenly I came across a book entitles
‘Sunni V/s Shia A Pitiful Outcry’. This book presented such facts that
answered all my questions and when you go through the arguments below
you will also realise that whatever it may be, this revolution in Iran
was definitely not a Shiite revolution to spread the Shiite faith. This
was only the establishment of the government of the Mullahs.

WHY DID THE MULLAHS THINK OF FORMING A GOVERNMENT?
--------------------------------------------------

Micavelli has written in his book ‘The Prince’, that in order to
establish religious ordinances, the formation of a government is
necessary. This is because, however they may be, they are above reproach
and the people tend to accept them easily without much opposition and
discipline gets established in the society. For this he quoted the
example of the Roman emperor Romulus’s heir Numa who diverted his people
towards religion and happily governed them in peace and security.

The point is that from the governments of the Banu Umayya and Banu Abbas
to the Othmania caliphates, all of them were dependent on the Fatwas of
the accursed people. Even an eternally accursed ruler like Yazeed
depended upon a Fatwa for the killing of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Even in
Iran the mullahs were heavily involved with the previous Shah’s
government. In all these periods the Fatwas of the mullahs were for sale
and strengthening the grip of the kings. Slowly, slowly the realisation
dawned upon the mullahs that if based on their Fatwas which were bought
by a rulers for a few pennies they can achieve governance, then why
can’t they themselves take over the rulership on the basis of all their
Fatwas. And so they spun their web of Taqleed and formed a large group
of their followers (muqallideen). So much Khums money was being
collected from them that it even exceeded the national budget of many
small countries. In other words a government within a government had
been formed and this thought of forming their own government was a
necessary conclusion for them.

Agha e Khomieni writes in his book ‘Islamic Government’: ‘Their plan is
to keep us backward, to keep us in our present miserable state so they
can exploit our riches, our underground wealth, our lands, and our human
resources. They want us to remain afflicted and wretched, and our poor
to be trapped in their misery. Instead of surrendering to the
injunctions of Islam, which provide a solution for the problem of
poverty, they and their agents wish to go on living in huge places and
enjoy lives of abominable luxury.

We believe in government and believe that the Prophet (s) was bound to
appoint a successor, as he indeed did. Was a successor designated purely
for the sake of expounding law? The expounding of law did not require a
successor to the Prophet. He himself, after all, had expounded the laws;
it would have been enough for the laws to be written down in a book and
put into people’s hands to guide them in their actions. It was logically
necessary for a successor to be appointed for the sake of exercising
government. Law requires a person to execute it.

We need righteous and proper organs of government; that much is
self-evident.

Today, we have 700 million Muslims in the world, 170 million or more of
whom are Shî‘ah. They are all ready to follow us, but we are so lacking
in resolve that we are unable to lead them. We must establish a
government that will enjoy the trust of the people, one in which the
people have confidence and to which they will be able to entrust their
destiny.’

Now that you have heard this from the man behind the revolution itself
you should have little problems in understanding the rest of the
chapter.  I would like to get rid of the misunderstanding that this is a
Shiite revolution, as you can see that there was not such concept in the
minds of the people who created this revolution. There was no
differentiation in the minds between the Shiites and the Sunnis. The
fact is that they neither believed in a Shiite government nor a Sunni
government, but an Islamic government in which there is no difference
between the two. Their Islam is the one which revolves around
government. The main purpose of the revolution was to form a government.

You know that I do not say anything without evidence, which I aim to
present later on. Let me first tell you that apart from a few minor
differences in their ‘Furoo’ there is no difference between the two
sects. Both sects are in fact one and the same. The teachings of the
Holy Imams (a.s.) and the injustices they suffered, their killings, the
suppression of the Shiites and their killings, being cemented in the
walls whilst still alive, etc. which have been related in thousands on
books over the centuries have all been regarded as fairy tales. Those
who have been to Iran will see that the Shiite religious ordinances are
slowly but surely being made to be ever closer to the Sunni ones, and
the day is not far when apart from the matter of grieving for Imam
Husayn (a.s.) no difference will remain between the two. Every one is
aware that there is a world of difference between the two sects in the
beliefs as well as actions. Take a look at a few examples.

1.The major differences is in the testimonies being borne. The Shiites
bear three testimonies which includes the Mastership (Wilayah) of Imam
Ali (a.s.) whilst the others just stop at two.

2.The Shiites do not ascribe a body to Allah (s.w.t.) and consider Him
(s.w.t.) to be beyond sight. The other sects, however, ascribe a body
for the Divine Creator and they all agree that He (s.w.t.) can be seen.

3.The Shiites believe in the Justice of Allah (s.w.t.) to be part of
their primary beliefs whereas the others consider it otherwise.

4.The Shiites believe in the Infallibility of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
whereas the other sects believe that he (s.a.w.) is prone to error. The
Shiites believe that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) is a Prophet all the
times whereas the others consider him (s.a.w.) to be a normal person
some of the time.

5.The Shiites believe in Imamate and is part of their fundamental
beliefs whereas this concept simply does not exist amongst the others.

6.The Shiites believe in Raj’at (Return) whereas the others have no such
belief.

I have merely glanced at the summary of the beliefs and have not paid
any attention to the actions as even they have a lot of differences
among themselves. You can see from above that the two major sects are
fundamentally difference and those who consider them to be similar are
either deluding themselves or others.

Even so, the Fatwa of Agha e Khomeini has been given on page 54 of the
book ‘Sunni Shiite differences an unreal’ “This act of differences among
the Ummah is forbidden in law and it is obligatory upon all Muslims to
oppose this”.

This tune of the amalgamation of the two Sects is so embedded in their
minds that even the Shiites today have lost faith in their own beliefs
to the extent that they are not sure whether they will be going to
Paradise or become the fuel of the fire of Hell. They have started
blaming Allah (s.w.t.) for creating the differences between the two
Sects and so these people are now trying to amalgamate the two Sects
against the Plan of Allah (s.w.t.). In the first page of the above book
it has been stated: ‘Whatever the reason might be behind the formation
of the Sects, but the reality is that we have had to pay a very heavy
price for this as the existence of these Sects has given strength to the
enemies of Islam. The Shiite/Sunni difference is only a difference of
actions, and this small difference does in no way justify the division
of this nation into two. As it will become clear from reading this book,
at the most the difference between the two is the same as the
differences which exist among the four Sunni schools of thought’.

Did you realise what type of people these are and what type of Islam
they have, and how much it relates to the Shiite sect? This is then
evidenced further in the book: ‘New constructions and the leaders of the
oil rich states and their puppets know full well that neither an army is
needed nor weapons, but only a handful of pretenders are needed who can
issue Fatwas as and when needed. They then got some of them to declare
the revolution as a Shiite revolution’.

In order to gain conviction I am now quoting the words of Agha e
Khomeini from page 54 of the book so that it can be concluded that this
revolution has nothing to do with the Shiite religion: ‘We desire that
we should have an Islamic government and that our decisions would be in
accordance with Islamic law; the same Islam that was revealed unto the
Holy prophet (s.a.w.) in which there was no concept of Sunni or Shiite
sects. There were only Muslims, and the difference schools of though did
not exist’.

I don’t understand how this belief came to the lips of this man and
which Islam it was that he is talking about. The Islam which reached us
through the Holy Imams (a.s.) is the Shiite sect, whilst the one which
came through the companions formed the Sunni sects. They are trying to
stop these two types of Islam and are adopting for themselves a third
type. There is no doubt that the correct Islam is the one which revealed
unto the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), but how did this Islam get to them
directly? Maybe someone can untangle this knot. This much is for sure
that in their view both the companions as well as the Holy Imams (a.s.)
are unreliable. In the madness of the unity of the Muslims, the have
falsified their own religion and the people regard this as some sort of
an achievement. It is further stated: ‘The stand for the unity of
Muslims was regarded by some as impossible to achieve while others
deemed it to be possible. They said that we should unite on common
beliefs, on which faith is not necessary, neither are these from the
fundamental beliefs nor from those necessities of religion who avoidance
is prohibited, and respect each others emotions’.

You can realise how dangerous this ground is on which they are taking
us. Based on this, the other sects have nothing to lose, but the Shiite
faith is based on Justice of God (Adaalat) and Imamate, and if these two
are taken away from it then where would it leave the Shiite sect?

In order to achieve their aims they have ignored what is right and what
is wrong. They created a belief that it does not really matter which
Sect you follow for they will all lead you to Paradise, and so on page
25 they printed a statement of Sheykh Shaltout: ‘Allah (s.w.t.)’s
religion and its laws are not based on any particular school of thought.
These are all sects based on jurisprudence and are all acceptable in
front of Allah (s.w.t.).

They have then quoted Sheykh Muhammad Al Ghazali: ‘Both groups have
paced their beliefs on the Unity of Allah (s.w.t.) and the Prophethood
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and none of them has any preference over
the others about this, and they are seekers of salvation’.

WHO CONCEIVED THE PLANS FOR THE REVOLUTION?
-------------------------------------------

There were three groups who conceived of this.

1.A specialist group of Iranian Mujtahids.

2.The Muslim Brotherhood (Ikhwan Al Muslimeen).

3.Jamaa’t Islami Pakistan.

Let me first introduce to you the Muslims Brotherhood.

THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD
----------------------

This organisation was set up by an Englishman called John Phelby who
changed his name to Sheykh Muhammad Phelby. The details of this can be
found in the book ‘History of the Family of Al Saud’ by Nasir Al Saeed.
John Phelby go together a lot of the followers of Sheykh Abdul Wahhab
with long beards and the students of Usool E Fiqh. He got them to issue
Fatwas that whosoever opposes Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud is a unbelievers and
should therefore be killed. An army of religious people was collected
who were obedient to these Sheykhs, who were named as ‘Jaysh Al Ikhwan’
(Army of the Brotherhood).

Ibn Saud collected an army of thirty thousand of these equipped with
British weapons. This army was known as ‘Jaysh Al Ikhwan Ul Muslimeen’
(The Army of the Muslim Brotherhood). This is the Muslim Bortherhood
which made an appearance in Egypt. It had its branches in many parts of
the world under different names. In Pakistan its branch is called
Jama’at E Islami. All these branches had one aim and purpose - take
control of the affairs of the country. They met with stiff opposition as
there are four schools of thought among the Sunnis who opposed them. In
Egypt all their activists, whose leader was Syed Qutb, were lined up and
shot by the then leader Jamal Abdel Nasser. In Pakistan they were
rejected by the people and their mission failed. However, in Iran where
the majority of the people were Shiites, a special group of Mujtahids
found it easier as a lot of them were in their Taqleed. They stepped
over the dead bodies of more than a hundred thousand people and claimed
the government.

This was a short introduction of The Muslim Brotherhood about which the
author writes: ‘In this book the position of the Shiites in the well
known organisation of the Arab world, The Muslim Brotherhood,  has been
clearly set out. The top Scholars of the Shiite world are the founding
fathers of this’ - (Page 3). Now we come to the main purpose of the
revolution which is to be found on page 143 of the book.

‘In the book Al Harkat Al Islami Wa Tahdeeth, Ghanoushi has considered
this new thinking to be the same as the one by Imam Hassan Al Banna,
Allama Mawdudi, Syed Qutb and Imam Khomeini’.

The compiler is of the opinion that a new discipline will emanate from
Iran. Under the heading ‘What do we mean by a new movement?’, he writes:
‘Our purpose is that thinking which will come about from the formation
of an Islamic government and this explanation is in accordance with all
the three movements - The Muslim Brotherhood, Jama’at E Islami Pakistan,
and Iran’s Islamic revolution’.

THE STARTING POINT
------------------

In the book ‘Sunni V/s Shia A Pitiful Outcry’ he writes on page 17 : One
of the thinkers of The Muslim Brotherhood, Suleym Al Hansawi, has
written in his compilations Al Sunnat Al Muftara: ‘During the formation
of this organisation for the unity of the Muslim countries Imam Hassan
Al Banna and a Shiite Mujtahid were present. Unity between The Muslims
Brotherhood and the Shiites was created resulting in the tour of Cairo
by Nawwab Safavi in 1954. Everyone knows that Imam Hassan Al Banna met
Ayatullah Kashani in 1948 during Hajj and there was an understanding and
similarity of views between them’.

And when Nawwab Safavi went to Damascus he met the caretaker of The
Muslim Brotherhood Dr. Mustafa Al Sibai. When Dr. Sibai complained about
the irrelidousness of the Shiites and their inclinations towards
nationalistic parties, Nawwab Safavi said in clear words, ’Those Shiites
who wish to be true Ja’faris should join The Muslim Brotherhood.

This is the Nawwab Safavi who was the leader of the Fidayee E Islam.
Despite having the Shiite ideology they still hold the belief in Muslim
Unity and they have with them a detailed plan for this. One page 19 he
is quoted as saying: ‘Come, let us all work together for Islam and
forget everything else in this struggle. Hasn’t the time arrived for the
Muslims to become aware and eradicate the differences between the
Shiites and the Sunnis.

When the Shah of Iran ordered the execution of Nawwab Safavi, Fateh
Yaqin of The Muslim Brotherhood commented: ‘In this way a Shiite Muslim
has become part of the martyrs of The Muslim Bortherhood. Is there any
Nwwab present in Iran today who can correct what is happening?’ The
writer says: ‘And so Fated Yaqin was waiting for another Nawwab from
Iran. But O my God! Why are these people so worked up about the Nawwab
of Iran? These Nawwabs are greater than the previous ones’.

If you were now to think over this drama played out in the name of
Muslims Unity, you will not come across the names of the Hanafis,
Shafeis, Malikis and Hanbalis anywhere. Are they not all Muslims? Should
they not have been included in this Muslim unity? But no! In all this
they are nowhere to be seen. Only two groups stand out as hot headed in
this. The Muslim Brotherhood and its branches and some Iranian
Mujtahids. This is sufficient for you to realise what the purpose of all
this was.

The following conclusion can be drawn from all the evidence presented
above:

1.On Page 12 there is a statement from The Muslim Brotherhood: ‘This
revolution is under the leadership of such an Imam who is the collective
pride of Islam and the reason for the high status of the Muslims’.

2.On page 41 - In west Germany a historical leader of The Muslim
Brotherhood, Assam Al Attar, sent quite a few congratulatory telexes to
Imam Khomeini and asked the Imam of the Ummah to supplicate for him. His
recorded cassettes have been distributed among the young Muslims.

3.On Page 141 - In Sudan, The Muslim Brotherhood had a great
demonstration in the University of Khartoum and Hassan Al Turabi who is
a well known politician, went to see Imam Khomeini and expressed his
full support.

4.On Page 43 - Faqih Yaqeen, a leader of The Muslim Brotherhood has made
more than one trip to Iran and has expressed his support in his
speeches. In Jordan, Abdul Rahman Khalifa, who is the leader of The
Muslim Brotherhood there, has also expressed his support for the
revolution, before and after it. Niyaz Yusuf, a poet, has advised all
Muslims to support Imam Khomeini in his poems. He says: ‘Khomeini is the
Imam and Guide who has got rid of injustice. (It is surprising that he
has not seen the injustices in Saudi Arabia and did not start a movement
over there. This is because they have already established themselves
over there. Their main purpose was for the destruction of the Shiite
Sect in which they have succeeded. And so if they do not celebrate over
this then what else will they do?) We have given our commitment to Imam
Khomeini and we will eradicate the darkness of polytheism with our blood
so that there will be light in the universe.

5.The Fatwa of Maulana Maudid of the Jama’at E Islami Pakistan has been
printed in the magazine ‘Al Dawah’ of 1979: ‘Khomeini’s revolution is an
Islamic revolution. All the Islamic organisations and youth groups are
involved in this. All Muslims in general and Islamic organisations in
particular should help this revolution in every which way they can’.

6.On Page 50 - Maulana Maudidi, who was a great thinker of this century
and is revered by many has said that it is the religious, moral and
legal duty of every Muslim to support this revolution.

You have seen the praise of Maulana Maududi. It has been assumed that it
is the religious, moral and legal duty of every Muslim to follow Maulana
Maududi. Their predicament is that they could not even manage to hold a
gathering in their own headquarters due to lack of support. The
situation of Jamaat E Islami is in front of your eyes and all Sects are
aware of this. Sometimes they seek support from the Hanafis and
sometimes from the Deobandis. There is a very strong and deep
relationship between the revolutionaries and the Jamaat E Islami
Pakistan. This can even be gauged by the fact that soon after the
revolution, the first group that visited Iran was not a Shia one but a
group of Jamaat E Islami Pakistan under the leadership of Mian Tufail
Muhammad.

THE DREAM OF RULING THE WORLD
-----------------------------

The plan of the Mullahs was not restricted to Iran, but they were
aspiring to rule the world and they wanted all the people to be clothed
in this. And so, on page 55 of the book it says: ‘Iranian Muslims,
alongside the true believers have lifted the banner of the preservation
of all religions’. And on Page 42,: ’It was thought that the armies of
the other countries would bring down their respective governments just
as the Iranian brought down the regime of the Shah’. Apparently, these
are just a few words, but ponder over this and you will see that what
this was leading to was wholesale bloodshed and destruction’.

On Page 47, this was issued from the international organisation of The
Muslim Brotherhood: ‘Kill the opposition in your area for this
opportunity may never arise again’.

Iqbal had told the truth when he said: ‘The religion of the Mullahs is
mischief in the way of God’.

They had even carved out their authoritative boundaries, after their
conquest of the world. On Page 29: ‘The Muslims Brotherhood’s leader of
the first line of the current times, Syed Hadi, writes in his book ‘Al
Islam: ‘Each sect will have autonomous authority in its own area and
they will chose their own leaders. It will be obligatory upon all of
them that they should be obedient to the caliphate’.

LICENCE OF THE REVOLUTION
-------------------------

It has been proven from above that this revolution had nothing to do
with the Shiites. It was due to the fact that the leaders were Shiites,
therefore they needed some sort of legitimacy for this, and so they made
use of two things as a shield. The Holy Quran and the life of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.).

The problem was not of Caliphate or Imamate or Trusteeship or Ul Il Amr,
but of making claims to these so that legitimacy can be obtained for
their actions. On Page 72 of the book ‘Islamic Government and the Rule
of the Jurist’: ‘That Quran whose stance is against the Emperors’.

What I am saying is that if someone were to hold this belief without
referring to the Holy Quran then that is another matter. Those that are
aware of the Quranic Injunctions or those that read the Quran with its
translation will find it difficult to believe this stance. The Holy
Quran is the Proof of Allah on His servants and not a declaration of an
emperor. Go and read the whole Quran. There is no place where Allah
(s.w.t.) has instructed His (s.w.t.) Prophet to overcome a king. Allah
(s.w.t.) did not send the Prophets so that they should leave aside the
propagation of religion and get involved in political affairs and the
achieving the rulership of governments. Did any Prophet tell the king of
his time that he should abdicate in his favour? The Prophet Musa (a.s.)
did not tell the Pharaoh that he should hand over his government to him
(a.s.). he (a.s.) told the Pharaoh to hand over the Israelites so that
he (a.s.) should guide them and correct them. In the story of Prophet
Dawood (a.s.) also we cannot see that he (a.s.) was told by Allah
(s.w.t.) to overturn the throne of Goliath, but it was the people who
requested Prophet Dawood (a.s.) to appoint a king for them so that they
can defend themselves. Prophet Dawood (a.s.) fought against Goliath, in
the army of Talut as an ordinary soldier. It was not his (a.s.) aim to
dethrone Goliath and become the king. It was a defensive battle which is
ingrained in human nature.

Out of all the Prophets, only four of them had a government - Prophet
Dawood (a.s.), Prophet Sulayman (a.s.), Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) and the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). None of them struggled to achieve their
governments and none of the other Prophets expressed such an intent. The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) did not overcome Madina and established a
government there. He fled from Mecca due to the dangers there and
migrated at the request of the people of Madina. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) did indeed call them towards the true religion but did not
aspire for their government. And so for the claim that: ‘The Holy
Quran’s whose struggle is for standing against the emeperors’, is
nothing but a false accusation against the Holy Quran and make is a
plaything. It is possible for this to be the view of Hassan Al Banna, or
Nawwab Safavi or The Muslim Brotherhood, but the Holy Quran is free from
such frivolities.

HOW WAS THE MAP OF THE REVOLUTION MADE?
---------------------------------------

Although evidence from the Holy Quran was given to prove the creation of
the revolution, you will be taken by surprise when you realise the
factors behind this revolution. The Holy Quran is nowhere to be seen.

On Page 152 - ‘When I was in prison, I came across the books of Nehru.
He wrote these books when he was in prison and did not know whether he
will be released or be killed. He had mad a plan for the independence of
India. When he was released, he acted upon the very same plan that he
had conceived of whilst in prison, and he became the prime minister of
four hundred million people’.

I have no need to say any more about this. The plan of Nehru and the
shield of the Holy Quran. Anyhow, this was his first reason. The second
reason was the reference to the lives of the Holy Imams (a.s.), which is
even more dangerous than the first. The first thing he did was to
speculate on the thinking of the Holy Imams (a.s.). What would they have
done in this situation? What would they think about? He found all this
out and in this inspirational state he did not even spare the Holy Imams
(a.s.). The second thing he did was to utilise the situation of the Banu
Abbas with the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.). Why did he do that? Only for the
gaining of government.

On Page 74 - ‘The oppressor rulers knew full well that if the Holy Imam
(a.s.) have time to spare then they will surely take a stand and make
life difficult for us. You can see that Haroun kept the Holy Imam Musa
Al Kadhim (a.s.) in prison for many years and Manoun kept the Holy imam
Ali AL Ridha (a.s.) under close scrutiny and eventually had him
poisoned. This was not because they were of the Family of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) but Haroun and Mamoun understood them to be on the true
religion. Anyway, this was because they knew that the children of Ali
(a.s.) were desirous of government and claim that the Caliphate is
rightfully theirs. They thought that if the Holy Imam Musa AL Kadhim
(a.s.) were to be left free then it is possible that when the
circumstances are favourable to him (a.s.) then he (a.s.) would take a
stand and destroy their governments. And so they never gave them
respite. Do not have any doubts that had the Holy Imam Musa Al Kadhim
(a.s.) been given any leeway he (a.s.) would have definitely taken a
stand and brought down their governments. These people were desirous of
the governments of Banu Abbas and would sacrifice everything for that.
They did not have any particular enmity with the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.).

You have read the reasoning given above. Remember this! There is no
honour for anyone except that which has been given in charity from the
door of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). And so, from someone’s words,
whoever it may be, were to degrade the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) in any
way then this is the criterion which should be used and these words
should be rejected without a moment’s hesitation otherwise you will end
up being unjust to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). They have done this
because they have considered the Holy Imams (a.s.) to be similar to
themselves - helpless. They have assumed that the Holy Imam (a.s.) would
also be dependent upon reasons just like us.  He (a.s.) has no personal
actions. He (a.s.) reacts to the prevalent circumstances. And if nothing
could be done then he (a.s.) kept quiet. As if keeping quiet is due to
his helplessness and not his policy. All this is either due to the lack
of understanding of the station and greatness of the Holy Imams (a.s.)
or is being done deliberately. You tell me! How was it possible that Ali
(a.s.), who lifted the gate of Khyber with his two fingers, was taken
away by a few people with a rope around his neck? And if they say that
Ali (a.s.) was alone, then how come nobody  from the multitude had the
courage to exhume the body of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)? Ali (a.s.) was
alone even then. Does this person who has offered this lame excuse not
realise that each of the Holy Imam (a.s.) has his own purpose to fulfil
which he (a.s.) does so at its appropriate moment in time? He (a.s.)
does not do anything else except fulfil this purpose regardless of the
circumstances that prevail.

#### AL KAFI - H 735, Ch. 61, h2

####

Ahmad ibn Muhammad and Muhammad ibn Yahya have narrated from Muhammad
ibn al-Husayn from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from abu al-Hassan al-Kinani from
Ja‘far ibn Najih al-Kindi from Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn ‘Ubayd Allah
al-‘Umari from his father from his grandfather from abu ‘Abd Allah,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following:
“Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High sent a document to His prophet,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, before his death. He then said, ‘O
Muhammad, this is your will to the noble ones in your family.’ He asked,
‘Who are the noble ones in my family, O Jibril (Gabriel)?’ He then said,
‘They are Ali ibn abu Talib and his sons, recipients of divine supreme
covenant,’ On the document there were several seals of gold. The
Prophet, recipient of divine supreme covenant, delivered it to (Amir al-
Mu’minin) Ali, recipient of divine supreme covenant, and commanded him
to open one seal and follow the instructions for him therein. (Amir
al-Mu’minin) Ali, recipient of divine supreme covenant, then opened one
seal and followed the instruction in it. Then he delivered it to his son
al-Hassan, recipient of divine supreme covenant. He opened a seal and
followed that which was therein (to follow). He then delivered it to
al-Husayn, recipient of divine supreme covenant.. He opened one seal and
found therein instructions that asked him to rise for martyrdom with a
group of people. That there will be no martyrdom for them except along
with you and sell yourself to Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High. He
followed all the instructions. Then he delivered it to Ali ibn
al-Husayn, recipient of divine supreme covenant. He opened one seal and
found therein instructions that asked him to fix his gaze just before
him and remain silent, secluded in his house, and worship his Lord until
his death will arrive. He did as he was instructed and then delivered it
(the sealed document) to his son Muhammad ibn Ali, recipient of divine
supreme covenant. He opened one seal and found therein instructions that
asked him to speak to people and make them learn. That he should not
fear anyone except Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High; no one can harm
him. He followed the instructions and then delivered it to his son
Ja‘far, recipient of divine supreme covenant.. He opened one seal and
found therein instructions that asked him to speak to people, make them
learn, propagate the knowledge of his family (Ahl al- Bayt) and affirm
the veracity of his righteous ancestors. That he should not be afraid of
anyone except Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High; he is secure and
safe. He did as was instructed and then delivered it to his son Musa,
recipient of divine supreme covenant.. In the same way Musa, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, will deliver it to the succeeding Imam and
so on up to the appearance of al-Mahdi, recipient of divine supreme
covenant.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 737, Ch. 61, h4

####

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad al-Ash‘ari has narrated from Mu‘alla ibn Muhammad
from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Harith ibn Ja’far from Ali ibn Isma‘il
ibn Yaqtin from ‘Isa ibn al-Mustafad, abu Musa al-Darir who has said the
following: In the script of al-Safwan there is the following addition:
“Ali in Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abd
al- Rahman al-’Assam from abu ‘Abd Allah al-Bazzaz from Hariz who has
said the following: “I said to abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine
supreme covenant, ‘May Allah keep my soul in service for your cause, why
is it that you, members of the family of the Prophet, recipients of
divine supreme covenant, live such short lives? Your deaths are so close
and soon after the other Imam even though people need you so much?’ “The
Imam said, ‘For every one of us there is a document that contains what
he needs to do within his time. When his assignment according to the
commandments therein is complete, he learns that his time of death has
arrived. The Prophet, recipient of divine supreme covenant, comes to him
to give the news of his death and informs him of all that is for him
with Allah.’

Can you accept that a seeker of knowledge like myself is aware of these
statements while the one who is emulated by multitudes of people is
unaware of this? And his statement, ‘Do not have any doubts that had the
Holy Imam Musa Al Kadhim (a.s.) been given any leeway he (a.s.) would
have definitely taken a stand and brought down their governments’, how
much does it carry in the light of this? Only two possibilities exist
based on his reasoning. Either the Holy Imam (a.s.) was unaware of his
plan of action or else he (a.s.) did not carry it out due to lack of
courage. Whichever of the options you chose, you will end up losing your
faith. The only possibility that exists otherwise is to openly falsify
the one who is reasoning like this.

The reality is that historically as well as from the statements of the
Holy Imam (a.s.), this reasoning which has been presented, cannot be
proven. If Imam Musa Al Kadhim (a.s.) wanted to overthrow the government
he (a.s.) could have done so, but he decided to keep quiet as this was
the right thing to do. If Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) wanted to rule, he
(a.s.) would have accepted the requests of the Khorasanis and assumed
the Caliphate, as this was a golden opportunity for him (a.s0), but did
not do so. Alas! These accusations have been thrown as the Holy Imams
(a.s.) that they (a.s.) used to make war preparations at home, and had
the opportunity arisen, they would have taken a stand and overthrown the
government. What is strange is what he has said about the Banu Abbas
that they neither had any particular enmity against the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) nor against the Holy Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.). This was just a
political matter just like when Aurangzeb has his brothers killed and
Mamoun had his brother Ameen killed. This is despite the fact that every
page of history as well as the statements of the Holy Imams (a.s.) bear
witness that these accursed people were enemies of God, enemies of
religion, adversaries of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and His Family
(a.s.). They were thirsty for their blood and used to envy the greatness
of their (a.s.) position and status. They were afraid that the
multitudes of followers of the Holy Imams (a.s.) might rise up against
them, although the Holy Imams (a.s.) never made any such moves and they
always used to reiterate that this will be done by the Al Qaim (a.s.).
Despite this, a lot of people of low understanding (whose understanding
was similar to the Mujtahids of today) used to take a stand against the
governments, and they never had the support of the Holy Imams (a.s.).

WHAT KIND OF REVOLUTION WAS THIS?
---------------------------------

From the discussion above it has become crystal clear that this
revolution was at the most a political revolution. It was never ever a
sectarian, religious or spiritual one. If you were to ask me proof of
this then I will say that there is no better proof than witnessing it.
Hearsay evidence is something else whereas eyewitness is something else.
I hereby invite you to go to Iran and survey the situation for yourself.
I am not saying this by just sitting in my living room, rather I am
making this statement after having been there myself and interacted with
the people of Iran. These are the conclusions that I have reached:

1.The Iranian currency has fallen in value by a third.

2.Inflation is sky high.

3.People’s purchasing power is on its last breath.

4.People are complaining about their poverty.

5.People are finding it difficult to make ends meet.

6.Harsh and crazy laws have resulted in the virtual obliteration of the
tourist industry. In this situation, calling this a cultural revolution
is a joke.

Intellectual, religious and spiritual revolution is one where the
people’s thoughts have been changed and they freely adapt to the new
life. Changing people’s lives by the force of law cannot be called a
revolution. When you survey the situation you will see that the
situation is quite opposite to the drum that is being beaten that the
people have changed into being pious, God-fearing overnight and that
they are now avoiding frivolities,

1.The people’s appearance is different from their actual lives. The
women observe Hijaab when they go out and about, but at home they are
the same as what they used to be during the previous regime.

2.During marriage and other occasions, the custom of dancing is still
being carried on to the extent that the bride herself participates in
dancing.

3.Music is being played commonly. Recorded tapes are being sold openly
in the market place. They used to listen in secret before, but now it is
being done in the open. It looks as if the government is turning a blind
eye to this desire of its public. This is being done in the buses,
hotels, and even in the parks which are under the control of the
government. It is apparent from this that music has been accepted as
part of life in Iran.

4.Drugs taking has increased and even under aged children can be seen to
be smoking cigarettes openly. This is due to the cultural environment
prevalent.

5.Men and women can be seen to be walking around hand in hand in parks
and other places. It is another matter that the woman is clad in Hijaab.

6.Gambling dens have increase. If you were to take a tour of Isfahan
especially at Pul Khwaju you will see a completely different world over
there.

7.The custom of keeping bear is slowly decreasing and now more and more
men are shaving off their beards.

8.The custom keeping a rosary in the hand and playing with it is also on
the decrease. People are slowly returning back to their previous
lifestyle.

9.They are considering the Holy Shrine of the Holy Imam Al Ridha (a.s.)
as a goldmine. Instead of respecting and honouring the visitors, they
are profiteering from them. The shopkeepers, taxi drivers and the
government itself is involved in this. They are charging the visitors
more in places where tickets need to be bought. In this situation, to
call this a religious, spiritual, intellectual and moral revolution is a
crazy man’s dream. It is clear that this was nothing but a political
revolution whose main purpose was to achieve power regardless of the
price which needs to be paid. This has had not effect on the individual
or the collective state of the people.

RESULTS OF THE REVOLUTION
-------------------------

The background and the powers on which this revolution was brought
about, those in the know knew full well the logical results of this.
Whipping up religious fervour and madness to  bringing about a
revolution and to expect good results is in itself a crazy thought. And
so enmity, envy, narrow mindedness, extremism, hard attitudes,
revengefulness, expressed itself in this religiousness. The attitude of
respecting other people’s views was eroded and the thinking ‘I am the
only one who is right and everyone else is wrong’ was created. In the
political, cultural, national and international arenas a hard-line
attitude was adopted instead of an understanding one. Internally people
were forced to adopt a robotic life. Killings and looting became a daily
routine. Fear was implanted upon the people with the help of religious
military forces so that no one would have the courage to lift his head.
On the international scene Iran became isolated due to these policies.
Only a few day had passed after this revolution, there was talk about
exporting it to other countries based on the policies of The Muslim
Brotherhood. As the Shiites were greatly influenced by the Mullas, those
countries where the Shiites were the majority, it was only natural for
the rulers to take notice and alarms bells started ringing. The Iran
Iraq war was due to this. One day the veil will be removed as to who was
behind this revolution. It is necessary to take a look at the effects of
this in the Shiite world and in Iran itself was well.

1.The biggest effect was that Iran stopped becoming a nuclear power. All
the agreements had been signed with European countries, technology from
China, and Plant from Russia.

2.Before the revolution Iran had become the Superman of the area and no
one had the courage to do anything about it. Iran had such a large array
of helicopters which was even bigger than that of America itself. It had
an air force which was even more modern than that of Israel. It had more
than forty thousand tanks and other hardware which cannot even be
numbered. After the revolution I don’t what happened to this. Did the
earth swallow this or the sky took it up. The situation was such that
even a small country like Iraq invaded Iran and got it embroiled in a
baseless eight year war. Iran was moved fifty years back in its
progress. Historically, a lot of powers have wreaked destruction upon
Iran, but the destruction that was brought about by this revolution far
exceeds all of these enemies.

3.Religious terrorism became the rule from which no one was safe. The
police Savak was replaced by the revolutionary guards who considered
everyone as their slaves. Even today they are treating visitors like
prisoners of war in the name of security. The situation in Iraq is even
more difficult but they do not treat visitors like this.

4.A show off society was born which had made exoteric worship as its
bedspread and cover. These people had prostration marks on their
foreheads and rosaries in their hands, but their purpose was to gain the
world in the name of religion.

5.Beliefs were destroyed and Mullah worshipping reached its peak. The
Kalema was changed and the national kalema was adopted from the
adversaries. In the Adhaan, instead of saying Allahu Akbar, Allahu Akbar
separately, it was being recited together. From the third testimony,
‘Ameerul Mo’mineed Imamul Muttaqeen Aliyyun Wali Ullah’ was taken out.
In the prostration they started using their knees instead of their
palms. In the Slaam they have started looking left and right.

These were just a few examples, otherwise a whole book can be written
about this.

THE EFFECTS OF THE REVOLUTION ON PAKISTANI SHIITES
--------------------------------------------------

There is a basic difference between the religious background of Iran and
Pakistan. In Iran, both the Mehraab and the Mimbar were in the hands of
the Fuqaha, and so during and after the revolution they used these two
tools to their full extent. They had very few obstacles in this. In
Pakistan the Mehraab was in the hands of those who play around with
Fatwas whilst the Mimbar had always been in the hands of the Zakireen
who used to teach people about their beliefs and recite the praises of
the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) and their grief and thus strengthen their faith.
From the smallest to the biggest of the Zakireen, all their
methodologies were the same and they hand control over the beliefs of
the people and so the Fatwa players had difficulties in spinning their
webs here. And so started the conflict between the Mehraab and the
Mimbar. An organisation was set up to discredit the Zakireen and that
the control should rest with the Fatwa players. It was either the
centuries old tradition or the grace of the Master (a.s.) that the
people stayed focussed towards the praises of the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.).
From the Mahraab, instead of the praises of the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.), they
started heaping praises on the leaders of Iran and got people acquainted
with their titles. Such an environment was created as if the Holy Imam
(a.s.) had himself appeared in the shape of these Mullahs. It became
obligatory to obey the Mullahs just like obedience is obligatory to the
Holy Imam (a.s.). A group of seven Mullahs was created to discredit the
Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) as much as possible through their lectures. These
satanic thoughts of their is to be found in books like ‘Ahsan Al
Fawaaid’ and ‘Usool al Shara’ie’ which are available even today. Since
all this was done with the blessings of the government, there it kept
quiet about it and did not oppose them even the slightest. This was the
government’s purpose anyhow that the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) should be
discredited to such an extent so that their own leaders should have some
respect among the people. But the Zakireen did oppose these lectures of
theirs and a lot of books were written against them, but nevertheless, a
group of people came into being that started worshipping the Mullahs and
was happy with the disrespect of the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.). This small
group is still existing today and is a thorn in the hearts of the
Shiites.

Over here a paramilitary force was set up similar to the revolutionary
guards of Iran. This group’s purpose was that if anyone were to speak
against any mullah then it would act against him. And so attacks were
started against the Zakireen who used to explain the true beliefs of the
Shiites and expose their deceit. For example the attacks against Allamah
Taaj Ud Deen Hyder and Allamah Abdul Hakeem Buturabi. They used to
recite slogans even during the Majalises of the Holy Imam Husayn (a.s.)
in order to divert the attention of the people away from the Holy Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and towards their own leaders. They changed the Durood and
started singing the praises of the Mullahs which was the constitution of
this group. I even heard a person say: ‘The reason why Imam Husayn
(a.s.) did not pray the afternoon prayer was because he was drenched in
blood which is unclean and so prayer could not be done’.  This group is
still around today and has closed its eyes on the hereafter in it
worship for authority and government. The common Shiite is fearful of
this group and is scared of speaking out against them. This group has
forgotten the lessons of history and does not understand that there is
nothing that is eternal over here and there is an ending to every
beginning over here. Maybe these people are unaware of what is to happen
after this ending.

On the other hand in Iran a group of Mullahs was set up to start heaping
praise on the revolutionary leaders rather than the Holy Ahl Ul Bayt
(a.s.) so that people would slowly become unaware of their true beliefs
and divert them towards exoteric acts of worship. This was because the
people would then be dependent upon the Mullahs for their exoteric acts
of worship and the mission of the Mullahs would move forward.

What happened is Pakistan was the religious terrorism became a way of
life. Paramilitary groups began to be set up whose declared intention
was to preserve the Azadaari of the Holy Imam Husayn (a.s.) but in
reality it was to beat up and kill those Shiites who did not conform to
their views. Contemporary history is witness to all this. In this way it
became common knowledge that the Shiites of Pakistan were also trying to
bring about a revolution similar to the one in Iran. The other Sect
vehemently opposed this. Apart from Jamaat E Islami, all the others
strongly opposed this. The other Sect then set up their own paramilitary
forces whose main purpose was the general massacre of the Shiites. The
indoctrination of these forces was that Paradise would become obligatory
on the one who kills Shiites, or loot their properties, or inflict some
sort of loss on them. There were some people among the Shiite leadership
who added fuel to this fire instead of calming things down. They were
waiting for the time when massacres of the Shiite would become
commonplace and there would be no safety for them. When this situation
arose, their dreams, which had had dreamt along with The Muslim
Brotherhood and Jamaat E Islami, came true.

When you look at the big picture you will see that these dreams were not
of their but of their masters, and that they were nothing but pawns in
the big game. And so they started their slogans once again which they
had at the start of the revolution who purpose was the destruction of
the Shiite beliefs. In order to stop this bloodshed an inter Muslim
organisation was set up and an agreement was signed. Have a look at this
agreement and see for yourself. I am quoting this from page 3 of the
magazine Zulfiqar of 12th September 1995: ‘The honour of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.), the Holy Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.), the Holy Imam Mahdi
(a.s.), the pure wives of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), the honourable
companions, and the rightly guided caliphs are part of faith. The who
rejects them is outside the fold of Islam. Insulting them and
discrediting them is forbidden and a crime’. This was signed on the 14th
April 1995 by Mawlana Shah Ahmad Noorani, Mawlana Syed Sajid Ali Naqvi,
Mawlana Syed Ali Al Musawi, Mawlana Muhammad Fazal Hyder (General
secretary of Wafaq Shia Ulama), Mawlana Mureed Abbas Yazdani, Mawlana
Qazi Husayn Ahmad, Mawlana Samee Ul Haq, Mawlana Zia Ul Qasim, Professor
Sajid Meer, Mawlana Agham Taza Pooya, etc. etc.

Since there is a mention of the ‘rightly guided caliphs’ in this
covenant that was signed, the magazine then goes on to explain this
term.

RIGHTLY GUIDED CALIPHS
----------------------

In explanation of the famous statement of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) that
there will be twelve caliphs after him (s.a.w.), the famous Sunni Judge
Qazi Ayyaz has written in his book ‘Al Shifa’, and the scholar Ibn Hajar
Askalani in his commentary of Sahih Al Bukhari, jalal Ud Deen Suyuti in
Taarikh Ul Khulafa, Mulla Ali Qadri in Sharah Fiqah Akbar and Shah Wali
Ullah Dehlavi in his book Azaalat Ul Khifa have listed them as
follows: -

**1.Abu Bakr**

**2.Umar**

**3.Uthman**

**4.Ali (a.s.)**

**5.Muawiya**

**6.Yazeed**

**7.Abdul Malik Bin Marwaan**

**8.Walid**

**9.Suleyman**

**10.Yazeed Bin Abdul Malik**

**11.Hisham**

**12.Walid Bin Abdul Malik**

Then there is a quote from Ibn Taymiyya, ‘Some are of the opinion that
Yazeed was from among the companions and some think he was a prophet and
some think he was from among the rightly guided caliphs’.

Under this there was an excerpt from a interview of the Sipah E Sahaba
leader Mawlana Qasimi: ‘Despite our sacrifices, we only agreed with this
covenant to be signed because if this can stop the cursing of the
companions then we would have achieved our purpose. In 1400 years these
two Sects have finally agreed that the one who abuses the rightly guided
caliphs, the pure wives, the honourable companions, has nothing to do
with Islam. Sajid Naqvi and Mured Abbas Yazdani are signatories to this
that those who abuse the rightly guided caliphs, the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.)
and the companions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) is outside the fold of
Islam’.

And so it is my advice to the Shiites that they should investigate the
happenings at Saqeefa, the injustice upon the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.), the
burning of the door of the Holy Lady Fatimah (a.s.) and the martyrdom of
her unborn child Mohsin, the battles of jamal, Siffeen and Nahrwaan, the
killing of Imam Ali (a.s.), and Imam Hassan (a.s.), the tragic events of
Karbala and the treatment of the Holy Family (a.s.), and the injustices
that were heaped upon the other Holy Imams (a.s.), and forget about all
that has been written in their books now. They should stop their
mourning sessions of the Holy Imam Husayn (a.s.) as the finger now
points to big people, and they might now end up being outside the fold
of Islam. They should now come to a new Islam which was the one
presented by the originators of the revolution. There is victory for
them in this. We come from Allah (s.w.t.) and to Him we return. I have
no more strength now to write any more about this revolution. Whoever
wants to do whatever can do it. My work was only for the uncovering of
the veil. And that I have done.

The reality is that all this audacity and courage was possible because
the public was fooled into believing that the Holy Imams (a.s.) were
just sitting tight at home and did not leave any guidance for us. The
Holy Imam Mahdi (a.s.) did not guide us as to what our way of life
should be during the major occultation and so the complete running of
the affairs of religion is in the hands of the Mullahs. They cant turn
and twist it as they feel like. They can play with it as they like and
we have no choice but to be obedient to them.

In order to do away with this misunderstanding I am hereby quoting the
Hadeeth of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) in reference to what our way of
life should be during the major occultation. There are numerous such
Hadeeth and it is obvious that it is not possible for me to quote all of
them and so I am only quoting a few of them by way of sample in which
the Holy Imams (a.s.) have strongly forbidden us to get involved with
the formation of government, political affairs of the state, violent
demonstrations, and armed rebellions.

The Holy Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: ‘I am advising you to fear
Allah (s.w.t.), stay away from the crowds of people and stay at home.
Stay away from those of our family that take up armed rebellions as they
have no purpose or destination. Know this as well that whichever group
that takes a stand will not be able to eradicate injustice not will it
be able to bring honour to religion, but afflictions will come upon them
which will break them up’ - BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 11; PAGE 276 (URDU)

The Holy Imam Ja’fa Al Sadiq (a.s.) said: ‘You people sit at home. When
you see me that I have associated myself with someone, then arm
yourselves and come towards me’. - BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 11; PAGE 287
(URDU)

The Holy Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) said; ‘At this time sit at home and
your coming out will create strife as Allah (s.w.t.) will occupy with
those matters which they do not approve of. - BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 11;
PAGE 287 (URDU)

The Holy imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) said: ‘You keep your mouths shut
and sit at home as this matter will not be for you nor for the people’ -
BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 11; PAGE 289 (URDU)

The Holy Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: ‘So long as the earth and the
sky are silent, you remain silent as well and do not come out as when
the Master of the Time (a.s.) comes it will not be hidden from anyone. -
BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 11; PAGE 281 (URDU)

It is written in Nahj Ul Balagah that the Holy Imam Ali (a.s.) said:
‘Hold on to the earth and be patient during afflictions, do not give
movement to your hands and your swords at all, hold your tongues, when
Allah (s.w.t.) is not in a hurry for you then why are you in a
hurry? - - BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 11; PAGE 291 (URDU)

The Holy Imam Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.) said: ‘By God, if anyone were to
take a stand before the appearance of the Holy Imam Mahdi (a.s.), his
example is that of a baby bird whose wings have not yet fully developed.
Comes out of its nest and the children capture it and start playing with
it’. - BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 12; PAGE 85 (URDU)

The Holy Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) said: ‘Sit at your homes silently
so long as the earth and the sky remain silent, but when you get the
news that Sufyani has made his stand then immediately come to us even
though you may have to walk all the way’. - BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 12; PAGE
85 (URDU)

The Holy Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: ‘There is no better Jihad in
this time than Hajj, Umrah and nearness to the Holy Imam (a.s.)’. AL
KAFI , BOOK OF DIVINE PROOF, CHAPTER 40, H8 (URDU)

The nine Hadeeth above and the one I am about to quote hereby completes
my book and they should be taken as the conclusion of this last chapter.
I do not have any better proof than this nor does any person of faith
has any need for it. Look at this last Hadeeth and remember me in your
prayers.

The Holy Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) said: ‘Before the appearance of Al
Qaim (a.s.), whichever standard (flag) is raised, then know that its
leader is Taghoot (Satan) who is worshipping someone other than Allah
(s.w.t.)’ - - BIHAR UL ANWAAR VOL 11; PAGE 287 (URDU)

This book was completed in November 1999 which corresponds to Rajab
1420.

APPENDIX
--------

UNDERLYING INTENTION
--------------------

I am presenting a gift to all those believing men and women who had
aligned themselves with falsehood only due to lack of knowledge. As they
had not been exposed to the truth before therefore they should now come
towards it as a bird returns to its nest and prove the fact that
‘Everything returns to its origins’.

REFUTATION OF ACTION
--------------------

I have no idea how many drowned and how many survived, but I am certain
that the number of those who survived far exceed those that drowned, for
which there is no amount of thanks that I can give in the presence of
the Holy Imam Mahdi (a.s.) which will be sufficient. The reactions which
I have received from not only Pakistan, but India, England and other
countries as well, clearly prove to me that no matter how strong
falsehood may be, it is not possible for it to eradicate the truth.
Falsehood is not something which can be eradicated and that tells me
that the believers hearts are not bereft of movement in matters of
faith.

As Iqbal has said - Soften yourself and you will see that this clay is
very fertile.

The only regret I have is that so far I have not received any academic
response to my book. For example someone may have pointed out that in
this book a particular reference is incorrect, or a particular Verse is
incorrect or the conclusions that have been reached from them are not
correct. The voice that was heard was that ‘The write is an unbeliever!
He has taken money from American and Israel. The buying of this book,
reading it and keeping it at home amounts to disbelief’. Etc. Etc. Only
those that do not have any evidence or proofs make this kind of talk.
There is no basis for these kind of reactions. These kind of crazy
assertions are not something on which time or paper should be wasted in
response to it, but I do not want the Shiites to be left in any
misunderstanding, no proof should be left out and there should be no
room for escape.

WHAT IS THIS NEW THING?
-----------------------

One thing that was said was, ‘This has been happening for a long time
now and no one has raised a voice against it, so who is this guy who is
creating new things in matters of religion?’ The point is that if a
blind person were to be given eyesight all of a sudden then everything
will look new to him. This is their condition. These people have kept
the Shiites in the dark about their real religion, and so many lies have
been spoken that the Shiites have now come to believe these lies as the
truth, and so if someone were to speak the truth to them then they would
consider it to be a new thing. When you read this book you will realise
that I have presented the interpretation of the Verse of the Holy Quran
as explained by the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). The Hadeeth I have
presented are from extremely old Shiite source books. The ‘Book Of
Suleym Bin Qays Hilali’ is the first Hadeeth book of the Shiite Sect
written at the time of the Holy Imam Ali (a.s.). This book has been
verified by three Infallible Imams (a.s.) - The fourth, fifth and sixth
Holy Imams (a.s.). I have presented quotations from this book.  I have
also quoted from Al Kafi which was written during the minor occultation
of the Holy Imam Mahdi (a.s.). There is no record of any reprimand about
this from the Holy Imam (a.s.) and so this cannot be doubted. Then there
is the period of Shaykh Sadouq which is very near to the beginning of
the major occultation. I have quoted from his books Man La Yahzurul
Faqih and Illul U Shara’ie. I have also quoted from the sermons of the
Holy Imam Ali (a.s.) to be found in Nahj Ul Balagah and Nahj Ul Israr.

Sahifa Kamila is collection of  supplications as taught by the Holy Imam
Al Bin Husayn (a.s.) and is considered to be a very authentic book. I
have quoted from this books as well. Nobody can dispute against the
person of Allamah Majlisi, I have quoted from his books as well. I have
also quoted from the well known Mara’jas, Allamah Hilli, Allamah Toosi,
Allamah Muhammad Baqir Khowansari, Allamah Bakhshashi, Agha e Khomeini,
Allamah Dastaghayb, Mufti Ja’far Husayn etc. Can you please tell me
where have I brought a new thing from? The inventors of new things are
those who have spoiled the map of the Shiite Sect and have established a
religion which has neither to do with the Holy Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) nor
with their (a.s.) religion. They have prohibited the asking of questions
and in this way the whole population has been made to be subservient to
them.

THIEVES BLOWING THE WHISTLE
---------------------------

The second accusation that has labelled against me is that I am breaking
up the community and creating differences between them. Glory be to
Allah (s.w.t.)! The people who are throwing this accusation at me are
the very ones who have been doing nothing but this for centuries. Every
person has his own set of beliefs, his actions are difference from
others, some are emulating this guy and some the other (Taqleed), some
are reciting something as an obligatory act and some as a recommended
one, some are considering a thing to be prohibited whilst the same thing
is considered by others as lawful and permissible, in one Mosque two
congregational prayers are seen. Who has created these differences? Me?

I have a pamphlet on me which has a photograph of a particular Ayatullah
and people have been invited to do his Taqleed as he is the real
Ayatullah. Then there is a reference to a particular person who was
given the title of Ayatullah whilst he was in prison in order to save
him from the death penalty. Who has done all this mess? And the blame is
on me? If in a crowd of falsehood, the raising of the voice of truth an
inviting people to it equates to the spread of dissension, then I accept
this accusation willingly. If you were to take dissension to mean who
you are saying it to be then all the Prophets (a.s.) would come under
this as whenever a Prophet (a.s.) the people became divided into two
groups of those with the truth and those with the falsehood. There can
never be a compromise between truth and falsehood. Whoever reads my book
will testify that its very purpose is to eradicate dissension, and that
is through obedience to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

Is this not a central point on which the whole Shiite world can get
united on? Is it no obligatory upon all to grab hold of the Firm Handle
(Urwat Ul Wusqa)? I have a whole chapter dedicated to differences in my
book where this matter has been extensively discussed in the light of
Divine Verses and the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). And who
is there who can accuse me of spreading dissension?  Except for the one
whose income has been adversely affected of course.

A BOOK OF KNOWLEDGE
-------------------

This is also some sort of a joke. The accusation is that this is not an
academic book. And when questioned as to why this is so, then answer
comes back that this has been written in a layman’s language and is
therefore not a scholarly work. Glory be to Allah (s.w.t.)! Glory be to
Allah (s.w.t.) again! These people are in need of a psychologist.
Remember this and know this well that this is also a conspiracy which
has been played out on the Shiites throughout the centuries that the
books should be written in such a manner that it would be impossible for
the common man to understand them and the knowledge should become
exclusive to a particular group of people only and that the people would
always be dependent upon them and keep their collars round their necks.
And now if someone were to bring the knowledge to the doorsteps of the
common people in their own language then obviously this would be
unacceptable to them as their conspiracy would break up.

DOCTORPHOBIA
------------

I am surprised that despite all the evidence and proofs these people, be
they learned or ignorant, keep on repeating the same thing over and over
again that ‘If someone is sick then he needs to see a doctor and
therefore if a religious problem arises then he needs to go and consult
the priest’. From the first day they said from the pulpit of ‘Baab Ul
Ilm’ that: ‘This person wants everyone to become a Mujtahid and if this
were possible then everyone would also become doctors’. This is a very
big false accusation against me. I definitely do not want every person
to become a Mujtahid. In fact I do not want anyone to become a Mujtahid.
That thing which has nothing to do with the religion of Ahl Ul Bayt
(a.s.) and has been taken from their (a.s.) enemies, how can I encourage
people towards it?

Medical science is a worldly profession and Allah (s.w.t.) hasn’t told
us to adopt worldly professions that everyone should become doctors,
engineers or lawyers. This is up to the individual which branch of
knowledge he wishes to learn and which one he wishes to ignore. He can
even decide not to do that and earn his living doing menial jobs. Allah
(s.w.t.) has regarded all types of methods to earn a living to be an act
of worship provided they are lawful in religion. In the matter of
religion, however, Allah (s.w.t) has not left us free to decide but has
made the acquisition of knowledge and obligation upon all Muslims. The
Pure and Holy Imams (a.s.) has severely reprimanded those who depend
upon others for knowledge and do not bother acquiring it themselves.
Therefore the example of medical science with the knowledge of religion
cannot be valid.

The second point which is necessary to make is that whether it is a
doctor or an engineer, going to them is merely for consultation. You may
have seen advertisements in various hospitals promoting medicine after
which there are the words, ‘If the symptoms persist consult your
physician’. You will also have seen that we can go to any doctor that we
feel like and there are no restrictions. We do not have to go to a
particular one only. Going to a particular doctor does not restrict us
from going to another one. There is also another warning which is
displayed in the hospitals, ‘Medication can be dangerous’. In other
words, it could be dangerous to treat ourselves through medication
without having consulted the doctor first. Now, if these people have
decided that the cure for religious ‘ailments’ has been given to us by
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.), and then if someone
were to create his own ‘medication’ in the form of religious laws and
get other people to partake from it, would this not constitute
‘self-medication’?

The third thing is that, be it a doctor or a lawyer, we have to consult
them out of necessity. These illiterate friends of mine have taken this
to equate to Taqleed (Blind emulation). Even the most serious person
will not be able to hold back his smile at this. When we need to have a
haircut we go to the barber for it, does this now mean that we are in
his Taqleed? When we want to have our shoes repaired and go to the
shoemaker for it does this mean that we are now his Muqallideen?
(Emulators) And so by consulting the doctors we are not emulating him,
but rather we are only consulting him. When turning towards a doctor
does not constitute Taqleed then how can consultation with a priest, be
so. Why are we being forced into it? This matter will become more clear
by way of an example. Supposing a priest were to become sick and goes to
the doctor. According to them he will then be doing his Taqleed. Now,
the situation would be that both of them are in each other’s Taqleed
according to them. This like the chicken and egg situation. Which came
first? Only those who are blind of intellect will regard the turning
towards the doctors and engineers as Taqleed. These people do not
understand what connotations come out of this. It is proven from history
that whenever prophet (a.s.) or the Holy Imams (a.s.) fell ill, they
consulted the physicians. But these people have their businesses to run
and if the Holy infallibles (a.s.) get degraded in the process then so
be it.

IGNORANT RESPONSE
-----------------

One Allamah expressed intense disgust over my book. Someone asked him:
‘Sir! If this book is so bad and a lot of people are being misguided
with it, why do you not write a response to it?’ He replied arrogantly,
‘We do not respond to ignorant people!’

First of all, I have neither claimed to be a scholar, nor have I adorned
myself with any titles. Furthermore the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has
defined an ignorant person in this way: ‘One who claims to be learned is
the ignorant’. Praise be to Allah (s.w.t.)! I fall outside the ambit of
this definition of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). This Allamah should worry
about himself as he has adorned himself with the title of ‘The Most
Knowledgeable One’ (Allamah).

CONSPIRACY TO DESTROY SHIITE LIFE
---------------------------------

One person was so impressed with this book that he expressed his
feelings that he agreed with all of it. Then he met this ‘teacher of
angels’ who said to him: ‘My friend! This book is very dangerous’. He
asked: ‘And why is that so?’ The guy said: ‘Have you not read the
chapter on Khums? This is a conspiracy to destroy the Shiite way of
life’.

Firstly, someone should ask him what connection do the Shiites have with
Khums, for it is only for the Family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and
not for the general public. Now, listen to me about the attitude that
prevail against the Family Member of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) (Sadaat).

First of all they ruin their honour by asking them for proof of being
Seyyids. Now where on earth is he supposed to get this certificate from?
And even if he does succeed in doing so, when are they going to accept
it anyhow? The want a Priest to certify it as he also has a living to
make.  Now, how does a strange Mullah know whether a person is a Seyyid
or not? He just has to take some money and issue a certificate. And when
this Seyyid gets this certificate to go and collect Khums he find that
there is a long queue before him. And when he finally gets his turn, he
gets a miserly two hundred rupees in his hand from which he has to run
his home, pay for hospital care and educate his children with it. The
correct thing for these degenerate people to do would be to deliver the
Khums monies directly to the homes of the Seyyids and not to make them
queue up for it. When the government imposes a tax, does it come to
their doors to collect it or do they go running towards their office to
pay it in case they get imposed with a penalty. This situation of the
Seyyids was either seen during the rule of the Umayyid and the Abbasid
dynasties or it is being seen now at the hands of those who call
themselves Shiites.

AN IMPORTANT OBJECTION
----------------------

I have discussed ‘Conjecture’ as being a principle of Ijtihad in my book
condemningly. I have presented Divine Verses and the statements of the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.) which have strictly forbidden the use of
conjecture. An objection was raised against me and a couple of Hadeeth
were sent to me without any references attached to them. The first one
quoted an incident whereby the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) was leading prayers
when a cry of a child was hear from inside his house. He (s.a.w.)
shortened his prayers and went inside the house. When he (s.a.w.)
returned the companions asked him: ‘O Prophet Of Allah! Why did you
shorten the prayers?’ He (s.a.w.) replied: ‘I surmised that it was
Husayn (a.s.) that was crying’. Over here the Arabic word ‘Zann’ has
been used by him (s.a.w.). The other Hadeeth which they presented to me
is to be found in Sermon No. 54 of Nahj Ul Balagah. When the people
crowded around the Holy Imam (a.s.) pressuring him (a.s.) to accept the
Caliphate, he (as.) said: ‘I surmised that they would kill me’. Over
here also the Arabic word ‘Zann’ has been used. The question they raised
was that if the Holy Infallibles can act upon conjectures then why can’t
we? What I am saying is that they have only given me a couple of Hadeeth
but I am referring them to a Verse of the Holy Quran where Allah
(s.w.t.) has used the term ‘Zann’ for his truthful Prophet.

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَالَ لِلَّذِي ظَنَّ أَنَّهُ نَاجٍ مِّنْهُمَا اذْكُرْنِي عِندَ رَبِّكَ
فَأَنسَاهُ الشَّيْطَانُ ذِكْرَ رَبِّهِ فَلَبِثَ فِي السِّجْنِ بِضْعَ
سِنِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 12:42] And he said to him whom he knew would be delivered of the
two: Remember me with your lord; but the Shaitan caused him to forget
mentioning (it) to his lord, so he remained in the prison a few years.

There you are! Now it has been established that the word ‘Zann’ has been
used for a truthful Prophet and so I hereby present my congratulations
to these people.

I don’t think this argument has been presented to me out of ignorance. I
am of the conclusion that this is a joke which has been played on our
religion. What I find to be strange is that these people do not even
shirk from falsifying Divine Verse and Holy Narrations in order to
justify their conjectures. The Holy Quran is quite clear is stating that
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) NEVER used to speak of his own accord.
Whatsoever was revealed unto him (a.s.) is what he (s.a.w.) spoke. What
has revelation got to do with conjecture? And the Holy Imam (a.s.) is
reported to have said that even if all the veils were to be lifted from
him, it would not make an iota of a difference to his conviction.
Despite this, these people have the audacity to associate these Holy
Personalities with conjecture. Any aware person will testify that a word
used by different people does not always carry the same meaning. We
refer to ourselves has being alive and Allah (s.w.t.) also refers to
Himself as being Alive. Does the term ‘alive’ carry the same meaning for
both? We have also been referred to as people and so have the Prophets
(a.s.) and Holy Imams (a.s.). Does this mean that we are all the same? I
would have never bothered to answer these frivolities, but as this is an
academic discussion therefore I want my readers to understand this
correctly.

At this juncture I would like to discuss five term which have been used
for both the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) as well as the generality of
people.

THOSE FIMRLY ROOTED IN KNOWLEDGE (RAASIKUNA FIL'ILM)
----------------------------------------------------

<p dir="rtl">
لَّـكِنِ الرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ مِنْهُمْ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيكَ وَمَا أُنزِلَ مِن قَبْلِكَ
وَالْمُقِيمِينَ الصَّلاَةَ وَالْمُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
بِاللّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ أُوْلَـئِكَ سَنُؤْتِيهِمْ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
</p>

[Shakir 4:162] But the firm in knowledge among them and the believers
believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before
you, and those who keep up prayers and those who give the poor-rate and
the believers in Allah and the last day, these it is whom We will give a
mighty reward.

The believers from among the People of the Book have been referred to as
‘Those who are firmly rooted in knowledge’.

<p dir="rtl">
هُوَ الَّذِيَ أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ مِنْهُ آيَاتٌ مُّحْكَمَاتٌ
هُنَّ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ وَأُخَرُ مُتَشَابِهَاتٌ فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ في
قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَابَهَ مِنْهُ ابْتِغَاء
الْفِتْنَةِ وَابْتِغَاء تَأْوِيلِهِ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلاَّ
اللّهُ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ يَقُولُونَ آمَنَّا بِهِ كُلٌّ مِّنْ
عِندِ رَبِّنَا وَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ إِلاَّ أُوْلُواْ الألْبَابِ
</p>

[Shakir 3:7] He it is Who has revealed the Book to you; some of its
verses are decisive, they are the basis of the Book, and others are
allegorical; then as for those in whose hearts there is perversity they
follow the part of it which is allegorical, seeking to mislead and
seeking to give it (their own) interpretation, but none knows its
interpretation except Allah, and those who are firmly rooted in
knowledge say: We believe in it, it is all from our Lord; and none do
mind except those having understanding.

In this Verse it is the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) that have been referred
to as those who are rooted in knowledge. How can we conclude from this
that they are both equally firmly rooted in knowledge.

THE UNJUST
----------

Take a look at these two Verses:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّالِحَاتِ فَيُوَفِّيهِمْ
أُجُورَهُمْ وَاللّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 3:57] And as to those who believe and do good deeds, He will pay
them fully their rewards; and Allah does not love the unjust.

<p dir="rtl">
كَيْفَ يَهْدِي اللّهُ قَوْمًا كَفَرُواْ بَعْدَ إِيمَانِهِمْ وَشَهِدُواْ
أَنَّ الرَّسُولَ حَقٌّ وَجَاءهُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ وَاللّهُ لاَ يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 3:86] How shall Allah guide a people who disbelieved after their
believing and (after) they had borne witness that the Messenger was true
and clear arguments had come to them; and Allah does not guide the
unjust people.

There are numerous such Verses in the Holy Quran. Two things can be
established with these two Verses - (1) Allah (s.w.t.) does not guide
the Unjust. In other words the unjust would be a people gone astray. (2)
Allah (s.w.t.) does not befriend the unjust. In other words the unjust
would be the enemies of Allah (s.w.t.). Let us now look for the same
wordings used for Prophets (a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
وَقُلْنَا يَا آدَمُ اسْكُنْ أَنتَ وَزَوْجُكَ الْجَنَّةَ وَكُلاَ مِنْهَا
رَغَداً حَيْثُ شِئْتُمَا وَلاَ تَقْرَبَا هَـذِهِ الشَّجَرَةَ فَتَكُونَا
مِنَ الْظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:35] And We said: O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in the garden
and eat from it a plenteous (food) wherever you wish and do not approach
this tree, for then you will be of the unjust.

<p dir="rtl">
وَذَا النُّونِ إِذ ذَّهَبَ مُغَاضِبًا فَظَنَّ أَن لَّن نَّقْدِرَ
عَلَيْهِ فَنَادَى فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ أَن لَّا إِلَهَ إِلَّا أَنتَ
سُبْحَانَكَ إِنِّي كُنتُ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 21:87] And Yunus, when he went away in wrath, so he thought that
We would not straiten him, so he called out among afflictions: There is
no god but Thou, glory be to Thee; surely I am of those who make
themselves to suffer loss.

Now if someone has the courage he should come forward and say that this
word has been used in the same meaning here that it was used for other
people. Then the ugly connotations of this would be assigned to the
Prophets (a.s.) (God forbid!)

I know that these people are now going to teach me the difference
meanings of the word ‘unjust’. One thing is for certain, whatever type
of injustice it may be, it is the opposite of justice.

KNOWLEDGE
---------

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ فَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ اللَّهُ
الَّذِينَ صَدَقُوا وَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ الْكَاذِبِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 29:3] And certainly We tried those before them, so Allah will
certainly know those who are true and He will certainly know the liars.

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَلَيَعْلَمَنَّ
الْمُنَافِقِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 29:11] And most certainly Allah will know those who believe and
most certainly He will know the hypocrites.

<p dir="rtl">
لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَأَنزَلْنَا مَعَهُمُ
الْكِتَابَ وَالْمِيزَانَ لِيَقُومَ النَّاسُ بِالْقِسْطِ وَأَنزَلْنَا
الْحَدِيدَ فِيهِ بَأْسٌ شَدِيدٌ وَمَنَافِعُ لِلنَّاسِ وَلِيَعْلَمَ
اللَّهُ مَن يَنصُرُهُ وَرُسُلَهُ بِالْغَيْبِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَوِيٌّ
عَزِيزٌ
</p>

[Shakir 57:25] Certainly We sent Our messengers with clear arguments,
and sent down with them the Book and the balance that men may conduct
themselves with equity; and We have made the iron, wherein is great
violence and advantages to men, and that Allah may know who helps Him
and His messengers in the secret; surely Allah is Strong, Mighty.

If we were to take the same meaning from this word, then the conclusion
would be that even Allah (s.w.t.) does not know the future events. (God
Forbid!)

MAYBE (LA’ALLA)
---------------

This word is used when the speaker is not convinced of what he is
saying.  Allah (s.w.t.) has Used this same word for Himself (s.w.t) on
numerous occasions. A few examples of which are:

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اعْبُدُواْ رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ
وَالَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:21] O men! serve your Lord Who created you and those before
you so that you may guard (against evil).

<p dir="rtl">
ثُمَّ عَفَوْنَا عَنكُمِ مِّن بَعْدِ ذَلِكَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:52] Then We pardoned you after that so that you might give
thanks.

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَى الْكِتَابَ وَالْفُرْقَانَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:53] And when We gave Musa the Book and the distinction that
you might walk aright.

Are we now to conclude (God forbid!) that even Allah (s.w.t.) talks
without conviction?

KINGDOM
-------

<p dir="rtl">
قُلِ اللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ الْمُلْكِ تُؤْتِي الْمُلْكَ مَن تَشَاء وَتَنزِعُ
الْمُلْكَ مِمَّن تَشَاء وَتُعِزُّ مَن تَشَاء وَتُذِلُّ مَن تَشَاء
بِيَدِكَ الْخَيْرُ إِنَّكَ عَلَىَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
</p>

[Shakir 3:26] Say: O Allah, Master of the Kingdom! Thou givest the
kingdom to whomsoever Thou pleasest and takest away the kingdom from
whomsoever Thou pleasest, and Thou exaltest whom Thou pleasest and
abasest whom Thou pleasest in Thine hand is the good; surety, Thou hast
power over all things.

<p dir="rtl">
أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلَى مَا آتَاهُمُ اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ فَقَدْ
آتَيْنَا آلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَآتَيْنَاهُم
مُّلْكًا عَظِيمًا
</p>

[Shakir 4:54] Or do they envy the people for what Allah has given them
of His grace? But indeed We have given to Ibrahim's children the Book
and the wisdom, and We have given them a grand kingdom.

Are we now to take kingdom to mean the same in all these situations?
This is the reason why the translators and the commentators have made us
of interpretation on these occasions. The word ‘conjecture’ (Zann) also
has to be looked at in the same manner. The Holy Infallibles (a.s.) are
at such a high level that the mere thought of uncertainty does not
arise. For ignorant people like us, acting upon conjecture is shameful
and prohibited as conviction is a condition for actions.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا يَتَّبِعُ أَكْثَرُهُمْ إِلاَّ ظَنًّا إَنَّ الظَّنَّ لاَ يُغْنِي
مِنَ الْحَقِّ شَيْئًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَيمٌ بِمَا يَفْعَلُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 10:36] And most of them do not follow (anything) but conjecture;
surely conjecture will not avail aught against the truth; surely Allah
is cognizant of what they do.

After all these clarifications, no doubt remains, but I would still like
to explain further as to what meanings are to be taken when this word
gets used for the Prophets (a.s.) and the Holy Imams (a.s.).

Zann has three meanings linguistically - conjecture, doubt, and
conviction. This is to derive a conclusion based on witnessing something
based on knowledge and intellect. When you realise the difference
between the knowledge and intellect of the Holy Imams (a.s.) and
ordinary people, the matter would become clear. All scientists,
philosophers and wise people are unanimous in concluding that the human
being does not use more than a third of his brain. If he were to use
more than this then he would become paralysed and go mad. In this way
two thirds of the brain remains unused. This is where the first stage of
revelations begins. Anyway, these are the possibilities. Practically,
all the intellectuals and scientists so far have only managed to used
five percent of their brain. The human has yet to exceed these levels.
This means that ninety five percent still remains untapped. It is
irrefutable that when a human being uses his deficient intellect to get
to some conclusions, the matter will always be subject to doubt. In
contrast the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) use their complete intellect. It is
the same with knowledge. Our knowledge is restricted and localised,
whereas the knowledge of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) unrestricted and
universal. And so whatever conclusions that will be reached by them
(a.s.) based on their (a.s.) knowledge will be free from uncertainty and
doubt. This is the reason why Allah (s.w.t.) has condemned our
conjectures whereas those of the Holy Inafallibles (a.s.) have been
Praised. Too try and equate our conjectures with theirs is proof of our
ignorance.

FRIDAY PRAYERS
--------------

Al lot of questions came to me regarding Friday and Eid Prayers. I never
respond to irresponsible talk and am not going to do so now. However, I
will respond to academic questions which are raised with good
intentions. Basically, all these questions can be summarised into one:
‘Why should we not pray the Friday Prayers when there is an explicit
Order for it in the Holy Quran?’ This is a reasonable question and I
consider it an obligation upon myself to answer it.

The first point to note is that the Friday Prayer is completely
different from other Daily Prayers. It is an obligation to ‘make up’ for
the missed Daily Prayers but there is not such regulation surrounding
the Friday Prayer. There is no Order to leave aside trading for the
Daily Prayers like there is for the Friday Prayer. The sermon forms an
obligatory part of the Friday Prayer and there is not such obligation
for the Daily Prayers. It is such and obligation that during the sermon
no other prayer can be prayed. The purpose of the sermon is to achieve
and understanding the Holy Imam (a.s.) of our time and announce his
apparent governance. The Prayer leader has to hold a stick in his hand
during the sermon. All these factors point to one thing that the purpose
of this is to explain the honour and dignity of the Holy Imam (a.s.). It
stands to reason that this can only be done when the Holy Imam (a.s.) is
physically present among us (Has come out of the major occultation).
Allah (s.w.t.) neither gives us any pointless Orders nor is He (s.w.t.)
in need of any of our Prayers.

OBLIGATORY PRE-CONDITIONS
-------------------------

Whatever obligatory acts that the Jurists deal with, they all come with
conditions attached to them. These acts are only obligatory if the
pre-conditions for it are met or else they become prohibited. For
example, for a Prayer to be done it is a must that the clothes that we
wear and the place where we Pray are not usurped property. Now if
someone were to wear usurped clothes and start praying on usurped land
and then respond to objections by saying that: ‘Why should I not pray
when there is an explicit order for it in the Holy Quran?’, then this
would testify to his ignorance and lack of intellect. And if in this
condition this person does pray, then instead of worshipping Allah
(s.w.t.) he would have ended up being disobedient to Him (s.w.t.).
Similarly, for fasting, it is a pre-condition that a person is not sick
or on a journey. And in this condition is a person insists on fasting
saying that ‘Why should I not fast when there is an explicit order for
it in the Holy Quran’, then he will end up being disobedient to Allah
(s.w.t.) despite having fasted. For Zakaat (Poor rate) possession of
taxable wealth is necessary. If someone were to say: ‘Why should I not
give Zakaat when there are explicit orders for it in the Holy Quran?’
when he is not in possession of taxable wealth, then he will have
rebelled against Allah (s.w.t.). It is a pre-condition of Hajj that a
person has disposable income and if someone were to say: ‘Why should I
not perform hajj when there is an explicit order for it in the Holy
Quran?’ the he is being stubborn against Allah (s.w.t.). For Jihad the
order of the Holy Imam (a.s.) is necessary and if someone were to adorn
himself with weapons and come out saying: ‘Why should I not do Jihad
when there is an explicit order for it in the Holy Qur’an’, then this
will be classified as bloodshed and strife, not an act of worship. It is
the same with Friday Prayers. This is indeed an individual obligation
and whoever disputes this, is an unbeliever and an accursed one. It is
necessary to understand that the Holy Quran contains summarised Orders
the explanations for which were give by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and
the Holy Imams (a.s.). If you were to obtain a list of the
pre-conditions of the Friday Prayer from any Mujtahid you will see that
from all the pre-conditions the most important one is the presence of
the Holy Imam (a.s.). Even Mufti Ja’far Husayn has accepted this. If
this was not the case then there would not have been so many difference
interpretations of the Quranic Verses. If there is an explicit Order to
pray the Friday Prayer then how come the Mujtahids differ in the
Verdicts. Some say it is obligatory, some say it is a recommended Prayer
while some say it is almost an obligation, when it is an individual
obligation. Agha e Khoie says that after the Friday Prayer the Mid-day
Prayer (Zohr) has to be recited while Agha e Khomeini says that it
should not be done. The reason for all these differences is that the
occultation of the Holy Imam (a.s.) is stuck in their throats and in the
interests of Muslim unity and in their desire to please their elder
brothers, these Mujtahids keep giving different Verdicts for this
matter. There is something fishy going on. Let me explain this by way of
an example. We have freedom to eat and drink all those things which have
been declared as lawful by Allah (s.w.t.), but in the month of Ramadhan
these very same things become unlawful unto us during fasting. The time
period that we are living in today can be regarded as the month of
Ramadhan. The occultation of the Holy Imam (a.s.) has rendered many
things as redundant, like Friday Prayer, Edi Prayers Holy War etc. Allah
(s.w.t.) Willing when our Holy Imam (a.s.) makes his appearance, we will
pray these Prayers and we will also take part in Holy Wars. To perform
these actions out of desire when the pre-conditions have not been met
equates to rebellion against Allah (s.w.t.) and obedience to Shaytan.

I have written all this in order to explain these matters to you so that
you may understand better otherwise for a believer the order of the Holy
Imam (a.s.) is sufficient. If the Holy Imam (a.s.) had not been in
occultation then the believers would not wander around here and there. I
have presented the order of the Holy Imam Ali Bin Husayn (a.s.) from
Sahifa E Kamila in my book, and not if someone were to go against that
in his obedience to someone else then he should know that this is a sign
of hypocrisy.

ALTERNATE VIEW
--------------

So far I have dealt with question and objections that have been levelled
against me, but I have also received letters from those who say that
what I have written is insufficient and that I have omitted many other
matters. The basic purpose of my book was to rectify the situation and
so I included whatever I thought was necessary for it and avoided those
matters which would have provoked pointless discussion. These people
have sent me some questions regarding the topics of Ijtihad and Taqleed,
and I think it is necessary to mention them here, but with precaution,
as this has nothing to do with me but it has to do with those who are
busy in promoting this system for worldly benefit. It is not on me to
answer these questions but on those that indulge in Ijtihad, because the
secrets of the home are known to the people of the household. These
Mujtahids, their representatives and their workers should answer these
questions with full responsibility, and with historical references,
since they have assumed the position of being guides of the people. The
people should consider it an obligation upon themselves to extract
answers from these people. They should ensure that their answers are
received in writing with their seals on it so that it can be verified.

QUESTIONS
---------

1 - Although the four special representatives of the Holy Imam Mahdi
(a.s.) themselves never claimed to be so, they were labelled with this
and this became popular. Then the claim was made of general
representation. The question is: ‘Who was the fifth representative?’ In
other words, who was the FIRST PERSON to declare himself as the
representative after the death of Husayn Bin Muhammad (the fourth one)?
How long after his death was this first claim made? What was the name of
his book, which in the language of jurisprudence is referred to as
Tawzeeh Ul Masaail, and when did it first reach the hands of the people?
It is being rumoured that the Abbasides burnt our libraries and so this
book was also burnt with it and is no longer available these days. The
question is that in those very libraries, very old books of ours like Al
Kafi, Man La Yahzur Ul Faqih, Tahzee, Istibsaar, Nahj Ul Balagah,and
numerous sermons of the Holy Imam Ali (a.s.), were present. How come
these books were preserved whereas the only book that burned was the
first Twazeeh Ul Masaail. Is there anyone who can unravel this mystery?

2 - The Mujtahids claim to be the representatives of the Holy Imam Mahdi
(a.s.) and it is a principle that a representative always does the same
as what the his mentor does. When we recite the salutations to our Holy
Imam (a.s.) we use the words: ‘Peace be on you O Imam of the Men and
Jinn’. The person has asked: ‘In the Holy Quran Allah (s.w.t.) has
Declared that He (s.w.t.) did not create the Jinn and the men but for
worshipping Him (s.w.t.)’ Worship denotes obedience to Commands and
these have been given to us by the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). Now that
these Mujtahids are claiming to be the representatives of the Holy Imam
(a.s.), then it follows that commands should also must emanate from
them. The commands should be for the Jinn as well as Men as obedience is
obligatory upon both of them. For Men they claim to be the
representatives of the Holy Imam (a.s.), but, has the obligation been
lifted from the Jinns? Who is the representative for them? Do the Jinns
also come to these famous people to sort out any of their problems?

A few more questions arise from the above:

•The Holy Imam (a.s.) has come as a guide to all mankind and all of the
Jinns and so no one can be equal to them. The origin of the Holy Imam
(a.s.) is different to those of the Jinn and the Men. Do these Mujtahids
claim to be of a different origin from that of the Jinn and Men? And so
how can they claim to be the representatives?

•In our salutation to the Holy Imam (a.s.) we say: ‘Peace be upon you O
partner of the Holy Quran!’ Can a person who is prone to errors ever be
a partner with the Holy Quran?

•In our salutation to the Holy Imam (a.s.) we say: ‘Peace be upon you O
Caliph of the Most Beneficent!’ Can the representatives of this Holy
Imam (a.s.) claim to be a Caliph of Allah (s.w.t.)? And if they cannot
then how can they be the representatives?

•According to the well known Hadeeth, all the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
have been referred to as ‘Muhammads’. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) never
spoke without revelation and therefore none of the Holy Imams (a.s.) did
either. How come these claimants are making statements without Divine
Commands?

3 - There is a strange claim in the Tawzeeh Ul Masaail of Syed Ali
Sistani which reads: ‘By following the rules in this book, you will be
free from giving account on the Day of Judgment for your actions’.

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمْ وَاخْشَوْا يَوْمًا لَّا يَجْزِي
وَالِدٌ عَن وَلَدِهِ وَلَا مَوْلُودٌ هُوَ جَازٍ عَن وَالِدِهِ شَيْئًا
إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ فَلَا تَغُرَّنَّكُمُ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا
وَلَا يَغُرَّنَّكُم بِاللَّهِ الْغَرُورُ
</p>

[Shakir 31:33] O people! guard against (the punishment of) your Lord and
dread the day when a father shall not make any satisfaction for his son,
nor shall the child be the maker of any satisfaction for his father;
surely the promise of Allah is true, therefore let not this world's life
deceive you, nor let the arch-deceiver deceive you in respect of Allah.

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ أَغَيْرَ اللّهِ أَبْغِي رَبًّا وَهُوَ رَبُّ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَلاَ
تَكْسِبُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ إِلاَّ عَلَيْهَا وَلاَ تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ
أُخْرَى ثُمَّ إِلَى رَبِّكُم مَّرْجِعُكُمْ فَيُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا كُنتُمْ
فِيهِ تَخْتَلِفُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 6:164] Say: What! shall I seek a Lord other than Allah? And He
is the Lord of all things; and no soul earns (evil) but against itself,
and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another; then to your
Lord is your return, so He will inform you of that in which you
differed.

<p dir="rtl">
مَّنِ اهْتَدَى فَإِنَّمَا يَهْتَدي لِنَفْسِهِ وَمَن ضَلَّ فَإِنَّمَا
يَضِلُّ عَلَيْهَا وَلاَ تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَى وَمَا كُنَّا
مُعَذِّبِينَ حَتَّى نَبْعَثَ رَسُولاً
</p>

[Shakir 17:15] Whoever goes aright, for his own soul does he go aright;
and whoever goes astray, to its detriment only does he go astray: nor
can the bearer of a burden bear the burden of another, nor do We
chastise until We raise a messenger.

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَى وَإِن تَدْعُ مُثْقَلَةٌ إِلَى
حِمْلِهَا لَا يُحْمَلْ مِنْهُ شَيْءٌ وَلَوْ كَانَ ذَا قُرْبَى إِنَّمَا
تُنذِرُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُم بِالغَيْبِ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَمَن تَزَكَّى فَإِنَّمَا يَتَزَكَّى لِنَفْسِهِ وَإِلَى اللَّهِ
الْمَصِيرُ
</p>

[Shakir 35:18] And a burdened soul cannot bear the burden of another and
if one weighed down by burden should cry for (another to carry) its
burden, not aught of it shall be carried, even though he be near of kin.
You warn only those who fear their Lord in secret and keep up prayer;
and whoever purifies himself, he purifies himself only for (the good of)
his own soul; and to Allah is the eventual coming.

<p dir="rtl">
إِن تَكْفُرُوا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَنِيٌّ عَنكُمْ وَلَا يَرْضَى لِعِبَادِهِ
الْكُفْرَ وَإِن تَشْكُرُوا يَرْضَهُ لَكُمْ وَلَا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ
أُخْرَى ثُمَّ إِلَى رَبِّكُم مَّرْجِعُكُمْ فَيُنَبِّئُكُم بِمَا كُنتُمْ
تَعْمَلُونَ إِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ
</p>

[Shakir 39:7] If you are ungrateful, then surely Allah is
Self-sufficient above all need of you; and He does not like
ungratefulness in His servants; and if you are grateful, He likes it in
you; and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another; then to
your Lord is your return, then will He inform you of what you did;
surely He is Cognizant of what is in the breasts

<p dir="rtl">
أَلَّا تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَى
</p>

[Shakir 53:38] That no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of
another-

The six Verses above quite clearly state that on the Day of Judgment, no
one will bear the burden of anyone else. Each person will have to answer
for his deeds himself. The Holy Quran has also stated that the deceivers
will surely deceive us in this regard. These Mujtahids must be fathers
to their own children and if they cannot bear the burden of their own
children then how can they make the claim to bear the burden of other
people? Does not this person who has made this claim in blatant
violation of it?

4 - Who was the first person to claim that it is obligatory to emulate
(Do the Taqleed of) a non Infallible. And when was this claim first
made?

5 - Who was the first person to make the claim that without being in the
Taqleed of a non Infallible none of the deeds are acceptable? When was
this claim first made? Between the time of the last special
representative of the Holy Imam (a.s.) till the time that this claim was
first made, how much time had elapsed? And what will happen to those
believers who left this world without being in the Taqleed of a
Mujtahid?

6 - Who was the first person to have claimed to be an Ayatullah? And
when he made this claim, what meaning did he make it in? And what is
meant by this title these days? By placing the words ‘Great’ and ‘Grand’
along with this, what benefit is derived from it?

7 - What was the deficiency in the Mujtahids of old who never made the
claim to be Naaib e Imam (a.s.), Hujjat Ul Islam and Ayatullah type of
titles, and what is the speciality of the Mujtahids of today which has
compelled them to make these claims.

These questions have been presented to the scholars and myself as well
as my readers are awaiting answers from them.  We hope that they will
give us replies that is befitting of their glorious status. Instead of
throwing accusations they will adopt the way of academic discourse which
should never be turned into political duels. What is acceptable is that
which can be proven by evidence not by the might of an individual.

THE LATEST
----------

I had already completed my discussion and my book had already gone to
press, so it was not possible for me to add a few pages to it afterward.
I have just received a letter today from someone who says that he used
to be my adversary, but after reading this book he now regrets his
actions and presented his apologies to me. He is my brother in faith and
God Willing a believer in the sight of Allah (s.w.t.).

Concerning the book, he says that someone gave it to him and requested
some answers and so he passed them on to me. This book, ‘Concerns
regarding Ijtihad and Taqleed’, which has been printed by Hassan
Printers of Chowk, Karachi, Pakistan. For contact they have given their
phone number which is 2623515. The price tag of forty rupees has been
printed on the book so that it can be established that it is indeed a
book and not a pamphlet produced by way of charitable donations.
Practically speaking, whoever I have spoken to is prepared to keep the
Holy Quran on his head that this book was distributed freely in Masjid E
Kahyr Ul Amal in Ancholi after the Majlis. It is strange that the very
people who are against the distribution of free food ‘Tabarruk’ in a
Mosque the ones distributing this forty rupee book.

The real problem was that since my book came in to the market, the
Mujtahids and their workers came under great pressure to write and
answer to it. But it will be impossible for them to falsify my book till
the Day of Judgment for falsifying my book will be like falsifying the
Holy Quran the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and their own Mujtahids, because
in this book there are no other references other than from these
sources. And so they were trapped both ways, whether they give an answer
to it or not. Now, everyone thinks that this is indeed an answer to my
book ‘Kash Ul Haqaaiq’, but in reality it is not. In this book there is
absolutely no reference whatsoever to my book nor have any of the points
raised in the book an answer to my points.  Yes, the have certainly
mentioned in their book matters which have nothing to do with the
intellect nor reality in order to mislead the blind and push them into a
pit. I have no concern with the blind but whatever that I have written
is for people of understanding.

Writing is not a problem for me, but there is no point in purposeless
discussions. If you were to look carefully into it you will see that
this book actually verifies what is written in my book and does not
refute it. All you need is an inquiring mind. The have presented on
Quranic Verse and ten Hadeeth, which have all been explained already in
my book to prove my point. Had they dealt with the points that I have
made in my book then at least an academic discussion would have ensued.
What have they gained from repeating the same points all over again?
For their information, they have only presented eleven arguments whilst
I have seventeen in my book. They should now write another book and
mention the six arguments that they have missed out. This is what has
been happening for centuries now.

What I have said is sufficient for this book but I think I should
present a summary of it for the benefit of the publishers. But I have a
slightly different approach of introducing matters. I have divided their
book into different ‘books’ (sections) and summarised these separately.
I never let go of truth-seeking, and so I apologise in advance.

1 - BOOK OF STRANGE THINGS
--------------------------

First of all this book is like a child for whom no one is prepared to be
his father. There is no mention of the author of the book. One Page
there is a statement which reads that: ‘A group of scholars’ have pulled
their resources to put this book together. From this I can gather that
all these scholars are unanimous in the views mentioned in the book.

Whoever has read my book will see that I have only presented the
statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and I have invited people only
towards them (a.s.). Their book is against this approach and there is a
statement of the Holy Imam (a.s.) that: ‘Whenever a consensus is reached
against the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), these people will be hypocrites’.
They should have at least written the name of one of the ‘group of
scholar’ so that he can be recognised and the book can at least be
associated to him. The term, ‘A group of scholars’ is a very wide one
and had different meanings in different areas. In the west even an owl
is referred to as ‘wise’. If they get hold of this book of theirs, they
will wonder how a group of owls have reached a consensus over it.

The second strange thing about this book is that it has proven that a
child is born first then a father comes into existence. One Page 2 it is
written, ‘Second Edition 2002’ when there is no mention of the first
edition and no one is aware of its existence.

The third strange this appears of Pages 52 and 59 of their book where
they have listed the criteria required for the understanding the Holy
Quran and Hadeeth. For the understanding of Hadeeth they have listed
forty nine pre-conditions. What they mean is that neither is anyone
going to be able to meet these forty nine conditions nor is he ever
going to touch a book of Hadeeth. In this way they have prohibited the
reading of the Hadeeth of the Holy Infallibles, except for the
Mujtahids. Let me list some of these conditions that they have listed.

1.The knowledge of all the narrators from the beginning till to date.

2.From the time of the companions and the Tabi’een (Repentants) till
now, the knowledge of the narrators and their clans. In other words, in
the past fourteen centuries whatever narrator of Hadeeth has lived, it
is necessary to know the family background, lineage, etc. of all of them
otherwise you cannot read Hadeeth. It is better if you remain ignorant.

3.The knowledge of the origin of the narrators. In other words he should
have the knowledge of geography otherwise he cannot read Hadeeth.

4.The knowledge of the brother and sisters of the companions and the
Tabi’een.

5.The knowledge of the children and slaves of the companions and the
Tabi’een. This is only possible when a person is related to them and is
a frequent visitor to their homes. What is beyond understanding is the
connection between a Hadeeth and the brothers and sisters of the
companions and the repentants. Anyhow, without this Hadeeth cannot be
understood and therefore it is prohibited to touch a book of Hadeeth.

6.The knowledge of the intention of the companions and the Tabi’een. In
other words, unless someone has the knowledge of the unseen, he can
neither read Hadeeth nor understand it.

I don’t understand whether the Holy infallibles (a.s.) came to give
religion to the people or to establish the leadership of a group. People
should try and understand what kind of game is being played here.

2 - BOOK OF NATURAL INSTINCTS
-----------------------------

Incidentally this group of scholars are experts in human psychology.
They are aware that if the book is monotonous their readers would become
bored and so they have stated certain things for their amusement.

On Page 79 they have quoted a Hadeeth: ‘We have forgiven Khums for our
Shiites’. As the Mujtahids have full knowledge of the brothers, sisters,
brother-in-laws etc. f the narrators, they have therefore derived
different meanings for this statement. Some say that it is forgive for
ever, some say that it is not forgive but it is not necessary for it to
reach the Holy Imam (a.s.) and so it should be buried in the ground so
that when he (a.s.) makes his (a.s.) appearance, then the ground would
regurgitate this wealth and it will then have reached him (a.s.).

You must have found this joke amusing.

In the whole book, people have been diverted into remaining ignorant to
the extent that on Page 71 they have quoted a Hadeeth of the Holy Imam
Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.): ‘Seventy sins of an ignorant will be forgiven
before one of a knowledgeable one’. Then they have quoted another one of
the same Page 71: ‘The scholars indulge in contemplation whilst the
idiots only copy’. Then they have quoted the Holy prophet (s.a.w.);
‘Whoever did not spend his life in seeking good knowledge has wasted
it’.

You have to decide whether one has to seek knowledge or to remain
ignorant.

With regard to Friday Prayer they have quoted a Hadeeth on Page 79:
‘Friday Prayer cannot be done in the absence of the Imam’. They have
also quoted the Fatwa of Syed Murtaza ‘In the period of the major
occultation the praying of the Friday Prayer is unlawful’. Then they
have also quoted from other Mujtahids who have taken the word Imam to be
a prayer leader rather than the person of the Holy Imam (a.s.) and have
come to the conclusion that the Friday Prayer is permissible.

On Page 87 they have quoted two Hadeeth:

(1)It is obligatory to pray the Friday Prayer.

(2)It is obligatory to lead the Friday Prayer.

In the eyes of these people the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have made
statements with double meanings attached to them so that people would
remain confused till the Day of Judgment.

This is the end result of being familiar with the brothers, sisters and
the brother in laws of the narrators.

On Page 51 they have written that: ‘Therefore it is the responsibility
of every person to investigate who is better than a Mujtahid on the
basis of knowledge. The principles of ‘the testimony of two just people’
will be a guide in this regard, otherwise a person should have the
capabilities of determining this and emulate (do the Taqleed of) a
particular Mujtahid’. Each of you can understand quite clearly that it
is not possible for a less knowledgeable person to understand a more
knowledgeable on whether he be just or otherwise. And so they have
quoted the Hadeeth of the Holy Imam Ali (a.s.): ‘A knowledgeable person
understand the ignorant one as he was ignorant before, but an ignorant
person can not understand the knowledgeable one as he we never
knowledgeable before’. This statement has actually sunk the ship of
Ijtihad and Taqleed right here. Since it is not possible for a less
knowledgeable person to know the knowledgeable one then how is it
possible for him to do his Taqleed. In real life, it is the Mujtahid
with the strongest lobby, and whose agents manage to convince the people
of his stature, that draws the biggest following, be he the most
knowledgeable or not. I have many examples of this in front of me but I
don’t think it would be appropriate for me to quote them over here.

On Page 64 the write: ‘If the Holy Imam (a.s.) wanted to appoint
representatives then he (a.s.) would have done so as soon as he went
into major occultation. It is the view of the group of scholars the he
(a.s.) should have left a ten kilometre long list of people to be
followed from the start of the major occultation up until the time of
his (a.s.) appearance’. The point is that whenever a person becomes an
adversary of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), Allah (s.w.t.) crucifies his
intellect.

3 - BOOK OF PROBLEMS
--------------------

This book contains such statements that give rise to questions.

On Page 54 they write: ‘The work of a Mujtahid is to find the solutions
to all the problems of ordinary people from the Holy Quran and the
Sunnah, and not get involved in discussions outside of this’.

The question is that if the limits of the Mujtahids are as defined by
them above then why did they jump into politics? Why did they get
involved in the formation and the break-ups of governments? Are these
matters to do with the future topics of Ijtihad? If they are then why
did the Mujtahids of old avoid this? In this very age, why did Agha E
Khoie sit in a corner away from all of them?

On Page 40 they have written: ‘It is proven from history that the first
one to divert people away from Ijtihad and Taqleed was the founder of
the Akhbari Sect Mullah Muhammad Amin Astarabadi, who wrote in his book
‘Fawaaid Al Madina’ the first treatise against Ijtihad and Taqleed in
eleventh century Hijra.

Over here also a question arises. This was the situation of the people
of that time. The people who are against Ijtihad and Taqleed are being
accused of receiveing dollars from America and this is being advertised
in their sermons and pamphlets. The question is, who was giving dollars
to Muhammad Amin Astarabadi in the eleventh century. Did America exist
at that time? We can prove that it was the English that created the
group of people who wear black and white turbans on their heads. Whoever
has read the book, ‘Memoirs of Hempher’ will testify to this.

4 - BOOK OF DISBELIEF
---------------------

This book contains such statements that give rise to disbelief.

One Page 7 they have quoted the Holy Imam Mahdi (a.s.): ‘The Mujtahids
that meet all the conditions are my example and are trustees of the
prophets (a.s.) and the Imams (a.s.)’.

These people should drown themselves. For the sake of a few worldly
gains they are adamant at selling their hereafter. They are so ignorant
that neither do they know the meaning of the word ‘example (Misl)’ nor
are they aware of the meaning of the word ‘trustee (Waaris)’. They
should first ask their superiors for the correct meanings of these words
before slapping themselves in the face. Neither the origincal Arabic of
these ‘Hadeeth’ have been give nor their references. I hereby challenge
anyone to bring me these ‘Hadeeth’ in Arabic with these very words being
used, from even the most torn book, then I will give him a reward of
then thousand rupees. If not, then it becomes obligatory upon all the
believes to supplicate to Allah (s.w.t.) to send curses upon the liars.
The fear of God has left their hearts and in the protection of a non
infallible person prone to errors, they are prepared to do anything. In
their very book they have quoted a Hadeeth of the Holy Imam Ja’far AL
Sadiq (a.s.) on Page 27: ‘Whoever is bereft of the fear of God cannot be
a scholar’.

On Page 24 they have written: ‘It is not right to say that that
knowledge and Hadeeth should be sought from the Holy imam (a.s.) when
the trustees of Prophets (a.s.) are present’. Both of the points made in
this are against the Holy Quran. I will only believe them when they give
me a written falsification of Ziyarat E Warisa. O group of scholars!
What have you to say?’

On Page 71 it is written: ‘The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has said: “Whoever
welcomes a scholar it is as if he has welcomed me; whoever visited a
scholar it is a though he has visited me; whoever sits near me it is a
though he has sat near me and whoever sits near me it is as though he
has sat near Allah (s.w.t.)’.

If the meaning derived from the word ‘scholar’ is taken to denote the
Mujtahids then understand that you have washed you hands off Tawheed.
The scholars are those who are the manifestation of Allah (s.w.t.),
whose desires and the Desires of Allah (s.w.t.) and whose intentions are
the intentions of Allah (s.w.t.). Looking at them is like looking at
Allah (s.w.t.), the understanding of whom is like understanding Allah
(s.w.t.), obedience to whom is obedience to Allah (s.w.t.), whose words
are the words of Allah (s.w.t.) and whose actions are Allah (s.w.t.)’s
actions. This is not a reference to those who have been born from a
impure clot and is entrapped in the affairs of this world. For God’s
sake! Take pity on yourself. You are not going to live in this world
forever.

Doubts have been raised, for example - Who is a scholar, the meaning of
Fiqh, Faqeeh and Tafaqqoh, difference between a Mujtahid and a Narrator
of Traditions etc. I have no need to write on these once again. You
should refer to the appropriate chapter in my book. I have been very
brief in my introduction of their book, otherwise there are many other
things to say about this. But I have neither the strength nor desire to
deal with all these frivolities. In the end I only want to ask one
thing: ‘You have not mention the Eid Prayers or the supplication recited
therein, anywhere in your entire book. What have you to say about this
disbelief that you are committing and getting others to do so as well?’
Do you not know that the word ‘Khayr’ (good) is in reality the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) themselves? If good were to separate from them even
for an instant then it would lose its existence. Then what does it mean
by the sentence ‘O Allah (s.w.t.) make us enter into good in the same
way as you have made Muhammad (s.a.w.) and his (s.a.w.) Family (a.s.)
enter’? Have you any instance whereby good was separate from them (a.s.)
even for an instant? Do you also not know what is meant by the word
‘Suu’ (evil)? Evil is evil, be it small or large. In your supplications
you used the words ‘Kulli Suu’ (all evil). Then what is meant by the
sentence: ‘O Allah (s.w.t.) remove us from all evil just like you have
removed Muhammad (s.a.w.) and his (s.a.w.) Family (a.s.)? Have you any
instance in your mind when these pure persons were immersed in all evil
even for an instant? Do you not believe in the Verse

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
</p>

Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.

O have you exceeded the Jew in the enmity towards the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) and his (s.a.w.) blessed Family (a.s.)?

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا تَوْفِيقِي إِلاَّ بِاللّهِ
</p>

With none but Allah is the direction of my affair
