CHAPTER 1: CARELESSNESS
=======================

SALVATION RESTS ON BELIEFS
--------------------------

Every religion has certain principles, which are embedded in its roots
and executed through its codes of practice, and give out fruits through
its branches. It is pointless to think about the branches when there are
no roots. Therefore, survival of a tree is dependent upon its roots and
not on its branches.

Based on intellect we can therefore conclude that the survival of a
religion is also based on beliefs and not on the performed deeds. If the
beliefs are incorrect then abundance of deeds are of no use whereas if
beliefs are correct then the scarcity of deeds will be acceptable.
Regarding this matter Allamah Hilli has written in his book ‘Ahsan Ul
Aqaaid’ on page 9: ‘The principles of religion are those which form the
foundation of religion. If any one of these is removed then religion
does not remain intact’.  On page 10 he states: ‘The acceptability of
worship and deeds as wells are salvations rests on the principles,
understanding of a religion and its creed. It is the principles, which
form the criterion for reward and punishment.’

Those that hold correct beliefs, but have ugly deeds will suffer
punishment in the hereafter after which they will be the recipient of
Divine rewards due to their correct beliefs. Eternal punishment is only
for those unbelievers that do not believe in the principles of religion.

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاتَّبَعَتْهُمْ ذُرِّيَّتُهُم بِإِيمَانٍ
أَلْحَقْنَا بِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ وَمَا أَلَتْنَاهُم مِّنْ عَمَلِهِم
مِّن شَيْءٍ كُلُّ امْرِئٍ بِمَا كَسَبَ رَهِينٌ
</p>

[Shakir 52:21] And (as for) those who believe and their offspring follow
them in faith, We will unite with them their offspring and We will not
diminish to them aught of their work; every man is responsible for what
he shall have wrought.

This verse does not state that the children were the doers of good
deeds, rather it refers to the children who followed them in faith.

In ‘Kitaab Ul Mo’min’ Imam Muhammad Baqirasws has said: “On the Day of
Judgment the Lord of the Universe will stop Hisazwj true believer and
make him count each and every one of his sins and forgive them all.
Neither a Prophet nor an angel would be aware of this”.

In another tradition, it has been narrated that Allahazwj the
Self-Sufficient will cover up the sins of a believer and will not make
his sins known to others.

These sins will then be ordered to turn into good deeds. This has been
revealed in this manner:

<p dir="rtl">
إِلَّا مَن تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلًا صَالِحًا فَأُوْلَئِكَ
يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا
رَّحِيمًا
</p>

[Shakir 25:70] Except him who repents and believes and does a good deed;
so these are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones; and
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

The last thing that I would like to say regarding this matter is that
there is a unanimously accepted Prophetic tradition that : ‘My Ummah
would be divided into 73 sects, out of which only one would go to
Paradise whilst 72 of them would go to Hell’.  So, from the 72 sects
that will go astray, even if one person were to go to Paradise then this
tradition will have been falsified. It follows from this that from the
one sect that is destined for Paradise, even if one person were to go to
Hell, even then this tradition will not deliver its promise.

Now, it is a matter of fact that many sects have been formed, not on the
basis of deeds but on the basis of beliefs. This argument of mine can be
verified by Allama Hilli’s book ‘Ahsan Ul Aqaaid’ where he said: ‘From
the Holy Prophetsaww’s nation, the seventy two sects that are destined
for Hell and one which is destined for Paradise, is not based on deeds,
for the deeds of all the people to be the same is against reason. Some
will be carrying out religious obligations without failure whilst others
will be careless in performing them. Since people’s deeds are not of the
same status and kind, therefore punishment and rewards will also be
different. The one sect that is destined for Paradise will surely be due
to its beliefs and not due to its good deeds. Since all the people of a
particular sect profess to the same beliefs, therefore it is possible to
refer to the whole sect as the one destined for Paradise or the one
destined for Hell fire.’

It is therefore imperative upon the ‘Ummah’  that they should analyse
their beliefs on the basis of intellect. Wrong deeds can therefore be
subject to forgiveness, but if the beliefs are wrong then the
possibility of forgiveness does not exist.

Now I am going to quote to you some more traditions from Al Kafi so that
there will remain no possibility of refutation after this.

#### AL KAFI - H 966, Ch. 86, h 4

####

He has narrated from Hisham ibn Salim from Habib al-Sajistani from abu
Ja‘far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the
following:

“Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, has said, ‘I will cause to suffer
punishment all those (citizens) who live a religious life in Islam with
belief in and acknowledgement of the guardianship of unjust 'A'immah
(leaders without Divine Authority) who do not possess authority from
Allah, even though such followers are (apparently) virtuous and pious in
their deeds. I will forgive all those (citizens) who live a religious
life in Islam with belief in and acknowledgement of the guardianship of
an Imam who is just in his dealings and possesses authority from Allah,
even though such followers in their dealings are unjust sinners.’”

Imam Jafar-e-Sadiqasws said: ‘No deed is harmful in the presence of Eman
(as sins will be forgiven) but no deed is beneficial in the presence of
Kufr.  Have you not pondered that Allahazwj Says: There is nothing which
is in the way of their forgiveness except for their denial of Allahazwj
and His Prophetsaww as they eventually die in the state of Kufr.

Imam Jafar-e-Sadiqasws said: In the presence of Eman, no misconduct is
going to have any detrimental effect (in the hereafter) whereas in the
state of Kufr, no benefit will be transferred from the performed good
deeds.

Imam Jafar-e-Sadiqasws said that Amir ul momineenasws frequently used to
say in his sermons: O people! You better adhere to Deen as it is far
beneficial to perform sins while clinching onto the Deen as compared
with those good deeds which are carried out while remaining outside the
Deen.  (In the hereafter) Muslims’ bad deeds will be forgiven but
non-Muslims good deeds will not be accepted.”

Now there is no doubt about the fact that salvation rests on beliefs and
not on the performed deeds. It is from here that I start my discussions.

Now that the importance of the principles of beliefs has become clear
the question arises in the mind that how much effort has gone into
propagating the beliefs. How much teaching and preaching has been done
to the Shia people about their beliefs except for the fact that they
have been made to just remember them superficially. Place your hand on
your heart and ask yourself how many Shias are aware of the concepts of
Tawheed (Divine Unity) and Adalat (Divine Justice)? Who is there among
them who understand Nabuwwat (Prophethood) and the secrets of Imamat?
How many of them know what the Day of Judgment is and what will happen
there? I would not be wrong if I say that 99.9% of them are unaware of
these principles of religion, to the point that they cannot even explain
even their basic definition. In their view religion is only the
performance of deeds, and take their principles as part of their culture
and tradition.

THREE TYPES OF SINS
-------------------

It is an obligation upon us to keep ourselves safe from sins. This means
that we have to keep away from injustice because Allahazwj has revealed
in the Holy Quran the conclusion that on the Day of Judgment a caller
shall cry out ‘Curse of Allahazwj is on the unjust’.

It has been narrated from Imam Mohammed Baqirasws that:

“ZULM (or sins) are of three types

**1-The one which Allahazwj will forgive**

**2-The second which Allahazwj will not forgive**

**3-The third which Allahazwj will not ignore until justice is done**

The one which Allahazwj will not forgive is ‘SHIRK’, and the one which
Allahazwj will forgive are those sins which a person would committed on
himself in the matters which are between him and his creator (such as
prayers, fast etc). The one which will not be ignored until justice is
done are those that a person has committed against other human beings”

This is the scientific age and everything gets done scientifically. If
someone were to give you multiple tasks to perform what would you do?
Would you start from whatever tasks are in hand and take it from there
or would you first make a priority list.

Let’s say for example that you have run out of flour in your home and
your family is hungry, while one family member happens to be ill and
needs attention. What would you do? Would you go and buy the flour first
to feed the family or would you first take the sick person to the
hospital? Obviously every person of intellect would first give priority
to take the sick to the hospital and then buy the flour, because the
other family members would still live, albeit being hungry, but not
taking the sick to the hospital would endanger his life. My Masterasws
has divided sins to be of three types. One, which will be, forgiven, one
which will only be forgive after punishment or compensation and one
which will never be forgiven. Now if you have the intention to stay away
from sins, which of the sins will you worry about first? Which one the
second? And which one is the third?

In my preface to this book, I had written those logical points, which I
am sure will appeal to your intellect. I am reiterating this appeal. You
let me know using your own intellect whether you will first try and stay
away from those sins which will never be forgiven, or not? Then you will
worry about the second type and then lastly about those sins where my
Masterasws has given me hope of forgiveness. So, now the list of sins to
stay away from is somewhat like this.

**1-Shirk**

**2-Dealing with others**

**3-Obligations of religion**

But the priests of our religion have reversed the above order
completely. They have explained to us our religions obligations and
given them the top priority, secondly, to the matters of dealings with
others and lastly they have told us about Shirk. Even then, they have
only said that we should not believe in more than one God. If you were
to even pay a little attention to this you will see that at the present
time hardly any work is taking place in the Shiite world to explain the
principles of religion. All our resources are being spent on explaining
how to perform our ablution correctly, if we forget one cycle in our
prayer then what shall we do etc. And most importantly, focus has been
more on how to collect Khums. When you listen attentively to those that
lead prayers and ascend the pulpits, and analyse their speeches you will
realise that their main purpose is Khums and nothing but Khums.

How did this come about? Why were our preferences changed to be in the
reverse order? Why have we been kept unaware of our beliefs? We shall
consider all these points in the next chapter, but before we proceed to
the next chapter please reflect upon this, as it is a matter of eternal
life, either of damnation or salvation, eternal punishments or eternal
rewards. Do not take this lightly as it could cost us an unrecoverable
loss, an opportunity which will never be given to us again!


