CHAPTER 2: AND NOW IT HAS COME TO THIS
======================================

The matter that I have referred to in the previous chapter will now, God
willing, be discussed in more detail. At present I am giving you a
glance at this situation after which I shall quote a tradition from the
Commander of the Faithful (a.s.).

The eminent scholar Zakir Husayn in his book ‘Hamaare Murtaza Ki Shaan’
has referred to by way of example:

Questioner:  ‘What is this unity of the light of Muhammad (s.a.w.) and
Ali (a.s.) that has been narrated in the traditions?’

Maulana: ‘Do you know the obligatory and the recommended acts in Namaaz
(prayer) and wudhoo (ablution)?’

Questioner: ‘Yes, whatever is necessary.’

Maulana: ‘You do not have the complete knowledge of these things and you
want to know about vain things? Go away and do not get involved in vain
discourse.’

If you have got the general picture of what has happened here then I
shall now quote what the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) has said:

‘Four things are proof of decline. Wasting of principles of religion,
sticking to the branches of religion and consider them more important,
elevating the dishonorable people, looking down upon the honorable
people.’ (Nahj Ul Israr Page 77).

Keeping this tradition in mind, you will find it easier to understand
what I am about to say. This will no doubt disturb the mind whilst one
wonders why all resources and efforts have been directed towards the
branches of religion rather than at its principles. Have we been given
this life so that we should only worry about whether we should wash our
faces once or twice during ablution? Alas, after 1400 years, the rules
of ablution have yet to be sorted out. Or shall I say that this is
nothing but frivolities of knowledge whose purpose is to divert the
people from the purpose of their life and get them entangled in
discussion. The kind of discussions which are better avoided, because
the more hairs they split in these intricacies, the more entangled they
will be and the differences they will create and the more doubts they
will create in regulations. Today there are differences in the most
ordinary of regulations between the Fuqaha (Jurisprudents). The result
of this is that today the believers have been divided into different
groups of different ways of doing things. This is despite the fact that
Allah (s.w.t.)’s Commands are decisive and there is only one Sharia
(law) and not fifty thousand. You have seen above from the statements of
the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) that by giving preference to the
branches of religion over its principles is proof of decline. Now,
reflect upon the decline that has set in on the Shiites, both in their
worldly matters as well as their religious matters, and ponder over what
their causes might be.

RECOGNITION OF IDOLS
--------------------

<p dir="rtl">
لاَ إِكْرَاهَ فِي الدِّينِ قَد تَّبَيَّنَ الرُّشْدُ مِنَ الْغَيِّ فَمَنْ
يَكْفُرْ بِالطَّاغُوتِ وَيُؤْمِن بِاللّهِ فَقَدِ اسْتَمْسَكَ
بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىَ لاَ انفِصَامَ لَهَا وَاللّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
</p>

[Shakir 2:256] There is no compulsion in religion; truly the right way
has become clearly distinct from error; therefore, whoever disbelieves
in the Shaitan and believes in Allah he indeed has laid hold on the
firmest handle, which shall not break off, and Allah is Hearing,
Knowing.

I would like to point out two things from this verse. There is only one
handle to hold on to for all the people. Each person cannot hold on to
his own handle. Secondly, it is necessary to disbelieve in Shaitan
before believing in Allah (s.w.t.). Believing and disbelieving is with
understanding, as that which is done in ignorance is void. That which a
person does not even know, can he accept or reject it. I am only
touching upon the understanding of belief at the moment as this is away
from the topic of this book. God willing I shall deal with this matter
at its appropriate time and place. Let me first deal with disavowing
Shaitan.

In order to disavow Shaitan we have to first understand him and his
methods. Allah (s.w.t.) has told us in many places in the Quran to save
ourselves from Shaitan, and so if we do not even know who he is how
shall we save ourselves from him. We do not even know how he misleads us
and what kind of web of deceit that he spins in order for us not to fall
into his trap. Let me now explain to you how he misleads people so that
we can save ourselves from him.

THE WEB OF SATAN
----------------

There is a long sermon from the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) which
in titled ‘The will to Kumayl Ibn Ziyad’. In this he (a.s.) has made
Qumayl aware of all things big and small about this world and the
hereafter. In this he (a.s.) has shed light on the workings of Shaitan.
He (a.s.) says:  ‘O Kumayl! Iblees has not made any promises for
himself. The promise he made to his Lord was to lead the people towards
sin so that they may be destroyed. O Kumayl! He will entangle you in his
web with enjoyment, and he will tell you what he knows and you will
follow him and will not be able to let go, as you will think that he is
dear to you although he is Satan, the accursed. Then when you go near
him and are contented with him he will then show you ways that lead to
destruction from where salvation would be impossible. O Kumayl! He has a
web which he sets up, so fear this so that you may not get entangled in
it. O Kumayl! The world is full of his webs. No one will be able to
attain salvation from it except through us. O Kumayl! As you have been
commanded, attain salvation from this through your love for us so that
Satan will not become part of your wealth and children. O Kumayl! Do not
be misled by those that prolong their prayers and keep fast all the time
and give charity and are of the delusion that they have the correct
understanding. O Kumayl! I swear by Allah (s.w.t.) that I have heard
from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) that when Satan wants to lead people
towards desires like intoxication, eating the flesh of swine and other
sins, then he first leads them to excessive prayers and prostrations,
then he gets them to fall for the Imamat of the false Imams who will
call towards Hell on the day of judgement when nobody will be helped.
(Nahj Ul Israr Page 366).

Read again the last section from the words ‘O Kumayl! Do not be misled’
up to the end and think over it with all your concentration, so that you
may understand the web of deceit spun by Satan and save yourself.

A HUMAN BEING’S NATURAL WEAKNESS
--------------------------------

We now have to see why it has come to this that the matters of religion
have been changed one by one. Why have the Commands of Allah (s.w.t.),
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the Imams (a.s.) been disregarded. If we
inquire into this then we will have to go back into history to the time
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

Allah (s.w.t.)’s Commands were given out by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
and obedience to him (s.a.w.) was made compulsory, without any if’s or
but’s. Then he (s.a.w.) explained the secrets of Tawheed (Divine Unity)
and Wilayah (Mastership) of Ali (a.s.) again and again at the end
announced this on the plains of Ghadeer because his (s.a.w.) complete
Message was hanging on this particular matter. In other words the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) did two things. He gave out the exoteric commands that
we have to follow and the esoteric command of Wilayah of Ali (a.s.).

Now it is an inherent human weakness to worship someone, from day one.
When he could not understand the One Creator, he started worshipping
stones, trees, moon, sun, stars etc. If nothing else, he started zero
worship in the name of hero worship. The people at the time of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) were not exempt from this. When you look at that
history you will see that even at that time there were only a handful of
people who obeyed the esoteric commands. Most of them were busy in
finding out the rules of Namaaz (prayer), Roza (Fast) and Zakaat
Charity) that is why the foundation of their religion could not become
strong. You will see that the esoteric knowledge only comes from Ahl Ul
Bayt (a.s.) and no one else. Things were not that bad at the time of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), but soon after, the fire of envy enveloped the
hearts of these people, turning them against the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.).

They wanted the people to refer to them and honour them in the same
manner as they do the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.). But this matter was that of
knowledge and to steal this was beyond their capabilities. As this
period was just close to that of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), some of his
(s.a.w.) commands were still ringing in their ears and even this used to
bite them. They wanted high authority in the land and in matters of
religion. Therefore during the period of the first two caliphs it was
forbidden to write down the narrations of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). And
so slowly as time went by the importance of the words of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) began to lose their importance in the daily lives of
the people the personal opinions of the leaders began to gain more
importance. All this was as a result of greed, envy and enmity towards
the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.).

The people after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)’s time had to decide whether
to choose between the exoteric knowledge and the esoteric knowledge.
They saw that those were with the esoteric knowledge have been ignored
by the people and hardly anyone refers to them in matters of religion.
Who used to ask Salman (s.a.), Abu Dhar (r.a.) and Miqdad (r.a.)? Even
then, at that time they used to refer to the people of fatwa like Ibn
Abbas and Ibn Mas’ud etc.

And about the exoteric knowledge, its affair was of a different nature
altogether. There is no doubt that ‘marjaiat’ is gained from this
knowledge and not from other. What glory they have. Hordes upon hordes
of people are coming, kissing their hands, acquiring exoteric commands,
and presenting gifts. Its like mangoes are being sold at the price of
their seeds. They had an open field to themselves. The traditions of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) had already been lowered in the eyes of the people
and the Holy Quran had already adorned the Mihrab. Now what else had
remained except for their own conjectures, their own opinions and their
own analogies. So the matter rests here now that:

1.When it comes to the Holy Quran, then whatever of it remains after
their logic, will be their conjecture.

2.When it comes to Hadeeth, then whatever of it remains after their
logic, will be their opinion.

3.Where both of these are silent then over there will be their
analogies.

There you are, now they have become the uncrowned kings of religion, and
when they release their fatwas then no question can be asked of them, no
references can be asked of them and no proofs either. You just follow
them without any if’s or but’s, give them their dues for their efforts
otherwise they will tell you to leave their marjaiat. Neither will you
remain a religious person nor will any of your deeds be acceptable as
now Allah (s.w.t.) has given them this right. The authorization papers
to enter Paradise are being issued right here in this world. It is
another matter that even they themselves don’t know whether their own
deeds are being accepted or not, or whether they themselves are going to
Paradise or not.

So my dear readers, this was the beginning of Ijtihad.


