CHAPTER 4: IJTIHAD
==================

Before I start discussing this important topic I think it is better if I
were to mention a few points.

The majority of us, in fact the majorities of the majority are of the
understanding that whatever you hear you should accept and not try to
find out what the reality is. That is why when someone tries to explain
the reality to them, they are surprised when it contradicts with their
beliefs which they know nothing about, and then they start arguing.
Therefore it is better for me to explain a few things beforehand so that
it would cut out unnecessary arguments later on.

IJTIHAD
-------

Ijtihad is the maximum efforts of a jurist to enable him to get the
presumption of a Sharia law - Allama Asad Haider.

This is not my definition but one that I have taken from a Mujtahid and
therefore am free from any blame. Anyhow, I thank Allah (s.w.t.) that in
the very beginning it has reached the minds of my readers that Ijtihad
has nothing to do with certainty. If the foundation of Sharia law were
to be set on Ijtihad, which permits conjecture, then the result would be
subject to doubt.

Let me quote another Mujtahid, Allama Bakhshahi of Tehran from his book
‘Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) Peshwa U Mazhab’, where he states: ‘The
significance of Ijtihad in relation to Islamic Law is such that a
Mujtahid takes the raw material of information and then processes it in
his factory by doing Ijtihad and then supplies the final product to the
Islamic Society. This is why the thinker Agha e Mutahhari has referred
to Ijtihad as the engine that drives Islam.

Apparently it cannot be refuted that during the times of the
Inafallibles (a.s.) the term Ijtihad was not there, and even in the
traditions it has never been used like it is being done today in
reference to the Shia and the Sunni jurists. This term was neither used
to refer to the Infallibles (a.s.) nor did they use it for any of their
companions who were scholars.

He goes on to say that, ‘We also see that until the 4th and the 5th
century Hijra, the scholars use to make use of the term Ijtihad in
reference to analogy and opinion. For example Sheikh Tusi in his book
‘Uddat Ul Usool’, in one of his arguments has referred to Ijtihad to
mean analogy’.

Let us take a breather here and let this sink in for a while.

1.The terms Ijtihad and Mujtahid have nothing to do with the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and they never used these words in the manner that is
being done today.

2.The Infallible Imams (a.s.) never appointed any Mujtahid to be a guide
for the people and therefore a Mujtahid can never be a NAIB-E-IMAAM.
(Appointed representative).

3.The terms used by the Infallbile Imams (a.s.), like scholar or jurist
can never be taken to mean Mujtahid.

4.In both the Sunni and Shia schools the terms Ijtihad and Mujtahid are
both being used in the same meaning.

5.Ijtihad and analogy are two names of one thing.

It is my view the term Ijtihad has been clarified sufficiently, but for
the contentment of the mind I would like to refer to Mufti Ja’far
Hussain’s commentary on Nahj Ul Balagah’s Sermon No. 18:

‘It is the view of the Imamia Sect that Allah (s.w.t.) has not
authorized anyone to make laws of Sharia nor did He (s.w.t.) Command
anyone to act according to a Mujtahid’s opinion.  There are no two
Orders for that same issue. Whichever the opinion that the Mujtahid
finally concludes, is regarded as sufficient both for himself as well as
his emulators. But, this is regarded as an apparent command which is in
replacement of the actual command. He has dived into the sea of
knowledge and tried to get to the pearl, but ended up with only its
shell, but he does not say that his emulators should consider it as a
pearl and get its value accordingly. It is another thing that the valuer
would value it at half its value so that his efforts do not go to waste
and his courage does not break.

I have only mentioned the above so that their viewpoint can be
understood. I shall be analyzing this and pointing out its shortcomings
at its appropriate place.

QIYAS (ANALOGY)
---------------

In religion the meaning of Qiyas is the application of a command in one
matter to another matter based on a common ground. This then demands
that the order should be the same for the two matters. -  (Commentary of
Sahifa Kamila by Mufti Ja’far Husayn)

ISTAMBAAT
---------

This means the extraction of religious law based on the application of
logic by the Jurist. (Al-munjid)

Now that these three definitions have been explained, we now come back
to the main topic of this book, Ijtihad.

BEGINNING OF IJTIHAD IN SHIA SECT
---------------------------------

Whenever you wish to know about something then you have to look at its
inception, otherwise you will not be able to understand its conclusion.
Its like trying to untangle a knot, one has first to look for one of its
ends and then try and untangle it.

That is why my Master the Commander of the Faithful (a.s.) has said:
When you are in doubt about a matter, you can understand it ending by
looking at its beginning. Therefore it is necessary that we look at the
inception of Ijtihad so that its reality may dawn upon us.

I have pointed out in Chapter 2 how Ijtihad entered among the Sunnis. In
practical life this started during the era of the 1st caliphate and then
the second and carried on to the extent that those who were considered
to the companions used to think that it was their birth right to use
their own opinion in matters of religion. This is why the Sunnis regard
all companions to be Mujtahids and cover up their mistakes by regarding
it as an ‘error of Ijtihad’. It was later on, at the time of Abu Hanifa
that Ijtihad was done in an organized manner, when he started commenting
on the Holy Quran based on his opinion and declared some Hadeeth to be
of a doubtful nature. This gave him an open field to play in. Later on
many others followed on from him and created their own sects. They also
created the principles of jurisprudence which formed the basis of Sharia
law. (Al Risalat Ul Ilmiya Fi Akhbar Ul Ma’sumeen - Al Risala for short)
It has been quoted from Rawdat Ul Jannat by Muhammad Baqir Khonsari: ‘It
is the unanimous view of all the scholars that the first one to set the
principles of jurisprudence was Imam Shafei of the Sunnis’.

I am only delving into this for the sake of understanding it and not to
narrate the history of Ijtihad among the Sunnis. This has nothing to do
with us. It’s their affair. We are only interesting in finding out where
this plague came from and how it was established among the Shias.

Allama Bakhshashi has quoted his book, ‘Imam Ja’fer Al Sadiq (a.s.)
Peshwa O Raees E Mazhab’ that the first Shiite scholar who used the term
Ijtihad in the other meaning was Allama Hilli (died 726 AH) who in his
book, in the chapter of Ijtihad used the term Ijtihad in the same
meaning that it is being used today in. This was the time period in
which the term Ijtihad accepted the Shiites or, shall I say, the Shiites
accepted Ijtihad.

Well, that was the 8th Century AH. Let us now go back a little. Allamah
Muhammad Baqir Kamrohi’s book, in his preface of Sheykh Saduq’s book Al
Khisal he says: Among the Shiites, until the end of the 4th CenturyAH,
on the Holy Quran and the Traditions of the Infallibles used to be the
source of law. But, when they started following the scholars of other
sects, they started writing books on Principles and Jurisprudence; they
introduced Consensus and Evidence of reason also as sources of law. When
it was pointed out to them that this was against the teachings of the
AHl Ul Bayt (a.s.), they tried to explain it away by saying that the
consensus includes the person of the Infallible Imam (a.s.), whilst the
evidence of reason on its own is not a source but is part of the
evidence which forms the law. This then led to the introduction of
analogy (Qiyas) in the Shiite sect.

This was the time when referring to the Holy Quran and the traditions as
sources of law, came to an end. Those than hung on to these two weighty
things as the only sources of law lost the attraction of the scholars
and the attention of the people.

Let me clarify the claim that ‘by consensus we mean that the Infallible
Imam (a.s.) is included therein’. Now it is up to you if you wish to
accept this claim without any evidence, however, it does not make sense.
If you were to look at the discussions of these scholars you will see
that they differ vigorously among themselves on many small and big
issues. This proves that the person of the Infallible Imam (a.s.) is not
present among them and part of their differences. The purpose of the
Infallible Imam (a.s.) is to remove differences and not to create them.

Furthermore, since they started to create a parallel system in contrast
to the unconditional obedience to the Infallible Imam (a.s.), how is it
possible for the Infallible Imam (a.s.) to be part of this discussion
and be agreeable to their analogies?

It has been clarified that the Shiite Sect was clean from the impurities
of Ijtihad up until the end of the 4th Century AH.

Now, it is said that ‘Excuse for the sin is worse than the commission of
it’. In this way they have sacrificed the Traditions of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) at the altar of the rules which they took from the
Sunnis. Their assertion that the evidence of reason and consensus are
the tools with which they uncover the sayings of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) is also invalid, because these two tools can have something to do
with Imam Shafei of the Sunnis since he was the one who made these up,
but they cannot have anything to do with the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
since they (a.s.) neither mentioned nor commanded the use of them.

We are discussing the period of the 4th Century AH, but this matter goes
further. As I have said before, Marjaiat is an intoxicant like none
other. Even at the time of the minor occultation, despite having respect
for the last of the Imams (a.s.), they had started thinking about
establishing their Marjaiat. The first thing they did was to introduce
the term ‘Naaib e Imam’ (Representative of Imam) and adopt it for
themselves. They were soon reprimanded for this from the letters that
came of Imam (a.s.), and so the Shias were kept safe from the deceptive
traps of Satan.

As soon as the major occultation started, the desires of these deceitful
people came to fruition. What they then did was to refer the four
messengers of the Imam (a.s.) as ‘the four representatives’ and made
them well known as such, despite the fact that these four noble people
never used this term for themselves. There is no mention anywhere in
history of the usage of this terminology for these four noble people. Al
Kafi was compiled during the minor occultation and does not refer to
this term anywhere. Man La Yahzur Ul Faqih was written immediately after
the start of the major occultation and there is not mention of this
terminology anywhere in it either. Is it not strange that the Shias of
that time had neither heard of these ‘representatives of the Imam’ nor
had any knowledge of the ‘four representatives’. It was centuries later
that some people had ‘revelations’ that these terms should be pasted
onto these four messengers of the Imam (a.s.) so that they should begin
to be known as such among the people. This was done so strongly that if
today someone were to try and uncover the veil in order to explain
reality, then the people would oppose him vehemently. The whole purpose
of this was that sometimes in the future they themselves would be able
to adopt these terms for themselves and there would be no objection from
the people. One twist in this tale is that those that referred to the
four noble messengers of the Imam (a.s.) as the four ‘special
representatives’ (Naaib e Khaas), and adopted for themselves the term
‘general representatives’ (Naaib e Aam) were neither Mujtahids
themselves, nor were they issuing any verdicts (Fatwas), nor did they
believe in the principles of jurisprudence, nor did they ever invite
people to emulate them (do their Taqleed). These ‘special
representatives’ only used to convey the commands of the Imams (a.s.)
and that’s it. So, they did not profit from this policy and so let us
see why they did it.

There are too many veils that have covered the events during the minor
occultation and it is no easy task to lift these and come to know the
reality. If you were to listen to the statements of these people or
peruse their books you will feel that (God forbid) the period of the
minor occultation was devoid of guidance. Only a few of his letters and
miracles will be seen, as if the whole of his (a.s.) network was engaged
in the sole activity of the collection of Khums. Someone will be seen to
be bringing Khums in a canister of oil or someone will be bringing it
concealed in a piece of cloth.

When they had looked at the profitability of the situation, they then
had the audacity to declare themselves as being representatives of the
Imam, and these days even Imams.Ijtihad and the principles of
Jurisprudence were systematically introduced among the Shias from the
Sunnis.

You may be astounded by this colourful display. These are not my words,
but those of Allamah Syed Baqir Musavi Khownsari from his book ‘Rowzat
Ul Jannat Fi Ahwal E Ulama O Sadaat’.

Muhammad Bin Junaid who was a resident of Baghdad, and was known by the
title of KATIB (Writer), was the first person who laid the foundation of
Ijtihad in the Shiite world by adopting the principles of Jurisprudence
from the adversaries. He followed Hasan Bin Aqeel Nu’mani in this
concept and lived at the time of Muhammd Bin Yaqoub Kulayni. These two
jurists are known as the Two Old Ones. Sheykh Toosi was the first one to
follow the footsteps of Ibn Junaid who issued a number of religious
commands against Yaqoub Kulayni, prompting the other scholars to try and
affect a compromise between the two in order to prove both of them to be
correct.

In this regard those that went against the companions of the Infallible
Imams (a.s.) by using the evidence of reason, the art of theology and
the analogy, were Muhammad Bin Junaid and Hasan Bin Aqeel Nu’mani. Then
came Sheykh Mufeed, who made conjecture a beloved thing from what he
wrote, and his companions Syed Murtadha and Sheykh Toosi who forwarded
the method of Ibn Junaid and Ibn Abi Aqeel to the next generation. After
this, Allama Hilli made the principles of the adversaries an obligation
and got the aggressive support of both the Shaheed E Awwal and Shaheed E
Thaani.

The first one to make the claim that the majority of Traditions are such
that they have been derived from those books which were written on the
instructions of the Infallible Imams (a.s.), upon which the Shias used
to act and will continue to do so during the major occultation, was
Sheykh Ali.

The Mujtahid Muhammad Idris Hilli was the first one to declare that any
tradition which has only one narrator cannot be relied upon and no
knowledge can be gained from it, because they do not contain any law
from which a decision can be concluded. Sheykh Ta’ifa, Syed Murtadha,
Sheykh Toosi all acted upon this regulation.

You have just seen what an old Mujtahid Allamah Muhammad Baqir Khonsari
has explained above. Now let us see what conclusions can be drawn from
all this.

1.The Mujtahid Ibn Junaid is the founder of Ijtihad in the Shia Sect,
but he was himself in the Taqleed of Hasan Bin Abi Aqeel Nu’mani and
they both were at the time of the Minor Occultation.

2.These two elders are referred to as the ‘Two Old Sheykhs’
(Qadeemain’).

3.Ibn Junaid is the first Shia Mujtahid to not only adopt the principles
of Jurisprudence of the Sunnis but also made these a part of the Shia
Sect.

4.The great Mujtahid who completed the adoption of these principles as
part of religion was Sheykh Toosi.

5.Ibn Junaid lived at the time of Sheykh Yaqoub Kulayni the narrator of
traditions, and openly opposed him.

6.The words, ‘Some Mujtahideen tried to make a compromise between the
two and try and prove both of them to be correct’ testifies that there
were some scholars who had the same Ijtihad mentality.

7.The vehement opposition to Sheykh Yaqoub Kulayni shows that the
process of Ijtihad had already started and the road to the guidance of
Infallible Imam Mahdi (a.s.) was being blocked. These people were backed
by the government of that time because Ibn Junaid was a minister of
Mo’iz Ud Dowla in the Buyid period.

8.The Mujtahids of that time stopped following the traditions and
started opposing the great collector of traditions Sheykh Yaqoub
Kulayni, who presented to us his monumental book ‘Al Kafi’, which is
based on the original principles of religion and is regarded as a
reliable book, vehemently opposed him in opposition to the Traditions of
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) started following their own opinions based
on conjecture and analogies and gave preference to Ijtihad.

If this religion of the Mujtahids were to be analysed, what would be the
criteria for it? Personal opinions, personal choice, personal
circumstances or the words of an Infallbile?

Certainly those that are aware and love their religion would say that
the criteria should be the words of the infallible Imam (a.s.). So,
without any hesitation I would like to quote one tradition from Al Kafi
and let you decide.

Imam Jafar (a.s.) said, “People have been ordered to get our
understanding, and to turn to us (rujoo) and obey what we say. If these
people fast , offer prayers , and give testimony of allah but have this
thing in their heart that they would not turn to us , they would become
polytheists” - AL KAFI.

Now look at some more from Rowzat Ul Jannat :

1.The first person to say that truth can only be reached by four
sources - The Holy Quran, Coincidental traditions (Hadees), The Evidence
of Reason (Aqal) and Consensus (Ijma), was Abu Huzaifa Wasil Bin Ata who
was the first one to be referred to as a Mu’tazilite. He is the leader
of the misguided and the father of the Mu’tazilites. He used to live in
Medina and has the title Abu Huzaifa Ghazali.

2.It is the unanimously accepted view of all the scholars that it was
Imam Shafei who first made up the principles of jurisprudence.

The more you look into these Mujtahideen the more shocking revelations
you will come across and you realize that the reins of this matter are
in the hands of the adversaries.

The main problem is that the Shiites have been impressed by the general
appearance of these Mujtahids who have adopted the apparent religion of
the Infallible Imams (a.s.), but follow their adversaries. The Shias,
when they look at their turbans and cloaks that they wear, get easily
influenced by them and consider their words as being the guidance of the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

EVIDENCE OF IJTIHAD FROM THE HOLY QURAN
---------------------------------------

It has now become clear from the words of the Jurists themselves that
Ijtihad, by its word and its meaning has been taken from the Sunnis and
it has nothing to do with the religion of Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.). The focus
of the people has been turned away from the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) and
towards the Jurists. They quote from the Holy Quran in order to justify
their misdirection and quite surprisingly the Shiites have believed
them. This is the result of staying away from religion that every one
tends to lend his ear to anyone who calls to them and ends up mortgaging
his intellect to him. They not only lose their religion to them but
their wealth as well. They then end up making enemies out of those who
reject the fallibles and only follow the Infallibles (a.s.), and only
emulate those whose obedience has been commanded by Allah (s.w.t.) and
they do not include others in this matter.

Anyhow, let us now examine the Verses which are presented as proofs of
the establishment of ijtihad. Incidentally, these verses are the same
that are presented by the Sunnis for the justification of their Ijtihad.

The verse is from Sura Tawbah (Repentance) 9:122:

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا كَانَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لِيَنْفِرُوا كَافَّةً فَلَوْلَا نَفَرَ مِنْ
كُلِّ فِرْقَةٍ مِنْهُمْ طَائِفَةٌ لِيَتَفَقَّهُوا فِي الدِّينِ
وَلِيُنْذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ
يَحْذَرُونَ
</p>

[Yusuf Ali] Nor should the Believers all go forth together: if a
contingent from every expedition remained behind, they could devote
themselves to studies in religion and admonish the people when they
return to them― that thus they (may learn) to guard themselves (against
evil).

[Mohsin Khan] And it is not (proper) for the believers to go out to
fight (Jihâd) all together. Of every troop of them, a party only should
go forth, that they (who are left behind) may get instructions in
(Islâmic) religion, and that they may warn their people when they return
to them, so that they may beware (of evil).

[Pickthal] And the believers should not all go out to fight. Of every
troop of them, a party only should go forth, that they (who are left
behind) may gain sound knowledge in religion, and that they may warn
their folk when they return to them, so that they may beware.

[Shakir] And it does not beseem the believers that they should go forth
all together; why should not then a company from every party from among
them go forth that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in
religion, and that they may warn their people when they come back to
them that they may be cautious?

Now, some of you will be of those who recite the Holy Quran quite
regularly and some of you might have even read some of these
commentaries. Tell me the truth, from the above translations; can you
even catch a glimpse of the permission of Ijtihad or the justification
for it?

Let me now quote from Syed Ali Haeri’s book where he has referred to the
above verse as, ‘In Sura Tawbah it has been revealed that it is not the
responsibility of all the believers to travel for the sake of acquiring
knowledge, but a group from among them should endeavor to gain the
knowledge of jurisprudence and wisdom so that when they return to their
people and warn them then maybe they will fear the punishment of Allah
(s.w.t.)’.

He then comments on this that ‘Therefore, a few matters can be proven
from this verse. Firstly, the acquisition of knowledge is a collective
responsibility and not an individual one.

Secondly, there is no need for the general public to indulge in this
exercise as they are handicapped by simply being members of the general
public. It is now obligatory on the educated ones to teach the ignorant
about matters of religion.

Thirdly, the warning has to be based upon the knowledge of the allowed
and the forbidden and the Commands of Allah (s.w.t.). This warning deals
with logic and verdicts because the Mujtahid talks without mentioning
the Divine Verses and Hadeeth. Ijtihad is therefore necessitated because
until such time as the Mujtahid is well versed in religious matters it
is not possible for him to warn the people, and if he does, without
being well versed, then he cannot be relied upon.

Fourthly the words ‘Maybe they will fear’ prove Ijtihad, because the
public is listening to them without any proofs and act upon these bears
testimony that they have the fear of God in them. They themselves do not
possess the ability to acquire this knowledge because they are emulators
(Muqalliden). Ijtihad is thus proven.

I am convinced that your eyes will have been opened after listening to
the above arguments. The way Ijtihad has been proven by the above points
makes me feel as if someone is telling me that ‘The day has dawned, the
sun is shining, there is also a cool breeze and the branches of the tree
are in motion, this therefore proves that there is a crow sitting on the
tree’.

The following points are actually proven from this discussion:

1.The words ‘Obtaining understanding in religion’ has been translated as
‘The knowledge of Jurisprudence’.

2.Acquisition of knowledge is only for a few and not for all.

3.The whole of the Shiite world has been described as illiterate, and
this is what actually suits the Mujtahids as illiteracy of the people is
profitable for their business.

4.The verdicts of the Mujtahids have been considered as the Commands of
Allah (s.w.t.).

5.‘Warning’ has been taken to mean Ijtihad and these warnings can only
be done by logic and verdicts.

6.The idiocy and stupidity of the people has been made the reason for
Ijtihad as they neither ask for any proofs nor for any references. They
just bow their heads to the statements of the Mujtahids and follow them
blindly.

7.The Mujtahids have been declared as being ‘well versed in knowledge’.

If you go through the above points again you will realize that this
mujtahid has placed certain accusations on none other than the Words of
Allah (s.w.t.) i.e. the Holy Quran Itself.

### 1st Accusation

###

The acquisition of knowledge is only for some people and not for all
whereas Allah (s.w.t.) and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) have commanded us
to do otherwise. Not only in the verse under discussion, but in the
entire Holy Quran there is no indication for the acquisition of
religious knowledge incumbent upon only a few. This audacious attitude
is only being promoted for the preservation of the institution of
Marja’iat and to keep people ignorant in opposition to the Commands of
Allah (s.w.t.) and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

### 2nd Accusation

###

Not only in this verse, but in the entire Holy Quran, Allah (s.w.t.) has
never referred to the believers as illiterate, or stupid or dishonorable
people like this Mujtahid has. In the Holy Quran words like ‘Ignorant’
etc. may have been used for the unbelievers, polytheists and the
hypocrites but not for the believers. Allah (s.w.t.) has referred to the
believers as ‘people of intellect’ etc. but never used any ugly words
for them. Nowhere has it been said that the warner or the one who
enjoins good and forbids evil should be a person of a particular level
of knowledge. In fact this is proven from the fact that based on the
verdicts of the Mujtahids themselves the enjoining of good and
forbidding of evil has been included in the branches of religion thereby
expecting everyone to perform these acts and not the Mujtahids only.
Whosoever knows whatsoever should warn those that are unaware of it and
it is not necessary to be a Mujtahid before one can do this.

### 3rd Accusation

###

There is nowhere in the Holy Quran anything devoid of evidence or
proofs. It is not allowed to issue verdicts without making any reference
to Hadeeth as they claim it to be. There are many places in the Holy
Quran where we have been told to ask for proofs and to give proofs.
Allah (s.w.t.) Himself has given proofs of the claims that He (s.w.t.)
has made and asked people to produce their proofs for their claims. So
who are these people who consider themselves to be above the provision
of proofs or evidence or reference? The Holy Quran has in fact forbidden
the religions without proofs or blind imitations, and so from the Holy
Quran, neither is Ijtihad proven nor Taqleed.

The reason why the Mujtahids have made use of this verse is because they
saw the word ‘Layatafaqqahu’ in it and they thought that it would be a
good idea if they were to translate it as ‘Usool Fiqh’ (Principles of
Jurisprudence), which were actually made up some 200 years after the
passing away of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.). In this way they altered the
meaning of the verse to allow them to place a lot of weight behind
jurisprudence, so that the people would think that the Jurisprudence of
the Mujtahids has actually been commanded by Allah (s.w.t.). This was
despite the fact that this word has been used in many places in the Holy
Quran to denote ‘understanding’.

If we were to look at the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) then
we would see that this word has been used in the same manner. For
example when Imam Husayn (a.s.) wrote a letter to Habib Ibn Mazahir to
invite him for help then he addressed it as ‘From Abu Abdillah Al Husayn
to a man of understanding (Rajool Un Faqih) Habib Ibn Mazahir’.

Can someone now tell me as to which Usool Fiqh did Habib Ibn Mazahir
study or whether he used to issue any verdicts (Fatwas)? When you study
the whole of Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s letter you will realize the
connotation of the epitaph ‘Man of Understanding’ that he (a.s.) used
for Habib Ibn Mazahir. He (a.s.) says in his letter ’O Habib! You are
aware of our station and position, therefore come to our help’. It is
now established that according to Imam Husayn (a.s.) the ‘Faqih’ is one
who understands the position and the station of the Imam (a.s.). This
word has no relationship with the branches (Furoo) of religion.

Now let us look at the meaning in which the Mujtahids take to be the
meaning of ‘Faqih’.

Al KAFI H 206, Ch. 22, h8

it is reported that: A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn
uhammad ibn Khalid from ‘Isma’il ibn Mihran from abu Sa‘id al-Qammat and
Salih ibn Sa‘id from Aban ibn Taghlib who has said the following: “Once
a man asked a question from Imam abu Ja’far, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, who replied to it, and then the man said, ‘The Fuqaha
(scholars of law) do not say this.’ “The Imam then said, ‘It is a pity.
Have you ever seen a Faqih (a scholar of law)? The real Faqih is one who
maintains restraint from worldly matters, who is deeply interested in
the life hereafter and holds firmly to the Sunnah (noble tradition of
the Holy Prophet, recipient of divine supreme covenant).’”

In AL KHISAL Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq has said: A man becomes a FAQIH by
leaving greed and personal desires to the extent that he becomes unaware
of what he is wearing or has even eaten.

These traditions have effectively eradicated the definitions of the
Mujtahids.

When we read history we see that most of the lives of our Imams (a.s.)
have either been spent in prisons or they have lived in their own
cities. So then who used to give verdicts (Fatwas) in far flung areas
where people did not have the direct contact with the Imams (a.s.)? If
people of those areas were in need of Mujtahids then who were the people
appointed by the Imams (a.s.) as Mujtahids for those people? If there
was no need for the Mujtahids at that time then there is no need for
them today. As far as newly occurring problems as time goes on is
concerned, God willing, this shall be discussed in the next chapter.

The author of ‘Al Risala’ has indulged in additional discussion on this
verse. ‘In this verse two terms ‘Fiqh’ and ‘Tanzeer’ (Warning) are used
by these people to prove Ijtihad. I have done the exposition of the term
‘Fiqh” above. Now let us look at the other term ‘Tanzeer’ (Warning).
Firstly let us look at the Mujtahideen of today. After the revolution of
Iran, now that the government is in the hands of the ‘Ayatullahs’ and
the ‘Hujjatullas’, and they have their own schools of learning, it has
become obligatory on every group that they should send their
representatives to Iran in order to learn Jurisprudence from them so
that on their return they can warn their own people who would then be
able to save themselves from the ‘punishment of Allah (s.w.t)’.

First of all they should explain to us as to how did the term ‘Tanzeer’
come to mean Ijtihad. This term actually means to warn people of the
punishments of the hereafter if they were to indulge in bad deeds. For
proof, I hereby refer you to the verse revealed for the day of
‘Be’that’:

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَنذِرْ عَشِيرَتَكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 26:214] And warn your nearest relations,

I cannot understand which part of this verse indicates that Fatwas
should be given based on analogies and consensus. This verse neither
proves Jurisprudence nor its principles, nor Mujtahids nor Ijtihad, nor
the issuance of Fatwas.

After this illogical struggle of the Mujtahideen let me refer you to
explanation of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) about this verse. Sheykh
Saduq has recorded in his book ‘Allal U Sharaai’ that Imam Al Ridha
(a.s.) in his explanation of the Pilgrimage (Hajj) said : “ From
whatsoever that is there for them in this congregation of Hajj, it is
also that they should gain their understanding of religion of the Imams
(a.s.) and spread if in every corner of this earth because Allah
(s.w.t.) has Commanded in the Holy Quran that why don’t some people from
all sects come out and obtain their understanding of religion from the
Infallible Imams (a.s.) in whose service Hajj is being done. And when
they return back to their people they should relate to them the
understanding that they have had from the Infallible Imams (a.s.) and
warn them so that they would save themselves from the forbidden things.
They must and must be a witness over their own benefits.

I hope that after this it will be clear that this verse 9:122 has
nothing to do with Ijtihad or going to a ‘Hawza’ but it is for the
annual Pilgrimage where the congregation is to gain knowledge of the
traditions of the Infallibles (a.s.) and spread them across the world.

This whole issue of Ijtihad was created from not understanding religion
and the misuse of the term ‘Understanding of religions’ (Tafaqqoh Fil
Deen). When the meaning of religion will be explained to you it will
then the whole game will become clear to you which has been played on
the premise of the people being ignorant.

You should know that religion (Deen) is a set of beliefs (Usool) whereas
religious laws (Shari’at) is both of the ‘Usools’ and ‘Fur’oos’ put
together. This is because the belief never changed because from Adam
(a.s.) to The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) there was only one religion.

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللّهِ الإِسْلاَمُ
</p>

[Shakir 3:19] Surely the (true) religion with Allah is Islam,

Since Shari’at is a combination of ‘Usools’ and ‘Fur’oos’, therefore
Shari’at keeps changing over time as the ‘Fur’oos’ change. For example
let us look at what Allamah Hilli has said in his book ‘Ahsan Ul Aqaaid’
on pages 8 and 9 : ‘In the Glorious Quran the Usool have been referred
to as ‘Deen’ and the combination of both the ‘Usools’ and ‘Fur’oos’ has
been referred to as Shari’at. Religion has always been one whereas
Shari’ats have been five as in the verse:

<p dir="rtl">
شَرَعَ لَكُم مِّنَ الدِّينِ مَا وَصَّى بِهِ نُوحًا وَالَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا
إِلَيْكَ وَمَا وَصَّيْنَا بِهِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَى وَعِيسَى أَنْ
أَقِيمُوا الدِّينَ وَلَا تَتَفَرَّقُوا فِيهِ كَبُرَ عَلَى الْمُشْرِكِينَ
مَا تَدْعُوهُمْ إِلَيْهِ اللَّهُ يَجْتَبِي إِلَيْهِ مَن يَشَاء وَيَهْدِي
إِلَيْهِ مَن يُنِيبُ
</p>

[Shakir 42:13] He has made plain to you of the religion what He enjoined
upon Nuh and that which We have revealed to you and that which We
enjoined upon Ibrahim and Musa and Isa that keep to obedience and be not
divided therein; hard to the unbelievers is that which you call them to;
Allah chooses for Himself whom He pleases, and guides to Himself him who
turns (to Him), frequently.

The Verses clearly show that the religion of all these five great
prophets was one whereas they had five different set of laws. In fact
all the prophets came with the one and only religion as has been
mentioned in the verse before that ‘Surely the religion with Allah is
Islam’.

The point to ponder over is this that if there was a Command to ponder
over Shari’at then some sort of argument could have been made to delve
into the principles of jurisprudence, however, the Command is to ponder
on religion (Deen) and therefore it can only mean to try and understand
the beliefs. This is why Imam Husayn (a.s.) referred to his Habib Ibn
Mazahir as a ‘Man of understanding’ (Rajul Un Faqih). It is now proven
that ‘Fiqh’ stands for the understanding of the station and position of
the Imam (a.s.) and a Faqih (Jurist) is one who understands the true
Imam (a.s.).

I think more than enough has been written about this verse now, that
those who reflect over their religious matters just as they do over
their worldly affairs, will be able to come to the correct conclusion
about it, and this is my aim. As for those that come under the
definition of this sermon of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali
(a.s.): ‘The third group of people is one who responds to every caller
and follows him, and change their direction according to whichever way
the wind blows’ as well as for those that consider it forbidden upon
them to ponder over religious matters or reflect upon their hereafter,
and prefer to blindly follow a non-infallible as proof of their
religiousness, and those who take pleasure in throwing away their
religion and their wealth, then I have nothing to do with these people
nor am I addressing them in this book. I am convinced that there is no
shortage of people who consider intellect and pondering over matters to
be a mark of a human being. If one were to make them aware of the truth
then they will not refute it without thinking over it, or consider the
weight of evidence or proofs.

The other verse that is used to prove Ijtihad is:

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا جَاءهُمْ أَمْرٌ مِّنَ الأَمْنِ أَوِ الْخَوْفِ أَذَاعُواْ بِهِ
وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَى أُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ
لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللّهِ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لاَتَّبَعْتُمُ الشَّيْطَانَ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
</p>

[Shakir 4:83] And when there comes to them news of security or fear they
spread it abroad; and if they had referred it to the Messenger and to
those in authority among them, those among them who can search out the
knowledge of it would have known it, and were it not for the grace of
Allah upon you and His mercy, you would have certainly followed the
Shaitan save a few.

I shall deal with this verse in the chapter of ‘Istambaat’ later on. In
the next chapter I shall deal with the ‘Usool Fiqh’ (Principles of
Jurisprudence) about which you have read earlier on.


