CHAPTER 5: USOOL-E-FIQAH
========================

People left the Household of the Prophet (a.s.) in favour of others and
so the principles of Jurisprudence that were made up by Imam Shafei
entered the Shia Sect. Due to their frequent and widespread usage, not
only did the original meaning of the term ‘Usool E Fiqh’ got obscured,
but is now being used mainly in the same meaning as held by our
adversaries. In fact the principles of Jurisprudence of both Sects are
the same. What I mean is that, and I have discussed earlier the sources
of law as being Qur’an, Traditions, Consensus and Analogy, the
replacement of analogy with Evidence of Reason does not alter its
meaning in any way, because from the Mujtahids of the earlier period to
the ones of today, they all take ‘Evidence of Reason’ to mean analogy
anyway. Let me first deal with the Holy Qur’an and Traditions.

As far as the Holy Quran is concerned, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) did not
leave it for us on its own but provided its explainers with it, and made
it obligatory on all of us to hold on to BOTH of them. This is because
the Holy Quran cannot be understood without guidance from the Ahl Ul
Bayt (a.s.) and the ummah will be need of their explanations till the
day of judgement.

The Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have stated that the Holy Quran has seven
exoteric meanings and seven esoteric ones. In another tradition the
number is seventy, and that only an Infallible is aware of all of these
meanings. It therefore means that Traditions have to be depended upon if
the Holy Quran is to be understood. I am convinced that there is not a
single person among the Shiites, however weak his beliefs may be or his
lack of knowledge, will never agree with the statement of the one who
said; ‘The Book of Allah (s.w.t.) is sufficient for us’.

It is now clear the Holy Quran cannot be understood at all without the
help of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) because Allah (s.w.t.) has state is
His Book that ‘We have made our chosen ones to be the inheritors of this
Book’. (Not anyone and everyone). Therefore it is the Traditions of the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.) around which the whole of the religion rotates,
and so it would be better, before I move forward, if I were to deal with
traditions so that the readers of the Holy Quran can realize what the
source of the religion actually is.

IMPORTANCE OF TRADITIONS
------------------------

The great translator of AL Kafi, Allamah Zafar Hassan has written under
the heading KUTUB E ARBA AUR HUM (The Four Books and Us): ‘Since the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) has placed the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) alongside the
Holy Qur’an it therefore becomes obligatory for the Shiites to keep the
Traditions of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) in their homes just as they do
the Holy Quran. Do you reckon that the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) would be
pleased with this action of ours whereby we have kept the traditions
sacrificed at the altar of delusion, and never tried to find out what
treasures have been exposited to us by the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)?

Allamah Zafar Hassan further states in his introduction to Al Kafi a
tradition, which itself forms part of Al Kafi

#### AL KAFI - H 149, Ch. 17, h11

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
al-Barqi from certain persons of his people from abu Sa’id al-Khaybari
from al-Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar who has said the following: “Abu ‘Abd Allah,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, has said, ‘You must write down
(Hadith) and spread your knowledge among your brethren. If you die your
children will inherit your books. A time will come when people will face
chaos and they will find no comfort except in their books.’”

For this purpose the words of Allamah Majlisi in his compilation of
Bihar Ul Anwaar are: ‘I have never come across anything, the crux of
which is not to be found in traditions’.

He further states that due to the importance of traditions and the
teachings of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), their companions used to pay
great importance to their collection and preservation.

#### AL KAFI - H 169, Ch. 19, h13

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn ‘Isa ibn ‘Ubayd from
Yunus ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman from Sama‘a ibn Mihran who has said the
following: “Once I said to (Imam) abu al-Hassan Musa, recipient of
divine supreme covenant, ‘May Allah keep you well, did the Messenger of
Allah bring everything that people needed?’ The Imam said, ‘Yes, and all
that they will need up to the Day of Judgment.’ I then said, ‘Is
anything lost from it?’ The Imam replied, ‘No, it all is with the people
to whom they belong.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 184, Ch. 20, h6

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Faddal
from Al-Tha‘laba ibn Maymun from one he narrated from al-Mu‘alla ibn
Khunays who has said the following:

“Abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, has said, ‘For
every issue disputed between two people there is a principle for it in
the book of Allah, the Most Majestic, the Most Glorious, however, man’s
power of intelligence is not able to find it.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 188, Ch. 20, h10

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from ‘Isma’il ibn Mihran from Sayf ibn ‘Amira from abu al-Maghra from
Sama‘a from abu al-Hassan Musa, recipient of divine supreme covenant,
who has said the following: “Once I asked the Imam, ‘Is everything in
the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His prophet or do you have a say in
it also?’ The Imam replied, ‘As a matter of fact, everything is in the
book of Allah and the Sunnah of His prophet, recipient of divine

supreme covenant.’”

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَوْ شَاء رَبُّكَ لَجَعَلَ النَّاسَ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلاَ يَزَالُونَ
مُخْتَلِفِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 11:118] And if your Lord had pleased He would certainly have
made people a single nation, and they shall continue to differ.

<p dir="rtl">
إِلاَّ مَن رَّحِمَ رَبُّكَ وَلِذَلِكَ خَلَقَهُمْ وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَةُ
رَبِّكَ لأَمْلأنَّ جَهَنَّمَ مِنَ الْجِنَّةِ وَالنَّاسِ أَجْمَعِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 11:119] Except those on whom your Lord has mercy; and for this
did He create them; and the word of your Lord is fulfilled: Certainly I
will fill hell with the jinn and the men, all together.

#### AL KAFI - H 1160, Ch. 108, h 83

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn abu
Nasr from Hammad ibn ‘Uthman from abu ‘Ubayda al-Hadhdha’ who has said
the following: “Once I asked abu Ja‘far, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, about the capability and the words of people. The Imam recited
this verse of the Holy Quran: ‘. . they still have different beliefs
(11:118) except those upon whom Allah has granted His mercy. For this
reason He has created them. . .’ (11:119) ‘O abu ‘Ubayda, people face
differences in search for truth and all of them will be destroyed,’ said
the Imam. ‘I (the narrator) then asked, “What about the words of Allah:
‘. . except those who receive mercy from your Lord. . .?’” (11:119) ‘The
Imam said, “Such people are our followers whom He has created for His
mercy. ‘. . For this reason He has created them. . .’” (11:119) ‘[He
(Allah) has said that they are created to obey the Imam of ‘Blessings’
that He has mentioned in His words]: “. . My mercy and blessings have
encompassed all things. . .” (7:156) [Such ‘Blessing’ is the knowledge
of Imam. The knowledge of 'A'immah (Leaders with Divine Authority) is
from His knowledge, which has encompassed all things. They (all things)
stand for our Shi‘a, followers]. ‘[Then He has said], “. . I shall grant
mercy to those who maintain piety [do not acknowledge the authority of
and obedience to those who are not of 'A'immah] . .” (7:156)

Imam Ali (a.s.) has said: ‘When a person, comes across a difficult
problem he does not understand, he should refer the matter to us. Anyone
who praised the Lord for the bounties received, and asked for
forgiveness for his sins, befriended obedient servants of the Lord and
praised them, and hated the rebellious people and thought them to be
bad, this would suffice for his salvation if he were to refer the matter
back to us’. (The Book of Suleym Bin Qays Hilali)

Honourable readers, are’nt all these statements of the Holy Infallibles
sufficient? I presented seven traditions although only one statement of
an Infallible (a.s.) would have been sufficient. Now I have earned the
right to state that religion is complete and all matters to the day of
judgement are to be found therein. Allah (s.w.t.) did not abandon us
with any normal person but made us needy of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
so that the believers can be distinguished from the hypocrites.

Therefore the burden of religious obligations upon us has been
restricted to those orders which have come to us from the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and no more. Any matter for which an instruction has
not been received by us from the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), it is not
obligatory for us to act upon it. It then follows that we should refrain
from acting upon such a matter.

#### AL KAFI - H 132, Ch. 16, h9

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from
Ali ibn al-Nu‘man from ‘Abd Allah ibn Muskan from Dawud ibn Farqad from
abu Sa’id al-Zuhri from abu Ja’far, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, who has said the following: “Holding back in an uncertain
condition is better than indulging in a destructive situation. Your not
narrating a Hadith is better than narrating one that you have not
verified.”

THE MISCHIEF OF REJECTING AHADEETH
----------------------------------

For those who peddle ‘analogy’ as a business, the biggest stumbling
block was the Hadeeth of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). This is because in
the face of clear Traditions of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) it was not
possible for them to call people towards them and collect their wealth.
It therefore became imperative for them to escape from the Traditions.

Two groups came into being as a result of this. One group completely
rejected the Hadeeth by claiming that the ‘Book of Allah (s.w.t.) is
sufficient for us’. It is another matter that this group actually never
claimed to have the knowledge of the Holy Qur’an nor did it ever give
any decision based on it. Whatever decisions made were either on the
basis of Hadeeth or personal opinions or by consultations. This faction
has always been present in every time period and is still present today.
This group refers to itself as the ‘Ahl E Qur’an’ (The party of the
Qur’an). In Pakistan their group leader was Mullah Pervaiz who used to
publish a magazine called ‘Tuloo Islam’.

The other group was one which did not have the courage to openly reject
Hadeeth, but did not have any advantage in acting according to Hadeeth
either. This group then further sub-divided into two. The first one
started to forge false Hadeeth which the later generations then brought
their efforts to fruition. This resulted in the springing of factories
which churned out Hadeeth as and when required. The Banu Abbas did not
lag behind with regard to this. In their time period, a lot of Hadeeth
were manufactured in favour of the ‘Uncle’ of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.),
Abbas and his progeny. (In reality Abbas was not the son of Abd Ul
Muttalib but was his slave. It was because he was brought up by him,
therefore he became to be known as his son. There are two records of the
will of Hazrat Abd Ul Muttalib in which Abbas and his mother have been
mentioned as having been given to Abu Talib - The History of Islam by
Allamah Muhammad Bashir Ansari).

Even in those dark ages, there was one place from where the true and
correct Hadeeth of the Holy Prophet (a.s.) used to be propagated. There
were strict orders for these Hadeeth to be preserved in writing and to
be passed on till the Day of Judgment. These were the Holy Ahl Ul Bayt
(a.s.) who, away from the crowd and political upheavals, were
propagating the knowledge thus ensuring the survival of the true
religion till the Day of Judgment. However, this used to badly affect
those who were busy trying to establish their own leadership in matters
of religion.

The second sub group which sprang up from this was one which started to
make up its own rules in order to make Hadeeth suspect. They named this
skill as ‘Ilm Ul Rijaal’ (Knowledge of Narrators). They based the health
of the Hadeeth on the person of the narrator.  This was the invention of
the Sunnis, and the first one to write a book on this was Abu Mansoor.

If you were to take a closer look at the history of the lives of the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.), which is spread over a period of approximately
three hundred and fifty years, you will realize that there was only one
purpose in their life - the preservation of religion and propagation of
knowledge. If a careful study of the Islamic books is made, especially
books like ‘Superman in Islam’ (This book has been written by twenty
five scholars from different parts of the world, two of which are
Muslim. In this book they have discussed in detail the different kinds
of knowledge that was propagated by Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.). It
would be beneficial to read this book), then you will come to know that
there is no knowledge which was not taught by the Holy Imams (a.s.),
from religious knowledge, to that of astronomy, chemistry and medicine.
The point to ponder over is, if ‘Usool Fiqh’ (Principles of
Jurisprudence) and ‘Ilm Ul Rijaal’ (Knowledge of the narrators) were
necessary, they would have certainly taught it to their companions and
students. You can peruse the entire Islamic literature and see for
yourself, you will not find anywhere the teaching of the Holy Imams
(a.s.) on these subjects. Forget about teaching of these subjects, you
will not even find it in any of their sayings and statements. This then
means that these two subjects have nothing to do with the religion of
Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.). These are inventions of the Sunnis which have been
introduced into the religion of the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) by some people.

ILM UR RIJAL
------------

Let us now look at the methodology of judging the health of a Hadeeth,
by the people during the time of the Imam (a.s.).

In his introduction to the translation of Usool e Kafi, the king of
theologians, the president of Narrators, Allamah Muhammad Hassan, A
Mujtahid, of ‘Dar Ul Uloom’ of Sarghoda, has written : ‘Every ‘News’
(Hadeeth) has two possibilities - either it is a frequently narrated one
(Mutawaatir) or it would be a solitary one (Wahid). A Hadeeth which has
been related from more than one source in such a way that it cannot be
doubted, it would be a Mutawaatir one, otherwise it would have to be
classified as a Wahid (solitary)’.

Now, during the time of Imams (a.s.) the people classified these
solitary hadeeth into two categories - correct or incorrect. All such
hadeeth which could be supported by additional factors, either within it
or in other Hadeeth were considered to be correct whereas for those ones
which could not be found to be compatible with the Holy Quran, they
would consider them to be incorrect.

From this we get the following clarifications:

1.Hadeeth are of two types - Frequently reported ones or solitary ones.
(Since the quantity of the frequently reported Hadeeth is so low that
they can virtually be counted on our fingers, it follows that most of
our religious commands therefore will have to be extracted from the
solitary ones).

2.According to the people of the era of the Imam (a.s.) hadeeth were
only of two types - correct or incorrect.

3.Because the people of earlier era lived very close to the times of the
Imams (a.s.), they had supportive factors in determining the reliability
of a Hadeeth.

4.These earlier people used to refer to the Holy Quran in order to
ascertain the Hadeeth. That which agreed to it was considered to be
correct, whilst the ones which were found to be in contradiction to it
were regarded as incorrect.

These were the principles employed by the people of the earlier times in
order to ascertain the Hadeeth which coincided with those that were
taught by the Imams (a.s.). But the people who lived in the later time
period abandoned these principles and started practicing those which the
Sunnis had invented before. What I mean is that they used ‘ILM UL
RIJAAL’ (Knowledge of narrators), which was an invention of the Sunnis,
as the only criteria to determine the strength of a Hadeeth. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) never told anyone to invent their own knowledge in
order to understand his (s.a.w.)’s statements.

In order to probe the above, I once again refer to the same introduction
to Usool e Kafi and see the types of hadeeth which are given there: -

SAHIH - Where the chain of narrators end at an Infallible (a.s.) and all
its narrators are Shia and Just.

HASAN - Where the chain of narrators end at an Infallible (a.s.) and all
its narrators are Shia but it is not known whether they were Just.

QAWEE -Where all the narrators are Shia but there is no information
available as to their trustworthiness.

MO’THIQ - Where all the narrators are trustworthy but they possess
incorrect beliefs.

ZAEEF - Where the above conditions are not met.

As you have seen from above, according to these people the one and only
criteria for Hadeeth is to do with their narrators and NOT with its
content.

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِن جَاءكُمْ فَاسِقٌ بِنَبَأٍ
فَتَبَيَّنُوا أَن تُصِيبُوا قَوْمًا بِجَهَالَةٍ فَتُصْبِحُوا عَلَى مَا
فَعَلْتُمْ نَادِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 49:6] O you who believe! if an evil-doer comes to you with a
report, look carefully into it, lest you harm a people in ignorance,
then be sorry for what you have done.

Allah (s.w.t.) has commanded us in the above verse that if an evil doer
comes to you with a report then investigate the report in order to
verify it. But what these people have done is to ignore the report and
started investigating the reporter. Who his ancestors were and which
tribe he belonged to etc.

Or have these people decided that any person who is known to speak the
truth will never lie and that a known liar will never ever speak the
truth? Or are they saying that we should close our eyes and accept
everything that is reported by one who normally speaks the truth and
reject everything from one who normally tells lies without considering
whether the report has any truth in it or not?

Did you notice that in the categorization of Hadeeth, being a Shia is a
pre-condition for it? This means that if we were to depend upon Ilm Ul
Rijaal then we would have no option but to reject hundreds of Hadeeth
written in Sunni books which are in praise of the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.).

This is the end result of adopting the principles of other people. Now
let us see what the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have to say about this.

1.The famous Hadeeth of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) states that:  ‘If you
come across any narration attributed to me and it is in accordance with
the Holy Quran the accept it, otherwise fling it at the wall (reject
it)’.

2.Imam Ali (a.s.) has said: ‘Do not see who is saying it, rather look at
what is being said’.

3.Imam Ali (a.s.) said in Nahj Ul Balagah : ‘Acquire wisdom and truth
from whomever you can because even a hypocrite can have them but unless
they are passed over to a faithful Muslim and become part of wisdom and
truth that he possesses, they have a confused existence in the minds of
hypocrites’ - Saying 79.

4.Imam Ali (a.s.) said in Nahj Ul Balagah: ‘Knowledge and wisdom are
really the privilege of a faithful Muslim. If you have lost them, get
them back even though you may have to get them from the hypocrites -
Saying No. 80.

5.“Never reject a hadeeth, regardless of being narrated by a khariji ,
qudri , or marji attributed to us , may be it has some truth in it which
you may not have grasped”

From the above statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) you should have
realized that instead of checking out the narrations, if these people
start checking out the narrators instead, then this is clearly in
violation of the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).  Not only
are these people acting upon this but they have directed the whole
community towards this.

It was because of the fact that the Shiites took Ijtihad from the Sunnis
that they used Ilm Ul Rijaal as a weapon with which to declare the
Hadeeth of the Infallibles (a.s.) as doubtful. Those Hadeeth which were
an obstacle for their Fatwas (verdicts), they declared them to be
doubtful and discarded them. Allamah Bakhshashi has quoted the Mujtahid
Sheykh Tusi in his book, in uncovering the secrets of the Mujtahids,
complaining that these Mujtahids have totally abandoned the Hadeeth and
are only depending on their analogies and opinions to issue Fatwas
(verdicts). Sheykh Tusi has been quoted as saying : ‘I have been trying
for quite some time now to write a book on Jurisprudence in which I
should give those principles of Furoo without the use of analogies and
personal opinion but base them on the Hadeeth of the Infallibles, but my
personal circumstances did not permit me to do so. My enthusiasm was
weakened greatly by the attitude of my group of Mujtahids who hardly pay
any attention to this’. In this way, in the book Rowzat Ul Jannat,
Allamah Khownsari Mujtahid has shown how much Sheykh Murtadha used to
believe in the Hadeeth of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

‘‘Sheykh Murtadha was a Mujtahid and only used to apply Jurisprudence.
He used to have very little concern with the Hadeeth and did not base
his decisions on these. This is not hidden from those who read the books
of Allamah Murtadha. He is well known for his statements that ‘these
Hadeeth are solitary ones and therefore cannot be relied upon to get
sure knowledge’. In this his actions were the same as Ibn Idrees’’.

Syed Murtadha Alam Ul Huda is the leader of the Mujtahids, and is the
elder brother of Syed Razi who has done a huge favour upon not only the
Shiites but the whole Islamic world by compiling Nahj Ul Balagah. It is
well know that Syed Razi never used to recite Namaaz behind his elder
brother as he was aware of his double faced approach.

Now that a glimpse of true nature of mujtahideen has been presented to
you, let us gift you a saying of Imam Baqir and the saying I m quoting
from usool-e-kafi, book of eman and kufr;

“In my companion , he is my favorite who is the most intellectual, and
looks after our ahadeeth well ; and his case is the worst who hears a
hadeeth narrated and attributed to us and finds it not as per his
liking, and thus dislikes it and rejects it and declares those who are
acting as per that hadeeth disbelievers , despite the fact that he does
not know that we have narrated that and given it authentication, just
because of this action of his in which he rejects our hadeeh , he is out
of our wilayat”

Now that you have seen that these people have been thrown out from
Wilayah, meaning Shiaism, by the Imam (a.s.), and this is why the words
of the author of Al Risala deserve to be written down in golden letters.

If the Mujtahids can place a thousand conditions before they accept the
statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), they why should we not
present two thousand pre-conditions before we accept their statements
based on their analogies?’

The race to present the Hadeeth to be doubtful began with the inception
of Ijtihad, and since then all the Mujtahids have been fighting over
each other in order to participate in this ‘good deed’. In this day and
age, this plague is at its peak. By way of example I present to you an
excerpt from Agha Khomeini’s book ‘Hukumat e Ilsami Ya WIlayat e Faqih’
(Islamic Government Or Mastership Of The Jurist) where he says :

Anyhow, the Imams (a.s.) went through such difficult circumstances that
the knowledge that they had taken from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) could
not be delivered by them to the people in and unadulterated form, e.g.
in the form of a book’.

It may be that after reading the above statement you feel like kissing
it and touch your eyes with it. Once you have done this you should read
it again and when the statement begins to sink in then ponder over the
next statement from the same page of that book.

‘The heaps of  praise and honour that has been awarded to the scholars
and the Jurist is for the reason that they managed to spread the
religious Commands and introduced the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) to the people’.

Four points come out of these statements:

1.The Holy Infallibles (a.s.) failed to convey the Commands of Allah
(s.w.t.) and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), to the people.

2.These Divine Commands did not reach to the people in the form of a
book.

3.Despite the Divine Commands not reaching the people, the narrations in
the praise of the scholars did reach them. (Please note that the
‘narration’ that has been referred to by him is a solitary one and has
been termed as ‘weak’, but he considers it to be reliable. If you wish
to praise Agha Khomeini for this then do so but there is no one who will
be able to declare a solitary narration as a reliable one as has been
explained before in this chapter.

4.Because the Holy Imams (a.s.) (God forbid) failed to convey the
religious Commands to the people and so Allah (s.w.t.) placed this
responsibility upon the Mujtahids so that they can manufacture these
commands by use of their own analogies and give them to the people.

Now what do I say. Any person who even has an inkling of understanding
of religion will realize the enormity of the accusation that has been
leveled at the Infallible Imams (a.s.). Whatever the reason may have
been, the claim is that the Holy Imams (a.s.) (God forbid) failed to
perform their duty. The rest of the Prophets (a.s.) however, and
including our Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) bore various kind of sufferings,
stoning, exiles, falsified, and even killed, but they did not leave any
stone unturned in the propagation of their Message. But our Imams (a.s.)
were such that (God forbid) did not perform their duties due to fear of
their lives and took their knowledge with them when they left this
world. This accusation is a challenge to the honourable Shiites, and
anyone who wants to accept these accusations as correct should
understand that his name will be counted amongst those of the enemies of
the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) even if he is Shia by name.

Now let us analyse this acusation and see how much truth there is in it
and what the motives are behind this accusation.

When you survey all the religions of this world and especially that of
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), then you will see that what the Shiites
have received from their Imams (a.s.) far exceeds that which has been
received by all the Imams of the others. As far as knowledge in the book
form is concerned, the Book of Suleym Bin Qais Hilali was written at the
time of Imam Ali (a.s.) and was available in the form of a book. Imam
Ali Ibn Husayn (a.s.)’s book Sahifa E Kamila, which is a treasure chest
of knowledge is available even today in book form. Various sermons of
the Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.) are present with us today.
People are also aware that numerous statements of Imam Baqir (a.s.) are
to be found in our ‘Four Books’ and others. In the time of Imam Ja’far
(a.s.) four hundred books were preserved, four thousand students used to
sit with him and they sued to bring their papers and pens to write down
what was taught to them and then they used to return back to their
localities and propagate that knowledge. Even today there are so many
narrations present in the ‘Four Books’ that they exceed the number of
narrations to be found in other books. On top of all these there are
thousands of other books in which the statements of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) are to be found. So one has to be blind by his eyes as well as
heart for one to believe such an accusation that the Holy Imams (a.s.)
failed to convey the Divine Commands to us. What kind of atrocity is
this that all these narrations have now been declared to be doubtful in
order to justify their verdicts based on their analogies. Are they
trying to prove that all the Shiite literature is false and therefore
unreliable?

And if they are saying that the Holy Imams (a.s.) themselves did not
write any books then we are in agreement with this. Allah (s.w.t.)’s
Proof (a.s.) do not write and construct their own books. From Adam
(a.s.) to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and from him (s.a.w.) up to the Imam
Mahdi (a.s.) not one of them has ever written his own book. I seek
refuge from those people who throw accusations at the Proofs (a.s.) of
Allah (s.w.t.), the inheritors of the Holy Quran, of not constructing
and writing their own books, and also from those people who agree with
these accusations. I swear upon Allah (s.w.t.) that the Family of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) was oppressed before and still is being oppressed
today. Those before usurped their caliphate and these Jurists today are
at the doors of their Wilayah and Imamate. Since the Holy Imams (a.s.)
(God forbid) failed in their duties to convey the Divine Commands
therefore in this fourteenth Century Hijra it has been left to these
Mujtahids to perform this ‘good deed’ and succeed in it, and they are
the true representatives of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

I think enough discussion has taken place over this issue for it to
suffice for men of understanding. So far I have discussed the first two
sources of Ijtihad i.e. the Holy Quran and Hadeeth. Now I shall turn my
attention to the other two, Ijma (Consensus) and Qiyas (analogy). But
first it would not be out of place to shed some light on one more issue
and that is Zan (Conjecture). As you have seen before in the description
of Ijtihad that this is ‘the maximum efforts of a jurist to enable him
to get the presumption of a Sharia law’ , let us now see what this
‘presumption’ (Conjecture) actually is, and what the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) have said about this.

ZAN
---

There is a word called ‘Shoba’ (Uncertainty) from which we get ‘Shabeeh’
(Replica). This is used when a duplicate copy is made and it becomes
difficult to distinguish between it and the original. The basis of
conjecture is the same.

For example, if you were to come across a shiny piece of glass and you
think ‘In my view this is a piece of diamond’. Now, this piece of glass
will not turn into a diamond simply because of your conjecture
regardless of whether you preserve it safely in your jewellery box. In
the same way the Mujtahid looks at two similar problems and conjectures
that the same Command is applicable to both of them. And so this Zan is
just another type of analogy (Qiyas). Now let us see what the Holy Quran
and the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have to say about this. Over here I will
only refer to one Divine Verse and two Hadeeth, and I will leave the
rest for the discussion on Qiyas (analogy).

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا يَتَّبِعُ أَكْثَرُهُمْ إِلاَّ ظَنًّا إَنَّ الظَّنَّ لاَ يُغْنِي
مِنَ الْحَقِّ شَيْئًا إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلَيمٌ بِمَا يَفْعَلُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 10:36] And most of them do not follow (anything) but conjecture;
surely conjecture will not avail aught against the truth; surely Allah
is cognizant of what they do.

Allah (s.w.t.) has stated that in the search for truth, conjecture is of
no use. It therefore follows that any commands that are issued based on
conjectured cannot possibly have anything to with truth.

#### AL KAFI - H 123, Ch. 15, h4

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from
al-Husayn ibn Sa‘id from al-Nadr ibn Suwayd from Yahya al-Halabi from
abu Sa‘id al-Mukari from abu Basir from abu Ja’far, recipient of divine
supreme covenant, who has said the following: “Imam abu Ja’far,
recipient of divine supreme Covenant, said about the words of Allah in
the Holy Quran, ‘The idol worshippers, the idols, the rebellious ones
(26:94) and the army of Satan will all be thrown headlong into hell,’
(26:95) has said, ‘They are the people who speak about justice a great
deal but in their own practice they disregard it altogether.’”

Imam Baqir (a.s.) said :

“when our narrations are presented to you people , their hearts wish to
be at a distance from them because there is no following of presumptions
in that , so who accept them , narrate more for them , and who do not ,
leave them as there is test in it for those so that the truth gets
separated from lies and after this separation, we get the result which
is we and our shia” - usool-e-kafi , book of hujjat chapter 82, hadeeth
5 (vol. 2, page 360)

From the above verse and Hadeeth a few points come to my mind.

1.Truth can never be obtained by the usage of conjecture. Those that use
this method surely cannot be sure about their own beliefs or actions.
This kind of person should evaluate his own position.

2.Those who follow conjecture will be flung headlong into Hell.

3.Those who follow conjecture stay away from the Imams (a.s.) only for
the reason that there is no conjecture there and that the Imams (a.s.)
have excluded them from being Shiites.

Let us now look at one more word called ‘Istambaat’. There is a lot of
noise being made about this method in the world of Ijtihad. Basically,
as far as the Jurist is concerned it means the statement that the he
give based on his own thinking.

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِذَا جَاءهُمْ أَمْرٌ مِّنَ الأَمْنِ أَوِ الْخَوْفِ أَذَاعُواْ بِهِ
وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَى أُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ
لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ وَلَوْلاَ فَضْلُ اللّهِ
عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَتُهُ لاَتَّبَعْتُمُ الشَّيْطَانَ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
</p>

[Shakir 4:83] And when there comes to them news of security or fear they
spread it abroad; and if they had referred it to the Messenger and to
those in authority among them, those among them who can search out the
knowledge of it would have known it, and were it not for the grace of
Allah upon you and His mercy, you would have certainly followed the
Shaitan save a few.

Now look at the commentary of this verse according to the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.).

1.In Tafseer Saafi it is reported that Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) has
explained that the people of Istambaat here are the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.).

2.In Tafseer Ayyashi it is reported that Imam Ali Ridha (a.s.) has
explained that over here the people who do Istambaat are the Holy
Infallibles as they extract knowledge from the Quran and they are the
Proof of Allah (s.w.t.) over the people.

3.In Ikmaal U Deen of Sheykh Saduq, it is narrated from Imam Muhammad
Baqir (a.s.) that: Whosoever regarded the people who do Istimbaat to be
those who are other that the Prophets (a.s.) and their Households, has
gone against the Commands of Allah (s.w.t.), and regarded the ignorant
as their commanders (Ul Il Amr), and those devoid of guidance to be
their guides, and conjecture that these are the one who do Istambaat.
They thus forged lies about Allah (s.w.t.) and strayed away from the
Commands of Allah (s.w.t.) and did not stay where Allah (s.w.t.) had
placed His Grace. The result was that they went astray and led their
followers astray as well. On the day of judgement, in from of Allah
(s.w.t.) no excuse will be of any use to them.

We get the following results from the above commentaries.

1.The only ones who have the right to Istambaat are the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) as they know the Desires of Allah (s.w.t.) and in fact are His
Desires themselves (a.s.).

2.The Holy Infallibles (a.s.) are aware of the prohibited and the
allowed (Halal and Haraam).

3.Those who give the right of Istambaat to anyone other than the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) then he is disobedient to Allah (s.w.t.), ignorant,
false pretender to be the Ul Il Amr and a forger of lies against Allah
(s.w.t.).

4.Such a person has himself gone astray and so have those that followed
him.

5.These people can do what they want in this world and entrap whosoever
they want in the web of Istambaat but on the Day of Judgment their void
evidence will not avail them at all.

After reading the above, does is not surprise you that the Mujtahids
actually use the above Verse in order to prove their Ijtihad? Strange,
very strange!

I would request you to read Allmah Haeri’s book ‘RISALAT UL TANQEED FIL
ASBAAT IKTIHAD O TAQLEED’, which would be sufficient proof of this
debate for those who possess even a little bit of understanding. Let us
now come to the third source of law of Ijtihad - Consensus.

IJMA
----

Ijma stands for the consensus of a group of people on a certain issue.

First of all you should know that Ijma is done by people of different
thinking and therefore cannot have anything to do with the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) nor with the truth. This is because neither is there
any difference of thought between the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) nor are
there difference types of truth. So, in the first step it has been
proven that Ijma has nothing to do with Allah (s.w.t.) or the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.). This word has never been used in the Holy Quran or
Hadeeth in order to prove anything. This principle has also been brought
in from the adversaries like the other ones in order to facilitate
personal gain.

Ijma is that weapon which was first used to usurp the rights of the
Family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w). It was on the strength of Ijma that
Jalal U Din Suyuti had the audacity to write in his book ‘Tareekh Ul
Khulafa’ (History of the Caliphs) : ‘Yazeed was the rightful Caliph
because there was Ijma of the Muslims on this, and Husayn (a.s.) was not
a Caliph because there was no Ijma on this’.

And when this weapon came into the hands of the Mujtahids, they used it
against Divine Commands and in favour of their analogical verdicts and
false commands. Meaning, if there is consensus on the Jurists on a
certain matter then the Commands of Allah (s.w.t.) and the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) has not standing. This reached such a stage that a non Muslim
writer commented that : ‘Ijma is such a weapon in the hands of the
Muslims that in front of it even their God and Prophet are seemed to be
helpless’.

And now if a person who is blind of intellect were to say that Ijma is
not for beliefs but for actions (Furoo), then only lamentations can be
done over this because branches only sprout out of the roots. How is it
possible for dates to grow from an apple tree? Those of you who have
been fortunate enough to have the desire for reading religious books or
those elders among you who have been listening to great speakers since
childhood will bear witness that not only Shiite scholars but the Shia
sect itself has always opposed Ijma and presented thousands of proofs
against it.

Over here I would only give you one proof which the speakers of these
days tend to relate. Even Allamah Talib Jowhari himself presented this
proof from the pulpit in Nishtar Park. This is such a proof that no
intellect can reject it. It is an eternal law that a total of
incompletes do not make a complete. For example if a hundred thousand
blind people get together, their whole group would still be blind. It is
not possible that a gathering of a hundred thousand blind people would
result in all of them being able to see. In this way if a million zeroes
were to be placed together then their total would still be zero. Based
on this principle the consensus of non-Infallibles would still be
fallible. For those who are prone to errors, and delusions, and desires
of the self were all to get together and agree upon something then they
would still not be free from these deficiencies. This can neither be a
proof nor can it be reliable enough to be acted upon.

As for their claim that an Infallible (a.s.) is part of their consensus
then this has already been refuted before. Even if I were to agree with
them for a while that an Infallible (a.s.) (God forbid) is part of their
consensus then surely, whenever there are differences between them the
Imam (a.s.) would be rectifying their errors and removing their
differences, and it would become obligatory for them to submit to his
(a.s.)’s decision. In this way the decision would be the decision of the
Infallible Imam (a.s.) and not a result of their consensus. I do not
want to waste your time by writing more about this. But, I would
definitely like to invite you to think over this question. After all,
what is the reason behind the inclusion of this principle of Ijma, which
is an enemy of the Shiite religion and taken from the adversaries, into
the principles of Jurisprudence?

IJMA AND ITS DISASTROUS EFFECTS - AN EXAMPLE
--------------------------------------------

I hereby present to you a small example of the disastrous results of the
use of Ijma and how it is being used as a weapon to contradict the
statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.).

The discussion of the inclusion of the third testimony (Ali Ul Wali
Ulllah) in Adhan, Iqamah and Tashahhud of Namaaz will be discussed later
on in the chapter of ‘Opposition to the Infallibles’. There I will
include a Hadeeth from Ihtijaj Tabarsi which has been narrated from Imam
Ja’fa Al Sadiq (a.s.) that : ‘Whenever any one of you says ‘La Ilaha
Illa Allah and Muhamma Un Rasool Ulllah, he shought straight away say
‘Ali Un Ameerul Mo’mineen’. This is such a strong and correct Haddeeth
of an Infallible (a.s.) that no Mujtahid has ever had the courage to
oppose it in any way whatsoever. And so scholars of repute have given
this Hadeeth a place in their writings, but also due to Ijma they have
to contradict this Hadeeth despite agreeing to its authenticity.

In his book ‘Shahada e Thalisa’ (Third Testimony) Allamah Muhammad
Husayn Sabiqi under the heading ‘It is only the consensus of the
scholars which does not declare ‘Ali Un Wali Ullah’ as part of the
Adhan, writes that : ‘What is the proof of those Mujtahids who have
refrained from declaring the third testimony as part of the Adhan’. For
this I would like to present the statements of Ayatullah Muhammad Hassan
from his book ‘Al Jawahir Ul Kalaam’, which is a very dependable
explanation of the Sharia of Islam and forms part of the course of
Ijtihad, says: ‘There is no harm is we read it (the third testimony) as
part of the Adhan so that the Hadeeth of Al Ihtijaj Tabarsi can be acted
upon’.

If the consensus of the Shiite scholars had not been on it not being
part of it from the beginning, then its declaration to be part of it
would have been possible.

He then goes on to say that: ‘The writer of Al Jawahir’s claim is not
without strength, but since the scholars have Ijma on this non inclusion
therefore he could not give a Fatwa on this’. (Sirr Ul Emaan, Page 34).

In the discussion of these above verdicts, Allamah Sabiqi states that:
‘It is clear from the statement of the writer of ‘Al Jawahir’ that based
upon the evidence and the Hadeeth and proofs, the third testimony is
part of the Adhan, but since the scholars have consensus about its non
inclusion, and this has to be respected, then he refrained from issuing
such a Fatwa. If Ijma were to be ignored then its inclusion in Adhan is
clear’.

Did you see how the Hadeeth of an Infallible Imam (a.s.) was sacrifice
at the altar of Ijma? I seek refuge with Allah (s.w.t.) from this Ijma
which is an enemy of the Holy Infallibles.

I have already discussed the Holy Quran, Hadeeth, and Ijma. Now let us
come to that which is the crux of the principles of Jurisprudence. If
you take a closer look you will see that both the Sunnis and the Shiites
have utilized the first three principles just to keep the people
occupied. The reality is that the business of Ijtihad is wholly run on
the basis of analogy. This is why asking for proof from a Mujtahid has
been regarded as an unpardonable offence. As soon as you ask for proof
you will be thrown out of his Marjaiat. O servant of God, if you are
giving Fatwas based on the Holy Quran and Hadeeth, then why are you
shying from giving your references? Are all the Shiites just donkeys and
eternally ignoramuses that they will not be able to comprehend your
proofs? The problem here is that, what proof can there be for analogy?
And if the asking of questions and the provision of answers becomes a
custom, then their whole Marjaiaat will be in danger. That is why they
have made it obligatory to accept their verdicts without question and
closed the doors of asking for proofs.


