CHAPTER 6: QIYAS (ANALOGY)
==========================

In religion the meaning of Qiyas is the application of a command in one
matter to another matter based on a common ground. This then demands
that the order should be the same for the two matters. (Commentary of
Sahifa Kamila by Mufti Ja’far Husayn).

You may now be getting tired of all this technical discussions, let me
therefore relate to you a light heated story so that you can relax your
mind a little.

This is a well known story of Sheykh Chilli. One day, in the midst of
the summer heat, he decided to do some gardening. So he went to get his
gardening tool which had become quite hot due to the summer heat. As
soon as he grabbed hold of the tool his hand got scalded from it. So he
asked for advice from someone to take a look at the gardening tool and
see what the problem was. So the advisor said mockingly: ‘Your gardening
tool has got high fever. The solution is to tie a rope round it and
immerse it into the water well so that its fever can come down’. So
Sheykh Chilli followed the instructions and lo, the tool cooled down. By
coincidence, after a few days his mother fell ill with high fever. So
Sheykh Chilli then started thinking that surely there is a similarity
here between the two cases. Therefore the same order should be
applicable on both the cases. He then tied a rope around his mother’s
neck and flung her into the water well. After a few dips when he took
her out, the fever was gone, but then so was his mother. I don’t think
Sheykh Chilli should be totally blamed for doing what he did as his
error can be classified as an ‘error of Ijtihad’.

TYPES OF QAYAS
--------------

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: ‘Every innovation is a sin and the
punishment of every innovator is Hell’.

When our elder brothers (Sunnis) looked at this Hadeeth they thought:
‘We are in trouble. Now where are we going to place innovations like the
forbidding of Mutah, Nabeedh, As Salaat Khairun Min An Nawm etc.’ Now,
their Mujtahids were not going to be left behind anyone, so they put on
their inventor’s garb and subdivided Innovation into two types, namely
good and bad. And so they classified the above innovations as good
innovations as the one who issued this order was also a ‘good’ person.
But the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) had forbidden innovations in its entirety
and not only certain kinds of it. And the ‘Writer of our Destiny’ Had
written that Sunnis and Shias are brothers and so why should the Shia
lag behind in this. And so as soon as the Imams (a.s.) Commanded us to
stay away from innovations, they only glanced at it, as their elder
brothers had already dealt with this matter beforehand. So they
immediately divided Qiyas (Analogy) into three parts.

Mufti Jafar Husayn writes that there are three types of analogies:

1.Qiyas Mansus Ul Ala - As the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said that wine if
forbidden because it is an intoxicant, it therefore means that every
intoxicant is therefore forbidden. (One Mujtahid actually made tobacco
unlawful based on this type of analogy).

2.Qiyas Ba Tariq Ul Ala - As Allah (s.w.t.) Has Said in the Holy Quran
‘Do not say UFF to your parents’, it therefore means that we should not
harm them in the least.

3.Qiyas Mustanbat Ul Ala - When one does Istinbaat based on one’s
opinion and arrives at the order. This Qiyas is incorrect from the
Shiite point of view.

Here I would like to say that to divide Qiyas into three types is in
itself Qiyas, for there is no such division of it to be found in the
statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) who actually forbid Qiyas in
its entirety. This subdivision was only done in order to keep their
businesses going.

They concluded that if a Holy Infallible gives a particular reason for
something then this is the only reason for it. What could also be the
case that the Imam (a.s.) actually had more reasons to give but gave us
only a particular one for a particular problem. In the same way a doctor
knows what to say to a patient and an Imam (a.s.) know what to say to
who and when.

So where did these people get the right to use analogies in matters of
religion, the interpretation of which is the sole right of an
Inafallible imam (a.s.).

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said that wine is forbidden due to the fact
that it is an intoxicant. Just like where they have used their analogies
in other matters, it is also possible in the absence of reasons other
that this one, for them to declare wine to be lawful. I can show you
thousands upon thousands of people who, after drinking bottles upon
bottles of wine, do not get intoxicated from it. So now if we use these
analogies, then based upon the reason for the forbidding of wine being
absent, wine would end up being lawful. The people who drink wine would
then make the claim as to why wine should be forbidden to them when it
does not intoxicate them.

So who gave these people the audacity to make these claims? It was
obviously the people who use Qiyas when they regarded the intoxication
to be the only reason for its unlawfulness. They did not consider the
fact that there could be numerous other reasons such as the effect it
would have on their future generations etc.

Let me give you another example, In Islam, two witnesses are required
for every crime to be proven, but for adultery four witnesses are
required. The Holy Infallibles (a.s.) explained that as for adultery the
criminals are two in number, hence twice as many witnesses are required,
whilst for other crimes only two are sufficient. So, now, if two people
were to murder one person, then according to their Qiyas, would we need
to call four witnesses?

For adultery, the reason given was that children would not become
impure. If we were to take this reason as the only one, and then
consider the case of a person who has had vasectomy done, then according
to their rules of Qiyas adultery would be allowable for him as he cannot
have children.

O servants of God! For God’s sake have mercy on this religion and do not
make it a laughing stock.

ILLUL UL SHARAI
---------------

They have named these types of analogies as Illul Shara’i (Reasons for
Laws). This has now given them a free license to issue whatever Fatwa
they feel like. (The example of the forbidding of Tobacco has been given
before). On top of this they have made it obligatory for the people to
listen to their Fatwas and act upon them without any question otherwise
their deeds would be nullified.

Let us now see what Allah (s.w.t.) and the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have
to say about this.

<p dir="rtl">
كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الْقِتَالُ وَهُوَ كُرْهٌ لَّكُمْ وَعَسَى أَن
تَكْرَهُواْ شَيْئًا وَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ وَعَسَى أَن تُحِبُّواْ شَيْئًا
وَهُوَ شَرٌّ لَّكُمْ وَاللّهُ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:216] Fighting is enjoined on you, and it is an object of
dislike to you; and it may be that you dislike a thing while it is good
for you, and it may be that you love a thing while it is evil for you,
and Allah knows, while you do not know.

This verse has been explained in Tafseer Ul Muttaqeen that: This verse
proves that as far as Divine Ordinances and Commandments are concerned,
people have no right to act upon their own opinions. Allah (s.w.t.) is
the Creator of people and is fully Aware of their nature, and Knows that
humans, due to their deficient knowledge, are not capable of
differentiating who is good from what is bad, and what is profitable for
him and what is not, because no matter how high a person’s intellect
might be, there come a limit at which it stops. Above this level, it is
up to the Prophet (a.s.) Chosen by Allah (s.w.t.) to provide guidance
for them.

Most divince commands tend to be of a very high level and only Allah
(s.w.t.) knows them fully. Sometimes people tend to adopt certain
reprimands thinking them to be for their benefit, and so Allah (s.w.t.)
has not allowed them any right of interference in the divine ordinances.

#### AL KAFI - H 172, Ch. 19, h16

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from
‘Uthman ibn ‘Isa who has said the following: “Once I asked (Imam) abu
al-Hassan Musa, recipient of divine supreme covenant, about the use of
analogy and the Imam said, ‘What do you have to do with analogy? Allah
will not ask how it was made lawful or unlawful.’”

Now that you are aware of the foundations of Qiyas, let us now see what
Allah (s.w.t.) and the holy Infallibles have to say about this. I am now
presenting to you nine Divine Verses and eighteen Hadeeth. Now it is up
to you and your faith. But, keep two conclusions in mind which we have
been through in the chapters before. It is clear from the statements of
the Mujtahids themselves that Ijtihad is only done where the religious
Commands are not clear, and that with the help of analogy and conjecture
the reason of an Order is deduced although Allah (s.w.t.) is the only
one Who Knows the real reasons.

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ كُلُواْ مِمَّا فِي الأَرْضِ حَلاَلاً طَيِّباً
وَلاَ تَتَّبِعُواْ خُطُوَاتِ الشَّيْطَانِ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ
مُّبِينٌ
</p>

[Shakir 2:168] O men! eat the lawful and good things out of what is in
the earth, and do not follow the footsteps of the Shaitan; surely he is
your open enemy.

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّمَا يَأْمُرُكُمْ بِالسُّوءِ وَالْفَحْشَاء وَأَن تَقُولُواْ عَلَى
اللّهِ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 2:169] He only enjoins you evil and indecency, and that you may
speak against Allah what you do not know.

Speaking without knowing has been regarded by Allah (s.w.t.) as doing
the Taqleed of Shaitan.

#### AL KAFI - H 96, Ch. 11, h2

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn ‘Isa ibn ‘Ubayd from
Yunus ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj who has said
the following: “Imam abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, once said to me, ‘Beware of two forms of behaviour. It is such
behaviours that have led many people to their destruction. Beware of
giving fatwa to people on the basis of your own opinion and of following
a religion without knowledge.’”

<p dir="rtl">
إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ يَحْكُمُ بِهَا
النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُواْ لِلَّذِينَ هَادُواْ
وَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالأَحْبَارُ بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُواْ مِن كِتَابِ
اللّهِ وَكَانُواْ عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاء فَلاَ تَخْشَوُاْ النَّاسَ
وَاخْشَوْنِ وَلاَ تَشْتَرُواْ بِآيَاتِي ثَمَنًا قَلِيلاً وَمَن لَّمْ
يَحْكُم بِمَا أَنزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 5:44] Surely We revealed the Taurat in which was guidance and
light; with it the prophets who submitted themselves (to Allah) judged
(matters) for those who were Jews, and the masters of Divine knowledge
and the doctors, because they were required to guard (part) of the Book
of Allah, and they were witnesses thereof; therefore fear not the people
and fear Me, and do not take a small price for My communications; and
whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they that are
the unbelievers.

<p dir="rtl">
وَكَتَبْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ فِيهَا أَنَّ النَّفْسَ بِالنَّفْسِ وَالْعَيْنَ
بِالْعَيْنِ وَالأَنفَ بِالأَنفِ وَالأُذُنَ بِالأُذُنِ وَالسِّنَّ
بِالسِّنِّ وَالْجُرُوحَ قِصَاصٌ فَمَن تَصَدَّقَ بِهِ فَهُوَ كَفَّارَةٌ
لَّهُ وَمَن لَّمْ يَحْكُم بِمَا أنزَلَ اللّهُ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ هُمُ
الظَّالِمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 5:45] And We prescribed to them in it that life is for life, and
eye for eye, and nose for nose, and ear for ear, and tooth for tooth,
and (that there is) reprisal in wounds; but he who foregoes it, it shall
be an expiation for him; and whoever did not judge by what Allah
revealed, those are they that are the unjust.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمِنَ الإِبْلِ اثْنَيْنِ وَمِنَ الْبَقَرِ اثْنَيْنِ قُلْ آلذَّكَرَيْنِ
حَرَّمَ أَمِ الأُنثَيَيْنِ أَمَّا اشْتَمَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ أَرْحَامُ
الأُنثَيَيْنِ أَمْ كُنتُمْ شُهَدَاء إِذْ وَصَّاكُمُ اللّهُ بِهَـذَا
فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَى عَلَى اللّهِ كَذِبًا لِيُضِلَّ النَّاسَ
بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 6:144] And two of camels and two of cows. Say: Has He forbidden
the two males or the two females or that which the wombs of the two
females contain? Or were you witnesses when Allah enjoined you this?
Who, then, is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah that he
should lead astray men without knowledge? Surely Allah does not guide
the unjust people.

<p dir="rtl">
وَلاَ تَقُولُواْ لِمَا تَصِفُ أَلْسِنَتُكُمُ الْكَذِبَ هَـذَا حَلاَلٌ
وَهَـذَا حَرَامٌ لِّتَفْتَرُواْ عَلَى اللّهِ الْكَذِبَ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَفْتَرُونَ عَلَى اللّهِ الْكَذِبَ لاَ يُفْلِحُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 16:116] And, for what your tongues describe, do not utter the
lie, (saying) This is lawful and this is unlawful, in order to forge a
lie against Allah; surely those who forge the lie against Allah shall
not prosper.

<p dir="rtl">
مَتَاعٌ قَلِيلٌ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
</p>

[Shakir 16:117] A little enjoyment and they shall have a painful
punishment.

Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) has explained Verse 116 thus : ‘If any
person were to commit a sin, whether minor of major, then he ends up
being expelled from faith and only the word ‘Islam’ is left for him. But
when he repents and is forgiven, then he comes back into faith and will
not go to unbelief. But if anyone declares what is lawful as unlawful or
vice versa based on his opinion, then as far as we are concerned he not
only leaves the fold of faith but ceases to be a Muslim as well. He is
an unbeliever and his example is of one who goes to the Kaaba and
commits a disgraceful act and then comes out and is killed and ends up
in Hell’.

From Verse 117 it can be said that those that issue Fatwas based on
opinion do get some profit from it.

<p dir="rtl">
فَإِن لَّمْ يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَكَ فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّمَا يَتَّبِعُونَ
أَهْوَاءهُمْ وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنِ اتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ بِغَيْرِ هُدًى
مِّنَ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 28:50] But if they do not answer you, then know that they only
follow their low desires; and who is more erring than he who follows his
low desires without any guidance from Allah? Surely Allah does not guide
the unjust people.

This has been commented upon by Imam Musa Al Kazim (a.s.) that this is
the person who does not act according to the orders of the Imam (a.s.)
of his time and makes his own opinions as being religious ordinances.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَن يَعْشُ عَن ذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَنِ نُقَيِّضْ لَهُ شَيْطَانًا فَهُوَ
لَهُ قَرِينٌ
</p>

[Shakir 43:36] And whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of
the Beneficent Allah, We appoint for him a Shaitan, so he becomes his
associate.

<p dir="rtl">
وَإِنَّهُمْ لَيَصُدُّونَهُمْ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ وَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُم
مُّهْتَدُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 43:37] And most surely they turn them away from the path, and
they think that they are guided aright:

In Tafser Saafi it has been narrated from Imam Ali (a.s.) that: ‘Anyone
who had decided upon the commission of a sin and turned away from the
remembrance of Allah (s.w.t.), and stopped learning religious Commands
from the one whom He (s.w.t.) had ordered to learn from, then Allah
(s.w.t.) appoints a Shaytan to become his associate’.

Let us summarise the conclusions that we get from the above verses so
that we can then move on to the Hadeeth.

1.In the first verse Allah (s.w.t.) has regarded the one who speaks
without knowledge as being in the Taqleed of Shaytan.

2.In the second and the third verse, those people that make decisions
based on other than what has been revealed, have been declared as
unbelievers and unjust. This means not accepting the decisions made by
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and basing decisions on personal opinions
and analogies. On the day of judgement a caller will cry out ‘The curse
of Allah (s.w.t.) be on the unjust’.

3.In the fourth verse the word ‘Or were you witnesses when Allah
enjoined you this?’ proves that no one is in receipt of revelation and
no one is inspired from Allah (s.w.t.) except the Holy Infallibles. And
those that issue fatwas based on their own analogies, their actions have
been equated to forging lies about Allah (s.w.t.) and leading people
astray.

4.The fifth and the sixth verse are quite clear that issuing fatwas
based on personal opinion and analogy about the lawful and the unlawful,
is like forging lies about Allah (s.w.t.). From this profit is gained in
the life of this world but such a person becomes deserving of grievous
punishment in the hereafter. And the Holy Imam (a.s.) has actually
thrown such a people out of religion altogether.

5.In the seventh verse, for a person who does not act according to Imam
(a.s.)’s orders and considers his own opinions as religion, Allah
(s.w.t.) has Issued three verdicts. Firstly such a person is gone
totally astray, secondly he is unjust and thirdly, such a person cannot
be guided. In the books of hadeeth there is a story about a man who used
to incur losses in whatever business deal that he transacted, until he
became bankrupt and dependent upon others. And so Shaitan appeared to
him in human for and said to him; ‘Shall I show you a way to become
rich?’ So he replied in the affirmative. Shaytan then advised ‘Then go
and invent a religion and invite people towards it. You will get both
fame and fortune’. So he did exactly that. The generality of people, as
you know, are always on the lookout for any caller who calls out and
they run towards him. Soon a large group collected around him and he
became their ‘Marja’ and was awash with wealth. One day he had a
reflective thought: ‘What have I done? For the sake of a few coins not
only have I gone astray but have led others astray as well’. He was
overcome with intense regret so much so that one day he tied himself to
a wooden pole in the heat of the sun and decided that he would keep
himself in this situation until such time as his Lord does not forgive
him. Allah (s.w.t.) then said: ‘Even if this person were to stay in that
position until such time as his meat melts away and bones decay, I shall
not forgive him until each and every person that he has led astray does
not repent and asks for forgiveness’. That is why in this verse it is
stated that such a person cannot be guided.

6.The eight verses is telling us that the person who closes his eyes to
the Imam (a.s.) and issues fatwas based on his personal opinion, then
Allah (s.w.t.) appoints a Shaytan for him as a companion.

7.The ninth verse clarifies that the Shaytan that becomes his companion
carries out two tasks. Firstly he stops him from ‘Sabeel Allah’ (The
Path of Allah (s.w.t.)) (Now this is not the time for an exposition
otherwise I would prove with sufficient evidence that the meaning of
‘Sabeel Allah’ here is the person of the Imam (a.s.). The person who
diverts attention away from the Imam (a.s.) towards himself and
suppresses the statements of the Imam (a.s.) and advertises his own
statements, would be the one that would come under the definition of
this Verse). The second task that the Shaytan carries out is that he
keeps on whispering to him that he is on the right path of guidance
(depite the fact that Allah (s.w.t.) has already testified that he has
strayed away from ‘Sabeel Allah).

We have gone through the verses of the Holy Quran and the statements of
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) regarding them. The conclusions that have
been derived from these have been explained to you clearly. It is now up
to you to ponder over these. I hereby pray that you will think over
these Verses and will not be entrapped by the one who is ‘blind from the
remembrance of Allah (s.w.t.)’.

FATWA
-----

Let us now come to hadeeth and first of all see what the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) have said about those that issue Fatwas.

#### AL KAFI - H 95, Ch. 11, h1

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad and ‘Abd Allah (both) sons of
Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from Ali ibn al-Hakam from Sayf ibn ‘Umayra from
Mufaddal ibn Yazid who has said the following: “Once, (Imam) abu ‘Abd
Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, said to me, ‘I like to warn
you about two forms of behavior that lead a man to destruction. I
prohibit you from dealing with Allah on the basis of falsehood and from
giving fatwa (a legal opinion) to people without knowledge.’”

It has been narrated from Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.): ‘There will be
people who will be ever ready to issue Fatwas and they will also make
the claim that whatever need to be questioned should be referred to them
although they may not be able to explain a single word correctly. Allah
(s.w.t.) does NOT befriend such self-made people’. - AL KHISAL Page 86.

#### AL KAFI - H 96, Ch. 11, h2

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn ‘Isa ibn ‘Ubayd from
Yunus ibn 'Abd al-Rahman from 'Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj who has said
the following: “Imam abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, once said to me, ‘Beware of two forms of behaviour. It is such
behaviours that have led many people to their destruction. Beware of
giving fatwa to people on the basis of your own opinion and of following
a religion without knowledge.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 97, Ch. 11, h3

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from
al-Hassan ibn Mahbub from Ali ibn al-Ri’ab from abu ‘Ubayda al-Hadhdha’
from abu Ja’far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the
following: “The angels of mercy and the angels of wickedness condemn
those who give to people fatwas without knowledge and guidance. Such
people will be held responsible for the sins of all those who have
followed such fatwas.”

Please try to understand that the above Hadeeth does not mean that those
who follow Fatwas are free from responsibility. One way of explaining
this through the example of a man riding a horse but is carrying his own
bag on his head whilst riding the horse. The horse is carrying both the
weights but the man is still carrying his own.

Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq has said: ‘Flee from issuing Fatwas like you flee
from a lion and do not make the people sacrificial lambs for your
responsibilities’. - NAHJ MIN BALAGHAT IMAM AL SADIQ (A.S.) SAYING NO.
5.

Please pay attention to the above Hadeeth, especially the last one and
then derive the correct conclusion from them.

In the Sermon of Imam Ali (a.s.) titled as ‘Unbelief and its pillars and
branches’, he says: ‘Unbelief stands of four things - Sinfulness,
Extremism, Doubt and Scepticism.

Sinfulness has four branches:

1.Giving low priority to Divine Commands.

2.Following conjecture. - Standing against the Creator and then Shaytan
overcomes him.

3.Incurring loss on ones own self and considering ones deviation as a
good deed.

4.Considering one’s own opinion as better than Divine Commadments. He
will be disgraced by Allah (s.w.t.).

GHULOO (FANATICISM) - Interfering in the laws of religion by the use of
personal opinion.

DOUBT - Quarrelling about the bounties of Allah (s.w.t.). (According to
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) what is mean by bounties here is the Wilayah
(Mastership) of Imam Ali (a.s.). This then means to quarrel about
Wilayah and establishing one’s own Wilayah.

UNCERTAINTY - To interpose truth and falsehood.

This is found in a similar hadeeth:

#### AL KAFI - H 2852, CH 163, h 1

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from Hammad ibn ‘Isa from
Ibrahim ibn ‘Umar al-Yamani from ‘Umar ibn ‘Udhaynah from Aban ibn abu
‘Ayyash from Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilali from Amir al-Mu’minin, Ali ibn
abu Talib, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the
following: “Disbelief is established on four pillars: Sinfulness,
Extremism, Doubt and Skepticism. Sinfulness has four branches: harshness
of manners, blindness of heart, neglect, and arrogance. Whoever behaves
in a harsh manner belittles the truth, hates the people of profound
understanding and persists in great sins. Whoever becomes blind of heart
forgets to remember (the truth), follows guesses, opposes his Creator
and Satan turns bold toward him. He asks forgiveness without repenting,
feeling humble and without being unaware of sin.

#### AL KAFI - H 101, Ch. 11, h7

####

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu‘alla ibn Muhammad from Ali
ibn Asbat from Ja’far ibn Sama‘a from several persons, from Aban, from
Zurara ibn A‘yan who has said the following: “Once I asked Imam abu
Ja’far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, ‘What are of the rights of
Allah on people?’ The Imam, recipient of divine supreme covenant,
replied, ‘They must say what they know and abstain from saying anything
that they have no knowledge of.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 165, Ch. 19, h9

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu ‘Umayr from
Muhammad ibn Hukaym who has said the following: “Once I asked (Imam) abu
al-Hassan Musa, recipient of divine supreme covenant, ‘May Allah keep my
soul in your service, please make us Faqih (people of proper
understanding in religion). Allah has granted us the blessing of your
existence among us and has made us independent of other people. This
blessing is so great that even if a whole group of us may come to one
place, no one needs to ask another a question to prepare an answer for
it. Sometimes, however, we may come across an issue for which we have
heard nothing from you or from your forefathers. We then look into the
best resources available and the closest to your guidance. Can we take
such a finding as an authority?’ ‘Never, ever, by Allah, O ibn Hakim,
many people have been destroyed in it,’ replied the Imam, recipient of
divine supreme covenant. Ibn Hakim has said that the Imam then said,
‘May Allah condemn abu Hanifa who says, “Ali said so and so, therefore,
I said so and so.’” Muhammad ibn Hakim has said that he told Hisham ibn
al-Hakam, ‘By Allah, I only wanted the Imam to give us permission to use
analogy.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 167, Ch. 19, h11

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-
Washsha’ from Muthanna al-Hannat from abu Basir who has said the
following: “Once I asked (Imam) abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine
supreme covenant, saying, ‘We may face an issue about which there is
nothing said in the book of Allah or in the Sunnah, tradition of the
Holy Prophet, recipient of divine supreme covenant, can we use our own
opinion in such matters?’ The Imam replied, ‘No, you must not do that.
If you, in this way, find the truth you will receive no rewards for it,
and if you missed the truth you have forged lies against Allah, the
Majestic, the Glorious.’”

This Hadeeth is sufficient to silence all those who claim that they are
compelled to do Ijtihad when they cannot find what they want from the
Holy Quran and Hadeeth. If anyone has any doubts after this should give
a second glance at his own faith.

#### AL KAFI - H 166, Ch. 19, h10

####

Muhammad ibn abu ‘Abd Allah has narrated in a marfu’ manner from Yunus
ibn 'Abd al-Rahman who has said the following: “Once I asked (Imam) abu
al-Hassan the First, ‘How can I prove that Allah is one?’ The Imam
replied, ‘O Yunus, do not be an innovator (heretic). One who depends on
his personal opinion is destroyed. One who abandons the members of the
family of his Prophet goes astray. Whoever abandons the book of Allah
and the words of His prophet becomes an unbeliever.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 173, Ch. 19, h17

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Harun ibn Muslim from Mas‘ada ibn
Sadaqa who has said the following: “(Imam) abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of
divine supreme covenant, has narrated from his father who said that Imam
Ali, recipient of divine supreme covenant, has said, ‘Whoever decides to
use analogical reasoning as a source of authority, his whole life will
remain in confusion. Whoever practices the religion of Allah by means of
analogical reasoning his whole life will pass in a drowning condition.’
Imam abu Ja’far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, then said,
“Whoever issues Fatwa on the basis of his personal opinion has practiced
the religion of Allah by means of what is not knowledge. Whoever
practices the religion of Allah without knowledge has opposed Him by
making things lawful and unlawful through things he has no knowledge
of.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 178, Ch. 19, h22

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Khalid
from his father in mursal manner (Mursalan) from abu Ja‘far, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following: “Do not take
anyone closely and intimately between yourselves and Allah; if you did
so it would cause you to become unbelievers. Every means, ancestral and
relative relations and intimacy, innovations (heresy) and doubts will be
cut off except what is established in the Holy Quran.”

#### AL KAFI - H 175, Ch. 19, h19

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn ‘Isa ibn ‘Ubayd from
Yunus from Hariz from Zurara who has said the following: “Once I asked
Imam abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, about lawful
and unlawful matters and he said, ‘Whatever the Holy Prophet, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, has made lawful will remain lawful forever
up to the Day of Judgment and whatever he has made unlawful will remain
unlawful forever up to the Day of Judgment. There will be no one other
than him and there will come no one other than him.’ He said that Imam
Ali has said, ‘No one has established any innovation (heresy) without
abandoning an established noble tradition.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 963, Ch. 86, h 1

####

A number of our people have narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad (from) ibn
abu Nasr who has said the following: “About the words of Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most Gracious: ‘Who strays more than one who follows his
desires without guidance from Allah? . .’ (28:50), abu al-Hassan,
recipient of divine supreme covenant, has said, ‘It refers to those who
consider their own opinions as their religion without a true Imam from
the 'A'immah (Leaders with Divine Authority).’”

In his Supplication No.20 On Noble Moral Traits Imam Ali IBn Husayn
(a.s.) said : ‘Perfect this for me through lasting obedience, holding
fast to the community, and rejecting the people of innovation and those
who act in accordance with original opinions!’

You have just been through eighteen Hadeeth from the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.), but did not realise how great an act worship you have done.
However, this act of worship would be incomplete if you were not to
ponder over this and arrive at the correct conclusions. I have saved one
Hadeeth so that it can be the final word on this matter. But, let us
first discuss the above traditions. You already know the decision of the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.) about those that issue Fatwas. Let us see what
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have to say about those that utilize
conjecture, analogy and personal opinion;

1.It leads to destruction.

2.Allah (s.w.t.) does not befriend them.

3.They are cursed by both the angels of mercy and punishment.

4.They make people their sacrificial lambs for their own purpose.

5.Wherever there is no religious ordinance then it is better to abstain.

6.It is forbidden to use analogy in the absence of an order.

7.If a Mujtahid issues a correct fatwa there is no reward for it whereas
issuance of an incorrect fatwa from him equates to forging a lie against
Allah (s.w.t.).

8.A person who does not know religious ordinances and makes use of
analogy will always be in a state of doubt and never achieve conviction.
(Imam Ali (a.s.) has clearly stated that sleep with conviction is better
than a whole night’s worship). One who deliberately makes divine
commandments to be doubtful in favour of his own analogy has opposed
Allah (s.w.t.).

9.Following someone who applies analogy is polytheism.

10.Acting in a condition of doubt and uncertainty is acting unlawfully.

11.One who extracts religious laws based on analogy is not a believer.

12.It is the Sunnah of the Imam (a.s.) to stay away from (Tabarra)
innovators, those who use analogy and personal opinion.

13.One who uses analogy and places the foundation of religion on
conjecture is a polytheist.

THE FINAL PROOF
---------------

Let me now give you the Hadeeth that I have saved to the last as the
final word. This will lift the veils from your eyes and you will be able
to see clearly the people who are being referred to in this Hadeeth.
Every word of this Hadeeth deserves to be pondered over.

#### AL KAFI - H 162, Ch. 19, h6

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from certain persons of his people and
Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father from Harun ibn Muslim from Mas‘ada ibn
Sadaqa from abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, and
Ali ibn Ibrahim from his father from ibn Mahbub in a marfu’ manner from
Amir al-Mu’minin Ali, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said
the following: “Of the most intensely disliked men in the sight of
Allah, the Majestic, the Most Glorious, are two kinds of people: A man
whom Allah has left all to his own soul and who deviates from the path
of justice, and is extremely attracted toward the words of innovation
(heresy). He seems a master at performing prayer and fasting but is a
mischief-maker to deceive people; he has strayed from guidance of the
people before him and misleads those who may follow him in his lifetime
and after his death. He carries the responsibility for others’ sins and
is a hostage of his own sins. “The other man is one who displays
ignorance as knowledge among the ignorant. He receives assistance from
the darkness of existing mischief. The people, who appear like people
(who in fact have no intelligence), consider him a scholar, but he has
not spent even a complete day with scholars. He has made an early effort
to accumulate something that in its being of a smaller quantity is
better than in larger quantities and in this way he has filled himself
with polluted water and has treasured what is of no use. He sits among
people as a judge to carry the responsibility of adjudicating what is
confusing and uncertain to others. He may even oppose the ruling of the
judge before him. One can never tell whether his judgment will remain
valid or if a judge after him will overturn it just as he has done to
the judgments of the judges before him. If he faces complex and
difficult issues he comes up with a great deal of his personal opinions
and shapes them up as a clear-cut judgment. In fact, he has dressed
himself up with doubtful issues the way a spider weaves his fragile web.
He is not sure if he has done the right thing or the wrong one. He does
not consider the fact that in an unknown case to have proper knowledge
is necessary, and he does not see that beyond his opinion there is a
school of law.

He analogizes one thing to the other but it does not matter to him if
his opinion will turn out to be a lie. If an issue is dark (not known)
to him he hides it to hide his own ignorance so that people will not say
he does not know. He then boldly judges and thus he is the key to
hazards, a storage of doubts, perplexed in ignorance, and he never
regrets his lacking knowledge. The level of his knowledge never rises to
absolute certainty so that he could benefit. He blows out Hadith like
winds that blow away hay. The legacies weep because of him, the bloods
(judging the case of murder) shout against him. The lawful marital
relations become unlawful because of his judgment and unlawful ones
become lawful. He has no confidence in the judgments he issues and he
can never be trusted for judgments that he may make nor was he qualified
for what he may have done in the matters in which he claimed to have
true knowledge.”

Now read more about this from an extract from Nahju Ul Balagah Sermon
No. 17.

He sits among the people as a judge responsible for solving whatever is
confusing to the others. If an ambiguous problem is presented before him
he manages shabby argument about it of his own accord and passes
judgment on its basis. In this way he is entangled in the confusion of
doubts as in the spider's web, not knowing whether he was right or
wrong. If he is right he fears lest he erred, while if he is wrong he
hopes he is right. He is ignorant, wandering astray in ignorance and
riding on carriages aimlessly moving in darkness. He did not try to find
reality of knowledge. He scatters the traditions as the wind scatters
the dry leaves.

May our lives be sacrificed for those Guides and Imams (a.s.) who closed
all the doors of deviations from us. They have show use how to save
ourselves from going astray by pointing out each and every point of
deviation. The only pre-condition is that we should stop following the
non infallibles who are prone to error and follow the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) exclusively. Then not only will we find a solution to all our
problems, but such doors of knowledge and understanding will open up for
us that we have never even dreamt of. This is the only way to sort out
our religion and problems of this world. Our Master (a.s.) have already
issued warnings to us that this world is full of Shaytan’s traps. If we
were to become oblivious from our Imams (a.s.) even for a moment then we
are abound to fall into one of these traps, and the biggest of the traps
is the following of a non infallible.

Now I am going to give you certain signs from which you should try and
draw a picture, then we shall see whose picture it is.

1.He becomes arrogant that he should avail of religious commandments
from the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and differs from him, so that he can
establish his own Marja’iat by referring to these commandments as
doubtful and divert the people towards his own Fatwas and make them
dependent upon them. This is why Allah (s.w.t.) he left him to wander
alone.

2.He has strayed from the straight path and regards his own commands as
beyond reproach and irrefutable he makes it obligatory upon the people
to follow them.

3.Instead of taking commandments from the Holy Quran and basing
decisions on correct proofs and understand the truth about religion and
call people towards understanding Imam e Zamana (a.s.) (As the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) has said that anyone who dies without having understood
the Imam of his time has died the death of unbelief, hypocrisy and
ignorance), he concentrates upon the exoteric ordinances of religion
like Prayer, Fast, etc. and diverts the people towards these matters
instead of the real reason of life. This is to such an extent that they
do not even think about anything else except the procedural matters of
these acts and consider these to be the main reason of life.

4.He is a source of mischief for his followers in this life as well as
after his death. He has led them astray in this life and will do the
same after his death.

5.He entraps others in ignorance. In other words he wishes to keep
people in a perpetual state of ignorance.

6.The ignorant among the people consider him to be the most
knowledgeable of all.

7.In matters of religion he is always in a state of uncertainty and
doubt. Although he never gains sure knowledge or conviction, he still
claims that he is removing doubts from the people.

8.He has acquired that whose acquisition is better if it were of less
quantity i.e. details of Furoo and that also based on conjecture. You
know very well that some people spend their entire lives in the
acquisition of this knowledge and are proud of it. If someone were to
present the statements of the Infallibles to people then they get told
‘Are you better knowledgeable or those who spend their entire lives in
the acquisition of this?’ Oh, only if they had indeed spent their entire
lives in acquiring the commandments of the Holy Infallible (a.s.) and
had not fallen in love with their own analogies and conjectures, and
instead of the exoteric commands they would have directed people towards
the true commands which is the understanding of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.).

9.He has invalidated the Fatwa of the previous one and replaced it with
his own, although he knows that the next person will come and invalidate
his one and replace it with another one. He considers Sharia as his
slave so that whosoever wishes can issue any command that he feels like.

10.The truth of religion is totally different from his conjecture and
analogy.

11.If there is a similarity between two matters then he applies the same
ruling on both of them and does not consider this to be wrong.

12.In matters that he knowS not, he still audaciously issues a verdict
on it.

13.He demeans the hadeeth of the Infallibles (a.s.) so that he can find
a way for his analogy and conjecture.

14.He is not worthy of the knowledge that he claims to possess nor is he
worthy that people should sort out their problems through him.

15.He himself does not know that the verdict he has issued is correct or
not. If it is right then he still doubts that it might be wrong and vice
versa. (You can collect all the Fatwas of the Mujtahids and you will see
that they will end with the words ‘Allah Knows best’. The simple meaning
of this is that ‘I have issued this verdict based on my analogy but only
Allah (s.w.t.) Knows what the correct verdict is).

16.Those who do not endeavor to acquire religious knowledge for
themselves live an ignorant life and die in a state of straying.

17.Imam Ali (a.s.) has defined their characteristics as : ‘When the true
meaning of the Holy Quran as presented to them they consider it to be
worthless, whilst if meanings are derived from it by manipulation of
verses then this becomes the most valuable thing for them’. (Refer to
Ayatullah Ali AL Haeri’s statements on Surah Al Tawba).

THE END RESULT OF FATWAS
------------------------

This chapter is coming to an end but will remain incomplete if I do not
explain the end result of all these Fatwas that are being issued. These
are not my words but those of Allama Hilli. This is so famous that it
does not require any evidence.

After the death of Allama Hilli some good people saw him in a dream and
asked him as to what had transpired with him after his death. He
replied: ‘Had I not written the books ‘AL FEYN’ and ‘ZIYARAT AL HUSAYN’,
then my Fatwas would have destroyed me.

The truth has been delivered to you. My proof over you is now completed.
Who will be able to guide the one whom Allah (s.w.t.) has left alone?


