CHAPTER 8: OPPOSITION TO THE HOLY INFALLIBLES (A.S.)
====================================================

1.Our first one is Muhammad (s.a.w.), our middle one is Muhammad
(s.a.w.) and our last one is Muhammad (s.a.w.).

2.Ali (a.s.) is the self of Allah (s.w.t.), the self of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.), the speech of Allah (s.w.t.), the face of Allah (s.w.t.), the
eyes of Allah (s.w.t.), the ears of Allah (s.w.t.), the hands of Allah
(s.w.t.) and the chest of Allah (s.w.t.).

3.They (a.s.) do not desire but what Allah (s.w.t.) desires.

4.They (a.s.) are all the desires of Allah (s.w.t.).

5.Their (a.s.) speech is the Speech of Allah (s.w.t.) and their (a.s.)
actions are the Actions of Alah (s.w.t.).

6.Obedience to them (a.s.) is obedience to Allah (s.w.t.), and
disobedience to them is disobedience to Allah (s.w.t.).

7.The truth is with Ali (a.s.) and Ali (a.s.) is with the truth. O Allah
(s.w.t.), turn truth to wherever Ali (a.s.) turns.

I have not presented the above quotations as some sort of evidence or
proof, rather I have presented those established facts that all Shiites
living in every sector of the world would not have the audacity to
oppose. The only ones that oppose this are those in whose hearts there
is enmity towards Imam Ali (a.s.) and go around the community dressed up
in Shiite garbs. We have been warned of them by Imam Ali (a.s.): ‘Save
yourselves from the people of low nature who call themselves Shia’.

The purpose of listing out certain beliefs of the Shiites was to draw
certain conclusions from these, but it seems that these conclusions have
already reached your minds. I mean, any person that opposes any of them
(a.s.), fights against any of them (a.s.), falsifies any of them (a.s.),
rejects any of them (a.s.), issues orders against any of their (a.s.)
orders, equates himself with any of them (a.s.), adopts any of their
(a.s.) virtues, or adorns for himself any of their special titles which
Allah (s.w.t.) has Allocated to them (a.s.), is neither a Shiite nor a
Muslim, nor has he anything to do with truth. He is falsehood from head
to toe.

Now if anyone were to associate these kinds of people with religion then
he should think twice about his own faith, for any opposition to them
(a.s.) is opposition to Allah (s.w.t.).

#### AL KAFI - H 166, Ch. 19, h10

####

Muhammad ibn abu ‘Abd Allah has narrated in a marfu’ manner from Yunus
ibn 'Abd al-Rahman who has said the following: “Once I asked (Imam) abu
al-Hassan the First, ‘How can I prove that Allah is one?’ The Imam
replied, ‘O Yunus, do not be an innovator (heretic). One who depends on
his personal opinion is destroyed. One who abandons the members of the
family of his Prophet goes astray. Whoever abandons the book of Allah
and the words of His prophet becomes an unbeliever.’”

I have nothing against any person or his status for that matter. I have
simple stated certain principles with full responsibility. If anyone has
anything against these principles then he should consider now whether he
wishes to accept them and be a believer or reject them and become an
unbeliever. It does not concern me at all, but, if these principles
cannot be denied, and surely they can never be denied, then instead of
being thrown out of their Mastership it would be better if we were to
bow our heads in front of these personalities and say: ‘O my Master, I
am with those that help you and support you, and I am an enemy to those
that oppose you regardless of whosoever he may be. I fully agree with
their statement: ‘Befriend one who befriends us even if he were your
father’s murderer, and be an enemy to one who is inimical to us even if
he were your own father’’.

If you have now come to be of such a state of mind then the discussions
which are to take place in this chapter and the following ones will not
appear strange to you. Neither will you get angry nor will you roll up
your sleeves, but rather you will side yourselves with those that have
given you the guarantee of salvation. The love for those (a.s.) and the
single tear which flows in their grief, is sufficient to put out the
fire of Hell. I am convinced that you will indeed be doing this. In
opposition to these (a.s.) personalities, will we then ally ourselves
with people whose own salvation is in doubt; and that besides some
worldly gain from them there is nothing more to achieve?

Now I come to the actual point I am trying to make and would like to
present before you certain questions and ask you for justice. Before I
do this I would like you to read the following statement of Imam Ali
(a.s.) from Nahj Ul Balagah:

SAYING 153 - One who assents or subsribes to the actions of a group or a
party is as good as having committed the deed himself. A man who joins a
sinful deed makes himself responsible for two-fold punishments, one for
doing the deed and the other for assenting and subscribing to it.

(1)If a Holy Infallible (a.s.) was to explain a Verse from the Holy
Quran and another person explains it differently?

(2)If a Holy Infallible (a.s.) issues an order and someone else issues a
contradictory one?

(3)If a Holy Infallible (a.s.) performs an act in a particular way and
someone else then performs it differently?

These are just a few questions which I have presented to you in order to
draw your attention to the group which opposes the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.). You will no doubt be able to think of many more, provided you
make the effort to look around.

Although the main purpose of this entire book is to point out to the you
the opposition that is being done to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), I have
made this topic a separate chapter, so that your attention does not get
diverted from it. Please do not depend only on this chapter as only a
few examples have been given herein.

1 - UNITY
---------

<p dir="rtl">
وَاعْتَصِمُواْ بِحَبْلِ اللّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلاَ تَفَرَّقُواْ وَاذْكُرُواْ
نِعْمَتَ اللّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ كُنتُمْ أَعْدَاء فَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ
قُلُوبِكُمْ فَأَصْبَحْتُم بِنِعْمَتِهِ إِخْوَانًا وَكُنتُمْ عَلَىَ شَفَا
حُفْرَةٍ مِّنَ النَّارِ فَأَنقَذَكُم مِّنْهَا كَذَلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللّهُ
لَكُمْ آيَاتِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 3:103] And hold fast by the covenant of Allah all together and
be not disunited, and remember the favour of Allah on you when you were
enemies, then He united your hearts so by His favour you became
brethren; and you were on the brink of a pit of fire, then He saved you
from it, thus does Allah make clear to you His communications that you
may follow the right way.

In the commentaries of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), ‘rope of Allah
(s.w.t.)’ here denotes the Wilayah (Mastership) of Imam Ali (a.s.). The
Mujtahids on the other hand say : ‘It is not obligatory upon all Muslims
to unite on one Sect or on one point of view, rather it is obligatory
upon them to act according to the Fatwas issued by their own
Mujtahids’ - Agha Syed Muhammad Qazwini.

2 - TAQAYYAH (Dissimulation)
----------------------------

This is to hide one’s faith for the protections of one’s life, wealth
and honour, even if one has to speak a word of disbelief for it.

Let us first see whether the mention of Taqayyah in the Holy Quran is
for the beliefs or for actions.

<p dir="rtl">
لاَّ يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاء مِن دُوْنِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ
إِلاَّ أَن تَتَّقُواْ مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللّهُ نَفْسَهُ
وَإِلَى اللّهِ الْمَصِيرُ
</p>

[Shakir 3:28] Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends
rather than believers; and whoever does this, he shall have nothing of
(the guardianship of) Allah, but you should guard yourselves against
them, guarding carefully; and Allah makes you cautious of (retribution
from) Himself; and to Allah is the eventual coming.

When the unbelievers had captured the parents of Ammar Yasir and
tortured them to renounce their newly acquired faith and praise the
idols, they refused and were killed for it. Ammaar Yasir, under
compulsion, uttered the words that the unbelievers wanted to hear. He
then ran towards the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) crying and questioning
whether he had become an unbeliever. This led to the revelation of this
verse which had to do with beliefs and not with actions.

#### AL KAFI - H 2231, CH 93, h 2

####

Ibn abu ‘Umayr has narrated from Hisham ibn Salim from abu ‘Umar
al-‘A’jami who has said the following: “Once abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, said to me, ‘O Abu ‘Umar, nine tenths of
religion is in al-Taqiyyah (cautious measures). One who does not observe
al-Taqiyyah has no religion. Al-Taqiyyah must be observed in all matters
except wine and wiping (a part of Wuzu) over the socks.’”

It follows from above that 90% of taqaiyyah is related to principles and
beliefs rather than actions.

#### AL KAFI - H 2246, CH 93, h 17

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from ibn Faddal
from ibn Bukayr from Muhammad ibn Muslim from abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following: “As it (time of
Imam al-Mahdi) draws closer, al-Taqiyyah will be more intensely needed.”

#### AL KAFI - H 2247, CH 93, h 18

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from his father from ibn abu ‘Umayr from
ibn ‘Udhaynah from Isma'il al-Ju’fi and Mu’ammar ibn Yahya ibn Sam and
Muhammad ibn Muslim and Zurara who have said the following: “We heard
abu Ja’far, recipient of divine supreme covenant, saying, ‘Al-Taqiyyah
is whenever the son of Adam is compelled; Allah has made it lawful for
him.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 2234, CH 93, h 5

####

Abu Ali al-Ash’ari has narrated from al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Kufi from
al-‘Abbas ibn ‘Amir from Jabir al-Makfuf from ‘Abd Allah ibn abu Ya’fur
from abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said
the following: “Protect your religion and veil it with al-Taqiyyah
(protective measures); one who does not observe al-Taqiyyah has no
belief. You in the people are like honeybees, in birds. Had birds known
what is inside honeybees no honeybee would have been left and it all
would have been consumed. Had people known that you love Ahl al-Bayt
they might have destroyed you with their tongues, abusing you in private
and in public. May Allah bless those of you who are in our Walayah
(Divine Guardianship).’’

The following points should be noted about Taqaiyyah.

1.It is to be done for the concealment of faith.

2.It is related to everything.

3.It is mostly related to beliefs rather than actions.

4.In our time period it should be done even more intensely.

In his book ‘Islamic Government’. Agha e Khomeini said: ‘Taqiyyah
relates to the branches (furū’) of religion; for example - performing
ablution in different ways. But when the chief principles of Islam and
its welfare are endangered, there can be no question of silence or
taqiyyah.’

COVETING LEADERSHIP AND GOVERNMENT
----------------------------------

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from
Mu’ammar ibn Khallad from abu al-Hassan, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, who has said the following: “It was mentioned before the Imam
that a certain man loves to have leadership. The Imam said, ‘Two fierce
wolves in a flock of sheep, whose shepherd is far away, are not more
harmful to the flock than seeking leadership to a Muslim’s religion
is.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 2494, CH 113, h 2

####

It is narrated from him (narrator of the Hadith above) from Ahmad ibn
Sa’id ibn Janah from his brother, abu ‘Amir from a man from abu ‘Abd
Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, who has said the following:
“Abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, has said,
‘Whoever seeks leadership is destroyed.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 2497, CH 113, h 5

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from
al-Hassan ibn Ayyub from abu ‘Aqilah al-Sayrafi who has said that Karram
narrated to us from abu Hamza al-Thumali who has said the following:
“Once abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, said to me,
‘Beware of leadership and beware of marching behind men (following
them).’ I (the narrator) asked, ‘May Allah keep my soul in service for
your cause, I understand what leadership is. However, as far as walking
behind men is concerned, I must acknowledge that two thirds of what I
know are but from my walking behind and following men.’ The Imam said to
me, ‘That is not the way you think. Beware of supporting a man who does
not have any (Divine) Authority but you acknowledge whatever he has
said.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 2500, CH 113, h 8

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from Yunus from
al-‘Ala’ from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the following: “I heard
abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, asking, ‘Do you
think I do not distinguish the bad from good among you? Yes, by Allah,
the bad ones among you are those who love people walking behind him.
Such a person is inevitably a liar or a helpless one (due to his
ignorance) in his opinion.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 2501, CH 114, h 1

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from Muhammad
ibn Sinan from Isma'il ibn Jabir from Yunus ibn Zabyan who has said the
following: “I heard abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, saying, ‘The Messenger of Allah has said, “Allah, the Most
Majestic, the Most Holy, has said, ‘Woe upon those who treacherously use
religion for their worldly goals and fight those who command people to
yield to justice. Woe upon those among whom the believers live
frightened and hide their belief. Are they deceiving Me or that they
dare to oppose Me? I swear by Myself that I will allow them to be
afflicted by means of such strife whereby the most forbearing will
suffer confusion.’”

In his book ‘Islamic Government’ Agha e Khomeini says: ‘This is an
individual obligation and if not then a collective one’.

QIYAS (ANALOGY)
---------------

#### AL KAFI - H 167, Ch. 19, h11

####

Muhammad ibn Yahya has narrated from Ahmad ibn Muhammad from al-Washsha’
from Muthanna al-Hannat from abu Basir who has said the following: “Once
I asked (Imam) abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant,
saying, ‘We may face an issue about which there is nothing said in the
book of Allah or in the Sunnah, tradition of the Holy Prophet, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, can we use our own opinion in such matters?’
The Imam replied, ‘No, you must not do that. If you, in this way, find
the truth you will receive no rewards for it, and if you missed the
truth you have forged lies against Allah, the Majestic, the Glorious.’”

The Jurists one the other hand claim that if a Mujtahid were to issue a
wrong fatwa then he will get single reward for trying, whereas if he
gets it right then he will get double the reward.

I have presented before, eighteen hadeeth that Qiyas is forbidden, but
they have categorized it into three types of which two types have been
declared as allowable. I have discussed this in detail before.

AHL UL ZIKR (PEOPLE OF REMEMBRANCE)
-----------------------------------

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ إِلاَّ رِجَالاً نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ
فَاسْأَلُواْ أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِن كُنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 16:43] And We did not send before you any but men to whom We
sent revelation-- so ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not
know--

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ إِلاَّ رِجَالاً نُّوحِي إِلَيْهِمْ
فَاسْأَلُواْ أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ إِن كُنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 16:43] And We did not send before you any but men to whom We
sent revelation-- so ask the followers of the Reminder if you do not
know--

#### AL KAFI - H 538, Ch. 20, h1

####

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu‘alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha' from ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Ajlan who has said the following:
“About the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most High, ‘Ask the people
of Dhikr if you do not know’ (16:43, 21: 7) Abu Ja‘far, recipient of
divine supreme covenant, has said that the Messenger of Allah, recipient
of divine supreme covenant, said, ‘I am the Dhikr and ‘A’immah are the
people of Dhikr.’ About the words of Allah, the Most Holy, the Most
High, ‘It is a Dhikr for you and for your people and you all must be
asked (for guidance).’ (43:44) The Imam, recipient of divine supreme
covenant, said, ‘We are his “people” and we must be asked (for
guidance).’”

There are eight more Hadeeth like this from the same chapter of Al Kafi
confirming the Ahl Ul Zikr to be the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) who must be
asked for guidance. This has also been commented upon in Tafseer Qummi,
Tafseer Ayyashi, and Uyoon Akhbar Al Ridha (a.s.).

The Mujtahids say that this is a reference to them. (Allamah Ali Haeri’s
AL RISALA, and Agha Syed Muhammad Hasan Qazwini).

I am amazed at the people who make such claims and I find it even
stranger that some people actually close their ears and accept these
claims although the whole Shiite world accepts that the world is never
without a Divine Proof. These Verses can only refer to the Holy Imams
(a.s.) as there is not restriction on what one can ask of them. I mean
the restriction is not only to questions on Fiqh, but the words are that
whatsoever that you do not know then ask the People of Remembrance. It
was only the Holy Imams (a.s.) that made the claim “Ask us whatever you
want to know’.

Imam Al Ridha (a.s.) has said: ‘An Imam is not one who replies that he
does not know when asked a question’. History bears witness that in the
time of each Imam (a.s.), they were asked question of various topics and
they all received an answer. I don’t understand how is it possible that
other people had the audacity to make these claims of being the People
of Remembrance and where was the intellect of the people who accepted
these claims of theirs. How is it that the Hadeeth of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) escaped their attention.

Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.)s said: ‘There will also be people who will
be ready to give verdicts and tell the people to ask them whatever they
want despite the fact that they may not even be able to explain a single
word correctly. Allah (s.w.t.) does not befriend such people’ - Al
Khisal.

KHUMS
-----

<p dir="rtl">
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الأَنفَالِ قُلِ الأَنفَالُ لِلّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ
فَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَأَصْلِحُواْ ذَاتَ بِيْنِكُمْ وَأَطِيعُواْ اللّهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
</p>

[Shakir 8:1] They ask you about the windfalls. Say: The windfalls are
for Allah and the Messenger. So be careful of (your duty to) Allah and
set aright matters of your difference, and obey Allah and His Messenger
if you are believers.

<p dir="rtl">
وَآتِ ذَا الْقُرْبَى حَقَّهُ وَالْمِسْكِينَ وَابْنَ السَّبِيلِ وَلاَ
تُبَذِّرْ تَبْذِيرًا
</p>

[Shakir 17:26] And give to the near of kin his due and (to) the needy
and the wayfarer, and do not squander wastefully

<p dir="rtl">
مَّا أَفَاء اللَّهُ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَى فَلِلَّهِ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَابْنِ
السَّبِيلِ كَيْ لَا يَكُونَ دُولَةً بَيْنَ الْأَغْنِيَاء مِنكُمْ وَمَا
آتَاكُمُ الرَّسُولُ فَخُذُوهُ وَمَا نَهَاكُمْ عَنْهُ فَانتَهُوا
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ
</p>

[Shakir 59:7] Whatever Allah has restored to His Messenger from the
people of the towns, it is for Allah and for the Messenger, and for the
near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, so that it
may not be a thing taken by turns among the rich of you, and whatever
the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever he forbids you,
keep back, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is
severe in retributing (evil):

<p dir="rtl">
لِلْفُقَرَاء الْمُهَاجِرِينَ الَّذِينَ أُخْرِجُوا مِن دِيارِهِمْ
وَأَمْوَالِهِمْ يَبْتَغُونَ فَضْلًا مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَرِضْوَانًا
وَيَنصُرُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ أُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الصَّادِقُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 59:8] (It is) for the poor who fled their homes and their
possessions, seeking grace of Allah and (His) pleasure, and assisting
Allah and His Messenger: these it is that are the truthful.

As you can see from the above verses, Khums and the spoils of war is the
right of Allah (s.w.t.), the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), the near of kin, the
orphans, the poor and the travellers. You can go through all the
commentaries of the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) and you will realise that the
near of kin referred to here are the Holy Imams (a.s.). The right of
Allah (s.w.t.) is theirs and so is the right of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.). As far as the right of the poor and the orphans and the
travellers is concerned, this is also for the relatives of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.). The non-Syeds are not entitled to anything and even in
narrations you will find that it is the right of the Syeds even if they
are rich.

Agha e Khomeini has said in his book, Islamic Government: ‘such a tax is
not merely the upkeep of the sayyids or the religious scholars, but on
the contrary, something far more significant - namely, meeting the
financial needs of the great organs and institutions of government’.

THE IMAM (A.S.)’S APPARENT RULE AND HIS (A.S.) ESOTERIC MASTERSHIP
------------------------------------------------------------------

It is established from Shiite books that Imam Mahdi (a.s.) will make
decisions based on his (a.s.) knowledge and not on the strength of
witnesses, just like Prophet Dawood (a.s.) used to do.

In the time of Imam Ali (a.s.), during the battle of Siffin on the Night
of Hareer, the battle started in the morning and continued overnight
until the next morning. During this period the time for Prayers (Namaaz)
passed by. Neither did he (a.s.) tell the combatants to pray the Prayer
of Fear nor did he tell them to make up their missed Namaaz later on.

From the above two examples of the actions of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) we can understand that an Imam (a.s.) can and does use his
esoteric Mastership for his apparent governance. There is a deep
relationship between the two aspects.

Agha e Khomeini said in his book Islamic Government: ‘This thing
(Esoteric Mastership) has nothing to do with the government and
caliphate’.

THE METHOD FOR RUKOO (BOWING)
-----------------------------

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) said: ‘In Rukoo place both the palms of your
hands on your knees, placing the right hand before the left hand, level
your back and forward your neck’ - AL KAFI, BOOK OF SALAAT, HADEETH NO.
1.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said: ‘Whosoever does not level his back in Rukoo, his
Prayer is not correct’ - AL KAFI, BOOK OF SALAAT, HADEETH NO. 4.

Three points can be extracted from the above two Hadeeth:

•The palms must rest on the knees.

•The back must be level straight.

•Without these two the Prayer is not correct.

In the Tawzeeh Ul Masail of Agha e Khomeini it says: ‘In every cycle of
prayer, you should bow down such that your hands should be placed on
your hips, and this is known as Rukoo. If you cannot place both hands on
your knees then it is not a problem’.

RECITATION IN THE 3RD AND 4TH CYCLE OF PRAYER
---------------------------------------------

In a written reply of Imam Mahdi (a.s.) he says: ‘In both these cycles
the recitation of Surah Al Fatiha abrogates the ‘Tasbeehat e Arba’.
However, that person can recite it who thinks that the recitation of
Surah Al Fatiha will lead to forgetfulness or deteriorate his health’.
(In other words the Tasbeehat e Arba can only be recited under those two
conditions, otherwise only Surah Al Fatiha should be recited).

In his Twazeeh, Agha e Khomeini says: ‘It is better to recite the
Tasbeeh in both the cycles’.

MAJOR SINS
----------

#### AL KAFI - H 2432, CH 108, h 2

####

It is narrated from him (narrator of the Hadith above) from ibn Mahbub
who has said the following: “Once certain individuals of our people and
I wrote to abu al-Hassan, recipient of divine supreme covenant, asking
what and how many were the major sins. He wrote back to us about major
sins, ‘Whoever avoids the act for which Allah has decided to send one in
the fire, his evil deeds are expiated, if he is of the believers. The
seven acts that subject one to punishment are to commit murder, a
disregard of kindness to parents, collecting unlawful interest in trade,
alienating oneself from religion after accepting it, accusing married
women of committing indecent acts, consuming the properties of orphans
and running away from the enemy during an offensive in battle.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 2433, CH 108, h 3

####

Ali ibn Ibrahim has narrated from Muhammad ibn ‘Isa from Yunus from ‘Abd
Allah ibn Muskan from Muhammad ibn Muslim who has said the following: “I
heard abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, saying, ‘The
major sins are seven in number: Murdering a believer intentionally,
Accusing a married women of committing indecent act, Running away from
the enemy in the battle field during an offensive, Alienating one’s self
from religion after accepting it, consuming the properties of the
orphans unjustly, consuming unlawful interest in trade after knowing it
clearly and all such acts that Allah has considered to be the cause for
one’s being subjected to suffering in the fire.’”

#### AL KAFI - H 2444, CH 108, h 14

####

Al-Husayn ibn Muhammad has narrated from Mu'alla ibn Muhammad from
al-Washsha’ from Aban from abu Basir who has said the following: “I
heard abu ‘Abd Allah, recipient of divine supreme covenant, saying, ‘The
major sins are seven: One of them is murdering a soul intentionally,
considering things as a partner of Allah the Most Great, accusing a
married women of committing an indecent act, consuming unlawful interest
in trade with evidence, running away from the battlefield during an
offensive against the enemy, alienation from religion after accepting
it, disregarding to maintain good relations with parents and consuming
the property of orphans unjustly.’ The Imam said, ‘Alienation and
paganism are the same.’”

According to the Mujtahids, the list of major sins is so long that I
begin to wonder whether there is any such thing as a minor sin. I have
in my possession the third volume of the Mujtahid Agha e Dastghayb
Shirazi’s book on sins, and I don’t even know how many more are to
follow.

If I were to list all the opposition that has taken place against the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.) then it would be too long. I suggest that you
read this book once more, and in fact read it a few times so that you
will realise that the main purpose of all these Mujtahids is to divert
the people away from the Marji’at of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) towards
their own Marji’at whilst giving the impression that they are advancing
the mission of the Holy Imams (a.s.). These people have now transferred
all the rights and titles of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) to themselves,
and have given the impression to the people that during the major
occultation of our Imam (a.s.), they are his (a.s.) representatives.

As per the statement of Mufti Ja’afar Husayn, the orders of the
Mujtahids are sufficient for their followers. In other words, their
followers have no need to refer to the Holy Quran and the Hadeeth. What
I am saying is that if we could make do without these people after the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), then why can’t we make do without them during the
major occultation, when in fact they were much closer to him (s.a.w.).
Why are you creating such a furore and thousands of books have been
written against these people and are still being written even today. My
ears are burning after listening to debates against them from the
pulpits. After all, what faults had the people of Saqifa committed?
Their actions were the same as yours are today. They replaced a Holy
Infallible (a.s.) with an ordinary person and so have you. Gradually,
the differences between the Mujtahids and the people of Saqifa are being
removed, and today they are claiming that the only differences between
them are those of Furoo (Actions) and this is indeed the reality. There
are many Shiite books that the government has confiscated and prohibited
their publication, and even keeping them at homes. Libraries were raided
and books confiscated, but was there any religious missionary who raised
his voice against these measures? This means that all this was done with
their blessings. They have complied with this because they have realised
that if the correct beliefs as taught by the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
were to fall into the hands of the people then their businesses would
shut down.

So far I have only made a hue and cry over the opposition to the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and you may have been surprised, that what is this
strange reasoning, but each and every argument of mine has been
presented with evidence and proofs. This is why I am certain that you
will not reject the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and adopt
the words of the ordinary people. If you come to a crossroads, then you
will no doubt take the road that has been indicated by the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.).

ENMITY WITH THE HOLY INFALLIBLES (A.S.)
---------------------------------------

Do not be worried when you are told that the whole system is based on
opposition to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), otherwise you will get even
more worried later on because the word ‘opposition’ is a very mild term
that I have used. It is not a question of just opposition but it goes
even further. I will prove to you in this chapter that in actual fact it
is a matter of enmity with the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) that forms the
basis of the system. They are making the people do such things as to end
up deserving of curses from the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). The fate of
such people is destruction, and to be the fuel of the fire of Hell, and
those that doubt this fate of theirs are hypocrites. Come, let me show
you such a statement of Imam Ali Bin Husayn (a.s.)’s from Sahifa E
Kamila, that after listening to it you will lament your previous life
and will cry over those that put you on this road of yours. Yes, those
that repent and hold on to the bosom of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and
stopped usurping their rights, their forgiveness has been promised by
Allah (s.w.t.).

Before I present to you the statement of this Holy Infallible (a.s.),
let me tell you something about the book Sahifa E Kamila. This is a book
of supplications. If you were to even ponder a little bit you will see
that from the Torah to the Holy Quran, from the Hadeeth of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) to the Hadeeth of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), all have
been subjected to doubt and distortions by a large group of people who
even believe in alterations to have taken place in the Holy Quran.
However, Sahifa E Kamila is such a book that from its inception up until
today neither friend nor foe has had the audacity to point a finger at
it. It is an established fact among the Shiites that these are one
hundred percent the statements of a Holy Infallible (a.s.). It therefore
follows that rejection of these statements is equal to casting doubt on
Allah (s.w.t.) and rejecting His (s.w.t.) statements.

Before I present to you this supplication from Sahifa E Kamila, I would
like you to cast aside any bias or doubts that you may have in your
hearts and make the intention that: ‘O Allah! I seek refuge in you from
that I should cast doubt on your Proof or reject him. O my Master! Do
not make me from among those on whom the Imam (a.s.) has cursed and save
me from punishment’.

SERMON 48 - SUPPLICATION FOR THE DAY OF SACRIFICE AND FRIDAY
------------------------------------------------------------

‘O God! This station belongs to Your vicegerents, Your chosen ones while
the place of Your trusted one in the elevated degree which You have
singled out for them have been forcibly stripped! But You are the
Ordainer of that, Your command is not overcome, the inevitable in Your
governing is not overstepped! However You Will and whenever You will! In
that which You Know best, You are not accused for Your creation or Your
Will! Then Your selected friends, Your vicegerents, were overcome,
vanquished, forcibly stripped; they see Your Decree replaced, Your Book
discarded, Your obligations distorted from the aims of Your Laws, and
the Sunnah of Your Prophet abandoned. O God! Curse their enemies among
those of old and the later folk, and all those pleased with their acts,
and their adherents and followers!’

You have now read what the Holy Imam (a.s.) has said in his
supplication. There is nothing complicated in this supplication, and it
is my belief that whosoever has even an inkling of truth in his heart
will have understood what the Holy Imam (a.s.) has said in his
supplication.

Mufti Ja’far Husayn said about this: ‘The Imam (a.s.) has clearly stated
a few commands in this supplication. The Friday Prayers and the Prayers
for the two Eids are exclusively for the Holy Imams (a.s.) and no other
person has got the right to perform these.

Abdullah Ibn Dinar has narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) that: ‘O
Abdullah! Be it the Eid of Azha or Fitr of the Muslims, the grief and
sorrow of the Family of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) is freshened anew’. So
I asked the reason for it and he (a.s.) replied: ‘It is because they see
their rights in the hands of the others’.

In this way the right of the leadership of the Friday Prayers is not for
anyone other than the Holy Imam (a.s.) or one appointed by him.

Now that you have read what the Mufti has commented about this, then the
gist of the supplication will have become even clearer to you.  The
Mufti has tried to hide half the truth here and only restricted himself
to the ‘Friday Prayers and the two Eids’, and skipped over the curse
part. The Holy Imam (a.s.) has cursed three types of people in this
supplication.

1.The prayer leaders of the Friday Prayers and the two Eids.

2.Those that pray behind these leaders.

3.Those that neither lead these prayers nor pray behind them, but are
happy with these happenings.

The Mufti has also skipped over that the Holy Imam (a.s.) has cursed
these three types of people.

This Hadeeth about being an enemy to the Holy Imams (a.s) is so well
known that you have probably heard it since childhood and is on the
tongues of virtually every person. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said to
Imam Ali (a.s.): ‘Even if a person were to recite so many prayers that
his back would become bent like a bow, fast so many fasts that he
becomes thin, gives in the way of Allah (s.w.t.) charity gold and silver
the size of the mountain of Ohad, and gets killed whilst doing SA’EE
(The running between Safa and Marwa) in an oppressed state, O Ali! If
that person keeps you as an enemy then that person will be flung
headlong into Hell’.

In another Hadeeth the Holy prophet (s.a.w.) said: ‘O Ali! No one will
love you except one who is of legitimate birth and no one will hate you
except one who is of illegitimate birth’.

The situation is so delicate that it is possible these words may have
hurt some people, but they cannot hold me to anything. If they have the
courage and the audacity then they should put up a fight against the
Holy Imams (a.s.) and say openly that they will not listen to the Holy
Imams (a.s.), and will only listen to their Mujtahids. As far as the
explanation is concerned, then each and every sect of the Muslims
produces evidence from the Holy Quran in justification for their beliefs
and faith. The reality is that this supplication is so clear that no one
will doubt it except a hypocrite.

The Holy Imam (a.s.) has not restricted his statements to a particular
time period and so it is applicable even today. The leading of these
prayers is either for the Holy Imams (a.s.) or for their appointed ones.
This principle cannot change along with the circumstances, that once the
Holy Imam (a.s.) goes into occultation whosoever wishes can usurp these
rights and adorn them for himself. When the Holy Imam (a.s.) makes his
(a.s.) appearance then these conditions will be met and not before and
so until such time these prayers, as they are congregational, cannot be
recited.

Mufti Ja’far Husayn himself agrees to this: ‘In the Friday Prayers and
the Prayers for the two Eids, one of the conditions is the person of the
Holy Imam (a.s.) himself. Therefore, it follows that when the Holy Imam
(a.s.) is not here then these Prayers cannot be obligatory upon us, and
whosoever leads them or follows them or is content with these being
done, will come under the curse of the Holy Imams (a.s.)’.

Can any one with intellect accept that when Allah (s.w.t.) has Commanded
the Friday Prayer to be prayed and the condition of the presence of the
Holy Imam (a.s.) has to be met, that someone will use his opinion to
declare the condition to be unimportant, change the obligation to
‘almost obligatory’ and stand up to lead these prayers? Furthermore
those who are enthusiastic about prayers would then join them in this by
casting aside this condition? This problem has been so illuminated that
anyone who has an inkling of the fear of Allah (s.w.t.) in him will
never be disobedient in this regard and will save himself from the road
which leads straight to Hell.

In this complete darkness, some Mujtahids have seen a ray of light and
have issued Fatwas that Friday Prayers during the occultation of the
Holy Imam (a.s.) are forbidden. I am listing nine of these Mujtahids
from the book Al Risala.

1.Allamah Noorullah Shustary (Shaheed e Thalith)

2.Maulana Hamza Salaad

3.Maulana Jalil Qazwini

4.Maulana Sheikh Ali Naqi

5.Maulana Muhammad Bin Idrees (Author of Sharai Ul Islam)

6.Maulana Hassan Bin Abdullah Tastary

7.Maulana Abdullah Bin Al Hajj Muhammad Touie

8.Maulana Ismail Mazandarani

9.Maulana Sheykh Suleiman Bin Ali Bin Abi Tayyib Al Shakhuri

People have abandoned their responsibilities in matters of religion so
much so that today they neither are aware of the beliefs, or religion or
its history. The reality is that during the occultation, the Shiites had
never recited the Friday Prayers. This plague first started in Iran, and
in India this was first led in Lucknow by the Mujtahid Dildar Husayn
Gufran. The other Muslims started mocking at them as to who are these
people who do not pray the Friday Prayers. Hence, in order to please
their elder brothers they have accepted being the accursed by the Holy
Imams (a.s.).

As for the Prayers of the two Eids, this is the icing on the cake. I
have perused through the Tawzeehs of Agha e Khomeini, Al Khoie, Shirazi,
Al Araki and have found the words: ‘As far as the prayers for the two
Eids are concerned this was obligatory during the time of the Holy Imams
(a.s.), but during the occultation these are preferable acts’.

Along with this, in all their books I have found only one command of
theirs regarding preferable prayers: ‘The preferable prayers cannot be
recited in congregation except for the ‘Istisqa’ in beseeching for the
rainfall’.

Who is this ‘person of power’ whose control over matters is so wide that
he has made this individual obligation of Allah (s.w.t.) into a
preferable deed based on his own opinion and get people to act on this.
To consider the deeds that have been made obligatory by Allah (s.w.t.)
to be obligatory in all circumstances and simply have to be done is not
right. Whatever that Allah (s.w.t.) has made obligatory is with certain
conditions which have to be met first e.g. Prayers, Fasts, Pilgrimage,
Charity, Khums, Holy War etc. If the attached conditions are not met
then these obligations would lapse. The Prayers of the two Eids also
have conditions, one of which is the presence of the Holy Imam (a.s.).
What logic is this that if the conditions are not met then instead of
the intention of obligation let us now pray together with the intention
of a preferable act. The purpose here is not obedience of Allah
(s.w.t.), but rather it is the madness to please the elder brothers.

Secondly, if you are reciting these prayers as preferable acts then why
are you doing so in congregation when the Fatwa of your own Mujtahid is
that it cannot be done as such? All of them have only one answer to
give. We are praying this with the intention of ‘Ba Rajaae Matloobiyat’.
You go and ask them for the meaning of this term. I am only asking you
is this - why have you been criticising the Taraweeh Prayers of your
elder brothers throughout the centuries? Maybe they will also give the
same answer as you did. ‘Ba Rajaae Matloobiyat’. At least now the
reality has dawned upon us here through this. Although, apparently these
are two sects, but in reality they are one and the same.

Anyhow, whatever I have said so far in this chapter is sufficient for
those who think and want to understand. I have proven their opposition
to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) through their Fatwas and their enmity
towards them from the word of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). But this
enmity is not so ordinary that it is restricted to the Prayers for the
two Eids and the Friday Prayers. It is spread out everywhere.

Enmity is on two aspects, life and glory. The enemies of the life of the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.) can be seen everywhere in history. The enemies
of their glory can be found in their writings and I will show them to
you.

THE DUA OF QUNOOT OF EID PRAYERS
--------------------------------

You have just read about the Prayers for the two Eids. Let us now look
at one of its horrifying aspects, the supplication that is recited nine
times in the Qunoot of the Prayer for Eid. Look at this supplication
very carefully and then think how many times in your life you have
earned the Wrath of Allah (s.w.t.) by the recitation of this. I do not
want you to be in a state of despair from the door of repentance, but
the crime is so grave that you will have to rub you head into the ground
to ask for forgiveness. I don’t think that it is possible to insult the
Holy Infallibles (a.s.) any more than what is being done in this
supplication that is recited in Qunoot.

They are making you recite two sentences in Qunoot which are
blasphemous.

The first one is -

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَنْ تُدْخِلَنِي فِي كُلّ خَيْرٍ أَدْخَلْتَ فِيهِ مُحَمّداً وَآلَ
مُحَمّدٍ،
</p>

And You may enter me into every of goodness with which You have entered
Muhammad (s.a.w.) and the Household of Muhammad (a.s.).

Now think over this sentence. Anyone with a little bit of sense will be
able to understand that when someone is told to enter, then it follows
that he must have been outside first, or else he cannot be told to
enter. What you are saying is that there was first a time period when
the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) (God forbid) were outside all goodness and
then they were told to enter into them and so they did. You can imagine
yourself what state a person would be in when he is outside of all
goodness.

But, the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) have stated that they are the essence
of all goodness themselves; meaning that they existed before any
goodness existed. Whatsoever acts they performed, goodness came into
existence with those. Any one who performs a good deed and does not have
in his mind that the origin of all goodness are the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.), then his good deeds will go to waste. And those who claim to be
Shiites, scream and scream at least nine times that the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.) were outside of all goodness and it was only after some time that
Allah (s.w.t.) put them into it. O Lord! Even after bestowing so much
‘honour’ on these pure personalities at least eighteen times a year, the
Shiites still remain Shiites.

On top of this ugly insult, the point to think about is that the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) are in every goodness and there is a desire on your
part to equate yourself with them.

The second sentence is even more dangerous than the first one -

<p dir="rtl">
وَأَنْ تُخْرِجَنِي مِنْ كُلِّ سُوءٍ أَخْرَجْتَ مِنْهُ مُحَمّداً وَآلَ
مُحَمّدٍ
</p>

And that You take me out from every evil from which You have taken out
Muhammad (s.a.w.) and the Household of Muhammad (a.s.).

What this means that you will have to accept that there has been a
period during which the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) (God forbid) were
immersed in all evil. Then Allah (s.w.t.) took them (a.s.) out. The
words used here are ‘every evil’, meaning that there is no evil in which
they were not present before they were taken out.

May Allah (s.w.t.)’s Wrath descend upon these people who make these
insulting assertions and those that are happy with them making these.

Even now if someone does not open his eyes, then he should understand
that his enmity towards the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) has been widened.

I spoke about this Qunoot with a Mullah and he presented a strange
defence to this. He said that the Arabic term ‘Akhraj’ means to keep far
away. Then I was convinced that this new logic is not based on ignorance
but it is a deliberate act of enmity. This Mullah is not that naive that
he cannot differentiate between the simple Arabic terms of ‘Akhraj’ and
‘Azhab’. Everywhere the term ‘Azhab’ is used to denote ‘keeping away
from’ like in the Verse of Purification.

<p dir="rtl">
وَقَرْنَ فِي بُيُوتِكُنَّ وَلَا تَبَرَّجْنَ تَبَرُّجَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ
الْأُولَى وَأَقِمْنَ الصَّلَاةَ وَآتِينَ الزَّكَاةَ وَأَطِعْنَ اللَّهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
</p>

[Shakir 33:33] And stay in your houses and do not display your finery
like the displaying of the ignorance of yore; and keep up prayer, and
pay the poor-rate, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah only desires
to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House! and to
purify you a (thorough) purifying.

You can look up any book of language, and if you were to come across
anywhere whatsoever whereby the term ‘Akhraj’ has been used to denote
‘keeping away’, then I am responsible. This is all nothing but
deliberate enmity towards the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and nothing else.

ENMITY WITH THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE HOLY INFALLIBLES (A.S.)
--------------------------------------------------------

•The foundation of the Shiite sect is on its belief of the Infallibility
of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), and the basis of this infallibility is
knowledge.

•Upon the creation of the human beings it was decided that the scale of
virtue is knowledge.

<p dir="rtl">
وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَسْتَ مُرْسَلاً قُلْ كَفَى بِاللّهِ
شَهِيدًا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَمَنْ عِندَهُ عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ
</p>

•[Shakir 13:43] And those who disbelieve say: You are not a messenger.
Say: Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you and whoever has
knowledge of the Book.

<p dir="rtl">
وَعِندَهُ مَفَاتِحُ الْغَيْبِ لاَ يَعْلَمُهَا إِلاَّ هُوَ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا
فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ وَمَا تَسْقُطُ مِن وَرَقَةٍ إِلاَّ يَعْلَمُهَا
وَلاَ حَبَّةٍ فِي ظُلُمَاتِ الأَرْضِ وَلاَ رَطْبٍ وَلاَ يَابِسٍ إِلاَّ
فِي كِتَابٍ مُّبِينٍ
</p>

•[Shakir 6:59] And with Him are the keys of the unseen treasures-- none
knows them but He; and He knows what is in the land and the sea, and
there falls not a leaf but He knows it, nor a grain in the darkness of
the earth, nor anything green nor dry but (it is all) in a clear book.

<p dir="rtl">
وَمَا مِنْ غَائِبَةٍ فِي السَّمَاء وَالْأَرْضِ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ
مُّبِينٍ
</p>

•[Shakir 27:75] And there is nothing concealed in the heaven and the
earth but it is in a clear book.

•It has been proven from above that whosoever has the knowledge of the
Book will have the knowledge of the unseen and of everything. He will be
a witness as well as have the knowledge of the apparent and the hidden.

#### •AL KAFI - H 600, Ch. 34, h1 - ‘Allah does not grant Divine Authority on His earth to those who if questioned are not able to give the right answer and say I do not know.’

####

•The claim of Imam Ali (a.s.): ‘Ask me! Ask me! Before you lose me’.

You have had a glimpse of the extent of the knowledge of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) from the above points, otherwise it is not possible
to fully understand the extent of their knowledge. To point accusing
fingers at them is to find fault with the Actions of Allah (s.w.t.).
Somebody posed a question at Imam Musa Al Kadhim (a.s.): ‘What is meant
by the phrase that Allah (s.w.t.) is Knowledgeable?’. The Holy Imam
(a.s.) replied: ‘This means that Allah (s.w.t.) has created someone who
has the knowledge of every thing’. In other words, he would have the
knowledge of whatever that the term ‘thing’ can be applied to.

I have stated in the beginning that the Shiite religion is based on the
infallibility of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) which is in turn based on
knowledge. So, if a person were to find fault with their knowledge then
that would put their infallibility in doubt. Then the whole Shiite
religion would collapse.

Let us now see what the scholars of religion have to say in the middle
of all this. In the time of Syed Murtadha (The pioneer Shiite
Mujtahids), the Sunni scholar Abdul Jabbar wrote in his objection to the
knowledge of the Holy Imams (a.s.): ‘We, the Sunnis agree that the Imams
of the Shiites do have the knowledge necessary for their position of
Imamate, but you Shiites consider it obligatory for your Holy Imams
(a.s.) to possess all the knowledge which has no bearing on their
Imamate. This belief means that they possess the knowledge of the
unseen’. Syed Murtadha replied to this in such a way that he proclaimed
the beliefs of all the Mujtahids.

‘Honourable judge, I hereby proclaim on behalf of the Shiites that we
also have the same beliefs that you do. We also believe that the Holy
Imams (a.s.) are only knowledgeable to the extent it is necessary, in
the performance of their duties as Imams. We do not accept that they
possessed all other knowledge including that of the unseen, and we seek
refuge in Allah (s.w.t.) from this belief. You can rest assured that it
is my responsibility to spread this belief among the Shiites.
Was-Salaam’.

It can be seen from the letter of this Sunni scholar that the belief of
the Holy Imams (a.s.) having the knowledge of the unseen was so
widespread among the Shiites that even the Sunnis knew about this. It is
now unthinkable that the belief that that was so widespread among the
Shiites did not reach a scholar like Syed Murtadha. Therefore only three
conclusions can be drawn from this.

1.Syed Murtadha had completely rejected the beliefs of the Shiites
pertaining to the knowledge of the Holy Imams (a.s.).

2.He was making amendments to this doctrine.

3.He had promised to spread these amended beliefs among the Shiites.

I reserve my comment on this enemy of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.), and
reply him through their (a.s.) statements which are quoted in the book
Al RISALA.

Imam Ali (a.s.), Master of the Universe has said: ‘I have the knowledge
of the Guarded Tablet. I have received this knowledge through
inspiration of Celestial origin’.

Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) said: ‘O Mufazzal! Whosoever is under the
assumption that there is something which is written on the Guarded
Tablet which the Holy Imams (a.s.) are not aware of is an unbeliever’.

You have read the replies of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). Now I am free
from all blame. Let me now present to you the Fatwa of Mujtahid of
Lucknow Maulana Naasir Husayn (Naasir Ul Millat).

‘The knowledge of reading and writing was given to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) from Allah (s.w.t.) after the declaration of his (s.a.w.)
prophethood. There is also a possibility that Imam Ali (a.s.)’s
knowledge was acquired from some one else or maybe it was from Allah
(s.w.t.). The first case seems to be more correct although I have not
come across this from any book of history as to who he had acquired it
from. Allah (s.w.t.) Knows best. - Kashful Asrar Page No. 171.

If you would like to have a more detailed explanation of this Fatwa,
then you should read the book Kashful Asrar. A lot of veils will be
lifted from your eyes and you will be more convinced of their enmity
towards the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). But, what I would like to say to
this Mufti is: ‘Sir, if you could not find any historical reference, nor
any reference from Hadeeth of the acquisition of knowledge of Imam Ali
(a.s.) from another person, then how did this become ‘more correct’ in
your view?’. There is always a reason to give preference to one thing
over the other unless of course it is your heart’s desire then you just
prefer one over the other. Therefore, it is clear that it is your desire
than only if Imam Ali (a.s.) had learnt his knowledge from someone else
just like you, then you would have been able to equate yourself with him
(a.s.).

At least the Mufti has regarded the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) as having
acquired the knowledge of reading and writing after the declaration of
his (s.a.w.) prophethood, but Syed Murtadha thinks that he (s.a.w.) did
not acquire this even after that - Kashful Asrar.

As you have seen that the Mufti has been pointing out the ‘deficiencies’
in a Holy Imam (a.s.), now look at what epitaphs have been given to
him - ‘Kaaba tul Imaan’ (The kaaba of faith) and ‘Ma’dan Imaan Wal
Islam’ (The Centre of Faith and Islam). Glory be to Allah (s.w.t.)!

ENMITY WITH THE MOURNING OF IMAM HUSAYN (A.S.)
----------------------------------------------

After the event that transpired in Karbala in 61 AH, the mourning and
lamentations of Imam Husayn (a.s.) have been the purpose of the lives of
us Shiites. If all the tears that have flowed in the outpour of grief
and mourning for Imam Husayn (a.s.) were to be collected, they would
become an ocean. From the first Majlis of Lady Zaynab (a.s.) in Damascus
up to this day where Majalises are taking place almost everywhere, this
flow of tears is showing no signs of abating, and God willing will not
stop until the Day of Judgement. The norm of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.)
has always been that as soon as the first moon of the month of Muharram
is seen, they used to sit in grief for Imam Husayn (a.s.). If the name
of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was mentioned in front of Imam Ja’afar Al Sadiq
(a.s.), then for the whole of that day nobody ever saw him smile. The
Shiites are proud of the fact they are the fruits of the supplication of
Lady Fatima Zahra (a.s.), and in fact it is the purpose of their
creation that they should sit in mourning for Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
await the coming of their Imam (a.s.) who is the manifestation of Allah
(s.w.t.)’s attributes and whose purpose of return is to avenge the blood
of Imam Husayn (a.s.). The Shiites have only two things to do, mourn and
wait. Apart from this no other responsibility has been placed on the
shoulders of the Shiites. There is nothing in the good lives of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.), in their statements or orders or actions, whereby
they have not instructed the Shiites to do anything else nor did they
turn this into a political issue. They only gave one message: ‘Whosoever
mourns for Imam Husayn (a.s.), or make others cry for him (a.s.), or
even expresses grief from his face then the Garden of Paradise is
obligatory upon him’. Now, how come it has become obligatory, you go and
ask them as they own it and it is in their control. It is up to them who
they give it to and who they don’t.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) said: ‘It is our right that, for whoever has shed
even a single tear for us, Allah (s.w.t.) should Grant him a place in
the Garden of Paradise’- Al Balagaht Ul Husayn (a.s.).

He (a.s.) also said: ‘I am being killed as a stranger, whoever remembers
me will cry over me’.

Allah (s.w.t.) has stated that the evil deeds of some people will be
changed into good ones.

<p dir="rtl">
إِلَّا مَن تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ عَمَلًا صَالِحًا فَأُوْلَئِكَ
يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَاتٍ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا
رَّحِيمًا
</p>

[Shakir 25:70] Except him who repents and believes and does a good deed;
so these are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones; and
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

Please understand this properly. The sins are not being pardoned here.
They are actually being converted into good deeds. You should now think
over this in isolation as to what kind of people are these that are so
beloved of Allah (s.w.t.) that He (s.w.t.) does not even want to
embarrass them or make them face remorse in any way that He (s.w.t.) is
simply converting their evil deeds into good ones. Now refer back to the
two Hadeeth of Imam Husayn (a.s.) quoted above.

Today when they turn the Hussainiyas into their political arenas and
instigate trouble and strife among the people as well as commissioning
terrorist activities in the name of Imam Husayn (a.s.). They are giving
the whole Shiite world, in fact the Shiite sect itself a bad name. The
result of all this has been the wholesale massacre of the Shiites in
Pakistan and there is no one to stop this. Let us ask Imam Husayn (a.s.)
as to what his (a.s.) mission was:

1.The place of my death has been fixed and I am going there.

2.Whoever among you can absorb the wound of a sword of a spear should
come with us otherwise be separate from here.

3.I am not embarking upon this to achieve authority, or to spread strife
and injustice in the land, but I am doing this for the correction of the
ummah of my grandfather (s.a.w.) and the Shiites of my father Ali (a.s.)

4.The Banu Umayya reduced my status among the people and I was patient,
they looted my belongings and I remained patient, but now they are bent
upon taking my life, and so I am leaving.

The following points can be made from the above quotations:

1.According the command of Allah (s.w.t.), striving to protect one’s
life is to act upon the apparent command.

2.As Imam Husayn (a.s.) was the desire of Allah (s.w.t.), he (a.s.) knew
that despite his (a.s.) efforts his (a.s.) life would not be saved and
so he told his companions accordingly.

3.Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s purpose was neither to fight a war, nor to form a
government, nor to spread strife in the land. His mission was to correct
the Shiites.

What is meant by correction here? Are you telling me that the Shiites
had stopped praying namaaz, or keeping fast, or not going to pilgrimage,
that Imam Husayn (a.s.) made his stand for that? Or maybe the Shiites
did not know the correct way to perform these tasks? Or maybe they were
not aware of the procedures of obligatory baths? No person of intellect
will accept this. It was the beliefs of the Shiites which were being
eroded by the Banu Umayya that Imam Husayn (a.s.) wanted to correct.
This is the reason why on seventy two people came out of their houses to
help him and the rest saved their lives. This fear of death was a result
of their weak beliefs and not their weakness in praying namaaz or
fasting.

You have heard the reasons for Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s stand from his own
words. Some historians have written all sorts of reasons in their books,
like coveting the government and that he (a.s.) was killed by his (a.s.)
own grandfather (s.a.w.)’s sword because he (a.s.) stood against the
caliph of the time. Books of histories over the centuries have borne
witness that the Shiite scholars and the people have claimed that Imam
Husayn (a.s.) made his stand only and only for the protections of
Tawheed (Unity of God), and that is why one of his (a.s.)’s title is
‘Dalil Ala Tawheed’ (Proof of Unity of God). The Khwaja of Ajmer has put
this in his words ‘Haqqa Ke Bina La Ila Ast Husayn’ (The basis of Unity
of God is Husayn (a.s.).

Some people hungry for authority have discovered that the sayings of the
Sunnis are correct, and that is why they have separated the grief of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) from his (a.s.) mourning, by turning this mourning
sessions into tools for establishing the government of the Jurists. This
is to the extent that is has been said that if these majalises do not
establish the rule of the Jurist then they are useless.

Agha Sharif Ud Din Musawi, in his book ‘Usool E Azadari’ (The Principles
Of Mourning’ states: ‘The mourning of Imam Husayn (a.s.) in the eyes of
the Holy Imams (a.s.) is a political event’. What this means that if the
Holy Imams (a.s.) did not take any political advantage out of this then
whey shouldn’t we? And so to achieve this aim they have pressed hard on
the speakers and the poets to politicise the mourning sessions and you
can see this happening around you these days. I shall now show you how
the Holy Imams (a.s.) have refuted this and what should our
responsibilities be in our time.

When someone posed the question to Imam Husayn (a.s.) that who had the
highest regard in his eyes, he said: ‘The one who does not care as to
who in whose hands are the affairs of the world’.

And he (a.s.) also said: ‘One who has loved us for the sake of Allah
(s.w.t.), then the both of us will be with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.)
like these two fingers of mine. The one who loves us for the sake of
this world, then whether good or bad, the world always comes to
everyone’.

‘People are the slaves of this world. So long as they are getting their
livelihood from it they will take care of it, but when they fall into
trials then only a few of them remain religious’.

As for our responsibilities during occultation, he said in a sermon:
‘Therefore sit tight until such time as the signs of his (a.s.)
appearance are not witnessed’. Bearing brevity in mind, I shall discuss
this Hadeeth in the chapter on revolution later on.

ENMITY WITH LAMENTATIONS AND POEMS (NAWHAS AND MARSIYAS)
--------------------------------------------------------

The Mujtahids have, for some time now, prohibited the lamentations and
the poems about Imam Husayn (a.s.) on the basis of the Hadeeth:
‘Music/Singing (Ghina) is worse than adultery’. In other words, first
they assumed them to be in the ambit of ‘Ghina’, and then issued the
fatwas accordingly. This is the result of issuing Fatwas based on
conjectures, analogies and doubts. They have done this despite the risk
that they would be deserving the anger of Lady Fatima (a.s.) and what
would be the position of the one she (a.s.) is displeased with.

Her (a.s.) sons (a.s.)’s remembrance is taking place and the fire of
Hell is being doused by the tears that are flowing from the eyes of the
participants, their minds are concentrating on the grief of the tragedy
and hearts are being hardened against their enemies, but these guys have
nothing to do with all this. They are only concerned with their
followers, and so not only fatwas are being issued in matters of Fur’oo,
but now they are interfering with beliefs as well.

The whole mischief started when they classified these lamentations as
music and singing. Their followers did not even have the inspiration to
ask, ‘Sir, can you please define music so that we may place some value
to your fatwa?’ If someone were to declare theft as being prohibited but
does not define it or prohibits adultery without having defined it, then
these rulings would be meaningless.

Now if I were to say something then some people would raise objections
on the basis that they do not consider me a Jurist and so they will not
listen to me. Okay, so I will not say anything, but the pleasure would
be when they themselves admit that they are wrong. I will now quote you
from a Mujtahid about whom Agha e Khomeini has referred to as a ‘son of
Islam’, ‘path of the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.) and the ‘Remembrance of
Imam Husayn (a.s.)’, and is the author of ‘Gunahane Kabira’ (Major
Sins).

Agha e Abdul Husayn Dastagahib Shirazi has defined music and singing in
his book as: ‘Every sound that is produced for entertainment and is
capable of exciting passion is known as singing’ and is prohibited.

Can anyone explain to me how the Marshiyas and Nawhas would fit in the
above definition of singing?

Dr. Ali Shariati in his book ‘Zikr O Zakireen’ (Remembrance and the
Preachers) has a chapter entitled ‘The Prohibition of Music and
Singing’. He has discussed this in detail and says: ‘Singing and playing
is that music which arouses feelings of love and animal desires’.

Now I would like to request those who walk away from the Marshiyas and
Nawhas when they are being recited, that they should ask for forgiveness
from Lady Fatima (a.s.) and beat their chests and see what feelings they
get.

BOMBING OF THE HOLY SHRINE OF IMAM AL RIDHA (A.S.) AND THE MASSACRE OF THE PILGRIMS
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abul Fariq Wasiti in his book ‘Anwaar Ul Iqaan’ quoting from a person
who used to work for the British Embassy in Iran, says: ‘For a long time
now the Russians and the British have been dreaming to take control of
Iran. The northern part of Iran was under the influence of the Russians
whereas the influence of the British was more pronounce in the South.
The Russians bought faith of one Mujtahid by the name of Syed Tahir and
made him their agent. He then started speaking out against the Russians
and instigated the fire of rebellion among the people. He started
throwing accusations against the government of Iran saying that it is
not competent enough to stand up to the Russians and free its people
from their influence. He said that he will, on the orders of the Imam
Mahdi (a.s.), declare Holy War (Jihad) on the Russians, and for which he
used to go to many places to speak out. After some time thousands heeded
his call and gathered around him. He then told them that I have received
advice from Imam Al Ridha (a.s.) that when you see a sword coming out of
my Zareeh (Sarcophagus) you can start the Jihad, and that time is very
near and I am also awaiting instructions from the Holy Imam (a.s.). In
those days he used to make speeches in the courtyard of the Holy Shrine
and kept on instigating the people. Then there was a sound of cannon
fire from the Russian Embassy, which as per their scheme was empty. He
shouted ‘Miracle! A miracle has happened! The cannon did not reach us
and could not harm us!’ This made the people even more courageous. Then
there was a second fire and the same thing repeated itself. The crowd
went wild. Then he came down from the pulpit and walked away. People
kept shouting for him to declare Jihad but he was nowhere to be seen.
Then the real cannons started falling on the people and thousands were
massacred. The whole courtyard was full of the blood of the people.

BOYCOTT OF THE VIRTUES OF THE HOLY INFALLIBLES (A.S.)
-----------------------------------------------------

In order to strengthen their own Marjiat these people have made it their
mission to suppress the virtues of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) and keep
them within the bounds of the books. This claim does not quire any
proofs and in fact you may even bear witness to this yourselves. They
have prepared a group which considers it prohibitive to speak the
virtues of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) from the pulpits and they spend
all their time explaining the problems of Fiqh, and the virtues of Iran.
Yes, they do recite the injustices against Imam Husayn (a.s.) so that
the people would think that a Majlis has indeed taken place. The reason
is that the recitation of the ‘Masaaib’ (injustices) does not harm them
in any way. The people then return home after the mourning sessions. The
danger to them is from the virtues. If the true virtues of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) were to get to the people then their schemes would be
spoilt. In order to stop the propagation of the virtues they have
invented a weapon called ‘Ghuloo’ (Extremism). As soon as someone speaks
out the virtues of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) he gets slapped with the
accusation of being an extremist. The situation has deteriorated to such
an extent that people are now scared of being labelled as extremists and
so are beginning to fear from the virtues of the Holy Infallibles
(a.s.). One speaker went as far as saying from the pulpit: ‘Enough of
these virtues have been said. The time for this has now passed. It is
now time for action’.

Alas! I am writing a book and not speaking to you, otherwise you would
have heard my reply to this in beautiful words.

Anyway, I am only trying to show you their enmity towards the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) and that is why I am only giving you certain points
otherwise this is a matter of belief. What are those virtues of the Holy
Infallibles (a.s.) which are being stopped from reaching the believers?
What is extremism, who is an extremist (Ghali) and who is a Mukassir
(Reducer of status), who will be forgiven and who will not. For this you
will have to wait for my next book which will be on the subject of
beliefs.

CLAIM OF BEING FROM THE SAME SPECIES
------------------------------------

In following the footsteps of the Najdis, it is being claimed that we
and the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) are of the same type, i.e. our births
are the same, just as we have been created from an impure drop, so have
they, we are both under the same compulsion. Neither can they give
anything to anyone nor is it right for us to beseech them for help.
Loads of books are being written on this subject e.g. ‘Ahsan Al
Fawaaid’, ‘Usool Sharia’ etc.

For this mission they chose a group of seven Mullahs (Mufti Jaffar
Hussain, Yaar Shah, Akhtar Abbas Baloch, Mohammed Hussain Dhakku,
Hussain Baksh Jara, Ghulab Shah Multani, and Mullah Saifullah) who would
shoulder all the blame whilst the rest go free. Allah (s.w.t.) has
purified the earth from the filthy origins of six of them, but the
environment is full of the germs that they have left behind in the form
of books among the Shiites. If someone were to claim that these were the
beliefs of the members of that particular group alone, then I say that
within that group were some Mujtahids as well. Secondly, to keep silent
about someone’s actions is to agree with it. In these books they have
heaped insults on the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) to such an extent that
they have even compared them to flies and mosquitoes. Can someone show
me even one Mujtahid who has refuted any of these books? Or even
condemned them by speech only? But they would only have done this if
those beliefs had contradicted their own. Those of you who have had the
good fortune to visit the Holy Sarcophagus In Mashad, should have given
some thought to the beliefs of the people there would definitely believe
what I am saying. You will not hear the phrase ‘Ya Ali’ from their
mouths, but rather ‘Ya Allah’.

Yes, those who have written in refutation of these books have been those
scholars who had clear understanding. Scholars like Allamah Muhammad
Bashir Hussain Ansari Fateh Texlai (Haqail ul Wasait), Allamah Mirza
Yusuf Husayn Lucknowi (Haqaiq-ul-Aqaid), Syed Abdullah Shah Abd, Allamah
Muhammad Hasnain Sabiqi Multan (Rosumay Shia Fi Mizan-e-Shariya) etc. I
have only summarised the situation as I do not have the audacity to
write here the insults that they have heaped upon the Holy Infallibles.
However, if the force of your faith is persuading you to find out these
and the replies to them, then I would advise you to read the Allamah
Muhammad Bashir’s book ‘Haqaaiq Ul Wasaait’. God willing, your chests
will radiate with light and you will come to know the real faces of
these ‘holy people’.

REJECTION OF SHAHADA BIL WILAYAH (TESTIMONY)
--------------------------------------------

Before discussing this topic I would like to present to you certain
points from the book by Allamah Nazar Hussein Qamar ‘Shahadat E Wilayat
E Ali’: -

1.And then Allah (s.w.t.) said to the Pen: ‘Write’, and the Pen asked
‘What shall I write?’, and Allah (s.w.t.) said: ‘There is no God but
Allah, Muhammad is the messenger of Allah and Ali is His vicegerent’ -
Madinat Ul Mo’ajiz, Kifayat Ul Mo’hideen.

2.After the creation of Adam (a.s.), as soon as he (a.s.) raised his
head, he (a.s.) saw written on the Throne ‘There is no God but Allah,
Muhammed is the Prophet of Mercy and Ali is the established Proof’ -
Irshad Ul Quloob.

3.The words which were taught to the angels were these - Tafseer Furaat.

4.When Allah (s.w.t.) created the heavens and the earth He (s.a.w.)
ordered the announcer  to announce, ‘I bear witness that there is no God
but Allah’, I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and
I bear witness that Ali is the Commander of the Faithful’, three times
each - Al Amali of Sheykh Sadouq.

5.The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) said: ‘When I went on Me’raj (Ascension), I
saw all the eight doors of Paradise and on every door was written,
‘There is no God but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and Ali
is the Vicegerent of Allah’ - Shajar E Tooba.

6.On the Throne, the Chair, the Guarded Tablet, the wings of Israfeel
and Jibraeel, the shores of the Heavens and the layers of the Earth, the
mountain tops, the Sun and the Moon, the same words were inscribed - Al
Ihtijaj Tabarsi.

7.All Prophets had borne this witness - Tafseer Furaat.

8.These were the words inscribed on the seal of Prophet Suleyman (a.s.).

The reason for quoting the above points was to emphasise that the
testimony ‘Ali Un Vali Allah’, is not a mere custom or personal belief
but it is a reality that permeates the whole Universe. The Throne had
not been set up, the Chair had not been placed, the heavens and the
earth and the sun and the moon and stars were not established until such
time as these words were inscribed on it. My Master Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq
(a.s.) said: ‘Religion is only Mastership (Wilayah)’. Mastership is such
an Attribute of Allah (s.w.t.) that overwhelms all other Attributes, and
its manifestation is my Master Imam Ali (a.s.). Therefore not accepting
the mastership of Ali (a.s.) is not accepting the Divine Mastership,
which is why he (a.s.) said: ‘Without my Mastership, Tawheed will not
profit you, nor will you benefit from Nabuwwat as both these testimonies
are obligatory with each other’ - Mishkat Ul Anwaar.

It is the Mastership of Ali (a.s.) which differentiates us from others.
But, who is there to hold the tongues of the rejectors. Have they not
rejected Allah (s.w.t.), or the Prophet or Revelations? The generality
of people are not aware of what to accept and what to reject. They
merely follow the representatives of their religion. The history of the
human race from the time of Adam (a.s.) is witness that the amendments
to the religion were not made by the generality of the people but it was
the priests of the religion that done it. The people merely followed
them without any question. This was the main reason for the destruction
of religions. It was these priests that were responsible for the killing
of seventy thousand Prophets of the Israelites. This also happened with
our Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) as well. The others, in order to establish
their leadership, made the claim that he (s.a.w.) did not leave any
successor and therefore they will now take over the running of religion
in their hands. The Shiites disagreed vehemently and said that he
(s.a.w.) not only left one, but two things to hold on to for guidance.
This is why the traditions of ‘The two weighty things’, is considered
foundational in the Shiite sect and is accepted by all Shiites. "I am
leaving for you two precious and weighty symbols that if you adhere to
both of them, you shall not go astray after me. They are, the Book of
Allah, and my progeny, that is, my Ahl al-Bayt. The Merciful has
informed me that these two shall not separate from each other till they
come to me by the Pool (of Paradise-Al-Kawther)."

Let us now consider this hadeeth and what conclusions we can reach from
it;

1.The words ‘I am leaving for you’, proves that it is the right of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w) to hand over the religious affairs to someone else.
The people have no right over this that they should take over by their
own will.

2.The Arabic word ‘Thaqalayn’ has been translated as two precious and
weighty symbols. Their value is that they should be obeyed till the day
of judgement. We have to see who bears this weight and who does not and
instead, puts his own burden on other people.

3.The words, if you adhere to both of them, you shall not go astray,
mean that if you were to leave any one of these you will definitely go
astray.

4.The words, these two shall not separate from each other till they come
to me by the Pool (of Paradise) means that during any time period if
someone were to think that the Imam (a.s.) is in occultation and the
Holy Quran has now been left alone and so let me make my enquiries
(Istambaat) and derive whatever meaning that I feel like, is in actual
fact attributing a lie to the statement of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

5.This Hadeeth is showing us that religion has had no connection with
non Infallibles and never will it have in the future. There is no room
for error, doubt, suspicion, mistakes, delusions, bad intentions,
interference from worldly matters, and that religion should survive in
the same form that it had been first revealed.

After going through the above points, can you please tell me if there is
any room for the Mullahs in this religion? Are you telling me that the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) did not know that the twelfth Imam (a.s.) would go
into occultation? Then why did he (s.a.w.) that these two things will
never ever separate from each other till the day of judgement? This was
only to tell us that only an Infallible can give us the understanding of
an Infallible. You will have to admit that even in this time of the
greater occultation, the meanings and explanations of the Holy Quran can
only be taken from the Infallible Imams (a.s.) statements and no one
else. Now if someone were to make a claim that the Holy Quran is here in
front of us and so we should now extract the religious law from it by
the use of ‘Istambaat’, then he is surely forging a lie against the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.). This was due to the fact that the Wilayah of Imam Ali
(a.s.) was a thorn in their side and they went on to believe the Hadeeth
of Thaqalayn through their actions, by abandoning the two things and
creating a third thing in the form of a group of these Jurists and made
it obligatory upon the people to follow them. There was no danger for
them from the Holy Quran as it is silent. Neither does it stop anyone
nor does it rebuke any of them. They can take whatever meaning that they
like from it and it will not say anything. Their danger was from the
Wilayah of Imam Ali (a.s.) as its radiance was so bright that not even
the blind could deny it. But these people became blinder than the blind
and the first thing they did was to remove the testimony of Wilayah of
Imam Ali (a.s.) from the Adhan, Iqamah (Call to prayer), and Namaaz.
They then formed a consensus that if this testimony were to form a part
of these actions then it would invalidate them. Those few Jurists that
gave some flexibility to Imam Ali (a.s.) made it a recommended act.
There was not one among them who made it an obligatory act. They made
this so well known that it has now become common knowledge and part of
people’s faith. It is very strange that the denial of the ‘Kulle Iman’
(Complete Faith) would become faith and people do not even think about
it. They lied consistently for so long that the lie became to be known
as the truth and the truth is now considered a lie. It is for this time
period that Imam Ali (a.s.) said: ‘In those days nothing will be more
hidden than the truth and nothing will be more apparent than falsehood.

Now, a believer should think that the one, without whose name the
universe cannot be spread out, without whose testimony the Prophet’s
cannot receive their Prophethood, without the announcement of whose
Wilayah the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) delivery of the message becomes
pointless and religion remains incomplete, how is it possible that your
calls to salat and prayers would be acceptable? This is not an
opportunity for me to give details about this matter and so I am only
giving you a few verses and Hadeeth. Whosoever wishes can submit to
these and whosoever wishes can reject these and make his own way from
there.

THE PROOF OF THE THIRD TESTIMONY IN KALEMA
------------------------------------------

Please bear in mind that in the Arabic language has two forms of
plural - the dual and the plural. The plural form is only used to denote
three or more.

<p dir="rtl">
مَن كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعِزَّةَ فَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ جَمِيعًا إِلَيْهِ
يَصْعَدُ الْكَلِمُ الطَّيِّبُ وَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ يَرْفَعُهُ
وَالَّذِينَ يَمْكُرُونَ السَّيِّئَاتِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ وَمَكْرُ
أُوْلَئِكَ هُوَ يَبُورُ
</p>

[Shakir 35:10] Whoever desires honour, then to Allah belongs the honour
wholly. To Him do ascend the good words; and the good deeds, lift them
up, and (as for) those who plan evil deeds, they shall have a severe
chastisement; and (as for) their plan, it shall perish.

The form used for ‘good words’ here is the plural form. As I have
explained before this means three or more. We have seen that wherever in
the universe, be it on the divine chair, divine throne, or on the
guarded tablet, the third testimony has always followed the second one.
Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) responding to a question about these good
words said: ‘These are the three testimonies borne by a believer’-
Tafseer Saafi, Tafseer Meerat Ul Anwaar and Tafseer Burhan. And so now,
if a Shiite were to raise objections to this, he would be initiating an
intellectual rebellion against the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) -  Shahaadat
E Wilaayat E Ali.

Now, I am not aware of which ‘Kalema’ you are reciting, but if there is
any one which reaches Allah (s.w.t.), then it is the one which includes
the third testimony. Now if someone were to recite only two testimonies
time and again and fill his pouch with it in the process, then his
pocket may get filled up but these words will not reach Allah (s.w.t.).

THE THIRD TESTIMONY IN TASHAHHUD OF NAMAAZ
------------------------------------------

There is an obligatory part of Namaaz which is Tashahhud, and generally
after sending salutations two testimonies are borne, but when we take a
look at the Holy Quran we find it clear that:

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِأَمَانَاتِهِمْ وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 70:32] And those who are faithful to their trusts and their
covenant

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِينَ هُم بِشَهَادَاتِهِمْ قَائِمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 70:33] And those who are upright in their testimonies,

<p dir="rtl">
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَى صَلَاتِهِمْ يُحَافِظُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 70:34] And those who keep a guard on their prayer,

<p dir="rtl">
أُوْلَئِكَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ مُّكْرَمُونَ
</p>

[Shakir 70:35] Those shall be in gardens, honoured.

The form used here for ‘trusts’ and ‘covenants’ is the plural one, which
denotes three or more. Allah (s.w.t.) is stating the virtures of those
that bear three testimonies that they have protected their prayers and
they shall be in gardens as honourable people.

There you are, even in the Tashahhud of namaaz, the third testimony has
been proven to be obligatory. Now it is a matter of choice whether you
bear the third testimony and become deserving of virtues from Allah
(s.w.t.) and be honoured in the gardens of Paradise, or whether you only
bear two testimonies and collect your namaaz under your prayer mat. In
the Hereafter you may be disgraced, but at least in this world people
will look at the quantity of your prayers and honour you accordingly.

Now, from the book Shahaadat E Wilayat E Ali, I am quoting a Hadeeth
from Ihtijaj Al Tabarsi which I have already quoted before and one which
is stuck in the throats of the enemies of Wilayah of Imam Ali (a.s.).

Imam Al Sadiq (a.s.), after describing how the testimony of Imam Ali
(a.s.) was found to be in every corner of the universe, said: ‘And so if
anyone of you were to recite the two testimonies, he must immediately
follow it up with the third testimony’. What he (a.s.) is saying is
that, why are you leaving the third testimony in any of your actions
when you have clearly been commanded to bear this. This is the reason it
is said that whosoever does not have the Wilayah of Ali (a.s.) none of
his actions are valid.

This hadeeth is to be found in many books of the Shiites and is regarded
as correct. You will have noticed that Imam Ja’far Al Sadiq (a.s.) has
not restricted the third testimony in any way and that it is to be
recited immediately after the second one regardless of the time or place
or action involved.

In this book there is a quoted from Al Amaali of Sheykh Sadouq of a
Divine Hadeeth (Hadeeth Qudsi) where Allah (s.w.t.) Says: ‘I will not
accept the deeds of a person who, after testifying to the Prophethood of
Ahmad (s.a.w.), does not follow it up by bearing witness to the Wilayah
of Ali (a.s.)’. It is obvious that Namaaz is also a deed, and how can
this deed of ours be honoured if it does not include the testimony of
the Wilayah of Imam Ali (a.s.).

I have presented to you clear evidence from the Holy Quran as well as
the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.) about this matter. The
only people left now are those who say that they will neither listen to
Allah (s.w.t.), nor the statements of the Holy Infallibles (a.s.); we
will only listen to the statement of the Mujtahid. Go and get us a Fatwa
from him and then we shall recite it. But I am not even addressing these
kinds of people as I want people to recite the third testimony in
obedience to Allah (s.w.t.) and not in obedience to any Mujtahid.

I will now present to you a statement of a Sunni scholar, as a witness
by an adversary in support of truth is considered reliable.

In the book Al Risala, Imam Abu Laith Al Harwi, a Sunni scholar has
quoted Allamah Ibn Hajar Al Athqalani as saying:

‘This statement of Ali Un Wali Ullah, in the last six months of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) and nine months afterwards, used to be recited five
times a day. This gave the opportunity to the Rafizees (Shiites) and
they started saying this in their Adhan and Iqamahs. But they do not
know that this statement had been abrogated because the big Sheykhs
during their caliphate did not allow this to be recited. And if one of
them was found to be reciting this then the big Sheykh Umar Farooq used
to deal very harshly with them. These Rafizees cling themselves to Ali
(a.s.) and they act upon an abrogated order. They have made it a habit
to say this in their Adhan and Iqamahs and are considering it true
religion. They don’t know that the big Sheykhs went to great lengths to
stop its recitation. If its recitation was allowed then the big Sheykhs
would have acted upon it themselves’.

This Sunni Imam Abu Laith has stated something which the Mujtahids of
the Shiites have hidden from the Shiites for a very long time now. Let
us summarise this in points below:

1.The third testimony was being recited by friend as well as foe for the
last six months of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

2.This recitation continued for nine months after the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.) and friend as well as foe used to recite this.

3.After the nine months the two big Shaykhs (Abu Bakr and Umar) stopped
its recitation.

4.I am not going to discuss whether the two big Sheykhs had the right or
not to abrogate the hadeeth of Ghadeer, but it is quite clear from the
statement of Imam Abu Laith that the Shiites used to recite this despite
the harsh disciplinary measures taken by Umar Ibn Khattab because they
considered it to be part of their faith. They used to consider this
recitation as such an obligation which could not be avoided under any
circumstances, even they be part of the government’s repressive
measures.

5.Is the Hadeeth of Ghadeer abrogated in the eyes of the Shiite Mujtahid
as well? Why have they expelled the third testimony from the Adhan,
Iqamah and namaaz, whilst acting upon the Seerah of Shaykhain (The Way
of the Two Sheykhs). Those that insist upon its recital have been
declared by them as extremists. If they do not think that this Hadeeth
has been abrogated then why are they not getting their followers to act
upon this.

This chapter is now coming to its end. I have proven both the opposition
as well as enmity to the Holy Infallibles (a.s.). But the discussion
would not be complete until I present to you this Hadeeth of Imam Hasan
Al Askari (a.s.) taken from Ihtijaj Al Tabarsi.

‘There is a group among the scholars which harbours jealousy and enmity
with our friends and lovers (Mawaalis). This group does not have the
courage to openly denounce us and speak evil about us. This group learns
from some of our knowledge due to which gains the attention of our
Shiites and lovers. When they find out that some of our simple Shiites
of little knowledge have begun to respect them, they then start showing
them deficiencies which they claim to have found about us, and state
these in front of the enemies of our friends. Then with the use of their
analogies and Ijtihad they exaggerate these false deficiencies of ours
despite the fact that we are far from these deficiencies. Our simple
Shiites, thinking that they are listening to our knowledge, get
entrapped in the web of these people and are led astray. This group
affects our Shiites even more than they have been by the army of Yazeed
which wrought injustices on Husayn (a.s.) and his (a.s.) companions.
This is because this group not only takes away the faith of our simple
Shiites with little knowledge, but takes away their wealth as well. This
group is the evil scholars. This is the group which harbours jealousy
and enmity towards our Mawaalis and entangles them by saying that they
are the ones who love the Ahl Ul Bayt (a.s.) and hates their enemies.
This group of scholars then changes its garb and infects the minds of
our Shiites with little knowledge with doubts and confusion. The result
is that these Shiites of ours then are deprived of the conviction on our
status and glory. This is the group which leads them astray and stops
them from the path of truth’.

Tell me! Has a clear picture come to your mind or not? That’s it! This
is the picture that I wanted to show you.


