Chapter 2: WiIaya of Imam Ali and its Theological-Juridical Implications for the Islamic Political Thought
==========================================================================================================

By: Abdulaziz A. Sachedina

**In the Name of Allah, the Merciful the Compassionate**

This paper examines the Qur'anic origins of the concept of wilaya in
light of its connection with the historical *wilaya* of Imam Ali.
Various explanations of the concept in the Qur'anic exegesis, written by
different schools of thought in Islam, have been studied to investigate
the theological importance of wilaya to the fundamental doctrine of the
leadership (*imama*) in Islam.The close relationship between the
doctrines of divine justice (*al-'Adl*) and the necessity of the
divinely-appointed imam in the Shi'i school of thought underscore the
pivotal status of the acceptance of the wilaya of Imam Ali as imperative
to the faith of believers.

At the same time, recognition of this wilaya of Imam Ali is regarded as
a precondition to the establishment of the ideal public order based on
the divine scale of justice. Consequently, no ideal public order is
conceivable in Islam without the imama being invested in the person in
whom this *wilaya* is validated through a divine designation.

This theological relationship between the imama and wilaya through
divine designation made it juridically problematic for anyone other than
the divinely appointed Imam to assume the absolute wilaya in the Muslim
Ummah. This problem of assuming the wilaya by other than the Imam
himself was duly treated in the Shi'i jurisprudence, which carefully
defined the limits of juridical wilaya in relation to the theological
wilaya of the Imam.

The paper, thus, demonstrates the significance of the wilaya of Imam Ali
in the Qur'anic context of establishing the public order and the
necessity of accepting the interdependency between *imama* and *waliya*
in Islamic leadership while differentiating between theological and
juridical forms of wilaya.

Introduction
------------

When he (the Prophet) had completed its (Hajj) ceremonies, he left for
Medina accompanied by the multitudes previously mentioned. He arrived at
the pool of Khumm (Ghadir Khumm) in al-Juhfa, where the roads of the
people of Medina, the people of Egypt and the people of Iraq cross. That
was on Thursday, Dhil-Hijjah 18th, when Jibreel (Gabriel), the faithful,
brought down Allah's revelation saying:

***“O Messenger! Deliver that which has been sent down to thee from thy
Lord” (Quran 5:67).***

And he commanded him to point out Ali to the people and proclaim to them
the revelation concerning him about the wilaya and the obligation of
obedience upon everyone. Those of the people who were in front were near
al-Juhfa. The Prophet of Allah commanded that those who advanced should
be halted at that place. He forbade them to sit down under five gum
acacia trees (*sumurat*) which were close to each other. When the
summons to prayer was given for the noon prayers, he went towards them
(the trees) and prayed at the head of the people under them. When he had
completed his prayers, he stood delivering a speech in the middle of the
people, on the saddles of the camels. He made them all hear, raising his
voice, saying:

“O people, the Kind, the Knower, informed me that a Prophet has not
lived but half the age of his predecessor and that I am about to be
recalled and I responded. I am to be interrogated and you are to be
interrogated. What will you say?”

The people said, “We bear witness that you have proclaimed the message
and that you have given the advice and that you have made the endeavour,
may Allah reward you!”

He said, “Would you not bear witness that there Is no deity but Allah
and that Muhammad is His Servant and His Messenger; that His Garden is
true; that His Fire is true; that death is true; that the hour comes of
which there is no doubt; and that Allah will resurrect those in the
graves?” They said, “Yes. We bear witness to that.” Then he said, “O
Allah, bear witness (to that),” and he continued, “O people! Do you
hear?” They said, “Yes.” He said, “I am preceding you to the Pond
(*al-Hawd*) and you will rejoin me at the Pond... See to it how you will
look after the Two Treasures (ath-Thaqalayn) after me.”

A caller called out, “What are the Two Treasures, O Messenger of Allah?”
He said, “The Bigger Treasure (*ath-Thaqlu'l-Akbar*) is the Book of
Allah, one end of it is in the Hand of Allah and one end is in your
hands. If you adhere to it you will not go astray. The Smaller Treasure
(*ath-Thaqlu'l -Asghar*) is my Family (*'Itrati*). The Kind, the Knower,
informed me that they will not separate until they rejoin me at the
Pond. I wished that from Allah for them. Do not precede them so that you
may not perish. Do not fail to reach them so that you may not succumb.”

Then he held the hand of Ali and raised it until the white of the armpit
could be seen and all the people recognized him. He said, “O people, who
is more worthy (*'awla*) (in the eyes of) the believers than their own
selves?” They said, “Allah and His Messenger know better.” He said,
“Allah is my Master and I am the master of the believers and I am
worthier in their eyes than their own selves. Whoever has me for his
master has Ali for his master.” He said it thrice, and according to
Ahmad, the imam of the Hanbalis, four times.[^1]

The above proclamation at Ghadir Khumm regarding the wilaya of Imam Ali
occurred in the last year of the Prophet's life (10 AH/632 AD). Fourteen
centuries have passed since then, and looking at the number of books and
studies written on the subject of wilaya, both by the proponents as well
as opponents, the proclamation at Ghadir Khumm proved to be one of the
most pivotal events for the determination of the direction of the
political-religious history of Islam.

Questions about the historicity of that event, whether raised by the
Sunni scholars or by their western counterparts, who, more than often,
followed the Sunni sources in their conclusions about the early history
of Islam, have overlooked the political-religious implications of Ghadir
Khumm on the subsequent conceptualization of Islamic leadership (imama)
among Muslims in general. The event at al-Juhfa, moreover, unfolded the
Qur'anic presupposition in the matter of the direction that human
society must follow in order to attain the final goal for which it has
been created. On studying the Qur'an in its entirety the following
general view emerges about human society which directly affects the
question of leadership (imama) of that society.

To begin with, the Qur'an states more than once that Islam is not a new
religion but the culmination of Allah's spiritual and temporal commands
made known throughout human history through the mediatorship of divinely
appointed prophets like Ibrahim (Abraham), Musa (Moses), Isa (Jesus),
and the other prophets, the last in that line being Muhammad, peace be
upon him.

Thus, the prophet is the bearer of divine revelation that puts forth the
divine commands for the guidance of humanity. This guidance lays the
foundation of human social organization by providing a set of laws and
rules by which the believers manage their affairs and through which
their public order is governed or should govern itself. Accordingly, the
divine guidance forms the basis for relations between man and Allah, on
the one hand, and, between all people, whether Muslim or non-Muslim, as
well as between man and all aspects of the creation, on the other.

Furthermore, the divine guidance also contains rational principles which
should help human intellect to infer detailed rules to organize the
Muslim society and proffer the means to resolve conflicts between
individuals and between individuals and the public order which has taken
upon itself to implement the essential elements of the divine
directives.

It is relevant to point out that unlike any other legal-political-social
system, Islamic revelation clearly points toward an integrated concept
of life based on the intricate relationship between this world and the
hereafter. It regulates the conduct of the public order and of the
individual in all aspects of human concern, linking the mundane and
transcendental concerns in an inseparable whole. In this linkage, the
will of Allah is decisive in guiding the inter-relationship of humans,
and of man and his Creator.[^2]

The Qur'an regards the knowledge of the All-Knowing and All-Powerful
Creator a priori through the precise creation of the innate disposition
(*fitra*) in humanity, which, if it heeds to the call of the divine
guidance, would attain 'prosperity' (*al-falah*). These preliminary
considerations about the Qur'anic view of divine guidance explain the
inter-relationship of the Islamic norms provided in the Shari'ah, that
divine scale of justice and equity, and the leader (*imam*) who
exercises the divinely invested authority in him to lead the Muslim
community to the prescribed goal of creating an ethical order on earth.

The Shari'ah norms and the divinely appointed leadership fulfill
humanity's need for the authoritative guidance based upon spiritual
values giving man the existential meaning of his position in the
universal context of Islamic revelation. The interdependency between the
divine norms and the divinely appointed authority to attain the Qur'anic
prosperity rejects the notion of separation between temporal and
spiritual spheres of human activity. Moreover, the connection between
divine guidance and the creation of the Islamic world order, as a
consequence, marked the inevitable interdependency between the religious
and the political in Islam.

The entire question of wilaya and its ramifications for the qualified
leadership (imama) to further the divine plan and to enable Allah's
religion to succeed must be seen from the perspective of the Islamic
promise of the creation of an ethically just order on earth. More
importantly, the belief in the wilaya of Imam Ali gave rise to the group
of dedicated individuals among the associates of the Prophet who formed
the nucleus of the early Shi'a.

These early followers of Imam Ali represented the growth of discontent
among the Muslims who refused to acknowledge and regard as legitimate
the rule of those whom they considered usurpers of a position of
leadership that rightfully belonged to Ali ibn Abi Talib and his
descendants. The period also caused the predicament of the Muslim
community precipitated by the Muslim political power under the khilafah
which led to revolutions and rebellions as well as to discussions and
deliberations. This is depicted in the early Islamic fiqh (theology cum
jurisprudence)[^3] literature that emerged toward the end of the
second/eighth century.

Early fiqh wove together the various threads of Islamic legal practice
with the doctrinal underpinnings of early Muslim groupings.
Consequently, the juridical opinions in the early fiqh works were
formulated by taking into consideration whether certain legal or
political injunctions affected the legitimacy of one or the other leader
among the associates of the Prophet favoured by each faction.

In other words, the legitimacy of a leader allowed him to be used as a
valid legal-religious precedent required to establish the
authoritativeness of Islamic practices. Thus, even when a particular
ruling went against explicitly textual evidence provided by the Qur'an,
the overriding consideration for the early Muslim scholars was the
preservation and legitimation of the authority in power, a consideration
that came to be justified under the rubric of *al-masalih aI-'amma* (the
general welfare of the Muslim community).

The most important issue throughout Shi'i history has been access to the
right guidance as an important consequence of the acknowledgement of the
wilaya of Imam Ali. For the Shi'as, the right guidance had continuously
been available to the Ummah even though the Imams, except for the short
period of Imams Ali and Hasan's khilafah, were not invested with
political authority and were living under the political power exercised
by the de facto governments.

The possession of the wilaya (notwithstanding the Imam's lack of
political power, he still had the right to demand obedience from his
followers) was clearly seen in the Imam's ability to provide religious
leadership by interpreting divine revelation authoritatively. What was
decided by him through interpretation and elaboration was binding on the
believers.

The interpretation of the divine revelation by the Imam, only because of
his position as the wali of Allah, was regarded as the right guidance
needed by the people at all times. It was, moreover, the divine guidance
that theologically justified the superstructures erected on the two
doctrines of Imami Shi'ism: the justice of Allah and the designation of
the Imam, free from error and sinful deviations, in order to make
Allah's will known to humanity.

The belief in divine justice demanded that Allah do what was best for
humanity; and the belief in divine truthfulness generated the confidence
that Allah's promise would be fulfilled. The proof that Allah was doing
what had been promised was provided by the divinely created institutions
of the prophethood (nubuwwa) and the imamate (through the wilaya) to
guide humanity toward the creation of an ideal public order.

In response to the dilemma created by the end of the manifest leadership
of the Imams through the occultation of the Twelfth Imam, and the
continued need of the community to their guidance, the Shi'i leaders
expounded the theological and legal content of the Islamic revelation
through meticulous study of the Qur'an and elaborated upon the teachings
of the Imams, in which a prominent place was given to the faculty of
reasoning (*aI-'Aql*). The importance of reason in the exposition of the
fundamental tenets of Islam was in accord with the Imami Shi'i rational
theology, in which reason was prior to both sources of revelation, the
Qur'an and the Sunnah.

This does not mean that the revelation was not regarded as
all-comprehensive. However, it was reason that acknowledged the
comprehensiveness of the revelation by engaging in its interpretation
and discovering all the principles that the believers needed to know. In
addition, there was recognition of a fundamental need of interpretation
of the revelation by reason, all the more so when the authority invested
with divine knowledge was in occultation.

At any rate, the decisive responsibility to guide the community by
interpreting revelation rationally needed authorization from a divine
source, a sort of designation to assume the wilaya similar to that which
was initiated at Ghadir Khumm that could guarantee to Muslims the
availability of right guidance based on Islamic revelation.

Ostensibly, only such an authorized person could assume the authority
that accrued to the Imam as the rightful successor to the Prophet.
Moreover, only the investiture of the wilaya (which reserved the right
to demand obedience, depending on legal-rational circumstances and the
assuming of political power -*qudra or sultana* - which could exact or
enforce obedience) could establish the rule of justice and equity on
earth, as promised by the Islamic revelation.

In light of the above, the central position of the event at Ghadir Khumm
for Islam becomes evident. The proclamation by the Prophet on that
occasion gave rise to the tension between the ideal leadership promoted
through the wilaya of Ali ibn Abi Talib and the real one precipitated by
human forces to suppress the purposes of Allah on earth. The
acknowledgement of the validity of the declaration about the wilaya at
Ghadir Khumm, in some sense, became the yardstick for measuring the true
faith in the divine promise for humanity.

Consequently, the entire theological question of qualified leadership to
further the divine plan and to enable Allah's religion to succeed must
be seen from the perspective of the Islamic promise of the creation of
an ethically just order on earth by the rightful possessor of the
wilaya. The relationship of the leadership (imama) and the possession of
the wilaya make it impossible to conceive an ideal public order in Islam
without this leadership being invested in the person in whom the wilaya
functions as a divine designation.

It was for this reason that in Imami Shi'ism the concept of wilaya
assumed a pivotal status as a precondition to the establishment of the
ideal public order based on the divine scale of justice. However, it was
important for the Imami theologians to secure the Qur'anic origins of
the doctrine of wilaya and connect it with the notion of human
obligation, the fulfillment of which was regarded as necessary to attain
prosperity in this and the next world. At this point, let us turn our
attention to the tradition that was to become the cornerstone of the
Imami theory of political authority.

Wilaya as the Moral Vision of Islamic Revelation
------------------------------------------------

The cornerstone of the Imami theory of political authority is the
existence of an Imam from among the progeny of Prophet Muhammad, peace
be upon him, clearly designated by the latter to assume the leadership
of the Muslim Ummah. Acknowledgement of the authority of the Imam falls
within the category of the religious obligations (*al-Takalif
al-Shar'iyya*) imposed on the adherents of the Imam.

In Imami Shi'ism, the government belonged to the Imam alone, for he was
equally entitled to political leadership and religious authority.
However, even though the Imam was entitled to both the political and
religious leadership, his imama was not contingent upon his being
invested as the ruler of the Ummah.

The religious leadership empowered the Imam to interpret Islamic
revelation and elaborate on it without committing an error. In this
respect, the Imam was like the Prophet, who was endowed with special
knowledge and had inherited the knowledge of divine revelation through
his designation in the wilaya. The Imam is, thus, the link with the way
of guidance, and without acknowledging his *wilaya*, no person seeking
guidance can attain it.

This wilaya (the spiritual authority with the right to demand
obedience), according to the Imami teaching, was not contingent upon the
Imam's being invested as the ruling authority (sultan, who could and did
exact or enforce obedience) of the community. As such, the spiritual
authority resided in Imam Ali from the day the Prophet died, for he
became the *wali aI-'amr* (the executor of the Prophet's spiritual
function) through the Prophet's designation on the occasion of Ghadir
Khumm.

This leadership would continue to be available in the line of the Imams,
explicitly designated by the preceding Imams. It was in this latter
sense that the imama of the Ummah came to be conceptualized. Therefore,
religiously speaking, to ignore the wilaya and disobey these Imams was
tantamount to disbelief in Allah's promise that He would provide the
necessary guidance to lead humanity toward the creation of an ideal
world order.

This confidence in the proclamation of Ghadir Khumm regarding the future
leadership was directly responsible for generating a threefold religious
experience of the Shi'i community which became the decisive sources of
the subsequent Imami political attitude. These were martyrdom
(*shahada*), occultation (*ghayba*) and precautionary dissimulation
(*taqiyya*). What made the Shi'as responsive to their religious leaders
has in large measure to do with this threefold religious experience
which conditions their political attitudes and inspires their
willingness to strive to preserve their religious identity in the
context of the larger Muslim community.

Martyrdom (*shahada*) has been sustained as a religious ordeal in Shi'i
political history by the conviction that Allah is just and commands
human society to pursue justice in accord with the guidance provided by
divine revelation to the Prophet. The divinely inspired guidance also
requires obedience to the Prophet in his capacity as the head of the
Islamic polity which would exist for the implementation of justice. The
Imam, who is regarded as the rightful successor of the Prophet, must
also be upheld as the true leader of the community to whom obedience is
due in his capacity as the *wali aI-'amr* of the Muslim Ummah.

When the Shi'i Imam, following the death of the Prophet, was denied his
right to assume the temporal authority invested in him by divine
designation, as the Shi'as believe, direct political action was regarded
as justified to establish the rule of justice - to replace a usurpatory
rule by a just and legitimate one. The ensuing struggle to install a
legitimate political authority resulted in the murder of several Shi'i
leaders. In light of the above conviction, these violent deaths were
regarded as martyrdom suffered in order to defeat the forces of
oppression and falsehood.

The most powerful symbol of this religious experience has without
question been the Third Imam of the Shi'as, Husayn ibn Ali (died 61
AH/680 AD), the grandson of the Prophet, whose martyrdom is annually
commemorated with solemnity through- out the Shi'i world. The importance
attached to the commemoration of Imam Husayn's martyrdom has provided
the Shi'i community with a religious paradigm that is traced with
remarkable enthusiasm by the community.

The commemoration went beyond its basic purpose of recounting the
tragedy that befell the family of the Prophet. It provided a platform
that was used to communicate the Shi'i teachings to the populace which
had little or no academic preparation to utilize written sources on the
subject. Indeed, these important gatherings have served as the principal
platform of communication with the Shi'i public.

Recognizing the low level of religious education among the lay
believers, the Shi'i leaders used the commemorative gatherings as a
forum by which to awaken their followers to the injustices of the
socio-political realities of their times. With the increase of religious
awareness among the Shi'as came the demand for some detailed information
on topics that were touched upon in these commemorative gatherings.

Subsequently, the mourning gatherings were utilized to disseminate
religious knowledge which, among other things, included information on
both quietist and activist postures of the Shi'i ideology, depending
upon the socio-political climate at the time. The religious experience
of martyrdom in Shi'ism thus became a formidable channel for mobilizing
the Shi'i populace.

The second religious experience, namely, occultation (the absence of the
Twelfth Imam from the temporal sphere), signified the postponement of
the establishment of a just Islamic order, pending the return of the
last Imam. Religiously speaking, the doctrine of occultation connoted
some sort of divine intervention in saving the life of the Imam, the
only awaited ‘Just Ruler’, by moving him from the realm of the visible
to invisible existence, and conveyed the idea that the situation was
beyond the control of those who proposed to overthrow tyrannical rulers
in order to establish the Islamic rule of justice.

Furthermore, the occultation of the last Imam and his eventual return as
the Mahdi of the Muslim Ummah at a favourable time helped the Shi'as to
persevere under difficult circumstances. This hope in the future
necessarily implied postponement of the establishment of the thoroughly
just Islamic order pending the reappearance of the last Imam, who alone
could be invested with the *wilaya* - the Muslim political authority.

Consequently, religious experience derived as a result of belief in the
occultation has, on the one hand, raised questions about creating a
thoroughly Islamic public order during the absence of the Twelfth Imam;
and on the other, it demanded that the entire Shi'i community provide
means for its religious, social, and political survival pending the
final return of the Imam.

The attitude of tenacity in this religious experience is derived from
the belief that the establishment of an Islamic order without divine
intervention through the return of the infallible Imam is impossible.
The theological problem for anyone to assume the authority accruing to
the Imam as the rightful successor of the Prophet, in whom the wilaya
resembling that of Imam Ali is invested, is in its implications for the
universalistic authority of the Imam whose political authority cannot be
delegated to any Shi'a however qualified.

On the other hand, the attitude of responsibility of the community in
this religious experience is derived from a rational interpretation of
the Qur'anic obligation imposed collectively on the community to
undertake the duty of supervising its own affairs under the religious
and moral injunction of 'enjoining the good and forbidding the evil,'
even when the Imam is absent.

By this interpretation, some religious leaders delegated the Imam's
wilaya, political as well as juridical, to a qualified member of the
Shi'i community, who, in his capacity as the trustee responsible for
directing the community, would be willing to shoulder the obligation of
'enjoining the good and forbidding the evil.'

The third religious experience stemming from the practice of shielding
the true intent of the faithful in the community from unbelievers and
outsiders through precautionary dissimulation (*taqiyya*) determined the
political direction of all the Imams and their followers.

The Imams encouraged taqiyya and even declared it to be a duty incumbent
upon their followers, so as to avoid pressing for the establishment of
the ideal rule and overthrow of the wrongful authority of the de facto
governments. In a sense, *taqiyya* signified the will of the Shi'i
community to continue to strive for the realization of the ideal Islamic
polity, if not by launching the revolution contingent upon the
appearance of the Twelfth Imam and his consolidation as the leader of
the community, then at least by preparing the way for such a revolution
in the future.

In the meantime, the Shi'as had to avoid expressing their true opinions
publicly about the short-comings evident in the various defacto Muslim
governments, regardless whether Shi'i or Sunni, in such a way as to
cause disunity and enmity. Consequently, the practice of taqiyya was
determined by the conditions of the Shi'as as a minority group living
under adverse settings; here again, the religious leadership determined
the appropriate time for the community to abandon quietist passivity and
engage in activism.

These three religious experiences of the Shi'as during the first three
centuries of Islamic history shaped the political outlook of the Imami
scholars whenever they were faced with a new political situation.
Rulings on such a situation could be traced back to precedents set by
the Imams. But the question of the legitimacy of a political rule
established by a professing Imami Shi'a during the absence of the
political discretion of the actual wali al-'amr, the Twelfth Imam, was
an issue that had no precedent set during the lifetime of the Imams.
Imami jurists could not give a legal opinion based on a precedent set by
the theory of Imamate of the infallible Imams.

As a result, they had to guide the community by issuing a legal opinion
based on their extrapolation in the terms of the documentation provided
by the communications transmitted on the authority of the Imams
regarding the nature of Imami political authority during the
occultation.

The main concern of the Imami scholars was to provide the Shi'i
community with practical guidance relevant to their survival under de
facto political authorities. None of the classical theological texts on
the fundamental principles (*usul al-din*) of the Imami School deal with
the possibility, not even as a fait accompli of temporal Imami authority
invested with the *wilaya* of the Imam during the occultation.

Such a discussion would necessarily have involved tampering with the
terms of the doctrine of the *imama*, which was absolutely ruled out
because of the absence of any directly designated deputy of the Twelfth
Imam. The 'special deputyship,' during the short occultation (873-941
A.D.), was seen as the ongoing guidance available to the community
through the Imam's explicit deputization. With the occurrence of the
complete occultation (from 941 AD), the on-going guidance through
deputization of a specific person was terminated.

However, the question of the leadership of the Shi'as in the absence of
the Imam was a crucial one. A sense of urgency is reflected in the Imami
jurisprudence whenever the question of exercising the Imam's authority
without a specifically designated deputy comes up in the treatment of
religious obligations requiring the presence of either the Imam or his
appointed deputy for that purpose.

It was under these circumstances that the Imami jurists had to deal with
the issue of the 'general' deputyship of the Imam, which was vested in
them as the custodians of Imami teachings. Nevertheless, the Imami
jurists who addressed the question of the deputyship of the 'general'
deputy of the Twelfth Imam were very conscious of the theoretical
position of the Imam as the absolute wielder of the wilaya.

The Trust (al-Amana) in the Qur'an and the wilaya
-------------------------------------------------

*Wilaya* in the Qur'an is intrinsically related to the moral vision of
Islamic revelation. Wilaya in this regard is the faculty of the legal
and moral authority, which enables a person in whom this authority is
invested to exact obedience to fulfill this moral vision. Accordingly,
the concept of wilaya is directly connected with the fundamental
question of *sultana* - exercise of that legal and moral authority by
demanding obedience.

Islamic revelation regards the creation of an ethical order as an
inevitable projection of personal response to the moral challenge of
accepting Islam. Personal devotion to Allah implies the responsibility
of furthering the realization of a just society, embodying all the
manifestations of religious faith in the material as well as spiritual
life of humankind. This responsibility of striving for one's own welfare
and that of the society in which one lives derives from the fact that,
according to the Qur'an, humankind has boldly assumed 'the trust' that
Allah had offered:

***‘Unto the heavens and the earth and the hills, but they shrank from
bearing it and were afraid of it. And man assumed it. Lo! he has proved
a tyrant and a fool' (Quran 33:72).***

Shaykh Tusi in his *Al-Masa'l al-Ha'iriyat*[^4] explains amana as
*taklif* (religious-moral obligation imposed by Allah on humanity) and
cites the Shi'i opinion as the one in which amana is equated with
wilaya. However, he argues that such an equation of amana with wilaya is
unnecessary, because the general sense derived from taklif also includes
acknowledgement of the person in whom wilaya is invested.

In his Qur'anic exegesis, Shaykh Tusi explains amana as the contract
(*al-'aqd*) that humankind must fulfill because it has been entrusted to
humankind by Allah.[^5] He cites several early authorities to show the
complication in interpreting the amana verse which has theological
implications in the realm of human volition and responsibility as the
recipient of this 'trust.'[^6] However, as Tusi explains it is in the
early traditions dealing with the wilaya that the amana verse has been
interpreted as pointing to the wilaya of Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib.

Allama Tabataba'i's detailed exegesis on this verse should be regarded
as the recapitulation of all these early materials, including those
written by the Sunni scholars, and his interpretation is derived in
light of the early traditions regarding the wilaya. According to him,
the 'trust' is *al-wilayat al-ilahiyya*, meaning the divine sovereignty
which Allah offered to all creatures.[^7]

Only human beings, having assumed the trust, have the potential to
attain perfection and perfect their environment. The crux of the problem
in the exegesis of the verse is that if man was the only creature of
Allah who accepted the 'trust,' why should he be described as a 'tyrant'
and fool'? At this point, Allama Tabataba'i's interpretation draws upon
the main tenets of Imami theology, which regard the 'trust' in the sense
of wilaya as a special favour to humanity entailing enormous
responsibility to stand by the obligation of guarding it.

Accordingly, only human beings are not afraid to bear the burden of this
trust, and to accept the consequences of being a 'tyrant' and
'ignorant,' because they only can acquire the opposite attributes -
namely, those of being 'just' (*'adil*) and 'knowledgeable' (*'alim*).

In fact, both 'tyranny' and 'ignorance' are the primary counterpoise of
human responsibility in accepting *al-wilaya al-ilahiyya*, especially as
it concerns Allah's providential purpose in allowing imperfect humanity
to accept this responsibility. The acceptance of this wilaya,
furthermore, makes human beings acquire both the responsibility for
their actions as well as superiority over all other creatures in the
world. It is al-wilayat al-ilahiyya that enables them to put society
into order in accordance with their unique comprehension of religion.

However, the wilaya is given to humankind with a clear warning that it
will have to rise above 'tyranny' and 'ignorance' by heeding the call of
divine guidance. Human beings, according to the Qur'an, have been
endowed with the cognition needed to further their comprehension of the
purpose for which they are created, and volition to realize it by using
their knowledge.

It is through divine guidance that human beings are expected to develop
the ability to judge their actions and choose what will lead them to
prosperity. But this is not an easy task. It involves spiritual and
moral development, something that is most challenging in the face of
basic human weaknesses indicated by the Qur'an in the following passage:

***'Surely man was created fretful, when evil visits him, impatient,
when good visits him, grudging' (Quran 70: 19-20).***

This weakness reveals a basic tension that must be resolved if human
beings are to attain the purpose for which they are created. It is at
this point that divine guidance is sent through the prophets and
revealed messages to provide either the sources and principles or basic
norms of social organization under which a divinely sanctioned public
order is to be established. The Prophet thus becomes a representative of
the divine authority on earth and exercises that authority in conformity
with the divine plan for human conduct.[^8]

In this Qur'anic context of the divine guidance for humanity the
Prophet's role should be understood as the Head of a State and the
founder of a religious order. The sense in which the Qur'an speaks about
the wilaya of the Prophet is necessarily in conformity with the Qur'anic
view of divine guidance governing the whole of human life, not just a
limited segment of it.

As a consequence, the wilaya of the Prophet meant not merely that the
Muslim Ummah be organized in the context of religious devotion to Allah
as explained by the Prophet, but also that it acknowledges his political
leadership as well. Thus, the wilaya of the Prophet establishes an
authoritative precedent regarding the relationship between religion and
political leadership in Islam.

It is on the basis of this concept of wilaya in the Qur'an that one can
say that in Islam religious and political authority are one and the
same. This wilaya is concerned with the whole life of the Muslim Ummah,
with the result that it never relinquished its belief in the identity of
religion and government as it saw them in the founder of Islam. The
Prophet's emergence, the Muslims believe, had a fundamental purpose
behind it: to transform the tribal structure of the Arab society at that
time into a Muslim Ummah - a religious-social-political community under
the divinely planned al-wilayat al-ilahiyya.

The social transformation envisioned and initiated by the Prophet was
the necessary consequence of this wilaya, which had to be acknowledged
by society as a whole, not merely by individuals as a logical outcome of
their faith in Allah. Acknowledgement of the wilaya of the Prophet,
necessary to live a new life based on divine norms, led to the emphasis
on a crucial requirement for the fulfillment of social responsibility of
the Muslim Ummah - namely, that the Ummah always needs to acknowledge a
leader, divinely designated, who would exercise wilaya in order to unite
its members in their purpose of creating a just social order under the
guidance of Islamic revelation.[^9]

Thus, the question of leadership (*imama*) is of utmost significance in
attaining the purpose of Islam, because it is only through divinely
guided leadership that the creation of an ideal society could be
realized. The need for the divinely guided leadership in the fulfillment
of divine planning, under the aegis of al-wilayat al-ilahiyya,
consequently, assumes a central position in the Islamic belief system or
worldview, in which the Prophet, as the active representative of the
transcendental Allah on earth, is visualized as possessing the divine
wilaya.

If the ultimate objective of Islam was conceived as the creation of an
ideal community living under a fitting moral, legal, and social system
of Islam on earth, then such an ideal, as enhanced by the Qur'an and
shown by the example of the Prophet himself, was dependent on leadership
that could assure its realization.

This fact was so important that, both during the Prophet's lifetime and
immediately following his death in 632 AD, the question of Islamic
leadership became inextricably interwoven with the purpose of Islamic
revelation, namely, the creation of an Islamic order. Islamic revelation
unquestionably presumed divine guidance through the divinely appointed
mediatorship of the Prophet for the realization of Islamic public order.

This mediatorship of the Prophet in human affairs was the logical
consequence of the strict monotheistic nature of Islam, which precluded
the possibility that Allah assume human form, ruling directly over
humanity and governing its affairs. Thus, a ruler to represent Allah on
earth and to exercise *al-wilaya al-ilahiyya* was deemed necessary in
order to achieve the ultimate goal of Islam.

Moreover, in light of the basic human weaknesses indicated in the
Qur'an, there had always existed an underlying tension between the
purpose of creation and the obstacles to its achievement. This tension
was to be resolved, according to the Qur'an, by further acts of divine
guidance through the Prophet, who became the pattern of moral behaviour
(*uswo hasana*) for human beings, showing them how to reform their
character and bring it into conformity with the divine plan.

Studying the Qur'an in its entirety, it becomes evident that the
question of divine sovereignty - *al-wilayat a-ilahiyya* - is the
integral element in the creation of an ideal society. It is through such
a wilaya that the divinely appointed leader is able to provide a set of
religious and moral laws and rules by which believers manage their
affairs, and through which their public order is governed and should
govern itself.

In the Shi'i worldview based on the Qur'anic injunction in which the
concept of wilaya occurs, the perspective sketched above on the
leadership of the Muslim Ummah assumes a central position. The
pertinence of the wilaya to the question of lawful and legitimate
authority can be deduced in those sections of the Our'anic exegesis that
deal with the passages on wilaya. The following verse of the Qur'an is
regarded by Shi'i exegetes as the most important reference to the
wilaya:

***Only Allah is your Wali (guardian) and His Apostle and those who
believe, who perform prayer and pay alms while they bow' (Quran
5:55)***[^10]

This passage establishes the 'guardianship' of Allah, the Prophet, and
'those who believe.' The last phrase - 'those who believe', according to
Shi'i commentators, refers to the Imams whose wilaya is established
through their designation by the Prophet.[^11]

The term *al-wali*, as it occurs in the above context, has been
interpreted diversely by Sunni exegetes. Although there is a consensus
among them that the verse was revealed in praise of Imam Ali's piety and
devotion, the term al-wali has been interpreted as denoting *muwalat*
('befriending') of Imam Ali and not necessarily the acceptance of his
wilaya (authority, in the form of imama).[^12]

But Imami exegetes have taken the term in another of its primary
significations, *al-awla* and *al-ahaqq* ('more entitled', ‘to exercise
authority’), because al-awla in ordinary usage is often applied to a
person who can exercise authority (*al-sultan*) or who has discretionary
power in the management of affairs (*al-malik li al-'amr*).[^13]

Furthermore, al-wali, as it occurs in the above passage of the Qur'an,
is unlikely to mean a person invested with *wilayat al-nusra* (the
authority of 'backing'), because there are numerous explicit references
to that effect in other verses of the Qur'an where believers are
exhorted to back the religion of Allah by promulgating Allah's laws, a
task in which the Prophet and the community of believers assist each
other.[^14]

Rather, *al-wali*, as applied to the Prophet, signifies a person who is
invested with *waliyat al-tasarruf*, which means possession of the
authority that entitles the wali to act in whatever way he judges best,
according to his own discretion, as a free agent in the management of
the affairs of the community. The wilayat al-tasarruf can be exercised
only by one so designated by the *wali al-mutlaq* (the absolute
authority) or by one who is explicitly appointed by someone in the
position of *al-wali bi al-niyaba* (authority invested through
deputization). Consequently, the Imam who is designated as wali by the
Prophet possesses the wilayat al-tasarruf and is recognized as the ruler
over the people.

This was the meaning of the term in the early usage of the Shi'i Imams.
In a speech to the Umayyad troops who had come to intercept him on his
way to Iraq, Imam Husayn ibn Ali explained to his adversaries the reason
why he had refused to pay allegiance to the khalifah Yazid, son of
Mu'awiya: ‘’We the family of the Prophet (Ahl al-Bayt) are more entitled
(awla) to (exercise) the authority (wilaya) over you than those who have
taken it for themselves (i.e., the Umayyads).’’[^15]

Accordingly, tasarruf (discretionary authority) has been regarded as the
primary and essential import of wilaya, especially as it is applied to
Allah, the Prophet, and the Imams in the above passage. However, there
exists a substantial differentiation in the way wilaya is apprehended in
relation to Allah, the Absolute Authority (*Al-Wali al-Mutlaq*), on the
one hand, and the Prophet and the Imams, the authority through
deputization, on the other.

When the Qur'an speaks about Allah being the Wali, it primarily
signifies *Wilayat al-Takwnil* - the unconditional wilaya 'originating'
in Allah, with absolute and all-encompassing authority and discretion
over all that Allah has created. To this wilaya is sometimes appended
wilayat al-Nusra, by means of which Allah helps the believers. Thus the
Qur'an reads:

***'Allah is the Guardian (Wali) of those who believe...Unbelievers have
no guardian' (Quran 47:11)***

Moreover, the Qur'an frequently speaks about Allah's wilaya in relation
to the believers, by means of which Allah manages the affairs of the
believers - their guidance to the right path and assistance to them in
obeying Allah's commandments:

***Allah is the Guardian (Wali) of those who believe. He brings them out
of darkness into the light'*** ***(Quran 2:257).***

But when wali is used in relation to the Prophet, it is designated as
*al-wilayat al-i' tibariyya* - that is, 'relative' authority - dependent
upon Allah's appointing him in that position; or *al-wilayat
al-tashri'iyya*, the religious-moral-legal authority invested in the
Prophet to undertake the legislation and execution of the divine plan on
earth. Thus, the Qur'an declares:

***The Prophet has a greater claim (awla) on the faithful than they have
on themselves (Quran 33:6)***

The wilaya of the Prophet over the believers is due to his being the
Prophet of Allah. As such, the point of reference for his wilaya is, in
actuality, the wilaya of Allah. It is for this reason that his wilaya is
signified as 'relative' - that is, accorded through designation as a
mark of trust. In this sense, the Qur'an speaks of only one kind of
wilaya - Allah's wilaya - which is the only fundamental wilaya. The
wilaya of the Prophet and 'those who believe' (i.e., in this context,
the Imams) is dependent upon Allah's will and permission.[^16]

It is because this wilaya was vested in them that the Prophet and the
Imams had more right than other believers to exercise full authority,
handing down binding decisions on all matters pertaining to the welfare
of the Muslim Ummah, and requiring complete obedience to them. The
corollary of this *wilayat al-tasarruf* was the Shi'i belief that not
only was the Imamate the continuation of the Prophethood, because of the
authority vested in the Imams after the Prophet, but it also meant that
the Imams were the sole rightful authority to lead the Ummah in
establishing just public older. The Imams became the just (*'adil*)
authority. In a case where the Imam's right to exercise his authority
was usurped, the usurping authority was rendered illegal, and the ruler
unjust (*aI-ja'ir*) and unrighteous (*al-zalim*).

The above elucidation of the concept of wilaya in the context of the
Qur'anic verse about the 'trust' makes the following hadith reported by
Shaykh Kulayni comprehensible: Imam Ja'far Sadiq was asked by someone
about the passage of the Qur'an that mentions the trust (amana) which
Allah offered to humankind. The Imam said: ‘’ This trust is the wilaya
of the Amirr al-Mumineen (Ali ibn Abi Talib)’’. [^17]

The Imam's statement makes it clear that it was the act of accepting or
rejecting the wilaya of Imam Ali that determined whether one had been
faithful to the divine trust or not. The same act, moreover, determined
the righteousness or unrighteousness of the ruling authority claiming to
be legitimate. In Shi'ism, from its inception, the Imams not only
possessed the wilaya to establish political authority on earth, they
were also regarded as the sole legitimate authority who could and would
establish Islamic public order.

Imami works treating the theory of political authority unanimously
maintained that an equitable government could not be established except
by the one who is *ma'sum* - that is, the infallible leader invested
with the wilayat al-tasarruf to exercise discretionary control over the
affairs of the Ummah. Furthermore, it was held that the process through
which this authority becomes known to the public is explicit designation
(*nass*) by the one possessing *al-wilayat al- i'tibariyya* - the
'relative' authority derived through one's being attributed to that
office (e.g. Prophethood or Imamate) by Allah.

Accordingly, in the Shi'i theory of political authority, power in the
sense of authority, having moral and legal supremacy because of
al-wilayti al-tasarruf, with the right of enforcing obedience to Islamic
ideology, can never be invested in a person without proper nass; and no
government can become equitable (*al-hukumal al-'adila*) if it is not
headed by *al-sultan al-'adil*, who is explicitly appointed by a
legitimate authority like the Prophet. If a government is established
without al-sultan al-'adil as its head, it is declared unjust and the
ruler is al-sultan ja'ir. Moreover, because the tyrannical ruler,
lacking the necessary al-wilayat al-tasarruf*,* has encroached upon the
authority of the rightful wali al-'amr, he is also al-zalim (the
oppressor).

*Khulafa al-jawr* or *al-zalama* is the title applied to these rulers
under whom, according to the Shi'as, the world was filled with
injustice. Disobedience to these unjust rulers was regarded as obedience
to Allah. Thus, according to Mas'udi there were pious Muslims, not
necessarily belonging to the Shi'a community, like Awn ibn 'Abd Allah
ibn Mas'ud during the Umayyad khilafah, who unheld the principle that
anyone who opposes an unjust ruler (i.e. an Umayyad khalifah) was not
devoid of divine guidance, but the unjust ruler was devoid of it.[^18]

It is perhaps significant that the terms *mashru'iyya* (legitimacy) or
*ghayr mashru'iyya* (illegitimacy), to denote these two types of
government in Islam, do not appear in the major works of Imami
jurisprudence of the classical age.

These terms, however, do appear in works of the Imamis who wrote during
the Qajar period, when the question of the legitimacy of a Shi'i
authority to exercise wilayat al-tasarruf during the occultation of the
Twelfth Imam was being discussed. Thus, in his discussion about the
necessity of government during the occultation, Muhammad Husayn Na'ini
(d. 1936) uses the concept of 'legitimate' (*mashru'*) government in
connection with the constitutional authority established by the approval
of the righteous jurists.[^19]

Conclusion
----------

By virtue of his being an infallible leader and authoritative
interpreter of Islamic revelation through his designation to exercise
*al-wilayat al-tasarruf*, the Imam is the sole legitimate authority who
could establish the Islamic public order. However, as historical
circumstances unfolded, the Imamate became divided into temporal and
spiritual spheres.

The temporal authority of the Imam was regarded as having been usurped
by the ruling dynasty, but the spiritual authority remained intact in
the Imam who was regarded as Allah's (unanswerable) demonstration (of
divine omnipotence) - *Hujjat Allah* (lit. the proof of Allah),
empowered to guide the spiritual lives of his adherents as the true
Imam.

This spiritual authority was not contingent upon the Imams being
invested as the ruling authority (sultan) of the Ummah. Accordingly, the
Imamate in the form of religious leadership that began with the
Prophet's proclamation about the wilaya of Imam Ali at Ghadir Khumm in
632 AD continued through all the political circumstances until the last
Imam, the Twelfth Imam al-Mahdi, went into occultation (874 AD).

It was during this period that questions regarding Imami political
authority during the absence of the Imam began to be treated
methodically, especially when, for the first time, following the last
manifest Imamate of Imam Ali (656-660 AD), the temporal authority of the
Shi'i Imami Buyid dynasty was established de facto. In view of the
prolonged occultation of the Imam and the absence of special designation
during this period, the Shi'i scholars in their works on jurisprudence
reemphasized the separation between power (which could exact or enforce
obedience) and wilaya (authority), which reserved the right to demand
obedience, depending on legal-rational circumstances) that had existed
even during the lifetime of the Imams.

Only the investiture of authority and the assuming of political power
could establish the rule of justice and equity. However, delegation of
the Imam's wilaya to an individual who could assume both the authority
and power of the Imam when the Imam in occultation could not monitor the
exercise of that authority was dangerous.

This danger was perceived by some jurists, who, pending the return of
the Twelfth Imam, ruled out the possibility of absolute claim to
political power and authority (wilaya) resembling that of the Imam
himself. Nevertheless, the rational need to exercise authority in order
to manage the affairs of the Ummah was recognized and authoritatively
legalized. The establishment of the Shi'i dynasties during the
occultation did not change the basic doctrine of the Imami leadership
whose direction was set on the occasion of Ghadir Khumm by the Prophet.

About the Author
----------------

Dr Abdulaziz A. Sachedina is professor of religious studies at the
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. He is the author
of numerous books and articles including Islamic Messianism and The Just
Ruler in Shi'ite Islam.

[^1]: Abd al-Husayn Ahmad al-Amini al-Najafi, Al-Ghadir fi al-Kitab wa
al-Sunna wa al-Adab, vol 1, Beirut, 1967, P 9-11, and all the Sunni and
Shi'i sources cited therein.

[^2]: This is the meaning of the word the Qur'an applies so often to
indicate the divine purpose in endowing humanity with guidance, namely,
al-falah. Usually translated as 'prosperity,' falah signifies the good
of both this and the next world for those who have responded to the
divine guidance.

[^3]: Fiqh in its early usage was not limited to legal jurisprudence. It
dealt with doctrinal and credal matters connected with basic Islamic
beliefs, including the subject of Muslim authority after the Prophet's
death. This early trend in fiqh writing continued much later as is
evidenced in many works of fiqh that were written in the
sixth/twelfth-thirteenth century which began with a prologue on the main
tenets of Islam. See article, Fiqh in Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd
edition; also Introduction to my work: The Just Ruler in Shi'ite Islam:
The Comprehensive Authority of the Jurist in Imamite Jurisprudence, New
York: Oxford University Press, 1988.

[^4]: Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Tusi, Al-Masa'il al-Ha'iriyat, Najaf,
1969, pp 3I2-313.

[^5]: Tusi, Tafsir al-Tibyan, Najaf, 1957, 8/368.

[^6]: See also, Al-Fadl ibn al-Husayn al-Tabarsi, Majma' al-Bayan fi
Tafsir al-Qu'ran, Beirut, 1379, 8/373-374; Zamakhshari, Al-Kashshaf,
3/276-277.

[^7]: Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i, Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, Beirut,
1960,6/10ff.

[^8]: John Wansborough, The Sectarian Milieu: Content and Composition of
Islamic Salvation History. Oxford, 1978, has discussed the development
of the practical application of the Qur'an during the process of
community formation. In his section dealing with authority he describes
the Islamic concept of authority as 'apostolic.' The charismatic figure
of the Prophet is depicted therein in an essentially public posture in
the emergence of Islamic polity. See especially pp 70-71.

[^9]: However, in the composition of Islamic salvation history, it was
in Shi'ism that the wilaya of the Prophet, as I have elaborated in this
paper, was repeatedly and consistently expressed by Shi'i scholars;
whereas in Sunnism the wilaya (authority in the form of exemplum [imam])
of the Prophet, in the absence of the charismatic authority following
the death of the Prophet, came to be located in the Sunnah, which became
the imam of the community. See: Wansborough, Sectarian Milieu, pp 70ff.

[^10]: See Tusi, Tibyan, 3/559

[^11]: Tusi, Tibyan, 3/561; Muhammad ibn Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Kulayni,
AI-Usul min al-Kafi, Tehran, 1964, 2/402, hadith 77; Tabataba'i, Mizan,
6/ 1ff. 'Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din Musawi, Al-Murji'at, Beirut, 1963,
p 180.

[^12]: See, for example, Tabari, Tafsir, 6/186ff; Zamakhshari, Kashshaf,
1/623-624; Baydawi, Anwar, p 154

[^13]: Tusi, Tibyan, 3/559

[^14]: See, for example, the Qur'an, 47:7, 7:157, 59:8. See also
Tabataba'i. Mizan, 6/13; Tusi, Tibyan, 3/565, alludes to this.

[^15]: Tabari Ta'rikh al-Rusul wa al-Muluk, Cairo, 1962, 5/402. See also
5/357, where instead of awla, ahaqq is used to signify the same
conclusion of being 'more entitled to tasrruf.' (16 ) Awla in this verse
has been translated by A J Arberry and others as 'nearer' and 'closer'.'
But, taking into consideration the Prophet's speech on the occasion of
theFarewell pilgrimage, where the same verse of the qur'an occurs in the
form of a question by the Prophet to the Muslims, the implication is in
the sense of being 'more entitled.' The Prophet asked the assembled
pilgrims: 'who is more worthy [in the eyes of] the believers than their
ownselves?' see: fn 1.

[^16]: Among the early works, besides the Qur'anic exegesis where wilaya
occurs in themeaning of wilayat al-tasarruf, one can cite the Ikhtiyar
ma'rifat al-rijal of Abu 'AmrUmar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Kashshi,
especially where he mentions the wilaya of Abu al-Khattab, which was
denounced by Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq. See Rijal, Mashhad, 1348/1964,
296,523. Also Tabataba'i's Mizan, 6/12-14.

[^17]: Kulayni, Kufi 2/368, hadith 02

[^18]: Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Mas'udi Muruj al-Dhahab wa Ma'adin
al-Jawaher, Beirut 1966. 3/ 193ff. In a more explicit speech, Imam
Husayn, on his way to Iraq, reminds the soldiers of the Umayyad
commander who had come to arrest him that the Prophet had required the
Muslims to challenge a sultan who had ruled unjustly, breaking all laws
of Allah and opposing the Sunnah of the Prophet. see Tabari, Ta'rikh,
5,403.

[^19]: Al-Mirza Muhammad Husayn al-Na'ini, Tanbih al-Umma wa Tanzih
al-Milla, Tehran, 1955, p 15.


