Chapter 3: Orientalists and the Event of Ghadir Khumm
=====================================================

By: Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi

**In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate**

Introduction
------------

The 18th of Dhil-Hijjah 1410 AH is to be celebrated in the Shi'I world
as the 1,400th anniversary of the declaration of Ghadir Khumm in which
the Prophet said the following about Imam Ali: ‘’ Whomsoever’s master
(mawla) I am, this Ali is also his master.’’ This event is of such a
significance to the Shi'as that no serious scholar of Islam can ignore
it.

The purpose of this paper is to study how the event of Ghadir Khumm was
handled by the orientalists. By 'orientalists' I mean the western
scholarship of Islam and also those easterners who received their entire
Islamic training under such scholars.

Before proceeding further, a brief narration of the event of Ghadir
Khumm would not be out of place. This will be especially helpful to
those who are not familiar with Ghadir Khumm. While returning from his
last pilgrimage, Prophet Muhammad, upon who be peace, received the
following command of Allah:

***'O Messenger! Convey what had been revealed to you from your Lord; if
you do not do so, then [it would be as if you have not conveyed His
message (at all). Allah will protect you from the people' (Quran
5:67).***

Therefore he stopped at Ghadir Khumm on Dhil-Hijjah 18th, 10 A.H. to
convey the message to the pilgrims before they dispersed. As it was very
hot, a dais shaded with branches was constructed for him. Then the
Prophet gave a long sermon. At one point, he asked his faithful
followers whether he, Muhammad, had more authority (*awla*) over the
believers than they had over themselves; the crowd cried out: ‘’Yes, it
is so, O Apostle of Allah!’’

Then he took Ali by the hand and declared: ‘’ Whoever's master (mawla) I
am, this Ali is also his master (*Man kuntu mawlahu fa hadha Aliyiun
mawlahu*)’’. Then the Prophet also announced his impending death and
charged the believers to remain attached to the Qur'an and Ahl al-Bayt.

This summarizes the important parts of the event of Ghadir Khumm.The
main body of this paper is divided as follows: Part II is a brief survey
of the approach used by the orientalists in studying Shi'ism; Part III
deals with the approach used to study Ghadir Khumm in particular; Part
IV is a critical review of what M A Shaban has written about the event
in his Islamic History 600-750 AD. This will be followed by a
conclusion.

Shi'ism and the Orientalists
----------------------------

When the Egyptian writer, Muhammad Qutb named his book Islam: the
Misunderstood Religion, he was politely expressing the Muslim sentiment
about the way the orientalists have treated Islam and Muslims in
general. The word 'misunderstood' implies that at least a genuine
attempt was made to understand Islam. However, a more blunt criticism of
orientalism, shared by the majority of the Muslims, comes from Edward
said: ‘’The hardest thing to get most academic experts on Islam to admit
is that what they say and do as scholars, is set in a profoundly and in
some ways an offensively, political context.’’

Everything about the study of Islam in the contemporary West is
saturated with political importance, but hardly any writers on Islam,
whether expert or general, admit the fact in what they say. Objectivity
is assumed to be inherent in learned discourse about other societies,
despite the long history of political, moral and religious concern felt
in all societies, western or Islamic, about the alien, the strange and
the different. In Europe, for example, the orientalists have
traditionally been affiliated directly with colonial offices.'[^1]

Instead of assuming that objectivity is inherent in learned discourses,
the western scholarship has to realize that pre-commitment to a
political or religious tradition, on a conscious or subconscious level,
can lead to biased judgement. As Marshall Hudgson writes: ‘’Bias comes
especially in the questions he poses and in the type of category he
uses, where indeed, bias is especially hard to track down because it is
hard to suspect the very terms one uses, which seem so innocently
neutral...’’[^2]

The Muslim reaction to the image portrayed of them by the western
scholarship is beginning to get its due attention. In 1979 the highly
respected orientalist Albert Hourani said: ‘’The voices of those from
the Middle East and North Africa telling us that they do not recognize
themselves in the image we have formed of them are too numerous and
insistent to be explained in terms of academic rivalry or national
pride.’’[^3]36

This was about Islam and Muslims vis-a-vis the orientalists. However,
when we focus on the study of Shi'ism by the orientalists, the word
'misunderstood' is not strong enough, rather it is an understatement.
Not only is Shi'ism misunderstood, it has been ignored, misrepresented
and studied mostly through the heresiographic literature of its
opponents. It seems as if the Shi'as had no scholars and literature of
their own. To borrow an expression from Marx: ‘’ They cannot represent
themselves, they must be represented, and that also by their
adversaries!’’

The reason for this state of affairs lies in the paths through which the
western scholars entered the fields of Islamic studies. Hodgson, in his
excellent review of western scholarship, writes: ‘’First, there were
those who studied the Ottoman Empire, which played so major a role in
modern Europe. They came to it usually in the first instance from the
viewpoint of Europe and diplomatic history. Such scholars tended to see
the whole of Islamdom from the political perspective of Istanbul, the
Ottoman capital. Second, there were those, normally British, who entered
Islamic studies in India so as to master Persian as good civil servants,
or at least they were inspired by Indian interests. For them, the
imperial transition of Delhi tended to be the culmination of Islamicate
history. Third, there were the Semitists, often interested primarily in
Hebrew studies, who were lured into Arabic.

For them, headquarters tended to be Cairo, the most vital of Arabic
using cities in the nineteenth century, though some turned to Syria or
the Maghrib. They were commonly philogians rather than historians, and
they learned to see Islamicate culture through the eyes of the late
Egyptian and Syrian Sunni writers most in vogue in Cairo. Other paths -
that of the Spaniards and some Frenchmen who focused on the Muslims in
Medieval Spain and that of the Russians who focused on the northern
Muslims - were generally less important.'[^4]

It is quite obvious that none of these paths would have led western
scholars to the centres of Shi'i learning or literature. The majority of
what they studied about Shi'ism was channelled through non-Shi'i
sources. Hodgson says: ‘’ All paths were at one in paying relatively
little attention to the central areas of the Fertile Crescent and Iran,
with their tendency towards Shi'ism; areas that tended to be most remote
from western penetration.’’[^5]

And after the First World War, 'the Cairene path to Islamic studies
became the Islamicist's path par excellence, while other paths to
Islamic studies came to be looked on as of more local relevance.'[^6]

Therefore, whenever an orientalist studied Shi'ism through Uthmaniyyah,
Cairene or Indian paths, it was quite natural for him to be biased
against Shi'i Islam. The Muslim historians of doctrine (who are mostly
Sunni) always tried to show that all other schools of thought than their
own were not only false but, if possible, less than truly Muslim. Their
works describe innumerable “*firqahs*” in terms which readily misled
modern scholars into supposing they were referring to so many “heretical
sects”.[^7]

And so we see that until very recently, western scholars easily
described Sunnism as 'orthodox Islam' and Shi'ism as a 'heretical sect.'
After categorizing Shi'ism as a heretical sect of Islam, it became
'innocently natural' for western scholars to absorb the Sunni scepticism
concerning the early Shi'i literature.

Even the concept of taqiyya was blown out of proportion and it was
assumed that every statement of a Shi'i scholar had a hidden meaning.
And, consequently, whenever an orientalist found time to study Shi'ism,
his pre-commitment to the Judeo-Christian tradition of the West was
compounded with the Sunni bias against Shi'ism. One of the best examples
of this compounded bias is found in the way the event of Ghadir Khumm
was approached by the orientalists.

The Event of Ghadir Khumm: From Oblivion to Recognition
-------------------------------------------------------

The event of Ghadir Khumm is a very good example to trace the Sunni bias
which found its way into the mental state of the orientalists. Those who
are well-versed with the polemic writings of Sunnis know that whenever
the Shi'as present a hadith or a historical evidence in support of their
view, a Sunni polemicist would respond in the following manner.

Firstly, he will outright deny the existence of any such hadith or
historical event. Secondly, when confronted with hard evidence from his
own sources, he will cast doubt on the reliability of the transmitters
of that hadith or event. Thirdly, when he is shown that all the
transmitters are reliable by Sunni standards, he will give an
interpretation to the hadith or the event which will be quite different
from that of the Shi 'as.

These three levels form the classical response of the Sunni polemicists
in dealing with the arguments of the Shi'as. A quotation from
Rosenthal's translation of Ibn Khaldun's The Muqadlimah would suffice to
prove my point. (Ibn Khaldun is quoting the following part from
*Al-Milal wa al-Nihal*, a heresiographic work of Ash-Sharistani.)
According to lbn Khaldun, the Shi'as believe that: 'Ali is the one whom
Muhammad appointed. They (Shi'a) transmit texts (of traditions) in
support of (this belief). The authority of the Sunnah and the
transmitters of the religious law do not know these texts.

(1) Most of them are suppositions, or

(2) some of their transmitters are suspect, or

(3) their (true) interpretation is very different from the wicked
interpretation that (the Shi'a) give to them.'[^8]

Interestingly, the event of Ghadir Khumm has suffered the same fate at
the hands of the orientalists. With the limited time and sources
available to me at this moment, I was surprised to see that most works
on Islam have ignored the event of Ghadir Khumm, indicating, by its very
absence, that the orientalists believed this event to be
'supposititious' and an invention of the Shi'as.

Margoliouth's Muhammad & the Rise of Islam (1905), Brockelmann's History
of the Islamic People (1939), Arnold and Guillaume's The Legacy of Islam
(1931), Guillaume's Islam (1954), von Grunebaum's Classical Islam
(1963), Arnold's The Caliphate (1965) and The Cambridge History of Islam
(1970) have completely ignored the event of Ghadir Khumm.

Why did these and many other western scholars ignore the event of Ghadir
Khumm? Since western scholars mostly relied on anti-Shi'I works, they
naturally ignored the event of Ghadir Khumm. L Veccia Vaglieri, one of
the contributors to the second edition of the Encyclopaedia of Islam
(1953), writes: ‘’Most of the sources which form the basis of our
(orientalists') knowledge of the life of the Prophet (Ibn Hisham, Al-
Tabari, Ibn Sa'd, etc) pass in silence over Muhammad's stop at Ghadir
Khumm, or, if they mention it, say nothing of his discourse (the writers
evidently feared to attract the hostility of the Sunnis, who were in
power, by providing material for the polemic of the Shi'as who used
these words to support their thesis of Ali's right to the caliphate).
Consequently, the western biographers of Muhammad, whose work is based
on these sources, equally make no reference to what happened at Ghadir
Khumm.’’[^9]

Then we come to those few orientalists who mention the hadith or the
event of Ghadir Khumm but express their scepticism about its
authenticity -- the second stage in the classical response of the Sunni
polemicists. The first example of such scholars is Ignaz Goldziher, a
highly respected German orientalist of the nineteenth century. He
discusses the hadith of Ghadir Khumm in his *Muhammedindische Studien*
(1889-1890) translated in English as Muslim Studies (1966-1971) under
the chapter entitled 'The Hadith in its Relation to the Conflicts of the
Parties of Islam.'

Coming to the Shi'as, Goldziher writes: ‘’A stronger argument in their
(Shi'a's) favour... was their conviction that the Prophet had expressly
designated and appointed Ali as his successor before his death...’’
Therefore the *'Alid* adherents were concerned with inventing and
authorizing traditions which prove Ali's installation by the direct
order of the Prophet. The most widely known tradition (the authority of
which is not denied even by orthodox authorities though they deprive it
of its intention by a different interpretation) is the tradition of
Khumm, which came into being for this purpose and is one of the firmest
foundations of the theses of the 'Alid party.'[^10]

One would expect such a renowned scholar to prove how the Shi'as 'were
concerned with inventing' traditions to support their theses, but
nowhere does Goldziher provide any evidence. After citing Al-Tirmidhi
and Al-Nasa'i in the footnote as the sources of hadith for Ghadir, he
says: ‘’Al-Nasa'i had, as is well known, pro-'Alid inclinations, and
also Al-Tirmidhi included in his collection tendentious traditions
favouring Ali, e.g., the tayr tradition.’’[^11]

This is again the same old classical response of the Sunni polemicists -
discredit the transmitters as unreliable or adamantly accuse the Shi'as
of inventing the traditions. Another example is the first edition of the
Encyclopaedia of Islam (1911-1938), which has a short entry under
'Ghadir Khumm' by F Bhul, a Danish orientalist who wrote a biography of
the Prophet. Bhul writes: ‘’ The place has become famous through a
tradition which had its origin among the Shi'as but is also found among
the Sunnis, viz. the Prophet on journey back from Hudaybiyya (according
to others from the Farewell Pilgrimage) here said of Ali: Whomsoever I
am lord of, his lord is Ali also!’’[^12] Bhul makes sure to emphasize
that the hadith and the event of Ghadir has 'its origins among the
Shi'as'!

Another striking example of the orientalists' ignorance about Shi'ism is
A Dictionary of Islam (1965) by Thomas Hughes. Under the entry of
Ghadir, he writes: ‘’ A festival of the Shi'as on the 18th of the month
of Zu 'l-Hijjah, when three images of dough filled with honey are made
to represent Abu Bakr, Umar and Usman, which are stuck with knives, and
the honey is sipped as typical of the blood of the usurping khalifahs.
The festival is named Ghadir, 'a pool,' and the festival commemorates,
it is said, Muhammad having declared Ali his successor at Ghadir Khumm,
a watering place midway between Makkah and al-Madinah.’’[^13]

Coming from a Shi'i background of India, having studied in Iran for 10
years and lived among the Shi'a of Africa and North America, I have yet
to see, hear or read about the dough and honey ritual of Ghadir!! I was
more surprised to see that even Vaglieri, in the second edition of the
Encyclopaedia of Islam, has incorporated this rubbish into his fairly
excellent article on Ghadir Khumm. He adds at the end: ‘’ This feast
also holds an important role among the Nusayris. It is quite possible
that the dough and honey ritual is observed by the Nusayris; it has
nothing to do with the Shi'as.

But do all orientalists know the difference between the Shi'as and the
Nusayris?

I very much doubt so.

A fourth example from the contemporary scholars who have treaded the
same path is Philip Hitti in his History of the Arabs (1964). After
mentioning that the Buyids established 'the rejoicing on that (day) of
the Prophet's alleged appointment of Ali as his successor at Ghadir
Khumm,’’ he describes the location of Ghadir Khumm in the footnote as 'a
spring between Makkah and al-Madinah where Shi'ite tradition asserts the
Prophet declared,” Whosoever I am lord of, his lord is Ali also”.[^14]

Although this scholar mentions the issue of Ghadir in a passing manner,
still he wants to leave his readers with the impression that the hadith
of Ghadir is a 'Shi'ite tradition.' To these scholars who, consciously
or unconsciously, have absorbed the Sunni bias against Shi'ism and
insist on the Shi'i origin or invention of the hadith of Ghadir, I would
just repeat what Vaglieri has said in the Encyclopaedia of Islam about
Ghadir Khumm: ‘’

It is, however, certain that Muhammad did speak in this place and utter
the famous sentence, for the account of this event has been preserved,
either in a concise form or in detail, not only by Al-Ya'kubi, whose
sympathy for the 'Alid cause is well-known, but also in the collection
of traditions which are considered as canonical, especially in the
Musnad of Ibn Hanbal; and the hadiths are so numerous and so well
attested by the different isnads that it does not seem possible to
reject them.’’[^15]

Vaglieri continues: ‘’ Several of these hadith are cited in the
bibliography, but it does not include the hadith which, although
reporting the sentence, omit to name Ghadir Khumm, or those which state
that the sentence was pronounced at al-Hudaybiyya. The complete
documentation will be facilitated when the Concordance of Wensinck has
been completely published’’. In order to have an idea of how numerous
these hadiths are, it is enough to glance at the pages in which *Ibn
Kathir* has collected a great number of them with their isnads.

It is time the western scholarship made itself familiar with the Shi'i
literature of the early days as well as of the contemporary period.
There is no need to wait for Wensinck's Concordance.The Shi'i scholars
have produced great works on the issue of Ghadir Khumm. Here I will just
mention two of those.

The first is *'Abaqat al-Anwar* written in Persian by Allama Mir Hamid
Husayn al-Musawi (d 1304 AH) of India. Allama Mir Hamid Husayn has
devoted two bulky volumes (consisting of about 1,080 pages) on the
*isnad* *tawatur* and meaning of the hadith of Ghadir. The second is
*Al- Ghadir* in 11 volumes in Arabic by Allama Abdul Husayn al-Amini
where he gives with full references the names of 110 sahaba of the
Prophet and also 84 tabi'un (disciples of the sahaba) who have narrated
the hadith of Ghadir. He has also chronologically given the names of the
historians, traditionalists, exegetists and poets who have mentioned the
hadith of Ghadir from the first until the fourteenth Islamic century.

Shaban & His New Interpretation
-------------------------------

Among the latest work by the western scholarship on the history of Islam
is M A Shaban's Islamic History AD 600-750, subtitled 'A New
Interpretation,' in which the author claims not only to use newly
discovered material but also to re-examine and reinterpret material
which has been known to us for many decades. Shaban, a lecturer of
Arabic at SOAS of the University of London, is not prepared to even
consider the event of Ghadir Khumm. He writes: ‘’ The famous Shi'ite
tradition that he (the Prophet) designated Ali as his successor at
Ghadir Khumm should not be taken seriously.’’

Shaban gives two 'new' reasons for not taking the event of Ghadir
seriously: ‘’ Such an event is inherently improbable considering the
Arabs' reluctance to entrust young untried men with great
responsibility. Furthermore, at no point do our sources show the Madinan
community behaving as if they had heard of this designation.’’[^16]

Let us critically examine each of these reasons given by Shaban: (1) The
traditional reluctance of the Arabs to entrust young men with great
responsibility. First of all, had not the Prophet introduced many things
to which the Arabs were traditionally reluctant? Was not Islam itself
accepted by the Makkans very reluctantly? This 'traditional reluctance,'
instead of being an argument against the appointment of Ali, is actually
part of the argument used by the Shi'as. They agree that the Arabs were
reluctant to accept Imam Ali as the Prophet's successor not only because
of his young age but also because he had killed their leaders in the
battles of Islam.

According to the Shi'as, Allah also mentions this reluctance when after
ordering the Prophet to proclaim Imam Ali as his successor:

***'O Messenger! Convey what had been revealed to you...'***

He reassured His Messenger by saying that

***'Allah will protect you from the people' (Quran 5:67).***

The Prophet was commissioned to convey the message of Allah, no matter
whether the Arabs liked it or not. Moreover, this 'traditional
reluctance' was not an irrevocable custom of the Arab society as Shaban
wants us to believe. Jafry, in The Origin and Early Development of Shi'a
Islam, says: ‘’ Our sources do not fail to point out that, though the
'Senate' (*Nadwa*) of pre-Islamic Makkah was generally a council of
elders only, the sons of the chieftain Qusayy were privileged to be
exempted from this age restriction and were admitted to the council
despite their youth. In later times, more liberal concessions seem to
have been in vogue; Abu Jahl was admitted despite his youth, and Hakim
ibn Hazm was admitted when he was only 15 or 20 years old.’’ Then Jafry
quotes Ibn 'Abd Rabbih: ‘’There was no monarchy or king over the Arabs
of Makkah in the jahiliyyah. So whenever there was a war, they took a
ballot among chieftains and elected one as 'King,' were he a minor or a
grown man. Thus on the day of Fijar, it was the turn of Banu Hashim, and
as a result of the ballot Al-Abbas,who was then a mere child, was
elected, and they seated him on the shield.’’ [^17]

Thirdly, we have an example in the Prophet's own decisions during the
last days of his life when he entrusted the command of the army to Usama
ibn Zayd, a young man who was hardly twenty years of age.[^18] He was
appointed over the elders of the Muhajirun and the Ansar, and, indeed,
many of the elders resented this decision of the Prophet.[^19] If the
Prophet of Islam could appoint the young and untried Usama ibn Zayd over
the elders of the Muhajirun, then why should it be 'inherently
improbable' to think that the Prophet had appointed Imam Alias his
successor?Error: Reference source not found The traditional reluctance
to entrust tried men with great responsibility.

Apart from the young age of Imam Ali, Shaban also refers to the
reluctance of the Arabs in entrusting 'untriedmen’ with great
responsibility. This implies that Abu Bakr was selected by the Arabs
because he had been 'tried with great responsibilities.' I doubt whether
Shaban would be able to substantiate the implication of his claim from
Islamic history. One will find more instances where Imam Ali was
entrusted by the Prophet with greater responsibilities than Abu Bakr.

Imam Ali was left behind in Makkah during the Prophet's migration to
mislead the enemies and also to return the properties of various people
which were given in trust to the Prophet. Imam Ali was tried with
greater responsibilities during the early battles of Islam in which he
was always successful. When the declaration (*bara'at*) against the
pagan Arabs of Makkah was revealed, first Abu Bakr was entrusted to
convey it to the Makkans, but later on this great responsibility was
taken away from him and entrusted to Imam Ali.

Imam Ali was entrusted with the city and citizens of Medina while the
Prophet had gone on the expedition to Tabuk. Imam Ali was appointed the
leader of the expedition to Yemen. These are just a few examples which
come to mind at random. Therefore, on a comparative level, Ali ibn Abi
Talib was a person who had been tried and entrusted with greater
responsibilities than Abu Bakr.Error: Reference source not found

The behaviour of the Medinan community about the declaration of Ghadir
is as follows: Firstly, if an event can be proved as true by the
accepted academic standards (of the Sunnis, of course), then the
reaction of the people to that event is immaterial. Secondly, the same
'traditional reluctance' used by Shaban to discredit the declaration of
Ghadir can be used here against his scepticism towards the event of
Ghadir. This traditional reluctance, besides other factors which are
beyond the scope of this paper[^20], can be used to explain the
behaviour of the Medinan community.

Thirdly, although the Medinan community was silent during the events
which kept Imam Ali away from the khilafah, there were many among them
who had witnessed the declaration of Ghadir Khumm. On quite a few
occasions, Imam Ali implored the sahaba of the Prophet to bear witness
to the declaration of Ghadir. Here I will just mention one instance
which took place in Kufa during the khilafah of Imam Ali, twenty four
years after the Prophet's death.

Imam Ali heard that some people doubted his claim of precedency over the
previous khulafah; therefore, he came to a gathering at the mosque and
implored the eyewitnesses of the event of Ghadir Khumm to verify the
truth of the Prophet's declaration about his being the lord and master
of all thebelievers. Many sahaba of the Prophet stood up and verified
the claim of Imam Ali. We have the names of 24 of those who testified on
behalf of Imam Ali, although other sources like the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal
and Majma' as-Zawa'id of Hafiz al-Haythami put that number at 30.

Also bear in mind that this incident took place 25 years after the event
of Ghadir Khumm, and during this period hundreds of eyewitnesses had
died naturally or in the battles fought during the first two khulafah's
rule. Add to this the fact that this incident took place in Kufa which
was far from the centre of the sahabas, Medina. This incident which took
place in Kufa in the year 35 A.H. has itself been narrated by four
sahaba and 14 tabi'un and has been recorded in most books of history and
tradition.[^21]

In conclusion, the behaviour of the Medinan community after the death of
the Prophet does not automatically make the declaration of Ghadir Khumm
improbable. I think this will suffice to make Shaban realize that his is
not a 'new' intepretation; rather it exemplifies, in my view, the first
stage of the classical response of the Sunni polemicists - an outright
denial of the existence of an event or a hadith which supports the Shi'i
views - which has been absorbed by the majority of the western scholars
of Islam.

Conclusion
----------

In this brief survey, I have shown that the event of Ghadir Khumm is a
historical fact which cannot be rejected, and that in studying Shi'ism,
the pre-commitment to the Judeo-Christian tradition of the orientalists
was compounded with the Sunni bias against Shi'ism. Consequently, the
event of Ghadir Khummwas ignored by most western scholars and emerged
from oblivion only to be handled with scepticism and reinterpretation.

I hope this one example will convince at least some western scholars to
re-examine their methodology in studying Shi'ism, and instead of
approaching it largely through the works of heresiographers like
Ash-Sharistani, Ibn Hazm, Al-Maqrizi and Al-Baghdadi who present the
Shi'as as a heretical sect of Islam, they should turn to more objective
works of both the Shi'as as well as the Sunnis. The Shi'as are tired,
and rightfully so, of being portrayed as a heretical sect that emerged
because of the political and economic circumstances of the early Islamic
period. They demand to represent themselves instead of being represented
by their adversaries.

About the Author
----------------

Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi is the Imam of the Shi'a Muslim community of
British Columbia.

[^1]: Edward W Said, Covering Islam, New York: Pantheon Books, 1981, p
xvii.

[^2]: Marshall G S Hodgson, The Venture of Islam, vol 1, Chicago:
Universityof Chicago Press, 1974, p 27

[^3]: Albert Hourani, 'Islamic History, Middle Eastern History, Modem,'
in M H Kerr (ed), Islamic Studies: A tradition and its problems,
California: Undena Publications, 1979, p 10.

[^4]: Hodgson, op. cit., pp 39-40.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Ibid. pp 66-67

[^8]: Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah, tr Franz Rosenthal, vol 1, New York:
Pantheon Books, 1958, p 403. In Arabic, see vol 1, Beirut: Maktatatul
Madrasah, 1961, p 348.

[^9]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1953, see under 'Ghadir Khumm.'

[^10]: I Goldziher, Muslim Studies, tr Barber and stern, vol 2, Chicago:
Aldine Inc, 1971, pp 112-113.

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1911-1938, see under 'Ghadir Khumm.'

[^13]:

[^14]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1911-1938, see under 'Ghadir Khumm.'

[^15]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1953, see under 'Ghadir Khumm.'

[^16]: M A Shaban, Islamic History AD 600-750, Cambridge: University
Press, 1971, p 16

[^17]: S H M Jafry, The Origin and Early Development of Shi'a Islam,
Qum: Ansariyan Publications, n.d., p 22.

[^18]: M H Haykal, The life of Muhammad, tr Al-Faruqi (n.p., American
Trust Publications, 1976, p 492

[^19]: See the Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd and other major works on seerah.

[^20]: For more details, see S S A Rizvi, Imamate, Tehran: WOFIS,1985,
pp 120-121

[^21]: For full references, see Al-Amini, Al-Ghadir vol 1, Tehran:
Mu'assatul Muwahhidi, 1976, pp 166-186.


