Introduction
============

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.***

An inquiry into the system of the laws which govern the process of
history and the effects which historical events produce on the life of
society is one of the most important needs of our society at the present
juncture. An insight into this system is essential for the continued
vitality of our cultural revolution and its extension to other peoples
of the world.

There is no doubt if a society wants to free itself from its
environmental limitations, suffocating atmosphere and overbearing
conditions, it must know to what extent societies are compulsorily
regulated by their circumstances and how they can overcome their
limitations in this regard.

What is important is only to find out the ways and means of overcoming
the limitations and hinderances. It is immaterial to us whether this
discovery is called a scientific discovery or is given the name of a
religious, philosophical, gnostic or some other kind of unravelling. Now
let us see what Ayatullah Sadr has said on this subject from the
standpoint of the Qur'an in his last lectures in the Religious
Centre,[^1] Najaf Ashraf (Iraq).

This study is significant, as it relates to the Religious Centre and
Ayatullah Sadr. In our institutes of learning, study is mostly based on
the four sources of law, the Qur'an, the Sunnah, the Reason and the
Consensus of the juristic opinions. Naturally in these seats of learning
the Qur'an is studied either from the juristic point of view or with a
reference to fundamental, philosophical, scholastic and moral questions,
which all come under the term of the exegesis[^2] of the Qur'an.

In the Religious Centre two different methods of teaching the exegesis
are followed. One of them is the old and conventional method and the
other is topical. In the first two lectures Ayatullah Sadr has explained
in detail the difference between these two methods. According to the
traditional method either the Qur'an from its beginning or a particular
chapter of it is taken and explained verse by verse, chapter by chapter
and word by word.

First the linguistic, grammatical and literary characteristics of every
verse are dealt with, and then the subtleties of its meaning are
elucidated. Next its historical background and the occasion of its
revelation are explained. Simultaneously the relevant traditions[^3] and
other similar questions are also discussed. In this way the whole Qur'an
is expounded. This type of exegesis may be called the split and part by
part exegesis[^4].

The other method is that of topical exegesis.[^5] In this method a
particular subject is chosen and studied from various angles. First
suitable mental data are formed, and then a reference is made to the
Qur'an in order to seek its verdict on the subject. From the traditions
of the Prophet's progeny it is gathered that this method is more
desirable than the other one. Imam Ali (peace be upon him) has said:
"Here is the Qur'an. Let it express its opinion". The fact is that the
Qur'an can reveal every truth. It is only up to the people to refer
their questions to the Qur'an so that it may answer them.

If we refer to the Qur'an in the form of a question an idea which has
already been investigated and discussed by various schools of human
society, we can be guided by the Qur'an as to which is the best answer.
In order to prepare ground for this kind of exegesis, it is necessary
that the study of the whole Qur'an should first be completed in
accordance with the first method.

In other words to be able to undertake topical study one should to some
extent be familiar with the verses connected with the Islamic and
Qur'anic questions and should be able to bring together all the verses
concerning the subject under study.

This kind of work has already been accomplished in connection with the
Islamic law when all the traditions pertaining to each subject have been
brought together and elucidated. Ayatullah Sadr wanted to make a topical
study of several subjects and deduce from the Qur'an its view on them,
but unfortunately he could get the opportunity of completing his study
of only one subject, namely the methodology of history or the philosophy
of history. What is important to us is that this subject has been
studied for the first time from religious and Qur'anic point of view.

This study has been given the name of 'The Trends of History in the
Qur'an'. Now let us see what these words signify and what points they
are expected to cover. Here it may be appropriate to point out that
history has several connotations.

One of its connotations is the transmitted history that is an account of
the events concerning a past subject. Another is the study of the
historical events concerning a particular society. The third is a broad
view of history detached from every limitation of time and place.

So far we have been studying the Qur'an from the standpoint of the
transmitted history or have occasionally studied some past society in
the light of what the Qur'an has said about it. In this connection we
have been confronted with some difficulties too. For example we find
that while relating the stories of the past the Qur'an does not describe
the events in the terms of numerical facts. Not that it has any doubts
about the figures, but it omits them intentionally. For instance, in the
story of the People of the Cave, the Holy Qur'an says:

***Some will say: They were three, their dog the fourth, and some say:
Five their dog the sixth, guessing at random; and some say: Seven, and
their dog the eighth. Say: (O Prophet!) My Lord is best aware of their
number. None knows them except a few. So do not argue about them.***
**(Surah al-Kahf, 18:22)**

This way of expression shows that the Qur'an intentionally does not pay
much attention to transmitted history. For the purpose of being
benefited by historical events, it does not want to make us prisoners of
any conventional form.

In contrast it wants to break the rigidity of such forms. The Qur'an has
an identical attitude in respect of all historical stories. It makes no
difference to it whether the events narrated concern such eminent people
as the Prophets, or some wicked tyrants or some other extraordinary
people. As such we have no right to fill in any gaps in the Qur'anic
stories with any lore, myth, guess or our own personal opinion. We have
only to find out what Islam (the Qur'an) aims at by narrating these
stories. The fact is that Islam has a special philosophy in regard to
the nations and the communities.

Similarly it has its own so called sociology. It does not want simply to
recount the events, nor is it interested in any particular period of
history or in the sociology of any particular people. If Islam has
referred to these things, it has done so purely with a view to deduce
certain universal laws which govern all human societies and determine
their future course, whether good or bad.

Therefore it is of utmost importance for us to find out what laws of
history the Qur'an puts forward so that we may understand our society as
well as the past societies, be able to ascertain our future course and
distinguish between what is right and what is wrong.

There is no doubt that for this purpose the Qur'an is the only reliable
source on which we can depend. If we want to know if there has been any
precedent for such a deduction of the laws of history, we see that a
great thinker and philosopher, Ibn Khaldun made such deductions eight
centuries after the revelation of the Qur'an. He for the first time in
\`The Introduction' of his history turned his attention to the question
of the development of societies and to the basic laws of history.
Unfortunately after him his ideas were not pursued further and were
almost entirely forgotten.

It was four centuries after Ibn Khaldun that the so called progressive
elements of Europe who claim to be the forerunners of all sciences, and
experts in every field, realized that human societies are governed by
certain laws and norms. They called these laws the philosophy of
history. With the passage of time every scholar began to interpret these
laws according to his own thinking, his mental background and his
personal whims.

Consequently now we are faced with divergent philosophies of history,
the most well-known of them being those of Hegel, Toynbee and Marx. Each
of these philosophies has its own method. As for our own society, it
took eight centuries to turn its attention to this subject and then
abandoned it before long. Others took to it, but they fell in grave
errors, some of which we propose to point out later.

Another point which needs clarification before we enter upon our main
subject is whether the Qur'an has a right to intervene in the discussion
of the norms of history? Is it within its bounds to discuss a scientific
subject at all?

If it is admitted that the Qur'an can put forward the laws of history,
this subject becomes of utmost importance to us in our present
circumstances. We have many problems of physics, chemistry, nuclear
technology, mathematics etc. Can we turn to the Qur'an for their
solution? Has the Qur'an dealt with scientific subjects?

If it has, why has the scientific progress of the Muslims been so much
delayed? Why have we reached, even the present level of our culture, at
least 1000 years after the revelation of the Qur'an? Should we not have
attained this level when the Qur'an was revealed? And if the Qur'an has
not dealt with the scientific subjects, why should we seek their
solution in it now?

It is a fact that the Qur'an is not a book of science. But the question
is: Why is it not a book of science when science solves so many problems
of society? The answer is that science is unable to solve any problem
unless and until it runs parallel to the course of guidance. Otherwise
it only adds to the problems and aggravates them. Anyhow, this is a
social question and outside the scope of our present discussion.

Briefly it may be said that the Qur'an is a book of Divine guidance. It
tells the human beings what will happen in the wake of and in
consequence to what they do. There is no information service in any part
of the world which may tell us what the consequences of our deeds will
be at a time subsequent to these deeds.

The knowledge which science provides is in its entirety based on the
causative system, but it cannot envisage the future relation of any
cause and its effects. It cannot say in what way the effect produced by
a cause will be useful to man and in what way it will be harmful to him,
nor can science indicate the direction to which man should be guided so
that he may enjoy the beneficial results of a cause.

The function of science is confined to showing only the insipid relation
between a cause and its effect. Even to discover this relationship man
himself has to make effort and study nature so that his talent may
unfold to the extent of understanding this relationship. He can exploit
this relationship only through his own endeavour and experience.

All the tribulations and sufferings of the world including the wars, the
diseases, the tragic incidents and all other problems and difficulties
which man has to face are meant to give him impetus to surmount the
difficulties and to find his way through them. Still the question of
Divine guidance is something different. If a man is not religiously
guided, he is bound to be swayed by the ideas and the problems which
would ultimately pervert him.

It is the Grace of Allah that He guides men and sends for them Holy
Books and clear guidance. The Prophets come so that men may not be
perplexed and deviate from the right path. Hence it is an indisputable
privilege of the Qur'an to guide people. It is also a fact that due
attention to the laws and the trends of history is an important part of
guidance, for it protects man from the evils of deviation and
perversion.

There is an important difference between the laws of history on the one
hand and the laws of physics and chemistry on the other. The laws of
physics and chemistry, which are based on the causative system of the
world, apply to inanimate objects unable to receive any guidance.

On the other hand the laws of societies, though as firm and definite as
any scientific laws, apply to human beings. It is the peculiarity of man
that he can take himself out of the scope of one law, which he considers
to be harmful to him, and put himself under the purview of another law
which he regards as beneficial.

In other words he can decide for himself which law should apply to him,
whether the law which leads him to happiness or the law which leads him
to misery. The choice is with man himself.

Anyhow, that does not mean that man can violate any law. All that he can
do is that instead of being under the purview of one law he may make
himself subject to another law. He can do so because it is within his
power to make or mar himself. It is for this reason that the Qur'an has
paid special attention to the history of the nations and human
societies. It has done so mainly with a view to give an opportunity to
the people to derive from the laws of history the best systems suited to
them.

History helps man in deriving general laws. If the Qur'an has referred
only to some laws of history, it is because the Qur'an does not want to
curtail the role of man's effort. There is no reason to think that the
laws to which it has referred, are the only laws concerning human life
and human society.

According to the Qur'an it is man's own duty to find out the trends of
history and derive the laws. Man must take this problem seriously, try
his best to discover the laws of history and accept their firmness. As
an example of the verses which explain the laws of human history, we
come across a verse in which the Qur'an in connection with the Battle of
Uhud says:

***If you have suffered a setback, a similar setback was suffered by
these people (your enemy) also. And We bring about these vicissitudes in
man's life.*** (Sarah Ale Imran, 2:140)

No people can say that they will always be victorious, nor are any
people condemned to be always defeated. Victory and defeat depend on
certain social conditions and are subject to the laws of history. Any
nation or community which abides by these laws, gains victory,
irrespective of the fact whether there are any virtuous people in it or
not.

In fact, what is important is the system prevailing on the whole in a
society. A few individuals do not count. That is why it should cause no
surprise if in a bad society good people are also affected by adverse
social laws, for the destiny of a society is determined by the conduct
of the great majority of its masses.

If a society on the whole is perverted, a good man, howsoever exemplary
his personal conduct may be, will certainly suffer the evil consequences
of the misdeeds of his society. The Qur'an says:

***And beware of involving yourselves into a trouble the consequences of
which shall surely not affect in particular those who are
wrong-doers.*** (Surah al-Anfal, 8:25)

This verse conveys the same idea as mentioned above. The behaviour of a
society is different from that of the individuals. Although it is the
individuals who make society, yet the virtuous individuals singly cannot
escape the evil consequences of the misdeeds of their society as a
whole, unless they are able to change its general condition.

The best proof of the correctness of this rule, is provided by the story
of Prophet Musa (Moses) and his people, as narrated in the Qur'an. The
people of Musa wanted to reach the land of the covenant and settle
there. But they asked Prophet Musa to wrest the holy land first from the
oppressors with the help of his Lord, Allah and then invite them to
enter it. They said to Prophet Musa:

***So go you and your Lord and fight them. We are sitting here.***
(Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:22)

The Qur'an says that this attitude of theirs proved that they were not
fit to gain victory.

***He answered: Then this land shall be forbidden to them for forty
years during which period they will be wandering aimlessly across the
earth.*** (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:26)

And so it happened. Prophet Musa undoubtedly had true faith in Allah,
was sincere in his purpose and had heroically carried out a successful
struggle against Fir'awn. But because his society was not disciplined
and lacked forbearance and spirit of self-sacrifice, he like others had
to wander in the desert and undergo hardships.

In this connection the charming interpretation of the Karbala tragedy
made by Ayatullah Sadr is note-worthy and thought-provoking. He says
that the people of Kufah were coward and timid while the people of Syria
were perverted and covetous. The Kufans tolerated the despotic and
blood-thirsty rule of the Umayyads. It means social behaviour of theirs
was bound to cause disorder and bring about calamities.

Accordingly the Kufans were beset by adversities, famines and bloodshed:
The incident of Karbala in which Imam Husayn and the members of his
family suffered very heavily, was one of a series of such incidents. It
was a social process which culminated in such a great tragedy. Such a
process cannot be halted unless something is done to change its course.

In case we succeed in doing so, we save ourselves from the impact of an
adverse law and put ourselves under a different law. Another point is
that according to the Qur'an societies are governed by some fixed and
unchangeable laws. The Qur'an has laid much stress on this point. The
relevant verses can be divided into several categories:

(i) The verses which lay down a general rule - The Qur'an says:

***Every nation has a term; when it comes, they cannot put it back a
single hour, nor can they put it forward.*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:34)

This is a universal law of history.

(ii) There are other verses which refer to the consequences of injustice
and oppression. One of them says:

***If Allah took people to task by that which they deserve, He would not
leave a single living creature on the surface of the earth; but He
reprieves them to an appointed term.*** (Surah Fatir, 35:45)

No doubt it is within the power of Allah to punish and destroy the
unjust and perverted societies immediately, but He has given them some
respite. Here it may be pointed out that as regards to time the law of
societies is different from the law of individuals. An individual may be
punished or rewarded immediately after doing an evil or good deed. But
as it is gathered from a number of verses of the Qur'an, the social
changes may take hundreds or even thousands of years.

In the case of societies, the time is relative and only relative
promptness is taken into consideration. Hence, one should not expect a
quick change in society, for social changes have their own appointed
time under the laws governing them.

(iii) Some verses of the Qur'an exhort people to study historical events
and carry out investigations about them. In this connection there are
several verses of similar wording. One of them says:

***Have they not travelled in the land to see what happened to those who
were before them? Allah wiped them out. And for the disbelievers there
will be the like thereof.*** (Surah Muhammad, 47:10)

Allah asks those to whom this verse is addressed; why they do not make
inquiries and travel in the land to see the deeds of the past people and
the results of their doings? Why do they not see how Allah destroyed the
disbelievers and the wrongdoers in the past and how he disgraced them?
From these verses it becomes clear that society is governed by fixed and
unchangeable laws and norms.

Now let us take up our main topic and see what these laws are and how
they work. But before advancing the specimens of these laws it is
necessary to mention some of their characteristics, for these
characteristics draw a line of demarcation between our outlook on the
norms of history and the outlook of others interested in this question.

We believe in three basic characteristics of these norms, by means of
which it is possible to identify the course of history.

The first characteristic of the historical norms is their universality.
They have no exceptions. The Qur'an has magnificently brought out this
point. Wherever it mentions the fate of any people, it adds that to be
so is a Divine method or a law. It firmly says:

***You will not find for Divine Law any substitute, nor will you find in
Divine Law any change.*** (Surah al Fatir, 35:43)

None can alter these norms or violate these laws. They are fixed and
unchangeable. This position is not confined to the material questions of
life, but is equally applicable to the question of Divine succour, which
also, according to the Qur'an, operates in conformity with the laws and
norms of history. As such the laws of society have no exception.

The second point is that the laws of society have a divine aspect or a
divine characteristic. This position is somewhat thought-provoking. All
physical relations in nature are based on a system of cause and effect.
If we overlook this system and consider everything to be spontaneous,
miraculous and a direct outcome of Allah's will, we will have to nullify
all branches of science and abrogate the entire causative system. As a
result our outlook on science will be totally changed and will become
similar to that of Christianity on history as may be gathered from the
sayings of St. Augustine.

According to his view the divinity of a thing means the negation of the
sequence of causes and effects. In other words, if a thing has a divine
aspect, that means that it is directly governed by the will of Allah.
Can we also subscribe to this view? No, this view is irrational and
contrary to all scientific knowledge and principles.

The view which we hold about the divine method and practice, passes
exactly through the same channels as the system of causes and effects.
The only thing is that while we accept what science says about the
causative and other systems, we also believe that all systems ultimately
depend on Allah.

Take a simple example. We know that it rains by the will of Allah. But
we do not deny that the process of rainfall begins with the evaporation
of sea-water and the rise of vapours. Then with a change in the
temperature of the air, vapours again change into liquid and because of
the gravity of the earth fall down in the form of the drops of water. We
accept all this, but also maintain that at every stage everything
depends on Allah, and at no stage causes operate or function
independently of Him. That is our belief as well as our observation. It
is not a question of any fictitious theory.

It is a reality that shows that in all its processes and causative
motions the whole world depends on Allah. Although science works on the
basis of causative system, it ignores that a reality underlies this
system. It is essential to realize that everything depends on Allah, so
that man may not lose himself and may not become self-conceited.

All the troubles and all the errors which the Western outlook on science
has caused, are due to the false notion that man is not in need of his
Creator. Such a notion makes man arrogant and conceited.

Hence one must give up this notion and find out that course, which has
been prescribed for him by his Lord, for that course is actually the
course along which the world operates. Hence, it is clear that there is
a basic difference between the divine aspect which we accord to history
and the divine aspect or the divine colour which Christianity accords
it.

The third point which is important to us, is that the laws of history
are not inconsistent with human freedom. We referred to this point
earlier also. Now we quote some verses in support of our view. The
Qur'an says:

***Allah does not change the condition of a people until they change
that which is in their hearts.*** (Surah ar-Ra'd, 13:11)

In this verse Allah does not mean to say that He would repeal His law if
people changed their condition. That is not the point. The real point is
that it is a divine law that people will have one destiny if they change
their condition, and quite a different destiny if they do not change and
stick to their old habits and customs. Thus while this verse emphasizes
the existence of a law, at the same time it confirms man's freedom. At
another place the Qur'an says:

***We destroyed these townships because they did wrong.*** (Surah
al-Khaf, 18:59)

In this verse an invariable law has been mentioned for obviously nobody
is forced to do wrong.

***If they continue to tread the right path, We shall give them water to
drink in abundance.*** (Surah al-Jinn, 72:16)

***If the people of these towns had believed and practised piety, We
would have surely showered on them the blessings of the heaven and the
earth. But they disbelieved and therefore We seized them for their
misdeeds. (Surah*** al-A'raf, 7:96)

You may notice how man has been given a choice of placing himself within
the purview of two alternative laws. He has been told that he can place
himself under the purview of either of them so that he may be dealt with
according to the definite provisions of the law of his choice.

We have already hinted at the important question of divine succour. Here
we propose to explain it a little further. Usually people think that
divine succour is a concession and favour granted by Allah to some
people of His choice. Actually that is not the case. Divine succour is
granted according to its relevant law, and in this case also man's
freedom has been ensured.

Thus even entry into paradise and the receipt of divine succour are
governed by a law and that law requires perseverance in the face of the
oppressors and a steadfast struggle against them. Allah's help comes in
the wake of man's own constant effort. This shows that the whole world
and all its systems are governed by some law or other.

Recapitulating our discussion we may say that the norms of history have
three characteristics. The number of the verses which throw light on
them is quite large. We have quoted only a few of them. Referring to the
classification of these verses we said that one group of them stipulated
the universality of the laws of history. In this connection we cited the
verse saying:

***Every nation has a term; when it comes, they cannot put it back an
hour, nor can they put it forward. (Surah Yunus, 10:49, Surah al-A'raf,
7:34).***

The second group of them exhorts to the study of that which happened to
the past people.

One such verse says:

***Have they not travelled in the land to see what happened to those who
were before them?"(Sura ar-Rum, 30:9)***

The third group of these verses tells the stories of the Prophets. The
Qur'an is concerned only with the teachings that these stories contain
and the moral which can be drawn from them. It is not interested in
their outward aspect.

As from this angle all stories are similar to one another, they may be
regarded as pages of the Qur'anic science dealing with the norms of
history. As we have already emphasized three qualities of the laws of
history should not be forgotten. These qualities are:

(i) Universality: The Quranic verses clearly show that the norms of
history are fixed and invariable. The Qur'an has emphatically indicated
that even in the case of divine succour no exception is admissible.
Unlimited divine help cannot be expected. The Qur'an says:

***Did you suppose that you would enter paradise while yet upon you has
not come the like of that which befell those who passed away before you?
They were afflicted by misery and hardship and were so shaken that the
Messenger of Allah and those who believed along with him said: \`When
comes Allah's help? Now surely Allah's help is near!'*** (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:214)

Allah says: Do not think that you are an exception to the general rule
of divine help. The rule about it is firm and it is as applicable to you
as it has been to others. The past peoples also had to face similar
hardship and setbacks, but they continued their struggle and remained
firm. You should also continue your struggle.

In their case the ground for a change was prepared only when they were
almost tired of waiting for divine help. Only then the fruit of their
patience and fortitude was made ready for them to pluck. Remember that
Allah's help is in close proximity!

It follows from this that divine succour is subject to a well-calculated
laws. Similarly the fight against falsehood is also governed by the laws
of history. Mere wishes and desires can stir no movement in the domain
of the laws of history, nor can they alone serve any purpose. Allah
says:

***It is not a question of your desire nor that of the desires of the
people of the Book.*** (Surah al-Nisa, 4:123)

Actually it all depends on what you do.

(ii) The second quality of the norms of history is their divine aspect.
As we have already pointed out what we believe in this respect is quite
different from what Christianity holds regarding the question of
divinity. We never cross the limits of the doctrine that everything has
a cause, and maintain that all things occur through their normal
channels.

The only thing is that besides believing in cause and effect
relationship and scientific channels, we also believe that all things
depend on their first cause. This belief is necessary so that man may
not break away from his origin and may not fall a victim to arrogance
and living in vacuum.

(iii) The third point or the third quality of the norms of history,
which we would like to emphasize is the question of man's freedom. The
norms of history, firm as they are, do not in any way curtail human
freedom. In this connection we have already quoted some verses and later
also we are going to cite some more. The most important verse on which
this question is based is the following verse:

***Surely Allah does not change the condition of a people until they
themselves change what is in their hearts.(Sura ar-Ra’d, 13:11)***

It is itself a norm of history that the development which a nation makes
should come from within it and not imposed on it from outside. These are
the points to which we have already referred. The next point we would
like to explain is that of the field in which the norms of history
operate.

This is a very important question. In this world many incidents take
place, which are produced by the cause and effect material relationship,
but the norms of history do not apply to them at all. Man is governed by
physical, physiological and biological relations. Someone becomes ill.
Someone dies. Someone is involved in an accident.

Such incidents may sometimes even change the course of the history of a
nation, but still they have nothing to do with the norms of history. In
history some very minor incidents have been of great importance.

In connection with the Marwanid Caliphs it is said that a dynasty
perished because of urination. It was a mere chance that Marwan II felt
the need of passing water. While doing so he was captured by the enemy
and killed. With him his dynasty fell. Such incidents are not governed
by any law of history. In other words such minor incidents by themselves
do not change the destiny of nations.

Ayatullah Sadr has cited another instance. He says: Had Uthman not been
murdered, would the course of history have been as it happened to be,
when people with great zeal and farvour rushed to Imam Ali to pledge
their allegiance to him, or would history have turned a different leaf?
Similarly it may be asked about the Holy Prophet himself.

If in the 10th year of the Prophethood the two sad events of the death
of the Holy Prophet's wife Lady Khadijah and the death of his uncle, Abu
Talib had not occurred, would history have moved as it did and would the
Holy Prophet still have migrated? These events may be regarded as the
outcome of biological, physiological and temperamental factors
concerning Lady Khadijah and Abu Talib, and as such they cannot have any
connection with the norms of history. Hence let us find out the actual
sphere of these norms.

We know that besides man the cause and effect relationship applies to
scientific field also. For example water boils at a particular degree of
heat (100° Centigrade) except on the surface of the sea. Similarly at a
particular degree of heat, gas turns into liquid. These properties are
invariable and are not subject to any change. But we cannot regard them
as the norms of human history, because man's will is not involved in
them in any way.

Similarly for an act to be within the scope of the norms of history it
is not enough to have a causative agent. The agent must have some
purpose also. In other words he must have an object in view. As such
only that act falls within the range of the norms of history which not
only has a causative agent but also has an object. This object may have
only mental existence.

It may be mentioned that when we think of a cause we look backward from
its effect, but when we think of an object we look forward from the
effect. As far as the object is concerned the agent has no control over
it. He cannot be sure of achieving it. He can have only a desire and an
inner craving for it.

For the applicability of the norms of history the existence of this
desire, which is merely a mental process, is essential. In short, norms
of history apply to those human acts which have an object. Those things
for which no object is kept in mind and occur simply as the result of
some cause and effect relationship are outside their scope.

Again if we go deeper, we will find that even all those acts which man
performs with an object in view, do not fall within the scope of the
norms of history. Suppose a man needs a house for his residence. He
makes plan for it, purchases a plot of land and engages some engineer
and architect. Then he begins to build the house. He does all that with
the object of living there. But so long as he requires that house for
his personal use, his action can have no impact on history. When we feel
hungry, we look for food. When we feel thirsty we go after water. To
satisfy our private needs we do something purposive. We make deliberate
moves.

In each case we have an object in our mind. But such acts certainly do
not fall within the range of the norms of history. Anyhow, there are
some other purposive actions of mass which start a social wave. They
have a popular aspect and hence stir a reaction among the masses. All
those social actions which have an object and create a wave in society
can become historical. Such actions include even vast trading activity
and a scientific discovery, which changes society from within. Such are
the things to which the norms of history apply.

Hence, the scope of the norms of history becomes clear. Now we know that
the laws and the norms of history can be expected to apply to those acts
which have three dimensions: (i) the causative dimension, (ii) the
purposive dimension and (iii) the popular dimension.

The popular dimension means that the act in question should have the
support of society as a whole. It is needless to add that for such acts
the whole society will be called to account by Allah and will be given a
collective deed-sheet.

In other words people are accountable for their collective as well as
their individual acts. An individual act may affect the individual
concerned only or it may affect a society as a whole. The collective
acts are the acts of a nation or a community as a whole. The Holy Qur'an
says:

***And We shall have fastened every man's deeds to his neck. On the Day
of Resurrection We shall confront him with a book which he will find
wide open. And it will be said to him: Read your book. Today it is
enough for you that your soul should call you to account.*** (Surah Bani
Isra'il, 17:13 - 14)

The book mentioned in this verse is the individual deed-sheet. An
individual will be called to account for all his deeds whether they
affect him only or others also. The collective deed-sheet is mentioned
in the following verse:

***And you will see each nation crouching, each nation summoned to its
book. And it will be said to them: \`Today you are requited what you
used to do. This Our Book pronounces against you with truth. We have
caused all that you did to be recorded'.*** (Surah al-Jathiyah,
45:28-29)

In this context a collective deed does not mean that all the members of
the community or the nation concerned should take part in its
performance. Moral support or even tacit approval is enough. In Nahjul
Balaghah Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, says: "He who is happy
with what a people do, should be regarded as one of them."

In this connection the example of the tribe of Thamud and the killer of
the Prophet Salih's she-camel may be cited. It was only one man of the
tribe of Thamud who actually killed the she-camel. But as the whole
tribe approved his action, all were subjected to a celestial punishment.

This shows that the will and desire of a nation are enough for the
applicability of the laws of history to it. For individual acts the
individuals concerned will be brought before Allah singly. The Qur'an
says:

***There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes before the
Beneficent as a slave. Surely He knows their numbers with right
numbering. And each one will come to Him alone.*** (Surah Maryam,
19:93-95)

For the deeds done collectively by a nation or a society there will be a
separate appearance before Allah.

***And you will see each nation crouching, each nation summoned to its
book.*** (Surah al-Jathiyah, 45:28)

Now we know the scope of the norms of history. We see that all nations
will be summoned so that their deed-sheets may be checked. That means
that the nations as such are accountable.

Let us now take up the main point. We find that in the Qur'an the norms
of history have been described in three different ways:

I. Some norms of history have been described in the form of conditional
clauses. Their conditional nature must be noted. The result of this form
of expression is that the relevant verses emphasize on man's freedom.

For example, someone says to you: "If you come to the meeting at the
appointed time, you will be able to take part in it." It follows that if
you do not come, you will not be able to take part in the meeting. That
shows an option. It is up to you whether you come and take part in the
meeting or do not come and do not take part in it. This position is
quite unlike that of water which must boil at a certain degree of heat.

Of course we can say: "If you provide the necessary heat to it, water
will boil." Here you are at liberty to provide or not to provide the
necessary heat, for in this case the statement is conditional. Man being
the master of his destiny, it is up to him to do or not to do a thing.

An example of conditional verses is that verse which we have already
mentioned and are now quoting it again. This is a verse worth
remembering:

***Surely Allah does not change the condition of a people until they
change that which is in their hearts.*** ***.(Sura ar-Ra’d, 13:11)***

In other words if a nation wants to change its social conditions it
should begin to carry out the change from within itself. This verse has
the form of a conditional statement. Here there is another verse:

***If they continue to tread the right path, We will surely give them
water to drink in abundance.*** ***.(Sura al-Jinn, 72:02)***

Here the right path means the path of justice and equity. Allah says
that if there is an equitable distribution of the essential commodities
and there is no extravagance, amassing of wealth, hoarding, wastage and
negligence, He will provide them with abundant produce.

On principle we can derive from the Qur'an a general rule. Abundant
produce depends on fair distribution. This is a norm of history. We
cannot find a single instance of the failure of this rule. All cases of
shortages and scarcity are due to man's own extravagance or lethargy.
Man can use his freedom to enhance production provided he observes fair
distribution. He can create famine also if he indulges in injustice and
encroachment on the rights of others.

Take another following conditional Qur'anic verse:

***When We intend to destroy a town, We first warn those of its people
who have an easy life. If they persist in their wickedness there, they
become liable to punishment. So We totally annihilate them.*** (Surah
Bani Isra'il, 17:16)

In other words it is a divine practice that if any nation or the people
of any country disobey the commandments of Allah, they are destroyed.
The cause of their destruction is not Allah's sovereign power alone.
They are destroyed because of their own doings. Allah has granted
freedom to man. Man has a choice. He can obey Allah or disobey Him. If
he prefers wickedness, his destruction becomes inevitable.

Hence, it is clear to what extent man's own will determines his destiny.
The beauty and elegance of this verse lies in its beginning with the
word 'iza' (when), its division into a. principal and a subordinate
clause and its implying that man's destiny is in his own hand.

This was the first of the various forms in which the norms of history
have been mentioned in the Qur'an.

II. The second form is that of a definite statement. These statements
are as firm as our statement can be when, for example, we say that a
solar eclipse or a lunar eclipse will take place on such and such date
at such and such time. The only difference is that an eclipse is not a
human act.

Anyhow, we find the specimens of this form in the Qur'an in connection
with the norms of history. These definite statements arouse a suspicion
that the norms of history conveyed by them are imposed on man, which
amounts to predetermination and compulsion of history. Then how can we
reconcile man's freedom with the compulsion of history?

Some have denied man's freedom. They hold that the laws of history are
fixed and inexorable. Some others with a view to safeguard man's freedom
deny the very existence of any norms of history. Some others maintain
that the norms of history do exist, but they are subject to man's will.
All these people have failed to resolve this problem satisfactorily.

But we are in no need of any such explanations, for we have shown that
conditional clauses adequately guarantee man's freedom. It is man who in
all cases determines the destiny of society and the norms of history.

We will give examples of this kind of norms when we discuss the elements
which form society.

III. The third form of the norms of history is a window through which we
can see the most important norms and understand a significant feature of
history. This form manifests itself in the shape of human tendencies,
desires and emotions which are not peculiar to any particular society
and have no local colour. They determine how man thinks and behaves in
society.

But these tendencies are not as rigid as the rule that water must boil
at a particular temperature. There are so many tendencies and cravings
which can at least temporarily be checked, curbed and controlled, or can
be diverted to a different direction.

Anyhow natural tendencies and cravings cannot be curbed or diverted for
a long time, for in that case history itself punishes the defaulters,
and the punishment of history is a reality that is not escapable. Sexual
desire may be cited as an example of a natural craving that can to a
certain extent be curbed. Sexual desire has a definite and direct link
with the instinct of procreation.

As such is it possible to curb that instinct and satisfy the sexual
desire in some other way? No doubt through various forms of sexual
perversion it is possible to satisfy it. There are people who satisfy
themselves through homosexuality, masturbation or in some other
unnatural ways.

It may be found interesting to know that in cultured America the
Association of the Homosexuals has launched a campaign. It stages public
demonstrations and has succeeded in winning the support even of some
members of the congress.

During my travels in America one day I saw a big demonstration on the
roads there. The same day the American Television telecast the news of
similar demonstrations in other states and towns. The demonstrators were
crying: "We are human beings, and want to satisfy our needs this way."

In fact this way of satisfaction is against the divine norms of history,
the violation of which is a culpable offence. The only thing is that in
such cases history takes a lenient view to give a chance to the
defaulters to realize their mistake and change their ways. If they do
not do that and persist in their error, they should expect nothing but a
punishment like one meted out to the people of Prophet Lut (Lot). That
is a reality.

In the field of human affairs other examples also may be cited. For
example, by their nature man and woman have separate fields of activity.
The woman is naturally inclined to tender and emotional jobs. She likes
to show her skill in tenderness and the elegance of human nature. We may
entrust these feminine jobs to man, who is a symbol of toughness and
strength, and entrust man's jobs to woman.

This is quite practical and apparently there is no difficulty. But such
an arrangement is not lasting. For a week it can be arranged that all
men stay at home, feed the children with bottle, wash and clean them and
perform other domestic chores, and in exchange women do the hard jobs.

This arrangement is possible. But it would look like giving the job of
the man of one trade to the man of another trade in an
under-construction building. For example we give the job of a carpenter
to a brazier, the job of a mason to a cabinetmaker, and the job of a
cabinetmaker to a blacksmith, or ask a veterinarian to act as a civil
engineer.

All these people can work and erect a building, but such a building will
not last long. The rain and the wind will soon pull it down. Similarly
if a society goes against the norms of history, it will disintegrate
very quickly.

At the most the word \`quick' has a special reckoning in the terminology
of the norms of history. Here the quickness is relative. It is this case
to which the following verse applies:

***A day with Allah is as a thousand years of what you reckon.*** (Surah
al-Hajj, 22:47)

Quickness being relative, for the purpose of changes in history, one day
according to the Qur'an is equal to 1000 years. Hence quickness does not
mean what we understand by it ordinarily. That the above verse is
related to the norms of history is shown by the words with which it
begins. The beginning words are:

***"They ask you to hasten the punishment."*** . (Surah al-Hajj, 22:47)

*The* pagans of Makkah were saying: *"If it is true that those who fight
against the Prophets are destined to be defeated and punished soon,
where is that defeat and when will we be punished? We are ready to
receive the punishment."*

The Qur'an says that those who violate the norms of history are bound to
be punished but in due course. The quickness of the punishment is
relative. Anyhow, they should rest assured that the punishment will come
soon.

We have another verse:

***The angels and the spirit will ascend to Him in a Day whereof the
span is fifty thousand years.*** (Surah al-Ma'arij, 70:3)

At the end of this verse the Qur'an says:

***That day the sky will become like molten copper.***

These words show that this verse relates to the Day of Resurrection,
because only on that day the sky will be like molten copper. No such
thing will ever take place in this world. Hence it is evident that the
previous verse relates to this world and mentions the norms of history.

The above point having been made clear, we may now say that religion is
also one of the norms of history.

This point may be elaborated in the light of the Surah al-Baqarah, 2:30,
which stipulates the vicegerency of man on the earth.

In every society there exist three elements: (i) Human element, that is
men;

(ii) Natural element termed by the Qur'an the earth;

(iii) The bond which exists between man and the natural element.

The first two elements are constant and invariable. There can be no
place where man may exist but he should have no contact with his
environment that is other men and nature. Nor can we imagine nature
anywhere in human history not linked with man. Hence man and nature are
two constant elements in all societies. The important point to be
studied is the nature of the link between these two.

If we analyse this link from the viewpoint of vicegerency as mentioned
in the Qur'an, we find that this proposition has four sides as under:

(i) The authority appointing the vicegerent, that is Allah, who
appointed man His vicegerent on the earth.

(ii) The vicegerent, that is man.

(iii) The things to administer which the vicegerent has been appointed.
They are two things: man and nature. Thus there are four sides of this
case.

When we consider the question of vicegerency, we find that man has been
made responsible for other men and nature. On the whole he holds
responsibility in respect of everything in this world. His
responsibility is so vast that Imam Ali has said: "You are responsible
for all places and animals.""

The fourth element, Allah has not been added to the list merely to
enhance the number. It is He who has allotted this responsibility to
man. Anybody who disregards this link, is liable to become arrogant and
to consider himself the absolute master of everything on which he can
lay his hand. The Qur'an itself says:

***Surely man is rebellious when he thinks that he is independent.***
(Surah al-Alaq, 96:6-7)

If man does not believe in Allah his relation to the world becomes based
on exploitation and despotism. Such a man enslaves his fellow-beings and
exploits them for his own gain. He imposes his absolute authority on
lands and property.

His self-conceit makes him oblivious of himself. So long as his relation
to his environment is merely three-sided, that is confined to other men
and nature, he is selfish, but the whole situation changes as soon as he
realizes that he holds a trust and works on behalf of the Lord of this
world.

You can clearly see the difference between a three-sided and a
four-sided relationship, if you see the films of American inhuman
treatment of the red Indians and the blacks and the films of the
American crimes in other countries like Vietnam etc. All this commotion,
sense of irresponsibility, and the feelings of conceit, lust and greed
are due to man's being three-dimentional.

We have another verse which covers the same point from another angle:

***We offered the trust to the heavens, the earth and the hills, but
they shrank from bearing it and were afraid of it. And man assumed it.
Surely he is unjust and a fool.*** (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:72)

It must be understood that here the assumption of a trust does not mean
the assumption of any duty because at no time man was in a position to
do that or had a choice of accepting or not accepting such a
responsibility. Then what is the nature of this trust which Allah places
on us? We are rational beings, still we did not know whether we should
or should not accept this trust. Then what to say of those which had not
even the capacity of understanding?

Are the hills able to understand anything? Do the heavens and the earth
understand? It was not an offer of any duty that could be accepted by
one and refused by another. Here the acceptance of a responsibility is a
subtle and beautiful way of saying that religion is ingrained in man's
nature, who is instinctively inclined to seek it.

Man by nature accepts the existence of Allah. He is automatically drawn
towards Him. The heavens, the earth and the hills have no such natural
tendency. They do not have the capacity of submitting to Allah's
commands and obeying them.

In another verse in which the true state of man's nature has been
mentioned, the Qur'an refers to this natural tendency of man from the
angle that it has been granted to him by Allah.

***Set your face towards religion as an upright man and follow the true
state of nature in which Allah has created man.*** (Surah al-Rum, 30:30)

In the above quoted verse of the Surah al-Ahzab the Qur'an refers to
this very quality of man from the angle that man has accepted it. This
acceptance had been done by man's nature. Religion is a divine trust and
it is in the making of man. But it is that type of trend of his which
can temporarily be disregarded.

Religion is not like fire which must always burn, its burning and
heating qualities being such that they can never be separated from it.
Religion is also not like water which always boils at a particular
degree of heat. It is one of those norms which can be disregarded at
will and can even be temporarily suppressed and curbed.

In this respect it can be compared to sexual drive. If a man does not go
the natural way, he can adopt some other course to satisfy himself.
Similarly a woman instead of doing what nature has prescribed for her,
may take up some masculine jobs. But it must be remembered that going
against nature always has dire consequence.

The same is true of religion, and evil are the results of opposing it.
It is only his bad luck if any man is hostile to religion in
contravention of his own natural tendencies. Surely man is unjust and a
fool.

He is unjust to himself if he tramples upon religion, and it does not
give a free hand to his true nature and does not submit to the
injunctions of Allah. In such a case the subsequent part of the Qur'anic
verse which says:

***"But most men know not,"***

 will apply to him.

Many people do not know that the observance of religion has vital social
importance for them. They contravene religion and then say: "If it is
true that religion is a norm of history, how is it that people can
safely afford to contravene it?" We say that they cannot afford to
contravene it. The defaulters have only a short respite and they will
soon see the consequences. Of course \`soon' in this context means
historical 'soon'.

In fact, man is surely unjust and a fool. He has consented to bear the
\`trust' and made it a part of his nature, but in actual practice he
does wrong to himself and out of ignorance goes against his own nature.
We will later discuss how religion makes its way to society and how the
outside influences affect man's environment. For the present we put off
the discussion of man and nature.

Now we revert to our main subject. As we have pointed out earlier the
Qur'an indicates that religion is one of the most important norms of
history. The discovery that religion is a norm and not merely a divine
idea is very significant and requires that this question should be
studied from scientific point of view, for many vital questions are
linked with this question. It is to be noted that the years, days and
hours of the norms of history are relative and longer than those
according to which we reckon the ordinary events.

We earlier inferred this point from the Qur'an. Nevertheless we still
have to study it as a scientific law. The discovery that religion plays
a significant role as a norm of history, makes it necessary that we cast
a glance on the question of man's vicegerency of Allah and on the
elements which constitute this vicegerency.

In this connection all that is derived from the Qur'an is that Allah has
appointed man His vicegerent in respect of men and nature.

In this relationship there are four sides or four elements, each one of
which should be considered separately.

The first side is man, the second is Allah, the third is man's relation
with nature and the fourth is man's relation with his fellow beings. If
we study the two constant elements - man and nature and place man in the
perspective of history, we find that the man who makes history is
different from the man who is a causative dimension of his past.

There are many factors, responsible for man's coming to this world and
his being placed under the existing conditions, but he must have some
other factors in his mind to induce him to go after an objective and
ultimately become a future-maker. What type of man is the future-making
man? We assert that man makes history with his own hands. Does history
exist in a material form? Is it a thing which man can hold in his hands?
Nothing of the sort.

All that man can have is a mental conception of future followed by a
mental determination and a will not executed so far. That is why as far
as the movement of history is concerned, we adjudge all the concrete
questions and the questions of the past, on the basis of the general law
of causation.

But we have no basis for all that is concerned with the future or with
our aims and objects, except a mental conception and subsequently a
mental determination or a state of preparedness to make a future move.
It is this state which is called 'will'. The whole structure of society
is built on two pillars:

(i) man's mental conception and

(ii) his will and determination to give a concrete shape to his ideas.

It is evident that whatever takes place in society, is a superstructure
based on man's thinking and his intentions. That is why the Qur'an
believes that there exists a close relationship between this
infrastructure and the superstructure of society built on this
infrastructure. When we closely study the following verse, we find that
in it there is a direct reference to these sections of the structure of
society:

*Surely Allah does not change the condition of a people, until they
change that which is in their hearts.*

It means that the superstructure of society can be changed only if its
infrastructure is changed. To bring about a change in society, it is
necessary to change its basic thinking and the will. If its way of
thinking is changed, society will automatically be changed. In this
connection there is one more essential condition.

Every action must be a reflection of its social thinking. When an idea
creates a wave in society and that wave becomes strong enough to change
its social thinking, the will of society is also changed.

As a result, a sequence of outer developments appears in society. But
all the developments must be the result of a basic and infrastructural
change. Otherwise they are fake and dangerous for society. That is why
Islam emphasizes that ***Jihad*** (the holy war) conducted by the
Muslims is only a minor ***jihad.***

The major and genuine ***jihad*** is that which is waged inside man
himself. If the inner thinking and the outer action are not in harmony
with each other, the correct name of this state is hypocrisy. A
hypocrite is known by the disagreement of his thinking and doing.
Describing the hypocrites the Qur'an says:

***There is such a man whose views on this worldly life please you. He
even calls on Allah to vouch for that which is in his heart. Yet he is
the deadliest of your opponents.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:205)

What a hypocrite says is apparently very pleasing, but he is still a
hypocrite because what he harbours in his heart is not in consonance
with what he says:

No ***sooner he leaves you than he tries to make mischief in the land,
destroying crops and cattle.*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:205)

If a man's actions do not agree with his thoughts and his intentions, he
is a hypocrite and a mischief-maker. He is likely to cause devastation
and subversion. It is our duty to pave the way for the forward march of
history. The wheels of history move in the right direction when their
movement is inspired by the ideals of the right-thinking men.

Actually it is big ideals which move everyone along a particular line,
feed the small movements and boost the wavering wills. We find our
ideals in the light of our outlook on the most important questions of
our life. These ideals become a motivating force and make the things
moving. Only then we are able to make some contribution to the
development of society.

An ideal is a thing which man always keeps in his view, by which he is
guided and to which he is absolutely devoted in his life. He continues
to advance along the line determined by his ideal. It may be called his
aspiration and ideology also. It is man's motivating force. Sometimes it
so happens that a licentious man makes his lewdness his ideal. The
religion also can be the ideal of some people. That is why the Qur'an
says:

***Have you seen him who has chosen for his god his own lust?*** (Surah
al-Furqan, 25:43)

There are people who are inspired and motivated by their base desires.
Their only ideal is their lust.

The main ideals of men can be studied under three different headings.
The first category of the ideals is that which is connected with the
existing conditions. Many people get so absorbed in the questions of
daily life that they remain content with the existing conditions and are
motivated by them only throughout their life.

If we look for the reasons why they are content with the status quo and
do not find any attraction in working for the future, we will find that
there are two reasons of that: The first is their lethargy.

Being easy-going they do not realize the need of moving towards future.
They are interested only in passing their life somehow or other and do
not want to take any trouble or to exert any pressure on their mind.

To this category belong those who adhere to what their forefathers did.
In the Qur'an so many verses refer to these people. For example take
this verse.

***They say: Enough for us is that wherein we found our fathers.***
(Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:104)

These were the people who accused the Prophets of misguiding them and
diverting them from their forefathers' way of life:

***We found our fathers following a religion and we are following their
footprints.*** (Surah al-Zukhruf, 43:24)

They forget that following the footprints of forefathers is not a goal
nor an ideal which could ensure their future. The Qur'an has another
expression for this attitude. It describes it as sticking to the earth,
that is having the materialistic tendency of satisfying one's base
desires, adhering to the existing conditions and passing a lazy life.

This tendency has eroded so many people from within and prevented them
from moving forward. Because of their lethargy they have failed to join
the caravan of advancement. These people, to ensure the satisfaction of
their base desires, stick to the ways of their forefathers. This is the
internal reason.

Besides that, there is an external reason also, which compels some
people to regard the existing conditions, as their ideal, if the status
quo could be described so. This reason is the force of authority
exercised by the Pharaohs (tyrants) of the time. Pharaohs were
particular persons, but we can use this word in its derived general
sense.

All over history the pharaohs have followed the same pattern. They have
always demanded that complete obedience and total submission to them
only should be the ideal of everybody under their control. The tyrants
want the existing situation to be accepted by the people as their ideal.
The Qur'an says that Pharaoh (Fir'awn) asked Prophet Musa how he could
think of any god other than him when he had all that could be expected
of a god.

***Fir\`awn said: \`O Chiefs, I do not know that you have a god other
than me'.*** (Surah al-Qasas, 28:38)

The pharaohs imposed their views on others:

***I do but show you what I think and I do but guide you to a wise
policy.*** (Surah al Mo'min, 40:29)

The tyrants neither want the people to think independently, nor do they
allow them to have their own way. People can get rid of the tyrants if
they think for themselves and do not blindly follow those who like
Fir'awn claim that whatever they say is right.

Islam exhorts people to shatter the limitations imposed on them and find
their own way. A part of this verse refers to the point under
discussion:

***Give good tidings to My bondmen, who hear advice and follow the best
thereof.*** (Surah az-Zumar, 39:17-18)

The verse 17 of Surah az-Zumar begins with these words:

***For those who refrain from adoring the tyrants and turn to Allah in
repentance, for them there are good tidings.***

Obviously unqualified obedience is a sort of adoration. The Qur'an says
that there are good tidings for those who keep away from the tyrants,
fight against them and turn to Allah. Then Qur'an continues to say that
these are the people who do not follow the orders of anybody blindly,
weigh carefully what they are told and choose their ideal themselves.
Thus the first category of the ideals is that which makes people content
with the existing state of affairs.

There are two factors which prevent them from thinking of any other
ideal. One is internal and the other is external. Both these factors are
dangerous for humanity. It is significant that gradually these ideals
are given a religious turn and clothed with a sort of sanctity. The
devotion shown to ancestors and forefathers becomes comparable to divine
worship.

According to the Qur'an these things have no reality. They do not bring
about any factors of homogeneity in society. At the most they create
some future hopes and expectations, but when these hopes do not
materialize, people become still more absorbed in the existing
conditions and make them their ideal. Then all hopes of the homogeneity
of society are lost.

Everybody's attention is concentrated on meeting his own personal and
family needs and securing bread, butter, shelter etc. As a result,
although the members of society may have a semblance of unity, their
actual condition is represented by the verse which says:

***Their adversity among themselves is very great. You think them as a
whole, whereas their hearts are diverse.*** (Surah al-Hashr, 59:14)

People may belong to one formation, yet they have no homogeneity. In
their ideals nothing being common to the whole community, each
individual goes after his own personal interest. When a nation falls to
such a low ebb, the past experience shows, that there are three ways how
the things may develop. In fact, there are some people who have some
half-way ideals, but after having achieved them they forget about their
future and become contented with the existing state of affairs.

The three ways of development hinted above are predictable. The
situation becomes most serious when a nation having no ideal is
subjected to a military attack from outside. In this situation everybody
thinks of saving his own life and property only. Such a nation cannot
forge unity to be able to withstand the foreign forces and hence its
resistance is broken soon.

In our history we have experienced the results of being interested in
transitory and momentary questions. The Mongol invasion of Iran is an
event which still requires some investigation. At the time of this
invasion people's interest in material questions and day to day life had
diverted the attention of society from its real ideal. Chaos and
disunity were the order of the day.

As society had no conception of an earnest and historical action, it was
completely shattered by the Mongol invasion. In the circumstances
prevalent at that time it was but natural that a foreign power should
come and destroy the crumbling and moth-eaten nation.

The second development which may take place when a nation does not have
an ideal of its own, is that it may pick up some imported ideal.
Nowadays many nations are facing this situation.

We saw a glaring example of this situation in our country when the
Persian Kings, Raza and Muhammad Raza tried to impose on us the Western
culture as if we were a nation which had nothing of our own and had to
beg for Western ideas. Ataturk did the same in Turkey. Other instances
can be seen in various other countries.

The third possible development is that a nation should find out its real
ideal and should start a movement to reconstruct itself. This was the
case with us when we launched our revolutionary movement in the years
preceding 1963. This movement gained strength day by day till we
succeeded in bringing about a revolution; and this is the third category
of the ideals. We will study it further at its appropriate place.

If we make a thorough study of the second category of the ideals we may
say that this category does not provide any absolute ideal. Anyhow, some
of the ideals of this category may be regarded as a stage which must be
passed.

We must not stop at the stage of these ideals. They may be a thing which
may be desirable for a nation, but not enough in itself, neither
horizontally nor vertically. In other words it must develop further with
the passage of time. For example, let us take freedom. It is a good
ideal. It is required. But the question is whether it is a content or
only a form which we must pass to reach the content.

There was a time when Europe was under the pressure of the Church, which
had monopolized knowledge and had thereby placed restrictions on the
common man. People were groaning under the yoke of the feudalists.
Trade, industry and other affairs of life were controlled by a cruel and
oppressive aristocracy.

At that time the most important question for the people of Europe was
that of freedom. They thought if they got freedom, they would obtain all
that they desired. They made freedom their ideal. But freedom is only
the first step towards making a historical move. It is not a thing with
which one should become content. Other steps must follow the first step.

One must see what is that for which freedom is required. We want freedom
to go to bazaar to be able to purchase something. If we have a freedom
to move, we must know what for we want to move. If we get free, but do
not know what to do with our freedom, we will be like a boat aimlessly
released in the middle of a sea.

Freedom is very important for marching towards the main ideal, but it is
extremely dangerous to regard it as the goal of life. Especially with
the present technical and industrial progress it may culminate in
playing with atomic weapons and drawing the world to bloodshed and ruin.
Means of devastation in the hands of a free but irresponsible man are
just like matches, cotton, gunpowder and other incendiary material in
the hands of the children playing with them.

From vertical point of view, that is from long term point of view a
half-way ideal is relatively good, but it is of no use if further
progress is not made towards the absolute ideal. A halfway ideal is fit
to be a stage and a means only. Another example of this sort of an ideal
is the unit formed by family members.

Several families make a tribe; several tribes make a clan; a number of
clans make a community and then several communities make a nation.
Instead of extending our outlook to the world level, we often make our
family our ideal and make every sacrifice to safeguard its interests.
This is another example of giving undue importance to a relative ideal.
The Qur'an says:

***As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are as a mirage in a desert.
The thirsty one supposes it to be water till he comes to it and finds it
nothing, and instead finds with him Allah, who pays him his due.***
(Surah al-Nur, 24:39)

The deeds of those who have no proper goal and have not a divine outlook
are like a mirage. They run after what has no real existence. They find
Allah before them because Allah is everywhere. Wherever one goes Allah
is there.

When the Qur'an says He finds Allah before him, it means that Allah is
at the beginning, in the middle and at the end of everything. When those
who have not a divine outlook reach the end of their journey towards
their ideal, they find no trace of it.

On the other hand, they find Allah everywhere. All their ideals being
half-way ideals, they must move forward from the stage of these ideals.
Otherwise they will again and again come across the same boring ideals
which cause society to degenerate and decompose it from within.

In short the declining societies find themselves facing one of the four
situations. In one of the situations they may have some relative ideal.
The Qur'an admits that a society having a relative ideal may obtain some
positive results as far as its material life is concerned. The Qur'an
says:

***Whoever desires this worldly gain, We hasten for him in this world
that We will and for whom We please.*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:18)

It is a different thing that in the next world he may have to face
difficulties. As for those who seek next worldly gain, the Qur'an says:

***And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it with the effort
necessary, being a believer; for such their effort finds favour with
their Lord.*** (Surah an-Nisa, 4:19)

That means that those who have an eye to the more distant horizon, their
wish is also fulfilled. The next verse makes it clear that both these
groups are helped in achieving their respective objects.

***Each do we supply, both these and those, from the bounty of your
Lord. And the bounty of your Lord can never be blocked.*** (Surah Bani
Isra'il, 17:19-20)

Those who have only a relative ideal, work to achieve it. That is the
first stage. After they have achieved their objective, the second stage
comes, which is a stage of pause. But as man cannot remain without an
ideal for long at the third stage they choose some prominent
personalities from among them as their ideal. That is why the Qur'an
says:

***They say: Our Lord, we obeyed our chiefs and elders, and they misled
us from the way.*** (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:67)

They follow their chiefs, because they had reached the stage of pause.
It is at this stage that man begins to adore other human beings, for he
cannot sit idle and must have something or someone as his ideal.

As a result, these chiefs and elders form an aristocratic class and
begin to lead a luxurious life. To maintain their position thus
acquired, these luxurious people oppose every reform. The Qur'an says:

***We never sent a warner before you (Holy Prophet) to any township, but
its luxurious ones said . . .. , (Surah*** al-Zukhruf, 43:23)

Whenever a Prophet comes, he is first of all opposed by this very
wealthy class, the members of which are held in respect and awe by
those, who having been cut off from their ideal, cannot think of
anything except maintaining the existing position.

Once having gained power, the luxurious and oppressive class never
agrees to loosen its grip on society. Then the fourth stage comes when
this class rides so roughshod over society that it deprives the common
people of all the fruits of their civilization and seizes and destroys
their resources.

We find many such instances in the past and the contemporary history.
Hitler and his German Nazis destroyed the fruits of civilization amassed
by so many countries over long periods through all kinds of trickery.
When wealthy classes come into existence, side by side with them there
appear those who ultimately annihilate them. The Qur'an says:

***And similarly We have allowed in every town its ringleaders to
intrigue therein, but they intrigue against themselves only.*** (Surah
al-An'am, 6:123)

They intrigue to create disorder which culminates in their own
destruction and the destruction of their civilization. Though none of
the ideals so far mentioned by us was a true ideal, yet it is a fact
that society regards each of them as a religion. Stalinism is a
religion. Nazism is a religion. Despotism and even licentiousness are
religions.

As we have already said, one of the ideals is the existing state of
affairs. It is accepted as such either because of laziness or as the
result of pressure by some oppressive force. Another ideal is some
half-way movement. This ideal also in the long run leads to the same
results as the first one.

In the wake of it society passes through various vicissitudes and is
ultimately annihilated. As such we must find out some other ideal which
may be consistent with man's forward-looking nature. As he can satisfy
this yearning of his by directing his attention to Allah, we propose
Allah as the third ideal.

There are two advantages of our proposal. The first advantage is
quantitative, for by following our suggestion man can incessantly move
forward towards his infinite goal. His movement is not stopped at any
stage, nor does he reach an impasse. There is no limit to his
achievement. Society can never come to a stand-still. Way is always open
for society to move forward.

From this point of view this advantage is quantitative. We have seen
that in the case of all other ideals man's progress comes to an end soon
and as a result, society begins to decay. Therefore a continuous and
constructive movement of society towards Allah is the only natural
alternative.

The other advantage of our proposal is qualitative. By following our
suggestion man can find a way to resolve the inner contradiction
existing in him. First let us see what this contradiction is. We can
study this question in the light of independent views as well as from
the viewpoint of the Qur'an.

It is gathered from the Qur'an that man has two kinds of tendencies. He
has some material tendencies which include both his physical and mental
needs and drives. He is naturally inclined towards ensuring his
self-interests. He strongly desires to be rich and feels compelled to
satisfy his sexual and other biological needs. He wants to live in
comfort and luxury.

At the same time man has a different kind of urge also. Having been made
of clay, he has material tendencies, but has a flicker of divine spirit
also in him. Allah says:

***"I breathed in him of My spirit".(Sura al-Hijr, 15:29)***

 As a result man has two conflicting kinds of tendencies. There is a
conflict between truth and falsehood, between justice and injustice,
between good and evil and between right and wrong. This is an inner
problem of man. Social studies do not provide any solution of this
problem. They only confirm its existence. Man is always in a fix which
way he should go. He appears to have no means to resolve this
contradiction.

Hence there must be an outside force which may pull him to one of the
two conflicting sides. By nature we know the necessity of being pulled
to that side which represents justice and virtue. Allah being the source
of the pull, evidently we must have Him as an ideal. If societies
organize themselves in such a way that they proceed toward Him, two
great reforms will simultaneously take place.

First, society will be reformed and secondly, man himself will change
for the better. Other ideals cannot do this, because they cannot instil
in man a sense of responsibility. Man regards other ideals either as his
equal or an existence below himself. Allah is far above man. He is the
Creator and Sustainer of the whole world. There is nothing like Him. He
is not of the same category as man. Man cannot oppose Him, nor can he be
His rival. Allah is Omniscient, All-hearing and All seeing. He is Just,
He keeps an account of everything and recompenses for evil and for good.
In Allah man can find all those forces which can induce an individual or
a society to do a thing.

As a result Allah's religion is the most important factor which can
persuade a society to reform itself. In this connection it is necessary
to explain how it is possible that Allah has a role in connection with
human societies which on the one hand are concerned with such affairs as
technical, industrial, agricultural and those connected with animal
breeding, and on the other with human relations.

Before giving our explanation in this respect, let us see what the
proponents of dialectical and historical materialism, who bore us with
their lectures on philosophy of history, have to say on this subject.
These people who wish to reduce man to animal, insist that man should
have no connection with Allah. They say that religion is the opium of
the nations. This statement is quite appropriate in respect of the
religions we mentioned above - the religions which make a god of the
existing state of affairs and deify their leaders, the religions which
regard the material condition of their family or half-way independence
as their ideal.

No doubt these things have a narcotic effect and are the opium of the
nations. We want man to get rid of these narcotics, but we do not want
to make him the victim of a more dangerous opium. If you think of
liberating man totally from religion, to what else do you want to hand
him over for his future?

While entertaining the reality of this divine ideal, we have to accept
the five fundamental principles of Islam on which the ideality of Allah
is based. These principles are: Monotheism, and Prophethood, which forms
a link between Allah and humanity, and the Ummah, which is the external
crystallization of Prophethood, the Hereafter, which serves as an
incentive to human efforts and lastly Divine Justice.

Should we try to elaborate these principles, we will have to go into the
relation of religion to society and history and will have to discuss
historical norms. Hence we skip over the ideological and intellectual
aspects of the question and take up the theme of society.

If society has a link with Allah, the two-fold relationship which exists
in every society works better. There are two constant elements in every
society, man and nature. Man's relation with these two is important,
that is man's relation with his fellow human beings and his relation
with nature. We want to study this relationship from the point of view
of religion and would like to see what should be done if we want to
improve the relation between man and man.

Here Marx comes with his analysis of the social questions. He says that
society is always divided into a privileged class and an
under-privileged class. In order to get rid of its deprivations that
under-privileged class has always been engaged in a constant class war
over all periods of history. The struggle between these two classes will
continue till all class disparities vanish and an ideal classless
society comes into existence. This should be regarded as an inexorable
process and a historical inevitability.

He says that all revolutionary activities that he wants to be conducted
are meant only to push forward this historical movement, though the
process will inevitably continue even otherwise. If we involve ourselves
with the discussion of this controversial theory, we are afraid that our
own programme and purpose will be left incomplete.

Hence we overlook the criticism which has been levelled against this
faulty theory. For example it is asked why this theory of revolutionary
process has failed in the case of industrialized countries such as the
U.S.A., Britain, France and Germany?

Why do we see that in certain countries the rich and the poor classes
have come close to each other and instead of fighting against each
other, work together without any mutual conflict at all. In the U.S.A.
the workers and the employers cooperate with each other. In this case
what happened to the principle of contradiction and conflict? Is this
class contradiction true in the case of certain selected peoples only or
is there a contradiction between the material prosperity of some and the
poverty of others?

If the theory of class conflict is really valid, this conflict should be
universal irrespective of the time and place. But we see that the
Marxists themselves admit that the divergent conditions prevailing in
each country make a lot of difference.

Incidentally it may be remarked that there appears to be an ominous
concord between the American workers and the American employers that
America should seize the resources of the countries under its influence
and divide them between its own workers and employers. The whole case
appears to be that of cocks making free with horse's corn.

All have eyes on oil of the Middle East, diamonds of Tanzania, cotton of
Egypt, and tobacco and wine of Algeria. There are other sectors also
where the American workers and employers have an agreement. As we cannot
accept the basis of contradiction pointed out by Marx, we must find out
another basis of it.

Despite all his originality, intelligence and study of history Marx's
thinking is limited. The flight of his thinking could reach only a minor
aspect of the real contradiction. He discovered that human relations
centre round a conflict between the strong and the weak. The strong may
derive his strength from his wealth, his post or any other sphere of
power and influence. Even science is an evil which may provide someone
with strength to trample upon the weak. It is not a question of capital
only.

In fact the root of this phenomenon goes much deeper. Hence we must find
out the real root-cause of the contradiction and conflict prevailing in
human society. The main question is whether man should have a
materialistic tendency or should tend towards the flash of divine light.
As this is a question of man's inner feeling, the contradiction can be
resolved only when all societies and men follow that course which man's
vicegerency of Allah demands.

As we know, Allah has placed every thing of the world at the disposal of
man as a trust. All problems are automatically solved, when man follows
that course. We see that a man who recognizes Allah and follows the
course prescribed by Him is compassionate and kind-hearted. He shows
respect to his fellow human beings and does not regard them as tools for
the satisfaction of his own desires.

As far as class war is concerned, it is to be noted that there are cases
when both the classes of a nation unite together to crush another
nation. Therefore class war does not have a root in society all over
history, nor are the ups and downs in the history of societies always
determined by economic and material questions.

The problem is more deep-rooted. Man has two contradictory elements in
his nature. The question is to which side he should incline. Within him
man has no force to give a definite turn to one of his conflicting
tendencies.

Therefore there must be an outside force to direct him, and that force
can be nothing except his turning and leaning towards Allah. This is the
position as far as the relation between man and man are concerned. In
fact our problem is two-fold: man's relation with other men and man's
relation with nature.

A link with Allah and religion solves both these problems. As for man's
relation with other men, the problem is that man while dealing with
others turns to selfishness and ignores the interests of others. This
not only creates conflict of interests, but is also contrary to man's
natural inclination towards Allah. The solution of this problem lies in
our belief in Allah and religion.

The second problem is how to subdue the ruthless and inflexible nature
and bring it under our control so that we may obtain from it all that we
need in life. This problem can be solved if we work with nature more and
more.

Thus we will get the experience necessary to bring nature under our
control. In fact this is a two-way process. The more we work with
nature, the better we control it and the more we control it, the more
experience we gain and consequently new avenues are opened to us.

But the problem is that when man begins to control nature and becomes
capable to make a better use of it, he enslaves others and his power of
exploitation increases. We had no power of exerting pressure on others
when we depended on hunting for our livelihood and could defend
ourselves only with wooden and stone weapons.

But with the availability of huge industrial outfits and modernized
means of agriculture, man acquires power of exploiting other fellow
beings also. This is affirmed by the Qur'an when it says:

***Surely man is rebellious when he thinks that he is independent.***
(Surah al-\`Alaq, 96:6-7)

When man could cultivate only his own land and could produce only as
much food as was barely enough for himself, he could not think of
seizing the land of others. At that time he scarcely had any means to
exploit others. But today he has acquired enough power of exploitation.

Now what is to be done to ensure that man subdues nature, gets maximum
benefit out of it and at the same time does not exploit his fellow
beings? In our opinion the solution of this problem lies in the relation
between work and experience. The more man exerts himself, the more
experience he gains. The only condition is that he must not sever his
relation with Allah.

He must look at all natural resources as a divine trust, at himself as
the vicegerent of Allah and at other human beings as his brethren. If he
does so, surely prosperity will grow many fold and the blessings of
Allah will shower from the heaven and the earth. There will be no
shortage of anything for human society. There is another way of saying
the same thing. If there is a fair distribution, the production is bound
to go up to the required level.

This is a belief which has its roots in the Qur'an. There are many
verses which lay stress on it. This view is also supported by historical
norms. As for the Qur'an we may quote the following Qur'anic verse for
example:

***If they continue to tread the right path, We shall give them to drink
of water in abundance.*** (Surah al-Jinn, 72:16)

The following verse is clearer in its import:

***If the people of the townships had believed and kept from evil,
surely We should have opened for them blessings from the sky and from
the earth. But they disbelieved, and so we seized them on account of
what they used to earn.*** (Surah al-A'raf, 7:96)

Of course this view can be accepted only by those who have faith in the
Qur'an. But we can observe the applicability of this formula in our
everyday life. If in a society justice, virtue and piety prevail; the
factors which unify it become strong. Its homogeneity which is necessary
to run the colossal wheels of industry and agriculture is galvanized.
Because of its unity and cohesion such a society can overcome all its
difficulties and never faces any disruption.

Societies not having this unifying force are liable to decay and
disintegrate. The authorities which subjugate these societies,
themselves create disunity and discord. One may think that they are
civilized and have unity and solidarity, but as a rule their solidarity
is artificial. They are split at the places where human solidarity is
required.

It is interesting to note that such words as arrogant, tyrant and
oppressor which we have used, we have derived from the story of Fir'awn
in the Qur'an. Some people may think that the Qur'an recounts historical
stories such as the story of Fir'awn and Prophet Musa, merely to narrate
history. Now we can say that this notion is wrong.

The Qur'an wants to point out that the factors of disruption and
annihilation are inherent in despotic societies. We can predict their
fate. On the other hand a divine society is blessed with the quality of
homogeneity.

***Surely this community of yours is one community, and 1 am your Lord,
so worship Me.*** (Surah al-Anbiya, 21:92)

Allah says that He has made the Muslims one single formation. Hence it
is their duty to march forward and open new avenues. The position of the
pharonic society is, on the other hand, quite different. The dissensions
of the members of this society inevitably split them into six classes.
We would name the first one the despised class. This class depends on
the despots and pharaohs and cooperates with them. In respect of them
the Qur'an says:

***When the wrongdoers are brought before their Lord, Those who were
despised (on the earth) say to those who were arrogant: But for you, we
should have been believers.*** (Surah as-Saba, 34:31)

This verse depicts the scene of the Doomsday. On that day some of the
wrongdoers will be blaming some others. The verse makes it clear that
even all those who belonged to the despised and depressed class were not
virtuous. Some of them also were wrongdoers. Allah says when the
wrongdoers will be brought before Him, some of them will be belonging to
the despised class and they will have a verbal contest with the
arrogant.

The second class consists of the pharaohs' favourites and their
advisers. They encourage and guide the pharaohs. So to say they are
often more Romans than the Romans themselves.

The Qur'an says:

***The chiefs of Pharaoh's people said: \`Will you allow Musa and his
people to make mischief in the land?'*** (Sarah al-A'raf, 7:127)

These Pharaoh's favourites were instigating him and saying: We wonder
why do you leave Musa and his people alone. They will be making mischief
and will not accept your godship. These chiefs provoked Fir'awn to say
that he would soon kill the sons of the Israelites and enslave their
womenfolk.

Thus the second class comprises the Pharaohs' favourites and advisers.

The third class consists of those who have no goal or ideal. This class
includes mostly the illiterate, backward and poor people, who are always
dragged from one side to another. According to the Qur'an they will say
on the Doomsday:

***Our Lord, indeed we obeyed our chiefs and elders and it is they who
misled us from the way.*** (Sarah al-Ahzab, 33:67)

It may be pointed out that these illiterate and barefooted people have a
remarkable role in society. It is our duty to dissuade them from
following their wicked chiefs and to guide them to the virtuous people.
Imam Ali has mentioned this group.

He classifies the people into three categories: the divines, those who
receive education for their salvation and the stupid having no goal. The
last ones are ready to follow anything false which may come across them.

There is a reference in the Qur'an to those who follow the divines. It
mentions the virtuous companions of the Holy Prophet and then adds: and
those who followed them in earnestness. (In Islamic jurisprudence the
followers of the divines are called *muqallids -* followers of a
*mujtahid).*

It is our duty to persuade the great masses of the people to adhere to
their juristic authority instead of going after false ideals or having
no goal at all, so that they may be included among those who follow them
in earnestness or in the words of Imam Ali among those who "receive
education for the sake of salvation". In short these people form a large
section of society.

In a despotic society a fourth class is also found. This class comprises
the people who fully understand the unjust and tyrannical nature of the
policies pursued by their rulers, but they keep quiet in respect of
these policies. Referring to them the Qur'an says:

***The angels take them when they are unjust to themselves. The angels
ask them: Where were you? They say: We were suppressed in the land.***
(Surah an Nisa', 4:97)

They mean to say that they were controlled by the despots and were not
free to take a decision. But the fact is that it is not permissible to
remain quiet in such a situation. The Qur'an quotes the angels as saying
to them:

***"Was not the land of Allah vast?"***

Why could they not emigrate to a safe place and save themselves from the
tyrants? Thus under a tyrannical and despotic government there exists a
fourth category comprising those people who keep quiet and make no move.
Even if they do not cooperate with injustice, they live in a despotic
atmosphere and take no action to change the situation.

The fifth class consists of a small number of people who alienate
themselves from society. They actually have no right to keep themselves
in seclusion. Society requires men who work to reconstruct it, not those
who renounce it. Allah reproached Prophet Yunus (Jonah) when he
abandoned his society and told him that he must have stayed with his
people. Consequently Prophet Yunus turned to Allah in repentance.

The Qur'an says:

***Many of the Jewish rabbis and the Christian monks devour the wealth
of the people and turn them away from the way of Allah.*** (Surah
Tawbah, 9:34)

Nowadays there are people who say that religious scholars have no right
to interfere in politics, for religion and politics are two separate
things. Those who have this logic, in the words of the Qur'an,

"***debar the people from the way of Allah."***

To the sixth class belong those who despite being underprivileged and
suppressed do their best to change the prevailing conditions. In this
connection there exists a divine law and a historical norm which we
would have discussed in detail if the space allowed.

Anyhow, according to this law if the whole underprivileged and
down-trodden class living under a corrupt system rises against it, it
always gains victory. Today this is an important question of our present
world. The subjugated nations making struggle for their liberation must
know that this historical norm materializes invariably. The Qur'an says:

***We desire to show favour to those who are oppressed in the earth and
to make them leaders and the heirs.*** (Surah al-Qasas, 28:5)

This verse refers to the same rule. The story of Prophet Musa and
Fir'awn also proves its truth.

"***When We delivered you from Pharaoh's folk."***

But if no effective resistances made gradually the pharaohs and tyrants
succeed in crushing and destroying the social forces by creating
dissensions among them. When social forces have been disintegrated, the
industrial and scientific forces are not of much avail or at least
cannot produce the desired results.

Even if any results are produced they do not benefit the common people
and do not bring prosperity to them in a disintegrated society. As a
result society is hit by disorder and chaos. In these circumstances how
can society be reformed?

It can be reformed only when all people have trust in Allah, believe in
a hidden force controlling them and follow the path of justice. Then all
the treasures of the earth are unveiled, all the potentialities become
effective and all that has been deposited in the earth and the space for
the welfare of mankind blossoms forth and becomes available. All this
will happen on the day when the Mahdi (May Allah hasten his solace) will
set up his government.

Then the Muslim Ummah will take the reign of justice in its hand. The
whole world will be following one single line of action. Consequently
all latent capabilities will be unfolded. All this will be perfectly in
accordance with the laws of history which indicate the course of man's
development.

When man will have experimented with base and loose ideals and will
cease to be attracted by them, he will naturally move in the right
direction and will cast off stagnation, mental laziness and lethargy. As
a result he will be drawn to the course that will lead him to this
historical development. This subject is quite vast, but its further
discussion will require more time and space than available to us.

[^1]: (Hawzah \`Ilmiyah)

[^2]: (Tafsir)

[^3]: (Ahadith)

[^4]: (Tafsir Tajziyah).

[^5]: (Tafsir Mauzu'i).


