Analysis of Social Elements 1
=============================

We have said that to explain the fact that religion is one of the norms
of history, it is necessary to analyse the elements forming society so
that we may know what these elements are and in what forms and norms
they are combined. To answer these questions we have chosen the
following Qur'anic verse

***When your Lord said to the angels: \`I am placing in the earth a
vicegerent,' they said: \`Will You put there one who will make there
mischief and will shed blood, while we proclaim Your praise and glorify
You?'*** (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:30)

When we study this verse, we observe that Allah informs the angels that
He has laid the foundation of a society on the earth. We naturally want
to know what elements form this society. From the expressions used in
this verse by the Qur'an the following three main elements can be
derived

(i) Man

(ii) Earth or nature as a whole as indicated by the words:

***"I am placing a vicegerent in the earth ".***

Here the second element is the earth or nature as a whole, the first
element being man whom Allah has appointed His vicegerent in the earth.

(iii) The third element is a mental bond which binds man to the earth or
nature on the one hand and to other fellow human beings on the other.
This bond has been called by the Qur'an vicegerency. These are the three
elements which form society on the earth: (i) man, (ii) nature,

(iii) Vicegerency - the bond which binds man to the earth and to his
fellow human beings.

When we look at human societies, we find that the first two elements are
common to all of them. You cannot find a single society in which man may
not be living with his fellow beings, or not living on the earth or not
having a contact with nature in order to play his role.

As far as these two elements are concerned, all societies are alike. But
as for the third element, each society has its own variety of bond.
Societies, in other words, differ in the nature and the form of the bond
which they have.

Thus the third element, that is the element of a mental bond is
changeable and it differs from society to society. Every society
operates it differently. This bond can be expressed in two ways.
According to one way of expression it has four sides and according to
the other three only.

The four-sided relationship is that which binds man and nature with
other men. Here also we have three clear sides, namely nature, man and
the bond existing between man and nature on the one hand and between man
and his fellow human beings on the other. If we presume that there is a
fourth side also, even then prima facie there will be three sides only,
the fourth side being outside the social frame and not a part of
society.

Anyhow, the expression that this relationship has four sides makes it
necessary that the fourth side also should be regarded as one of the
fundamental factors of social relations. That is what is meant by the
Qur'an when it gives the name of vicegerency to the four social
dimensions.

From the viewpoint of the Qur'an vicegerency is a social relationship.
If we study and analyse it, we can say that it has four elements, for
vicegerency necessitates the existence of:

(i) One who appoints the vicegerent,

(ii) The things in respect of which the vicegerent is appointed,

(iii) The vicegerent himself.

In this case the vicegerent is man. The things in respect of which he
has been appointed vicegerent, are the earth and all that exists on the
face of it, including the human beings. Thus besides man and his
relation with his fellow men and nature, the fourth side necessary for
the materialization of vicegerency is Allah, Who appoints the
vicegerent. As such the social relationship of vicegerency consists of
the following four sides:

(i) The one who appointed the vicegerent, that is Allah; (ii) The
vicegerent, that is man.

(iii) and (iv) That which has been put under the charge of the
vicegerent, that is nature and human beings.

As a result of his monotheistic conception of the world, man acquires a
special outlook on the life and the universe. It is with this outlook
that he says: There is no deity and no lord of the world and life but
Allah, and that man has to play no role in his life except that of the
vicegerent, for Allah has appointed him His deputy on the earth and has
assigned to him the position of leadership.

Man's relation with nature is not that of the owner and the owned. In
fact the relation between them is that of the trustee and the trust.
Irrespective of their social position one man's relation with his fellow
man is that of the two colleagues performing the same duty of the
vicegerent of Allah, and not that of the master and the slave, nor that
of master and the servant. This description of the four sides of the
social relationship of vicegerency to which the Qur'an has referred, is
closely related to the conception of cosmos in Islam.

In contrast to this Qur'anic conception, there is another idea of a
three-sided relationship which links up man with his fellow beings and
nature but rejects the fourth side (Allah) and makes this social
relationship devoid of its fourth dimension. As a result of ignoring the
fourth dimension the whole relationship is upset and the entire social
structure changes.

Man's lordship over his fellow beings resulting from overlooking the
fourth dimension and regarding man alone as the source of all values,
has appeared in various forms over history. Different forms of ownership
and varying degrees of man's domination over other men have manifested
themselves on the scene and stage of life.

If we minutely compare these two relationships with each other and make
a comparative study of the four-sided relationship (man + nature +
relation between man and nature + Allah) and the three-sided
relationship (man + nature + relation between man and nature), we will
observe that the addition of the fourth side is not merely a numerical
question, but this addition brings about a fundamental change in the
basis of social relations and the structure of the other three sides.

Therefore the addition of the fourth side should not be regarded as
merely a numerical addition. In fact this addition gives the other three
sides a new spirit and a fresh significance, and brings about a basic
change in the mutual relationship of the four sides.

In fact the addition of the fourth side changes the whole structure of
the social relations. Therefore in regard to social relations we can act
either according to the system of the four-sided relationship or
according to the system of the three-sided relationship.

The Qur'an believes in the four-sided relationship only, as can be
inferred from the above quoted verse, for man's appointment as the
vicegerent of Allah amounts to the confirmation of the four-sided social
relationship.

The Qur'an not only believes in it, but also regards it as one of the
norms of history. As we have seen in a previously quoted verse, the
Qur'an regards religion as a norm of history. The four-sided social
relationship being nothing but an application of religion to life, it is
one of the historical norms. Now let us see how it can be so.

The Qur'an presents this relationship in two ways: Sometimes it
describes it as a Divine act because vicegerency is Allah's favour
bestowed on His creation. The Qur'an expresses it thus:

***"1 am about to place a vicegerent in the earth."***

In this verse the four-sided relationship has been described as Allah's
favour to man and Allah's positive role in it, has been stressed.
Sometimes the same four-sided relationship is advanced from another
angle. In the following verse it has been declared that this
relationship has been accepted by man himself:

***We offered the trust (vicegerency of Allah) to the heavens and the
earth and the hills, but they shrank from bearing it and were afraid of
it. And man assumed it. Surely he has proved a tyrant and a*** fool.
(Surah al-Ahzab, ***33:72)***

The trust referred to in this verse is the same as the vicegerency. This
high position was granted by Allah to man who accepted it. The
acceptance of the trust means that man was chosen by Allah to be His
vicegerent and deputy, and he accepted that heavy responsibility. This
responsibility is the same as the four-6ided relationship. It is
sometimes observed from the angle of the bestower of this favour. In
this case it is said:

***"lam about to place a vicegerent in the earth";***

sometimes it is observed from the angle of the acceptor of this
responsibility. Then it is said:

***"We offered the trust to the heavens, the earth and the hills . . ..
"***

This trust which was offered to man and which he accepted was not,
according to our interpretation, some kind of duty to be discharged or
some order to be obeyed, for the same trust was offered to the hills, to
the heavens and to the earth also. Evidently a duty and obedience have
no meaning in respect of them. That shows that the offer does not mean
the enunciation of any law to be observed. What is meant is that this
favour of Allah looked everywhere for an object which may be its nature
and historical structure be suitable for its application. The hills were
not suitable to receive this favour.

The heavens and the earth were not compatible with the four-sided
relationship and could not shoulder the responsibility of this Divine
trust, that is the vicegerency of Allah. Hence an offer was made to man,
who accepted it in the sense that the four-sided relationship was made a
part of his creational structure and his natural and historical
development.

Hence this verse refers to a historical norm a norm of the third form
which can be resisted and contravened. It is not one of those norms
which cannot be resisted even for a short time. It is a part of human
nature and one can rise against one's nature at least temporarily. The
Qur'an has hinted at this reality, and so after mentioning this
historical norm it adds:

***"And man assumed it. Surely he has proved a tyrant and a*** fool."

By using the expression, '***a tyrant and a fool***' the Qur'an has
thrown light on the fact that any arrogant and foolish man can withstand
this norm and can content with it negatively. We find a similar
expression at the end of that verse which describes the true human
nature. In that verse also the Qur'an first says:

***"So set your face to religion as a man by nature upright . . .."***

and then adds:

***"But most men do not know".***

Just as we deduced from the verse of true human nature that religion was
a norm of life and a norm of history, from this verse also we can deduce
that the relation between religion and life consists of a four-sided
social relationship described by the Qur'an as the trust and the
vicegerency. This social relationship also in its Qur'anic sense is a
norm of history. In fact both the verses amount to the same thing. In
the first verse the Qur'an says:

***So set your face to religion as a man by nature upright - the nature
framed by Allah in which He has created man. There is no altering o f
the laws of Allah's creation. That is the self-sustaining way.*** (Surah
al-Rum, 30:30)

The expression of self-sustaining way has been used to lay stress on the
true concept of religion. The Qur'an wants to say that it is religion
that forms man's basic nature and the cornerstone of his history.
Religion regulates man's life.

The religion has been described as the self-sustaining way because it is
religion which acquaints us with the conception of self-sustenance in
life. Here self-sustenance is a concise term representing four-sided
social relationship at which the two verses, one mentioning vicegerency
and the other mentioning trust hint.

Religion is a norm of life and history. It introduces the fourth
dimension in life with a view to bring about a basic change in the
social set-up, not merely to increase the number of dimensions.

This concept that religion is a norm of history is deducible from the
above-quoted two verses of the Qur'an. Now how can we form a more clear
and comprehensive picture of this norm and how can we know the role of
vicegerency and the establishment of religion as a norm of history in
life? How can the role of the fourth side of the social relationship as
a norm of history be accepted? How can religion have had a basic role in
man's life over history?

In order to be able to understand these points we must have the
knowledge of the two stable elements of the social relationship. One of
these two elements is man and his fellow beings and the other is nature
or the universe. We call these two elements stable because they are the
part of the three-sided as well as the four-sided relationship. In order
to know the role of the fourth side, that is Allah in the structure of
man's social relationship, we first must know the role of these two
stable elements. What is man's role in the process of history?

The Qur'an has its own views about man, history and the ways of life.
What according to it is man's role in social relations? What is the role
of nature in them? How does nature influence the social relationship and
how can the role of man and nature be determined? If we study these
questions, we can find out the role of the fourth side which is the
distinguishing feature of the four-sided relationship as opposed to the
three-sided relationship.

This study will show to what extent the role of the fourth side is
essential, and to what extent the law of history and man's own structure
make the existence of this element necessary for the formation of man's
four-sided social relationship. To understand this law of history it is
necessary to look at the role of man and nature in the formation of
history from the viewpoint of the Qur'an. We propose to deal with this
question later.


