All Proceed towards Absolute Ideal
==================================

***Surely you, O men, are striving hard toward your Lord and so you are
going to meet Him.*** (Surah al Inshiqaq, 84:6)

This Qur'anic verse sets a very high target for human society. It says
that humanity endeavours on every level to meet its Lord. In this verse
the word, ***'kadh'*** has been used, which means persistent movement
and tedious and irksome progress. The whole human society has to work
hard to move forward, for this is not an ordinary movement.

It is an ascending movement representing development and evolution. It
may be compared to the serious effort the mountaineers have to make to
get on the top of a mountain. They have to cross many heights to reach
the summit.

Their movement is irksome and requires great effort. The same way
humanity endeavours to reach Allah. Only by making a persistent effort
it is possible to climb the ladder of perfection, to make evolutionary
progress and to proceed to the high position that befits humanity.

It is evident that this persistent movement requires a way along which
man marching towards perfection should move till he reaches his
destination. This way has been described in several verses of the Qur'an
as the way of Allah or the path of Allah.

These expressions of the Qur'an indicate the existence of a way along
which man must move. As a way is necessary for movement, similarly
movement is a necessary corollary of a way. When the above quoted verse
says that man is striving hard, it speaks of an actual fact and an
existing reality.

This verse is not a call to the people to follow Allah's way. It is not
meant to urge people or to encourage them to take any action. Unlike
some other verses it does not express a command. It does not ask people
to come to Allah's way or to repent in Allah's House or to do any other
such thing. Instead it says:

***Surely you, O men, are striving hard towards your Lord and so you are
going to meet Him.***

Thus it mentions an actual fact that man's every movement in his long
historical march is towards Allah. Even the groups which have chosen
from themselves inferior ideals and false gods and are called
polytheists by the Qur'an, take steps towards Allah, when they are found
advancing in their long journey.

Their advancement towards Allah depends on the motivating power of their
ideals. If these ideals push them forward, that means that they become
nearer to their Lord. But there is a difference between the progress
which creates a sense of responsibility and the progress which, as we
shall explain, does not have this characteristic.

When humanity makes progress while fully conscious of its ideals, it is
said that worship has been performed. It is a characteristic of worship
that all along it is analogous to the world and in complete harmony with
world conditions. Yet even an unconscious advance in relation to an
ideal is a movement towards Allah, though as we pointed out,
irresponsible.

Hence every advance is a movement towards Allah, even the advance of
those who go after a mirage. As it is inferred from the above quoted
verse, those who tend to proceed social mirages and choose inferior
ideal for themselves, when reach these mirages, they notice that there
is nothing there and find in place thereof Allah who pays them their
due.

It is evident from this verse that, Allah is the end of their journey,
yet He is not a geographical and like the end of a geographical route.
For example, if we take into consideration the route between Tehran and
Isfahan, Isfahan is the terminal point, that is the end of this
geographical route.

In other words, Isfahan is situated at the end of the route, not in
between. If a person travels towards Isfahan and stops somewhere on his
way, he cannot be called to have reached Isfahan, which is the terminal
point and which we call the end of the route. Anyhow Allah is not a
geographical end in this way. Allah is Absolute. He is Self-existent.
There is no place where Allah is not present. His existence has no
limit. He is the end of the journey, but He is all along the way also.
The person who traverses only the half way - he who reaches a mirage,
stops at it and discovers that it is only a mirage - what does he find?

We observe that according to the Qur'anic verse, he finds that Allah is
there and that Allah pays him his due, for the Absolute is present at
every point on route also. As man advances on his way, he realizes his
ideal in proportion to his progress. He finds Allah as much as he
advances along his way. As Allah is Absolute, the way to Him also has no
end.

Therefore a journey to Him means only to come near to Him. The more man
advances, the nearer to Allah he comes, but this nearness is always
relative. Man only can take some steps along the line of march, but he
cannot traverse the whole route, for a limited being can never reach the
Absolute. A limited being cannot reach the unlimited one.

Therefore in this case there exists an unlimited field between man and
his ideal. In other words, man has an unlimited field of action. He can
make unlimited progress. The scope of his development is unlimited, for
the way before him is indefinitely long and limitless.

Quantitative and Qualitative Changes
------------------------------------

Two changes, one quantitative and the other qualitative appear in man
when he regards his real ideal as the indicator of his route to humanity
and reconciles his reason and understands with the universal truth
ensuing from the ideal which he holds to be the true reality. In other
words when man's conscious advance is reconciled with the cosmic reality
of his advance, quantitative and qualitative changes appear in him, for
man and the world both are advancing towards Allah.

Man's movement towards Allah produces a quantitative change in him,
because as we said earlier, the way towards his true ideal has no limit.
In other words, there always exists for him an opportunity for
self-construction, self-development and progress and the door for his
going forward is ever open, for the ideal can remove from his way every
false god, every idol and every idol-like impurity that may become a
barrier between him and his Allah.

Hence the monotheistic religion constitutes a constant struggle and a
continuous war against all false gods and low and repetitious ideals,
for an ideal other than Allah always requires man to confine his
movement up to a particular point only. The false gods want him to stop
in the middle of his journey.

All over history the monotheistic religion has borne the standard of
opposition to all false gods and low ideals. That is why the true ideal
brings about a quantitative change in man's movement, unties his
shackles and liberates him from the bonds of artificial limits and thus
enables him to continue to march forward.

As for the qualitative change in the man's movement, it is brought about
by the true ideal through providing a basic solution of human
contradictions and controversies. Man gets a sense of responsibility as
the result of his faith in this ideal and a consciousness of his
universal limits. This consciousness creates in him a deep sense of
responsibility. Unlike all other motivating ideals over human history,
it is only to this ideal that man feels responsible.

Why so? It is so because this ideal has a concrete reality and in no way
depends on man. It is from here that the logical condition of
responsibility materializes, for a true responsibility two sides are
required: a responsible person and to whom he owes responsibility. If
there is no higher side or the man responsible does not have faith in
it, no sense of responsibility can be produced at all.

For example take low and inferior ideals into consideration. These
important gods and abject deities have done over human history nothing
other than creating dissensions and undue discriminations among mankind.
These ideals along with man form one whole and are reckoned as a part of
a total. Man cannot feel to have a sense of responsibility towards
something which he has set apart from himself and which he himself has
shaped and developed. The Qur'an says:

***They are but names which you have named.*** (Surah an Najm, 53:23)

These ideals cannot create a sense of personal responsibility. Owing to
them laws may be framed and habits and customs may be framed but all
such things remain superficial and seeming. Man can throw off these
habits and customs at the first opportunity available to him.

On the contrary the ideal which has been presented as the monotheistic
religion of the Prophets, having all over history a concrete reality
independent of man and fulfills all the necessary conditions in this
respect.

Why have the Prophets brought about the most intensive revolutions in
human history? Why have they been the soundest revolutionaries in the
world? Why have the Prophets on the historical stage been above all
personal consideration? Why have they not agreed to any compromise? Why
have they never wavered in their mission?

Why have the Prophets been like that? We find many revolutionaries in
history who changed their doctrines, but it has never been heard that a
Prophet ever wavered in his mission or faltered in his compliance with
the teachings of his revealed Book. The Prophets always remained steady
because they had an ideal which was independent of man and superior to
him. This ideal gave them a glimmer of the sense of responsibility.

This sense is not a matter of secondary importance in man's spiritual
journey. It is the basic condition of his success in this respect. It is
the sense of responsibility which resolves man's inner conflict and
contradictions. According to his creational scheme man always lives in a
state of contradiction, for according to the Qur'an he has been created
of clay as well as of a flash of divine spirit.

The Qur'an says that man has been created of clay. It also says that a
breath or a flash of divine spirit has been breathed into him. As such
man is a combination of two things. His clay (origin) draws him to the
earth and calls him to base desires, material tendencies and all that is
low, vile and becoming of the earth.

At the same time the breath of divine spirit breathed into him calls him
to high and noble qualities and lifts him so much that he comes near to
the divine qualities and adopts them. Divine spirit invites him to
Allah's endless knowledge, His endless power, His endless justice, His
generosity and magnanimity, His mercy, His retribution and His other
attributes and qualities.

Man finds himself in the midst of the contradiction. He had fallen into
this conflicting situation as a result of the nature of his psychical
content and his inner structure. It is man's inherent nature which has
given rise to this conflict and contradiction, as we shall elucidate by
explaining the story of Adam, the first man.

The only way of resolving this contradiction is the creation of a sense
of responsibility. Mere perception of this inner conflict can identify
this conflict, but cannot do away with it. Nothing can create a sense of
personal responsibility in man except his choice of the supreme ideal.

It is this lofty ideal that makes man realize that he is accountable to
his Lord, Who is Omnipotent and Omniscient and who recompenses him for
all his good and bad deeds. Therefore a sense of inner responsibility
which is a sort of a qualitative change in man's behaviour, is the only
way of resolving the contradiction and conflict having their roots in
man's nature.

The role of the monotheistic relation is to facilitate the adoption of
this solution and with the growth of its quantitative and qualitative
effect to remove the obstacles in the way of human progress. While
supporting this solution the monotheistic religion carries out an
incessant and intensive struggle against artificial, low and repetitious
ideals which stop man's progress on the one hand and make him devoid of
the sense of responsibility on the other.

That is why, as already mentioned, the fight of the Prophets against
false gods has throughout history been incessant and intensive. Every
low ideal on completion of its incubation period assumed the form of an
idol and gains supporters. It is but natural that those whose material
interests and worldly position depend on such ideals, keenly defend
them.

That was the reason why those whose interests depended on the low ideals
or idols tooth and nail opposed the Prophets and fought against them in
defense of their own material and worldly interests and the luxurious
life which they led.

The Qur'an has revealed a norm of history when it states that there has
been a continuous clash between the Prophets, because they were the
people who were benefited by the false ideals. When these ideals assumed
the form of idols, they were against those given to easy life and
enjoyment who reaped all the benefits and justified their own existence
by the existence of their idols.

Therefore it was but natural that the people living at ease who had
vested interests were always in the front line of those who were hostile
to the Prophets. The Holy Qur'an says:

***We did not send a warner before you to any township but its luxurious
ones said: 'Surely we found our fathers following a religion and we are
following their footprints'*** (Surah az-Zukhruf, 43:23)

***We did not send to any township a warner, but it's pampered ones
declared: 'No doubt we are disbelievers in what you bring to us'***
(Surah as-Sabah, 34:34)

***I shall deprive them of the blessing of My revelations those who are
arrogant in the earth, and if they see any sign, they do not believe it
and if they see the way of righteousness, they do not choose it as their
way, and if they see the way of error they choose it as their way. That
is because they deny Our revelations and are used to disregard them.***
(Surah al-A'raf, 7:146)

***And the chieftains of his fold, who disbelieved and denied the
meeting o f the Hereafter, and whom We had made prosperous in the life
of this world, said: 'He is only a human being like you, who eats like
you eat and drinks like you drink'*** (Surah al Mu'minun, 23:33)

Therefore in order to exterminate their false gods the monotheistic
religion has taken steps to neutralize the interests of these luxurious
people. In the beginning these false gods were only ideals, but
subsequently their statues were made and thus they were converted into
idols. The monotheistic religion severs man's relation with these low
and abject gods.

Yet is it possible to sever the relation of humanity with these abject
ideals and bury their heads under ground simply to allow them to raise
their heads again in a different godless form, as has been the case with
the dialectical-materialistic revolutionaries who take inspiration from
historical materialism and from what they call the materiality of
history. They also like us fight against false gods and call a belief in
them the opium of the nations.

Yet the difference between our thinking and theirs is that we do not
fight against the false gods to convert man into an animal or to sever
man's relation with his spirit of lofty love and adoration. We do not
fight against them to drag humanity to a lower course.

We sever man's relation with inferior ideals to establish his relation
with his real and supreme ideal, to guide him back to the course of
humanity and to attach him to his Almighty Allah with a view to bring
about in him the desired quantitative and qualitative changes in the
course of his development.

Now it must be understood clearly that the march of humanity towards
this supreme ideal depends on certain prerequisite conditions which are
as under:

(i) Clear Intellectual and Ideological Approach to the Supreme Ideal: To
have a clear idea of the supreme ideal prevailing over history and which
depended on monotheism. This belief co-ordinates and unifies all ideals,
goals, aspirations, desires and all human knowledge in the Person of the
Supreme Ideal, who is all-Knowledge, all-Power, all-Justice, all-Mercy
and all-Retribution.

The doctrine of monotheism gives us a clear idea of this ideal who has
realized all aspirations and goals in His Person. This doctrine teaches
us that we should regard all Divine attributes as concrete facts, but
dissimilar to our own qualities and characteristics.

We should regard the Divine attributes as a model, as a practical guide,
as a goal for our practical advance and as mile-stones on our long route
to the Almighty. The doctrine of monotheism fulfils the condition of
providing a clear ideological and intellectual approach to our ideal.

(ii) The existence of a psychological force emanating from this ideal so
that it may serve as a permanent asset and a motivating force for human
will over history. This spiritual force which we call the motivating
force of will, is inspired by our faith in Allah. This faith
crystallizes in the belief in the Doomsday and the Day of Resurrection,
which are a continuation of the life of this world.

A belief in resurrection and the life after death teaches man that the
small historical field in which he plays his role in this world, has a
strong link with other fields or worlds called ***barzakh*** (purgatory)
and the hereafter.

Man's condition in those great and perilous worlds depends on the role
he plays in the historical field of this world. This belief equips man
with a spiritual force that brings his will into action and fortifies it
for successfully performing his role in the other worlds.

(iii) This supreme ideal of which we are talking differs from inferior
ideals because it is outside the existence of man. It is not a part of
man detached from him. The supreme ideal has its own separate and
independent existence. It is everywhere and is not a part of man.

Its separation from man makes it necessary that there be a link between
man and this ideal. Other ideals have a human aspect and they have been
detached from man. As such it is not necessary that man should have any
link with them.

Of course the devils and the Pharaohs have over history tried to
establish links of some sort between man and the so called gods of the
sun and the stars. But such links are false, for these gods are
imaginary and fictitious. They are only a mental concept detached from
man and given a concrete shape.

In contrast the supreme ideal has no existence absolutely separate from
man, and hence there should be genuine link between man and this ideal.
It is this genuine link that has found full expression in the role of
the Prophets. Every Prophet has pointed out the existence of this link,
for a Prophet is the person who fulfils in himself the first and the
second conditions of arranging the progress of humanity to this ideal by
the Will of Allah.

He has a clear ideological vision of this ideal and at the same time his
psychological force is fully saturated with this belief in Allah and the
Day of Judgment. These two elements combined in his person help him play
the role of a Prophet, and the link between the supreme ideal and
humanity expressed in this combination makes the Prophet a warner and
bringer of good tidings.

When humanity arrives at the stage called by the Qur'an the \`Decisive'
stage, the significance of which we shall explain in our forthcoming
lectures, things so develop that the coming of a warner and bringer of
good tidings becomes insufficient, for this is the stage when the low
ideals or false gods block the road of man's development.

At this stage it becomes necessary to remove the obstacles and pull down
the barriers which prevent man from proceeding towards Allah - the
Almighty. At this stage it is necessary for humanity to launch a
campaign and fight against the false gods, vicious and malignant beings
and low ideals which regard themselves as the guardians of humanity but
actually are a sort of highwaymen, for they block the way of humanity
and prevent it from continuing its onward historical movement.

For this purpose a leader is required. Such a leader is called Imam and
his role is known as Imamat. An Imam is the leader who guides and
supervises human combat against falsehood. At a stage of Prophethood the
roles of the Imam and the Prophet are amalgamated. The Qur'an has spoken
of this feature and we shall discuss it shortly. Most probably this
amalgamation began with Prophet Nuh.

The role of the Imam is though amalgamated with that of the Prophet, yet
it continues even after the role of the Prophet has come to an end. This
happens when a Prophet quits the field while the fight is still on and
it is necessary in the interest of his mission that the struggle for
crushing the false gods be continued. In such a case the period of
Imamat maintains the continuity of the role of Prophethood even after
its coming to an end

This was the fourth condition of arranging the way of human progress to
the supreme ideal. In its light we can have a clear idea of what we call
the five cardinal principles of religion. Now we shall see how sound
these five principles are and how they determine man's historical
course.

The five cardinal principles of religion are as under:

(i) **Monotheism:** The role of monotheism lies in the fact that it
provides us with a clear intellectual and ideological point of view.
Monotheism attaches all human aspirations and goals to the supreme
ideal, that is Allah.

(ii) **Divine Justice:** Justice is just another dimension of
monotheism. From social point of view knowledge, power and other
attributes of Allah are not His distinguishing features, but justice is,
for justice is the quality which can give many things to society and can
make it independent of others.

In the course of our social progress we need justice more than any other
quality. Justice has appeared as the second cardinal principle of
religion, because from social point of view it has a guiding and
instructional aspect.

We have said earlier that Islam teaches us not to regard the Divine
attributes as mere metaphysical realities having no connection with us.
We should look at them as sign-posts which guide us to pursue a certain
way of life.

From this point of view, justice is the biggest concept that can guide
humanity, and for this very reason it is distinguished from other
attributes. Otherwise justice lies within the framework of total
monotheism. It is an essential quality of a perfect ideal.

(iii) **Belief in Prophethood:** It is the third cardinal principle of
religion. It establishes a genuine link between man and his ideal. As
said earlier humanity needs this link when it marches toward its ideal,
that is Allah who is independent of man, and has neither been detached
from him nor produced by-him. It is a Prophet who ensures the
establishment of this link. Throughout history the Prophets have
satisfied this real need.

(iv) **Imamat:** It is that leadership which amalgamates with
Prophethood. A Prophet is an Imam also. He performs the functions of
Imamat as well as Prophethood. Yet Imamat continues if the struggle is
not over even after the end of the period of a Prophet, and a leader is
still required to carry out his mission.

In such a case an Imam shoulders this responsibility and during the
period of his Imamat supervises the unfinished work of the Prophet. Thus
Imamat is the fourth cardinal principle of religion.

(v) **The Day of Resurrection:** The fifth principle is the belief in
the Day of Resurrection. This principle ensures the fulfillment of the
second condition out of the four prerequisite condition of arranging the
progress of humanity to the true ideal, as mentioned above. The
principle of the Hereafter creates a psychological force that motivates
and fortifies human will and guarantees man's responsible behaviour.

From the foregoing it is clear that in the final analysis these cardinal
principles of religion are the elements which take part in man's
adoption of the supreme ideal. They have also determined the social
relationship of this ideal over history as we explained in a previous
lecture when we discussed the four-fold advantage of religion.

We explained earlier that according to the concept presented by the
Qur'an the social relations are four-dimensional and not
three-dimensional. We deduced this concept from the word
***\`istikhlaf*** (appointing a vicegerent) used by the Qur'an.
Explaining this word we said that appointing a vicegerent had four
dimensions.

It required the existence of man, nature, Allah - the Almighty and the
person appointed the vicegerent. This combination of four-fold social
relationship is another way of expressing the combination of the
five-fold cardinal principles of religion for the purpose of the tedious
and long journey of man to Allah - the Almighty.

The above mentioned facts explain man's role in determining the course
of history. In his historical journey man is the centre of gravity, not
as a physical body, but because of his inner content, the meaning of
which we have already explained. The basis of man's inner content is the
ideal which he himself chooses.

The true ideal is only that which can ensure to man all his main and
prior goals and objectives, which serve as historical incentives to his
activities on the stage of history. Hence the choice of the supreme
ideal by man as his ideal lays the strong foundation of his inner
content. This shows the importance of the role of this fourth dimension.


