Analysis of Social Elements 2
=============================

Society consists of three elements: Men, nature and the social relations
which influence the course of history. In the previous lectures we spoke
about man and his basic role in historical field. We also spoke about
nature and discussed its characteristics. Now we propose to discuss the
social relations so that we may know our position in regard to these
relations vis-Ã -vis what we deduced from the Qur'an in respect of the
role of man and nature on the stage of history.

We have already made some comments on this third element, namely the
social relations and social ties. Social relations include two kinds of
contacts, one being man's contact with nature and the other man's
contact with his fellow beings. These are two different and
comparatively independent lines of relationship, their reciprocal impact
on each other being almost insignificant, as we shall explain.

These two lines are not identical. Each of them is comparatively
independent and corresponds to the solution presented in case of each
problem.

The first line represents man's contact with nature. Man tries to
exploit the natural resources. He wants to bring nature under his
control so that he may meet the needs of his life. Here he faces a big
problem which we may call the problem of contradiction between man and
nature. In other words, nature takes a stand against man and does not
respond to his needs. Consequently a clash between man and nature takes
place. Nature shows might and does not obey men.

This contradiction between man and nature is the biggest problem of this
line. The solution of this problem lies in acting according to a law of
nature which is an important norm of history. This law is the law of
reciprocal effect between practice and skill. As man's ignorance about
nature diminishes and his knowledge of its language and laws increases,
proportionately his control over nature to meet his needs, is enhanced.
As with more practice he acquires more skill, he makes many new
discoveries.

The law of reciprocal effect between practice and skill being a sound
law, can undertake to resolve this contradiction. Hence the solution of
the problem of contradiction between man and nature can safely be left
to this law.

In other words it may be said that the more man's ignorance about nature
diminishes and the more his acquaintance with it increases as the result
of practical experiments, the more fresh skill is gained by him.

The fresh skill thus acquired awards man a power of controlling nature
in new fields and with further practice and experiences in new fields,
he again acquires more fresh skill. This process continues so long as no
unexpected accident occurs to disturb man's relation with nature. The
expansion and practical application of this law gradually resolves the
problem of contradiction between man and nature.

Therefore it may be said that from historical and realistic point of
view this problem stands resolved. Perhaps the under mentioned Qur'anic
verse is meant to refer to this very solution:

***And he gives you of all you ask of Him, and if you would count the
bounty of Allah, you cannot reckon it.*** (Surah Ibrahim 14:34)

In this verse asking is not meant to mean any verbal prayer, for this
verse refers to all men without any distinction. It does not make any
difference between the believers who pray to Allah and the disbelievers
who do not. It is also a known fact that it is not always necessary that
one gets all that one prays for. There is no doubt that every prayer is
heard, but that does not mean that all that is asked is granted. Yet in
this verse Allah says:

***He gives you all you ash o f Him.***

 In other words, in this verse a practical response to every request has
been promised. Most probably, the request mentioned in this verse
relates to all men over history, during all times, past, present and
future. This request lies in man's creational scheme and applies over
history to the law of reciprocal effect between practice and skill. As
such this verse shows how the problem ensuing from man's contact with
nature is to be resolved.

Basic Contradiction in Man's Existence
--------------------------------------

In the case of the second line, that is man's contact with his fellow
human being, like two brothers, in various social fields including such
cases as the distribution of wealth and the clash of different human
cultures, we are confronted with another problem. This time the problem
is not that of contradiction between man and nature, but is that of
contradiction between man and his fellow beings.

This contradiction between men in various social fields has many forms
and many names but basically it is a contradiction between the strong
and the weak, between the powerful and the powerless. When a powerful
being is unable to resolve his own contradiction, that is his inner
conflict, his obsession will before long appear in the form of a social
contradiction, which may take any shape or form and may be tagged with
any law or cultural usage yet in the final analysis will be same form of
contradiction between the strong and the weak.

It does not make any difference if sometimes the strong is an individual
by the name of Pharaoh, sometimes a class and sometimes a community or a
nation. All these are various forms of contradiction and the ruling
spirit in each case it that of conflict and exploitation. In each case
there is a clash between a weak individual and a strong man whose inner
conflict and contradiction has remained unresolved and who consequently
tries to exploit a weak individual to satisfy his own vanity.

We observe various forms of social contradiction along the line of man's
contact with his fellow man, yet the spirit in each case is the same,
and all contradictions spring, as we have just said, from one basic
contradiction, that is man's inner conflict or the contradiction between
a handful of clay and a flash of the desire to meet Allah. So long as
one of these two tendencies does not completely suppress the other
tendency, the contradiction will continue to exist in all circumstances.

Although both these tendencies are always present, yet one of them is
usually predominant according to the actual condition of society and
according to the level of the thinking and general education of the
individual concerned.

The viewpoint of Islam in regard to the problem of human relations is
very vast and deep. No form of contradiction has been ignored by it. It
takes into consideration all forms of contradiction, analyses them fully
and finds out their common spirit. So it has linked all contradictions
to a more deep-rooted contradiction, that is man's own inner conflict.

That is why Islam believes that one mission alone can solve the whole
problem of human relations. It can simultaneously work on two levels. It
can strive in the historical field to remove social contradictions and
at the same time or even before it and after it, can resolve man's inner
conflict. Thus it can dry up the social contradictions at their very
source.

Islam believes that if we leave the source of inner conflict unattended
and try to resolve outward social contradictions with the help of some
laws and their interpretations, we will be attending to only one half of
the problem. The other half, that is the crystallization of the inner
conflict, if left unattended, will soon give rise to some other forms of
the same contradiction which we have tried to exterminate.

Therefore a mission which wants to propose a realistic solution of this
problem, while doing so must take into consideration both the inner and
outer levels, and believe that to resolve the problem finally it is
necessary to carry out the struggle on both the levels. The struggle
which is carried out to remove inner conflict and purify the heart is
called by Islam major Jihad.

The other type of jihad is that which is carried out to do away with
every form of social contradiction and to put an end to the exploitation
of the weak by the strong. Instead of confining our struggle to any one
form of exploitation we should try to remove the root cause which is
common to all acts of exploitation.

Short-sightedness of Marx
-------------------------

This is the viewpoint the correctness of which has been proved by human
experience over history. In contrast to it, is how the materialistic
revolutionaries interpret the social contradiction or the social
conflict.

Because of his being a European Marx with all his super intelligence
could not go a step further than the limits of the views held by the
ordinary Europeans, to whose popular view he considered himself to be
indebted. The Europeans think that the world ends where Europe or rather
the West ends. Their view in this respect is similar to that of the Jews
who maintain that they alone represented the entire humanity. They used
to say:

***What have we to do with the ordinary people (of Makkah or Hijaz).***
(Surah Ale Imran, 3:75)

The Jews meant that the Arab of Hijaz had no importance. Similarly in
the eyes of the Europeans the world is confined to Europe or rather the
West. Marx has not been able to set himself free from the European way
of thinking, nor could he rescue himself from the pressure of the class
factor which plays an important role in his theory of historical
materialism. Influenced by this cheap theory he has made a comparatively
limited interpretation of the contradiction faced by man.

According to him all human contradictions boil down to just one
contradiction, that is class contradiction or class conflict, existing
between a class that owns all or most of the production instruments and
another class that does not own them and works for the interests of the
former class and depends on it for the use of the production
instruments.

When wealth is produced through the sweat of the brow of an exploited
worker, it is grabbed by the class that owns the production instruments
and the other class gets only a very meagre amount that is only enough
to guarantee the continued living of this class so that it may continue
to work for the former class. That is the class conflict which,
according to Marx, is the basis of every other conflict and
contradiction.

This class conflict from social point of view is the outcome of class
war between the proprietor class and the worker class. The clash between
these two classes grows in intensity with the development of the
production instruments and the progress and complexity of the industrial
means, for with the development of the production instruments the
standard of life comes down and that gives the capitalist class an
excuse to lower the wages of the worker.

As we know, the capitalists try not to give the workers more than that
on which they can subsist. As production instruments develop and the
living expenses come down, the capitalist on the one hand tries to
reduce the wages of the workers, and on the other, with the development
of the production instruments he gets an opportunity to reduce number of
workers gradually and extract more work from a lesser number of them,
for an improved industrial instruments can do the job of many workers.

Accordingly the capitalists retrench the surplus workers with the result
that the conflict and differences between the two classes grow to the
extent that they ultimately culminate in a revolution and an explosion.

This revolution is mainly brought about by the working class, which will
ultimately put an end to the class conflict and succeed in converting
whole society into a unified classless unit, all members of which will
form one class only. Only then all contradictions will be eliminated,
for the basis of every contradiction is the class contradiction. When
this contradiction will vanish, other secondary contradictions will also
disappear.

This is a very brief summary of the viewpoint of the materialistic
revolutionaries regarding the contradiction or conflict, the solution of
which we are seeking. It may be mentioned that this limited and
short-sighted theory does not correspond with the reality, nor does it
tally with the historical facts.

Actually the factor which brings about historical events is neither the
class contradiction nor the development of the tools of production. In
fact it is man, the maker of the tools, who brings about historical
events. As for contradiction the European man himself is extensively
responsible for it.

The production instruments never set up a capitalist system. It was the
European man who when production instruments fell into his hand,
established this system to put his own values of life into practice. It
is also to be noted that the class contradiction is not the only form of
social contradiction.

Several other forms of contradiction in the social field also do exist.
The class contradiction is not even the most important of these forms.
In fact all these contradictions in the social field are the products of
a basic conflict in man himself involving a hidden tussle in his inner
content which regularly and ceaselessly appears in different forms of
contradiction.

Now let us draw a comparison between the short-sighted view of the
materialists and the reality shown by human experience, and find out
which of the above mentioned two theories more corresponds with the
world in which we live, so that we may know what future developments we
can expect.

Should the theory of the materialists and their interpretation of all
contradictions as the class contradiction be correct, would we not be
justified in expecting that the class contradiction and conflict between
the capitalists and the workers in the industrial societies of Europe
having well developed industrial tools, would be going up day by day?

Should we suppose that in industrial societies like those of England,
America, France and Germany class contradiction has greatly gone up and
class conflict is growing in intensity day by day? If that were so, the
exploiting system of these countries should be decaying progressively
and should be on the verge of collapse and annihilation, for the wealth
of the exploiting capitalist class of America, England, France, etc is
growing.

We were waiting for such a development and expecting that the
difficulties of the capitalist countries would grow, the European and
the American workers would come to believe in the necessity of a
revolution and would regard it as the only way of resolving class
conflict. This was the right conclusion, had the Marxist idea of the
interpretation of contradiction been correct. But what has happened in
history proves direct to the contrary.

Unfortunately we see that the capitalist system in the capitalist
countries is being more and more firmly established day by day and there
are no signs of its early collapse. All the sweet hopes of our
materialist revolutionaries that because of the development of
production instruments and industrialization of these countries a
revolution would hit England and other industrial countries of Europe,
have come to naught.

Against all these predictions revolution has taken place in such
countries as Czarist Russia and China where production instruments had
not developed, industrialization had not taken place and where no class
contradiction as defined by Marx existed or should have existed.

On the other hand the position of the workers in the industrialized
countries did not diminish. Actually their income increased, they got
more advantages and comforts, and their importance grew in the eyes of
the exploiting capitalists.

The income of an ordinary American worker is far more than that of any
manual worker in any socialist country. The position of workers in the
capitalist countries has tremendously improved. The workers and their
representatives have organized themselves on semi-democratic lines. They
have gained political importance. They neither think of a revolution,
nor do they accept its logic. They live hand in glove with the
capitalists and believe in obtaining their rights through their
representatives and the parliament.

According to our thinking all this has happened in a very short time.
Then how has it happened? Was Marx too suspicious of the capitalist
exploiters and for that reason he made such predictions, which proved
false, without a single one of them having come true even by chance? Was
it a sort of mistrust on the part of Marx in these exploiters? Have the
capitalists ever been afraid of Marx, Marxism or the liberation
movements of the world? Have they condescended to allow a part of their
income to pass to the workers because they were afraid of the workers'
revolt against them? Has the American millionaire any apprehensions in
this respect.

Even the most optimist of those who look forward to a revolution cannot
expect a real revolution in America against oppression earlier than a
hundred years henceforth. Then how can it be believed that the American
millionaires have any apparition of fear before them because of which
they have surrendered a part of their profits? Or alternatively can we
believe that the American capitalists have become pious all of a sudden?

Have their hearts been filled with the light of Islam like the Muslims
of the early period of Islam who did not recognize any limits for their
cooperation, tolerance and equality with other people and shared the
booty gained by them with their Muslim brethren?

Have the capitalists of the west embraced Islam or has their hearts been
converted into that of the Muslims? None of these things has happened.
Karl Marx was not too suspicious of the capitalists. He held a correct
opinion about them. Neither had any fear of the workers gripped the
hearts of the capitalists and forced them to surrender a part of their
profits to the workers in order to quieten them, nor has the heart of
the capitalists been shaken by piety and fear of God. They are not aware
of piety and so long as they are absorbed in their pleasures and
passions, they will never be.

Then what has happened and how should the happenings of everyday be
interpreted? Actually what has happened is the result of another
contradiction which from the beginning has accompanied the class
contradiction but Marx and his comrades failed to discover it.

They could only know the contradiction that existed between the American
millionaire and the American worker and that existed between the British
capitalist and the British worker. But they ignored the bigger
contradiction resulting from the conflict and clash between the
Europeans and the non-Europeans.

This contradiction, the symbol of which the European himself is,
conceals class contradiction and holds its operation in abeyance for a
considerably long time. What is the nature of this contradiction? We
believe that with a cursory glance we can see this contradiction and put
our finger on it, for we do not believe that class contradiction is the
only form of contradiction.

As we have said, man's inner conflict constantly continues to create new
forms of contradiction. There are some forms of it in which American or
European capitalism plays no part. There are still other forms in which
sometimes the capitalists and the workers or the oppressors and the
oppressed join hands to become a party of the contradiction.

In this case they forget all their differences and join together to
create a contradiction far bigger than all the contradictions which have
existed from the beginning of history until now. Now the question is
that if the capitalists and the workers of the West form one party to
this contradiction, where is the other party?

The other party are we and you, that is the poor countries of the world,
known today as the third world, that is the countries of Asia, Africa
and Latin America. These countries form the second pole of this
contradiction.

Both the social classes of Europe have agreed to extend their
battlefield to the poor countries and to exploit them. They have
conspired to create the biggest contradiction. This contradiction has
many colonial forms. It begins when the European or the American sets
out from his country to explore the underground minerals all over the
world in order to snatch the wealth of the poor nations of various
countries.

This contradiction counteracts the class contradiction and even
nullifies it, for all classes get equal interest in grabbing this
wealth. The whole or at least the greater part of the immense riches in
the hands of the capitalist class of the capitalist countries comes as
the war booty obtained through the raids of the white men in the poor
countries. The immense affluence enjoyed by the Western countries is not
the result of the sweat of the European worker's brow, nor is the result
of the class conflict between the capitalist and the worker.

This immense affluence is due to the oil of Asia and Latin America, to
the diamonds of Tanzania, to the iron ore, tin, copper and uranium of
the various African countries, to the cotton of Egypt, to the tobacco of
Lebanon and to the wine of Algeria. Yes, the wine of Algeria, for the
colonial non-Muslim power which colonized Algeria converted all its
lands into vineyards so that wine might be produced from their grapes.

This wine was supplied to the workers also to win their hearts by
intoxicating them in order to persuade them to cooperate with the
capitalists. The Algerian were allowed to drink Algerian wine and pluck
grapes. They are nice things, but obtained from the sources mentioned by
us. From these sources they got intoxicated by the Algerian wine.

Thus the bigger contradiction that exists between the two classes of the
capitalist countries on the one hand and the poor countries on the
other. This contradiction has superceded class contradiction in the
western world, and brought it to a standstill.

In these circumstances the European and the American capitalists deemed
it advisable to grant to their workers a part of the booty they seized
by plundering you and me, that is the poor and the weak of the world.
They agreed that they and their workers both should enjoy the wine of
Algeria and both should bedeck their wives with the diamonds from
Tanzania.

So we see that as predicted by Marx the life style of the worker has
improved. But this change is neither due to the generosity and
broadmindedness of the European and the American capitalist nor to his
piety, but is due to his feeling that out of his big booty he should
give some share, a very small share, to the European and the American
worker also to keep him satisfied.

History has recorded only that contradiction which has always existed.
This should not lead us to think that there is only one form of social
contradiction. It has many forms, but all of them spring from one basic
source, which is man's inner conflict, which produces varied forms of
contradiction. If man gets rid of one form, he may fall prey to another
form.

Therefore we should not confine contradiction to the class contradiction
between the haves and the have nots. However, if we succeed in resolving
this basic contradiction all other contradictions will be resolved
automatically. Though social contradictions are innumerable, they all
amount to the exploitation of the weak by the strong.


