Foreword to Ayatullah's Last Lectures
=====================================

Following European renaissance there was a need of a basic change in the
method of studying the Islamic sources in order to be able to face the
modern trends in the fields of so-called science, philosophy, and
Western Culture.

It became necessary to look at the social, economic, political and
psychological questions in the light of the vast original Islamic
literature with the spirit of inquiry which became prevalent in the
world following its emancipation from the ignorance of middle ages and
the ecclesiastical Inquisition.

It became a duty of our Islamic centres of learning and our erudite
Muslim scholars to take appropriate steps to check the onslaught of the
flood of misconceptions and exploitation of freedom and culture in the
sacred name of science and religion.

It was indifference or rather opposition of the Church and
ecclesiastical circle to the movement of Renaissance that made religion
confined to the four walls of the churches and turned out the Pope and
his divines from the field of public administration, economy, politics
and cultural affairs.

The Europeans who were jealous of the Muslims whose broad-mindedness
they had experienced in Andalus (Spain) and other centres of learning
which they frequented for receiving their education and who were envious
of the grandeur of the Muslims in Baghdad, Iran, Egypt and other
countries of which they had heard, imagined that Islam was similar to
their own religion.

Subsequently in order to subdue the countries of the Muslim East and to
facilitate their exploitation by the greedy and corrupt white
colonialists, they invented the theory of the separation of politics
from religion and antagonism between the old and the new sciences. They
tried to create a gulf between these two views and the two systems.

They not only separated the language of religion from the language of
modern science, culture and philosophy, but also caused a big breach
between the two with the result that conciliation between these two
languages becomes difficult.

That is why whenever anyone of those religious-minded people who had
been to Europe and were conversant with modern civilization and culture,
tried to defend and propagate whatever of religion was left to him, he
in most cases presented religion in a distorted and unpleasing form
which appeared to be incompatible with modern civilization and modern
sciences.

Many of our scholars, especially during the last 100 years have tried to
bridge this gulf and to introduce modern science and civilization in a
perspective compatible with the broad and progressive outlook of Islam
and free from all misconceptions and distortions.

In this respect valuable contributions were made by such distinguished
scholars as Sayyid Jamaluddin Asadabadi, Ayatullah Shaykh Balaghi,
Ayatullah Mirza Muhammad Husayn Naini, Shaykh Muhammad Riza Najafi,
Shaykh Hibatullah Shahristani, Mirza Abbas Ali Wa'iz Charindabi and
lately Shaykh Muhammad Riza Muzaffar and Professor Ahmad Amin.

Anyhow the value of the work done by them has been limited and
temporary. They could not cure the ailment of the young men who studied
Western science, and the gulf between science and civilization on the
one hand and religion and moral principles on the other continued as it
was.

This was the position till Ayatullah Sadr an illustrious scholar and a
prominent personality of Shi'ah history appeared in Najaf and with his
valuable and world famous works, did full justice to Western science,
civilization, economics and psychology, and dispelled all misgivings
about them.

Simultaneously with this intellectual movement, we in Iran also had
certain scholars, though less known, who were fully conversant with the
civilization and culture of the West and the East and who in their
research work followed a correct line of thought and critically examined
modern science and civilization from Islamic point of view.

Our philosopher and thinker Ayatullah Mutahhari, who laid down his life
for the Islamic revolution in Iran, was virtually Ayatullah Sadr's
comrade in-arms in his struggle for stopping the misuse of Western
science and civilization. The difference between the two was that till
his martyrdom Mutahhari was not introduced on a world level. Only Muslim
intellectuals took inspiration from him in their revolutionary
activities.

We see that the same line has been followed by some other distinguished
scholars and philosophers like Allamah Tabataba'i the author of
authentic commentary on the Qur'an al-Mizan, the eminent Islamic thinker
Muhammad Taqi Ja'fari and others.

What distinguishes Ayatullah Sadr is that he had been busy with his
intellectual struggle in the field of ***Our Philosophy, Our Economics
and Our Culture*** on a world level long before others. Perhaps had
mercenary Iraq not received instructions from its masters, it would not
have, despite its bloodthirstiness, dared to commit the crime of putting
him to death. The big powers regarded this great scholar as a threat to
their imperialistic designs.

The keenness which the Islamic Research Unit of the Renaissance
Foundation is showing in publishing and popularizing the works of this
scholar is not due to the fact that he and his illustrious sister were
killed in cold blood by the henchmen of imperialism for the sole crime
of defending our revolution. For this revolution many other people have
sacrificed their lives, but we are unable to discharge our duty which we
owe to these martyrs.

Then how can we render his due to this martyr who rendered valuable
service to our people and the world at large?

Actually the idea is to convey the thoughts of this great scholar who
has shown his true Islamic thinking, deep knowledge and revolutionary
spirit in all fields of knowledge and philosophy boldly and
successfully.

This book is the fruit of his last discourse. It consists of 14
lectures. The first two lectures discuss a change in the study of the
exegesis of the Qur'an. They contain very useful matter on the subject.

From the third lecture the author enters into the topical discussion of
the norms of history in the light of the Qur'an. With his deep study, he
throws ample light on this new subject. He has made valuable
contribution to the discussion of economic, political and sociological
problems. In the important 14th lecture he soars from the material world
to the spiritual world, and there also shows his mettle.

Dr. Sayyid Jamal Musavi


