What is Topical Exegesis? 2
===========================

Need of the Expansion of juristic Studies
-----------------------------------------

We have already pointed out that since long juristic discussions have
usually been arranged on topical basis, but in exegetic discussions the
commentators have followed split style and expounded the Qur'an verse by
verse from the beginning to the end. We do not mean to say that topical
style being the usual practice in jurisprudence there is no longer any
need of further topical investigations and studies in that field.

Our juristic discussions also must be expanded now. As regards topical
discussions we require new research both horizontally and vertically,
for as we have said topical method begins from the realities of life and
ends at the rules of Islamic law.[^1]

It has always been the practice of our scholars and jurists to take
their subjects of discussion from the realities of daily life and submit
them to the judgement of Islamic law. Such daily transactions as offer
of agreement, limited partnership, share-cropping of field and gardens
have induced our jurists to deduce rules regarding them from the sources
of Islamic law and state the provisions of law from divine point of
view.

In fact, it must be recognized that topical style of jurisprudence also
needs expansion. Over many centuries our scholars have continuously
carried out their researches on the basis of topical style, and have
deduced rules of law concerning every human need, but with the passage
of time and complexity of civilization new dimensions have been added to
human life.

Hence it has become necessary that with the expansion of the needs of
life, the topical juristic investigations should also expand. This shows
that although the investigation into juristic rules begins with concrete
realities, yet it is to a large extent confined to the realities of the
period of the late Shaykh Tusi or the late Muhaqqiq Hilli, while the
realities of their lifetime could meet the needs of their time only, and
not the needs of our time.

For example, the transactions, such as leasing, sharecropping and
partnership as mentioned in their books represent the market conditions
of 800 or 1000 years ago, while the market conditions and the nature of
transactions have changed today and economic relations have become
complex.

Therefore jurisprudence today must follow the same course that it did
follow during the time of the past scholars, when it showed reaction to
every event and every condition of life. As rules relating to every
situation that existed at that time were deduced from religion, the
scholars of our time also must study the problems of today topically and
deduce rules relating to them from the general principles of Islam so
that jurisprudence may expand horizontally to the required degree.

Vertically also the same topical style of jurisprudence should be
pursued so that juristic research may effectively expand. In other words
it is essential that juristic question are deeply studied vertically and
basic principles of jurisprudence are discovered. Tall buildings must be
erected on juristic foundations.

Elaborate laws should be framed reflecting the Islamic point of view,
for as we know, every set of Islamic laws concerning every field of life
is linked with basic principles ensuring human development in the field
of Islamic legislation. We find this principle clearly reflected in
Islamic economy and the Islamic laws concerning marriage and divorce.

For example, see the rules of Islamic law in respect of marriage and
conjugal relations. They are linked with the role of man and woman in
life as determined by Islam. Islamic views in this respect are basis and
fundamental.

On them the whole structure of the relevant law is based. It will be
wrong to suppose that the rules of law are incoherent ideas of
jurisprudence. They are not a literary miscellany. They should be
regarded as a natural need and as far as humanly possible effort should
be made to unravel their underlying idea and their rationale.

Need of Topical Exegesis
------------------------

Now we revert to the points of difference between topical exegesis and
split exegesis. We have already given some reasons why topical exegesis
is preferable. As we have pointed out, the field of topical exegesis is
vaster and more fruitful. It is more advanced than split exegesis. It
can continuously make progress and make new discoveries, for this type
of exegesis is based on human experience and as human experience
advances, it becomes more fruitful.

In topical exegesis the accuracy of the data provided by human
experience is checked against the Qur'an. That is the only way that
enables us to find out the basic views of the Qur'an and Islam in regard
to different subjects of life.

It may be said: What is the need of finding out these basic views of
Islam? For example, what is the need of knowing the general theory of
Islam about Prophethood? Is there any need of knowing what the Qur'an
says about the trends of history? Or why would we interpret the social
changes in the light of what the Qur'an says? Why should we know the
Islamic law of economy?

Is there any reason why should we know what the Qur'an means by the
words of sky and earth? What is the need of knowing the significance of
these words and deducing theories relating to them. We know that the
Holy Prophet himself refrained from describing any such theory in exact
and definite terms.

Generally speaking he has not mentioned any such theories. He only
presented the Qur'an to the Muslims in its present form. Then why should
we trouble ourselves to derive from it any separate theories?

In fact, today we feel a basic need of discovering these theories and
cannot dispense with this need.

The Holy Prophet explained these theories in the context of the Qur'an
in a way suited to his environment. He applied them on the whole to
Islamic life. Now it is a duty of every Muslim to rediscover these
theories within the ideological framework of that time. That framework
was natural, though it might be a little primitive.

It is only the spiritual, social, intellectual and instructional
framework prescribed by the Holy Prophet that can convey to us his ideas
in a perfect form. It alone can evaluate every situation and every event
of any time and can apply what it says to all situations.

If you compare between two common situations, this idea will be
understood better:

Suppose a man is living among the people who speak a particular
language. He wants to learn their language and its usage, and wants to
know how their mind reaches from a word to its meaning and how they
comprehend the exact meaning of a word. Now there are two ways of doing
this.

One way is that he should mix up with the people of that society and
fully participate in their activities. If he does that for some time, he
will become familiar with the correct use of their language and as a
result his mind will begin to move from the words to their meanings as
required by that language and its usage.

As this man lives among those who speak the language as their mother
tongue, a hidden stock of the meanings will soon be deposited in his
mind. As a word will be uttered he will draw upon that stock and
understand the word correctly. As a result of his contact with those who
speak the language as their mother tongue, he will get an insight into
the language like them.

In contrast a man who is not living in the society of those who speak
the language -as their mother tongue, but wants to become conversant
with its correct usages, has no alternative but to refer to its grammar
and composition. He will have to acquire the ability of deriving its
general rules.

Take the case of Arabic language. In the beginning the Arabs had to make
no effort to learn it, for they lived in a predominantly Arab society.
But later when their atmosphere changed and with the entry of other
languages into their life, their own language became weak and mixed with
a large number of foreign words, need was felt for the development of
Arabic grammar and the theories of philology.

As the atmosphere was no longer conducive to learning correct Arabic, it
became necessary to study it in scientific lines. Theories were formed
for consideration, discussion and criticism, so that the language may be
moulded according to scientific rules and new theories. This was only an
approximate example to explain our point.

The companions who lived along with the Holy Prophet might not have
understood his views as general principles, but there is no doubt that
they on the whole absorbed his ideas and were mentally impressed by
them.

The general condition of the social, spiritual and mental framework in
which they lived was helpful in understanding the Holy Prophet's
teachings and creating an accurate standard for the purpose of
evaluating the things. But such a helpful atmosphere and appropriate
conditions do not exist today. At a time when a need is being felt for
the study of the views of the Qur'an in respect of the science of Islam,
how can the general and universal theories in this respect be ignored?

During contacts between the Muslim world and the Western world
expression is given to many divergent theories and points of view.
Although the Muslims have vast treasures of intellectual resources and
the Qur'an has provided them with a rich and varied source of learning
in all branches of human knowledge, when there is a contact between a
Muslim and a Westerner, the Muslim finds himself faced with so many
theories which have emerged in different fields of life. Therefore it is
a duty of the Muslims to know Islamic view vis-Ã -vis other theories.

For this purpose they have no alternative but to go deep into the texts
of Islam and find out Islam's stand in order to be able to understand
how Islam has solved particular problems in a way commensurate with
intelligent human experience in different fields of life.

Cooperation Between Topical and Split Styles
--------------------------------------------

In this respect we have come to the conclusion that topical style is the
best style of exegesis. But that does not mean that we are in favour of
totally abandoning split style, for superiority of one style does not
mean the abandonment or suppression of the other style. It only means
that more attention should be paid to the better style, for topical
exegesis is one step ahead of split exegesis.

Split exegesis being the foundation on which topical exegesis is based,
there is no sense in superseding it. All that we mean is that instead of
one two steps should be taken, the first step being split exegesis and
the second step, which is more advanced, being topical exegesis.

[^1]: (Horizontal expansion in juristic discussion means the study of
the questions and the rules of law which did not exist previously, but
in modern life they have become a matter of daily requirement. The
Shi'ah jurists call them \`current issues'. They have compiled special
treatises to cover these questions and have issued them as supplements
to their main treatises. Such new questions include the questions of
grafting limbs, plastic surgery, artificial insemination, prayers in
polar regions and such transactions as insurance and dealings in
value-bearing papers like cheques, drafts, bonds and company shares.
Vertical expansion of topical method includes looking deep into the
rules of Islamic law and discovering the values which the law-giver of
Islam never consented to dispense with).


