Topical Exegesis 3
==================

We have already mentioned some points which require that preference
should be given to topical exegesis rather than to usual split exegesis.
On the basis of these observations, we have shown that topical exegesis
is more fruitful and more capable of making new discoveries and finding
out the principles on which the whole Qur'anic system is based.

Now we would like to give another practical reason why topical exegesis
is preferable. It takes a very long time to complete the usual course of
exegesis from the beginning of the Qur'an to the end of it. That is why
only a small number of Muslim scholars have had the honour of completing
it. We feel that even the whole life is short to complete this long
course. So we prefer a short course during which a few selected subjects
of the Qur'an may be thoroughly studied.

Accordingly we have chosen a few subjects and collected the relevant
material on which the Qur'an throws light. We propose to make as far as
possible a coordinated study of these important subjects. We would deal
only with the basic principles and fundamental ideas connected with them
and will try to cover each of these subjects is not more than five to
ten lectures so that we may be able to deal with a good variety of the
Qur'anic subjects.[^1]

Now the question was with which subject we should begin. The first
subject which we have chosen for discussion is the 'Trends of History in
the Qur'an.' Has human history any definite trends or norms in the
Qur'anic sense? Are the developments in human history governed by any
laws? What are the laws which make human history? How did human history
begin and how does it develop? What are the factors effective in the
theory of history?

What is man's role in history and what is Allah's role in it? How can
Prophethood play a role in this social field?

These are the points which have been dealt with by the Qur'an in its
important sections from different angles in order to elucidate the
trends of history. For example, the stories of the Prophets which form
an important part of the Qur'anic material from historical point of
view, have been discussed by a good number of historians. They have
dealt with all the events and happenings mentioned by the Qur'an.

Wherever they have observed any gap, they have filled it with the help
of traditions, the Holy Books of the former religions or with help of
myths and the folktales. They have compiled their books in the style of
historical stories, based on this Qur'anic material.

These stories have been studied from another angle also. The Qur'an's
style of story-telling and its value from the viewpoint of its
originality, freshness and its motivating power have been discussed
thoroughly.

We now want to discuss this Qur'anic material from still another angle.
We want to see if some part of this material can throw any light on the
norms of history. In other words, we want to see if we can reasonably
infer, from the Qur'an any laws regulating history and its trends.

The field of history like any other field is full of phenomena. Just as
phenomena constitute the fields of cosmology, physics and botany,
similarly the field of history also is full of phenomena in the sense
that we will explain later, just as scientific phenomena are governed by
their laws, similarly in the case of history also we can look for its
laws.

We can ask: Do there exist any laws and norms which govern the
historical events? Has the Qur'an expressed any positive or negative,
detailed or brief opinion about such laws? Can the Qur'an carry out any
scientific investigations?

Some people think that as we should not expect the Qur'an to discuss any
physical, cosmological, nuclear and botanical laws, similarly we should
not expect it to scientifically discuss the laws of history.

The Qur'an is not a book of scientific discussions and discoveries. It
is a Book of Guidance. It is also not a textbook revealed to the Holy
Prophet as a teacher, for being taught to any group of specialists and
educationists. It has been revealed to bring the people from darkness to
light - from the darkness of pre-Islamic period to the light of the
guidance of Islam.

Hence the Qur'an is a book that guides, instructs and develops man, not
a book of scientific discoveries. That is why we do not expect it to let
us know the principles of science. We do not want it to explain to us
the problem of physics, chemistry, botany or zoology.

It is true that in the Qur'an there are hints of all these sciences and
as far as possible the Qur'an has dealt with them with divine deepness,
for it is a book which covers the past, the present and the future. It
has been able to go hundreds of years ahead of human experiments in the
discovery of scientific truths. But in spite of all that it is obvious
that these hints are meant only for instructional and practical purposes
and do not aim at teaching physics, chemistry etc.

The Qur'an does not want to take the place of man's creative power, nor
does it want to restrain man from using his own talents and
capabilities. It is man's indisputable right to make discoveries in all
fields of life through his vast knowledge and experience.

The Qur'an does not want to occupy this science. It introduces itself as
a spiritual and psychological power which can build man and by causing
an explosion within him can make him march forward in the right
direction.

When we recognize that the Qur'an is a Book of Guidance, not a book of
scientific discoveries, it is improper to expect it to discuss the
general principles of science. These principles should be discovered by
man by means of understanding the laws governing them. Why should we
expect the Qur'an to stipulate any principle in this field or to have
any particular point of view in this respect? Why should we ask the
Qur'an to give us any scientific conception of the trends of history?
What special connection has the Qur'an with this particular field?

If the Qur'an begins to deal with such laws and make such discoveries,
the character and purpose of the book will be changed. Instead of being
a book revealed for the entire humanity, it will be degraded to being a
book for the specialists in a particular science belonging to a
particular period.

Difference Between History and Other Sciences
---------------------------------------------

This objection is valid in itself, and on the whole, it is correct to
say that the Qur'an is a-Book of Guidance, not of science, and that it
does not want to curtail the scope of human effort, nor does it want to
dry up man's powers of development and originality.

But still there is a basic difference between the field of history and
the fields of the rest of the sciences of the world. This basic
difference turns history and the laws governing it, into a thing which
is closely related to the function of the Qur'an as Guidance. That is
not the case with other sciences.

In short, the Qur'an is a Book of Guidance which brings about the
desired change in man, that is, in the words of Qur'an itself,

***it brings them out o f darkness into light.*** (Sarah al-Baqarah,
2:257)

This desired change must have two aspects. The first aspect of it
concerns actions. Man must come back to the adherence of necessary laws.
This aspect of the change is divine in the sense that it relates to the
divine laws revealed to the Holy Prophet, the revelation of which covers
the laws as well as the trends of history, for these laws are ahead of
the environment in which the Qur'an was revealed and more extensive than
the individual sent to preach them. This aspect of the desired change
represents a change in the content, that is a change in the laws and
rules according to which one is called upon to act.

This is the divine aspect of the change. But there is another aspect of
it. The change was originally carried out by the Holy Prophet and his
devoted companions. It becomes a human act when we see that this vital
change first took place in a particular group of people, that is the
Holy Prophet and his companions. It may be regarded as an embodied
social action in these persons.

This change becomes a human act when we see that it came into clash with
various other social trends from all around and faced dogmatic battles
and social, political and military encounters. It becomes a human act
when we see it in its human form in history and observe its relationship
with other trends and other groups which either support it or oppose it.

It becomes a human act when we see it from all these angles. The Holy
Prophet and his companions were as human beings as any other people.
Like any other human society they were also governed by historical laws.

Thus this process of change of which the Qur'an speaks and which was
carried out by the Holy Prophet, has two aspects. From the viewpoint of
its having been connected with the revelation and the source of
revelation, it is divine and ultra historical, but as it had a
historical background and involved the effort of human being and faced
the opposition of some others, we call it a historical act governed by
the laws of history determined by Allah to regulate all historical
phenomena.

That is why we believe that when the Qur'an speaks from the standpoint
of the people governed by the same rules as all other human beings and
makes no mention of a heavenly mission.

We see that when the Qur'an speaks of the set-back of the Muslims in the
Battle of Uhud following their remarkable victory in the Battle of Badr
and explains why they suffered a defeat, it does not say that the
heavenly mission was defeated.

A heavenly mission is far above success and failure which pertain to
material situations only. A heavenly mission does not run away from the
battlefield and will never run away. The person who runs away is a human
being, not the school of Islam. Even if this person is an embodiment of
a heavenly mission, he is still a man governed by the laws of history.
In this respect the Qur'an says:

***These (victories and defeats) are only the vicissitudes which We
cause to follow one another for mankind.*** (Surah Ale-Imran, 3:140)

In this verse the Qur'an speaks to the people as such and says that the
event of Uhud is merely a question of the laws and norms of history. The
Muslims gained victory at Badr because they through their own efforts
fulfilled the conditions which necessitated their victory. At Uhud the
conditions necessitated their defect, and hence they were defeated. The
Qur'an says:

If ***you have received a blow, the disbelievers also had received a
similar blow. These are only the vicissitudes which We cause to***
follow ***one another.*** (Surah -Ale Imran, 3:140)

The Qur'an means to say that the Muslims must not think that it is their
divine right to gain victory and receive divine help. Victory is the
natural right of those who fulfil the conditions conducive to it. Allah
has fixed laws and norms of victory in this world. He awards victory
only to those who observe these laws.

The Muslims were defeated at Uhud because they could not make themselves
concordant with the conditions of victory. The above verse talks about
human action, not about a divine action which may be termed heavenly
help.

The Qur'an has gone still further. Threatening mankind it says if these
men will not perform their historical duty, and will not act on the
basis of their heavenly mission, the laws and norms of history will not
be suspended for them.

Their position will surely change, and the laws and norms of history
will put them aside and will bring in their place some other peoples who
fulfil the conditions of victory and are capable of performing a better
role so that they may be witnesses of this ***ummah*** (nation) when
this ***ummah*** will be a witness of others.

The Qur'an says:

***If you do not go forth, He will afflict you with a painful doom, and
will choose instead o f you a people other than you. You cannot harm Him
at all. Allah is able to do every thing.*** (Surah Tawbah, 9:39)

***Believers, whosoever of you becomes a renegade from*** ***his
religion, (in his stead) Allah will bring a people whom He loves and who
love Him, humble towards believers, stern towards disbelievers, striving
in the way o f Allah and fearing not the blame of any blamer. Such is
the grace of Allah which He gives unto whom He will. Allah is
All-Embracing, All-Knowing.*** (Surah al-Maidah, 5:54)

Here the Qur'an talks about the second aspect of the process of change
and tells man his weak and strong points. It speaks of man's rectitude
and deviation and of the conditions conducive to his activity and
inertness. This shows that the discussion of laws of history is a
subject that concerns the Qur'an as a Book of Guidance and as a book
which leads man from the darkness of perdition to the light of
rectitude, for the practical or the human aspect of this process is
influenced by the norms of history.

Hence we should be inspired by this human aspect, and it is in the
fitness of things that the Qur'an should give us some indication as to
how it determines the framework of its outlook on the trends of history.

This shows that the case of the laws and norms of history is different
from that of the laws of physics, chemistry, astronomy, biology, botany
etc. These laws and norms are not directly affected by the historical
process, but the process of change is directly influenced by it. Hence
when the second aspect of the change is studied, it is necessary that
the trends of history should be explained.

The Qur'an should give us some general principles in this respect. Of
course it is not proper to expect the Qur'an as a Book of Guidance to
turn into a book of history and its trends, and give details of even
those points which have no connection with the process of the change.

The Qur'an cannot deal with the details which are not effective in the
change desired by the Holy Prophet, although these details are also
covered by the trends of history. The Qur'an pays attention only to the
basic and important things. For the Qur'an it is enough to be a Book of
Guidance and a Book that leads from darkness to light. It works
exclusively within this framework which has great importance in itself.

The Qur'an mentions some historical events and the laws of history, but
only with a view to throwing light on the process of change. It does so
within the limits of providing a correct outlook on the conditions and
events of life and the limits observed by the Holy Prophet.

During our study of the Qur'an we observe that it has mentioned the laws
of history with the same firmness as is applicable to the laws of
cosmology. The Qur'an is quite explicit in this respect, and has pointed
to this fact in different ways. In many verses it has been mentioned as
a general rule that the historical vicissitudes represented by the
Qur'anic stories are governed by the laws of history.

This fact has been mentioned in some other verses where these laws and
the instances to which they apply have been described, and some examples
of what happens to man in the course of history have been given.

In some verses this fact has been mentioned in such a way that the
theories and their application have been mixed together. In other words
after giving a general principle some instances of its application also
have been described.

There are some other verses which exhort to the study of the past
events, and encourage a thorough investigation of them. As you know such
investigation in itself is a scientific work aiming at finding out the
law by looking into details.

Thus the Qur'an in different ways and different tones has explained the
trends of history and has unfolded them.

[^1]: Unfortunately out of these subjects the late Ayatullah Shahid
could deal with only one subject, that is 'The Trends of History'
Saddam, the despotic ruler of Iraq did not allow this great scholar any
further opportunity, and following a long period of detention by the
authorities in Iraq, he was martyred on 23rd Jumadiul Awwal, 1400 A.H.


