Norms of history mentioned in the Qur'an
========================================

As we have said the Qur'anic concept of the norms of history has been
mentioned in a large number of its verses and the fact of their
existence has been emphasized in many ways.

In some verses the concept of the norms has been given in general terms
and in some other verses their examples have also been given. Similarly
some verses call upon us to make a thorough investigation of historical
events in order to find out historical trends and norms. We see that a
very large number of verses have dealt with this subject in different
ways.

In this connection we propose to quote a good number of verses. Some of
the verses which we produce here as evidence, quite clearly indicate the
existence of the norms of history. Some other verses, though not so
specific, are in perfect harmony with the spirit of the teachings of the
Qur'an regarding this issue, and may be looked upon as a supporting
evidence.

Some Examples of Norms of History in the Qur'an
-----------------------------------------------

The following two verses are an example of those verses of the Qur'an
which describe the idea of the laws and the norms of history in general
terms:

***For every nation there is an appointed time. When their time comes,
then they cannot put it back an hour, nor can they put it forward.***
(Surah Yunus, 10:49, Surah al-A'raf, 7:34)

As may be noticed, in these two verses it has been said that for every
nation, that is for every society there is an appointed time. It is
evident that this "appointed time" is different from that which exists
in the case of every individual.

The Qur'an calls ***ummah*** or nation that society the members of which
are linked together on the basis of some common ideas and principles
which furnish them with certain common powers and capabilities. Such a
society has an appointed time. In other words like an individual, it
lives, moves and dies. So long as an individual moves, we say that he is
alive. When he ceases to move, he dies. The same is the case with a
society. As the death of an individual has an appointed time and is
governed by a law and a system, similarly societies also have their
appointed time and are governed by certain laws of their own.

These two verses give us a clear idea that history has some norms which
are different from the laws and norms which exclusively apply to the
individuals. Allah says in the Qur'an:

***And We destroyed no township, but there was a known decree for it. No
nation can outstrip its appointed time, nor can they lag behind.***
(Surah al-Hijr, 15:4-5)

Exactly the same thing is mentioned in the following verses:

***No nation can outstrip its appointed time, nor can they lag
behind.*** (Surah al-Mu'minun, 23:43)

***Have they not seen the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and
what things Allah has created, and that it may be that their own term
was nigh? In what report after that will they believe?*** (Surah
al-A'raf, 7:185)

The wording of the verses indicate that the appointed time which is nigh
or about the nearness of which warning is being given, refers to the
collective death of a society, not the individual death of its members,
for all members of a nation do not normally die together. When the
collective death of a people is mentioned, it means their social death,
not their individual death.

As we know individually people die at different times. But when we look
at them as one group bound together in matters of justice and injustice,
prosperity and misery, then they have one appointed time of death. This
social death is the death of a nation. In this sense the following verse
is closely linked with the verse preceding it:

***Your Lord is Forgiver, full o f Mercy. If He were to take them to
task, for what they earn, He would hasten on the doom for them; but they
have an appointed term from which they will find no escape. And those
townships! We destroyed them when they did wrong, and We appointed a
fixed time for their destruction.*** (Surah al-Kahf, 18:58-59)

***If Allah were to take mankind to task for their wrongdoing, He would
not leave a single living creature on the face of earth, but He
reprieves them to an appointed time, and when their appointed time
comes, they cannot put it*** off ***an hour nor can they advance it.***
(Surah an-Nahl, 16:61)

***If Allah were to take mankind to task for what they earned, He would
not leave a living creature on the face of the earth; but He reprieves
them to an appointed time, and when their term comes, then surely (they
will know that) Allah is ever aware of His slaves.*** (Surah Fatir,
35:45)

In the last two verses the Qur'an says that if Allah wanted to take
people to task during their lifetime, He would not leave a living
creature and would destroy all people.

Difference Between Punishment in This Life and the Next
-------------------------------------------------------

Now there is a difficulty about this Qur'anic concept. As we know, all
people are never unjust. There may be Prophets, Imams and their
executors living among them. Will this general destruction include the
Prophets, the Imams and the righteous believers? This doubt has been so
magnified that some people have produced these two verses as a proof of
the invalidity of the idea of the infallibility of the Prophets and the
Imams.

The fact is that these two verses neither speak of this worldly
punishment nor that of the next world. They speak of the natural
consequence of the unjust deeds of a nation. The natural consequences of
its deeds do not remain confined to the wicked of society but
encompasses all its members irrespective of their personalities and
conduct.

When as a result of their misconduct Israelites were doomed to roaming
about in the desert, this punishment did not remain confined to the
wicked. It equally affected Prophet Musa, who was the most pure and
active person of his time and who most courageously had faced the tyrant
and his tyranny. Prophet Musa being a member of the community had to
share the chastisement inflicted on the community as a whole for its
wickedness. Consequently he also had to wander about in the desert for
40 years along with other Israelites.

Where as a result of their deviation from the right path the Muslims
were afflicted with a calamity and Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah was imposed on
them to ride roughshod over their lives, property, honour and creed, it
were not the wrongdoers among the Muslims society alone who suffered.

Even the infallible Imam Husayn, the grandson of the Holy Prophet, who
was the most virtuous and the most upright person on the face of the
earth, was killed along with his companions and the members of his
family. All this was in consonance with the logic of the norms of
history. When a punishment in this world comes to a society in
accordance with the norms of history, it does not remain confined to the
unjust of that society. That is why the Qur'an says:

***Guard yourselves against a chastisement which cannot fall exclusively
on those of you who are wrongdoers, and know that Allah is severe in
punishment.*** (Surah al-Anfal, 8:25)

At the same time the Qur'an at another place says:

***No burdened soul can bear another's burden.*** (Surah Fatir, 35:18)

Yes, in the next world only the culprits will be punished. But this
worldly punishment is more extensive and affects the culprit and the
innocent alike. Hence the two previous verses have nothing to do with
the punishment that will be awarded on the Day of Judgement. They speak
only of the norms of history and what a nation can achieve through its
efforts.

Another Example:

***They indeed wish to scare you from the land so that they may drive
you out from there. In that case they will not be able to stay there for
long. Same has been our method in the case of Our Messengers whom We
sent before you, and you will not find Our method to be changing.***
(Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:76)

This verse also lays stress on the norms of history. It says:

***You will not find Our method (Our law) to be changing.***

In other words, Allah assures that the way He treated the former
Prophets is still valid because His law never changes.

Allah says that the people of Makkah now want to harass the Prophet in
order to drive him out from there, for they have failed to eliminate
him, to silence his voice and to crush his mission. Now the only option
left to them is to drive the Prophet out of their city. This is one of
the norms of history which we propose to explain.

According to this norm the people of Makkah could not stay there for
long when after the failure of all their efforts to resist the Holy
Prophet they had become so desperate as to drive him out of this city.
This did not mean that any chastisement was to befall them soon. Hence
it cannot be said that no chastisement befell the people of Makkah while
they successfully harassed the Holy Prophet and forced him to emigrate
to Madina.

What the verse means is that they will not for long continue to be a
fighting force, for because of their behaviour they will soon lose their
position and will cease to be a force to be reckoned with. The Prophet
who has baffled their designs so far, in future also will succeed in
practically overawing them and breaking their resistance. And so it was.

After the Holy Prophet left Makkah, they could not withstand for long.
Their resistance was broken. Makkah fell and became a Muslim State. A
few years later it became the second centre of Islam.

Thus the above quoted verse first speaks of a norm of history and then
emphatically declares:

***You will never find our method to be changing.***

The following verses are other examples:

***There have been many examples before you. So travel across the land
and see what has been the fate of the rejecters.*** (Surah Ale Imran,
3:137)

This verse lays stress on the norms of history and urges people to
follow the truth and look into historical events to learn a lesson from
them and find out the trends of history.

***Messengers indeed have been denied before you, but they were patient
under the denial and prosecution till Our help reached them. There is
none to alter the words of Allah (the conditions of His promises).
Already there have reached you some reports about the Messengers.***
(Surah al-An'am, 6:34)

This verse encouraging the Holy Prophet, tells him of what the past
people experienced, and explains that in this respect there exists a law
and a norm which is equally valid in his case as it has been in the case
of the former Prophets.

In accordance with this law which has already proved correct in the case
of the former Prophets, he will soon receive divine help and will gain
victory provided he fulfils all the pre-requisite conditions. These
conditions are patience, perseverance etc. Success can be achieved only
through these traits. That is why the Qur'an says:

***They were patient under the denial and the persecution till Our help
reached them. There is none to alter the words of Allah - the conditions
of His promises.*** (Surah al-An'am, 6:34)

According to this verse the words of Allah cannot be altered. In other
words the pre-requisite conditions and the circumstances on the
materialization of which the fulfilment of His promises depends, cannot
change over history.

Here \`word' signifies the relation between success and the fulfilment
of its conditions and other circumstance, as explained in different
verses dispersed in the Qur'an. Only a hint has been made here. This
relation is a norm of history.

Are the Norms of History Changeable?
------------------------------------

On the basis of this norms the Qur'an says:

***When a warner came to them, it aroused in them nothing but
repugnance, arrogance in the land, and plotting evil; and the evil plot
encloses only the men who make it. Then do they expect the application
of a law different from that which applied to the people of the old? You
will not find any change in Allah's law, nor will you find any case of
its failure.*** (Surah al-Fatir, 35: 42-43)

***Did you suppose that you would enter paradise while yet you have not
come to the like of that which befell those who passed away before you?
They were afflicted by misery and hardship and were so severely shaken
that the messenger and those who believed along with him said: \`When
comes Allah's help?' Now surely Allah's help is nigh!*** (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:214)

Allah criticizing these people, asks them why they expect that there
should be an exception in their case with regard to the norms of
history?

They should not expect that the laws of history would fail to be
effective in their case and they would enter paradise without leading
the life of those nations which were successful and entered paradise.
These nations passed a hard life so much so that in the words of the
Qur'an, they were severely shaken. Hardships, worries and unfavourable
circumstances are a sort of a training school for this Ummah and are a
test of its will and perseverance.

They are an exercise which enables this Ummah to gain power gradually
and occupy the position of the middle nation. Allah's help is nigh, but
it has a method. It is not accidental, nor does anyone get it
haphazardly.

Allah's help is nigh, but according to the Qur'an, to get it, it is
necessary to know historical norms and understand the logic of history,
for it often happens that a patient has his medicine near at hand, but
he does not use it because he is not aware of its medicinal properties.

The knowledge of the norms of history enables people to receive divine
help. The above verse denounces those who wish to be an exception to the
norms of history. The Qur'an says:

***We sent not to any township a warner, but it's pampered ones
declared: \`Surely we are disbelievers in that which you bring to us'.
And they say we are (more than you) in wealth and children. (In the
Hereafter too) we are not going to be punished.*** (Surah Saba, 34:34 -
35)

All over history and in all societies there has always been the same
relationship between the Prophets and the pompous people living in
luxury. This relationship points to a norm of history.

It should not be regarded as a mere chance. Had it been a chance only,
it would not have been repeated again and again and would not have
acquired a generality to the extent that Allah says:

***We sent not to any township a warner, but its pampered ones declared:
. . ."***

Therefore there is always a negative relationship and a contradiction
between the celestial missions in the social life of people and the
position taken by the pampered ones living in luxury. In fact this
relationship separates the role of the Prophets in social life from that
of the luxurious ones.

On the whole this relationship is a part of the social outlook of these
two groups, as we will explain when we deal with the role of Prophethood
in society and the social position of the Prophets. There we shall show
that those who live in luxury are the natural opponents of Prophethood
in society.

That is why the Qur'an says:

***When We would destroy a township We send commandments to its people
who lead a luxurious life, and they commit abominations therein, and so
the word of doom has effect for it, and thus We annihilate that township
completely. How many generations have We destroyed since Nuh! And Allah
suffices as the Knower and the Beholder of the sins of His slaves.***
(Surah Bani Isra'il, 17: 16 -17)

This verse speaks of a definite relationship between the injustice of
the rulers and the destruction which follows it. The verse emphasizes
that this relationship being a historical norm, has existed all over
history. On this very subject another verse says:

***If they had observed the Tawrat and the Injil and that which was
revealed from above them and from beneath their feet. " (Surah***
al-Maidah, 5:66)

Still another verse says:

***If the people of the township had believed and refrained from evil,
surely We should have opened for them blessings from the sky and from
the earth. But they denied, and so We seized them on account of what
they used to earn.*** (Surah al-A\`raf, 7: 96)

***Had they kept treading the right path, we would have given them
abundant water to drink.*** (Surah al-Jinn, 72:16)

The above three verses show that there is a special relationship between
acting in accordance with the commandments of Allah on the one hand, and
prosperity and abundance of production on the other. In modern
terminology it may be called the relation between fair distribution and
increased production.

The Qur'an emphasizes that there can be no shortage of production and no
poverty where fair distribution prevails. Fair distribution increases
wealth and boosts up prosperity. Some people think that fair
distribution causes poverty, but that is not true. The trend of history
proves contrary to that and shows that whenever celestial rules of
distribution are observed, national wealth increases and the blessings
of the heaven and the earth are showered.

Necessity of Investigating Historical Events
--------------------------------------------

Other verses of the Qur'an urge the people to thoroughly examine the
historical events and ponder over them so that they may discover the
laws of nature and the trends and norms of history. Allah says in the
Qur'an: ***Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the
consequence for*** ***those who were before them? Allah wiped them out.
And for the disbelievers there will be the like thereof.*** (Surah
Muhammad, 47:10)

***Have they not travelled in the land and seen the nature of the
consequence for those who were before them?*** (Surah Yusuf, 12: 109)

***How many a township have We destroyed while it was sinful, so that
lies in ruin, and how many a deserted well and lofty tower! Have they
not travelled in the land, so that they may have hearts to feel and ears
to hear? For indeed it is not the eyes that grow blind, but it is the
hearts in the bosom, that grow blind.*** (Surah al-Hajj, 22: 46)

***How many a generation have We destroyed before them, who were
mightier than these in prowess so that they overran the lands! Had they
any place of refuge? Surely therein is a reminder for him who has a
heart or gives ear with full intelligence?*** (Surah Qaf, 50: 36 - 37)

These verses taken together make clear the concept of the norms of
history. They emphatically say that like any other field there exist
definite laws in the field of history too.

Importance of Discovering Norms of History From the Qur'an
----------------------------------------------------------

The discovery of this Qur'anic concept is a big achievement, for as we
know, the Qur'an is the first book which emphatically and in a very
convincing way tells us of the existence of the norms of history and
severely opposes the idea that events take place automatically. It also
rejects the view that all events being divinely decreed, we have no
choice but to submit to them.

Most people regard historical events as a series of incongruous
happenings. They interpret them on the basis of accident, fate or power
of Allah, whose decree cannot be resisted.

The Qur'an is absolutely against this wrong idea. It does not consider
any event to be without a cause or to be a mere manifestation of Allah's
irresistible power. In contrast, it tells human intelligence that the
field of history is governed by definite laws and norms, and that to be
the master of his destiny man must know them. If you are aware of these
laws, you can influence them, otherwise if you keep your eyes shut,
these laws will certainly overpower you. Therefore you should open your
eyes so that you may recognize them and dominate them instead of being
dominated by them.

This great Qur'anic discovery paved the way for human intelligence to
understand and realize the practical role of history in human life.
Eight centuries after the revelation of the Qur'an efforts in this
respect were begun by the Muslims themselves.

It was Ibn Khaldun who undertook the study of history and discovered its
laws and norms. At least four centuries thereafter in the beginning of
the Renaissance period the Europeans began to pay attention to this
subject which was not pursued further by the Muslims.

The Europeans discussed this subject from various angles, and the basis
of their way of thinking each of the various European schools of thought
such as the idealists, the materialists and others tried to determine
the laws of history from its own point of view.

As a result several theories emerged, the most renowned and clamorous of
them being historical materialism or Marxism which has influenced
history itself. Therefore we may say that all efforts in this connection
has been inspired by the Qur'an, which still retains the proud privilege
of introducing this idea for the first time in the field of human
knowledge.


