Laws of History in the Qur'an
=============================

Now time has come that we should know the different ways in which the
laws of history are mentioned in the Qur'an. In other words, we should
see how the laws which, from the viewpoint of the Qur'an, govern history
have been expressed by it, and how has the Qur'an pointed to the norms
of history.

In the Qur'an we find three forms of the expression of the laws of
history. We propose to study each of them minutely and to show how they
differ from each other.

(i) The first form in which the Qur'an has mentioned a law of history is
that of a conditional form. When two phenomena or two sets of phenomena
are linked together in the realm of history, the Qur'an expresses this
link in the form of the two clauses of a conditional sentence indicating
that whenever the conditional clause (protoasis) materializes, the
concluding clause (apodosis) is also bound to materialize. This form is
applicable to many natural laws and norms also on various levels.

For example, when we speak of the law of boiling, we always express this
law by means of a conditional sentence. We say that if water as a result
of proximity to heat attains a certain degree of temperature (100Â°C), it
boils because of a special kind of pressure.

This is an example of the relationship between the two clauses of a
conditional statement. The phenomenon of the boiling of water appears
whenever a certain condition, that is proximity to heat and a particular
degree of temperature is fulfilled. Here the natural phenomenon of
boiling, which means conversion of water into gas, has been described in
the form of a conditional sentence.

This law does not say whether this condition has been fulfilled or not.
It merely says that if this particular condition is fulfilled, its
consequence inevitably materializes. In other words water must boil at a
certain degree of heat. That is what the law of a conditional statement
tells us.

This sort of laws renders great service to man in his ordinary life, and
plays, an effective role in his development. With the knowledge of these
laws man can take a suitable action in respect of the consequence of a
condition. If he needs it, he may take action to fulfill the
prerequisite condition, and if he is not interested in it, he can
prevent its fulfillment.

If a person is interested in the boiling of water, he should arrange the
materialization of the appropriate conditions stipulated in the law of
boiling, and if he wants water not to boil, he should ensure that water
is not heated to the boiling point.

Hence, a law advanced in the form of a conditional sentence has a
constructive value in human life. From the above it also becomes clear
that there is a philosophy behind the expression of laws in the form of
conditional sentences. Allah has based the system of this world on
universal laws and firm norms. He draws man's attention to this firm and
compact system of the world so that man may know where he stands in it.
Allah tells man about the factors which make or mar his life so that he
himself may be able to meet his due needs properly.

If the boiling process of water was to take place accidentally, was not
subject to a definite law and did not require heat, man could not
control this process, nor would it have been possible for him to boil or
not to boil water as he wanted.

Man acquired this skill when he came to know the definite norms and firm
laws of the world. The laws of nature have been put forward to him in
the form of conditional propositions, thus enabling him to see things in
light, not in darkness.

In the light of the laws of nature he can determine his course of action
in regard to the world.

Exactly the same applies to the forms in which the Qur'an enunciates the
laws of history. In many cases we find these laws put forward in the
form of conditional statements. For this purpose the Qur'an mentions two
interconnected social or historical phenomena and says whenever the
first phenomenon appears, the second phenomenon is bound to appear. It
does not say when the first phenomenon appears or when it does not.

Several of the Qur'anic verses mentioned by us earlier narrate the
historical laws in the form of a conditional statement. In this
connection the following verse may be recalled:

***Allah does not change the condition of a people unless they change
what is in their hearts.*** (Surah ar-Ra'd, 13:11)

Here a law of history has been mentioned, and as we explained earlier
and will further explain later, it has been put forward in the form of a
conditional statement, for the verse says that there exists an
inseparable link between the two different changes, namely a change in
man's inner content and a change in his external position.

Substantially this is a case of conditional statement. The divine law
mentioned here virtually says if a people change internally, their
material condition and social position are bound to change consequently.
Hence divine law has been stated in the form of a conditional statement.

The following verse is another example of a law expressed by means of a
conditional statement:

***If they continue to tread the right path, we shall give them to drink
of water in abundance.*** (Surah al Jinn, 72: 16)

We have already said that this verse speaks of a law of history,
according to which good produce depends on fair distribution. This is a
clear case of a conditional statement.

Another example is provided by the following verse:

***When We would destroy a township, We send commandment to its people
who live at ease, and afterward they commit abomination therein and so
the word (of doom) has effect on it, and We annihilate it with complete
annihilation.*** (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17: 17)

In this verse also a historical norm has been stated in the form of a
conditional statement. Here two things have been combined, one of them
being the direction of the command of Allah to the wicked and those who
live at ease and their disobedience of these commandments, and the other
being the consequent destruction and annihilation of such a society.

This is another law of history put forward as a conditional statement.
The law does not say in which circumstances the condition mentioned in
it is to materialize. It only stipulates that as and when the condition
will materialize, the consequent clause of the law is also bound to
materialize with it. This is the first form in which the laws of history
have been mentioned in the Qur'an.

(ii) The second form in which the laws of history have been advanced in
the Qur'an is that of a definite and unqualified statement. In many
cases the laws of nature are stated in this way also. When an
astronomical prediction is made on the basis of the movement of the
planets, such as the prediction about the time of a lunar or a solar
eclipse, no condition is attached to such a statement.

In this case a scientific law or a scientific question is put forward as
a definite and unconditional statement. Man can in no way influence or
modify the conditions and the circumstances of such occurrences.
Therefore a prediction about them is made in the form of a definite and
unqualified statement without any conditions being attached to it.

When we say that the sun will eclipse on such and such day or say that
the moon will eclipse on such and such night. We express a scientific
question in the form of a definite statement and not a conditional
statement.

In such cases it is not within human power to change the conditions or
the circumstances of the matter in question because it is not
conditional. When we say that the sun or that the moon will eclipse,
though we speak with reference to the future, we make a firm statement.
The same is true of the weather forecasts based on scientific laws.

When it is said that it will rain in such and such area, the statement
is firm and unconditional and forecasts rainfall at a definite place and
at a definite time.

This is the second form of the expression of the laws of history. While
dealing with the analysis of the social elements we will cite some more
examples of it from the Qur'an.

This second form of expression of the laws and norms of history has
created a wrong impression among the European thinkers, who maintain
that historical norms are inconsistent with human freedom, for if it is
presumed that they regulate man's life, he can have no freedom of
choice.

This wrong idea has led some thinkers to say that in this world man has
only a negative role, for he cannot change the norms of history. These
thinkers have renounced man's freedom for the sake of historical norms
to which they have attached too much importance.

The followers of this way of thinking say that the role which man plays
is negative, not positive. Man is like a device which moves as required.
We will elaborate this idea later.

Some other thinkers with a view to combine the idea of human freedom and
the idea of the apparent existence of the norms of history, maintain
that it is man's power of choice alone which establishes the norms of
history. The historical laws are in fact subject to man's will. Hence we
need not sacrifice man's freedom for the sake of historical laws.

On the other hand it may be said that man's freedom and his power of
choice is a phenomenon which in its turn is itself a part of the norms
of history. In this case also though man's freedom is affected, yet in a
concealed manner.

Some believe that the laws of history should be rejected altogether in
the interest of human freedom. A number of European scholars are of the
opinion that to maintain man's freedom the scene of history should be
kept outside the purview of the universal laws and it should be
maintained that no special laws are applicable to the field of history.
This, they say, is necessary to promote man's free choice in respect of
his activities.

All these points of view are largely incorrect, as they are based on the
wrong idea of the existence of a basic contradiction between the laws of
history and man's freedom. What is the source of this misunderstanding?
The misunderstanding has arisen from the fact that the scholars having
this wrong notion are under the impression that the laws of history are
always and invariably expressed in the form of a verbal statement having
the import of certainty.

Had it been so really and had we believed that in the presence of the
laws of history no scope was left for human effort and initiative, their
contention would, of cause, have been correct to refute their wrong
impression it is enough to refer back to the first form of the laws of
history, that is the form of a conditional statement.

In the conditional statements which we have quoted from the Qur'an, the
main condition mostly refers to man's will, his choice and the relation
between the conditional clause and the consequent clause. It may be
observed that the conditional clause invariably implies man's effort and
his work.

For example take the Qur'anic verse which says:

***Allah does not change the condition of a people until they change
what is in their hearts.***

In this verse it has been specifically stated that the change in the
condition of people depends on their own deeds. They themselves can
bring about a change if they so want. When a law of history is mentioned
in the language of a conditional statement, and the stipulated condition
directly relates to man's will and choice, then the law of history
itself necessitates the existence of man's free will and his choice.

It gives man freedom of action so that he may change his condition. It
is knowledge of a natural law, such as the law of the boiling of water
enhances his power, for when he knows under what conditions water boils,
he can boil it at his will.

In this way the laws of history in the form of conditional statements
are not only not inconsistant with man's freedom and will, but in
contrast they lay stress on these qualities. They also explain the
results of man's actions so that he may take the proper course leading
to the desired results. This was the second form of the laws of history.

(iii) The third form of the laws of history to which the Qur'an has
given special attention, relates to the laws which are not firmly
resolute and unbreakable, but imply only a sort of natural tendency of
human history.

Obviously there is a difference between a tendency and a firm law. For
further clarification, let us conceive the idea of a law. Our normal
conception of a scientific law is that of a humanly unbreakable norm,
for we know that man cannot violate or evade natural laws.

It is within man's power not to offer prayers, for to offer prayers is a
duty prescribed by Islamic law, and not a law of creation or a universal
law. Similarly one can take alcoholic drinks, for prohibition of
intoxicants is a rule of Islamic law, not a law of creation. In contrast
man can never violate universal laws and norms.

For example, it is not possible to make water not to boil or to delay
it's boiling a single moment in spite of the presence of all the
conditions necessary for its boiling, for the law of boiling is
inescapable and cannot be evaded.

Normally we have this concept of a law and it is correct to a certain
extent. But it is not necessary that every natural law should be so
inflexible and unbreakable. We have a number of natural tendencies,
which though effective in the natural development of history and man,
are not rigid enough and can be resisted. But still they cannot be
resisted or violated for long. You cannot put off boiling of water for a
single moment, but there are tendencies which can be contained for quite
a long time.

We do not mean to say that on account of their having a different
character, these tendencies do not influence the movement of history.
These tendencies being flexible, can be resisted and violated, though
according to the norms of history they may in the long run gradually
crush all those who opposes them.

From there it may be said that there are some tendencies which may
safely be resisted with impunity, but there are some others which can be
resisted only for a short time, and then they crush him who fights
against them in contravention of the laws of history. This has been a
characteristic of genuine human tendencies and drives all over history.

Conjugal Drive is a Historical Norm
-----------------------------------

To make the point clear we can say that there are human drives which are
effective in man's birth and his constitution. These tendencies and
drives have a concrete reality and are not merely a legal matter.
Marriage and conjugal ties are meant for creating special relations
between man and woman in human society.

These tendencies should not be regarded as merely a legal formality. In
contrast they are a genuine drive which has come into existence for
man's development and should not be considered to be merely a legal act
or a religious command. This drive is deep-rooted in man's nature and is
a part of human constitution. It attracts man to the opposite sex for
the purpose of the survival of human race by means of creating a
particular social set-up called marriage.

This tendency or a drive in itself is a genuine norm, not a mere legal
form, and that is why it can be resisted for a short period only. The
example of many people shows the possibility of ignoring the natural law
of normal conjugal relations for a while. In contrast, it is not
possible for anyone to stop the operation of the law of boiling for any
length of time.

A society which plays with the divine laws of nature signs its death
warrant with its own hand, for a deviation from natural tendencies
involves it into so many perversions and consequently leads it to
devastation and annihilation. That is why we said that it was possible
to violate these laws for a limited period, but it was not possible to
ignore them for long, for the violation of these laws leads the
defaulters to annihilation.

Natural Need of Man and Woman to Behave Differently
---------------------------------------------------

The tendency that man and woman should have two different sets of duties
and should behave differently is a plan designed by nature and not a
mere legal provision. It is a natural tendency of man and woman and not
a decision imposed on them from outside. But still this tendency can be
resisted.

A law may be enacted to the effect that it is man's duty to stay at home
to nurse and rear children and that woman must go out to earn livelihood
and undertake external activities. By the enforcement of such a law the
tendency of the natural division of duties between man and woman can be
resisted, but such an arrangement being contrary to the norms of history
and the natural genius of man and woman, cannot last forever.

By the enforcement of such a law society will lose woman's special
talent for nursing the children, her spirit of motherly love and her
aptitude for being patient in the face of the hardships and difficulties
unbearable to men. This law appears to be exactly like entrusting the
job of a carpenter working in the construction of a building to a
blacksmith and that of the blacksmith to the carpenter. Such an action
is possible.

The building in question may get erected, but it cannot last long, and
with the passage of time is bound to collapse before long as the result
of the contravention of historical norms. The resistance of a natural
urge which is the basis of man's development will pull him down. Though
the resistance of a natural urge is possible for a short time, its
reaction will appear sooner or later.

Religiousness is a Historical Norm
----------------------------------

The most important example of historical norms is religion itself. It is
also one of the historical norms and not a mere legal provision. We can
define religion in two ways. It can be introduced as a divine
legislation called in the terminology of scholastic jurisprudence - the
divine will of law-giving. The Qur'an says:

***He has ordained for you that religion which He commanded to Nuh
(Noah) and that which We revealed to you and that which We commanded to
Ibrahim (Abraham), Musa (Moses) and*** Isa ***(Jesus), saying:
'Establish the religion and be not divided therein. Dreadful for the
idolaters is that to which you call them.'*** (Surah al-Shura, 42:13)

In this verse religion has been described as a law given by Allah. But
at another place it has been described as a law rooted in man's own
nature and structure.

***Set your face to religion as a man upright by nature - the nature
framed by Allah, in which He has created man. There is no altering of
Allah's creation. That is the right religion, but most men know not.***
(Surah al-Rum, 30:30)

In this verse religion has been described not only as a law ordained and
imposed on man from above, but also as a part of his divine nature which
can never be changed. This verse simply makes a statement and does not
prescribe any rule of law.

It says that man has been so created that religion is a part of his
nature, and that the divine creation cannot be altered. Religion cannot
be detached from man as no other part of his body can be detached from
him. Religion is not a cultural matter acquired by man over history. It
being a part of man's divine nature, he cannot dispense with it.

Religion is a part of the nature in which Allah has created man and
Allah's creation is unalterable. Should religion be alterable, it would
become a thing acquired by man in the course of his cultural and social
development over history.

The Qur'an wants to say that religion is not a thing which may either be
accepted or rejected by man. It is a part of his nature which Allah has
framed and which is unalterable.

***\`There is no altering of the creation o f Allah'***

 is an indicative, not an imperative expression. It only makes a factual
statement when it says that religion is a divine creation and as such is
unalterable. So long man is man, religion is a divine norm for him.

There is a difference between this norm and other norms, for this norm
is not as irresistible and rigid as the law of boiling. This norm can be
resisted for a short time in the same way as the law of marriage and the
urge of natural relations between man and woman can be resisted. It is
possible to withstand marriage by indulging into sexual perversion, but
that can be done only for a short time.

Similarly for a short time religiousness also can be resisted, but it is
not possible to deny religion and ignore this big truth forever.

For a short time man can close his eyes and refuse to see the sun.
Similarly he can refrain from seeing the religious truth, but he can do
so only for a short time, and those who reject religion are punished
before long. Here we do not mean that punishment which would be meted
out to the wrong-doers by the angels on the Day of Judgement, nor do we
mean that punishment which is awarded to the criminals by the police.

In this case the retribution ensues from the laws of history themselves.
This punishment descends on those who want to change the unchangeable
creation of Allah. The Qur'an says:

***They ask you to hasten the punishment. Surely Allah never fails His
promise, but a day with Allah is as a thousand years of what you
reckon.*** (Surah al-Hajj, ***22:47)***

We say that a man who fights against the third form of the laws of
history, is before long afflicted with retribution and according to the
norms of history receives punishment very soon. Here the phrase \`very
soon' should be taken to signify historical quickness and not what we
understand of it in our ordinary life.

This is the point which has been mentioned in the above verse in regard
to the punishment to be meted out to the idolaters. This verse first
mentions the punishment which descended on the lands of the wrongdoers
of the past.

Then it says that the pagans are asking the Holy Prophet to hasten the
punishment promised to them, and saying: Where is that punishment? When
will it come? We have not received is so far although we don't believe
in you, fight against you, and have closed our ears to your Qur'an. Then
why are we not punished?

Length of One Day in the Terminology of the Laws of History
-----------------------------------------------------------

In the above-mentioned verse the Qur'an speaks of historical quickness
which is different from ordinary quickness. The verse says:

***"They ask you to hasten the punishment. Surely Allah never fails His
promise,*** (for the historical norms are firm and stable), ***but a day
with Allah is as a thousand years of what you reckon. "***

***The*** length of one day for the purpose of the laws of history by
the reckoning of Allah is 1000 ordinary years. As we explained earlier,
when the Qur'an speaks of

***"The words o f Allah",***

means the laws and the norms of history, and in the words of Allah the
minimum length of a day is measured equal to that of 1000 years. As you
know there is another verse in which one day has been described to be
equal to 50,000 years. In that verse the day refers to the day of
judgement and not to a day of this world. That is how the two verses are
reconciled. The verse in question is as under:

***The angels and the Holy Spirit ascend to Him in a day whereof the
span is fifty thousand years. So be patient grace***fully. ***They
behold that day far*** off, ***while we behold it nigh: the day when the
sky will become as molten copper.*** (Surah al-Ma'arij, 70:4-8)

Here the Day refers to the Day of Judgement, for it is on that day only
that the sky will become as molten copper. The Day of Judgement is
estimated to be as long as 50,000 years. As for the previous verse, that
spoke of the day of collective punishment, which was fixed according to
the norms of history. In that case

***"a day with Allah is as 1000 years of what you reckon ".***

In short, the third form of the laws of history consists of man's inner
tendencies and his drives which are a part of his structure and which
influence history. These drives can be resisted, but only for a short
time, not for a long period.

But one thing is to be noted. The length of time should not be reckoned
as we normally do in our ordinary life. One day in the ***\`words of
Allah'*** and for the purpose of divine norms is as 1000 years of what
we ordinarily reckon.

Religion is the best and the most important example of the third form of
the laws of history. Religion is a historical norm. What is the role of
religion? What is its source? Why is it not a matter of mere enacting a
law? Is it exactly as natural as the law of marriage between a man and a
woman? If so, why and how?

To answer these questions and to know for certain that religion is a
norm of history, it is necessary to analyse the elements forming society
in the light of the Qur'an. Now the question is how to analyse society?
In our opinion it should be analysed in the light of the following
verse:

***When your Lord said to the angels: \`I am placing in the earth a
vicegerent', they said: \`Will You put there one who will make there
mischief and will shed blood, while we proclaim Your praise and glorify
You?' He said: \`I know what you do not know.'*** (Surah al-Baqarah,
2:30)

This verse provides us with the finest, the deepest and the most exact
points to analyse society. We are going to analyse these points and make
a comparative study of them so that in the end we may be able to
ascertain how religion is one of the norms of history.


