Who Is Sayf?
============

Sayf Ibn Umar al-Dhabbi al-Usayyidi al-Tamimi lived in the second
century of the Muslim era (8th century AD) and died after the year 170
AH (750 AD). al-Dhahabi said that Sayf died during the rule of Haroon
al-Rashid in Baghdad (Iraq). During his life, Sayf wrote the following
two books which were available even during the reign of Umayad:

1. "al-Fotooh wa al-Riddah" which is the history of the period before
the death of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) until the third Caliph Uthman resumed
office as the ruler of Muslim world.

2. "al-Jamal wa Maseeri Aisha wa Ali" which is the history from the
murder of Uthman to the battle of Jamal (the fight that happened between
Imam Ali and some companions).

These books are now lost but survived for a number of centuries after
Sayf's own lifetime. Based on what we found, the last person who had
said that he had possessed Sayf's books was Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani (d.
852 AH).

These two books of Sayf contained more action than truth, some forged
stories, and some true events which, intentionally, have been recorded
in a ridiculing manner.

Since Sayf spoke about some of the companions of the Prophet (PBUH&HF)
and also invented some companions with strange names, his stories have
affected the history of early Islam.

Some biographers such as the authors of "Usdul Ghabah", "Isti'ab" and
"Isabah" and geographers such as the authors of "Mu'jamul Boldan" and
"al-Rawzul mi'tar" have written the life of some companions of the
Prophet, and named places which exist only in the books written by Sayf.
Because of this, the life and character of Sayf and his credibility
should be carefully investigated.

**What Do Sunni Scholars Say About Sayf?**

The following leading Sunni scholars confirm that Sayf Ibn Umar was a
well- known liar and untrustworthy:

(1) al-Hakim (d. 405 AH) wrote: "Sayf is accused of being a heretic.
His narrations are abandoned."

(2) al-Nisa'i (d. 303 AH) wrote: "Sayf's narrations are weak and they
should be disregarded because he was unreliable and untrustworthy."

(3) Yahya Ibn Mueen (d. 233 AH) wrote: "Sayf's narrations are weak and
useless."

(4) Abu Hatam (d. 277 AH) wrote: "Sayf's Hadith is rejected."

(5) Ibn Abi Hatam (d. 327 AH) wrote: "Scholars have abandoned Sayf's
narrations."

(6) Abu Dawud (d. 316 AH) wrote: "Sayf is nothing. He was a liar. Some
of his Hadiths were conveyed and the majority of them are denied."

(7) Ibn Habban (d. 354 AH) wrote: "Sayf attributed fabricated
traditions to the good reporters. He was accused of being a heretic and
a liar."

(8) Ibn Abd al-Barr (d. 462 AH) mentined in his writing abut al-Qa'qa:
"Sayf reported that al-Qa'qa Said: I attended the death of the Prophet
Muhammad." Ibn Adb al-Barr continued: "Ibn Abu Hatam said: Sayf is weak.
Thus, what was conveyed of the presence of al-Qa'qa at the death of the
Prophet is rejected. We mentioned the Sayf's traditions for knowledge
only."

(9) al-Darqutini (d. 385 AH) wrote: "Sayf is weak".

(10) Firoozabadi (d. 817 AH) in "Towalif" mentioned Sayf and some
others by saying: "They are weak."

(11) Ibn al-Sakan (d. 353 AH) wrote: "Sayf is weak."

(12) Safi al-Din (d. 923 AH) wrote: "Sayf is considered weak."

(13) Ibn Udei (d. 365 AH) wrote about Sayf: "He is weak. Some of his
narrations are famous yet the majority of his narrations are disgraceful
and not followed."

(14) al-Suyuti (d. 900 AH) wrote: "Sayf's Hadith is weak."

(15) Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani (d. 852 AH) wrote after mentioning a
tradition: "Many reporters of this tradition are weak, and the weakest
among them is Sayf."

It is interesting to see that although al-Dhahabi (d. 748 AH) has
quoted from the book of Sayf in his History, he has mentioned in his
other book that Sayf as a weak narrator. In "al-Mughni fi al-Dhu'afa'"
al-Dhahabi wrote:

"Sayf has two books which have been unanimously abandoned by the
scholars." (al-Mughni fi al-Dhu'afa', by al-Dhahabi, p292)

The result of the investigation into Sayf's life shows that Sayf was an
agnostic and an unreliable story teller. Stories told by him are dubious
and are entirely or partly forged. In his stories, he has used names of
cities which never existed in the world.

Abdullah Ibn Saba are the star of those stories. He also introduced
some 150 imaginary companions for the Prophet to fill out the empty
characters of his scenarios, by giving them some strange names which are
not found in any other documents. Also the timing of the events given by
Sayf's narrations contradict the authentic Sunni documents. Sayf has
also used imaginary chains of narrators, and reported many miraculous
events (like talking cows with human etc...).

Some of the defenders of Sayf hold the opinion that eventhough he was
known as a weak transmitter and many scholars of Hadith do not trust his
reports, it is only in the matter of the Shari'ah (the Law), but not in
the matter of historical report!

By that, they want to rely on the "historical" stories of someone who
was regarded a liar and "zindeeq"! If the problem of Sayf was just lack
of knowledge about Shari'ah (divine law), one could say he can be
trusted on other accounts. But the problem with Sayf was that he was a
liar, and made lots of forgery by constructing the events, attributed
fabricated traditions to good narrators.

Then such person becomes questionable for almost everything. As for his
historical accounts we will witness in Part V that even Christian
historians have confirmed great inconsistencies between his historical
report and other sober transmitters. No need to mention Sunni and Shia
opinion on the heretical nature of Sayf.

The stories about Abdullah Ibn Saba which do NOT have any source or any
chain of transmitters

There are some reports from both Shia and Sunni scholars, historians,
and story tellers of ancient cultures who wrote few lines about Abdullah
Ibn Saba but did not supply any evidence for their claims, nor did they
provide any chain of supportive authorities (isnad) for their reports to
be examined.

For instance, their reports start with: "some people say so and so ..."
or "some scholars say so and so ..." without mentioning who that scholar
was, and where they got it from. It was based on rumor which was
propagated by Umayads (AFTER Sayf's work) which had reached them, and
some based on the authors' own creativity. This is inferred when we see
these authors have reported some legends which are clearly false and
rejected by logic.

These reports are provided by those who wrote books about "al-Milal wa
Nihal" (stories about civilizations and cultures) or "al-Firaq"
(divisions/sects).

Among the Sunnis who mentioned the name of Abdullah Ibn Saba in their
stories WITHOUT bringing any source for their claims, are:

(1) Ali Ibn Isma'il al-Ash'ari (d. 330) in his book "Maqalat al-
Islamiyin" (Essays about the People of Islam).

(2) Abdul-Qahir Ibn Tahir al-Baghdadi (d. 429) in his book "al-Farq
Bain al-Firaq" (Differences of the Sects).

(3) Muhammad Ibn Abdil-Karim al-Shahrastani (d. 548) in his book
"al-Milal wan Nihal" (Nations and Cultures).

The above mentioned Sunnis do not give any source or any chain of
authority for their story about Abdullah Ibn Saba. They have competed
with each other to increase the number of sects in Islam with strange
names such as al- Kawusiyyah, al-Tayyarah, al-Mamturah, al-Ghrabiyyah,
al-Ma'lumiyyah !!, al-Majhuliyyah !!! and so on WITHOUT giving any
source or reference for their claims.

Living in medieval times, these authors presumed that writing stranger
stories and attributing unrealistic events to different Muslim nations
will make them more reputable than the other competitors in this area.
And by that, they caused a tragic damage to the history of Islam and
committed a great crime for what they have falsely attributed to the
Muslim nations.

Some of them have provided silly legends and fairy-tales whose
falsehood are easy to detect nowadays, though it would have been
possible for them to succeed in passing off such stories as history in
those times. For instance, al-Shahrastani in his book "al-Milal wan
Nihal" has mentioned that there was a group of semi-human creatures in
the name of "al-Nas-Naas" with only half face, one eye, one hand, and
one leg.

Muslims could talk to these semi-human creatures and they even
exchanged poetry!!! Some Muslims even used to go hunting these
semi-human creatures and they used to eat them!!! These semi-humans
could jump faster than a horse and were ruminant/cud- chewers!!!
al-Shahrastani further mentioned that al- Mutawakkil, the Abbasid
Caliph, ordered the scientists of his time to investigate about these
creatures!!! (See al-Milal wan Nihal, by al- Sharastani)

People at that time did not have the modern tools that would enable
them to discover the falsehood these unrealistic stories and
fairy-tales, and perhaps they would have preferred more extensive and
more strange collections which may have seemed a guarantee of their
accuracy, eventhough they were provided with no reference.

Also by chronological study of the life time of these authors, we can
conclude that ALL of them were long after the era of Sayf Ibn Umar, and
even after al-Tabari. So it is quite possible that they all got the
story of Abdullah Ibn Saba from Sayf.

This claim becomes more strong when one observes that non of them
mentioned the source of their reports which might be due to the fact
that Sayf Ibn Umar's scandal was known to every body by that time and
they did not want to discredit their books by mentioning its source.
Moreover there exists NO document available related to Abdullah Ibn Saba
BEFORE Sayf.

The scholars or historians who lived before Sayf Ibn Umar NEVER
mentioned the name of Abdullah Ibn Saba in their books. This shows that
if Ibn Saba ever existed he was not anything important for the
historians before Sayf. This is also another reason to believe that what
was propagated around the personality of Abdullah Ibn Saba was initiated
by the mass propaganda of Sayf Ibn Umar al-Tamimi.

Among the Shia who mentioned the name of Abdullah Ibn Saba but without
any information regarding to their source, are the following two
historians:

(1) Sa'ad Ibn Abdillah al-Ash'ari al-Qummi (d. 301) in his book
"al-Maqalat wal-Firaq" mentioned a report in which there exists the name
of Abdullah Ibn Saba. But he did not mention any chain of authorities
nor did he mention from whom (or which book) he got the story and what
his source was. Moreover al-Ash'ari al-Qummi has narrated many
traditions from Sunni authorities.

al-Najjashi (d. 450) in his "al-Rijal" said that al-Ash'ari al-Qummi
traveled to many places and was well-known for his relation with Sunni
historians and heard many stories from them. He wrote many weak reports
from what he heard, one of which is a short story about Abdullah Ibn
Saba, with no reference.

(2) Hasan Ibn Musa al-Nawbakhti (d. 310) who was a Shia historian who
provided in his book "al-Firaq" a report in which is the name of
Abdullah Ibn Saba. However he never mentioned from whom he got the
report and what his source was.

The above two were the Shia who originally provided some information
about the existence of an accursed man in the name of Abdullah Ibn Saba
at the time of Imam Ali (AS). Notice that all of them reported these
information long after Sayf Ibn Umar and even after al-Tabari wrote his
history.

Thus they might perhaps got the information from Sayf or those who
quoted from him such as al-Tabari. This becomes more probable when we
see that they wrote "Some people say so and so..." without giving any
documented support (isnad) or the name of those "some people"!

Reports about Abdullah Ibn Saba which were NOT transmitted through Sayf
Ibn Umar

We should point out however that there are less than 14 reports
available in the collections of Shia and Sunni which mentions the name
of Abdullah Ibn Saba, and are supplied with the chain of authorities,
but in their chain of authorities the name of Sayf does not exist.

As for the Shia, he was al-Kushshi (or al-Keshshi; also abbreviated as
Kash) (d. 369) who wrote his book "Rijal" in 340 AH. In that book he
mentioned few traditions in which there exists the name of Abdullah Ibn
Saba, from the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt which were quoted below. As we will
see, these traditions give a very different picture than those mentioned
by Sayf. However, it has been proven for Shia scholars that the book of
al-Kashshi has some errors, especially in the names and also few errors
in quotations.

His book also contains some weak traditions, and as a result, it is not
a fully reliable source for the Shia. Not to mention that the reports of
al-Kushshi (Kash) are not found in any of the major 4-books of tradition
for Shia. (For a critical evaluation of his errors, please see al-Rijal
by al-Tusteri as well as al-Askari.)

Other Shia scholars who mentioned Abdullah Ibn Saba, have quoted
al-Kushshi or the two historians mentioned above (i.e., al-A'sh'ari
al-Qummi and al- Nawbakhti who did not provide any chain of transmitters
or any source for their report). Among those who quoted al-Kushshi
(Kash) are: Shaikh al-Tusi (d. 460), Ahmad Ibn Tawoos (d. 673), Allama
al-Hilli (d. 726), etc.

As for the Sunnis, beside those who quoted from Sayf Ibn Umar whose
names were given earlier, there are few reports from Ibn Hajar
al-Asqalani which provide the very similar information of what
al-Kushshi (Kash) provided (see below).

For these very few Shi'i and Sunni reports, we would like to mention
the following points:

1. The story that these few Sunni and Shia traditions provide, are
totally different than the heavy narrations propagated by Sayf Ibn Umar.
These tradition say that there was a poor man in the name of Abdullah
Ibn Saba appeared AT THE TIME OF government of Imam Ali (AS). He claimed
that he was a Prophet and Ali was God, and as soon as Imam Ali heard the
news, he imprisoned him, and asked him to repent. He did not do so, and
thus, Imam Ali ordered to burn him.

The traditions confirm that Imam Ali and his descendants cursed this
man and disassociated themselves from his claim of deity for Imam Ali
(AS). This is all there is about it, provided that these few traditions
are genuine in the first place.

2. These few (less than 14) traditions do NOT exist in any authentic
book.

In fact, there is NO mention of Abdullah Ibn Saba in ANY of the six
authentic Sunni collections (Sihah). Moreover, these few reports were
NEVER rated authentic by Shia or Sunni scholars, and there is a great
possibility that a person in the name of Abdullah Ibn Saba never existed
in the world, and was the total invention of Sayf Ibn Umar, similar to
his invention of 150 imaginary companions for the Prophet (PBUH&HF)
which do not exist in any other independent report.

Granted that Abdullah Ibn Saba ever existed, Sayf has used his
character and attributed many events to him for which there exists NO
SIMILAR REPORT by other Sunni narrators. Not only that, but also Sayf's
reports clearly contradict other reports by the Sunnis, as we will show
in this part and the next parts. Such malicious construction of the
events were easy to detect even by the Sunni scholars.

Now, let me give you some of these few traditions which have NOT been
reported by Sayf, and compare what Sayf attributed to Abdullah Ibn Saba.
As for Shia:

It is attributed to Abu Ja'far (AS) saying:

Abdullah Ibn Saba used to claim being a prophet and claimed that The
Commander of Believers, Ali (AS) is God. Allah is Higher than such
(claim). This news reached to The Commander of Believers (AS), so he
called him and questioned him. But he repeated his claims and said: "You
are Him (i.e., God), and it has been revealed to me that you are God and
I am a prophet." So The Commander of Believers (AS) said: "How dare you!
Satan has made a mockery of you.

Repent for what you said. May your mother weep at your death! Quit
(your claim)." But he refused, so (Imam Ali) imprisoned him and asked
him three times to repent, but he didn't. Thus he burnt him with fire
and said: "Satan had taken him into his whim, he used to come to him and
to induce these (thoughts) in him." (Rijal, by al-Kushshi)

Moreover it is reported that Imam Ali Ibn Husain (AS) said:

"May the curse of Allah be upon those who tell lies about us. I
mentioned Abdullah Ibn Saba and each hair in my body stood up, Allah
cursed him. Ali (AS) was, by Allah, a proper servant of Allah, the
brother of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF). He did not earn the
graciousness/honor from Allah except with the obedience to Allah and His
Messenger. And (similarly) the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) did not earn
the honor from Allah except with his obedience to Allah." (Rijal, by
al-KuShshi)

It is reported that Abu Abdillah (AS) said:

"We are a family of truthfulness. But we are not safe from a liar
telling lies about us to undermine our truth with his lies in front of
people. The Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) was the most truthful among
people in what he said (Lahjatan) and the most truthful among all
humanity; and Musaylima used to lie on him.

The Commander of Believers (AS) was the most truthful one among the
creation of Allah after the Messenger of Allah; and the one who used to
lie on him, and tried to undermine his truthfulness and claimed lies
about Allah, was Abdullah Ibn Saba." (Rijal, by al-Kushshi)

Also:

"As he (Aba Abdillah - Ja'far al-Sadiq) was telling his companions in
the subject of Abdullah Ibn Saba and that he claimed in Godness of The
Commander of Believers, Ali Ibn Abi Talib. He said: When he claimed that
in Ali, he asked him to repent and he refused, so he burnt him with
fire." (Rijal, by al-Kushshi)

As for the Sunnis, few reports from Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani which provide
the very similar information of what al-Kushshi (Kash) provided. Ibn
Hajar mentioned:

"Abdullah Ibn Saba was one of the extremist (al-Ghulat),
dualist/seducee/manichaeist (Zindeeq), and misguided, which is conveyed
that Ali burnt him with fire." (Lisan al-Mizan, by Ibn Hajar
al-Asqalani, v3, p289)

Then Ibn Hajar continues:

"Ibn Asakir mentioned in his History that \`his origin (Abdullah Ibn
Saba) was from Yemen and that he was a Jew who adopted Islam and
traveled in the cities of Muslims and preached them to disobey their
rulers, to induce evil amongst them, then he entered Damascus for that
purpose.' Then Ibn Asakir mentioned a LONG STORY from the book of
al-Futooh of Sayf Ibn Umar, which does not have correct support/
authorities (isnad)." (Lisan al-Mizan, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v3,
p289)

Then Ibn Hajar gives a tradition among whose chain of authorities two
individuals are missing. In footnote he says that its has been dropped.
This is the tradition:

"Ali ascended the pulpit and said: What is wrong with him? people said:
He is denying (or lying upon) Allah and His Messenger." (Lisan al-Mizan,
by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v3, p289)

In another tradition, Ibn Hajar reported:

"Ali said to Abdullah Ibn Saba: I have been told that there shall be
thirty liars/imposters (who claim prophethood) and your are one of them"
(Lisan al-Mizan, by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v3, p290)

He also wrote:

"Ibn Saba and his followers believed in the deity of Ali Ibn Abi Talib,
and certainly Ali burnt them by fire during his rule." (Lisan al-Mizan,
by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, v3, p290)

These Sunni traditions were not rated authentic either. The total of
these tradition by both Shia and Sunni (reported by other than Sayf), do
not exceed fourteen at most. They will be even less if you remove
repetitions. These few Sunnite and Shi'ite traditions convey that:

1. Abdullah Ibn Saba appeared during the Caliphate of Imam Ali (AS),
and not during the rule of Uthman as Sayf alleged.

2. Abdullah Ibn Saba did not say that Ali is the successor of Prophet
(PBUH&HF) as Sayf claimed. Rather he said Ali (AS) is God.

3. Imam Ali (AS) burnt him along with all other extremists (al-Ghulat).
This is while Sayf does not state such a thing.

4. There is no mention of his existence or his playing a role at the
time of Uthman. There is no mention of his agitation against Uthman
which ended up with assassination of Uthman as Sayf attributed to
Abdullah Ibn Saba.

5. There is no mention of the role of Abdullah Ibn Saba in the battle
of Camel as Sayf attributed to him.

6. These traditions do not indicate that any righteous companions of
Prophet followed Abdullah Ibn Saba. This is while Sayf maliciously
alleged that some of the most faithful pioneers of Islam such as Abu
Darr (RA) and Ammar Yasir (RA) were the students of Abdullah Ibn Saba
during the reign of Uthman.


