Abdullah Ibn Saba (part Ii)
===========================

After an overview in the previous part, I will Ensha Allah analyze the
fictitious story of Abdullah Ibn Saba reported by Sayf, in comparison
with the other Sunni reports. First I give a brief tour of the
allegations of Sayf Ibn Umar attributed to Abdullah Ibn Saba:

Sayf alleged that a Yemenite Jew, called Abdullah Ibn Saba (also known
as Ibn Amutus-Sawda'; son of a black slave), declared his Islam at the
time of \* Uthman \*. He willfully associated himself with Muslims and
traveled in their cities and towns, from Damascus to Kufa to Egypt,
propagating among Muslims that Muhammad (PBUH&HF) will be resurrected
like Jesus.

He also said Ali is Prophet's executor and was deprived of his divine
office by Uthman. He provoked Abu Dhar and Ammar Ibn Yasir to agitate
against Uthman and Muawiyah. He provoked Muslims to kill Uthman since he
had usurped the seat of Ali. Sayf also alleged that Ibn Saba was the key
element in the tragedy of the battle of Camel. Let us now discuss each
of the above allegations one by one:

**The Return of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF)**

Saif alleged Abdullah Ibn Saba was the one who invented the idea that
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF) would return before the Day of Judgment. Saif
wrote that Ibn Saba said: If Jesus is going to come back, Muhammad will
also return because he is more important than Jesus.

Attributing the idea of al-Raj'a/al-Karra (Bodily resurrection of some
dead and returning to this word before the Day of Judgment) to Abdullah
Ibn Saba was another trick of Saif Ibn Umar to confuse people's mind
with regard to true Islamic beliefs.

Had Saif studied Quran carefully he would have seen that many verses
Quran confirms the miracle of al-Raj'a has happened in the past for some
specific nations and individuals and will also happen in the future for
some people.

Although the Shia sources may not be considered as proof to the Sunnis
in general, yet in many of our Hadiths, the Ahlul-Bayt (AS) proved the
issue of al-Raj'a by Quran.

Their logical conclusions from the Quranic verses are quite interesting
and can be presented as proof for all Muslims since we all believe in
the same Quran. As such, I am quoting some of the traditions of
Ahlul-Bayt (AS) below by classifying them into three categories:

I) Those which point to Quranic verses about return in the past.
II) Those which point to Quranic verses about return in the future.
III) Those which point to Quranic verses about returning the Messenger
of Allah (PBUH&HF) and other Prophets.

**I) Quran Speaks: Return in the Past**

al-Asbagh Ibn Nabata narrated that Abdullah Ibn Abi Bakr al-Yashkari
(also known as Ibn al-Kawwaa who was one of al-Khawarij) asked the
Leader of Faithful (AS) about the possibility of returning to this world
after death. Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (AS) replied:

... Don't you know that Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, said
in His Book, "And Moses chose out of his people seventy men for Our
appointment (7:155)," ... and when they said to Moses (AS): "we will not
believe in you until we see Allah manifestly (2:55)," and Allah said "so
the thunderbolt overtook you while you were watching.

Then We raised you up after your death that you may be grateful.
(2:55-56)" Don't you see O' Ibn al-Kawwaa that they indeed returned to
their homes after they died? Isn't it that (after the above verse) Allah
informed in his book "And We made the clouds to give shade over you and
We sent to you manna and quails (2:57)" Thus this was after they died
and when Allah raised them again.

And similar to that, O' Ibn al-Kawwaa, for some people from the
Children of Israel about whom Allah said: "Have you not considered those
who went forth from their homes, for fear of death, and they were
thousands, then Allah said to them, Die, and then He again gave them
life (2:243)"

And also saying of Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, about Uzair
where (Allah) said: "Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town,
and it had fallen down upon its roofs; he said: How shall Allah give it
life after its death? So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years,
then raised him to life. He said: How long have you tarried?
He said: I have tarried a day, or a part of a day. Said He: Nay! You
have tarried a hundred years (2:259)" So do not cast doubt, O' Ibn
al-Kawwaa, on the power of Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty.
(al-Bihar, v53, p72, Hadith \#72)

There are other verses of Quran about return in the past, including but
not limited to: 2:260, 3:49, 8:26, 16:38-41, 18:18-19, 18:42, which I
skip for the sake of brevity.

**II) Quran Speaks: Return in the Future**

The numerous verses of Quran indeed have pointers to a period in the
future of the world that some top believers and top disbelievers of each
era will return to this world. This phenomenon is called in the language
of Quran and Hadith is called al-Raj'a/al-Karra.

This happens at the time of the rising of Imam al-Mahdi (AS) who he
will get revenge from all tyrants throughout the history and will
implement the government of Justice, and when the righteous will rule
over the entire universe (not just this Earth). Let us study some of the
verses of Quran in this regard through the words of Ahlul-Bayt (AS). Abu
Basir narrated:

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (AS) about the verse: "And on the day when We
will gather from every nation a group (27:83)" He (AS) said: "What do
people say about it?" I said: "They say it is in the Day of Judgment."
Thereupon Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: "Do you think Allah will gather from
every nation only a group, and leave the rest? Verily this verse is
about al-Raj'a. On the other hand, the verse related to the Day of
Judgment is: 'and We shall gather them together and shall not leave out
anyone. (18:47)'" (Tafsir Ali Ibn Ibrahim, as quoted in al-Bihar, v53,
p51, Hadith \#27)

Also, on the commentary of the verses: "And on the day when We will
gather from every nation a group from among those who rejected Our
Signs, then they shall be set in arrays. Until when they come, He will
say: Did you reject my signs while you could not encompass them in
knowledge? Or what was it that you did? (27:83-84)" Imam al-Sadiq (AS)
said: "The Signs are the Leader of Faithful and the Imams (after him)...
and this is about al-Raj'a" (Tafsir Ali Ibn Ibrahim, as quoted in
al-Bihar, v53, p53, Hadith \#30)

Muhammad Ibn Muslim as well as Abu Basir narrated:

On the commentary of verse: "And (We) have made binding on the society
which We destroyed that they shall not return. (21:95)" Imam al-Baqir
(AS) and Imam al-Sadiq (AS) both said: "Every society that Allah has
destroyed by punishment do not return in al-Raj'a. Thus this verse is
one of the greatest signs for al- Raj'a since no one among the People of
Islam denies that all people return in the Day of Judgment whether they
are destroyed by punishment or not.

Therefore His saying 'they shall not return' points to al-Raj'a
(returning to the world). This is while they shall return to the Day of
Judgment in order to enter the Fire." (Tafsir Ali Ibn Ibrahim, as quoted
in al-Bihar, v53, p52, Hadith \#29)

Also on the commentary of verse "O Lord! Thou caused us die twice, and
Thou hast given (back) to us life twice, so we do confess our faults; is
there then a way to get out? (40:11)" it is narrated from Imam al- Baqir
(AS) who said:

"This is exclusive to those (Kuffar) who return to this world after
death, and this is their (statement) in the Day of Judgment (after the
second rising). So, far removed (from mercy) the wrongdoing folk."
(al-Bihar, v53, p116, Hadith \#139.

Similar narratives are given from Imam al-Sadiq (AS) and Imam al-Ridha
(AS). See al-Bihar, v53, p56, Hadith \#36 and also p144)

According to the above verse, in the Day of Judgment the Kuffar who had
died twice would be asking a third chance in order to repent for their
sins. Note especially in the above verse that death has been mentioned
before life. So this giving life means rising after death. There are two
deaths for those people and after each death they will be brought back
to life. In other words, after they die in this world, they will return
to this world (al-Raj'a) and then will die again, and thereafter they
will be resurrected in the Day of Judgment.

Also on the commentary of the verse "And most certainly We shall make
them taste of the nearer punishment before the greater punishment
(32:21)," Mufadhdhal Ibn Umar narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The 'nearer punishment' is the punishment of
al-Raj'a (i.e., when they return to this world). And the 'greater
punishment' is the punishment of the Day of Judgment about which (Allah
said) 'On the day when the earth shall be changed into a different
earth, and the heavens (as well), and they shall come forth before
Allah, the One, the Supreme (14:48).'" (al-Bihar, v53, p24)

Moreover, on the commentary of the verse: "And surely for those who are
unjust there shall be a punishment before that, but most of them do not
know. (52:47)" It is narrated that:

Imam al-Baqir said: "And surely for those who are unjust with regard to
the right of family of Muhammad (PBUH&HF) there shall be a punishment
before that (i.e., before the Day of Judgment) though most people do not
know, and this refers to the punishment in al-Raj'a." (al-Bihar, v53,
p117, Hadith \#144)

Further, on the commentary of the verses: "Nay! You shall soon know.
Thereafter nay! You shall soon know. (102:3-4)" Abdullah Ibn Najih
narrated that:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The first instance refers to al-Karra (return
to this world) and the second instance refers to the Day of Judgment."
(al-Bihar, v53, p120, Hadith \#156)

Muhammad Ibn Abdullah al-Husain narrated:

My father asked Imam al-Sadiq (AS): "What do you say about al- Karra
(return)?" He (AS) said: "I say what Allah, to Whom belong Might and
Majesty, said and sent its interpretation to the Messenger of Allah...
Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, said: 'They say: That is then a
return with loss (79:12).' This when they will return to this world (and
will be punished) while the revenge from them would not expire (i.e., it
is a return with loss since their punishment in this world will not
suffice their punishment in the hereafter)." (al-Bihar, v53, p46, Hadith
\#17)

Zurara narrated:

I asked Imam al-Baqir (AS) if death and being slain are the same. The
Imam replied: "Allah has differentiated between dying and getting killed
in Quran. Then He (AS) recited 'Then if he dies or is slain (3:144)' and
'And if indeed you die or you are slain, certainly to Allah shall you be
gathered together (3:158)' ...
and also 'Surely Allah has bought from the believers their persons and
their property for that they shall have the garden; they fight in
Allah's way, so they slay and are slain, a promise on this which is the
truth (9:111)' and also 'Every soul will taste the death (21:35).' Don't
you see that the one who is killed (by weapon) does not taste the death?
He who is killed by sword is not like the one dies in bed. Thus
(concluding the above verses) whoever (among believers) is killed should
return to this world till he die (natural death)" (al-Bihar, v53, p65,
Hadith \#58)

The above-mentioned verse (9:111) (that is 'Surely Allah has bought
from the believers their persons and their property for that they shall
have the garden; they fight in Allah's way, so they slay and are slain,
a promise on this which is the truth') proves that ALL true believers
will be killed and this is Allah's promise. Allah states they kill and
will be killed.

Those among true believers who die natural death will rise again and
join the army of Imam al-Mahdi (AS) and will be killed during in the
holy war. On the other hand, those among believers who were killed will
rise and live in the government of justice till they die natural death.
This fact has been mentioned in many other Hadiths including the
following:

Abdurrahman Ibn Qasir narrated that Imam al-Baqir (AS) recited the
verse: "Surely Allah has bought from the believers their persons...
(9:111)" and then said: "Do you know what it means?" He (AS) then
continued: "Anyone among the believers who was killed will be
resurrected till he dies, and anyone among them who was died will be
resurrected till he is killed. And this is the power of Allah, so do not
deny it." (al-Bihar, v53, p74, Hadith \#73; also in Rijal al-Najashi) In
another Hadith, Imam al- Baqir (AS) said: "For every believer there is a
death and martyrdom." (al-Bihar, v53, p64, Hadith \#55) Also about the
verse: "And on the day when We will gather from every nation a group"
Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: "There shall not remain any killed believer but
he shall return till he dies. And no one return but absolute believers
and absolute disbelievers (i.e., only believers and disbelievers of
highest degree)" (al-Bihar, v53, p53, Hadith \#30)

Himran Ibn A'ayun narrated:

I asked Abu Ja'far (AS): "Is there anything in what happened to the
Children of Israel that would not happen to our nation?" He (AS) said:
"No." Then I asked: "So tell me about the saying of Allah (on the
Children of Israel): 'Have you not considered those who went forth from
their homes,

for fear of death, and they were thousands, then Allah said to them,
Die, and then He again gave them life (2:243)' Were they brought to this
world again after they died?" The Imam (AS) said: "In fact, (Allah)
returned them to this world till they stayed another period and eat food
and married women and remained here to the extent Allah wished, and then
they died (again) on their appointed time." (Muntakhab al- Basa'ir, as
quoted in al-Bihar, v53, p74, Hadith \#74)

Al-Hasan Ibn Jahm narrated:

Al-Ma'mun asked Imam al-Ridha (AS): "O' Abul Hasan! What do you say
about al-Raj'a?" The Imam (AS) replied: "It is truth. Verily it had been
in the ancient nations and Quran has spoken about it, and verily the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) said: 'There shall be for this nation all
what had been for the previous nations like the similarity of two pair
of shoes." (Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (AS), as quoted in al-Bihar, v53, and
p59, Hadith \#45)

Rafa'a Ibn Musa narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The first (groups) who shall return to this
world is al-Husain Ibn Ali (AS) and his companions and Yazid Ibn
Mu'awiya (LA) and his companions, and they will fight and kill them one
by one (in the same order). Then Imam al-Sadiq (AS) recited the verse:
''Then We returned for you in a new turn to prevail against them, and
aided you with wealth and children and made you the most numerous.
(17:6)'" (al-Rijal al-Najashi, as quoted in al-Bihar, v53, p76, Hadith
\#78)

In this connection, al-Mu'alli Ibn Khunais narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said: "The first one who shall return to this world
(at the time of al-Mahdi (AS)) is al-Husain Ibn Ali (AS) who rules until
his eyebrow falls over his eyes due to his old age." (al-Bihar, v53,
p46, Hadith \#19 quoted from Muntakhab al- Basa'ir; Similar traditions
can be found in Tafsir Ali Ibn Ibrahim al-Qummi, Rijal al-Kashshi, and
Tafsir al-Nu'mani)

**III) Quran Speaks: Return of the Prophet (PBUH&HF)**

In the previous part we provided many verses of Quran concerning the
fact that most perfect believers will return to this world at the end of
the world. This naturally follows that the Prophets, peace be upon them,
should be among them. In this part, we specifically focus on the verses
that point to return of all Prophets as well as those related to the
return of Prophet (PBUH&HF) Muhammad and his Ahlul-Bayt (AS).

Jamil Ibn Darraj narrated:

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (AS) about the verse: "Most surely We help Our
apostles, and those who believe, in the life of this world and on the
day when the witnesses shall stand (40:51)" The Imam (AS) said: "By
Allah, this happens in al-Raj'a.

Don't you know that many of Allah's Prophets were not helped in this
world and were killed, and the Imams (i.e., the believers mentioned in
the verse) after them were also killed and were not helped? Thus this
(help) will happen in al-Raj'a." I also asked about the verses: "And
listen on the day when the caller shall call from a near place. The day
when they shall truly hear the cry; that is the day of rising
(50:41-42)." The Imam (AS) replied: "This is al- Raj'a." (al-Bihar, v53,
p65, Hadith \#57)

Asim Ibn Hamid narrated from Imam al-Baqir (AS) who said:

The Leader of Faithful (Ali), peace be upon him said: "Verily Allah,
the most High, the One, was alone in His oneness, then He spoke one
word, thereupon it became light and then He created from that light
Muhammad (PBUH&HF) and created me and my progeny, ... and while there
was no sun, no moon, no night, and no day we were glorifying Him and
were praising Him, and this was before He create the creatures and take
covenant from the Prophets for faith and aiding us.

And this is the saying of Allah: 'And when Allah took a covenant from
the prophets: Certainly for what I have given you of Book and wisdom
when an apostle comes to you verifying that which is with you, that you
must believe in him, and you must aid him. (3:81)'" Then the Imam (AS)
continued:

"This means you (i.e., Prophets) must believe in Muhammad (PBUH&HF) and
you must aid his executor. And they all will soon aid his (executor).
Allah took the oath for me along with Muhammad (PBUH&HF) for aiding one
another. Most cirtainly, I aided Muhammad (PBUH&HF) and made Jihad along
with him and killed his enemies and fulfilled Allah's promise while no
one among the Prophets and Messengers aided me.

But they will soon aid me and I hold whatever between the East and the
West. And verily Allah shall raise alive from Adam (AS) to Muhammad
(PBUH&HF) all the sent Prophets, and they fight along with me and along
with all (other) notable dead and alive (believers).

How amazing and how astonishing shall be the dead whom Allah shall
raise alive group by group while they shall be uttering 'Labbaik Labbaik
O the Caller of Allah' holding their weapons over their shoulders by
which they shall hit notable disbelievers and the tyrants and their
followers from among the oppressors of the first to the last generations
till Allah fulfill what he has promised them in His saying:
'Allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that He
will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as He made rulers
before them, and that He will most certainly establish for them their
religion which He has chosen for them, and that He will most certainly,
after their fear, give them security in exchange; they worship Me, not
associate anything with Me (24:55).' This means they worship Me in
security without fearing from any one and without any dissimulation."
(al-Bihar, v53, p46, Hadith \#20)

On the commentary of verse: "He is the One Who sent His Apostle with
guidance and the religion of truth in order to prevail over all
religions, even though the polytheists may be averse. (9:33)," al-
Mufadhdhal Ibn Umar narrated:

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (AS): "Didn't the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF)
prevail over all religions?" He (AS) replied: "O Mufadhdhal! If the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) had prevailed over all religions, there
wouldn't have been any Magi, Jew, or Christian, or any sect,
disagreement, and doubt, or any polytheism and idol. Verily, His saying
'in order to prevail over all religions' is in the time of al-Mahdi
during the al-Raj'a, and this is His saying: 'And fight them until there
is no more trouble and till religion is only for Allah (8:39).'"
(al-Bihar, v53, p33)

Salih Ibn Maitham narrated:

On the commentary of "And We have not sent you but to ALL mankind as a
bearer of good news and as a warner, but most men do not know. (34:28)"
Imam al-Baqir (AS0 said: "There shall not remain any place on the Earth
but in it (people) give testimony to 'there is no god but Allah and
Muhammad (PBUH&HF) is the Messenger of Allah'" and he (AS) pointed by
his hand to the horizons. (al-Bihar, v53, p113, Hadith \#138-15)

Abu Khalid al-Kabuli (RA) narrated:

On the verse "Certainly the one who sent the Quran to you, shall return
you to the returning (place) (28:85)," Imam Ali Ibn al- Husain (AS)
said: "Your Prophet (PBUH&HF) shall return to you." (al-Bihar, v53, p56,
Hadith \#33, also p46, Hadith \#19)

Abu Marwan narrated:

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (AS) about the verse "Certainly the one who sent
the Quran to you, shall return you to the returning (place) (28:85)."
The Imam (AS) replied: "No by Allah! The world does not end till the
Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF) and Ali (AS) come together in al-Thawiyya
and meet each other and build a Mosque with 12000 entrance in
al-Thawiyya, a place in al-Kufa." (al- Bihar, v53, p113, Hadith
\#138-17)


