Abdullah Ibn Saba (part Iii)
============================

**Agitation Against Uthman**

Sayf alleged that the main reason behind the agitation against Uthman
was Abdullah Ibn Saba. He provoked Muslims of different towns and
provinces such as Basra, Kufa, Syria, and Egypt, to rush to Medina and
to kill Uthman since he believed Uthman had occupied the seat of Ali.
Sayf also alleged that the companions inside Medina such as Talha and
Zubair did not oppose Uthman.

Similar to his other allegations, this allegation of Sayf Ibn Umar
about Abdullah Ibn Saba has NOT been reported by any other reporters. No
trace of Ibn Saba can be found on the issue of agitation against Uthman,
except through Sayf. In fact, other authorities have a totally the
opposite story.

Should a reader of Islamic history be liberated from his emotion toward
or against the third Caliph, he can be assured that the call for a
revolt against Uthman did not start in Basra, Kufa, Syria, or Egypt. The
weakness of Uthman in handing the affairs of the State caused many
companions to oppose him.

This naturally resulted in a power struggle among the influential
companions in Medina. Sunni historians such as al-Tabari, Ibn Athir, and
al-Baladhuri and many others provide traditions (reported by other than
Sayf) which confirm that the agitation against the Caliph started right
inside Medina by some influential individuals among the companions.

These companions were the first who asked the other companions, resided
in other cities, to join them in revolt against Uthman. Ibn Jarir
al-Tabari reported:

When the people saw what Uthman was doing, the companions of the
Prophet in Medina wrote to other companions who were scattered
throughout the frontier provinces: "You have gone forth but to struggle
in the path of Almighty God, for the sake of Muhammad's religion. In
your absence the religion of Muhammad has been corrupted and forsaken.
So come back to reestablish Muhammad's religion." Thus, they came from
every direction until they killed the Caliph (Uthman).

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, p184

In fact al-Tabari quoted the above paragraph form Muhammad Ibn Is'haq
Ibn Yasar al-Madani who is the most celebrated Sunni Historian and the
author of "Sirah Rasool-Allah".

History (reported by other than Sayf) testifies that those influential
people who were the key element in agitation against Uthman include
Talha, Zubair, Aisha (the mother of believers), Abdurrahman Ibn Ouf, and
Amr Ibn al-Aas.

**a) Talha**

Talha Ibn Ubaydillah was one of the biggest agitator against Uthman and
was the one who plotted his murder. He then used that incident for
revenge against Ali by starting the first civil war in the history of
Islam (i.e., the battle of Camel). I just give few paragraphs from both
of al-Tabari and Ibn Athir to prove my point. Here is the first one
which is narrated by Ibn Abbas (in some manuscripts it is Ibn Ayyash):

I entered Uthman's presence (During the agitation against Uthman) and
talked with him for an hour. He said: "Come Ibn Abbas/Ayyash," and he
took me by the hand and had me listen to what the people were saying at
his door. We heard some say, "what are you waiting for," while others
were saying, "wait, perhaps he will repent."

While the two of us were standing there (behind the door and
listening), Talha Ibn Ubaydillah passed by and said: "Where is Ibn
Udays?" He was told, "He is over there." Ibn Udays came to (Talha) and
whispered something with him, and then went back to his associates and
said: "Do not let anyone go in (to the house of Uthman) to see this man
or leave his house." Uthman said to me: "These are the orders of
Talha."

He continued, "O God! Protect me from Talha for he has provoked all
these people against me. By God, I hope nothing will come of it, and
that his own blood will be shed. Talha has abused me unlawfully. I heard
the Messenger of God said: 'The blood of a Muslim is lawful in three
cases: apostasy, adultery, and the one who kills except in legitimate
retaliation for another.' So why should I be killed?"

Ibn Abbas/Ayyash continued: I wanted to leave (the house), but they
blocked my path until Muhammad Ibn Abi Bakr who was passing by requested
them to let me go, and they did so.

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, pp
199-200

The Sayf's claim is shattered into pieces when its is compared with any
other reports similar to above. The above report gives evidence to the
fact that Uthman himself knew companions like Talha were doing all this
to him, and not the personage of Abdullah Ibn Saba.

Do these mercenaries claim that they understand the situation better
than the Caliph Uthman while they were born centuries after the
incident? The following report also supports that the murder of Uthman
was led by Talha, and the killers came out to inform their leader that
they took care of Uthman:

Abzay said: I witnessed the day they went in against Uthman. They
entered the house through an opening in the residence of Amr Ibn Hazm.
There was a skirmishing and they got in. By God, I have not forgotten
that Sudan Ibn Humran came out and I heard him say: "Where is Talha Ibn
Ubaydillah? We have killed Ibn Affan!"

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, p200

Uthman was besieged in Medina while Imam Ali (AS) was in Khaibar. The
Imam (AS) came to Medina and found people gathering at the residence of
Talha. Then Imam Ali (AS) went to met Uthman. Ibn Athir wrote:

Uthman said to Ali: "You owe me my Islamic right and the right of
brotherhood and relationship. If I have non of these rights and if I
were in pre-Islamic era, it would be still shame for a descendants of
Abd Munaf (of whom both Ali and Uthman are descendants) to let a man of
Tyme (Talha) rob us of our authority."

Ali said to Uthman: "You shall be informed of what I do." Then Ali went
to Talha's house. There were a lot of people there. Ali spoke to Talha
saying: "Talha, what is this condition in which you have fallen?" Talha
replied: "O' Abul Hasan! it is to late!"

Sunni reference: al-Kamil, by Ibn Athir, v3, p84

Tabari also reports the following conversation between Imam Ali and
Talha during the siege over Uthman:

Ali said to Talha: "I ask you by Allah to send people away from
(attacking) Uthman." Talha replied: "No, by God, not until the Umayad
voluntarily submit to what is right." (Uthman was the head of Umayad).

Reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, p235

Talha even deprived Uthman of water:

Abdurrahman Ibn al-Aswad said: "I constantly saw Ali avoiding (Uthman)
and not acting as he formerly had. However, I know that he spoke with
Talha when Uthman was under siege, to the effect that water skins should
be taken to him. Ali was extremely upset (from Talha) about that until
finally water skins were allowed to reach Uthman."

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, pp
180-181

To know why Imam Ali (AS) deserted Uthman, see the traditions close to
the end of this article.

Furthermore, the historians confirm that those who plotted his killing,
did not let the body of Uthman be buried in a Muslim Cemetery, and that
he was finally buried in a Jew Cemetery called "Hashsh Kawkab", without
washing and without a shroud. (See History of al-Tabari, English
version, v15, pp 246-250).

If Jews were doing all that, they wouldn't permit to bury him in their
own Cemetery!!! After Muawiyah came to power, he joint that Jew Cemetery
to al-Baqi including the land between them. (See History of Tabari,
English version, v15, pp 246-250).

**b) Aisha**

Talha was not the only collaborator against Uthman. Sunni history tells
us that his cousin, Aisha (the mother of believers), was collaborating
and campaigning against Uthman as well. The following paragraph also
from the History of al-Tabari shows the cooperation of Aisha with Talha
in overthrowing Uthman:

While Ibn Abbas was setting out for Mecca, he found Aisha in al-Sulsul
(seven miles south of Medina). Aisha said: "O' Ibn Abbas, I appeal to
you by God, to abandon this man (Uthman) and sow doubt about him among
the people, for you have been given a sharp tongue. (By the current
siege over Uthman) people have shown their understanding, and light is
raised to guide them.

I have seen Talha has taken the possession of the keys to the public
treasuries and storehouses. If he becomes Caliph (after Uthman), he will
follow the path of his parental cousin Abu-Bakr." Ibn Abbas said: "O'
Mother (of believers), if something happens to that man (i.e., Uthman),
people would seek asylum only with our companion (namely, Ali)." Aisha
replied: "Be quiet! I have no desire to defy or quarrel with you."

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, pp
238-239

Many Sunni historian reported that Once Aisha went to Uthman and asked
for her share of inheritance of Prophet (after so many years passed from
the death of Prophet). Uthman refrained to give Aisha any money by
reminding her that she was one those who testified and encouraged
Abu-Bakr to refrain to pay the share of inheritance of Fatimah (AS). So
if Fatimah does not have any share of inheritance, then why should she?
Aisha became extremely angry at Uthman, and came out saying:

"Kill this old fool (Na'thal), for he is unbeliever."

**Sunni references:**

- History of Ibn Athir, v3, p206
- Lisan al-Arab, v14, p141
- al-Iqd al-Farid, v4, p290

- Sharh al-Nahj, by Ibn Abi al-Hadid, v16, pp 220-223

As we can see, the main figures in plotting against Uthman are some
highly influential individuals, like Talha and Aisha. These Sunni
reports are in clear contradiction with the reports related to Abdullah
Ibn Saba, which were made up to cover up for those individuals centuries
after the incident.

Another Sunni historian, al-Baladhuri, in his history (Ansab al-Ashraf)
said that when the situation became extremely grave, Uthman ordered
Marwan Ibn al-Hakam and Abdurrahman Ibn Attab Ibn Usayd to try to
persuade Aisha to stop campaigning against him. They went to her while
she was preparing to leave for pilgrimage, and they told her:

"We pray that you stay in Medina, and that Allah may save this man
(Uthman) through you." Aisha said: "I have prepared my means of
transportation and vowed to perform the pilgrimage. By God, I shall not
honor your request... I wish he (Uthman) was in one of my sacks so that
I could carry him. I would then through him into the sea."

Sunni reference: Ansab al-Ashraf, by al-Baladhuri, part 1, v4, p75

Certainly the revolution against Uthman \* started \* in Medina, and
not in Basra, Kufa, and Egypt. The prominent people of Medina are the
ones who first wrote to those outside Medina and instigated them against
Uthman. To say that a Jew, named Ibn Saba, is the one who inspired
people to revolt against the Caliph is not logical unless we accept that
he was the one who also inspired Aisha, Talha, and Zubair to revolt. But
those who speak of Ibn Saba and his role, do not include Aisha and
people of her position as the followers of Ibn Saba.

The alleged role of Ibn Saba, in the revolt against Uthman, would also
be credible if we were to say that Ibn Saba was the one who persuaded
the Caliph to follow a path contrary to the first two Caliphs, and that
he was the one who advised Uthman to give Islamic funds to his relatives
and appoint them governors of Islamic provinces.

The manner in which Uthman conducted the affairs of the Islamic states
gave Aisha, Talha, and Zubair and others, a reason to provoke Muslims
against Uthman. However those who attribute the revolution against
Uthman to Ibn Saba, do not accept that Ibn Saba was the one who advised
Uthman to follow that wrong policy. They are right, because that alleged
Jew with such achievements never existed except in the imagination of
Sayf Ibn Umar al-Tamimi and those who quoted from him.

A few (less than 15) traditions (which are not even in any authentic
Sunni books nor in any reliable Shia books) related to Abdullah Ibn Saba
narrated by people other than Sayf give a totally different story in
compare with Sayf's heavy documentation which is being distributed
everywhere. These traditions do NOT mention the presence of Ibn Saba in
the revolt against Uthman.

**c) Amr Ibn al-Aas**

It is amazing that such an important role in the revolution against
Uthman is attributed to a Jew for whose existence neither Shia nor Sunni
have any strong evidence. Yet historians forget the important role which
was played by a person well known in Islamic history, namely Amr Ibn
al-Aas. He was more intelligent and more clever than any Jew ever
existed in that era. Amr had all the reasons to conspire against the
Caliph, and he had all the abilities to instigate most of the people of
Medina against him.

Amr Ibn al-Aas was one of the most dangerous agitators against Uthman.
He was the governor of Egypt during the reign of the second Caliph.
However, the third Caliph dismissed him and replaced him with his foster
brother, Abdullah Ibn Sa'd Ibn Abu Sharh.

As a result of this, Amr became extremely hostile towards Uthman. He
returned to Medina and started a malicious campaign against Uthman,
accusing him of many wrong doings. Uthman blamed Amr and spoke to him
harshly. This made Amr even more bitter.

He used to meet Zubair and Talha and conspire against Uthman. He used
to meet pilgrims and inform them of the numerous deviations of Uthman.
According to Tabari, when Uthman was besieged, Amr settled in the palace
of al-Ajlan and used to ask from people about the situation of Uthman:

...Amr had not left his seat before a second rider passed by. Amr
called him out: "How is Uthman doing?" The man replied: "He has been
killed." Amr then said: "I am Abu Abdillah. When I scratch an ulcer, I
cut it off. (i.e., when I desire an object, I attain it). I have been
provoking (people) against him, even the shepherd on the top of
mountains with his flock."

Then Salamah Ibn Rawh said to him: "You, the Quraishites, have broken a
strong tie between yourselves and the Arabs. Why did you do that?" Amr
replied: "We wanted to draw the truth out of the pit of falsehood, and
to have people be on an equal footing as regards the truth."

Sunni reference: History of al-Tabari, English version, v15, pp
171-172

The divider of Muslims ignored what is well known in the history of
Islam which was reported by important Sunni reporters. The revolt
against Uthman was as a result of the efforts of prominent personalities
in Medina, such as Aisha, Talha, Zubair, Aburrahman Ibn Ouf, and Amr Ibn
al-Aas. Instead of attributing the revolution to real people who
rebelled against Uthman, the dividers of Muslims refuse to accept the
truth or to mention it.

They attribute the revolution to a fictitious Jew, relying on the
reports of Sayf Ibn Umar al-Tamimi, a man who was accused by prominent
Sunni scholars to be a man of lies and innovations. They chose to accept
Sayf's report in order to cover up for the Caliph, Aisha, Talha, and
Zubair.

It is even more amazing that Aisha, Talha, and Zubair, and Muawiyah Ibn
Abu Sufyan fought Imam Ali in two wars, unprecedented in the history of
Islam, yet non of them accused the followers of Imam Ali to be students
of Ibn Saba. Sunni history books and Sunni collections of traditions
clearly state that Muawiyah commanded all the Imams of the mosques
throughout the Muslim world to CURSE Imam Ali in every Friday prayer.

If the fictitious Jew, Ibn Saba, had any small role in the revolt
against Uthman, Muawiyah would have made it the main topic of his
defamation campaign against the Imam and his supporters. He would have
publicized throughout the world that those who killed Uthman were the
student of Abdullah Ibn Saba, and that they were ones who brought Ali to
power. However neither Muawiyah nor Aisha took this route, because such
stories attributed to Ibn Saba was invented by Sayf Ibn Umar who lived
in the second century after Hijrah, long after their death.

The murder of Uthman provided a nice scapegoat for those who were
fighting over more power, while serving under the government of Uthman.
They were mainly his relatives, the Umayads such as Muawiyah and Marwan,
who thoroughly took advantage of Uthman's life as well as his death. The
story of Ibn Saba in this regard has served to cover the face of those
power- hungry individuals, and yet another way to attack Imam Ali and
his true followers.


