Author’s Preface
================

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds and may prayer and
peace be upon our master and Prophet, Muhammad, and his pure progeny,
and may Allah’s curse be upon all their enemies from the first to the
last one.

In Islamic rulings, we have two Mut'as, Mut'a of hajj and Mut'a
(temporary) marriage. Muslim scholars have from long time ago seriously
discussed these two issues from different angles. They have always paid
attention to them. Scholars of past and present have written many books
in this regard, with each one looking from a particular angle at them.

Some scholars of tradition have narrated a tradition from the Holy
Prophet (s) which prohibits temporary marriage. The present work studies
and analyses these issues in a critical manner. Most of these traditions
are narrated by Bukhari and Muslim from Imam Ali (a.s), commander of the
faithful. As an instance, in his Sahih, Muslim Nayshaburi narrates: When
Imam Ali (a.s) learns that Ibn Abbas is of the view that Mut'a is
permissible, he, addressing him, says: You are a forgetful person. The
Holy Prophet (s) prohibited us from temporary marriage in the battle of
Khaibar.

These traditions are forged and fabricated. Anyone who studies
impartially the chains and significations of them agrees that they are
so (forged and fabricated).

The present work studies the chains of these traditions on the basis of
the opinions expressed by great and reliable Sunni scholars. It also
evaluates the main parts of these traditions comparing their texts with
each other with the aim to make the truth plain in regard with these
traditions. These assessments are made within two sections. The first
section is on Mut'a of hajj and the second on temporary marriage.

We ask Allah the Exalted to make this discussion a useful one for
scholars and researchers. It is Allah in whose hand lies success.

Ali Husaini Milani


