Preface
=======

There is consensus among Muslims that there are verses in the Holy Quran
on mut'a of hajj and temporary marriage. In regard with mut'a of hajj
Allah says:

فَمَنْ تَمَتَّعَ بِالْعُمْرَةِ إِلَى الْحَجِّ فَمَا اسْتَيْسَرَ مِنَ
الْهَدْيِ فَمَنْ لَمْ يَجِدْ فَصِيامُ ثَلاثَةِ أَيَّامٍ فِي الْحَجِّ وَ
سَبْعَةٍ إِذا رَجَعْتُمْ تِلْكَ عَشَرَةٌ كامِلَةٌ ذلِكَ لِمَنْ لَمْ
يَكُنْ أَهْلُهُ حاضِرِي الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرامِ وَ اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَ
اعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقابِ[^2]

But when the pilgrim is secure [from the enemy or illness ] then whoever
performs Hajj following 'Umrah, he must make an offering easily
available, but he who is not able to find any offering he should fast
three days during the hajj and seven days after his return to his home,
making ten days complete. This is for him whose household does not live
near the Sacred Mosque. Fear from the disobedience of Allah's commands
and know that Allah is the server in punishment.

فَمَا اسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ فَرِيضَةً
وَ لا جُناحَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِيما تَراضَيْتُمْ بِهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ الْفَرِيضَةِ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ كانَ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً[^3]

If you marry them for the appointed time you must pay their dowries.
There is no harm if you reach an understanding among yourselves about
the dowry. God is All-knowing and All-wise.

Obviously, Muslims acted in accordance with these verses until Umar bin
Khattab after assuming caliphate declared:

Two pleasures were lawful and current during the time of the Holy
Prophet (s). I prohibit both of them and punish those who commit them.
They are mut'a of hajj and temporary marriage.

Thus there emerged difference among Muslims. The followers of Umar, who
considered his words as a part of their principles were perplexed as how
to justify his words which were as he himself admitted in contradiction
with Allah's commandment. Umar himself said that two pleasure were
lawful and he prohibited them.

Section One: Mut'a of hajj
==========================

What is the mut'a of hajj?
--------------------------

In mut'a of hajj, a pilgrim wears ihram garment in hajj months at Miqat
and then leaves it for the house of Allah in order to perform Tamattu'a
Hajj. [After arriving at the house of Allah], He circumambulates, walks
between Safa and Mawa, does taqsir[^4] and then gets out of the state of
ihram. Thereupon he once again enters the state of ihram in the same
journey in Mecca or preferably at the Sacred Mosque. Thereupon he goes
towards 'Arafat and Mash'ar al-Haram performing hajj rituals to the end.

By doing this, he is able to perform tamatu'a hajj and Umra [in the same
journey]. The term 'mut'a' means pleasure and enjoyment. In this kind of
hajj, things that are prohibited during ihram, are allowed in the
interval between ihrams. That is why it is called mut'a of hajj.

The prohibition of two mut'as and Imam Ali's opinion
----------------------------------------------------

When Umar prohibited those two lawful pleasures [muta' of hajj and mut'a
marriage], Imam Ali (a.s), the guardian of Shari'a laws and the
supporter of the Holy Prophet (s) stood against it.

Ahmad bin Hanbal and Muslim Nayshaburi have narrated certain traditions
in this respect. Ahmad quotes Abdullah bin Shafiq as saying: Uthman used
to prohibit mut'a and Ali (a.s) used to allow it. Addressing Uthman, Ali
(a.s) said: You are so and so![^5]

Thereupon Ali (a.s) said: You know very well that we used to practice
mut'a at the time of the Holy Prophet (s).

Uthman said: Yes, but we entertained fear.[^6]

In another tradition, Sa'eed bin Musayyab says:

'Ali and 'Uthman differed on Hajj-at-Tamattu' while they were at 'Usfan
(a familiar place near Mecca). 'Ali said, "I see you want to forbid
people from doing a thing that the Prophet did?" When 'Ali saw that, he
assumed Ihram for both Hajj and 'Umra.[^7]

In another tradition, Marwan bin Hakam says:

I saw 'Uthman and 'Ali. 'Uthman used to forbid people from performing
Hajj-at-Tamattu' and Hajj-al-Qiran (Hajj and 'Umra together), and when
'Ali saw (this act of 'Uthman), he assumed Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra
together saying, "Labbaik for 'Umra and Hajj," and said, "I will not
leave the tradition of the Prophet on the saying of somebody."[^8]

Great companions on prohibition of two mut'as
---------------------------------------------

The great companions of the Holy Prophet (s) have also confirmed the
stance that Imam Ali (a.s) took in regard with the prohibition of the
two mut'as. Here are the views of some of them:

### Ibn Abbas

###

One of the companions who has rejected Umar's opinion is Ibn Abbas. In
his Musnad, Ahmad bin Hanbal narrates:

Once Ibn Abbas said: The Holy Prophet used to perform mut'a of hajj.

'Arwa bin Zubair said: Abu Bakr and Umar prohibited mut'a of hajj.

Belittling him, Ibn Abbas said: What does this little 'Arwa say?

'Arwa said: I said that Abu Bakr and Umar prohibited mut'a of hajj.

In response Ibn Abbas said: I think they are perished! I say that the
Holy Prophet says so and so and he says that Abu Bakr and Umar forbade
people from doing it![^9]

### Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas

###

Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas did not accept Umar's opinion either. In his*Sunan*
, Tirmidhi quotes Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Harith bin Nufil as saying:
Sa'ad bin Waqqas and Dahhak bin Qays were talking on muta' of hajj.
Dahhak bin Qays said that no one except someone who does not know about
shari'a laws does it (mut'a of hajj).

Sa'ad said: My nephew! How bad your idea is!

Dahhak said: Umar bin Khattab has prohibited it (mut'a of hajj).

Sa'ad said: The Messenger of Allah did it and following him we did it
too.

After quoting this tradition, Tirmidhi says that the chain of this
tradition is authentic.[^10]

### Abu Musa 'Ash'ari

###

Another companion who has refused to accept Umar's opinion is Abu Musa
Ash'ari. In his*Musnad* , Ahmad says: Abu Musa always decreed that mut'a
of hajj was permissible. One day a man addressing him, said: Review some
of your decrees, as you do not know that Umar, commander of the faithful
has given a new decree concerning hajj rituals!

Thereupon, Abu Musa met Umar and asked him about it. In response, Umar
said: I know that the Holy Prophet (s) did it and his companions also,
following him, did it, but I did not like Muslims to (leave mut'a of
hajj and) make sex with their wives under these arak[^11] trees and then
perform hajj rituals while their heads and hairs are wet.[^12]

### Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari

###

Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari was also among the companions who were opposed
to Umar's opinion concerning mut'a of hajj. Muslim in his*Sahih* and
others have reported the following:

Abu Nadra reported: Ibn'Abbas continued to decree that mut'a of hajj was
permissible, but Ibn Zubair forbade doing it. I made a mention of it to
Jabir b. Abdullih and he said: It is through me that this hadith has
been circulated. We entered into the state of Ihram as Tamattu' with the
Messenger of Allah (may peace be upon him). When 'Umar was Installed as
Caliph, he said: Verily Allah made permissible for His Messenger (may
peace be upon him) whatever He liked. Quran is revealed for a particular
occasion. Now however separate hajj from umra (mut'a of hajj) and leave
aside temporary marriage. And any person would come to me with a
marriage of appointed duration (Mut'a), I would stone him (to
death).[^13]

### Abdullah bin Umar

###

Abdullah bin Umar was also opposed to his father's decree concerning
mut'a of hajj. When he was asked about mut'a of hajj, he said, "Mut'a of
hajj is permissible". When the questioner said that his father had
forbidden it, he said, "If my father forbade it and the Holy Prophet
permitted it, whom

should we follow, my father or the Holy Prophet (s)?" When the
questioner said 'indeed the Messenger of Allah's command', Abdullah bin
Umar said, "The Messenger of Allah (s) did it himself".[^14]

### Imran bin Husain

###

According to Ibn Abd al-Barr in his*al-Isti'ab* and Ibn Hajar Asqalani
in his*al-Isaba,* Imran bin Husain was one of the great companions and
jurists.[^15] During the last days of his life, he was extremely
critical of Umar's opinion. Muslim narrates a tradition as under:

Mutarrif reported: 'Imran bin Husain sent for me during his illness of
which he died, and said: I am narrating to you some traditions which may
benefit you after me. If I live you conceal (the fact that these have
been transmitted by me), and if I die, then you narrate them if you like
(and these are): I am blessed, and bear in mind that the Messenger of
Allah (may peace be upon him) combined Hajj and Umra. Then no verse was
revealed in regard to it in the Book of Allah (which abrogated it) and
the Apostle of Allah (may peace be upon him) did not forbid (from doing
it). And whatever a person (Umar) said was out of his personal
opinion.[^16]

Commenting on traditions that indicate that Imran bin Hasin was denying
it, Nawavi says, "All these traditions unanimously agree that Imran
intended to say that mut'a of hajj and qiran hajj[^17] both were
permissible. This tradition likewise clearly indicates that Imran is
critical of Umar's decree concerning mut'a of hajj".[^18]

Ibn Taymiyya defends Umar but admits his mistake
------------------------------------------------

Ibn Taymiyya, a great Sunni scholar has also commented in this regard.
Defending Umar's opinion concerning women, he says that Umar wanted to
order [his followers] to do a better thing. To substantiate his point of
view, he resorts to Ibn Umar's words, saying that Abdullah bin Umar used
to allow mut'a. When he was told that his father had prohibited it, he
said that his father meant something else [from prohibiting Mut'a].

In short, Ibn Taymiyya wants to say that the prohibition verdict issued
by Umar was something acting on which was optional not compulsory,
implying that Umar did not really prohibit the said two mut'as.[^19]

In my point of view, the justification on the bases of which Umar wanted
to order his people to do a better thing is not acceptable at all. This
is utterly false and ridiculous. On the other hand, he has attributed
something to Ibn Umar, which is in contradiction with what is narrated
from Ibn Umar in Sunni books. According to Ibn Kathir, Abdullah used to
oppose his father to the extent that when he was told that his father
used to prohibit mut'a, he said, "I am afraid lest Allah descends stones
from the sky on you! The Messenger of Allah (s) used to do it. Whose
tradition should we now follow, the Holy Prophet's tradition or
Umar's?![^20]

The main point in Ibn Taymiyya's words is his denial of Umar's opinion
according to which the said two mut'as are forbidden.[^21] A group of
scholars have however, as we will mention, narrated this opinion.

Nevertheless, it seems that Ibn Taymiyya has sensed that his struggles
for the justification of Umar's stand are in vain, leading nowhere. That
is why he helplessly mentions that Sunni scholars are unanimous that it
is only the

Messenger o Allah whose deeds are authoritative and we are supposed to
follow them. According to him, on the view of Sunni scholars all human
beings except the Holy Prophet (s) are prone to error and Umar is no
exception to this rule.[^22]

The stand taken by Umar is considered to be an 'innovation', being an
instance of the tradition reported by Abu Musa Ash'ari, who quotes the
Holy Prophet as saying:

أَنَا فَرَطُكُمْ عَلَى الْحَوْضِ وَلَيُرْفَعَنَّ مَعِي رِجَالٌ مِنْكُمْ
ثُمَّ لَيُخْتَلَجُنَّ دُونِي فَأَقُولُ يَا رَبِّ أَصْحَابِي فَيُقَالُ
إِنَّكَ لَا تَدْرِي مَا أَحْدَثُوا بَعْدَكَ[^23]

I am your predecessor at the Lake-Fount, and some of you will be brought
in front of me till I will see them and then they will be taken away
from me and I will say, 'O Lord, my companions!' It will be said, 'You
do not know what they did after you had left.'

It can be said that the main aim behind forbidding mut'a of hajj was to
revive a tradition that was current at the time of ignorance. This is
because it was considered a major sin on earth at the time of ignorance
to do mut'a of hajj during the hajj months.[^24]

In*his al-Sunan al-Kubra* , Bayhaqi quotes Ibn Abbas as saying: By
Allah, the Messenger of Allah did not take Aisha with himself during the
hajj months but to declare the tradition practiced at the time of
ignorance as null and void. That is why there are many authentic
traditions that quote the Holy Prophet (s) as saying:

<p dir="rtl">
لو استقبلت من امری ما استدبرت ما اهدیت و لو لا ان معی الهدی لاحللت
</p>

If I had formerly known what I came to know lately, I would not have
brought the Hadi (sacrificial animal) with me. [Had there been no Hadi
with me, I would have finished the state of lhram] Suraqa b. Malik b.
Ju'shum said: O Messenger of Allah, is it (this concession putting off
Ihram of Hajj or Umra) meant for this year or is it forever? He said: It
is forever.[^25]

According to this tradition, it is not necessary to make sacrifice in
order to get out of the state of ihram. It indicates that it is
permissible to get out of the state of ihram after completing the
rituals of umra of tamattu'a. The said tradition is reported by all
Sahihs and Bukhari has allocated a particular chapter to it.


