Section Two: Temporary Marriage
===============================

What is temporary marriage?
---------------------------

In a temporary marriage a free and wise woman concludes a marriage
contract with a Muslim man on a specified dowry and time and the man
accepts the contract. This is called temporary or mut'a marriage. The
conditions necessary for this kind of marriage are the same as those
needed for permanent marriage. Among these conditions is that there
should not be any obstacle (on the way of this marriage) whether by
blood or by marriage.

In this kind of marriage like the permanent marriage, it is permissible
to give power of attorney to a concluder of marriage. The child they
will have will be legitimate belonging to its father. All the
consequences of permanent marriage including mahramiyat (intimacy) and
iddah (a period during which a divorced or widowed woman many not be
married to another man) can be followed through temporal marriage.

The difference between these two kinds of marriages is that in temporary
marriage separation can take place with the expiration of the time fixed
or the exemption of the remaining time without applying divorce.

The idda period in this kind of marriage is two menstrual periods for
women who have reached menopause. This is to say if the woman in
question has goat her period. Otherwise idda period will be 45 days.

Among other conditions of this kind of marriage is that man and woman do
not inherit from each other and man is not supposed to sponsor her. The
fact that temporary marriage has its specific rules and regulations not
available in permanent marriage does mean that there are two kinds of
marriages in Islam. It does not imply either that temporary marriage is
like marriage of bond women, different from permanent marriage. The
difference between the two is limited to a few legal words.

Arguments for temporary marriage
--------------------------------

The Holy Quran, prophetic tradition and the consensus among Shia and
Sunni scholars signify that this kind of marriage was legitimate and
current in Islam. Here are the arguments for this kind of marriage.

### Temporary marriage and Quranic Argument for it

###

Allah says:

[^26] فَمَا اسْتَمْتَعْتُم بِهِ مِنْهُنَّ فَآتُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ
فَرِيضَة

Then as to those whom you profit by give them their dowries as appointed

A tradition tells us that according to a group of companions and their
followers who were a reference in reciting the Holy Quran and
comprehending its verses, the said verse is about temporary marriage. It
is said that they used to recite it as under:

<p dir="rtl">
فما استمتعتم به منهن إلی أجل
</p>

Then as to those whom you profit by until an appointed time .

They used to record this verse as mentioned above in their copies of the
Holy Quran. According to this reading, the Holy Quran is very clear
about temporary marriage. Among those who considered this verse as
verifying

temporary marriage are Abdullah bin Abbas, Ubai bin Ka'ab, Abdullah bin
Masud, Jabir bin Abdullah, Abu Sa'aeed Khidri, Sa'aeed bin Jabir,
Mujahi, Suddi and Qutada.[^27]

Moreover, traditionists have quoted Ibn Abbas as saying three times: By
Allah, Allah has revealed this verse in that way.

Above all, Qurtubi mentions that according to all scholars this verse is
about temporary marriage. According to him, all have said that this
verse is about temporary marriage that was current at the early period
of Islam.[^28]

### Temporary marriage in tradition

###

There are several traditions concerning temporary marriage but we will
suffice to narrating only one tradition that is reported from Abdullah
bin Mas'ud by Bukhari, Muslim, Ahmad bin Hanbal and others:

We used to participate in the holy wars carried on by the Prophet and we
had no women (wives) with us. So we said (to the Prophet). "Shall we
castrate ourselves?" But the Prophet forbade us to do that and
thenceforth he allowed us to marry a woman (temporarily) by giving her
even a garment, and then he recited:

یا ایها الذین آمنوا لا تحرموا طیبات ما احل الله لکم و لا تعتدوا ان الله
لا یحب المعتدین[^29]

"O you who believe! Do not make unlawful the good things which Allah has
made lawful for you."[^30]

It is however obvious why Ibn Mas'ud has recited this verse after
narrating the said tradition. He did so because he was critical of the
man (Umar) who forbade it.

### Temporary marriage and consensus

###

Muslims unanimously agree that temporary marriage is a kind of marriage.
After mentioning some specifications of temporary marriage he mentions:

Previous scholars did not differ that temporary marriage is a kind of
marriage in which there is no inheritance and in which separation takes
place after the expiration of the duration of contract needing thus no
divorce.

Qurtubi then quotes Ibn Atiyya on the specifications of this contract
and its rulings.[^31]

Tabari also quotes Saddi as saying, "In this kind of marriage, man
marries a woman on a pre-specified dowry and time "[^32]

In his*al-Tamhid* , Ibn Abd al-Barr, says, "Scholars are unanimous that
in temporary marriage there is no need for witness or the permission of
the guardian of the woman. Similarly all agree that this kind of
marriage is temporary in which there is no exchange of inheritance and
in which separation takes place with the termination of the duration of
contract – not with divorce."[^33]

Umar forbids temporary marriage
-------------------------------

(Like mut'a of hajj), temporary marriage was lawful and current during
the time of the Holy Prophet (s), Abu Bakr and even for some while at
the time of Umar, until Umar forbade it saying, "Two pleasures were
lawful and current at the time of the Messenger of Allah (s) but I
forbade both of them

and punish those who do them. They are pleasure (mut'a) of hajj and
temporary (mut'a) marriage.

This word of Umar has been mentioned in tradition sources as well as in
commentary and theological books. Among the books that contain it,
are:*Tafsir Razi, Sharh Ma'ani al-Athar, Bayhaqi's al-Sunan al-Kubra,
Bidaya al-Mujtaheed, al-Muhallah, Jassas's Ahkam al-Quran, Ash'arite
Qushji's Sharh al-Tajrid, Tafsir Qurtubi, al-Mughni, Zad al-Mi'ad fi
Huda Khair al-Ibad, al-Durr al-Mansur, Kanz al-Ummal* and*Wafiyat
al-A'ayan* .[^34]

Some historians and traditionists such as Sarakhsi have mentioned that
this tradition is authentic. Others like Ibn Qayyim Jawzi have testified
to the authenticity of this tradition.

In his*al-Muhadirat,* Raghib Isfahani says: Addressing a sheikh in
Basra, Yahya bin Aktham said, "Whom do you follow in permitting mut'a?"
"I follow Umar", he replied. "How do you follow him while he was among
the strictest opponents of mut'a?", he asked. "This is because according
to an authentic tradition, he mounted pulpit and said: Allah and His
Messenger (s) made two mut'as lawful to you, but I forbade them and
punish those who do them. I accept his testimony that this practice was
lawful but I do not accept his verdict", he answered.[^35]

According to some traditions, Umar forbade the said two mut'as plus with
'Hayya ala khair al-'Amal' chapter in the azan and iqama of daily
prayers.

In accordance with a tradition, 'Ata quotes Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari as
saying:

We used to practice temporary marriage during the time of the Holy
Prophet until Amr bin Huraith temporarily married a woman (whose name
Jabir mentioned but I forgot) towards the end of Umar's caliphate. She
became pregnant. When Umar learnt about it he summoned her and asked:
"Is it true that you have temporarily married?" "Yes", she replied. "Who
is your witness?" Asked Umar. According to Ata she introduced her mother
or guardian as her witness. "Is there anyone else who stands witness?",
Umar asked.

It was after this happening that Umar forbade temporary marriage.[^36]
There are other similar traditions in accordance with some of which Umar
threatens her that he would stone her to death.[^37]

According to another tradition, a Syrian man came to Medina and married
a woman there temporarily. He stayed with her for sometimes until the
period ended. When Umar learnt about it, he summoned him and asked, "Why
did you marry her temporarily?" "We did so during the lifetime of the
Holy Prophet (s) but he did not prohibit us from doing it until he died.
Same was the case with Abu Bakr. He did not prevent us from doing it
until he died and you came to power. We have not heard that you have
forbidden temporary marriage", he answered. "I swear by the One in whose
hand is my life, if I had forbidden temporary marriage before I would
have stoned you to death", Umar said.[^38]

As it is plain, all traditions attribute the prohibition of temporary
marriage to Umar, using these wordings: "When Umar came to power he

prohibited two mut'as", "Umar forbade it", "A man (Umar) issued a
self-fabricated verdict" etc.

Thus if it were the Holy Prophet (s) who prohibited it no one would
attribute the prohibition or its ill consequences to Umar.

Imam Ali (s) is quoted as having said: لولا ان عمر نهی عن المتعه ما زنی
الا شقی[^39]

If Umar did not prohibit temporary marriage no one would commit adultery
except a vicious person.

Ibn Abbas is also quoted as having said: "Temporary marriage was nothing
but Allah's blessing to His servants. If Umar did not prohibit temporary
marriage no one would commit adultery except a vicious person."[^40]

Therefore the first one who prohibited temporary marriage was Umar bin
Khattab.[^41] It is Umar himself who says that two mut'as (pleasure of
hajj and temporary marriage), were legal during the time of the Holy
Prophet (s) but he forbids them.

He does not talk about the Holy Prophet's prohibition. Instead, he
attributes it to himself. He considers punishment for outlaws. When the
Syrian man said that until then he had received no verdict from him
forbidding temporary marriage, he did not refute his words. He instead
admitted that until then temporary marriage was legal.

The tradition also contains the term 'فلم تحدث' which means 'you did not
invent'. The application of the term 'invent' implies that Umar's
verdict was an innovation in religious matters.

Great companions and prohibition of temporary marriage
------------------------------------------------------

Albeit some companions such as Abdullah bin Zubair have followed Umar in
prohibiting temporary marriage great companions, following the Holy
Quran and the Holy Prophet's tradition, believed that it was lawful.
Forerunners among great companions were Imam Ali (s) and other
infallibles.

Expressing his point of view in this regard, Ibn Hazm says, "Some great
companions continued to consider temporary marriage as lawful after the
demise of the Holy Prophet (s). included among them are Asma, daughter
of Abu Bakr, Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari, Ibn Mas'ud, Ibn Abbas, Mu'awiya
bin Abi Sufyan, Amr bin Huraith, Abu Sa'aeed Khidri, Salma and Ma'abad,
children of Half".

Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari has quoted all companions as saying that
temporary marriage was lawful at the time of the Holy Prophet (s), Abu
Bakr and the early period of Umar's caliphate. From among the followers
of companions (Tabi'aeen), it was Tawoos, 'Ata, Sa'aeed bin Jubair and
other jurists of Mecca who considered temporary marriage as lawful.[^42]
Ibn Hazam, however does not mention names such as Imran bin Husain and
other companions. Qurtubi has also mentioned these names. Quoting Ibn
Abd al-Barr, he says, "All the followers of Ibn Abbas from the people of

Macca and Yemen have followed him in considering temporary marriage as
lawful".[^43]

Abd al-Malik bin Abd Aziz (d. 149 AH), known as Ibn Jarih, a prominent
jurist in Mecca, has considered temporary marriage as lawful. He is a
great jurist, a well-known follower of companions, a reliable
traditionist and one of the narrators from whom Bukhari and Muslim have
narrated. It is said that he contracted temporary marriage with about 90
women.

Ibn Khllakan says that during his caliphate, Ma'amoon proclaimed
temporary marriage as legal. Muhammad bin Mansoor and Abu al-Aina (from
among the jurists of his court) paid him a visit and tried to change his
view, but Ma'amoon who was brushing his teeth, got angry, mentioning the
word of Umar, "Two pleasures were lawful at the time of the Messenger of
Allah and Abu Bakr but I forbid them" [and saying,] "O cross-eyed! How
can you prohibit what the Messenger of Allah (s) and Abu Bakr have
done?"

Muhammad bin Mansur wanted to say something to Ma'amoon, but Abu
al-'Aina told him quietly, "What would you like to say to a person who
says such things so explicitly about Umar?"

At this moment, Yahya bin Aktam entered. He met Ma'amoon behind closed
doors. He talked to him about the dangers of sedition (that his theory
may cause) and thus was able to change his view.[^44]

A defense of Umar
-----------------

We will now deal with the words of those who trouble themselves in vain
in order to defend Umar and justify this action of his. This is because
the legality of temporary marriages is indisputable and is among the
self-evident truths of Islam from the perspective of Quran and Prophet's
tradition. Despite all these the second caliph tries to resist it.

### Three distinctive opinions

###

Those who tried to justify Umar's verdict are roughly speaking of three
categories:

**One** : The Messenger of Allah (s) abrogated the legality of temporary
marriage, but no one other than Umar was aware of it.

After relating some justifications for Umar's action and denying them,
Fakhar Razi relates the above mentioned opinion, saying, " The only
option left is to say, when Umar said that temporary marriage was lawful
at the time of the Holy Prophet (s) but he prohibited it, he meant that
it was proven to him that the Holy Prophet had forbidden it".[^45]

After mentioning this word of Umar, Nawavi says that those who
contracted temporary marriage at the time of Abu Bakr and Umar were not
aware of its abrogation.[^46]

**Two** : The Holy Prophet (s) himself prohibited temporary marriage.

**Three** : Umar prohibited temporary marriage.

Ibn Qayyim Jawzi has related the second and third opinions.[^47] Those
who accept the second view and say that it was the Prophet himself who
prohibited temporary marriage are highly divided on when the Holy
Prophet (s) prohibited it. They fall into seven divisions[^48] which say
that abrogation happened:

1. at the battle of Khaibar. This view is supported by Shafi'ai.

2. at the time of performing umra hajj after the conquest of Mecca.

3. in the year of the conquest of Mecca. Ibn 'Aiyna and others followed
it.

4. at the battle of Awtas.

5. at the battle of Hunayn.

Commenting on this view, Ibn Qayyim says that since the battle of Hunain
is connected to conquest of Mecca, therefore this view can be reduced to
the second view.[^49] We will deal with this opinion later.

6. in the year in which the battle of Tabuk occurred. We will talk about
it later.

7. in the year in which Farewell Hajj happened. Ibn Qayyim is of the
view that this opinion is the illusion of some reporters. In their
imaginary journey, they covered the distance between the conquest of
Mecca and the Farewell Hajj. This is because imaginary journeys from one
point to another, from one time to another or from one event to another
is something that frequently happens for narrators![^50]

In short, the supporters of the third opinion, are of the view that Umar
prohibited temporary marriage but the Holy Prophet ordered his community
to follow his tradition and what his guided caliphs order.[^51]

We have taken these views from what they have said here and there
without any specific order and arrangement. It is however good to
evaluate these opinions.

### A critique of first opinion

###

It would be far better for Fakhr Razi, the imam of the Sunnis if he did
not touch the question of abrogation at the hand of the Holy Prophet (s)
and Umar's exclusive knowledge about it. This is because one cannot
accept that Umar was aware of abrogation and Imam Ali (a.s) and other
great companions did not know about it. Why did the Holy Prophet (s)
tell him about it? Why didn't he mention this when Imran, an illiterate
man was advising him? Addressing him, Imran said, "Your community is
critical of you because of four things, including forbidding temporary
marriage. Allah had made it legal and we were able to contract temporary
marriage through a handful of dates [but you forbade it]. Let's skip the
other three issues". "The Holy Prophet (s) permitted it at an emergency
time. When people are not in an emergency situation there is no need for
the legality of temporary marriage ",[^52] Umar replied.

Why didn't Muslims accept this answer from Umar and the difference among
them remained until now?

### A critique of the third opinion

###

According to this opinion, it was Umar who forbade temporary marriage
and it is a must on this view to follow his order.

Commenting on this issue, Ibn Qayyim says, "It is said that in
his*Sahih* , Muslim Nayshaburi, quotes Jabir bin 'Abdullah as saying: We
contracted temporary marriage giving a handful of dates or flour as a
dower during the lifetime of Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him)
and during the time of Abu Bakr until 'Umar forbade it in the case of
'Amr bin Huraith. What do you say in response to this tradition which
says that temporary marriage was

forbidden at the time of Umar? Likewise it is proven that Umar has said,
"Two pleasure were lawful and current during the time of the Holy
Prophet (s). [I prohibit both of and punish those who commit them.] They
are mut'a of hajj and temporary marriage". How do you justify these
words?

In response, it is said that scholars are divided into two groups on
this issue: Some say that Umar prohibited temporary marriage and forbade
people from doing it. The Messenger of Allah had ordered people to
follow his traditions and the verdicts of his caliphs. Thus it is an
obligation to follow Umar's verdict. They do not believe in the
authenticity of the tradition narrated by Abd al-Malik bin Rabi'a bin
Sira from his father, from his father, according to which temporary
marriage was forbidden in the year of the conquest of Macca. Ibn Mu'aeen
has criticized this tradition which is not related by Bukhari in
his*Sahih* , though it was necessary to deal with it as an Islamic
principle. It can thus be said that Bukhari did not mention because it
was not authentic from his point of view. If he did not entertain doubt
in regard with its authenticity, he would have mentioned it and dealt
with its chains. Narrators of traditions are of the view that if Sabra's
tradition is authentic then there is no fault with Ibn Mas'ud narrating
their practice of temporary marriage and invoking a Quranic verse.

Similarly, if this tradition is right Umar must not say that this
practice was current at the time of the Holy Prophet (s) but he forbade
it, threatening to punish those who did it. Instead, he must say that
the Holy Prophet forbade it and prohibited us from contracting temporary
marriage.

Some scholars are of the view that if this tradition were right
temporary marriage should not have been in use at the time of Abu Bakr.

The second group of scholars considers Sabra's tradition as authentic.
According to them, even if this tradition is not authentic there is
another authentic tradition narrated by Ali (a.s), according to which
the Holy Prophet (a.s) prohibits contracting temporary marriage with
women.

Thus we must interpret Jabir's tradition, saying: "Those who are said to
have contracted temporary marriage were in fact unaware of its
prohibition. The prohibition was not known until the time of Umar, when
there emerged a dispute concerning the issue of temporary marriage. It
was at this time that the prohibition of temporary marriage was known.
In this way, there will be reconciliation between conflicting
traditions.[^53]

The proponents of this opinion, according to this view, believe that it
was Umar who forbade temporary marriage, not Allah and His Messenger.
They however justify the prohibition made by Umar, attributing thus the
prohibition to Allah and His Apostle by saying that the Holy prophet has
ordered us to follow the verdicts issued by the guided caliphs.

That is the most important justification for what Umar did, but we
should remember that it is based on a tradition that deems following
guided caliphs as obligatory. If it is proved that this tradition is not
authentic then it has to be admitted that Umar has introduced something
'heretical' in religion. Most of the companions of the Holy Prophet (s)
have also said the same thing.

According to Ibn Qayyim, the Messenger of Allah (s) has ordered [us] to
follow the verdicts issued by caliphs. His word refers to what the Holy

Prophet (s) has reportedly said, "Follow my tradition and the tradition
of the guided caliphs after me, hold fast to them and keep abiding by
them".

It is worth mentioning that studies show that this tradition is false
and fabricated with all its chains.[^54] Some great Sunni scholars such
as Hafiz bin Qattan (d. 628 AH) have rejected it. Commenting on Abd
al-Rahman Salmi, Ibn Hajar says, "He has reported only one tradition on
admonishing which is regarded as authentic by Tirmidhi".

I would like to add that Ibn Hayyan and Hakim Nayshaburi have narrated
this tradition*in al-Mustadrak 'ala al-Sahihayn* . According to Ibn
Qattan, this tradition is not authentic, for its narrator is not
known.[^55] It should be noted that great scholars have given an account
of the life of Ibn Qattan and admired him.[^56]

### A critique of the second view

###

As to the time of prohibition of temporary marriage by the Holy Prophet
(s), there are more than one opinion about it. Some are of the view that
temporary marriage was forbidden in the year of Farewell Hajj.
Commenting on this view, Ibn Qayyim says that the origin of this view is
to be sought in some of the narrators.

According to others, temporary marriage was forbidden in the year in
which the battle of Hunain occurred. Rejecting this opinion, Ibn Qayyim
says, "Since there is no [considerable] temporal distance between the
battle of Hunain and the conquest of Macca, this opinion can be be
considered as the same as the second opinion".[^57] As to the opinion
that the prohibition occurred in the battle of Awtas, Suhaili says, "The
opinion of those who say that prohibition occurred in the battle of
Awtas is in line with the tradition that says that prohibition happened
in the year of the conquest of Mecca".[^58]

As to the prohibition of temporary marriage in compensatory umra,
Suhaili says, "Strangely enough, some traditions deem prohibition to
have occurred in in the battle of Tabuk or in compensatory umra".[^59]
According to Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani, it is not correct to say that
temporary marriage was forbidden in in compensatory umra. This is
because the tradition that supports it is mursal (broken) narrated from
Hasan. His mursal traditions are weak, for he used to narrate from
anyone he came across. If his tradition is presumably right, then it has
to be said that he meant it was forbidden in the battle of Khaibar. This
is because these two battles happened in the same year, just as the
battles of Mecca and Awtas happened in one year.[^60] According to Ibn
Qayyim the truth is to say that temporary marriage was forbidden in the
year of the conquest of Mecca.[^61]

On the view of Ibn Hajar, the tradition that is narrated by Muslim
stating that prohibition occurred in the year of the conquest of Mecca
is more acceptable. The year of the conquest of Mecca is thus the year
in which temporary marriage is forbidden. He firstly relates all
traditions and opinions and then evaluates them. Commenting on this
view, he finally says, "From among the different suggestions about the
time of prohibition, the opinions that suggest the year of the battles
of Khaibar and Mecca as the time when prohibition was made, is more
correct. We talked before about the opinion that says prohibition
occurred in the battle of Khaibar. According to Suhaili most scholars
hold this view.[^62]

### Prohibition happens in year of conquest of Mecca

###

Here is the text of the tradition (as reported by Muslim) that suggests
that temporary marriage was prohibited in the year of the conquest of
Mecca. Ishaq bin Ibrahim narrated from Yahya bin Adam from Ibrahim bin
Sa'aeed from Abd al-Malik bin Rabi'a bin Sabra Juhanni from his father,
from his grandfather who said, "In the year of the conquest of Mecca,
the Messenger of Allah ordered us to contract temporary marriage but
before leaving Mecca he prohibited us from doing it.[^63]

### Prohibition happens in battle of Tabuk

###

There is a tradition that says that temporary marriage was prohibited in
the battle of Tabuk. Sunni narrators have reported it from three
companions of the Holy Prophet (s), namely Imam Ali (a.s), Jabir bin
Abdullah Ansari and Abu Huraira. Nawavi quotes Imam Ali (a.s) as saying,
"All scholars excluding Muslim quote Ali (a.s) as saying that the Holy
Prophet (s) prohibited temporary marriage in the battle of Tabuk. The
chain of this tradition is as below: Ishaq bin Rashid narrates from
Zuhri from Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Ali from his father who quotes Ali
(a.s) as saying[^64]

Hazmi narrates this tradition from Jabir. As to the tradition of Abu
Huraira, it is reported from him by Ibn Rahwiyya and Ibn Habban. Ibn
Hajar has also related the tradition narrated by these two persons.[^65]

Since we will deal with tradition of the battle of Tabuk [in future] we
will skip dealing with it right know.

### Prohibition occurs in battle of Hunain

###

There is a tradition that says that temporary marriage was prohibited in
battle of Hunain. Sunni narrators have narrated this narration from Imam
Ali (a.s). Nisaee narrates it as under:

Amr bin Ali, Muhammad bin Bashar and Muhammad bin Muthanna quote Abd
al-Wahhab as saying, "Yahya bin Sa'eed says: Malik bin Anas narrated
from Ibn Shahab from Abdullah and Hasan, children of Muhammad bin Ali,
from their father, Muhammad bin Ali who quoted Ali (a.s) as saying: The
Messenger of Allah prohibited it in the battle of Khaibar [/Hunain]."

Muhammad bin Muthanna says that this tradition uses 'battle of Hunain'
in place of 'battle of Khaibar'. He says that Abd al-Wahhab has
mentioned it as such in his book.[^66]

### Prohibition of temporary marriage in battle of Khaibar

###

In their sihah and other books, Sunni narrators have narrated from Imam
Ali who said that temporary marriage was prohibited in the battle of
Khaibar. There are different variations of this tradition. We will
suffice to what Bukhari and Muslim have said.

Bukhari narrates from Malik bin Ismael from Ibn Ayyina from Zuhri from
Hasan bin Muhammad bin Ali and his brother Abdullah from their father
who quotes Ibn Abbas as saying, "The Holy Prophet (s) prohibited
temporary marriage and and the flesh of domestic asses in the battle of
Khaibar".[^67]

Muslim has reported this tradition through several chains which are as
follows:

**Chain One** : Yahya bin Yahya narrated Ibn Shihab, from Abdullah and
Hasan, children of Muhammad bin 'Ali from their father who quoted Imam
Ali as saying, "Allah's Apostle (may peace be upon him) on the Day of
Khaibar prohibited forever the contracting of temporary marriage and
eating of the flesh of the domestic asses."

**Chain Two** : Abdullah bin Muhammad bn Asma Zab'ai narrated from
Juwariyya from Malik (as in the previous chain) who said that he heard
Ali addressing somebody say, "Your are forgetful This is because the
Messenger of Allah had prohibited us from contracting temporary marriage
with women "

**Chain three** : Abu Bakr bin Abi Shaiba and Ibn Numair and Zuhair bin
Harb from Ibn Ayyina from Zuhair, from Zuhri from Hasan and Abdullah
children of Muhammad bin Ali from their father who quotes 'Ali (Allah be
pleased with him) as saying, "The Holy Prophet (s) on the Day of Khaibar
forbade forever the contracting of temporary marriage and the eating of
the flesh of domestic asses".

**Chain Four** : Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Numair narrated from his
father, from Ubaidullah from Ibn Shahab from Hasan and Abdullah children
of Muhammad bin Ali from their father who said, "Ali (Allah be pleased
with him) heard that Ibn Abbas (Allah be pleased with them) gave some
relaxation in connection with the contracting of temporary marriage,
whereupon he said: Don't be hasty (in your religious verdict), Ibn
'Abbas, for Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) on the Day of
Khaibar prohibited forever the doing of it and eating of the flesh of
domestic asses".

**Chain five** : Abu Tahir and Harmala bin Yahya narrated from Wahab
from Yunus from Ibn Shahab from Hasan and Abdullah children of Muhammad
bin Ali from their father from an a person who heard Ali (s) addressing
Ibn Abbas say, "The Messenger of Allah (s) forbade contracting temporary
marriage with women and flesh of domestic assess on the day of
Khaibar."[^68]

Common criticisms
-----------------

All these traditions face some common criticisms which show that they
are false and fabricated, though having authentic chains. We first
briefly mention these criticisms and then we will specifically deal with
the tradition of prohibition of temporary marriage in the year of the
conquest of Mecca, for it is said to be well-known. Thereupon we will
deal with the tradition of prohibition of temporary marriage in the
battle of Khaibar. This is because this tradition is said to be narrated
by Imam Ali (s) and Bukhari and Muslim have also narrated it. The reason
why we have chosen to deal with these two traditions is that Sunni
narrators have narrated these two traditions from Imam Ali (s).

The first criticism concerning these traditions is that they are
self-contradictory contradicting each other in content. Some of these
traditions refute others, a thing that has caused confusion among Sunni
scholars making them present contradictory solutions.[^69]

It is because of this that some scholars have been forced to say that
temporary marriage was lawful in the beginning but later on it was
forbidden, though it was made legal again. It was however again declared
as

forbidden, to the extent that Muslim has allocated a chapter in his book
to this discussion dealing with the legality of temporary marriage, its
abrogation, its legality for the second time and its abrogation
forever.[^70]

The contradictory statements do not end here. Some scholars like Qurtubi
have said that permission and prohibition continued for seven
times.[^71]

Ibn Qayyim however says that it is not possible in Islamic Shari'a laws
to accept abrogation more than once not speak of more than twice. He, on
the other hand, thinks that temporary marriage was forbidden on the Day
of Khaibar- a thing that implies a second abrogation which has not
happened and will never happen in Islamic Shari'a laws.[^72]

These opinions are likewise in contraction with Umar's words, for Umar
said, "Two pleasures were lawful and current during the time of the Holy
Prophet (s) but I forbade them " according to these words which are
transmitted through a reliable chain, Umar openly says that he forbade
what was lawful during the time of the Holy Prophet (s).

Another criticism is that the companions of the Holy Prophet (s) whether
before or after Umar's caliphate testify to the fact that temporary
marriage was legal and it was Umar who forbade it. Some of them have
also added that if Umar did not forbid it, no one other than a vicious
person would commit adultery.

### Evaluation of prohibition in conquest of Mecca

###

Let's now assess and evaluate the tradition that says temporary marriage
was forbidden in the year of the conquest of Mecca. If you study Ibn
Qayyim's opinion you will know that this tradition is incorrect.
According to him, Abd al-Malik bin Rabi'a bin Sabra reported this
tradition from his father from his grandfather. Ibn Mu'aeen is critical
of the narrator of this tradition and Bukhari has not mentioned this
tradition in his*Sahih* . It will be enough to give an account of his
life on the bases of what Ibn Hajar has said.

Ibn Hajar says: Abu Khaithama says: Somebody asked Yahya bin Mu'aeen
about the traditions reported by Abd al-Malik bin from his father from
his grandfather, he said: According to Ibn Mu'aeen his traditions are
weak. Ibn Jawzi quotes Ibn Mu'aeen as saying: Abd al-Malik is weak in
terms of narrating traditions. Abu al-Hasan bin Qattan is of the view
that it was not proved that he was just. Though Muslim narrates
traditions from him we cannot rely on his traditions. As mentioned,
Muslim has narrated only one tradition from him on temporary
marriage.[^73]

### An evaluation of prohibition in battle of Hunain

###

Nisaee has reported this tradition from Imam Ali (a.s). We will deal
with it while treating the traditions narrated from him. Thus we avoid
evaluating it now.

Besides, Sunni narrators narrate a tradition from Rabi'a bin Sabra,
according to which temporary marriage was prohibited at Farewell Hajj.
According to Abu Dawood, Musaddad bin Musarhad narrated from Abd
al-Warith from Ismael bin Umayya from Zuhri who said, "We were in the
presence of Umar bin Abd al-Aziz when there was a discussion about
contracting temporary marriage with women. Rabi'a bin Sabra, addressing

Umar bin Abd al-Aziz said: I testify that my father said that the Holy
Prophet (s) forbade temporary marriage at Farewell Hajj.[^74]

### Evaluation of prohibition in battle of Tabuk

###

We will deal with the tradition of the battle Tabuk, which is reported
from Imam Ali (a.s) in its own place. Besides, Ibn Hajar openly says
that the tradition narrated from Jabir is not authentic. This is because
it is reported through Ibn Kathir who is rejected and is not a reliable
person.[^75] In his*Tahdib al-Tahdib* , mentioning two narrators named
Abbad, he says, "Abbad bin Kathir Thaqafi Basri and Abbad bin Kathir
Ramli Falastini are not reliable. They are rejected. They narrate
fabricated traditions and are liars".

Commenting on Falastini, Abu Hatam says that he was thinking that he was
better than his namesake, but he found that he did not differ from him
and his traditions were thus weak.[^76]

It seems that he who fabricated the tradition did so in order to
contradict authentic traditions that indicate that temporary marriage
was legal until the last moment of the life of the Holy Prophet (s). [To
reach their goal], they also invented numerous traditions to show that
Ibn Abbas changed his mind (and accepted that temporary marriage was
forbidden). We will treat this question later as well as the question of
attributing fabricated traditions in this connection to Imam Ali (a.s).

One of the traditions in question was reported by Abu Huraira. According
to Ibn Hajar, Abu Huraira's tradition is not correct either. This is
because he narrates from Mu'ammil bin Ismael from 'Akram bin 'Amar, both
of whom are questionable.[^77]

### An evaluation of prohibition in battle of Khaibar

###

The most important traditions available in this connection are the
traditions falsely narrated from Imam Ali (a.s). This is because Imam
Ali (a.s) was a vigorous opponents of this prohibition. Those who were
flattering cruel rulers to receive rewards from them did their best to
show their enmity towards Imam Ali (a.s) and fabricate traditions in his
name. The fabricated traditions narrated from Imam Ali (a.s) are
self-contradictory and inconsistent. This is because many were willing
to fabricate traditions in his name. This is also one of the great signs
of righteousness. They have narrated these fabricated traditions from
his grandchildren from his son Muhammad bin Hanafiyya. They have not
narrated any fabricated narration from the children of Imam Hasan (a.s)
and Imam Husain (a.s). this is because they know very well that they
cannot be accused of such kind of things.

Liars falsely relate that when he heard the relaxation Ibn Abbas had
given to temporary marriage he spoke to him angrily If there were no
contradiction among the fabricated traditions it would be difficult even
for scholars to know the truth. Let's now explain in detail under the
following headings, why these traditions are fabricated.

Contradiction on time of prohibition
------------------------------------

Zuhri narrates from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Ali and his brother Abdullah
bin Muhammad bin Ali from their father from Imam Ali (a.s), who
addressing Ibn Abbas, said, "The Messenger of Allah (s) prohibited on

the day of Khaibar contracting temporary marriage with women and eating
the flesh of asses".[^78]

Ibn Muthanna narrates this tradition in a slightly different manner:

"The Messenger of Allah (s) prohibited on the day of Huanain contracting
temporary marriage with women and eating the flesh of asses". He also
says that Abd al-Wahhab had related this tradition as under:

Zuhri narrates from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Ali and his brother Abdullah
bin Muhammad bin Ali from their father from Imam Ali (a.s), who says
that the prohibition occurred in the battle of Hunain.[^79]

In accordance with another variation, Zuhri narrates from Hasan bin
Muhammad bin Ali and his brother Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Ali from
their father from Imam Ali (a.s), who says that the Holy Prophet (s)
prohibited termporary marriage in the battle of Tabuk.[^80]

In accordance with another tradition narrated by Muhammad bin Hanafiyya,
Imam Ali (a.s) addressing Ibn Abbas, says that he is a forgetful person
as the Holy Prophet forbade temporary marriage in his Farewell
Hajj.[^81]

In yet another tradition, Shafi'ai narrates from Malik who quotes Imam
Ali (a.s) saying, "The Messenger of Allah (s) prohibited on Khaibar day
eating the flesh of asses".

This tradition does not talk about the prohibition of temporary marriage
with women.[^82]

As it is clear, all these traditions that are apparently reported from
Imam Ali (a.s) have one chain and speak about one subject matter.

If it is said that from among these traditions only some are credible
(thus there is no inconsistency among them), in response it has to be
said that [all these traditions are credible from their point of view].
The first tradition is regarded as credible by all and that is why they
have given reference to it in their works. As to the second tradition,
it has to be said that it is also reliable, for Nisa'ee has mentioned it
in his*Sunan* which is one the Sihah Sitta.

As to the fourth tradition, it is mentioned by Tabarani. Haithami has
also said that its reporters are reliable.[^83] As to the third
tradition, Nawavi has mentioned it. He quotes Qazi Ayyaz as saying, "No
one has followed him in this and thus it is a mistake of his".[^84]

Ibn Hajar says, "Stranger than this is the tradition narrated by Ishaq
bin Rashid according to which temporary marriage was prohibited in the
battle of Tabuk." This is also a fake tradition.[^85]

As to the fifth tradition, the following points have to said:

If he knew that temporary marriage was forbidden on Khaibar day he would
not keep quiet. This is because if he remained silent it would be
regarded as concealing the truth which is a bad thing. Shafia'I however
believes that the prohibition took place on Khaibar day.[^86]

Moreover, Malik narrates in his*al-Mu'atta* from Zuhri from Hasan bin
Muhammad bin Ali and his brother Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Ali from
their father from Imam Ali (a.s) who said, "The Messenger of Allah (s)
prohibited on the day of Khaibar contracting temporary marriage with
women."[^87]

### Sunni narrators and playing with Khaibar tradition

###

It goes without saying that according to Sunnis the most reliable
traditions on prohibition of temporary marriage are traditions reported
from Imam Ali (a.s), according to which the prohibition happened in the
battle of Khaibar. The most important among them is the tradition
reported by Zuhri from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Ali and his brother
Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Ali from their father from Imam Ali (a.s). We
must know Sunnis have narrated this tradition in different variations.

According to Ibn Taymiyya credible reporters in*Sahih Bukhari* ,*Sahih
Muslim* and other books, have reported this tradition from Zuhri from
Hasan bin Muhammad bin Ali and his brother Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Ali
from their father from Imam Ali (a.s), who addressing Ibn Abbas who was
considering temporary marriage as legal, said, "You are forgetful. The
Messenger of Allah (s) prohibited on the day of Khaibar contracting
temporary marriage with women and eating the flesh of asses"

In their time, great men of Islam such as Sufyan bin Ayyina, Malik bin
Anas and other scholars on whose knowledge, equity and being memorizers
Muslims were unanimous, have reported this tradition from Zuhri – as the
most knowledgeable of his time concerning the conduct of the Holy
Prophet (s) and the most concerned among to keep it. Tradition scholars
were unanimous on the authenticity of this tradition and that is why no
one form among them criticized it.[^88]

Sahih Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, Sunan Tirmidhi and Musnad Ahmad have
narrated from Zuhri the following:

Hasan bin Muhammad bin Ali and his brother Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Ali
narrated from their father from Imam Ali (a.s), who addressing Ibn
Abbas, said, "The Messenger of Allah (s) prohibited on the day of
Khaibar contracting temporary marriage with women and eating the flesh
of asses"

According to*Sahih Muslim* , it was heard that Ali bin Abi Talib,
addressing somebody, said, "You are forgetful". It is related in this
book that Ali (a.s) came to know that Ibn Abbas had given relaxation on
temporary marriage and thus addressing him he said, "O Ibn Abbas! Be
cautious!"

According to Nisa'ee, Hasan bin Muhammad bin Ali and his brother
Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Ali narrated from their father from Imam Ali
(a.s) that he learnt that somebody regarded temporary marriage as legal
and thus he addressing him said, "You are forgetful. The Messenger of
Allah (s) prohibited on the day of Khaibar contracting temporary
marriage with women and eating the flesh of asses"

*Al-Muwatta* quotes Imam Ali (a.s) as saying: "On the day of Khaibar,
the harbinger of the Messenger of Allah (s) proclaimed that temporary
marriage was forbidden".

Shafiai also narrates Khaibar tradition, but when he learns that there
is difference about it among Muslims he chooses to remain silent!

Tabarani narrates this tradition as under, "Ali was talking with Ibn
Abbas on the issue of temporary marriage. Addressing Ibn Abbas Imam Ali
said, "You are forgetful. The Holy Prophet (s) prohibited temporary
marriage in

his Farewell Hajj". Thus Tabarani has also narrated this tradition
though he is of the view that the prohibition was made in Farewell Hajj.

### Points on signification of Khaibar tradition

###

According to one the one of the traditions narrated, temporary marriage
was prohibited in the battle of Khaibar. A glance at the text and
meaning of this tradition clarifies certain points:

Firstly it shows that Imam Ali (a.s) believed in the prohibition of
temporary marriage. That is why he, addressing Ibn Abbas who in its
lawfulness, said, "You are forgetful".

This is nothing but a mere lie. All knows that Imam Ali (a.s) was a
leading opponent of the prohibition of temporary marriage, just as he
was strongly opposed to the prohibition of mut'a of hajj. It is not
however surprising to fabricate traditions and attribute them to him.
The same was done in the mut'a of hajj It is not surprising either to
narrate such things from the two sons of Muhammad bin Hanafiyya from
their father from Imam Ali (a.s).

Bayhaqi narrates a tradition from Hasan bin Muhammad bin Ali and his
brother Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Ali from their father from Imam Ali
(a.s), who said,

یا بنی افرد الحج فانه افضل[^89]

My son, perform (the obligatory) hajj separately, as it is better.

Secondly, it signifies that the prohibition occurred in the battle of
Khaibar, which is denied by great tradition scholars. They wonder how to
justify it. In his commentary on Sahih Bukhari, Ibn Hajar quotes Suhaili
as saying, "There is some fault with this tradition. This is because
according to this tradition, temporary marriage was prohibited in the
battle of Khaibar, whereas no biographer or historiographer has recorded
such a thing".[^90]

Commenting on this tradition, 'Aini quotes Ibn Abd al-Barr as saying,
"The tradition that says that prohibition took place in the battle of
Khaibar is incorrect".[^91] Qastalani quotes Bayhaqi as saying, "This
tradition is not known to biographers and historiographers".[^92]

According to Ibn Qayyim, the companions of the the Holy Prophet (a.s)
did not contract temporary marriages with Jewish women and they did not
take permission in this regard from the Holy Prophet (a.s). On the other
hand, no one has related any tradition whatsoever on doing it or on its
prohibition.[^93]

According to Ibn Kathir, some scholars including Sheikh Hafiz Abu Hajjaj
Mazi have tried to justify this tradition by rearranging some of its
words. Despite all this, Ibn Abbas continued to believe that it was
permissible to eat the flesh of assess and to contract temporary
marriage with women.[^94]

Thirdly it implies that Ibn Abbas and Imam Ali (a.s) differed on this
issue, whereas we do not accept it. This is because Ibn Abbas used to
follow Imam Ali (a.s) particularly on such issues which are among the
necessaries of religion. How can then one believe that Imam Ali (a.s)
reminds Ibn Abbas of a necessary ruling in Islam and yet he continues to
resist it?

By Allah this is not the case. That is why liars felt it inevitable to
go towards fabricating traditions. According to Ibn Taymiyya, Ibn Abbas
says, "When I heard about the prohibition of temporary marriage, I gave
up my own opinion".[^95] But Ibn Taymiyya's words are not true. To
refute it, we will quote Ibn Hajar's words. He quotes Ibn Battal as
saying, "The question that Ibn Abbas gave up his idea is related through
weak traditions"[^96] It is because of this that according to Ibn
Kathir, Ibn Abbas however continued to cherish the idea that temporary
marriage is permissible. Thus he did not change his mind until the end
of his life. This is what some great scholars of tradition point out.

According to Muslim Urwa bin Zubair quotes Abdullah bin Zubair as
saying, "Some people who are spiritually blind –just as they are
physically blind- permit temporary marriage".

Urwa said: You are ignorant and foolish. By my soul, temporary marriage
was practiced during the time of the Holy Prophet (a.s), the most pious
man.

Ibn Zubair said: If you are bold enough go and contract temporary
marriage. By Allah if you do it I will stone you to death.[^97]

He was referring to Ibn Abbas, the son of Imam Ali's uncle. At that
time, he was blind. The traditions reported by Muslim and Ahmad bin
Hanbal from Abi Basra, openly mention the name of Ibn Abbas. It shows
that Ibn Abbas was denying temporary marriage at Mecca during the time
of Ibn Zubair. Until the end of his life, he continued to believe in the
permissibility of temporary marriage and the Meccan jurist were
following him.

On the other hand, if the Messenger of Alah (s) had prohibited temporary
marriage and Imam Ali (s) had informed him about it, he would have
accepted it, not showing any sign of opposition.

### Points concerning traditions narrated from Imam Ali (a.s)

###

As mentioned before, the contradictory traditions narrated from the Holy
Prophet (s) through Imam Ali (a.s), are all but fabricated and false.
All these traditions are narrated by Zuhri from the sons of Muhammad bin
Hanafiyya from their father. Hasan bin Muhammad has on the other hand
narrated from Salma bin Awka'a and Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari that the
Holy Prophet (s) visited them and permitted them to contract temporary
marriage with women.

This tradition signifies that the two sons of Muhammad bin Hanafiyya
believed in the lawfulness of temporary marriage. This is because it is
not reasonable for a person to narrate the lawfulness of temporary
marriage from two companions of the Holy Prophet not knowing about its
abrogation by the Holy Prophet (s).

Thus if we forget about the signification of the said tradition, the
problems in the life of Abdullah and Hasan, sons of Muhammad Hanafiyya
and the contradictions in the traditions attributed to Imam Ali (a.s),
we cannot forget about Zuhri, who is the axis of the narrators of these
traditions. Thus let's go through his account of life.

### A glance at life of Zuhri

###

1. He was among the well-known persons who were opposed Imam Ali (a.s).
He used to associate with Urwa bin Zubair and talk ill of Imam Ali
(a.s).

2. He narrated traditions from Umar bin Sa'ad bin Abi Waqqas, killer of
Imam Husain (a.s).

3. He was one of the Ummayyid's agents. That is why prominent scholars
have reproached and criticized him.

4. Imam Yahya bin Mu'aeen criticized him after comparing him with
'Amash.

5. Writing him a letter, Imam Ali bin al-Husain, Zayn al-'Abdidin
rebukes him because of his attending cruel rulers' court and advises him
to change his mind, but his advice did not changes him.[^98]

Conclusion

1. According to Quran and tradition, temporary marriage is one of the
essentials of Islam. Muslims used to adhere to it both practically as
well as theoretically.

2. Umar bin Khattab prohibited it after he assumed power and ruled for
sometimes.

3. Being aware of these two issues, Sunni scholars differed on how to
justify it. Some said that prohibition was made by the Holy Prophet (s)
and no one other than Umar was aware of it. This justification as
mentioned before, is wrong. Others were of the view that it was Umar who
prohibited it. According to them we must follow him, for the Holy
Prophet (s) has ordered us to follow his conduct and the conduct of his
guided caliphs. We have elsewhere dealt with this tradition
independently and proved that it is wrong.[^99]

Some have said that the Holy Prophet (s) himself prohibited it. Those
who follow this theory, differ on the time and place of this happening.
They have resorted to traditions that are squarely fabricated.

4. It is clear thus that temporary marriage is lawful and the traditions
on its prohibition are fabricated.

Given all these [specially the tradition that stresses on following
caliphs][^100] we are led to believe that the prohibition of temporary
marriage by Umar was nothing but an innovation – a thing that was
forbidden by the Holy Prophet (s).

<p dir="rtl">
ایاکم و محدثات الامور...
</p>

Distance yourself innovations.

In this short treatise, so far we have briefly evaluated different
opinions on the two mut'as [and argued that both are lawful], but this
issue has other dimensions which need to be touched by jurists and
theologians.

We ask Allah to help us find the true path and do our deeds purely for
Allah. We also ask Him to help us associate with the Holy Prophet (s),
his progeny and his real followers. He is no doubt beneficent and
merciful.


