Bibliography
============

1. The Holy Quran

2. Ibn al-Arabi Maliki,*Ahkam al-Quran* , Buirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, 1416.

3. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin*Abu Bakr Qastalani* , Bierut, Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-Arabi.

4. Ibn Abd al-Barr,*al-Isti'ab fi ma'arifat al-Ashab* , first edition,
Beirut, 1415AH.

5. Ibn Hajar, 'Asqalani,*Al-Isaba fi Tameez al-Sahaba* , first edition,
Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, 1415.

6. Muhammad bin Ahmad bin Rushd Qurtubi Andulusi,*Bidayat al-Mujtahid* ,
Beirut, Dar al-Fikr.

7. Hafiz Abu al-Fada Ismael bin Kathir Demishqi,*al-Bedaya wa al-Nihaya*
, Beirut, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi, 1408 AH.

8. Zubaidi,*Taj al-Arus* , Buirut, Dar Maktaba.

9. Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti*, Ta'arikh al-Khulafa* , Qom, Mashurat Sharif
Razi, 1411.

10. Abu Ja'afar Muhammad bin Jarir Tabari, Ta'arikh Tabari*(Ta'arikh
al-Umam wa al-Muluk* ), Beirut, Mu'assisa al-'Alami.

11. Dahabi, Tazkira al-Huffaz, Beirut,*Dar Ihyat al-Turath al-Arabi* .

12. Ibn Kathir,*Tafsir Ibn Kathir* (Tafsir al-Qur'an al-'Azim), Beirut,
Dar al-Ma'arifa, 1409 AH.

13. Fakhr Razi,*al-Tafsir al-Kabir* , Beirut, Dar al-Fikr, 1415.

14. Muhammad bin Jarir al-Tabari*, Tafsir Tabari* (Jami'a al-bayan fi
tafsif al-Quran), Beirut, Dar al-Ma'arifa, 1412.

15. Imam Fakhr Razi,*Tafsir Fakhr Razi* (Tafsir al-Kabir), Beirut, Dar
Ihya al-Turath al-Arabi, third edition.

16. Muhammad bin Ahmad Ansari Qurtubi,*Tafsir Qurtubi* (al-Jami'a li
al-Quran), Beirut, Dar ihya al-Turath al-Arabi, second edition, offset.

17. Ibn Abd al-Barr,*al-Tamhid lima fi al-Muwwata min al-Ma'ani wa
al-Asanid* , Qairo, Dar al-Faruq al-Haditha, first edition, 1420 AH.

18. Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani,*Tahdib al-Tahdib* , Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, first edition, 1415.

19. Sayyid Ali Millani,*Chigunagi Namaz Abu Bakr be Jae Rasul Khuda* ,
Qom, Markaz Haqaeq Islami, 1387 AH.

20. Jalal al-Din Suyyti,*al-Durr al-Mansur fi al-Tafsir bi al-Ma'athur*
, first edition, 1421.

21. Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzi,*Zad al-Mi'ad fi Huda Khair al-Ibad* , Beirut,
Mu'assisa al-Risala, 1408.

22. Sayyid Ali Husaini Milani,*Sunnat Piyamber ya Sunnat Khulafa* ?,
Qom, Markaz Haqaeq Islami, first edition, 1389 AH.

23. Ibi Dawood*, Sunnan* , Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, first
editioin, 1416 AH.

24. Ahmad bin Husain Bayhaqi,*al-Sunan al-Kubra* , Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, second editon, 1414 AH.

25. Ahmad bin Shu'ayb Nisaee,*al-Sunan al-Kubra* , Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya.

26. Muhammad bin Isa bin Sura Tirmidhi*, Sunan Timidhi* , Beirut, Dar
al-Fikr, second edition, 1403.

27. Mulla Ali Qushji Ash'ari,*Sharh Tajrid* .

28. Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Salma bin Abd al-Malik Azdi Tahavi
Hanafi,*Sharh Ma'ani al-Athar.*

29. Muhammad bin Ismael Bukhari,*Sahih Bukhari* , Beirut, Dar Ibn
Kathir, fifth edition, 1414 AH.

30. Muslim bin Hajjaj Nayshaburi,*Sahih Muslim* , Beirut, Dar al-Fikr,
first edition, 1407AH.

31. Jalal al-Din Suyuti,*Tabaqat al-Huffaz* , Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, second edition, 1414 AH.

32. Badr al-Din 'Aini,*Umda al-Qari fi Sharh al-Bukhari* , Beirut, Dar
al-Fikr.

33. Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani,*Fath al-Bari fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari* ,
Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, first edition, 1410 AH.

34. Jarullah Mahmood bin Umar Zamakhshari,*al-Kashaf* , Beirut, Dar
al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, first edition, 1415.

35. Ula al-Din Ali Muttaqi Hindi,*Kanz al-Ummal* , Beirut, Dar al-Kutub
al-Ilmiyya, first edition, 1419 AH.

36. Shams al-Din Sarakhsi,*al-Mabsut fi al-Fiqh al-Hanafi* , Beirut, Dar
al-M'arifa, 1406 AH.

37. Noor al-Din Ali bin Abi Bakr,*Ma'jma'a al-Zawaed wa Manba'a
al-Fawaed* , Beirut, Dar al-Fikr, 1412 AH.

38. Abu Muhammad bin Hazm Zahiri Andulusi,*al-Muhalla* , Beirut, Dar
al-Fikr.

39. Ahmad bin Hanbal Shaybani,*Musnad* Ahmad, Beirut, Dar Ihya al-Turath
al-Arabi, third edition, 1415 AH.

40. Abd al-Razzaq San'ani,*al-Musannaf* , Beirut, Maktab al-Islami,
1403.

41. Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Quddama,*al-Mughni*
, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-'Arabi.

42. Ibn Taymiyya Harrani, Mihaj*al-Sunna al-Nabavi* , Cairo, Maktaba Ibn
Taymiyya, second edition, 1409AH.

43. Yusuf bin Abd al-Rahman Mazi, al-Minhaj fi Sharh Sahih Muslim bin
Hajjaj.

44. Yahya bin Sharaf Dimishqi Shafi'ai Nawavi,*al-Mihaj* , Beirut, Dar
al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, first edition,1415 AH.

45. Malik bin Anas,*al-Muwatta* , Beirut, Dar Ihya al-Turath al-'Arabi,
1406.

46 Ibn Athir,*al-Niyaha fi gharib al-Hadith* , Beirut, 1418 AH.

47, Shams al-Din Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khallakan*, Wafiyat al-'Ayan* ,
Beirut, Dar al-Sadir.


