Khums In The Qur'an & History
=============================

"Khums" literally means "one-fifth or 20%". In Islamic legal
terminology, it means "one-fifth of certain items which a person
acquires as wealth, and which must be paid as an Islamic tax". The
Qur'an mentions it in the following verse:

***Know that whatever of a thing you acquire, a fifth of it is for
Allah, for the Messenger, for the near relative, and the orphans, the
needy, and the wayfarer...(8:41)***

In this verse, the word "ghanimtum" has been used which has been
translated as "you acquire". As explained above, it means "certain items
which a person acquires as wealth." What are these certain items?
According to the ahadith of the Imams of Ahlul Bayt, the items which are
eligible for khums are seven:

• the profit or the surplus of the income.

• the legitimate wealth which is mixed with some illegitimate wealth.

• mines and minerals.

• the precious stones obtained from sea by diving.

• treasures.

• the land which a dhimmi kafir buys from a Muslim.

• the spoils of war.

However, there are some people who interpret the word "ghanimtum" as
"whatever of a thing you acquire as spoils of war," thus confining the
obligation of khums to the spoils of war only. This interpretation is
based on ignorance of the Arabic language, the history of khums, the
Islamic laws and of the interpretation of the Qur'an.

To make this point crystal clear, I would like to quote the following
arguments from my father, \`Allamah Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi. In
reading the following paragraphs, remember that the word ghanimtum has
been derived from al-ghanimah.

The Meaning of “Ghanimtum”
--------------------------

The famous Arabic dictionary of al-Munjid (by Father Louis Ma\`luf of
Beirut) says, al-ghanim and al-ghanimah means:

(a) What is taken from the fighting enemies by force.

(b) All earnings generally...Furthermore, the saying al-ghunm bi
'l-ghurm means that the profit stands against expenses, i.e., as the
owner is the sole proprietor of the profit and nobody shares it with
him, therefore only he bears all the expenses and risk.'[^1]  
 This implies that in Arabic language al-ghanimah has two meanings: one
the spoils of war, and the other 'profit'. The above quoted proverb also
proves that 'profit' is not uncommon meaning.

When a word in the Qur'an can be interpreted in more than one way, it is
incumbent upon the Muslims to seek guidance from the Prophet and the
Ahlul Bayt. Otherwise, they would be guilty of tafsir bi 'r-ra'iy
(interpreting the Qur'an according to one's own personal views); and
this is a sin which pushes the sinner into jahannam.

The History of Khums
--------------------

Khums is one of those things which were introduced by \`Abdu
'l-Muttalib, the grandfather of the Prophet, and continued in Islam.
Acting upon a command of God given to him in dream, when \`Abdu
'l-Muttalib rediscovered the well of Zamzam, he found in it many
valuable things which were buried in it in very remote past by the
Ismailites when they feared that their enemies would usurp them.

When \`Abdu 'l-Muttalib found that buried treasure, he gave away its
one-fifth (literally, khums) in the way of God and kept the remaining
four-fifth to himself. Then it became a custom in his family; and after
the hijrah of the Prophet, the same system was incorporated in Islam.
Thus the first khums was not given from the 'spoils of war', but from a
buried treasure (which is one of the seven items eligible for khums.)

The Islamic Laws
----------------

Not a single sect of Islam confines the meaning of ghanimah to the
'spoils of war'. In addition to the 'spoils of war' the following items
are subject to khums:

(a) Minerals: eligible for khums in Shi\`ah and Hanafi sects.

(b) Buried treasure: eligible for khums in all Muslim sects (that is,
Shi\`ah, Hanafi, Maliki, Hanbali and Shafi\`iy).

The Interpretation of the Qur'an
--------------------------------

As mentioned earlier, the interpretation of the Qur'an must be based on
the teachings of the Ahlul Bayt. The word ghanimah in the verse under
discussion has clearly been interpreted as 'al-fa'idatu 'l-muktasabah --
the earned profit' by our Imams.

"To conclude, we can say that the word ghanima was never treated as
being confined to the 'spoils of war' by any sect of Islam; and as far
as our Imams are concerned, it meant many things besides the spoils of
war right from the day of Imam \`Ali (peace be upon him), as the
authentic traditions show."[^2]

What has been quoted above can also be substantiated from the practice
of the Prophet of Islam himself. For example, when the Prophet sent
\`Amr bin Hazm to Yemen, he wrote instructions for him in which, among
other things, he says, "...to gather the khums of Allah from the gains
[of Yemenis]."[^3]

And when the tribe of Bani Kilal of Yemen sent its khums to the Prophet,
the latter acknowledges it by saying, "Your messenger has returned and
you have paid the khums of Allah from the gains (al-ghana'im)."[^4]

It is interesting to note that the Bani Kilal obeyed the Prophet's order
and sent the khums of its gains to him while no war had taken place
between the Muslims of Yemen and the unbelievers. This is a clear
indication that khums was not restricted by the Prophet to the spoils of
war.

The importance given by the Prophet to the issue of khums can also be
seen in his advice to the delegation of Bani \`Abdu 'l-Qays. It seems
that Bani \`Abdu 'l-Qays (which was a branch of Rabi\`ah) was not a very
strong tribe. Moreover, in order to travel to Medina, they had to cross
an area inhabited by the Muzar tribe which was against the Muslims.
Consequently, the Bani \`Abdu 'l-Qays could not travel safely to Medina
except during the months in which war-fare was forbidden according to
the Arab custom.

Once a delegation from Bani \`Abdu 'l-Qays came to Medina and said to
the Prophet, "We cannot come to you except in the haram months [when
war-fare is forbidden], and there are between us and you the unbelievers
of Muzar.

Therefore, please give us some advice that we may give to those whom we
have left behind and that we may enter the Paradise [by acting on it
ourselves]." The Prophet advised them to believe in One God, establish
prayer, pay zakat, fast in the month of Ramadhan, and "to pay khums
(one-fifth) of whatever you gain."[^5]

The circumstances of the Bani \`Abdu 'l-Qays -- they were weak and small
in numbers, and were thus prevented from traveling safely to Medina --
leaves no room for interpreting the application of khums in the above
hadith on spoils of war exclusively.

\* \* \*

Khums is wajib on seven items; but in this book we will discuss only two
items:

(1) the profit or surplus of the income, and

(2) legitimate wealth which is mixed with some illegitimate wealth.

The reason for being selective in this discussion is that the other
items eligible for khums (for example, mines and minerals, precious
stones and treasure) are not common to all people and, therefore, I
decided not to burden the readers which details about those items.
Anyone who wants more information on rules of those items can contact
the religious scholar in his or her local area or write to us.

[^1]: See the entry under G-N-M; in the 28th edition of al-Munjid
(Beirut: Dar el-Machreq, 1986) it is on p. 561. Also see other famous
dictionaries like Lisan al-\`Arab and al-Qamus.

[^2]: Rizvi, S.S.A., Your Questions Answered, vol. 1 (Dar-es-salaam:
Bilal Muslim Mission, 1973) p. 44-46.

[^3]: Ibn Khaldun, Ta'rikh, vol. 2, part II (Beirut: al-A\`lami, 1971)
p. 54; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa 'n-Nihayah, vol. 5 (Beirut:
al-Ma\`arif, 1966) pp. 76-77; Ibn Hisham, Sirah, vol. 4 (Beirut: Daru
'l-Jayl, 1975) p. 179.

[^4]: Abu \`Ubayd, al-Amwal (Beirut: Mu'assah Nasir, 1981) p. 13;
al-Hakim, Mustadrak, vol. 1 (Hyderabad: \`Uthmaniyyya Press, 1340 AH) p.
395. For more references, see Ja\`far Murtada al-\`Amili, al-Sahih fi
Sirati 'n-Nabi, vol. 3 (Qum: n.p, 1983) p. 309.

[^5]: Bukhari, Sahihu 'l-Bukhari, vol. 4 (Beirut: Daru 'l-\`Arabiyyah,
n.d.) p. 213; Abu \`Ubayd, al-Amwal, p. 13. This has also been recorded
by other Sunni sources of hadith like Sahih Muslim, Sunan Nisa'i, Musnad
of Ahmad bin Hanbal, and Sunan of Tirmidhi.


