Some Thoughts On Khums
======================

A. Khums: a Charity or a Duty?
------------------------------

In our evaluation, we judge a person by his deeds. This is so because
we, as human beings, cannot know the motives of the doer. But does Allah
judge the people in the same way? Allah will not judge the people by
looking at their deeds; He will instead judge by looking at their
motives. The Qur'an says,

***"Verily Allah accepts (the good deeds) only from the pious
people."(5:27)***

In the introduction, we mentioned there are two levels by which Islam
aims to create and preserve the economic equilibrium in society:
individual and collective. Under 'individual level,' we talked about
charity which is a voluntary good deed. Under 'collective level,' we
talked about the taxes which Islam has made obligatory upon the Muslims.

Khums and zakat come under the second category and, therefore, it should
never be looked upon as an act of charity. Rather, it is a duty, an
obligation which must be fulfilled whether one likes it or not. In
fulfilling this obligation, you must train yourself to pay khums and
zakat with the intention of seeking the pleasure of Allah. It should be
done fi sabili 'l-lah.

We must emphasize that doing a deed is one thing but its acceptance or
rejection by Allah is something else. The former does not guarantee the
latter. It is the motive which will be crucial in acceptance or
rejection of one's deed. To use khums, whether on a personal or
organizational levels, as a leverage to promote oneself is very
detrimental to the spirit of khums.

I am especially concerned about the emphasis put on accrediting as
'donors' the persons or organizations who give khums for valid Islamic
causes.

They should take a moment to think whether the sihmu 'l-Imam which they
are giving is owned by themselves or Imam Mahdi (upon whom be peace)? If
it belongs to the latter, then why insist on getting credit for it as
the donor? If any acknowledgment is to be made, should it not go to the
Imam?

B. Do Others Also Give Khums?
-----------------------------

Another issue is that of pride, or I should say arrogance, in giving
khums. There are some who give khums on a regular basis (may Allah
increase their numbers), but have also become victim of \`ujb. \`Ujb
means a sense of self-righteousness in which one looks down upon others.
Such people think that they are the only ones who pay khums!

This happens because of ignorance about others. \`Ujb does not harm
anyone but its own victim. Such a person will suffer from a wrong sense
of pride and will lose the most important means of spiritual development
known as self-criticism.

One should be aware that every country or group of people goes through
financial ups and downs. If, today, you are financially on a good
footing and give khums, while others are on the receiving end -- this
does not mean that those who receive khums have been the same during all
times in their history!

The best case in our time is India: After the British colonization of
that country, in particular after its independence, the Muslims of India
have gone through a very difficult financial crisis. The Shi\`ahs have
suffered even more. Their present plight should not be taken as a sign
that they have always been at the receiving end of charity. There was a
time not long ago when the Shi\`ahs of India (especially during the
Shi\`ite Oudh sultanate in North India) were the main financial
supporters of the centers of learning in Iraq.[^1]

The Shi\`ahs in the Oudh and even in the southern sultanates of
pre-British India had contributed greatly to the growth of their faith
and community in that part of the Muslim world.

Train yourself to give khums, zakat and charity without injuring the
feelings of the recipients. Allah says,

***"O you who believe! Do not nullify your charity by reproach and
injury (to the recipient), like the person who spends his wealth to show
it to the people..." (2:264)***

C. Khums Dependency Syndrome
----------------------------

I would also like to express my thought about the attitude which some of
our religious organizations in Europe and North America have adopted to
the issue of khums. The Shi\`ahs in India, Pakistan and East Africa have
built many religious centers in their countries. After migrating to the
West, it is pleasing to note that they carried on the tradition and have
built religious centers in their adopted homelands.

However, there is one important difference between the immigrant Muslim
communities in the West and their ancestors in Asia and Africa. The
latter built the centers mainly by the contributions made from their own
money. Whereas the former have to large extent built their centers with
the khums fund. I do not want to imply or suggest that the use of khums
for such purposes is not right; but I am worried about the habitual
dependency on khums by our organizations.

I have named this mentality as "the khums dependency syndrome". Whenever
we think of a worthwhile project, we immediately look at the sihmu
'l-Imam as the first and the main source for financing that project.
This is not to deny that often the local resources are not sufficient.
But it seems to me (and I pray to Allah that I be wrong) that we are
gradually forgetting how to give from the remaining 80% of our excess
wealth towards worthwhile causes, and are getting into the habit of
depending on khums!

D. Those Who do not Pay Their Dues as Seen By Imam \`Ali (A.S.)
---------------------------------------------------------------

Some Shi\`ahs take the issue of paying khums lightly; they think that
giving some money in charity from time to time absolves them of their
duty. Such Shi\`ahs apparently do not realize that not paying khums,
zakat or fitrah (which are obligatory dues) amounts to misappropriation
of the money which rightfully belongs to the Imam (peace be upon him)
and the needy, orphan and poor people.

To get the feeling of how Imam \`Ali (peace be upon him) looks upon the
misappropriation of such funds, I would like to quote some parts of a
letter which he wrote to one of his officers about the latter's
misappropriation of the public fund. While reading the letter, keep the
fact in your mind that the officer addressed in this letter was
apparently a cousin of Imam \`Ali (a.s.). I would specially like to draw
the attention of the respected wakils of the mujtahids of our time to
this letter.

Imam \`Ali bin Abi Talib wrote:

"As soon as it was possible for you to misappropriate the ummah's trust,
you hastened to turn around and attack (them), and made a swift leap to
snatch away whatever you could from their property meant for their
widows and their orphans as a wolf snatches a wounded and helpless goat.
Then, you happily loaded it off to Hijaz without feeling guilty for
having misappropriated it...It was as though you were sending to your
family what you had inherited from your father and mother!

"Glory be to Allah! Do you not believe in the Day of Judgement, or do
you not fear the exaction of account? O' you who were considered by us
among the men possessed of mind, how can you enjoy food and drink when
you know that you are eating the unlawful and drinking the unlawful. You
are...marrying women with the money of the orphans, the poor, the
believers and the mujahidin to whom Allah has dedicated this
money...Fear Allah and return to these people their properties. If you
do not do so and Allah grants me power over you, I shall excuse myself
before Allah and strike you with my sword with which I did not strike
anyone but that he went to Hell.

"By Allah, even if Hasan and Husayn had done what you did there would
have been no leniency with me for them and they could not have won their
way with me till I had recovered from them the right and destroyed the
wrong produced by their unjust action. I swear by Allah, the Lord of all
beings, that I would not be pleased to regard the people's money which
you have appropriated as lawful for me and to leave it to my successors
by way of inheritance.

"Mind yourself and consider for a while as though you had reached the
end of life and had been buried under the earth. Then your actions will
be presented to you in the place where the oppressor cries 'Alas' while
he who wasted his life yearns for return (to the world), ***but time was
none to escape***[^2]***.*** "[^3]

[^1]: See, Cole, J.R.I, "'Indian Money' and the Shi\`i Shrine Cities of
Iraq, 1786-1850," Middle Eastern Studies, vol. 22 (1986) No. 4, pp.
461-480.

[^2]: Sura Sad, 38:3.

[^3]: Nahju 'l-Balaghah, Letter No. 41.


