Introduction
============

Throughout history all over the world, there have usually been thinkers
on humanities, and particularly on education, whose theories and
writings have been based on the Original nature, and therefore these
have received acceptance of most people in all times and places.

Since the religion is based on nature a Then set your face upright for
religion in the right state; the nature made by God in which He has made
men" (Qur'an. Rum 30:30). Thus their natures have had the color of God,
and since man's nature is unchangeable "There is no altering of God's
creation)) (Qur'an, Rum 30:30), their sayings and writings have always
been useable and good for citation. But the presence of such scholars in
quite different parts of this great world and in different periods of
history has caused many people of the world to he unaware of their
opinions or to understand them incorrectly.

Undoubtedly, this will increase disagreements and discord among
different people of the world, the very thing those thinkers wished to
rectify. Therefore, it appears evident that under such conditions in the
world, different factors intend to fun such disagreements and discord,
and the bad results of such discord are evident all over the world; the
duty and task of researchers and writers will be greater. First, they
should discover and identify such scholars, second, identification.
analysis and interpretation of their theories, and third. comparative
study of different scholars' theories in different religions. This not
only will cause, on the one hand, familiarity of the inhabitants of the
world with their views and so to use those viewpoints, but also it will,
on the other hand, cause designing a systematic model based on religious
education for all inhabitants of the world through clarification of the
shared core of those views. Such a model can be appHed by all peoples
and humans of the world in the direction of a worldwide unity and
creating peace among, all human beings. There were in Iran, throughout
history, some great Muslim scholars who represented educational and
philosophical theories which had a worldwide influence.

These opinions and theories that were written in hundreds of books and
papers were mostly based on Islam, and included all branches of a
philosophical- educational school: ontology (and anthropology as its
subset), epistemology, axiology; and their educational effects which
consisted of definition and description of education, goals, methods,
principles, foundations, factors, kinds of education, teaching,
curriculum and educational contents, etc. There have been many of such
authorities and figures in Iran. However, in this research, the
educational opinions and theories (the effect of the philosophy on
education) of ten of the most important of them, i.e. Farabi, Avicenna,
Ghazali, Khajeh Naseer Tusi, Jalal al-Din Rumi, Hafez, Sa'di, Ibn
Khaldün, Tabatabaee and Motahhari. Investigation of educational theories
of such scholars as Avicenna. Ghazali and Khajeh Nasecr Tusi indicate
that our great educators, even in the past, were aware of the principles
of education and always tried to found their teachings on given and
definite principles (Shariatmadari; cited in Attaran. 1992). These three
scholars' writings and speeches are in many cases well-supported by the
Qur'an and Islamic traditions or influenced by them and they were from
outstanding personalities of Islamic thought, and were effective in a
deep thinking transformation in their era (Attaran. 1992).

**(1) A Brief Biography of Muslim Scholars

** 1-1. Farabi

Farabi (Al-Farabi) (259-339 AH) was born in the village "Vasij" near of
Farab. Farabi is a great philosopher and founder of Islamic philosophy.
He spent many years in Baghdad in which he wrote most of his books
(Seyyed Arab. 2007). His works have been mentioned to be about 400
(Reshnou zadeh, 2007). He went to the court of Seyfoddowleh Hamdani by
his invitation and spent some time in Halab (in Syria). He also traveled
to Sham and Egypt. He passed away in Damascus (Seyyed Arab, 2007 &
Hoseini Dashti, 1997). In addition to intellectual aspect and knowledge.
Abu Nasr Farabi was morally higher than many other philosophers were. He
was a contented person and was accustomed and attached to solitude. He
was a man of charitable donation and almsgiving. He believed that the
greatness and happiness of a philosopher was in forsaking the world
(worldly matters) and the happiness of the soul was in forsaking worldly
interests and in seclusion. Farabi considered morality as the result of
knowledge and as the introduction of happiness. He considered no
greatness, esteem or perfection for a scholar who had no morality. All
happiness is obtained through morality and virtues, and one.

whose knowledge has not been a cause of moral refinement, is not happy
or lucky. Farabi was not much interested in fame. He preferred truth to
all other things (Dehkhoda, 1998). Farabi first started to study and
investigate Aristotle's books. He summarized and improved Aristotle's
philosophy in such a manner that all people confessed his virtue, and so
he made clear the errors of the translators of Aristotle's works. That
was the reason why he was called "the Second Teacher" (Aristotle was
called the First Teacher) (Hoseini Dashti, 1997). Islamic neo-Platonist,
philosopher of language, culture, and society... "the Second Teacher,"
he was called so for his achievements in logic. Of Turkicorogin,
al-Farabi studied under Christian thinkers. He settled in Baghdad,
traveled in Byzantium, and died in Damascus. His Arabic commentary on
Aristotle's Deinter-pretention argued that divine omniscience does not
imply determinism, since the necessary implication of a fact by the
corresponding knowledge is not transferred to the fact itself. This
division of intrinsic from relational (hypothetical) necessity
undergirds Avicenna's essence existence distinction and his central
claim that nature is contingent in itself, though necessary in relation
to its causes. Al-Farabi found the logic of Koranic promises and threats
by seeing prophets in the role that Plato had assigned to poets:
naturalizing higher truths imagery and legislation (Honderich, 2005).

Al-Farabi, also called Abu Nasr, in Latin, Alpharabius (870950).
studied and taught in Baghdad when it was the cultural capital of the
Islamic world, responsive to the philosophical and scientific legacy of
late antiquity. AI-Farabi was highly instrumental in effecting a
transition of Greek philosophy, last publicly known in its entirety in
sixth-century Alexandria, into Islamic culture. Despite ongoing
opposition because of philosophy's identification with pagan and
Christian authors, ™ succeeded in naturalizing the Western philosophy in
the Islamic world, where it retained vitality for the next three hundred
years. Al-Hirable because known as "the second teacher" after Aristotle,
is the main source of philosophical information. His summaries and
interpretations of the teachings of Aristotle and Plato were widely
read, and his attempt as synthesizing their views was very
influential.

BeHeving in the universal nature of truth and holding Plato and
Aristotle in the highest esteem, he minimized their differences and
adapted Neo-platonic teachings that incorporated elements of both
traditions. Unlike the first philosopher of the Islamic world, the
ninth-century al-Kindi, al-Farabi was in possession of full Arabic
translations of many of the most important texts of classical times and
of some major Hellenistic commentaries on them. His own commentaries and
digests of the works of Plato and Aristotle made them more accessible to
later generations of scholars, even as his relatively independent
treatises established a high standard of logical rigor and subtlety for
later Muslim and Jewish philosophers. Avicenna found his Metaphysics
commentary indispensable for understanding Aristotle's text, while
Maimonides recommended all his writings, calling them "pure flour".
Medieval Scholastic thought, however, was more interested in Averroes
and Avicenna than in al-Farabi. Contemporary scholars such as Leo
Strauss and Muhsin Mandi have emphasized the esoteric nature of
al-Farabi's writings., seen as critical for understanding much of
medieval Islamic and Jewish philosophy.

Al-Farabi's main interests lay in logic and political theory. He
understood that the Organon was just a universal instrument for
understanding and improving reasoning and logical discourse. Against the
traditional grammarians of Islam, he argued for the value-free and
neutral nature of Greek of logic, while against the theologians of
Islam, (motakallimoon), he emphasized the difference between their
dialectical type of discourse and the preferred demonstrative syllogism
of the philosophers. Much of the responsibility for the separation
between Islamic theology and philosophy may be attributed to al-Farabi,
who avoided engaging religious dogmas and specifically Muslim beliefs as
much as possible. He was able to accommodate belief in prophethood and
revelation to a general theory of emanation, though he made no special
claims for the prophet of Islam. His general view of Religion was that
it was a popular and symbolic representation of philosophical ideas,
often designed by philosophers. The influence of Plato's Republic in
this and other areas of political philosophy is evident, though
al-Farabi's Principles of the Views of the Citizens of the Best State
manage to give an Islamic coloration to Platonic teachings. Al-Farabi's
metaphysical beliefs are more problematical still, and he was reputed to
have disowned his earHer belief in the immortality of the soul. (Audi,
2001)

He wrote extensively on logic, and expanded Aristotle's description of
the intellect. He also exhibits the influence of Neo-Platonism: creation
is an emanation and it is as the images of the world soul or anima munch
that become bodies in space. His work The Virtuous City is a version of
Plato's Republic, a description of the ideal civic society in which all
the virtues flourish. (Blackburn, 2005)

1-2. Avicenna

Avicenna (Ibn Sina) (980-1037). Persian (Iranian) philosopher and
Physician, regarded as the greatest of the medieval Islamic
philosophers, served as court physician for the Sultan of Bukhara. He
was deeply influenced by Aristotle and still maintained a Muslim faith.
He is best known for his distinction between essence and existence, in
which the essences of existing things must be explained by their
existing cause (s), whose reality is higher than the sophical and
theological perspective. (Pojman, 2003)

Avicenna. as a Persian philosopher, scientist, and physician. widely
called "The Supreme Master,- held an unsurpassed position in Islamic
philosophy. His works, including the Canon of Medicine, are cited
throughout most medieval Latin philosophical and medical texts. The
subject of more commentaries, glosses, and super glosses than any other
Islamic philosopher, they have inspired generations of thinkers,
including Persian poets.

His philosophical works. especially Ile Directives and Remarks and
Deliverance, define Islamic Peripatetic philosophy, one of the three
dominant schools of Islamic philosophy. His contributions to science and
philosophy are extraordinary in scope. He is thought to be the first
logician to clearly define temporal modalities in prepositions, to
diagnose and identify many diseases, and to identify specific number of
pulse beats in diagnosis. Honderich, 2005)

His autobiography describes him as an intuitive student of philosophy
and other Greek Sciences who could not see the point of Aristotle's
Metaphysics, until he read a tiny essay by al-Farabi (870-950), who
showed him what it meant to seek the nature of being as such. - It was
in metaphysics that Avicenna made his greatest contributions to
philosophy, brilliantly synthesizing the rival approaches of the
Aristotelian-NeoPlatonism tradition with the creationist monotheism of
Islamic dialectical theology (kalam). Where Aristotle sought and found
being in its fullest sense in what was changeless in its nature (above
all, in the cosmos as a whole), kalam understood being as the
immediately given, allowing no inference beyond a single contingent
datum to any necessary properties, correlatives, continuators, or
successor.

The result was a stringent atomist occasionalism resting ultimately on
an early version of logical atomism. Avicenna preserved an Aristotelian
naturalism alongside the Scriptural idea of the contingency of the world
by arguing that any finite being is contingent in itself but necessary
in relation to its causes. He adapted al-Farabi's Neo-platonic
emanationism to this schematization and naturalized in philosophy his
own distinctive version of the kalam argument from contingency: any
being must be either Necessary Being, which is therefore simple, the
ultimate cause of all other things. Avicenna found refuge at the court
of one 'Alaal-Dawla, who bravely resisted the military pressures of
Mahmud against his lands around Isfahan and made the philosopher and
savant be his vizier. Here Avicenna completed his famous philosophic
work the Shifa' (known in Latin as the Sufficientia) and his Qanun fi
Tibb, the Galenic Canon, which remained in use as a medical textbook
until finally was brought down by the weight of criticisms during the
Renaissance. Avicenna's philosophy was the central target of the
polemical critique of the Muslim theologian al-Ghazali (1058-111) in his
Incoherence of the philosophers, mainly on 'the ground that the
philosopher's retention of the Aristotelian doctrine of the eternity of
the world was inconsistent with his claim that God was the author of the
world. Avicenna's related affirmations of the necessity of causation and
universality of God's knowledge, al-Ghazali argued, made miracles
impossible and divine governance too impersonal to deserve the name.

Yet Avicenna's philosophic works (numbering over a hundred in their
Arabic and sometimes Persian originals) continued to exercise a major
influence on Muslim and Jewish philosophers and (through Latin
translations) on philosophers in the West. (Audi, 2001)

One of his arguments concerning the nature of the soul postulates a
full-grown man suddenly coming into existence although suspended in
empty space, with eyes covered and limbs separated. This 'flying man'
would have no sensation. but nevertheless be aware of his being and his
self. The argument anticipates the cogito of Descartes. Avicenna
believed that being was an accident of essence, and that contingent
beings require necessary causes sustaining their existence. This version
of the cosmological argument was the accepted by Aquinas. It is in the
theological substances as kinds of intelligence that Neo-Platonism
surfaces in his work. (Blackburn, 2005)

Avicenna was born in the year 980 of the Christian era, or in
Mohammedan reckoning the year 370. On 13 October 1950, the Mohammedan
year 1370 began: it will end on 1 October, 1951. Therefore, we are met
together during the one thousandth anniversary of the birth of Avicenna,
Mohammedan reckoning; and that is in fact the occasion for these
lectures, which thus form part of the celebration taking place all over
the world, to commemorate the greatness of one of the outstanding
philosophers and scientists of all times (Wickens, 1952).

1-3. Ghazali Persian Abu Hamid Muhammad Ghazali (Alghazal in Latin
texts) (1058- 1111) was the most influential Ash'arite theologian of his
time. His role as head of the state-endowed Nizamiyya Madrasa, his
monumental work Revival of Religious Sciences, and his autobiographical
account Deliverance from Error (often compared to Augustine's
Confessions) furthered the triumph of revelation over reason. His
specifically anti-philosophical works, Intentions of the philosophers
and Incoherence of the philosophers, called on theologians to use
philosophical technique to oppose 'heretic' arguments. How-ever, the
effects on philosophy proved positive. The study of logic gained
widespread theological acceptance. The identification of twenty
philosophical problems argued to be false (including eternity,
immorality, and rational causality) yeas brilliantly rebutted by
Averroes, thus leading to refinement of Aristotelian arguments. and
Sohravardi's philosophy (Honderich, 2005).

Ghazali was an Islamic philosopher, theologian, jurist. and mystic. He
was born in Khurasan and educated in Nishapur, then an intellectual
center of eastern Islam.

He was appointed the head of a seminary, the newly founded Nizamiyyah
School of Baghdad, in which he taught law and theology with great
success. Yet, his exposure to logic and philosophy led him to seek a
certainty in knowledge beyond that assumed by his profession. At first,
he attempted to address his problem academically, but after live years
in Baghdad, he resigned, left his family, and embarked on the mystic's
solitary quest for al-Haqq (Arabic word for 'the True One'). As a Sufi,
he wandered Oar ten years through many of Muslim major cities and
centers of learning, finally returning to Nishapur and to teaching
theology before his death. AlGhazali's literary and intellectual legacy
is particularly of his work and the esteem hi which he is held within
Islam. Ile may be compared to Aquinas and Maimonides in the Christian
and Jewish traditions respectively. His Revivification of the Religious
Sciences is considered to this day a major theological compendium. His
mystical treatises also have retained their popularity, the Deliverance
from Error. This book chronicles his lifelong quest for truth and
certainty, and his disappointment with the premises of dogmatic
theology, both orthodox Sunni and heterodox Shiite thought, as well as
with the teachings of the philosophers. The light of truth came to him,
he believed, only through divine grace; he considered his senses and
reasoning powers all susceptible to error. (Audi, 2001)

1-4. Tusi

Khajeh Naseeroddeen Tusi was from the great scholars of mathematics,
astrology and wisdom in Iran in the seventh century of hejira. He was
also of the ministers of that time and he was also one of the great
jurisprudents of Shiite Islam. Khajeh has written numerous books
regarding different sciences (Moin, 1992). Khajch Naseer Tusi has also
very valuable works in ethics and education (Beheshti, Abuja'afari &
Faqihi, 2000, P. 113). He was born in 597 All [in Tus. or in Jahrud of
Qom] and died in 672 All [in Baghdad] (Modarresi, 2000). Khajeh Naseer
spent his childhood with those ones, according to him, who were pious
and religious, and who were aware of some sciences, occupations and
crafts. His father was an experienced person, and always encouraged him
to learn different techniques and sciences, and to listen to the speech
of the aware persons in religiosity. Naseeroddin emigrated from Tus to
Neishabur and some other cities to complete his education. Two of his
important activities were the establishing of the very great observatory
of Maragheh, and a very great library in Maragheh too which had 400
thousands books. He planned that the thinkers could continue and extend
their researches, and keep the great heritage of Islam. Tusi wrote about
274 books.

Most of his writings concern philosophy, theosophy, mathematics,
astrology, and ethics. His writings can be classified under the
following ten titles: mathematics, ethics, interpretation, religious
jurisprudence, history, geography, medicine, logics, theosophy, and
philosophy (Beheshti, Abuja'afari Faqihi, 2000, PP. 113-121). In spite
of this fact that Khajeh Naseer Tusi was making much effort to promote
his own religion and belief ( Shiite, Islam), was very kind to other
religious groups of Islam, and respected scholars of each class or
religion and refrained from rigid religious intolerance and dogmatism.
That is the reason why some Christian orientalists and some of the Sunni
scholars and all of Shiite scientists have highly considered his
spiritual greatness, religiosity, humbleness and good manners
(Modarresi, 2000)

1-5. Rumi

Jalal al-Din Rumi (Rumi, or Moulavi or Moulana), author of a vast
collection of Persian odes and lyrics, of which a selection is here
offered in translation, was born in A.D. 1207 at Balkh, which now Hes
within the frontiers of Afghanistan, and died in 1273 at Konya, in
Asiatic Turkey. For an account of his Rumi's Fihi ma fihi, published by
John Murray in 1961 under the title Discourses of Rumi; there is nothing
I wish to add to what is written there, except by way of stressing the
curios circumstances, which attended Rami's transformation from sober
theologian and preacher into ecstatic dancer and enraptured poet. Rumi's
father Bah-a' al-Din Valad, had attained eminence in religious circles
in Khorasan before his headlong flight to Sal\* Turkey on the eve of the
Mongol invasions; in Konya where he died in 1230, he enjoyed royal
patronage and popular esteem as preacher and teacher. From 1240 to 1244,
having completed his long formal education in 1244, when Rumi was
ahead), thirty-seven years of age and seemingly set in his ways as a
conventional mullah, a wandering dervish named Shams al-Din, a native of
Tabriz apparently of artisan origin, suddenly arrived in the Saljuq
capital and attracted attention by the wildness of his demeanor.
(Arberry, 2002)

1-6. Sa'di

Sa'di's full name is Mosharraf-edin bin Moslehedin-Abdullah and he was
born in Shiraz, a city in Iran. in 1184 and died there in 1291. He
adopted the pen name of Sa'di in honor of his patron, Abu-Baler Sa'di, a
contemporary king of the Atabakan dynasty in Fars, a province of Iran.
He lost his father at an early age and came under the protection of this
Atabak at his accession in 1 195.

Sa'di's life may be divided into three periods :

The period of study, lasting until 1226 when he was sent to the famous
Nezamieh College of Baghdad to study. There he

was deeply influenced by the eminent Sufi, Suhravardi, as well as
Ibn-e-Jowzi, another great teacher, whose name appears in some of his
poems.

The period of travel beginning in 1226 and lasting till 1256, during
which he traveled widely to many parts of India, Yemen, Hejaz, Arabia,
Syria, Abyssinia, North Africa and Asia Minor, and had many
opportunities of mingling with peoples of those countries and gaining
rich experiences which are reflected in all his works; (Pazargadi,
2000)

Sa'di of Shiraz, or Sheikh Moslehedin Abdullah Sa'di Shirazi, poet,
writer and distinguished thinker of the 13th century A.D. (7th century
All.) is one of the few men of letters of Iran who has acquired fame not
only in Persian-speaking regions, but whose renown has spread well
beyond Iran, and has become known in the wider literary circles of the
world, as a well known and recognized literary figure. Sa'di was born in
Shiraz, according to himself "in a household, all the members of which
were theologians stepped in religious learning." The first years of his
childhood and early youth were spent in his own hometown where he got a
grounding in the sciences and learning of his own times. He then moved
on to Baghdad to continue his studies at the "Nizamieh" which was the
University of his day. Over a period of twenty years, Sa'di pursued and
completed his studies in theology and literature, and then left on a
long journey covering Iraq, Hejaz and North Africa and, according to
some sources, India, Asia Minor and Azerbaijan as well. It was during
the course of these travels that. while adding to his valuable
experiences, he came across personalities such as Mowlana Jalaludin
Mohammad Moulavi, the great poet of Balkh, Sheikh Safiyudin of Ardabil,
Hamam Tabriz and Amir Khosro of Delhi. (Hakimi, 2005)


