2-2. Principles and Methods of Education
========================================

Education is based on broad and general rules and policies which are
called principles of Education. These policies can be appHed and
practiced through methods of education which bring the person to the
goals of education. It is possible to extract the following principles
from the texts that Khajeh Naseer has written (Beheshti, Abuja'afari
Faqihi, 2000) :

**1. Discovering aptitudes

** People are different in intellectual aptitude and ability, and
personal capacities and interests on sciences, skHis and occupations. If
the unique and particular aptitude and interest of each person in
different sciences, techniques and skHis are discovered, and she or he
is involved in a job and educational field consistent with her or his
aptitude and interest, she or he will undoubtedly attain considerable
success. Therefore, it is up to individuals, their parents and teachers
to discover children's aptitudes and interests to guide them to the way
suitable for them.

**2. Harmony with nature

** Khajeh Naseer believes that one should consider children's nature and
the gradual trend of their soul faculties, and that education should be
in harmony with the stages of their aptitudes development. Since
moderation governs the nature, and coherence and system of the world is
based on justice, it is also necessary in education that the principle
of moderation, which is based on the nature, be observed so that all the
human being's aspects be developed.

**3. Harmony with the human's nature of seeking God and religion

** According to Khajeh Naseer, harmony with human's nature and religion
is the certain principle of education, and all educational policies
should be based on this nature, and human's perfection is possible
through considering the above fact.

**4. Observing development stages

** Khajeh Naseer, regarding education based on the gradual growth and
development of the individuals, refers to the stages of development of
children, the quality of the gradual formation of their aptitudes and
powers, and the procedure of the instruction of the composition lesson
to children. The stages of children's education are :

A) Suckling period: This stage starts with the birth of children until
they become two years old. B) Correction period: After finishing the
suckling state, children's education should be started, and they should
also be forbidden from companionship with the bad, because they are much
influenced by their companions. If their virtues and values are praised,
they will turn to these good properties. C) Period of the instruction of
religion and morality: the subjects and materials which should be first
instructed to children, are religious and morals obligations and that
those may become unwavering in their souls. D) Complementary
instructions or trainings:

complementary instructions should be started after finishing
complementary educations. Students should first be taught the science of
ethics if they are interested in acquiring science, after which they
should learn social manners and they should be made familiar with social
adjustment factors, and move them away from luxury, affluence, wealth
and comfort. E) Job and employment: getting a job and occupation should
be prepared for youngsters when the period of their complementary
training and instruction is finished. This causes that they taste the
sweetness of an occupation and earn a living in this way.

**5. Observing the student's understanding and comprehension

** Different students and pupils have different powers of understanding
and comprehension. Observing these individuals' differences and becoming
in complete agreement and unanimity with them is of the certain
principles of education. Khajeh Naseer emphasizes that every knowledge
or science cannot be taught to every person, rather each knowledge is
suitable for a particular group, and teaching that particular kind of
knowledge to those, who do not deserve it, is considered as an
oppression. Some people receive dubious things, but they do not
understand the answers to those dubieties. Therefore, such doubts should
not be told to them. It is also necessary that teachers and educators
should be familiar with logic and can use it when necessary and speak
with each person according to her or his particular mentality.

**6. Counseling

** Khajeh Naseer Tusi says that all people need counseling in all of
their individual and social fields of life, because it can help to
achieve goodness and advisability more simply and prevent badness and
loss. Khajeh Naseer also emphasizes that the students and seekers of
knowledge discuss about a subject they have learned it, because it may
be that an hour of discussion would be better than a month of review and
repetition.

**7. Affection

** According to Khajeh Naseer, one should love (a real love) and should
be really loved. Thus, if affection governs home, school and society,
and is considered in the plans of the officials responsible of
educational planning and backgrounds, and plans for its implementation
have been provided, then many of corruptions and problems will be
solved. The highest kind of affection is that one, which is free from
all sorts of defect of materiality, passivity, estrangement and
darkness. This kind of affection is given to humans to love the Exalted
God. After the inner affection of humans to God, the affection and
kindness of parents to their children and of teachers to students are
considered as highest affections.

**8. Encouragement and punishment

** Khajeh Naseer has considered encouragement and punishment as two
means for the guarantee of the implementation and extension of
education, and making sound the home climate, school, and society, and
creating motivation for avoidance of offenses. Ile believes that people
are different; a group of them should be led to courtesy and morality by
warning and punishment, and another group with encouragement and
announcement. Although education is founded on encouragement, and a
child should be praised and encouraged in public when she or he does a
good behavior and if she or he does a bad behavior, we should try to
feign negligence in some cases. But if that bad action is repeated, he
or she should be blamed in private, and then state the heinousness of
that action and caution her or him against repeating that behavior.

**9. Practice and repetition

** Khajeh Naseer is of the opinion that practice and repetition cause
actualizing and realization of one's aptitudes and abilities. Therefore,
people should try to create suitable and desired habits and skHis and
finally acquire sensual dispositions through practice and repetition.
Students should repeat the lessons happily and with motive, after
learning that lesson and reflection and precision in it.

**10. Interior Purification

** According to Khajeh Naseer, interior purification is the purification
of the inner self from moral corruptions and it is the first step in
self-education without which one cannot he adorned with moral virtues.
Thus, students should be pious from the very beginning and keep their
heart or soul free from offences so that their knowledge may become
fruitful.

**11. Mortification

** Khajeh Naseer believes that mortification is necessary because if the
human's soul follows and obeys appetitive and irascible faculties, it
will decline to a bestial soul. Although mortification is difficult in
the beginning, but considering its effects such as chastity, self-
preservation, contentment, trust in God, generosity and piety, it would
be sweet and easy.

**12. Self- vigilance and Self- examination

** According to Khajeh Naseer, self-vigilance is that one always tries
to avoid sins, worldly involvements, and obstacles of perfection and
cares for his or her inward and outward behavior and speech in order not
to behave against God.

Self-examination is that one controls his or her worships and compares
them with God's bounties and then confesses his or her defects and sins
before God. Both of these cause one to compensate for previous behaviors
and try to clean the effects of sins by worship and mortification.

Khajeh Naseer Tusi's view on educational principles is very similar to
Avicenna's. The following items can also be extracted from Khajeh
Naseer's writings as the most important of educational principles from
his viewpoint :

1. Following Nature

Khajeh has paid much attention to this fact that in education, one
should consider man's nature and its gradual development. Thus, the
education of children should be quite in harmony with their gradual
stages of physical growth. Therefore, we should first know the stages of
children's natural growth and then plan consistently with that nature.

2. Observation of Stages of Education

Khajeh has considered some stages for education, considering the law of
following the nature and some other things. These stages are similar to
those ones that Avicenna has put forward.

3. Observation of Individuals' Differences

Khajeh Naseer recommends observing individual differences of persons in
educational planning (Howzeh and University Co- operation Center, 1993,
pp. 318- 320).

If one wishes to extract some principles from the Farabi's statements,
the observing of which originates suitable methods and decisions for
achieving goals of education, can refer to the following cases :

Education is for the happiness of the individuals of a society.

Instruction cannot be separated from education, since speculative and
practical trainings or instructions are justifiable. Therefore, an
instruction, which does not lead to faith and action along with faith
and certitude, is useless. Observing individual differences in aptitudes
and attitudes to sciences and industries is necessary.

Universal education and instruction are necessary. Those ideas and
concepts, which are a prerequisite condition for attaining real
happiness, should be taught to all people. Even those ones, who avoid
the opinions consistent with Utopia, should become convinced by
different methods so that they might turn to right ideas and opinions
(Howzeh- University Co-Operation Center, 1998).

Although Farabi has not presented an independent model and design for
educational principles, but the following important principles of
education can be extracted from his writings and discussions :

1. Social education: according to Farabi's viewpoint, education is
social (meaning humans are social by their natures). Therefore, it is
necessary that social goals to be considered for their education, and
the achieving of Utopia is a goal that should be considered and
accomplished in education.

2. Observation of individual differences: Farabi believes that
individual differences (different aptitudes and interests of students)
should be considered and observed in education.

3. Preparation of individuals for different occupations: Farabi is of
the opinion that each person should be educated for a particular skill
and occupation, and this fact should be considered from childhood.

4. The effect of geographical environment and quality of buildings:
Farabi believes that natural environment, climatic conditions, and
architectural fashion are effective in education. Therefore, he
recommends that educators should pay attention to this fact in education
(Howzeh- University Co- operation Center, 1993, pp. 271-272).

Education is actualized in the light of some important and
comprehensive principles. In the viewpoint of Avicenna. these principles
are realized through some educational methods (Howzeh- University Co-
Operation Center, 1998) :

1. Self-cognition and Self-education

One should first rectify himself before trying to educate others. To
rectify oneself it is necessary to know oneself well. Individuals should
completely know their reprehensible properties and habits.

2. Observing individual differences

Different people are different in physical powers, powers of thinking,
intellect, aptitudes, and other aspects. Their interests towards
different crafts are different as well.

3. Cognition of aptitudes, interests and possibilities

Discovering intellectual abilities and aptitudes should be considered
in the selection of a major (or an educational field) or an occupation
and craft. Ibn Sina also believes that personal interests in a major or
occupation plays an important role in one's progress and success and
prevents from wasting one's time. In addition to all of these, there
should also exist the learning of possibilities and instruments for a
particular kind of science or occupation.

4. Formulating the plan on the basis of the stages of development

Avicenna has paid attention to the stages of development of children in
the process of their education, and has considered a particular plan for
each of these stages. Therefore, educational planning should be based on
the stages of a person's development and growth.

5. Group training and instruction

Avicenna emphasizes group instruction and believes that a child should
acquire knowledge and do his or her job in group, because good children
have a good influence and effect on a child. Observing the above
principle causes moral and social education of children, actualizes
their intellect and perceptions, and satisfies their spiritual needs.

6. Encouragement and punishment

Ibn Sina recommends encouragement and punishment of children as
guaranty to keep the admirable dispositions and avoid iniquities and
reprehensible habits. He mentions different ways for encouragement or
punishment. This indicates that educators should not only use one
particular method for encouragement or punishment. For example,
encouragement of children can be carried out through praising their good
behaviors and moralities, and through getting friendly with children or
acknowledging them.

According to Avicenna, five principles are of importance in education
of children and youngsters: faith, good and admirable morality, health,
knowledge and occupation (Shiite encyclopedia).

7. Selection of Teacher and Friend

Avicenna says in this field that it requires the educator of a child to
be wise, religious, and aware of moral education, and to have skHis in
the education of children. On the other hand, since one cannot trust
one's own cognition of oneself, he or she needs a wise and kind friend
to help to show them their morals and moods. (Howzeh and University
Co-operation Canter, 1993. pp. 280-283).

The following educational principles can be extracted from Ghazali's
writings :
