Educational Ontology
====================

Goals of Education
------------------

Khajeh Naseer believes that human being has different and diverse
abilities, aptitudes and capacities. Man has two attitudes: attitude
towards goodness and badness. Therefore, It is quite necessary that, as
one of the most important goals of education, manُ s abilities to be
educated and his or her capacities to be actualized in order that he or
she might achieve a scientific and practical perfection and attain the
ultimate happiness and nearness to God. It is evident that education and
guidance of educators, teachers and guides play a great role in this
field (Beheshti, Abu ja’afari & Faqihi, 2000).

Khajeh Naseer Tusi introduces an absolute happy as one whose happiness
has no decline and change. Happiness is obtained whenever its owner
enjoys a pleasure of wisdom. One, who has not comprehended such a true
and real pleasure, how will be inclined to it? (Tusi, 1981).

Khajeh Naseer Tusi emphasizes “moderation” a characteristic which can
bring humans to happiness. Those ones who pay attention to only some of
their aptitudes or powers canُ t reach happiness (Tusi, 1981).

Farabi believes each folk (country) whose cities cooperate to achieve
happiness will become lucky, and all the inhabitants of the world will
become lucky whenever all folks (countries) in the world cooperate to
attain perfection and happiness (Seyyed Arab, 2007).

Farabi considers human perfection, as one of the educational goals, in
acquiring virtues and acting according to them. He believes that action
is of particular importance in actualizing the intellectual development
(Soltanolqaraee, 2005).

Farabi sees guidance of man’s main aptitudes or powers, i.e. lust, anger
and rational faculty or intellect as the aims of education. The major
aim was the cultivation of the rational faculty in such a manner that it
becomes governor of other aptitudes (Soltanolqaraee, 2005).

The following cases can be known as the goals of education from Farabi’s
viewpoint:

1. Instruction of right beliefs, and strengthening the belief to them.
Such beliefs as belief in God, hereafter, happiness and the way to reach
it through cognition of deeds and actions that lead to happiness.

2. Training of necessary skills for incumbency of a duty in Utopia
(virtuous or perfect city)

3. Encouragement of individuals for action according to right beliefs.

4. Encouragement of individuals for doing social duties (Howzeh-
University Co- Operation Center, 1998).

Farabi is of the opinion that the goal of education is moderation in the
appetitive and irascibility faculties and submissiveness to intellect.
Therefore, the goal of ethics and education is a moderate personality
that its speech and rational faculties govern other faculties. As for
lust and anger Farabi says that these two are not good or bad in
themselves, rather their goodness or badness is dependent upon whether
they are in service of intellect and real happiness or not.

In social aspect of education, he deeply believes that the orientation
of education should be towards regulating the affairs of Utopia that he
has described it in one of his books. Farabi much emphasizes that
educational goals to be social oriented. On the whole, it can be said
that the following points can be concluded about educational goals:

Perfection of rational faculty in its two sections: Speculative
(theoretical), and practical (Pragmatic). Originality or authenticity
belongs to perfection and development of speculative intellect, and the
leadership of societies is the right of real philosophers, whether, they
have achieved truth thought their own efforts, or through inspiration.

Action and behavior are of particular importance in actualization and
development of intellectual faculty of humans. A special and great
attention has been paid to social goals and development of expertise,
skills, social and economic problems, in the thinking and educational
system of Farabi.

Intellectual and spiritual perfection and pleasure is higher than
material and physical pleasure.

Farabi considers the worldly happiness as an introduction for hereafter
happiness, and he also deems it possible to achieve spiritual happiness
in this word. He introduces cognition and attaining Truth as the ideal
goal and the final perfection (Howzeh- University Co- Operation Center,
1993, PP. 267-269).

Avicenna’s view on educational goals is almost similar to Farabi’s.
These two philosophers both emphasize speculative intellect, and social
aspect of education (Howzeh- University Co-operation Center, 1993, P.
275).

Avicenna calls God as the pure and absolute goodness who is the true and
real Beloved for all human beings. He also believes that happiness is
the real purpose and the desired aim of humans. A real happiness is free
and pure from worldly interests and defects. Although sensory affaires
and worldly things appear as happiness apparently, but in fact they
can’t be considered as happiness (Avicenna, 1981).

Avicenna, regarding happiness as one of the goals of creation and
education, in harmony with Plato believes that whatever humans become
closer to God, their enthusiasm, love, and their beatitude increase and
whenever they remain away from God, such an enthusiasm, love, and
beatitude and joy decrease in them (Shiite encyclopedia, 2007).

Avicenna swears by God that it is only the foolish who become unable of
perfection and get attached to this abject and low world. One who has
given her or his heart to the world is always involved in abyss of pains
and disappointment, and is always distressed and in delusion of worldly
goods. Then how may it be possible that such people have love of seeking
and cognition of the truth?

Avicenna introduces amphibolies and quarrelsomeness as the most invalid
efforts. The best actions are those which their doers have a pure
intention and clear belief, and the best intentions are those sprung
from knowledge. Wisdom is the mothers of virtues, and cognition of God
is the first and the most important involvements. All bondmen should
seek help from God. They should come to know that following the worldly
desires causes darkness of the soul, therefore, it is necessary to
forsake of many of carnal desires in the way of helping people.

People should take lessons from the past folks. It is Knowledge that
gives its owner a high rank and esteem. In the light of acquiring
knowledge and virtues, manُs soul will be purified from all kinds of
vices (Dehkhoda, 1998).

The foundation of Ghazali’s educational philosophy is the realization of
humankindُs happiness as one of the goals of education. He means by
“happiness”, the other worldly happiness because it includes all wishes.
This happiness is eternal, is a pleasure without pain, is perfection
without decrease, is an esteem without abasement. To achieve such a
happiness, “knowledge” and “action” should be with each other so that
one’s behavior to be changed, for so far as one’s behavior is not
changed well, no happiness will be attained.

If a light of knowledge shines to one’s heart, her or his behavior will
become admirable. Therefore, no change in behavior is expected without
education and instruction. That’s the reason why instruction is
considered as the noblest affaires. The desirable otherworldly happiness
has a non-disjunctive connection with the societies of this world. Thus,
it requires that instruction to have no disjunctive connection with
society needs, in such a manner that there should be some people who
strive for a accomplishment of social life in which the life needs of
this world have been satisfied, and also be consistent with man’s nature
and all people observe God’s orders and guidance in what they do.

Humans are social in their nature and need cooperation with each other
to prepare their life materials. The task of instruction and education
is preparation of people for participation of them in the accomplishment
of the social life, in such a manner that everyone can do what he or she
should do without difficulty and doubt (Kilani, translation, criticism
and additions by Rafiie, 2007).

Ghazali says that honesty and virtue of human being is in having the
aptitude for cognition of the exalted God. The characteristic of human
being is the ability of obtaining knowledge and wisdom, and the noblest
kinds of knowledge is cognition of the exalted God and his Attributes,
because man’s perfection is dependent upon this, and humans can attain
happiness and can deserve neighborliness of God and proximity to Him
through that particular sort of knowledge.

The whole happiness of mankind is in this fact that makes vision of God
as his or her destination, and makes the hereafter as his or her
deployed place and the world as passageway (Ghazali, 1989).

Humans should know and recognize their truth of their essence, because
if they do not identify this, it will be impossible for them to seek for
their happiness and attain it. In fact, man’s happiness is in the
cognition of the exalted God, and the cognition of one’s soul is the key
for the cognition of God (Ghazali, 1997).

Ghazali believes that wisdom is God’s bounty which will be given to
everyone who deserves it, and the result of wisdom is easiness and the
result of wealth is pain and disaster (Ghazali, 1888). Ghazali says that
each thing which is finished because of death has now value for the
wise, rather that bounty has value which is eternal and permanent, and
this bounty is “faith” which is the seed of eternal happiness (Ghazali,
1888).

Ghazali believes everyone who knows the world and is always remembering
the last breath of life (death), the affairs of the world will become
easy for him, and his faith will become strengthened. Ghazali says that
the comfort of the world is only for a few days, and mixed with
different kinds of pains (Ghazali, 1888). Everyone who makes his effort
in following the bodily pleasures, and is like animals in eating, will
fall in a abyss of ignominy (Ghazali, 1989).

Ghazali stimulates anger, lust, etc. to troops that attack humans and
can finally overcome them, and make humans their slaves and perish them
and debar them from the way of reaching to the eternal happiness
(Ghazali, 1989). As for goals of education, Ghazali is of the opinion
that human’s inner form is not good so far as four powers or aptitudes
have not become good in: knowledge, anger, lust, and justice (Attaran,
1992).

According to Beheshti, Faqihi and Abuja’fari (2001), although Sa’di has
not explicitly stated the educational goals in his works, the following
goals can be deduced from his sayings and poems:

### 1. Detachment

Sa’di speaks in detail of self-cognition, faith, servitude toward God,
and praising God in his writings and considers such traits necessary if
one desires reaching the position of attachment to God, therefore reach
a place that includes all values. Sa’di recognizes serving God as a way
to gain esteem, power and greatness, and he regrets that the people come
and go and do not taste the most pleasurable and enjoyable pleasures of
sincere devotion and absolute sincerity, which will cause wisdom springs
to flow from his heart to his tongue.

Therefore, the ultimate goal of education, from Sa’di’s viewpoint, is
cognition of the exalted God and devotion to him. He says the way to
reach this state is through the soul and being detached so that one
acquires inner purity or good morality and is able to surrender to God.

### 2. Cultivation of spirit

Sa’di considers the cultivation of spirit as the basis of education and
man’s personality, and believes that it is impossible to cultivate
spirit without purification of soul and banishing carnal desires,
arrogance, rancor, oppression. He says it is also impossible without
acquiring moral virtues such as humility, modesty, benevolence, justice,
magnanimousness, and magnanimity.

### 3. Health of Body

Sa’di considers man as consisting of physical body and spiritual soul.
He states that spirit’s cultivation is by itself desirable and the major
goal. However, he considers procurement of health and the power of body
and satisfying its needs as desirable intermediate goals for the purpose
of worship of God and rendering service to people. He warns humans
against indolence. Sa’di mentions four points regarding health of body:

1) avoiding gluttony, 2) moderation, 3) preservation of greatness and
magnanimity, 4) refraining from idleness.

### 4. Social Adjustment

From the viewpoint of Sa’di, social adjustment leading to peaceful
coexistence is desirable as we aspire to the perfection of the ideal
society. He imagines a Utopia in which these two things are the firm
foundation of each individual in such society. That’s the reason that
Sa’di, in all parts of Gulistan and Bustan, speaks of characteristics of
the individuals in a desired society and mentions such properties as
justice, humility, peace, benevolence, sympathy, and contentment as the
characteristics of the desirable society.

Sa’di mentions the following items as the factors which create social
adjustment: 1) justice, 2) humility, 3) self-esteem and uprightness, 4)
benevolence and goodness.

Moulavi says that the goal of man’s creation is “knowledge and
guidance.” In another part of “Masnavi,” he introduces “knowledge of the
truth” as the goal of man’s creation. Therefore, Moulavi believes that
knowledge should be for God only. The possessors of such a knowledge are
those who are affected by their knowledge and insight, and their
intellect restrains them from doing evil and committing sins.

Moulavi places a particular emphasis on “intent.” He says that, for
example, a poet composes poetry for a special intent, and his intent
plays the main role in this area. Therefore, all men benefit from their
deeds and the sciences they learn on the basis of their intent and goal.
If these intents and goals are good, the results and benefits of their
deeds and behaviors will be unimaginable and very good.

A man who establishes his prayer for God will definitely be rewarded in
this world and the Hereafter. Thus, one can understand that each of the
disciplines are a means and instrument that can lead man to God, truth,
and true peace and tranquility if man’s intent or goal is good and
approved, and these disciplines cannot, by themselves, give man
sublimity and are not consolatory. Sciences, which are tools for
submission, sublimity, and transcendence are for leading man to the
goals of creation, and should not be taken as the final goals. Moulavi
emphasizes that all the branches of sciences and knowledge are for the
sake of man.

Therefore, it can be said that those who love God, should really love
Him, and their final desire should be for God. In this case, it is
possible for us to speak of a learned and loving worship of God as one
of the most important goals of man’s creation. Thus, it is up to all the
virtuous and wise scientists and scholars not to involve themselves in
words, utterances, and appearances, and not to forget the real goal
behind the words and controversies.

Goals of education from the viewpoint of Moulavi can be divided into
main different groups:

1) Ultimate aims,

2) Intermediary goals.

### Ultimate Aims

As regards “ultimate aims”, the following aims can be extracted from
Moulavi’s poems and writings (Beheshti, Abuja\`afari & Faqihi, 2000, pp.
211-219):

#### Annihilation in God and abiding in Him

Moulavi believes that the ultimate and final perfection of human being
is disengagement from existence or being, and reaching an abiding state
after annihilation; and this is the meaning of proximity to God.
Annihilation in God means becoming free from darkness, involvements,
material and worldly attachments, and disillusionment with everything
except God. A man annihilated in God does not see and does not want save
God (Beheshti, Abuja\`afari & Faqihi, 2000, pp. 211-212).

#### Voluntary death

This particular kind of death means that man dies or separate, when
living, from nature and material attachments, and is borne in divine
world, fights against carnal desires, and lives, free from ambition,
disgrace, position, eminence and destroys all devilish temperaments and
dispositions and reaches a position that kills the evil- prompting self,
and makes himself or herself free, and is borne with divine and
spiritual life and humanly admirable dispositions, and this is the
second birth of human being.

#### Intuition or knowledge by heart

In addition to value of formal sciences, Moulavi believes that a seeker
mystic or possessor of gnosis position of intuition, has really achieved
the infinite Divine knowledge, and has undoubtedly revealed some secrets
of being, even a sea of sciences and facts that others are deprived of
it. This intuitional and inspired knowledge is not only endless, but it
is always, in a state of being created, and represents at every moment
new sciences and discoveries for the wayfarer mystic.

#### Immediate receiving of God’s bounty or emanation

In the beginning, a mystic goes through the way along with his or her
educator or leader, but the highest position and rank is where he or she
receives the bounty and favor of God Immediately, even the seeker
becomes the channel of Divine bounty.

### Intermediary goals

As for intermediary goals, the followings can be extracted from
Moulavi’s works:

#### Cultivation and guidance of intellect and thought

Moulavi deems necessary the cultivation and guidance of intellect and
thought in spiritual experience and intuition, and considers it as a
goal of education. Moulavi says that the real knowledge is an intuitive
knowledge than man receives immediately from God, and it is endless, and
the superficial sciences can’t be considered real because of limitation
and instability; but if people receive these sciences correctly and
follow them well, and act according to them, and cultivate and guide
their intellect and thought in the light of them, they will gradually
achieve the real knowledge.

#### Solving the existential problems

From Moulavi’s viewpoint, humans’ existential problems are the
philosophy of creation, imprisoning of the spirit in body, fear of the
future, man’s attachment to the lust shackle, anger, fame, position,
etc., neglectance from the real “ego” and from the original home, defect
in thinking and intellect, loneliness, etc. Solving these problems is
the goal of mystical education from Moulavi’s viewpoint.

Moulavi says that these difficulties can be solved through appealing to
spiritualities, acquisition of soul virtues, and avoiding vices, and
seeking help from those endowed with divine breath and spiritual soul,
and finally the basic solution of these problems is “love”. A lover is
always in happiness and exhilaration. He or she complains of nothing and
no one. There are no short sightedness, meanness, malignancy, cynicism,
arrogance, temptation, greed, self- interest, grief over this world and
the world hereafter in the hearth of a mystic.

Love satisfies the thirst of spirit, and satiates the heart, and
dissolves the lover in Master and he or she enjoys heartfully, because
the right cause for enjoyment and happiness is internal not external.

Happiness is never possible through possessions, position, fame or
prestige; rather it is from inner being. Moulavi (2000) believes that
acquisition of knowledge should be for God. In other words, man’s
intention from learning and the dissemination of knowledge should be
nearness to God (pp. 1-2).

The knowledge of such scholars is not superficial, because superficial
science may lead to neglectance (Rum: 7). It is intellect and reason
that governs their lives (ibid, p.2). Even their religiosity is based on
knowledge. Thus, According to the prophet of Islam “the best of you from
the viewpoint of faith, is the best of you in knowledge” (Muhammadi Rey
Shahri, 1993, p.121), their faith is the best and firmest kind of faith;
that’s because Imam Baqer says someone who acquires knowledge, their
knowledge will lead them to righteous deeds (ibid, p. 131).

Therefore, it can be concluded that humans receive benefit from the
sciences they learn according to the intentions they have. It is in the
light of good intentions that they receive real tranquility and are led
to God and truth (ibid, p. 32). The prophet of Islam says that if a
person learns science for hypocrisy and worldiness, God will remove
blessing from his life and make the life annoyed and difficult for him
(Muhammadi Rey Shahri, 1993, p. 479).

Educational goals from Ibn Khaldun viewpoint can be divided into two
general groups:

1. Ultimate goals

2. Spiritual dispositions, i.e. series of goals and perfections of soul
(Behehsti, Faqihi & Abuja’afari, 2001,pp. 109-113).

### Ultimate goals

Ibn Khaldun considers “knowledge, faith, theistic belief” as the
ultimate goal of education. From His viewpoint spiritual dispositions
can be divided into three groups:

1. Scientific dispositions

2. Industrial dispositions

3. Spiritual dispositions

#### Scientific Dispositions

These are mastering skills in science in such a manner that its owner
can teach that science, participate powerfully in discussions, and
understand derive branches from principles with master on foundations of
rules and science problems.

#### Industrial Dispositions

**T**hese are practical- intellectual skills, like sewing and carpentry

#### Spiritual habits or dispositions

These are firm humanistic moral properties, and the position of soul
perfection which is along with exaltation and motivation and approaches
of the individual to God, angels and the ultimate aim.

According to Tabataba’i (1987) Islam has established its most important
commandments, such as Hajj, prayer, jihad, charity, and every kind of
religious piety, based “on community” (society). It has also considered
real happiness in nearness to God as the supreme goal of an Islamic
community. Achieving this sacred goal is in itself a great guarantee of
performance that acts as a serious, inner supervisor for the
implementation of the laws regarding an Islamic society.

Tabataba’i (1987) considering one of the verses of the Qur’an (Zariat:
56), says that the ultimate aim of man’s creation and of Islamic
education can be worship (and in fact devotion to and submission to
God). Both worship and perfection man receives from it are the aims of
man’s creation, and all are results of worship, e.g. mercy of God, and
etc. cognition or knowledge obtained from worship, will be a higher aim
as compared with worship itself.

The truth and reality of worship is in the fact that a bondman reaches
the place of humbleness and submission to God. The ultimate aim of
creation is achieving the truth of worship, i.e. a position in which the
bondman has separated from himself and all other things, and is always
in remembrance of his Lord.

Tabataba’i (1990) in the eighteenth volume of Al-Mizan Interpretation,
in description of the Qur’nic verses mentions this speech from Imam
J’afar Sadeq that a believer is a brother for another believer, and his
eye and his guide, does not beguile and deceive him, does not oppress
him, does not mislead him , and if he promises him something, he does
not break that promise.

Tabataba’i (1987) argues that in the light of “law of social justice”
each rightful cause will be sided with and righteousness will be sided
with its doers, and the relations among people will become justly. Thus,
humans are inevitably in acceptance of having a society and social
justice. Islam has considered social spirit in all of its commandments
and rules. According to Mutahhari (1988) ; man in Islam has a
comprehensive personality and is very sensitive to his social
responsibilities.

Principles and methods of Education
-----------------------------------

Education is based on broad and general rules and policies which are
called principles of Education. These polices can be applied and
practiced through methods of education which bring the person to the
goals of education. It is possible to extract the following principles
from the texts khajeh Naseer has written (Beheshti, Abuja’afari &
Faqihi, 2000):

1. **Discovering aptitudes:** People are different in intellectual
aptitude and ability, and personal capacities and interests on sciences,
skills and occupations. If the unique and particular aptitude and
interest of each person in different sciences, techniques and skills are
discovered, and she or he is involved in a job and educational field
consistent with her or his aptitude and interest, she or he will
undoubtedly attain considerable success. Therefore, it is up to
individuals, their parents and teachers to discover children’s aptitudes
and interests to guide them to the way suitable for them.

2. **Harmony with nature:** Khajeh Naseer believes that one should
consider children’s nature and the gradual trend of their soul
faculties, and that education should be in harmony with the stages of
their aptitudes development. Since moderation governs the nature, and
coherence and system of the world is based on justice, it is also
necessary in education that the principle of moderation, that is driven
from the nature, be observed so that all the human being’s aspects be
developed.

3. **Harmony with the human’s nature of seeking God and religion:**
According to khajeh Naseer, harmony with human’s nature and religion is
the certain principle of education, and all educational policies should
be based on this nature, and human’s perfection is possible through
considering the above fact.

4. **Observing development stages:** Khajeh Naseer, regarding education
based on the gradual growth and development of the individuals, refers
to the stages of development of children, the quality of the gradual
formation of their aptitudes and powers, and the procedure of the
instruction of the composition lesson to children. The stages of
children’s education are:

a) **Suckling period:** This stage starts with the birth of children
until they become two years old.

b) **Correction period:** After finishing suckling state, Children’s
education should be started, and they should also be forbidden from
companionship with the bad, because they are much influenced by their
companions. If their virtues and values are praised, they will turn to
these good properties.

c) **Period of instruction of religion and morality**: The subjects and
materials which should be first instructed to children are religious and
morals obligations and that those may become unwavering in their souls.

d) **Complementary instructions or trainings:** complementary
instructions should be started after finishing complementary educations.
Students should first be taught the science of ethics if they are
interested in acquiring science, after which, they should learn social
manners and they should be made familiar with social adjustment factors,
and move them away from luxury, affluence, wealth and comfort.

e) **job and employment:** getting a job and occupation should be
prepared for youngsters when their complementary period of training and
instruction is finished. This causes that they taste the sweetness of an
occupation and earn a living in this way.

5. **Observing the student’s understanding and comprehension:**
Different students and pupils have different power of understanding and
comprehension. Observing these individual differences and becoming in
complete agreement and unanimous with them is of the certain principles
of education.

Khajeh Naseer emphasizes that every knowledge or science can’t be taught
to every person, rather each knowledge is suitable for a particular
group, and teaching that particular kind of knowledge to those who do
not deserve it, is considered as an oppression. Some people receive
dubious things, but they do not understand the answers to those
dubieties. Therefore, such doubts should not be told to them. It is also
necessary that teachers and educators be familiar with logics and can
use it when necessary and speak with each person according to her or his
particular speech.

6. **Counseling:** Khajeh Naseer Tusi says that all people need
counseling in all of their individual and social fields of life, because
it can help to achieve goodness and advisability more simply and prevent
badness and loss. Khajeh Naseer also emphasizes that the students and
seekers of knowledge discuss about a subject they have learned it,
because it may be that an hour of discussion would be better than a
month of review and repetition.

7. **Affection:** According to Khajeh Naseer, one should love (a real
love) and should be really loved. Thus if affection governs home, school
and society, and is considered in the plans of responsible of
educational planning, and backgrounds and plans for its implementation
have been provided, then many of corruptions and problems will be
solved.

The highest kind of affection is that one which is free from all sorts
of defect of materiality, passivity, estrangement and darkness, this
kind of affection is given to humans to love the exalted God. After the
inner affection of humans to God, The affection and kindness of parents
to their children and of teachers to students are considered as highest
affections.

8. **Encouragement and punishment:** Khajeh Naseer has considered
encouragement and punishment as two means for guarantee of
implementation of education, and its extension, and making sound the
home climate, school, society and creating motivation for avoidance of
offenses.

He believes that people are different; a group of them should be led to
courtesy and morality by warning and punishment, and another group with
encouragement and announcement. Although education is founded on
encouragement, and a child should be praised and encouraged in public
when she or he does a good behavior and if she or he does a bad
behavior, we should try to feign negligence it, in some cases. But if
that bad action is repeated, he or she should be blamed in private, and
then state the heinousness of that action and caution her or his against
repeating that behavior

9. **Practice and repetition:** Khajrh Naseer is of the opinion that
practice and repetition cause actualizing and realization of one’s
aptitudes and abilities. Therefore, people should try to create suitable
and desired habits and skills and finally acquiring sensual dispositions
through practice and repeatation, and students should repeat the lessons
happily and with motive, after learning that lesson and reflection and
precision in it.

10. **Interior** **Purification:** According to khajeh Naseer, interior
purification is purification of inner self from moral corruptions and it
is the first step in self – education without which one can’t be adorned
with moral virtues. Thus, students should be pious from the very
beginning and keep their heart or soul from offences so that their
knowledge may become fruitful.

11. **Mortification:** Khajrh Naseer believes that mortification is
necessary because if human’s soul follows appetitive and irascible
faculties and obey these two faculties, will decline to a bestial soul.
Although mortification is difficult in the beginning, but considering
its effects such as chastity, self- preservation, contentment, trust in
God, generosity and piety, it would be sweet and easy.

12. **Self- vigilance and Self- examination:** According to Khajrh
Naseer self- vigilance is that one always tries to avoid sins, worldly
involvements, and obstacles of perfection and keeps and cares for his or
her inward or outward behavior and speech in order that not to behave
against God.

Self-examination is when one controls his or her worships and compares
them with God’s bounties and then confesses his or her defects and sins
before God. These two cause one compensate for previous behaviors and
tries to clean the effects of sins by worship and mortification.

Khajeh Naseer Tusi’s view on educational principles is very similar to
Avicenna’s. The following items can also be extracted from Khajeh Naseer
writings as the most important of educational principles from his
viewpoint:

1. **Following from Nature:** Khajeh has paid much attention to this
fact that in education one should consider man’s nature and its gradual
development, and the education of children should be quite in harmony
with their gradual stages of physical growth. Therefore, we should first
know the stages of children’s natural growth and then plan consistent
with that nature.

2. **Observation of Stages of Education:** Khajeh has considered stages
for education, considering the law of following from the nature and some
other things. These stages are similar to those ones Avicenna has put
forward.

3. **Observation of Individual Differences:** Khajeh Naseer recommends
observing individual differences of persons in educational planning
(Howzed and University Co- operation Center, 1993, pp. 318- 320).

If one wishes to extract some principles from Farabi’s statements
observing of which originates suitable methods and decisions for
achieving goals of education, can refer to the following cases:

• Education is for the happiness of individuals of the society.

• Instruction can’t be separated from education, since speculative and
Practical trainings or instructions are justifiable. Therefore, an
instruction which does not lead to belief and action along with belief
and certitude is useless. Observing individual differences in aptitudes
and attitudes to sciences and industries is necessary.

• Universal education and instruction is necessary. Those ideas and
concepts which are prerequisite condition of attaining a real happiness
should be taught to all people. Even, those ones who avoid the opinions
consistent with Utopia, should become convinced by different methods so
that they might turn to right ideas and opinions (Howzeh- University Co-
Operation Center, 1998).

Although Farabi has not presented an independent model and design for
educational principles, but the following important principles of
education can be extracted from his writings and discussions:

1. **Being social of education:** from Farabi’s viewpoint, education is
social, i.e. humans are social by their natures, then it is necessary
that social goals to be considered for their education, and achieving
Utopia is a goal that should be considered and a accomplished in
education.

2. **Observation of individual differences:** Farabi believes that
individual differences, i.e. different aptitudes and interests of
students, should be considered and observed in education.

3. **Preparation of individuals for different occupations:** Farabi is
of the opinion that each person should be educated for a particular
skill and occupation, and this fact should be considered from childhood.

4. **The effect of geographical environment and quality of buildings:**
Farabi believes that natural environment, climatic conditions, and
architectural fashion are effective in education. Therefore, he
recommends that educators should pay attention to this fact in education
(Howzed- University Co- operation Center, 1993, pp. 271-272).

Education is actualized in the light of some important and comprehensive
principles. From the viewpoint of Avicenna, these principles are
realized through some educational methods (Howzeh- University Co-
Operation Center, 1998):

1. **Self- cognition and Self- education:** One should first rectify
himself before trying to educate others and to rectify oneself it is
necessary to know himself or herself. Individuals should completely know
their reprehensible properties and habits.

2. **Observing individual differences:** Different people are different
in physical power, power of thinking, intellect and aptitude and other
aspects, their interests to different and crafts are different as well.

3. **Cognition of aptitudes, interests and possibilities:** Discovering
intellectual abilities and aptitudes should be considered in selection
of a major or an occupation and craft. Ibn Sina also believes that
personal interests for a major or occupation plays an important role in
one’s progress and success and preventing from wasting one’s time. In
addition to all of these, there should also exist learning possibilities
and instruments for a particular kind of science or occupation.

4. **Formulating the plan on the basis of the stages of development:**
Avicenna has paid attention to the stages of development of children in
the process of their education, and has considered a particular plan for
each of these stages. Therefore, educational planning should be based on
the stages of a person’s development and growth.

5. **Group training and instruction:** Avicenna emphasizes group
instruction, and believes that a child should acquire knowledge and do
his or her job in group, because good children have a good influence and
effect on the child. Observing the above principle causes: moral and
social education of children and actualizing their intellect and
perceptions, and satisfying their spiritual needs.

6. **Encouragement and punishment:** Ibn Sina recommends encouragement
and punishment of children as guaranty keeping the admirable
dispositions and avoidance of moral iniquities and reprehensible habits.
He mentions different ways for encouragement or punishment.

This indicates that educator should not only use one particular method
for encouragement or punishment, e.g. encouragement of children can be
carried out through praising their good behavior and morality, and
through getting friendly with children or acknowledging them.

According to Avicenna five principles are of importance in education of
children and youngsters: faith, good and admirable morality, health,
knowledge and occupation (Shiite encyclopedia).

7. **Selection of Teacher and Friend:** Avicenna says in this field that
it deserves the educator of a child to be wise, religious, and aware of
moral education, and have skills in the education of the children. On
the other hand, since one can’t trust one’s own cognition from oneself,
he or she needs a wise and kind friend to help to show them their morals
and moods. (Howzed and University Co- operation – Canter, 1993, pp.
280-283).

The following educational principles can be extracted from Ghazali’s
writings (Howzeh- University Co- Operation Center, 1993, p 305):

1. Imprintability of child’s heart

2. Changeability of morality

3. Graduality of personality formation

4. Effect of habits in education

5. Effect of indoctrination in education

6. Negative or affirmative nature of education

7. Individual differences

8. Different stages of development and growth, and the necessity of
observing them

The following educational principles can be extracted from Moulavi’s
works (Beheshti, Abuja\`afari & Faqini, 2000, pp. 220-232):

1. **Submission to God:** Moulavi has emphasized this principle in many
cases of his writings and poems. Obeying this principle gives a
particular insight to humans in the light of which they would not see
and want save God, and not get attach to anything else but Him, and
worship Only God. In fact, the real philosophy and reason of all
worships is submission and servitude to God.

2. **Following Educator:** Moulavi has expressed the need of human being
to an aware and reliable educator; and he believes that following such
educator will bring man to perfection and elevation. This educator knows
the soul, faculties of the soul, existential dimensions of the soul,
temptations and deceptions of the soul, and the spirit’s pains and
that’s the reason why this educator can help others and treat them.
These educators, are as physician and guidas, and are pure bondmen of
God that never think of the material and worldly things.

3. **Motivation and Request:** Moulavi says that the basis and
foundation of attaining truth is request or wanting which increases
man’s efforts and activities.

4. **Effort and Activity:** Moulavi considers effort and activity as
great factors for bringing man to goals and aims. He had also introduced
these two factors as the cause of man’s happiness and joy.

5. **God’s bounty and grace:** In addition to effort and activity, grace
of God exalted is a major factor of bringing humans to perfection.

6. **Esteem or the dignity of man:** Moulavi believes that in addition
to satisfying material and superficial needs of people, we should not
neglect their high and supreme needs.Man has a structure that can be a
manifestation of God and a light of Him. Therefore, he should not lose
himself and his esteem or dignity.

7. **Sociability:** Moulavi believes that there is no monasticism or
renunciation in Islam. He has introduced joining society as the way of
reaching growth, elevation and perfection. Moulavi says that membership
in a society makes man valuable and spiritual, and this causes that man
avoids egoism and individualism. It is in the light of joining society
that the spirit of compassion, altruism, patience, trust or good
judgment, and affection is cultivated in humans. That’s the reason why
the principle of sociability has been considered in Islamic worships.

8. **Individualism:** Moulavi has stated the individual differences and
psychological, intellectual characteristics of each person and the
necessity of observing these factors in life and education. Educational
policies should be consistent with the rate of comprehension,
understanding, intelligence and aptitude of each student.

9. **Simplification:** Moulavi is of the opinion that this principle is
the educational principle of all divine religions, and the
recommendation of all high mystics; while severity, and imposing an
ignorant plan indicates crude.

The educational methods from Moulavi’s viewpoint can be divided into two
groups:

1. methods of student education

2. methods of self-training

Methods of Student Education
----------------------------

The following educational methods can be extracted from Moulavi’s works
this field, as some of the important methods (Beheshti, Abuja\`afari &
Faqihi, 2000, pp. 233-253):

a. **Suggestopedia or mimesis Method:** Moulavi has emphasized the
effective role of this method in education. He believes that the
admonishment of others through one’s deeds is more attractive.

b. **Affection Method:** Moulavi believes that educator can make student
attached to him or her, and provide the ground for student’s acceptance
of education and trust to the educator.

c. **Encouragement or punishment Method:** Moulavi agrees that education
is based on encouragement and affection. In spite of this, he has
sometimes spoken of punishment when encouragement or kindness is not
effective in the education of a student. But the intention of teacher
should be educational and for the correction of student’s behaviors, and
must not be taking revenge, acting out of self- interest or self-
comfort.

d. **Good Admonishment or Positive Advice Method:** Moulavi introduces
good admonishment or good exhortation as the educational method of God’s
prophets. He has used this method in many cases and in different stories
and exemplum. He refers to two major points in this regard:

First) If admonishment is prudent and tactful and its conditions are
observed, it will have a very great influence and effect. Second) the
main condition for effectiveness of admonishment is readiness of the one
who is to hear that admonishment. Many a stubborn man, opposes the
friendly advice, or justifies them.

e. **Counseling Method:** Moulavi has spoken of this method in many
cases, and has mentioned its role and importance in helping individuals
for cognitive changes and creating new insights and finding solutions to
different problems.

f. **Taking an object lesson Method:** Moulavi has introduced taking
lesson method as the sign of intellectuality, insight and growth. He
believes that man can take many lessons from the history of the past.

g. **Story Telling Method:** Story telling is one of the most frequent
used methods of Moulavi. He has explained many facts in different kinds
of stories.

h. **Exemplum Method:** Moulovi has used exemplum to clarify different
subjects to permeate them in audiences and address.

He has described, in some cases, difficult and complex subjects through
using several running subsequent exemplums.

Self-training Methods
---------------------

The following educational methods can be extracted from Moulavi’s works
in this regard, as some of the important methods (Beheshti, Abuja\`afari
& Faqihi, 2000, pp. 235- 262):

a. **Fulfillment of Knowledge:** According to Moulavi, the heart of the
matter for knowledge is commitment and action. The criteria of humanity
should be searched in practical obligation and commitment, and we should
not be beguiled by superficial sciences of some people. If knowledge is
combined with action, it not only brightens the soul of its owner, but
also it guides the ignorant people.

A man, who has no commitment to his knowledge, is like a tree which has
no root. On the other hand, from Moulavi’s view, the basis of knowledge
is intuitional, and this particular kind of science is only obtained
through action. It should also be noted that in the event of acting
according to superficial science, i.e. not intuitional sciences, one can
gradually achieve the desired perfection and intuitional knowledge.

b. **Loving God:** Moulavi considers love the most basic mystical
educational method, and believes that spiritual education and
development is only possible through having such a love; because love
has a power that changes or revolutionizes the personality of the lover
and purifies him from himself and from his unbecoming properties, habits
and behaviors, and leads him to harmony with the beloved.

c. **Watching over the soul and self- examination:** Moulavi has much
talked about watching over the soul and self-examination and their role
in self- training. He has considered them as the factors of leading
humans to perfection, self revelation, heart indulgence and passing the
stages of Mystic Journey.

d. **Reciting the Qur’an:** Moulavi says to us regarding the Qur’an not
to consider it like other words and usual concepts; because its
appearance has a great inner form. If we read the Qur’an and accept it
and speculate on the deep meaning of each verse, our spirit will gain
such a magnitude that enthusiasm for flying leaves the spirit restless
without moment of calmness.

e. **Remembrance and Thinking:** Moulavi is of the opinion that man’s
thinking should be combined with remembrance of God, because this
remembrance causes dynamism and purification and magnificence of
thinking, and also causes separation and purification from all sorts of
evils and vices. It not only enlightens man’s thought, but also it
cultivates man’s inner senses.

Ibn Khaldun believes that the following items can be considered as the
principles and methods of education (Beheshti, Abuja\`afari & Faqihi,
2001, pp. 115- 128):

1. **Graduality in Instruction:** According to Ibn Khaldun, the first
point which should be considered here is that, instruction for the
student leads him to learning. When it requires creating a disposition
in that student, it needs time and is done gradually, because the
aptitude of someone is gradually actualized or realized.

2. **Consideration of the Measure of Student’s Understanding and
Aptitude and its Gradual Cultivation:** Ibn Khaldun believes that the
amount of intellectual ability of students in scientific subjects and
problems should be identified, and then they should be instructed
consistent with their aptitudes so that their understanding and aptitude
in learning might be cultivated.

3. **Development of Instruction From Simple to Difficult:** Ibn Khaldun
is of the opinion that not observing the above mentioned fact and not
considering the correct instructional and teaching method cause student
not to comprehend the subject matter and then drops out.

4. **Applying Different Teaching Methods:** It is up to the teacher to
be aware of different teaching methods and be able to apply them in
order to use the suitable method and procedure in instruction and
teaching. Ibn Khaldun believes that teachers can use different teaching
methods for their students.

Some of these methods are: first) lecture, a teaching method in which
the teacher tries to transfer his knowledge to the student, and there is
a one- sided dialogue between teacher and student and the lecture is
teacher- centered.

second) Suggestopedia teaching method in which the subject matters are
taught to the students through their imagination by deeds or speeches.
Third) dialectic and scientific dialogue (debate) between teacher and
student, or encouragement of the students to discuss with one another.

Ibn Khaldun considers the second method more complete and more
comprehensive than the first one. He also believes that the third
teaching method is the simplest one for learning of the students.

5. **Creating a suitable ground and atmosphere for learning and removing
the obstacles:** Ibn Khaldun says that there are the following obstacles
and problems for learner in learning, and teachers should try to remove
or solve them:

a. Applying vague words

• Selection of a brief and short text (or subject matter)

• Abundance of text books (as instructional sources)

• Frequency of involvement in instrumental sciences

• Teaching materials beyond student’s understanding

• Mixing the subject matters

• Longitude of instruction time

• Concurrent instruction of two different disciplines

• Verbal controversies

6. **Simplification and Kindness of teacher:** This can be very
effective in educational achievement and moral education of students. In
contrast, severity an harsh treatment will cause many negative and
psychological disorders, including student’s dropping out.

7. **Keeping freedom and personality (self-esteem) in students:**
According to Ibn Khaldun, it is of the effective methods in education
that binds teachers, educators, parents or everyone else, to be
friendly. Also, it is a stimulant to free expression of feelings and
personality in students, and they avoid imperious orders or
instructions. Not considering this fact causes that ability and self-
esteem of students to be destroyed.

8. **Evaluation and Assessment:** It is up to teachers and educators to
evaluate their student’s performances in order that the student might
know what he or she has done, and what- that should have done- has not
done. What he or she has said, and what- which should have said- has
said, and in general what and how have been his or her deeds and
speeches so that it might become possible to correct them.


