Educational Epistemology
========================

Learning
--------

Ghazali believes that human’s soul is acceptable for education, for
there is basically knowledge and wisdom in such a soul. These two items
have been given to the soul from the very beginning of creation and one
should try to actualize them, as one should try to dig a well and then
extract water.

Knowledge is obtained from two different ways: first) divine revelation
and inspiration. God’s or divine revelation belongs to God’s prophets
which finished with the prophet of Islam, and inspiration belongs to the
saints and still continues and does not end. Second) usual and current
instruction and learning in schools. For this this particular kind of
learning to happen, some principles should be observed:

1. Cultivation and reinforcement of moral aspect, before instruction,

2. Consideration of individual differences and aptitudes,

3. graduality and sequence in instruction and learning.

4. rewarding and punishment.

5. Encouragement and motivation,

6. having a master (teacher), and presence in classroom (instruction),

7. Practice, action, and repetition,

8. involvement in schooling

Ghazali invites people to an open attitude to different sciences and
showing an open face to them, whatever their subjects might be, because
knowledge, irrespective of its subject is noble.

It is necessary that differences among ideas to be accepted. Diversity
of ideas and views in a single subject is not a reason for invalidation
of that subject. There are two reasons for this opinion of Ghazali:
first) there are many kinds of potential sciences that have not been yet
actualized, and humans can achieve them. Second) discovering of one new
science causes deepness in one’s faith and firmness in Islam.

If religious sciences cause cognition of God and His Attributes, natural
sciences reveal and expose the Acts of the exalted God in being. Thus,
Ghazali invites teachers to inform their students of the value of all
science in order that the students, observing graduality and sequence,
to study other sciences after learning each branch of science. Ghazali
is of the opinion that it is up to the wise of a society to study and
investigate the new or foreign subject and make it suitable for their
own society adorned with values.

According to this viewpoint, scientific and cultural interaction and
exchange are carried out among the wise, because Ghazali believes that
it is dangerous for the beginners in knowledge to go to an environment
which is against their own beliefs and values (Kilani, Translation,
Criticism and additions by Rafiie, 2007).

Ghazali believes that education can bring humans from what they are to
what they should be. Education, as life, is the natural right of
everyone. Man has been created for worship and servitude of God, and
education is not only the perquisite of worship of God, but it is also a
kind of worship. Ghazali considers education both as an individual
necessity and as a social necessity for it is in the light of which,
that culture and thought remain, and it is also a means for transmission
from a generation to another.

Therefore, what culture and thought man has is from education without
which man worth nothing and he is the product of his own education. Imam
Ali, in a very educational warning says to the educators to educate
their children for today. The delicate point of this wise statement is
that the development of a child should at least be in harmony with the
natural development of culture and civilization and positive
transformations of humans’ life.

Some parents have no view from life except that which they themselves
wish. Then, they educate their children as they themselves have desired
or as they had been educated. While according to the saying of Imam Ali,
Parents should think beyond their own time. It is not only the student
that needs to be educated, but it is even the educator that needs to be
educated, and he or she needs to educate someone else (the student), and
this need is satisfied through education of another person (the
student), and this is one of the reasons of affection of the great
teachers to their noble students (Rafiei, 2002).

Ibn Sina has mentioned the necessity of this fact that student’s
interests should be known and discovered and they should be much cared
for to be educated to become moderate persons. To do this one should not
let sever anger or grief overcome him. They should be kept away from
what they hate. Moral modification causes body and spirit health.

Ibn Sina also wants that education to be a means for entering in the
production and participation in the economic activities of society. Thus
Ibn Sina deems it necessary that the boy after learning the Qur’an and
the principles of the Arabic language, to be led to one of crafts and
occupations which is consistent to his nature (Ali & Reza; translation,
Criticism and additions by Rafiee, 2005).

Teaching and instruction methods should bring the students to the
educational goals. Therefore, to reach the goals envisioned by Sa’di,
there is emphasis on such activities as question and answer, and
improved lecture methods. He also suggested some points in teaching,
instruction, and learning that can improve students’ education.

He not only emphasized paying attention to the techniques of speaking or
talking, but also placed much emphasis on the distinct role of silence
as one of the greatest techniques or methods of increasing and improving
educational policies.

The importance of questioning and asking from Sa’di’s viewpoint is
revealed when he says, “They asked Imam Mursheed Muhammad Ben Muhammad
Ghazali, (on whom be the mercy of God!) by what means he had attained
such a degree of knowledge. He replied, ‘In this manner, whatever I did
not know, I was not ashamed to enquire about…’”

He tells people to inquire about everything you do not know; “since for
the small trouble of asking, you will be guided in the respectable road
of knowledge (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LXXVII). However, he also
notes “that whenever you are certain that anything will be known to you
in time, be not hasty in inquiring after it” (ibid, tale LXXVIII).One
should think and then answer. He says that “whosoever doth not reflect
before he giveth an answer, will generally speak improperly” (Gulistan,
chapter VIII, tale XXXVI).

Sa’di refers to three points in applying the question-and-answer method.
First, we should question for knowledge: He believes that one should not
ask a question for pedantry, ostentation and dawdling, and for getting
information about the other’s private and personal affairs. Therefore,
if the questioner receives his answer without asking and with patience
and silence, it is not necessary that he asks a question.

Second, ask questions of the wise ones: Sa’di is of the opinion that one
should ask educated, knowledgeable and well-intentioned scholars. Third,
he believes in the necessity of a well-thought-out answer. When a wise
person wants to give the answer to a question, he will do this in a
thought-provoking way, technically and with good intentions because the
unexamined speech can mislead instead of increasing knowledge (Beheshti,
Faqihi & Abuja’fari, 2001).

When speaking and questioning or answering, Sa’di emphasizes not
interrupting the others. “No one confesses his own ignorance, excepting
he who begins speaking whilst another is talking; and before the
discourse is ended” (Gulistan, chapter IV, tale VII).

The reason Sa’di says this is that “a discourse hath a commencement and
a conclusion” (ibid).In another instance, he says, “Whosoever interrupts
the conversation of others, to make a display of his own wisdom,
certainly betrays his ignorance” (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LXXXII).
And he adds, “A wise man speaketh not until they ask him a question”
(ibid).

Sa’di orders all people, “Till you perceive a convenient time for
conversing, lose not your own consequence by talking to no purpose”
(Gulistan, chapter I, tale XIII). Sa’di says that when a business can be
managed without his interference, it is not proper for him to speak on
the subject; but if he sees a blind man in the way of a well, if he
keeps silence, it is a crime (Gulistan, chapter I, tale XXXVIII).

Therefore, Sa’di concludes, “Until you are persuaded that the discourse
is strictly proper, speak not; and whatever you know will not obtain a
favorable answer, ask not” (Gulistan, chapter VII, tale XIII). “He who
listens not to advice, studies to hear reprehension. When advice gains
not admission into the ear, if they reprehend you, be silent” (Gulistan,
chapter VIII, tale XLVIII).

Since Sa’di believed the sources of knowledge are unlimited, he did not
confine himself to formal and classic textbooks. He placed particular
emphasis on informal learning, by which the students try to take lessons
from the great school of nature and the individual events of their
lives, and the lives of other people, in all places and times.

Thus, people should not confine themselves to the appearance of matters;
rather, they should make great effort to get to the essence of matters
and subjects and try to comprehend their truth. The educational method
of storytelling utilized by Sa’di in both poetry and prose can be
considered as an epitome of the teaching methods.

Therefore, students should be committed to this approach in that they
not only study history books, for example, but also must pay great
attention to all of history, nature, and all human beings, if they wish
to reach the highest educational goals. This is also a task of all
scholars and authorities in the educational system.

Sa’di believes in hidden learning and learning from all things: For
example, he relates, “They asked Lokman from whom he had learnt
urbanity. He replied, ‘From those of rude manners; for whatsoever I saw
in them that was disagreeable, I avoided doing the same.’ Not a word can
be said, even in the midst of sport, from which a wise man will not
derive instruction” (*Gulistan*. Chapter II, tale XXI).

Sa’di believes in “informal learning” and says, “Listen to the discourse
of the learned man with the utmost attention” (*Gullistan*. Chapter II,
tale XXXVIII).Sa’di wants all people to pay attention to the admonitions
of the advisers and take lessons from them.

He says, “Know you not, that you will see your feet in fetters, when you
listen not to the admonition of mankind” (*Gulistan*, chapter I, tale
XVI). Sa’di believes that “admonish” comes before “confinement,” saying,
“Great men first admonish, and then confine; when they give advice, and
you listen not, they put you in fetters” (*Gulistan*, chapter XIII, tale
XC).

Sa’di says that it is up to humans to admonish even though the other
does not listen: “Admonish and exhort as your duty requires; if they
mind not, it does not concern you. Although thou knowest that they will
not listen, nevertheless speak whatever you know that is advisable. It
will soon come to pass that you will see the silly fellow with his feet
in the stocks, there smiting his hands and exclaiming, ‘Alas! that I did
not listen to the wise man’s advice’” (*Gulistan*, chapter VII, tale V).

Sa’di also believes, “The fortunate take warning from the histories and
precepts of the ancients, in order that they themselves not become an
example to posterity” (*Gulistan*, chapter XIII, tale XC). Therefore,
Sa’di orders all people, “Take warning by the misfortunes of others,
that others may not take example from you” (ibid).

Teaching methods and instructional content alone are not sufficient to
bring students to the educational goals. It is also necessary to utilize
particular techniques to improve and accelerate the gradual progress of
students toward those goals. Encouragement and punishment of students
are necessary techniques.

The reasons for using these two are the same: leading students to
educational goals. It is necessary for educators and teachers to be the
epitome of both authority and affection, so students will both respect
and love them.

A teacher should be the epitome of affection and authority. He explains,
“Anger, when excessive, createth terror; and kindness out of season
destroys authority” (*Gulistan*, chapter VIII, tale XVIII). Therefore,
Sa’di believes that teachers should be not so severe as to cause
disgust, nor so lenient as to encourage audacity. Severity and leniency
should be tempered together; a wise man carries not severity to excess,
nor suffers such relaxation as will lessen his own dignity. Thus, one
should be complacent, but not to that degree that they may insult him
with the sharp teeth of the wolf (ibid).

Sa’di believes that one should use both encouragement and punishment in
a timely manner, adequately and thoughtfully, because undue, unnecessary
and unexamined anger and punishment makes the student truant; and the
undue encouragement makes him or her arrogant, egoistic and exigent to
the extent that the he doesn’t obey the teacher or the educator.

From the viewpoint of Sa’di, encouragement and motivating others is of
particular importance and can influence them for better performance to
accomplish the desired goals (*Gulistan*, chapter I, tale III).

Sa’di puts emphasis on praise the student and says in this regard, “If
you wish to preserve peace with your enemy, whenever he slanders you in
your absence, in return praise him to his face; at any rate as the words
will issue from the lips of the pernicious man, if you wish that his
speech should not be bitter, make his mouth sweet” (*Gulistan*, chapter
I, tale XXIV).Sa’di doesn’t think it advisable to overindulge in blame,
when the blame is necessary (*Gulistan*, chapter I, tale XVI).

It appears that Sa’di affirms punishment when necessary. Sa’di says, “A
king sent his son to school, and placed a silver tablet under his arm.
On the face of the tablet was written in gold, “The severity of the
master is better than the indulgence of the father” (*Gulistan*, chapter
VII, tale IV).

However, punishment should be the last method in education and not the
first one. He professes, “When the hand has failed in every trick, it is
lawful to draw the sword” (*Gulistan*, chapter XIII, tale XV).
“Forgiveness is commendable, but apply not ointment to the wound of an
oppressor. Knoweth he not that whosoever spareth the life of a serpent,
committeth injury towards the sons of Adam (ibid, tale XVI).

The reason Sa’di confirms punishment in some cases is that “An enemy
does not become a friend, through indulgence; nay, it increases his
avarice. Be humble unto him who shows you kindness” (*Gulistan*, chapter
VIII, tale LXXXI). In another tale, he adds, “When you speak to a low
fellow with kindness and benignity, it increases his arrogance and
perverseness” (*Gulistan*, chapter VIII, tale LXI).

He believes the base men do not deserve affections because “when you
connect yourself with base men, and show them favor, they commit crimes
with your power, whereby you participate in their guilt” (*Gulistan*,
chapter VIII, tale VIII). And in another instance, he says, “When you
support and favor the vicious, you commit wickedness with your power, by
participation (*Gulistan*, chapter VIII, tale LIII).

Sa’di believes that in spite of some of similarities between different
people, there are some differences in their aptitudes as compared with
each other, i.e. there are differences between their physical,
intellectual, social, emotional and moral aptitudes.

Sa’di says that people should consider the extent of their abilities. He
is of the opinion that “whosoever contendeth with the great, sheds his
own blood. He who thinks himself great has been compared to one who
squints and sees double. You will get a broken front by sporting your
head against a ram” (*Gulistan*, chapter XIII, tale XLV).

In another example of this, he says, “It is not the part of a wise man
to box with a lion, or to strike his fist against a sword. Neither fight
nor contend with one more powerful than yourself; put your hand under
your arm-pit” (ibid, tale XLVI). He also warns, “A weak man, who
contents with one that is strong, befriends his adversary, by his own
death”. (ibid, tale XLVII). Sa’di emphasizes that the teachers should
speak to students in conformity with the temper of the hearer
(*Gulistan*, chapter VIII, tale XXIX).

From the viewpoint of Moulavi, one of the points that the teacher should
consider is the individual differences of the students, that is the
teacher must pay attention to the fact that the addresses and the
students are quite different in aptitudes, attitudes, interests,
knowledge, etc., and therefore, the sayings and teachings of the teacher
should be in accordance with these differences.

It is also up to the teacher to consider the spiritual capacity of his
students. The word “reminding” can indicate that Moulavi believes that
man has the best potential aptitudes in himself, and one of the
responsibilities of the tutor and teacher is to nurture those aptitudes.

Mutahhari (1997) emphasizes that teacher should pay attention to the
mental and psychological states of students, and not to make them tired
when they are not ready for learning.

According to Mutahhari (1997) if a teacher uses encouragement or
punishment for students, they should be aware of the reason of this
action of teacher; because these actions might become useless when the
students do not know which behaviors of them should continue or which of
them should be improved or avoided.

Mutahhari (1996 and 1997) takes much emphasis on harmonious cultivation
and breeding of all of the students’ aptitudes: physical, intellectual,
social, emotional, moral and religious.

Mutahhari (1997) does not accept those habits which individuals do
passively without any thinking, brightness and luminosity (of the soul).
He emphasizes the education and acquisition of knowledge in childhood
and narrates this say that knowledge in childhood is like inscription on
a stone.

He introduces work as a factor for concentration, and prevention from
committing sins. He also believes that the particular aptitudes of every
person should be considered in choosing any job or occupation for him or
her. A good work can be very effective in man’s feelings, personality
and self- esteem.

According to Mutahhari (2003), the necessity of society is not only for
satisfying one’s biological needs, rather human being needs social life
in his or her spiritual dimension. Therefore, many natural aptitudes of
humans are not actualized without society.

Mutahhari considered “teaching” of his students as a religious worship
and obligation ((Educational Facilities Affaires and Libraries Bureau or
EFALB, 2007). In addition to the fact that Mutahhari mastered teaching,
he also had a great piety, and moral obligation and commitment. That was
one of the reasons why he was well accepted by his students. Mutahhari
never gave a contemptuous look to his students.

He listened to his students and answered their questions carefully. In
addition to his gentility, his behavior towards the students was
friendly and kindly. He tried to solve his students’ problems. Mutahhari
made much effort to educate his students to be alert and sensible
critics. He was much interested in seeking truth.

Mutahhari put forward the scientific and religious problems, and then
encouraged his students to pursue and solve them. He respected
scientific opinions even though he was opposed to them. He deeply
investigated the subjects, and he reacted scientifically to them. He
sometimes used discussion teaching method, and he often used question
and answer teaching method.

Sometimes, one third or more of the time of the class was spent on
solving the lesson-related problems of the students and answering their
questions. He warmly welcomed student’s questions, and gave suitable
answers to them. Mutahhari had a clear speech when teaching and
explaining the subject matters.

He had also a regular and disciplined way of teaching. He described well
the prefatory notes at the beginning of his teaching, and determined all
the lesson upon which the preliminaries were based. He spoke clearly and
wrote in a simple style and used many examples. He taught with
enthusiasm, and mastered the relations of sciences with each other. The
materials he taught were new, and his students knew the benefit and
application of those materials.

He paid attention to individual differences of the students and
encouraged the active and cheerful pupils. Therefore, his teaching did
not appear to be monotonous, and his students did not become tired
(EFALB, 2007).

Educating a Child
-----------------

Family should be so fit that they can represent admirable and useful
children to society. Avicenna takes much emphasis on the product of a
marriage, i.e. children and their education. He has introduced the
following periods as the stages of a child development and growth upon
which his or her education should be based:

1) prior to instruction: Ibn Sina considers the first stage of the
development of a child from birth to about six years old. The duty of
parents in this stage is giving a name to their child. It is up to them
to choose a good name for the child a name which is admirable from
religious and social viewpoint. The second duty of the parents is
milking their child.

Avicenna recommends that child should eat her or his mother’s milk. In
the event of choosing a nanny, she should have a praiseworthy morality,
a healthy nature, and away from foolishness and illness, because her
milk affects the child. The third duty of parents in the above stage is
correction of their child.

When the child weans, his or her correction should be started before
blameworthy dispositions and reproachable habits attack him or her.
That’s because Avicenna believes that the child tends to evil and
appeals to reprehensible habits and dispositions faster, then these bad
properties overcome his or her nature, and it will hardly be possible to
separate these habits and properties from him or her.

The second stage starts when the child’s joints have grown and the child
has possessed verbal, aural readiness, and suggestibility ability.
Although Avicenna has not mentioned a particular age for this stage, but
he has considered the suitable age for beginning primary education when
the child is six years old. Ibn Sina is of the opinion that the subject
matters the child should learn and should be are: the Qur’an, writing
and knowledge of the religion, besides the instruction of those poems
which instigate the child. Simultaneous with this, intellectual and
moral education should be carried out.

Avicenna believes that memorizing poems, understanding and repeating
them can cause intellectual cultivation, strengthening the memory,
intellectual readiness, and promotion of the level of comprehension on
one hand, and on the other, it leads the child to good morality and
behavior of which the poems are composed, and installs the moral virtues
in the child’s soul, and the child gradually appeals to good deeds
through speculative accepting the good morality and habits.

In the stage of vocational training, an adolescent should learn the
occupation and crafts he loves, select them, and make herself or himself
ready for them. When she or he masters that occupation, she or he should
turn to acquisition of income and earn his livelihood by his own wage.

After the above stage one can get married and create an independent
family. Avicenna does not mention a definite age four this stage, but so
much is certain that this new stage can begin when a person has passed
successfully the previous for stages: has been adorned with praiseworthy
properties and habits morally and behaviorally, has possessed the
necessary ability economically and intellectually for managing his
family.

Although Avicenna himself has not directly defined education, but
considering the ideas of him, it can be deduced that he believes the
nature of education is planning and activity of society and individual,
for health of family, child development and management of social affairs
to bring human being to happiness in this world and hereafter (Howzeh-
University Co-Operation Center, 1998). Avicenna emphasizes education of
children, and has put forward new subjects in this field (Shiite
encyclopedia, 2007).

Curriculum and Educational Contents
-----------------------------------

Khajeh Naseer Tusi has formulated the children’s educational plan
according to their natural development. Thus, he believes that this plan
should extend consistent with the development of the children’s powers
and abilities. Appetitive faculty should be first paid attention to in
the beginning, because it is the first faculty that appears in humans,
and it has been installed in them for their survival, and that’s the
reason why children search first for food, water and sleep.

Therefore, before overcoming blameworthy morals and habits through
satisfying this faculty, they should be corrected with good manners and
praiseworthy disposition, and manners of living such as manners of
eating food, speaking, socializing, taking exercise, and also good
dispositions such as humbleness, obeying parents and teachers, and
religious teachings should be taught to them.

When children grow more, they should the taught with reason and proof
what they had already learned through imitation, and appeal to science
or crafts on the basis of their capacity, aptitude and interest. If they
want to learn wisdom, they should first learn logics so that they might
learn the procedure of thinking correctly, to be kept from intellectual
errors, and they should then learn mathematics to become familiar with
argumentative problems, and at the end, they should engage in philosophy
and wisdom.

Khajeh Naseer has mentioned three fundamental points regarding
educational plans:

1. Educational plans should start with those texts which are simple in
content and small in volume in order that children enjoy acquiring
knowledge, and then harder texts should gradually be started.

2. Educational plans should be formulated in such a manner that every
person who is involved in acquiring each branch of science and skill,
may bring it to its final and ultimate state, and does not give it up in
the middle of the way.

3. in educational plans, fundamental, durable and old sciences should be
preferred to new and endurable sciences. Islamic sciences should be
considered as the most valuable ones, and prayer and relation with God
should be more paid attention to, because these two are very fruitful
for learning sciences and achieving to nearness to God, and makes man
familiar with origin and end (Beheshi, Abuja’afari & Faqihi, 2000).

Khajeh Naseer recommends that it is necessary that the principles of
health to be taught to students (Modarresi, 2000). Khajeh Naseer
believed that medicine, astrology and philosophy could be applied for
welfare and health of people. Therefore, he was always thinking to find
a way to encourage people to empirical sciences. He himself was famous
because of his very comprehensive information regarding wisdom,
astrology, medicine, mathematics and religious sciences (Badkubehee
Hazavehee, 2004).

Khajeh Naseer Tusi mentions that it was in the light of “knowledge” that
God showed the superiority of Adam to angels and ordered them to
prostrate Adam. In addition to this, knowledge is the means for bringing
humankind to the eternal happiness. Therefore, the seeker of knowledge
is a growing existence that does not accept to surrender to ignorance.

It is up to a learner to choose the best from each branch of science,
and seek for a science that is needed now and in the affairs of the
world, and then for a science that is needed in the future, and it is
also to the learner to prefer knowledge of Divine Unity (unity of God)
and try to recognize God through argument and reason. Students should
choose the more aware, pious and older ones as their teachers.

In addition to consignment of their teachers, it is necessary that
students themselves always try to speculate regarding the accurate
problems and points, for these things can only be comprehended through a
deep consideration.

A student should have self-esteem and should be high-minded, and seek
simultaneously for acquisition of knowledge and earning a living and
never stares people’s properties. There is not only a particular time
for acquiring knowledge, rather students should always seek for
knowledge so that they achieve virtues.

This is a picture that Khajeh Naseer portraits for a student, and shows
him or her as a person who has decided to strive in the cause of God and
transacts with God to exalt the esteem of knowledge and extend its
lights in the boundaries of life, in order that he or she might be
purified, and this is the task and duty of all the God’s prophets.

From Ghazali’s viewpoint, curriculum has an extensive and complete
structure in which religious sciences and worldly occupations interact
and are taught with each other. Religious sciences can’t be comprehended
and understood and intellectual sciences are like drug for health and
religious sciences are like food.

It is not meant in such a comprehensive instruction that learner should
achieve expertise in all fields of the curriculum, rather it is meant
that the learner should become familiar with the general features of
sciences in order that might help him or her to achieve a cognitive
perfection, and then become expert and master in a particular field of
science.

Curriculum is extensive and includes diverse fields of knowledge and
work. Ghazali believes that the standard and criteria of value and
distinguishing of sciences from each other are the result of each branch
of science, and the firmness of the reasons for that science.

From the viewpoint of Ghazali for both obligatory and voluntary
sciences, their rate of obligation is determined based on one’s life
development and the conditions of a society, e.g. when an individual
reaches legal age (at which he or she should do religious commandments)
having the knowledge of prayer becomes obligatory for him or her, or
whenever a person has had a wealth that should pay alms from it, he or
she should have the knowledge of almsgiving.

Such a concept for Ghazali is a changeable concept that causes the
curriculum to develop in harmony with an individual’s life and society
conditions development. The domains of curriculum from Ghazali’s
viewpoint is almost equal to the educational principles of the Qur’an
and Islamic traditions, the most important of which are: domain of
Islamic belief, domain of soul purification, domain of study of the
Qur’an and the systems and principles mentioned in it, domain of applied
skills (Kilani; translation, Criticism and additions by Rafiie, 2007 ).

Ghazali believes that curriculum should consist of Qur’an instruction,
good news, stories and biographies of the good and memorizing good
poems. Ghazali also is of the opinion that the child should herself or
himself face problems and difficulties in order that she or he might
acquire the necessary readiness for tolerating and solving the life
problems.

He considers physical training as a necessary part of curriculum to move
the students away from weakness and infirmity. He considers play as a
natural means for learning and progress of students (Sheari Nejad,
1998).

Avicenna recommends learners to decide to learn “natural sciences, “
pure mathematics science and arithmetic science”, “divine science” and
“logic science “ that help to know the truth for itself and virtue for
its acceptance and acting according to them. He deems also necessary to
instruct knowledge of language and words, because it is necessary for
all of us to apply the words, and these help thinking.

Despite all of these, Avicenna believes that it is necessary to learn
philosophy before other sciences, because it makes humans familiar with
the truth of the facts and phenomena as far as it is possible for
humankind. Phenomena are divided into two groups: first) those affaires
which their existence depends on our will power and our actions, second)
those affaires the existence of which is not dependent upon our will
power or our actions.

Knowledge or cognition to the first group is called speculative
philosophy, and to the second group is called practical philosophy. The
aim of the speculative philosophy is the Perfection of human’s soul
through learning, and the aim of practical philosophy is completion and
perfection of the soul not only through instruction, but also through
instruction of what is done and acting according to them (Ali & Reza;
translation, criticism and additions, by Rafiee, 2005).

Mutahhari (1997) lakes emphasis on this fact that we should also pay
attention to the future, its needs and conditions in educational and
curriculum planning, and teaching.


