4-2. Factors of Education
=========================

According to Khajeh Naseer, human's deeds, behaviors and thoughts are
among those factors which make their personality in such a manner that
when an action is repeated, it influences people's inner self and
gradually forms permanent and firm disposition and becomes so hard that
is not easily perishable and transitory. Therefore, one who lives
thinking always concerning the Origin and Return day, his or her soul is
affected accordingly and accepts those states consistent with such
thought and effects. One of the other influencing factors on man's
personality is a companion and playmate. Thus, it is up to all people to
socialize and associate with those who are pure from evils and adorned
with virtues.

On the basis of this, those, who seek perfection, should search for an
anthropos teleios (the perfect man), associate with him and accept his
speech so that they may reach perfection, because every being, who wants
to attain perfection, should attain herself or himself to a more perfect
being in order that he may enjoy his perfection. It should be noted in
this regard that the highest companionship and association is the
association with God, His name and his remembrance and surrendering to
Him that gives a divine color to human's behavior and thought (Beheshti,
Abuja'afari & 2000).There are many factors which are effective on one's
education. Two most important factors in this field are 'heritage' and
'environment'.

Ghazali, following Islam, accepts the effect of heritage on human's
education. He also refers to some Islamic traditions to mention the
importance of individual heritage and its role in creating the
personality backgrounds in a child. Therefore, Ghazali deems it
necessary that a spouse should be righteous, pious, faithful and
friendly. He emphasizes that people are not to give, as wives, their
girls to ill-tempered, weak in faith men. That is because the
consideration of these facts does not let reprehensible heritage factors
affect the growth and development of a child's personality. On the other
hand, Ghazali also accepts the influence of environment on the education
of people. The environmental factors can be divided into two groups:
first) non-humanistic factors, which are divided into natural and
supernatural factors. Second) humanistic factors, which are divided into
family, school, community (group of friends), and individual factors. As
for the natural factors. Ghazali does consider the instructional role of
nature, and according to this, he has invited people to external
(objective) Journey. Ghazali believes in the effect of supernatural
factors on human's life, personality and education. He considers God as
the basis and principle in man's life, the creation of his personality,
and his education. Other things are considered only as some means or
instruments. Ghazali also believes that true knowledge is the result of
illuminative disclosure and intuition that he calls such knowledge,
"God-given knowledge" and considers it as a divine gift. As for the
other factors, Ghazali mentions the roles and duties of parents,
teachers, friends, and students. Observing such duties and tasks may
have very good influences on pupils and students (Rafiei, 2002). The
principle that all philosophers and moralists have agreed upon is this
fact that the ultimate aim or goal of seeking knowledge and education is
a religious aim, and as Ghazali says that this aim is learning a
knowledge which is useful in the hereafter and that encourages its
learner to obey God and brings him to a certitude that is the source and
origin of knowledge.

Khajeh Naseer also considered it compulsory for learners to obtain
God's satisfaction, purify ignorance from themselves and others, and
revive the religion and keep it through promotion of good and prevention
of evil in themselves and their relatives as much as possible (Ali &
Reza; translation, criticism, and additions by Rafiee, 2005).

Ghazali has considered teacher as the successor of the prophet of Islam
in guidance of people provided that he or she is adorned with some moral
virtues including endurance, gratitude, trust in God, certitude, open
handedness, contentment, tranquility of the soul, patience, humbleness,
knowledge, truth, modesty, loyalty, dignity, and equanimity. If all of
these admirable characteristics are available in a teacher, then he will
be a light of the prophet's lights that deserves to be followed by
others. Ghazali is of the opinion that those involved in instruction
have undertaken a great work, then they should respect manners and
duties of being a teacher (Ali & Reza; translation, criticism and
additions by Rafiee, 2005).

Ghazali believes that nutrition, parents, school, companions, exercise,
encouragement...etc., are effective in education (Howzeh- university
Co-Operation Center, 1993, P.305).

According to Moulavi, interaction of humans is of the important
foundations of education. People are affected by different factors such
as parents, educators, teachers, friends, social and environmental
conditions and situations. On the other hand, good or bad behaviors and
actions of human beings make their dispositions, and their intentions,
thoughts, attitudes, beliefs, and inner things make their appearance. In
fact, apparent deeds and behaviors and inner intentions and beliefs are
always in continuous interaction until man's personality and character
is created. Moulavi has mentioned such interaction in different parts of
his poems and writings. He has explained the influence on people by
their educators, friends, companions, temptations, imaginations,
thoughts, etc., and considering all of these, he has deemed it
impossible that one can take the way of happiness without a guaranteed
and secure model and example. Regarding good and bad thoughts,
imagination and temptation to beauty, he believes that bad thoughts of
humans make them sensitive, depressed, out of spirit, and disappointed-
Moulavi was of the opinion that someone's speech, behavior, insight, and
thinking make his real personality and character, and his personality
structure is influenced by them. Sins cause man's spirit to decline. He
also considered the decline and depression of spirit and the happiness
and cheerfulness of one's spirit as a being influenced by actions and
behaviors.. Man's spirit tends to egoism due to false imaginations and
illusions, vanities, such as servility, eulogy, and flattering, and his
heart gradually becomes sick and he violates (laws or traditions). The
basis of all of these is baseless imaginations and invalid fancies.
Even, it is peoples' vanities that have caused some wars, corruption,
disgrace and all that they have been involved in (Beheshti, Abuja'fari &
Faqihi, 2000, pp. 201-204).

Ibn Khaldun believes that there are different factors effective in
man's education. These factors can be classified into three groups:
social, psychological, and natural. Social factors are divided into life
situation, social situation, job situation, and fanaticism.
Psychological factors are divided into intimacy, habit, and imitation.
Natural factors are divided into weather, existence environment, and
kind of food (Beheshti, Faqihi & Abuja'afari, 2001, pp. 95-108).

Motahhari (1997) introduces the following items as the factors of
education :

Enforcement of will power and worship
Affection, the enforcement of the sense of seeking the truth
Meditation or watching over the self, and self-examination
Thinking (thought), affection to friends of God, marriage, striving in
the way of God
Work (having an occupation).

Sa'di places much emphasis on the determinative role of inheritance and
heritage on man, to the extent that he says, "An evil root will not
thrive in a goodly shade. To educate the worthless is like throwing a
walnut upon a dome. Though the clouds should pour down the water of
life, you would never gather fruit from the branch of the willow. Waste
not your time on low people, for we can never obtain sugar from the
reed. The wolf's whelp will at length become a wolf, although it be
brought up along with men. How can anyone form a good sword out of bad
iron? 0 ye philosophers, it is impossible to convert a worthless wretch
into a good man. The rain, in whose nature there is no partiality,
produces tulips in the garden, but only weeds in a barren soil. A
sterile soil will not yield spikenard, waste not then seed upon it"
(Gulistan, chapter I, tale IV). In another tale, he says, "When nature
has given capacity, instruction will make impression, but if iron is not
of a proper temper, no polishing will make it good" (Gulistan, chapter
VII, tale I).

Sa'di believes that "a capacity without education is deplorable"
(Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LVI). He gives some examples of this,
saying, "the education is the same, but the capacities are different;
although silver and gold are produced from a stone, yet these metals are
not to be found in every stone. The star Canopus shines all over the
world, but the scented leather comes only from Yemen" (Gulistan, chapter
VII, tale VI). Therefore, Sa'di concludes that "an education without
capacity is thrown away" (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LVI). "A student
without inclination is a lover without money; a traveler without
observation, is a bird without wings; a learned man without works, is a
tree without fruit; and a devotee without knowledge, is a house without
a door" (Gulistan, chapter VIII, tale LXXI). In spite of this, Sa'di
emphasizes the role of education in childhood and believes, "He who is
not taught good manners in his childhood will have no good qualities
when he arrives at manhood" (Gulistan, chapter XII, tale III). Sa'di
likens a child to a piece of green wood that can be bent as much as we
please, but when it dries, it cannot be made straight without fire
(ibid).

Sa'di believes that good children are so important for their parents
and society that "it is better in the opinion of the wise that a woman
in labor should bring forth a serpent than wicked children" (Gulistan,
chapter VII, tale X). Therefore, it is up to educators to teach wisdom
to their sons. He counsels, "If you desire your name to be remembered,
teach your son wisdom and judgment" (Bustan, pp. 382-383). Sa'di places
so much emphasis on intellect that he believes if such a son "lacks both
these assets, you will die, and have no descendants" (p. 383). Sa'di
admonished that it is up to the parents and educators to take care of
their sons and bring them comport "so that their eyes are not fixed at
others' hands, because he who shows no care of his offspring will see
him cared for by others and roaming about" (Bustan, year, p. 384).

**References**

Al- Hakimi, M.. Al- Hakimi. M. & Al- Hakimi, A. (1991). AlHayah, vol.
1. (6th ed.). Tehran, Islamic cultural publications Bureau Alavi, H. R.
(2002). Dictionary of Educational and concepts of Sa'di's Gulistan.
Kerman, Vadiat Ali, S. E. and Reza, M. J (2005), Educational schools and
Attitudes in Islamic Civilization; Translation, Criticism and additions
by Behrooz Rafiee, Qom and Tehran: Howzeh and University Research
Center, and Samt.

Attaran, M. (1989), Trends of educational culture and history in Iran
and Europe, (3rd ed.), Tehran, Negah

Attaran, M. (1992), Muslim Great Educators, Views on Child Education,
(3 rd ed.), Tehran, Madreseh

Avicenna (1981), Rasael-e- Ibn Sina (Monographs of Ibn Sina),
Translated by Ziaaddin Dorri, (2nd ed.), Tehran, Markazi

Badkubehee Hazavehee, M. (2004), Khajeh Naseeraddin Tusi, (4th ed.)
Tehran, Iran Libraries Development Corporation.

Beheshti, M.; Abuja'afari, M. & Faqihi, A. N., (2000), Theories of
Muslim Scientists in Education and its Principles, Vol. 2. Tehran,
Samt

Binder, L. (1955), Al-Ghazali's theory of government, Muslim world, 45:
233- 240.

Dehkhoda, A. A. (1998), Lexicon, vol. 1, (2nd ed.), Tehran, Tehran
University Printing and Publication Institute

Educational Facilities Affairs and Libraries Burea, (2007),
Mothahhari's Teachership Manifestations (11th ed.), Tehran, Madreseh

Eslami Nadushan, M.A. (1995), Endless Adventures of Hafez, (2nd ed),
Tehran, Yazdan

Frank, R. M. (1994), Al-Ghazali and the Ash'arite school, Durham, NC,
Duck University Press

Gha'fare, M. H. (2001), Islamic Scientists- An Analysis of their Lives
and Works, Guilan, Guilan university publication

Ghazali M. (1997), Kimiya-e-Saadat [Elixir of Salvation], Corrected by
Ahmad Aram (4th ed.), Tehran, Ganjineh

Ghazali, M. (1988), Nasihatolmoluk (Admonishment to Kings), Corrected
by Jalaloddin Homaee (4th ed.), Tehran. Homa

Ghazali, o M. (1989), Ihya' ulum ad-din [Revival of the religious
Sciences], translated from Arabic to Persian, Moayyedoddin Mohammad
Kharazmi, by effort of Hoscin Khdiv Jam (2nd ed.), Tehran, Scientific
and Cultural Publications Corporation

Goli Zavareh, K. (1996), Reviving Sips Qom: Hozur Hafez (1997), by
effort of Sayeh, Tehra, Karnameh

Hafez (2002), Divan of Hafez, English Translated by Henry Willberforce
Clarcke, Tehran: Peyk-e-farhang

Hafez (2003), Divan of Hafez, by effort of Salehe Salchpour (3'd ed.),
Tehran: Farhangsara-e-mirdashte

Hillenbrand, C. (1988), Islamic orthodoxy or realpolitic, Al-Ghazali's
views on government, Iran: Journal of the British Institute of Persian
Studies, 26: 81- 94

Hoseini Dashti, M. (1997), Sciences and Sientists, Vol.7 (2n1 ed.)
Tehran: Mofid

Hoseini Tehrani, M. 1-1. (2002), Shining Sun (5th ed.), Mashad: Allameh
Tabatabaee

Howzeh - University Co- operation Center, (1993), Philosophy of
Education, Vol. I , Tehran: Samt

Howzeh- University Co-Operation Center (1998), Theories of Muslim
Scientists in Education and Its Principles, Vol. 1, Tehran: Samt.

Ja'fari, M.T. (1994), Interpretation, Criticism and Analysis of Masnavi
of Jalaloddin Mohammad Moulavi (12th ed.), Tehran: Eslami

Khorasani, S. (2006), Ibn Sina, In K. Musavi Bojnourdi (Ed.), The Great
Encyclopedia of Islam (PP. 1-29), Vol. 4 (3rd ed.), Tehran: Center of
Great Encyclopedia of Islam

Khorramshahi, B. (1993), Hafez-Nameh (5th ed.), Tehran: Scientific and
Cultural Publications

Kilani, M. A. (2007), The Development of Educational Views in Islamic
Civilization, Translation, Criticism and additions by Behrooz Rafiie,
Qom and Tehran: Howzeh and University Research Center and Cultural
Studies Center of Tehran City

Laoust, H. (1970), La politique de Gazali. Paris: Librairie
Orientaliste Paul Geuthmer

Modarresi, M. (2000), Biography and Philosophy of Khajeh Naseer Tusi
(2nd ed), Tehran: Amir Kabir

Mohammadi Rey Shahri, M. (1993), Mizan-al-Hekmah (Critcrium of wisdom),
vol. 6 (4th ed.), Qom: Maktab-al-Aalam-al- Eslami

Moin, M. (1992), A Persian Dictionary, Vol. 6 (8th ed.), Tehran: Amir
Kabir

Mojtabaee, F. ( 2006), Ibn Sina, In K. Musavi Bojnourdi (Ed.), The
Great Encyclopedia of Islam (PP. 41-49), Vol.4 (3rd ed.), Tehran: Center
of Great Encyclopedia of Islam

Mokhtari, R. (1998), Aspect of wises (12th ed.), Qom: the center of
publication of the office of Islamic propagation of Islamic seminary

Motahhari, M. (1991). Innate Nature. (2nd ed.). Tehran & Qom: Sadra

Motahhari, M. (1996), Philosophy of Ethics (15th ed.), Tehran & Qom:
Sadra

Motahhari, M. (1997), Education in Islam (29th ed.), Tehran & Qom:
Sadra

Motahhari, M. (undated). The Principles of Philosophy and Method of
Realism. Tehran & nQom: Sadra

Moulavi (2000), Complete Divan of Shams Tabrizi (14th ed.) Tehran:
Javidan

Mumisa, M. (2002), Al-Ghazali's life and theory of knowledge, Muslim
Education Quarterly, 19 (3): 31-47

Nasri, A. (2003), Life's outcome- A surver of Motahhari's Ideas,
Tehran: Islamic culture publication Bureau

Qorbani, Q. (2005), Introduction on Religious and Political Thought of
Martyr Motahhari, Tehran: The Research Institute of Imam Khomeini and
Islamic Revolution

Rafiei, B. (2002), Theories of Muslim Scientists in Education and Its
Principles, Vol. 3, Qom and Tehran: Howzeh and University Research
Center and Samt.

Rahman, M. M. (1977), The philosophy of Al-Ghazali, Dacca:
International Islamic Philosophical Association

Ravandi, M. (1988), Development of Culture and History of Education in
Iran and Europe (2nd ed.), Tehran: Negah

Reshnou zadeh, B. (2007), Ghazali, In: Sadr Haj Seyyed; javadi, K. Fani
& Khorramshahi (Eds.), Encyclopedic of Shiite (PP. 80-83) Vol.12,
Tehran: Shahid Saeed Mohebbi

Rumi (Moulavi), J. (2000), Fih-e-Ma Fih, Explanation by Dr. Hosein
Elahi Ghomshei (7th ed.), Tehran: scientific and cultural publications

Sa'di Shirazi. (1996), Bustan, Explanation by Mohammad Ali Naseh, by
effort of Dr. Khalil Khatib Rahlar (4th ed.), Tehran: Safi Alishah

Sa'di. (1995), Divan of poems, Corrected by Mohammad Ali Forughi,
Tehran: Javidan

Sadr Haj Seyyed Javadi, A., Fani, K. & Khorram Shahi, B. (Eds.) (2007),
Encyclopedia of Shiite, Vol. 1 (6th ed.), Tehran: Shahid Saeed Mohebbi
Seyyed Arab, H. (2007), Farabi, In A. Sadr Haj Seyyed Javadi; K. Fani &
B. Khorramshahi (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Shiite (PP. 161-163), Vol. 12,
Tehran: Shahid Saeed Mohebbi

Sheari Nejad, A. A. (1998), Philosophy of Education (5th ed.), Tehran:
Amir Kabir

Smith, M. (1944), Al-Ghazal the mystic, London: Luzac

Soltanolqaraee, Kh. (2005), Philosolohy of Education and Educational
Ideas, Rabriz: Tabriz University Publications

The Glorious Qur'an (1999), English Translation by: Mohammad Shakir,
Qom: Ansaryan

Tusi, Kh. N. (1981), Akhlaq-e-Naseri (Ethics of Naseri), Correction and
Criticism by Mojtaba Minavi and Ali Reza Heidari (2nd ed.),
Tehran:Kharazmi Publications Corporation

Zamiri, M. A. (1995), History of Iran and Islam Education (5th ed.),
Shiraz: Rahgosha


