Educational Axiology
====================

Religious and Intellectual Education
------------------------------------

Khajeh Naseer Tusi has considered a very firm and deep relation between
religion and philosophy, and has also considered the task of these two
compatible and coordinated. He has introduced religion as the helper of
intellect and religion as the first educator, and wisdom and philosophy
as the second educator for human beings.

He has combined the doctrines and teachings of these two with each
other, and recommends that it is up to parents to lead their children to
religion, because it is religion that can lead humans to wisdom,
justice, bravery and chastity, and makes them moderate and forbears them
from immoderation and going to extremes. Thus, parents and educators
should first teach the Qur’an and religious traditions and obligations
to children, and care them for doing religious commandments.

When children finish their childhood period, they should be invited to
learning wisdom so that they might make what they have learned in the
beginning through imitation, based upon reason, and try to appeal to
moderation, and govern justice in their lives, although achieving
justice seems very difficult in every field. Humans can only attain real
happiness when they command and direct their lust, anger, desires and
make their intellect consistent with the orders of religion, and make
their will power in harmony with God’s will.

Khajeh Naseer Tusi recommends to three facts to guarantee the
implementation of religious commandments:

1. Encouragement and punishment: Parents and educators can make children
and adolescents interested in religious affairs through praise,
compliment and acknowledgment from them in the presence of others, and
through becoming attached to them.

2. Good mentioning of the pious: children accept model; therefore if the
pious ones are praised before them, and sinners and the mischievous are
blamed, and the badness of sin is well portrayed for them, they will
undoubtedly tend to good models and appeal to piety and avoid sins.

3. Endurance: Patience and endurance are necessary to achieve to the
divine straight path, and on can’t achieve perfection and elevation
without them.

Worship is of the important religious education factors, and is divided
into three kinds:

1. inner worships: These are concerned with one’s heart, such as
beliefs, and thoughts

2. organ worships : These are concerned with body, such as prayer,
fasting, and hajj(pilgrimage to Mecca)

3. social worships: These manifest in social contacts, such as observing
justice, equity, benevolence and Prodigality.

Prayer is the factor of humble submissiveness and adoration before God,
and causes a decrease in faculty of anger and avoiding superciliousness
and megalomania, and fasting is the cause of creation of patience,
endurance, self-restraint and control of instincts; and Hajj is an
emigration towards God and causes nearness to God (Beheshti, Abuja’afari
& Faqihi, 2000). From the viewpoint of Khajeh Naseer Tusi one whose
knowledge and action are right and correct can be called wise (Tusi,
1981).

Avicenna emphasizes moral education and deems religious education
necessary for moral education. He means by moral education, upbringing
chaste women and men who have a strong will power, love virtues and
consider God’s satisfaction and countenance in their deeds (Sheari
Nejed, 1998).

Moulavi confirms the knowledge of those ones who are not superficial in
science and attain “Certainty by sense-perception” and higher ranks of
knowledge (Ja’fari, 1994, vol.2, p.616). He complains of an imitational
science in which learner does not apply his or her intellect, and
doesn’t understand anything through thinking and reflection, and only
rely on suspicion (2000, p.357). Therefore, those who satisfy only to
their senses in cognition, such knowledge will be an obstacle for them,
and will debar them from all kinds of perfection (Ja’fari, 1994, vol.
11,p.375).

Imam Ali introduces the real science as the root of every goodness
(Ghorar-al-Hekam). Moulavi introduces “ignorance” as “disbelief” and
knowledge as a factor which removes such a disbelief (Ja’fari, 1994,
vol. 7, p.156). He also believes that knowledge has a particular
shinness, therefore it can be said that those persons without knowledge
are dark and without effectiveness (Moulavi, 2000). Therefore, Moulavi
believes that it is knowledge that causes the piety to become effective
and fruitful (Ja’fari, 1994, vol. 14, p.50).

Moulavi emphasizes informal education, in addition to formal education.
According to Moulavi, skies and the earth speak with the one who
understands, but everyone comprehends the wise words of the universe
according to their spiritual ability. Also, life can teach the highest
lessons to humans provided that they take lessons (Rumi, 2000, pp. 15,
19-20, 71).

Moulavi believes that all teachers should really pay attention to the
individual differences of their students, and speak to them according to
the power of understanding and merit of them.

Every person does not deserve receiving wisdom and higher ranks of
knowledge and insight (Rumi, 2000, pp. 50-51, 19-20, 34). The prophet of
Islam said that God’s prophets have been ordered to speak with people in
accordance with the level of their understanding and intellect (Al-
Hakimi, 1991, P. 167).

According to Moulavi, it is up to all people and students to reinforce
the power of thinking and reflection in themselves so that they may
understand the real and hidden aspect of every fact and achieve to very
comprehensive and deep meanings of everything (Rumi, 2000, pp. 8,20,38,
40, 49, 53, 60).

Moulavi is of the opinion that speeches, deeds and characteristics of
teachers and educators can actually affect students (Rumi, 2000, p. 21).

Moulavi believes that human being has naturally the best aptitudes,
thus, the main role of educators is to realize and actualize these
potential aptitudes in the pupils, not creating new aptitudes in them
(Rumi, 2000, p.22).

According to Moulavi, motivation, interest and enthusiasm in seeking and
acquisition of science and knowledge can be very effective factors in
success of individuals. If one wants to attain comprehension of truth,
it is quite necessary to make his thought free from all carnal desires
and all worldly goals which are against divine aims (Rumi, 2000, P.4).

Also, the Qur’an confirms this fact that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَآمِنُوا بِرَسُولِهِ
يُؤْتِكُمْ كِفْلَيْنِ مِنْ رَحْمَتِهِ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ نُورًا
تَمْشُونَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) God and believe in
His Apostle: He will give you two portions of His mercy, and make for
you a light with which you walk and forgive you” (Surah al-Hadid,
57:28).***

It is in the light of a real knowledge that man achieves a status in
which can see the being or universe as it is. That’s the reason why
Moulavi repeats this pray of the prophet of Islam: “O God; show us the
things as they are. It is in the light of the real possessors of such
knowledge that all the world lightens, and all human beings are guided
by them (Rumi, 2000.p.2).

If man wishes to understand the truth, it is quite necessary to purify
his thought from all sorts of temptations, and those intents and
objectives which are not Divine and God-like. Moulavi asks God to show
him the entire universe as it is and not to be strayed.

Worldly belongings that appear very beautiful and attractive for some
superficial people, they are in fact objects that those who have not
understood their reality fall in love with and never identify their
worthlessness. From the viewpoint of Moulavi, “knowledge and sciences”
can both “guide” and “make man to go astray.”

Knowledge can guide man to the straight path if he is freed from the
shackles of materialism and temptations. Moulavi emphasizes that if man
can overcome lusts and carnal desires, even for a moment, in this case,
all the knowledge of the prophets will become clear for him. But those
who are pawns of selfishness and egoism and have not been delivered from
passing fancies and urges cannot possess useful knowledge for themselves
or others.

That is because worldliness and profanity make blind the man’s
intellectual eye and separate him from the real knowledge. Moulavi even
believes that teaching the bad-natured persons is like giving a sword to
a thief. That is the reason why Moulana says that giving the sword to a
dead and blind drunk is better than the base and abject have knowledge.
Knowledge, wealth, and status will create havoc, turbulence, and
disturbance for the bad-natured.

But the man who possesses intellect which has reached insight and
intuition and has “knowledge and action,” that is, he thinks well and is
driven to do deserving deeds, others will assuredly have humility and
humbleness before such an intellect.

Moulavi speaks of “the pleasure of knowledge and Devine action.” He
deems sufficient the Devine acceptance for his own “knowledge” and
“action,” and he also expresses his repugnance toward all things save
this. But Moulavi does not agree with those sciences and actions that
have no spiritual effect, and spring from blind imitations and
repetitions, and he asks God that he would be freed from such sciences
and actions before his death.

From the viewpoint of Moulana, the real knowledge tries to reach the
“Certitude” and “Certitude” tries to see “the Beloved.” Moulavi believes
that such love cannot be found in the pages of usual books because this
real love comes from pure hearts and souls that are freed from the
shackles of egotism and have therefore come to a position where they can
see and understand the truth as it is. Moulavi introduces the “love” as
a real school the teacher of which is God and all the men are the
students.

The knowledge received in such a school is “infinite” because “the
Beloved,” that is the Lord of the worlds, is “infinite.” That is the
reason why Moulana orders man to require the knowledge that is not
limited to “signs and marks.”

Moulana believes that one can be delivered from usual schools and pages
and repetition. And the seekers of truth do not become tired of such an
inborn and instinctive knowledge. The sciences that are found in the
usual schools are something different from “love.”

Thus, a man who appeals to the Divine love is as if he had obtained all
the real sciences and it is not necessary for him to have any other
distinctions and sciences. Because when the knowledge is blended in
man’s heart and soul, it really helps and saves him.

Moulavi uses the words “spirit,” “knowledge,” and “love” with each
other, and believes that the real life is in the light of such a
knowledge ingrained with love, which pervades the man’s body and the
body receives the spirit and life. It is in the light of “love” that
man’s intellect changes into pure gold and finds its true value. Thus,
Moulana requests insistently from the superficial jurisprudents to seek
the “knowledge of love” and learn and teach it, because this knowledge
can save man in this world and in the Hereafter. Therefore, the
enlightened know the knowledge of reaching God through their hearts.

According to “Abu Ali Varag,” whosoever considers a saying from
knowledge without sufficient piety has become an offender. Hafez orders
such persons:

“O ye, the unaware and ignorant! Try to become aware and knowing”.

It means that Hafez asks those persons to remove all lusts which are
obstacles of receiving the real heartfelt and cleanse the rust of sins
from their hearts so that they may change to a true learned and real
scholar and enlightened wise. That is because to a man who does this and
loves God, there would be nothing hidden to him, and according to the
Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنْ تَتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ
فُرْقَانًا وَيُكَفِّرْ عَنْكُمْ سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ۗ
وَاللَّهُ ذُو الْفَضْلِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O believers, if you fear God, He will assign you a salvation, and
acquit you of your evil deeds, and forgive you; and God is a bounty
abounding” (Surah Anfal, 9: 29).***

In this stage, it is possible for man to require the insight, wisdom,
and knowledge along with a real love, and in such a period, he can be
the leader of others because according to Hafez:

“The way of love, is a way which it is impossible for one to guide
others to it until he himself has not become a true lover inwardly and
heartily”:

“As long as thou are not a true follower, then how may it be possible
for thee to become a true leader?”

And a school that nurtures such pupils and students is the school of
mysticism (Gnosticism) and love:

“In the school of truth, before the love belletrist

O ye the son! Try to become a father someday.”

The necessity of accompanying “love” and “intellect” and avoidance of
absolute rationalism is emphasized by Hafez.

Evidently, Hafez does not disagree with all sciences; rather he confirms
a knowledge which leads to the spirituality, truth, and God, but “his
critic nature and alert mind often oppose the pedantries and
pretentiousness of the superficial learned men of his time”
(Khorramshahi, 1993, Vol. 2, p. 991).

Hafez worries that the joy of life and fervency of love are not found in
the lives of most people, and thought of piety, guidance, and cure or
remedy of the hearts among men are not seen in the society; thus he is
waiting for a state and time when the enlightened recluse, by
enlightening the bright sun of truth to bestow upon the dark and sunless
life of men a real verve and vigor:

“I see no verve in anyone nor any thought of heart's cure and piety. The
inner self became dark, may God want that from the unseen a recluse
would enlighten a light, Hafez attends not in lessons and seclusion, nor
the learned have an absolute knowledge.”

Therefore, it can be deduced that “Hafez's criticism of science,
knowledge, book, lesson, piety, learning, and college is not because he
himself is not a learned man and a scholar; for it is quite evident that
Hafez had learned well the prevalent sciences of his day and was a wise
man and an eloquent and literary master and knew the art of religious
argumentation and theosophy, and he had a high status in the Qur’anic
sciences.

Hafez criticism of knowledge and science is at least due to two reasons:
first, disagreement with rational sciences and philosophy in the fourth
and fifth century in the Islam world, which Gazzali is its leader and
the Sufis, such as Ibn Jauzi and Ibn Teymiyyeh, its followers; second,
disagreement with pedantries of the superficial scientists and the
avaricious hypocrites and sanctimonious during the time of Hafez
(Khorramshahi, 1993, Vol. 2, p. 991).

Such learning, science and intellect are obstacles of attaining a true
insight and knowledge because it is possible for man to require this
insight and knowledge when he is freed from the shackles of materialism,
egoism, ambitiousness, and pretentiousness:

“As long as (in thyself) the wisdom of excellence thou seest (and, of
that wisdom art proud), thou sittest void of divine knowledge ; To thee
, one word I say : Thyself, behold not, so that (in safety) thou mayst
escape.”

Hafez has criticized the “intellect” in some of his poems, but “his
purpose is not to dispraise the innate intellect, but he wants to
confront giving extremist validity to intellect, and oppose putting it
against intuition, spiritual insight, mysticism, and love.” And the
college, which is the promoter and disseminator of such intellect and
knowledge, is in contrast and conflict with love, intuition, and
insight. It is not confirmed by Hafez, even it is very dreary and gloomy
for him:

“Now, weariness of the (useless) disputation of the (outward) college,
hath my heart taken:

Once, awhile (only) the service of the beloved (the perfect murshid) and
of wine (of love) I will do.”

“Seek the book of verse (truths and subtleties) and make way to the
desert (choose solitude) (’Tis the time of justice.) What time is this
for the college, and the argument of the Kashf-i-Kashshaf?

“Yesterday, the Head of the college was intoxicated; and gave decision,
Saying: “Wine is unlawful, but (is) better than the property of legacies
(obtained by fraud).”

In the two above poems, Hafez mentions “Kasf-I-Kashshaf, on the subject
matters, and administering the school(s) of endowments and “he names the
formal college and book tauntingly and bitterly” (Khorramshahi, 1993,
Vol. 1, p. 275).

Hafez addresses, with much emphasis, the unaware persons and wants them
to become aware of the facts of the universe (1997, p.554), because if
they do not change themselves, they will die from egoism (ibid). Hafez
considers egoism as the worst veil and obstacle in the way of achieving
elevation, knowledge and submission to God.

The great wish of Hafez is the purification of all humans from what is
bad (Eslami Nadushan, 1995, p.19). Therefore, Hafez does not confirm a
school in which controversies, arguments and discussions do not lead to
a truth and cause pedantry and hypocrisy (1997, p.433). Hafez believes
that carnal desires and worldiness are the greatest obstacles or
attainment for sacred goals.

According to Hafez, seeing and comprehension of truth determines worth
of every person (1997, p.370). But Hafez speaks of, conceit of science
and science without action (that proves that science) and complains of
them (ibid, p.521 and p.122).

Hafez introduces elevation and perfection obtained through submission to
God and His worship. Undoubtedly those who can achieve such station have
known and recognized God. Therefore, the goal of education can be
acquisition of knowledge and acquisition of love and nearness to God.

Sa’di considers forsaking carnal desires as the cause of acquisition of
real knowledge (1995, p.947). That’s the reason why he emphasizes that
truth should be searched for in those ones who have succeeded to forsake
their carnal desires (ibid, p.796).

Also, Sa’di introduces a superficial scholar whose action does not prove
his or her knowledge, as those individuals who suffer in vain, and make
effort in vain (Alavi, 2002, p.186). Sa’di believes that committing
crimes and doing sins is much more objectionable from scholars as
compared with others (ibid). Even, Sa’di introduces knowledge as the
factor of nurturing religiosity (ibid, p.214).

Sa’di believes that a man is lucky and prosperous has provided a
provision from knowledge for himself (1996). Sa’di introduces science
and knowledge as the heritage of God’s prophets (Alavi, 2002, P.180).

Sa’di introduces the wise persons as the pure gold that everywhere they
go all people do know their values, while the ignorant are like
counterfeit jewelry that are alone and outsider in their own home (ibid,
p.180).

Sa’di strongly emphasizes that “knowledge” is the factor of nurturing
“religiosity” in humans (Alavi, 2002, p.214). Thus, he takes emphasis on
this fact that people not to waste their valuable times learning
superficial sciences, and appeal to those sciences which lead them to
perfection (Sa’di, 1374, p.847).

Sa’di considers humanity, magnanimity and courtesy as the knowledge, or
the essence of knowledge. Thus, from his viewpoint, if a human being
lacks such characteristics he is only apparently human, and will be
inwardly as an animal (ibid, p.974).

Sa’di has a comprehensive view of education. He considers all kinds of
education and considers them as complementary of each other. According
to Beheshti, Faqihi and Abuja’fari (2001), kinds of education from the
viewpoint of Sa’di can be classified as follows:

1. **Intellectual Education:** Sa’di considers intellect as the great
gift of God. He believes that if intellect governs man’s existence and
being, then the carnal soul will have no power to fight with intellect,
and man will be able to reach perfection. It is in this way that man
speaks thoughtfully, avoids pretentiousness, takes lessons from every
happening, swallows his anger, quells his lust, and is not avaricious.

Sa’di believes that the soul’s purification and deliverance from the
captivity of gluttony and lust is the first step of intellectual
education. He considers talkativeness, pretentiously not speaking when
it is necessary to speak, and speaking when an event doesn’t deserve
speech as the characteristics of ignorant people.

2. **Religious Education:** Sa’di frequently speaks in *Gulistan* and
*Bustan* of God, His greatness, mercy, forgiveness, kindness, creation
manifestations, and of the hereafter and resurrection day. He invites
people to religion and religious education. He has considers religion
and faith as the basis of a man’s life, and he even considers knowledge
as the means of cultivating religion’s.

He emphasizes knowledge and good deeds in religious education, and
recognizes the religious knowledge as the means of bringing man to his
spiritual purpose. He says good deeds are the result of that religious
knowledge. Sa’di places emphasis on three points in religious education:
1) God’s remembrance, 2) lamentation and supplication for morality, 3)
thinking of the hereafter.

3. **Mystical Education:** Sa’di is aware of mystical thoughts, and he
frequently speaks in his works of mystical education, deep emotion,
exaltation, love, self-sacrifice and detaching God and welcoming
hardships for the sake of God, and annihilation in divine essence.

He has allocated the third part of *Gulistan* to love, deep emotion and
exaltation and says that it is up to the mystic seeker to start the
journey to the infinite region of cognition and mysticism by
self-refinement and overcoming the carnal soul, until he gradually
reaches a place where there is no trace of his own name and remembrance.

4. **Moral Education:** Sa’di frequently speaks of moral virtues and
high human values such as forgiveness, chivalrousness, sympathy,
compassion, justice, magnanimity, goodness, righteousness, and
contentment. in *Gulistan* and *Bustan*, and has allocated many chapters
of these two books to moral education.

He considers himself to be an educator of morality and as an admonisher.
Sa’di’s art is in his ability to express skillfully and artistically the
moral virtues and admonishments using beautiful, eloquent, fluent, and
rhythmical statements in order that the reader might accept them and
might not become tired of them.

Sa’di has particularly emphasized moral education, and has introduced
moral education and acquisition of good morality as the purpose of the
mission of the prophet of Islam and the aim of the Qur’an’s revelation.

He considers bad-temperedness and moral degeneration as factors that
will cause man to fall into a burning hell and eternal punishment. Sa’di
believes that moral education is very difficult and requires much time.
He emphasizes two fundamental points in moral education. Sa’di is of the
opinion that moral education should begin in childhood because if a bad
habit is positioned in a man’s nature or soul, it can’t be easily
omitted.

Secondly, Sa’di believes that the success of moral education is
dependent upon a good educator who has virtue and knowledge, does good
deeds, has a right speech, and has educated his own soul before
educating others.

Mutahhari (1997) takes much emphasis on intellectual development and
reasoning in students so that they achieve a position they might be able
to identify and differentiate goodness from badness and have a critical
thinking.

Intellect in itself is not sufficient; rather it is necessary that
knowledge and science to be added to it, so that it might be cultivated.
It is also necessary that we make free our intellects from the
indoctrinations of the environmental norms and habits, and try not to
follow the majority if we see that they go astray. In other words, we
should have a scientific spirit (Mutahhari, 1997).

He introduces man’s intentions as the spirit of worship. Those worships
can be accepted by God and are effective for humans which their doers
have a good intention for the sake of God.

Mutahhari (1996) considers self- esteem as the center of Islamic ethics.
He emphasizes this Islamic tradition that whosoever knows oneself, will
surely know one’s God. He also says that it is up to all of us to know
ourselves in order that we might discover how to be and how to behave.

Qorbani (2005) introduces the properties and characteristics of the
Universal Perfect Man from the viewpoint of Mutahhari as follows:

• Faith and belief to God

• Moderation and harmony between values and aptitudes

• Being of service to God’s creatures

• Freedom, so that one does not put up with any compulsion, not to be
slave of any power, and select all (good) things freely

• Having a spiritual suffering; because of lack of harmony with this
world. Man has to struggle for eternality, and getting attach to the
Supreme Deity.

Mutahhari believes that one of the reasons for lack of success in the
refinement of the soul is that moral education among us has reduced to
instruction and teaching, not in the form of constructiveness and
treatment (EFALB, 2007).

Mutahhari (1991) believes the cognition which is obtained through man’s
senses is called “superficial” cognition but the kind of cognition
obtained trained through “intellect or reason” is “deep cognition”.
Sense and imagination are considered as preparing factors for intellect
to make conceptual form which is proportionate to the intellectual or
reasoning faculty (Mutahhari, 1987).

According to Tabataba’i (1987), speculation and reflection on man’s
status and paying attention to the Qur’anic verses indicate that human
theoretical sciences, i.e. the knowledge of properties of things, spring
from senses which intellectual knowledge follows. As for practical
sciences which are concerned with piety, impiety, corruption and
righteousness of affaires, these sciences are obtained through divine
inspiration which have been placed in man’s hearts and natures.

The third kind of knowledge that roots from divine inspiration can be
effective whenever the second kind of knowledge is competent and grows
correctly as intellect can be effective when man is stable in his
natural piety and religion. God says in the Qur’an: “And none do mind
except those having understanding (Al-Emran: 7).

The Qur’anic statements both in extending religious sciences and
teaching useful sciences to people, regarding the details which possess
sensory properties, uses such verses as the followings which refer to
man’s senses: Did you not see?, do you not see?, did you see? and, etc;

As for the intellectual generalities which are related to material and
immaterial general facts, even out of matters and sensory things of
environment, the Qur’an does introduce “intellect” as a reliable source
and uses such sentences as: “for the people who reflect and rationalize,
the people who think or reflect, the people who remember or remind
themselves of their actions, the people who comprehend’, and etc.

In practical propositions which concern good and evil, profit and loss
in piety and ugliness, the Qur’an refers to divine inspiration and
mentions those things that man can understand through his inner
inspiration and uses statements as “this is better for you”; “his heart
is verily sinful” etc.

Tabataba’i (1987) refers to this fact that despite being more than three
hundred verses in the Qur’an which invite people to thinking, reminding,
and reasoning, or teach the prophet of Islam an argument for proving a
truth or wiping out any vanity, there is not even one verse in the
Qur’an that God has ordered His bondmen to believe unknowingly or
anything else which God has ordained, or go away blindly.

The world is just like a book written by an aware and informed author,
each sentence and chapter of which consists of some meanings, subjects
and purposes. A discipline applied in words and sentences is of
particular precision, and indicates a special aim.

Everyone can somewhat read the sentences of the creation book and
understand some meanings from them, and find out the purpose of the
author of this great book. Everyone can comprehend clearly the wise
systems and signs and symbols of prudence in the reaction of the world.
Thus, the Qur’an invites and leads all human beings to study the
creation and structure of creatures in order that they might recognize
and know God.

This fact has also been much emphasized in the speeches of the
infallible Imams of the religion (of Islam) (Tabataba’i; Footnote by
Mutahhari, undated).

Tabataba’i (1990) in the interpretation of the verse***, “Certainly We
sent our apostles with clear arguments, and sent down with them the Book
and the balance that men may conduct themselves with equity”, (Surah
al-Hadid, 57: 25)*** says that the Qur’an explains the meaning of divine
legislations of the religion through sending the messengers and divine
scriptures and balance, and adds that the purpose from all of these is
that people become accustomed to justice.

Tabataba’i (1990) in the nineteenth volume of al- Mizan Interpretation
with regard to one of the verse of the Qur’an: ***“He is who raised
among the illiterates an Apostle from among themselves, who recites to
them His communications and purifies them, and teaches them the Book and
the wisdom, although they were before certainly in clear error”***
***(Sura al-Jomu’ah, 62:2),*** states that the word “purification” means
pure growth, growth which is accompanied by blessing divine grace.
Therefore, the reason why the Qur’an says the prophet purifies people,
is that he makes their morality virtuous and their deeds rightful. As a
result, they reach perfection in their humanity, their status become
good in the world and in the hereafter, they live prosperously, and die
prosperously.

Factors of Education
--------------------

According to Khajeh Naseer human’s deeds, behaviors and thoughts are
among those factors which make their personality, in such a manner that
when an action is repeated, it influences people’s inner self and it
gradually forms permanent and firm disposition and becomes so hard that
is not easily perishable and transitory.

Therefore, one who lives thinking always concerning the Origin and
Return day, his or her soul is affected accordingly and accepts those
states consistent with such thought and effects. One of the other
influencing factors on man’s personality is a companion and playmate.
Thus, it is up to all people to socialize and associate with those who
are pure from evils and adorned with virtues.

On the basis of this, those who seek perfection, should search for an
anthropos teleios (the perfect man) and associate with him and accept
his speech so that they might reach to perfection, because every being
who wants to attain perfection, should attain herself or himself to a
more perfect being in order that it may enjoy its perfection.

It should be noted in this regard that the highest companionship and
association is association with God, His name and his remembrance and
surrounding to Him that gives a divine color to human’s behavior and
thought (Beheshti, Abuja’afari & Faqihi, 2000).There are many factors
which are effective in one’s education. Two most important factors in
this field are: heritage and environment.

Ghazali, following Islam, accepts the effect of heritage in human’s
education. He also refers to some Islamic traditions to mention the
importance of individual heritage and its role in creating the
personality backgrounds in a child. Therefore, Ghazali deems it
necessary that a spouse should be righteous, pious, faithful and
friendly.

He emphasizes that the people not give in marriage their girls to
ill-tempered, weak in faith men. That’s because consideration of these
facts does not let reprehensible heritage factors affect the growth and
development of a child’s personality.

On the other hand, Ghazali also accepts the influence of environment in
education of people. The environmental factors can be divided into two
groups: first) non-humanistic factors, which are divided into natural
and supernatural factors. Second) humanistic factors, which are divided
into family, school, community (group of friends), and individual
factors.

As for natural factors, Ghazali does consider the instructional role of
nature, and according to this, has invited people to external
(objective) Journey. Ghazali believes in the effect of supernatural
factors on human’s life, personality and education. He considers God as
the basis and principle in mankind’s life and his personality creation
and education, and other things are considered only as some means or
instruments.

Ghazali also believes that a true knowledge is the result of
illuminative disclosure and intuition that he calls such knowledge,
“God-given knowledge” and considers it as a divine gift. As for the
other factors, Ghazali mentions the roles and duties of parents,
teachers, friends, and students.

Observing such duties and tasks causes they might have very good
influences on pupils and students (Rafiei, 2002).The principle that all
philosophers and moralists have agreed upon it, is this fact that the
ultimate aim or goal of seeking knowledge and education is a religious
aim, and as Ghazali says this aim is learning a knowledge which is
useful in the hereafter and encourages its learner to obey God and
brings the learner to a certitude that its the source and origin of the
knowledge.

Khajeh Naseer also has considered it compulsory for learners to set
obtaining God’s satisfaction and purifying ignorance from themselves and
other ignorant and revival of the religion and keeping it through
promotion of good and prevention of evil about themselves and their
relatives as far as possible (Ali & Reze; translation, criticism and
additions by Rafiee, 2005).

Ghazali has considered teacher as the successor of the prophet of Islam
in guidance of people provided that he or she is adorned with some morel
virtues including: endurance, gratitude, and trust in God, certitude,
open handedness, contentment, and tranquility of the soul, patience,
humbleness, knowledge, truth, modesty, loyalty, dignity, and equanimity.

If all of these admirable characteristics are in a teacher, then he will
be a light of the prophet’s lights that deserves to be followed by
others. Ghazali is of the opinion that those involved in instruction,
have accepted a great work, then they should respect manners and duties
of being a teacher (Ali & Reza; translation, criticism and additions by
Rafiee, 2005).

Ghazali believes that nutrition, parents, school, companions, exercise,
encouragement, etc. are effective in education (Howzaeh- university
Co-Operation Center, 1993, P.305).

According to Moulavi, interaction of humans, is of the important
foundations of education. People are affected by different factors such
as parents, educators, teachers, friends, social and environmental
conditions and situations.

On the other hand, good or bad behaviors and actions of human beings
make their dispositions, and their intentions, thoughts, attitudes,
beliefs, inner things make their appearance. In fact, apparent deeds and
behaviors and inner intentions and beliefs are always in continuous
interaction until man’s personality and character is created. Moulavi
has mentioned such interaction in different parts of his poems and
writings.

He has explained the influence on people by their educators, friends,
companions, temptations, imaginations, thoughts, etc., and considering
all of these, he has deemed it impossible that one can take the way of
happiness without a guarranted and secure model and example. As regards
good and bad thoughts, temptation and imagination to beauty, he believes
that bad thoughts of humans make them sensitive, depressed, out of
spirits, and disappointed.

Moulavi is of the opinion that some one’s speech, behavior, insight and
thinking make their real personality and character, and their
personality structure is influenced by them. Sins make man’s spirit
declined. He also considers the decline and depression of spirit, and
happiness and cheerfulness of one’s spirit as a being influenced by
actions and behaviors. Man’s spirit tends to egoism due to false
imagines and illusions, vanities, such as servility, eulogy, flattering
and his heart gradually becomes sick and he violates.

The basis of all of these is baseless imagines and invalid fancies.
Even, it is peoples’ vanities that has caused some wars, boast, disgrace
and all that they have been involved in (Beheshti, Abuja\`afari &
Faqihi, 2000,pp. 201-204).

Ibn Khaldun believes that there are different factors which are
effective in man’s education. These factors can be classified into three
groups: social, psychological, and natural. Social factors are divided
into: life situation, social situation, job situation, and fanaticism.
Psychological factors are divided into: intimacy, habit, imitation.
Natural factors are divided into: weather, existence environment, and
kind of food (Beheshti, Faqihi & Abuja’afari, 2001, pp. 95-108).

Mutahhari (1997) introduces the following items as the factors of
education:

• enforcement of will power; and worship

• affection, the enforcement of the sense of seeking truth

• meditation or watching over the self, and self- examination

• thinking (thought), affection to friends of God, marriage, striving in
the way of God

• work (having an occupation).

Sa’di places much emphasis on the determinative role of inheritance and
heritage in mankind, to the extent that he says, “An evil root will not
thrive in a goodly shade. To educate the worthless is like throwing a
walnut upon a dome. Though the clouds should pour down the water of
life, you would never gather fruit from the branch of the willow. Waste
not your time on low people, for we can never obtain sugar from the
reed.

The wolf’s whelp will at length become a wolf, although it be brought up
along with men. How can anyone form a good sword out of bad iron? O ye
philosophers, it is impossible to convert a worthless wretch into a good
man. The rain, in whose nature there is no partiality, produces tulips
in the garden, but only weeds in a barren soil.

A sterile soil will not yield spikenard, waste not then seed upon it”
(*Gulistan*, chapter I, tale IV). In another tale, he says, “When nature
has given capacity, instruction will make impression; but if iron is not
of a proper temper, no polishing will make it good” (*Gulistan*, chapter
VII, tale I).

Sa’di believes that “a capacity without education is deplorable”
(*Gulistan*, chapter VIII, tale LVI). He gives some examples of this,
saying that “the education is the same, but the capacities are
different; although silver and gold are produced from a stone, yet these
metals are not to be found in every stone.

The star Canopus shines all over the world, but the scented leather
comes only from Yemen” (*Gulistan*, chapter VII, tale VI). Therefore,
Sa’di concludes that “an education without capacity is thrown away”
(*Gulistan*, chapter VIII, tale LVI).“A student without inclination is a
lover without money; a traveler without observation, is a bird without
wings; a learned man without works, is a tree without fruit; and a
devotee without knowledge, is a house without a door” (*Gulistan*,
chapter VIII, tale LXXI).

In spite of this, Sa’di emphasizes the role of education in childhood
and believes, “He who is not taught good manners in his childhood will
have no good qualities when he arrives at manhood” (*Gulistan*, chapter
XII, tale III). Sa’di likens a child to a piece of green wood that can
be bent as much as we please, but when it dries, it cannot be made
straight without fire (ibid).

Sa’di believes that good children are so important for their parents and
society that “it is better in the opinion of the wise that a woman in
labor should bring forth a serpent than wicked children” (*Gulistan*,
chapter VII, tale X).Therefore, it is up to educators to teach wisdom to
their sons. He counsels, “If you desire your name to be remembered,
teach your son wisdom and judgment” (*Bustan*, pp. 382-383).

Sa’di places so much emphasis on intellect that he believes if such a
son: “lacks both these assets, you will die, and have no descendants”
(p. 383). Sa’di admonishes that it is up to the parents and educators to
take care of their sons and bring them comport, “so that their eyes are
not fixed at others’ hands, because he who shows no care of his
offspring will see him cared for by others and roaming about (*Bustan*,
p. 384).


