Introduction By Imam Ali {peace Be Upon Him} Foundation
=======================================================

The root of Islamic education gain its fountain head from what came in
the Book of Allah the most High in the origin and good elevated Ethics
till the prophet {s.a.w.a} said: "My Lord educates me and give me a
sound education". When we ponder the situations of the Ignorant society
the prophet was sent to,

we meet that they were completely lack of spiritual personality or a
commended conduct........ Then ponder over how the holy Prophet was able
in the midst of this tedious environment with morale and in a very short
period of time to produce from them the best Nation among men. Verily
the Prophet {s.a.w.a} was able to do that due to his high level of
Ethics and his faith for human personality and his due respect to it.

That is why Allah the most High has said in his respect: "Surely thou
art upon a mighty morality".

When we ponder over his words, advices and his sermons in this field,
we will see the purpose and what it meant, it is in it self a law
suitable to emerge an origination on it, then his sayings {s.a.w.a}
"Good child is a scent from the scents of the Paradise" or his saying
{s.a.w.a} "Who ever kiss his child, Allah will write good deeds for his
and whoever teaches him Quran, the parents will be prayed for and
covered with two garment that the inhabitant of the Paradise shines from
their light".

You will found that mercy, love and sympathy drop from this word that
the child needs from the foster parents in order to emerge as a good and
fair origination.

When Imam Ali's {peace be upon him} foundation put forward before the
readers of this book that was translated to English language it aimed to
easy the ways to attain the fundamentals of Islamic education, believing
on the responsibility that was on her, that Islam present the divine
great trust to the people with its magnificent pictures and good
condition.

**INTRODUCTION BY MARKAZ RISALLAH.**

The past and present scholars of child training have tried to guide to
the comprise method of training with precise ways, fundamental and a
guaranteed criterions by studying what is fit for the stage of
childhood. In this respect they have given much struggles and continuous
hardship till they were able to reach views,

suggestions and advices that will lead one to value and benefit (in
terms of theoretical aspect) but with all this effort they were not able
to precise an accurate method which is reliable in solving difficult
problems that will protect this sensitive stage of human life. They were
also not able to solve the daily increasing difficulties one after the
other that are facing the fathers, the mothers (parents) and teachers in
this respect.

Unfortunately may be many Muslims have followed on the western schools
(especially this practitioner fields) to we achieve from them their
method of training, and it miss them that there are successful remedy in
Islamic laws to solve all this difficulties for them. Verily there are
assistance and unexhausted advices, guidance,

teachings and the life history of the great Messenger of Allah (Peace
be upon him and his descendants) and that of the biography of the
Ahlulbait (Peace be upon them) if they utilized in the field of
education and applied in many areas, it could have been enough to
establish the best fundamentals and the highest exemplary in the mind of
the child to set him up as a fair and sound formation and to make him a
sound personality that will be able in his own role to build the
community.

Verily the Islamic method that is able to precise its feature and its
laws relying on the holy Quran, the tradition of the biography of the
Prophet and all that was transmitted from the infallible Imams (Peace be
upon them) aimed at establishing a prudent education for the child
before the commencement of coagulation of the embryo in the womb of the
mother and it continue with him till he is matured from incapability
passing through the stage of pregnancy, birth, breast feeding and early
childhood.

O' my dear readers the book before you was able to precise the feature
of Islamic education that in a form to prepare the child
psychologically, mentally and morally base on the verses of the Quran,
the traditions from our great Prophet (Peace be upon him and his
descendants) and from the Ahlulbait (Peace be upon them). It also
benefits from the modern studies in this field.

Our center is pleased to present this beneficial and interesting
lessons in giving its quota in assistance to the fathers, mothers and
workers in the child education, that was to simplify the clear and most
perfect method and secured in bringing up a child with a sound and good
originations, so that he gives his desired role.


