Fifthly : Equality Between Distress and Leniency
================================================

Honoring the child, doing goods to him, making him to feel love and
sympathy, making him to feel his status in the society, that he is
accepted by his parent and the community, he should not exceed the
proper bond or limit and should not allow complete freedom to act
according to his wishes.

It is incumbent on the parents to lay down equality method in their
dealing with the child. Don't be so much lenience to reach the utmost
limit of leniency and not to be severely in all that he committed but
leniency and severity at their limit. Let moderation prevail between the
two (i.e. leniency and severity) in all stand till he transcend the
stage of childhood with peace and tranquility. He will then
differentiate between the beloved and the disregarded conducts because
the first five or six years in the child's life is where he constitute
his personal mode of life.

Verily the narrations have laid emphasis on moderation while dealing
with child without negligence or excessiveness.

Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: "The worst father is he whose
kindness has led to immoderate ......"[^30].

It is incumbent on the parents when the child committed some
disagreeing conduct to make him feels the wrong of this disagreed
conduct and try to convinced him to abstain from it, he should reproach
or punishes him spiritually and not corporal punishment if conviction
and leniency are not beneficial because psychological punishment is
better than corporal punishment just as Imam Musa bn Jaafar Al-kazim
(peace be upon him) answered on how to deal with the children and said :
"Don't beat him, dissociate with him but not for a long time"[^31].

In a repetition of the child's short-comings Imam did not call for
leniency and tolerance and did not also call for continuous spiritual
punishment (i.e. dissociation) but he calls for moderation and balance
between punishment and leniency.

Negligence and immoderate leads to negative effect on the child in all
aspect like mentally, psychologically and morally.

It is incumbent in light of free educational method to create
moderation between commendation and reproach because excess commendation
is like reproach for its effect on the child emotionally and makes him
anxiously worried. The child that (rise from excess compassion will not
be able to resist the changes in life before him or to strive with
it)[^32].

The emotional maturity of a child who is babied delayed and his
childhood period prolonged before him.[^33].

He will then remain in need of his parents in all stances that face
him, this situation continued with him till his old age. That is why we
can find youth and matured ones in our society waiting for the community
to call for their needs or to support their views or to praise and
commend them. They are not also able to confront the problems standing
before their aspirations. It is the same saying to the child whose
conduct is disregarded or who is subjected to insult or excessive
reproach from the side of the parents or the children that are made to
be accountable to all that occurred from them. Like wise Imam Ali (peace
be upon him) said: "Immoderate in reproach rises the deep flame"[^34].

That is why we find in the community the phenomenon of the perverted
ones whose attitudes are hostile towards others; they were subjected to
insult and continuous punishment.

It is then incumbent on the parents to laid down a program enlightening
the children the good and bad deeds so that commendation and reproach
will base on what he has committed and it enable us to plant love for
good deeds and hatred for bad deeds in his mind. In this stage you
should struggle to strengthen the inner-most of the child so that it
will be his future plans. We should plant fear from committing bad deed
and motivate him for good deeds instead of fear from punishment and
motivation for commendation and laudation.

The parents should let commendation and reproach sincerely for the aim
of educating the children and should not reflect their psychological
status while educating them like he who was confronted with problems and
cast his anger on the child without any justification.

In this respect the holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) has forbade educating while on a state of anger[^35].

There are some situations the parents have to be very vigilant so that
reverse effect should not be on the child's sense and psychology. For
example a child that break in to pieces some costly items in the house
he deems he has done a nice job by making it two through breaking it and
he is demanding praise and commendation for the well done job, the child
will be surprise of being punished instead of commendation. The
punishment will then have its psychological effect on the child.

In another situation some times the child may be in need of reproach or
blame or abandonment or corporal punishments as DR. Sapok says (Verily
the children in most cases are happy because the father has laid
impudence for them)[^36].

The child needs a balance attention when he is sick without negligence
nor immoderate (i.e. no excess attention nor absence of attention)
moderate is better, and make him feel of being attended to a reasonable
limit because the exaggeration method taking by the mother when their
children are in sick has psychological effects on the child even at his
old age, it will create a gloomy child from it, with much complaint and
quick agitation.

It is incumbent for the parents to observe one and agreed method while
educating the child so that they can realize the right and mistake in
his conduct. The mother should not contradict the father when he
reproach the child for a certain committed mistake like wise in
commendation because the conduct disorder and psychological sickness
that affected the child in his youth and as a man in future is as a
result of the wrong treatment of the parents .....

Like contradiction in method of dealings, swing between tolerance and
stress.... verification and negligence, all these development will
neither create hostility or criminality or psychological chilliness or
frustration and scruple or excess depending on others, babied conduct
and personal weakness.[^37].


**Sixthly : Equity Between Children**

The first child in the family is in position of love, sympathy and
protection by the parents being the first and the only child. He was
granted excess attention and leniency all his psychological and material
needs was fulfilled. The parents will try all their possible best to
please them in different means by providing all his needs in terms of
dresses, playing instruments and other things of this nature.

He always accompany his parents either the mother or the father or both
of them (in another expression) he attain exceptional attention. This
type of child with all these attention and leniency will encounter a
serious problem when they give birth a second child, he will then
commence anxiety for the second child, that there will be a competition
in all angles, the new child will compete with him in terms of the
parent's love and care for him, his position as the only child before,
his playing instruments, jealousness will then commence right from the
first day he was born.

He will engage the parents in a new unforeseen situation including the
safety of the mother and the child. If the parents are not vigilant on
this phenomenon the jealousy of the first child may gradually change to
enmity and hatred for the new born baby. This enmity will reflect in his
status emotionally and psychologically. This increases whenever
attention and care are focus on the newly born baby which will remove
the first child from the circles of care and attention. It is then
incumbent on the parents to heed to that and protect this new phenomenon
to leave the first child to enjoyed the same attention and care and make
him feel love and sympathy and to love the second child.

Let him satisfied that he will become brother or sister to him, that he
will assist and comfort him, he is not a rival to him in terms of love
and care, and it is incumbent for the both of them in reality to believe
this inducement. The mother should rise to embrace and kiss him while
the father should rise to respond to his needs or buying new playing
instruments for him and other means of showing him real attention and
care. The optimum resolution is to make equity and equality between the
first and the second child because that is the protection and remedy for
jealousy, hatred and enmity.

The importance of equity and equality becomes certain when the both
child advance in age because their feelings and emotions developed and
they gradually matured linguistically and mentally which enable them
comprehend the meaning of equity and equality. They can also identify
its substantial in a real feasible.

There are many related traditions emphasizing the spread of equity
between the children. The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his
descendants) said: "Justify between your children as you wants them to
justify between you in obedience and kindness"[^38].

Justice between the children is general and comprises all portion of
life that is surrounding the child spiritually and materially. I.e. to
satisfy all their material needs and their spiritual needs in love,
commendation and care.

It came from the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) that
he saw a man with two children kissing one of them and leaving the
other, the Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his descendants)
said: "You should have do equality between them"[^39].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Verily Allah
the most high wants you to justify between your children even in
kissing"[^40].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) emphasize on equity
in presents and gifts even in food, drinks, dresses, playing instruments
and so on as it was related from the saying s of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his descendants): "Do equality to your children in
presents, but if I am to favor any of them, I will prefer the female
child"[^41].

The Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his descendants) said:
"Make justice between your children in dividing as you want them to do
you justice in obedience and kindness"[^42].

Justice doesn't mean "there should be no preference" because some
children attract the parents more than the other. From Rifa'ah Al-Asadi,
he said: (I inquire from Abu Al-Hassan Musa bn Jaafar (peace be upon
him) about a man having many children from different mother, can he
prefer one of them than the others? He (peace be upon him) replied
positively, it doesn't matter, my father (peace be upon him) does prefer
me than Abdullah my brother)[^43].

Preference should be in veil and not to be manifested before the
children, he should conceal it in his mind but in reality he should not
act except with justice and equality as Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq
(peace be upon him) has said: "My father said: by Allah I will do to
some of my children, sit him on my thigh, love him much, gratified him
much, that the Right is for other than him from among my children but
for protecting him from others so that they should not act on him what
Yousuf's brother done to him"[^44].

Injustice has negative effect on the children psychologically that
leads to the plant of the spirit of hatred and aversion between them, as
a result of that it will lead to intense enmity and unfair decision like
that of Yousuf's brother s when they threw him into the well.

The history has been on the base of spreading equity between the
children of same father or of same kinship.

It was related from Abdullah bn Abbas, he said: (I was with the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his descendants) while on his left thigh Ibrahim
his son and on his right thigh Al-Hessian bn Ali, he sometimes kisses
this and sometimes kisses the other) [^45]

Ibrahim is the son of the Prophet while Hussein is the son of his
daughter but with this difference in relation he (peace be upon him and
his descendants) did not differentiates in his dealing between them.

In narrations (The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) was
praying while Alhassan and Al-Hussein came to climb him, he gently took
them when he rises his head, when he return they return, when he
finishes he seated this at his right thigh and the other at his left
thigh)[^46].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) was on the pulpit
given sermon while Alhassan and Al-Hussein came across him walking (The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) get down from the
pulpit, he takes them and place them before himself)[^47].

Among the substantial of equity and equality is not to make comparism
between the children in their physical, spiritual and psychological
attributes. It is not proper to say this one is more beautiful than the
other or more brilliant or more moral because it will be source of
grudges and comparism between the children, because it also leads to
jealousy from some of them and to competition.

Comparism leads to lost of trust between the brothers and the opposite
is correct.

(Not differentiating in dealing is the greatest support to create
exchange of confident atmosphere between the child and other members of
the family)[^48].

We can observe from most fathers un-intended stance like his saying:
verily in my son this resemble me and that does not resemble me, even
this comparism does its duty in jealousy, rivalry and the better is to
refrain from it.

Among equity is not to distinguish between boy and girl because the
distinction has negative effect on the girl's psychology and planting of
enmity and grudges between the sister and her brother. This phenomenon
is common in most countries when the parent's inclination towards the
male child was more than that of the female child. They fulfill the
request of the boy more than that of the girl's requests.

Narrations came in order to minimize this phenomenon by granting
exceptional providence for a baby girl and educates parents on that
basis as it was narrated by bn Abbas from the Messenger of Allah (peace
be upon him and his descendants): "Whoever enters market and purchases
presents for his family is like who takes charity to the needy peoples
and he should commence with the females before the males ....."[^49].

Commencing with the female will not have any negative effects on the
male because he sees it natural that one should receive before the
other, what mostly silent the child and not to considered it a
distinction, if he obtain the gift from the parents, there is no
difference whether he is the first or the second.

Equity between the children doesn't mean we should not adopt
encouraging methods by giving additional gift to who executes good
deeds. It may be beneficial and permissible competition between the
children which did not have any negative effects in their psychology but
they will consider it as permissible and natural Right.

It is incumbent on the parents when dealing with the children to take
care of this situation, knowing the psychology of their children by
inventing successful ways of encouragement that conform with their
psychological status, so that they shouldn't feel injustice. No matter
how justice and equity is established it will not put an end to some
negative phenomenon like quarrel and conflict between the children. It
is a natural phenomenon that occurs between the children in all or most
of the families.

Serious argument and hand to hand fight do occur between the children,
one will accuse his brother or for remising his Right or that he
commence the aggression on him. In this situation the parents should
study the problems objectively that the quarrel and conflict are
natural, if it is simple, uncomplicated and limited; the best is not to
interfere as they will resolve by themselves to put and end to their
quarrel.

It is not proper for the parents or one of them to interfere as a judge
between them because to judge in favor of one against the other will not
conform with implementation of justice and equality with the children
but if the quarrel or the conflict repeated or continued through the day
or it becomes severe and dangerous for the children the parent's role
comes, to intervene and terminate it by issuing order to both of them to
discontinue the conflict or to divert their attention to another topic
entirely and engaged them with it or to intervene by distancing them
from each other but when the issue demand reproach or spiritual
punishment, the better to focus both of them to concord with
implementation of equity between the children.


