Ninethly : Emotional Development
================================

Emotion is among the most important stimulant for action as previously
discussed, emotion commence since the early days of breast feeding stage
then gradually develop when the child advance in age. When his societal
surrounding broadens it influences his emotional development with
changes in the thought the child believe, in the limit of his mental
perception. Whenever the child believe that executing certain duty
pleased his parents or Allah the most High it will induce him to execute
it, the reverse is authentic. Possibly we divide emotion in four parts:
Individual, social, exalted and ethical.

What we mean by individual emotion is the emotion that connect with
ones personality like love for possession, love for independence, love
of ascendancy over others, love for societal status and others to
respect him. These are the emotions that fetch him personal benefit.

Exalted emotion is the emotion that develops in child with the limit of
his mental perception to the elevated exemplary, he will then love to
connect with the ONLY, that is Allah the most High, the source of
kindness, wealth, and mercy and blessing, he will also love good and
reality and there is nothing like attaining personal benefit in it.

The Social emotion is the emotion that prompts one to have connection
with the others starting from the parents, brothers and sisters, close
relations up till the community and the whole human beings.

The ethical emotion is the emotion that has link with prohibited and
none prohibited types of conduct, like the link with truthfulness,
avoiding telling lies and other commendable acts and commendable
morals.

The best ways and method of developing the child's emotion by the
parents is to make him feel of love through encompassing him with
sympathy, mercy and satisfying his spiritual and material needs. When
the child feel all this, he will duly connect with the source of that
love and sympathy which are the parents and that will result to his
trust in them and also to continue to imitate them and he will accept or
satisfy with what will put forward by them regards thought, concept and
others.

The child will be prepared to answer their commandments and executes
their requests. The parents will then has control over his emotion and
will be able to focus him towards a good direction, they should be
following his speeches and activities especially when he is playing, it
will then complement their work on developing and purifying his emotion
in a suitable form with the concept and sound personality and has
created equilibrate types of emotion with him. The most important
emotion that is good to develop is the one towards Allah the most High.
The feeling for love will be developed in him and his trust in Allah and
sanctification to Him.

At a time he believes that Almighty Allah is the source of wealth,
mercy and forgiveness, that He created ever lasting wealth in the
Paradise for the Righteous and Obedient ones. It is compulsory upon the
parents to develop the child's emotion towards the Messenger of Allah
(peace be upon him and his descendants) and the other Messengers and
Prophets and the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them). The best way in this
aspect is through narrating purposeful stories that will accomplish
these two benefits.

Firstly: Deepings their love in his mind.

Secondly: Struggle to let him join their conduct in life.

Different emotion will develop inside him like love for sincerity, love
for braveness, honor and sacrifice, love for sound conduct and
personality. He will slay distance from all that they are distance from,
and will develop the hatred, detestation and disinclined from those that
contradict and stand against them and avoid their ways of life presently
or in future to come.

Among the other method of developing the child's emotion is their
continuous focus and guidance till the child comprehends the permitted
and non permitted conducts and again encouraging having connection and
relation with sound actions and personality. He should encourage with
good words when he gives out something out of his playing instruments to
another child and to replace it for him. Whenever he spokes truth or
honor others or have mercy on the poor or assist his brother or his
parents by executing some work, should be encourage for that by
laudation, praise and commendation before him, the family, his close
relations and his friends.

Dealing with children like friends encourage him to express his
repressed emotion and feelings, this expression is beneficial to
establish equilibrate emotion and refine the unpleased emotion.

Through experience we will find that narrative method as the best
method of developing emotion especially the method that is suitable to
his perception and mental ability. Possibly we can narrate to him
stories of birds and animals that possess good and bad fundamentals. It
will develop the emotion with him towards justice or assistance or
sacrifice or other fundamental ethics. The emotion will be developed by
loving the oppressed ones and hating the oppressors.

Stories about birds and animals are desirable by the children of this
stage; they will listen attentively with interest and more desire than
the real stories that comprise of many occurrences base on the
imagination of the parents while narrating the stories.


**Tenthly : Care For The Orphans**

An orphan feel deprivation after loosing his father or mother or both
of them. Deprivation of satisfying his emotion and spiritual needs,
deprivation of satisfying his material needs like food, drinks and
dresses, he will be befallen with obsessions and fears, predominated by
anxiety and disturbance.

Feeling of deprivation from affection and kindness has its negative
effect on the existence and building the personality of the child.
Through the observation of the society reality we found that most
orphans that didn't get assistance and care from others do personally
disturbed and were befallen with tied psychology and negative agreement
with the community that deprive him from assistance and care. For that
Islam bequeath special guardianship of the orphans even more than other
children. It emphasizes the satisfaction of all of their material and
spiritual needs.

The specified verses of the Qur'an for the guardianship of the orphan
are more than that of the general children.

Satisfaction of the orphan's material needs is the first needs that
Islam laid emphasis on.

Allah the most High said: {And they feed the poor, the orphan and the
prisoner, for the love for Him}[^78].

{.... And to feed in the day of hunger, to an orphan, near of
kin}[^79].

{.... And give the wealth, for love of Him, to kinsfolk and to orphans
and the needy ....}[^80].

Allah the most High makes the Right of the orphan in the Muslim's
wealth. {And know that what ever ye take as spoil of war, Lo! a fifth
there of is for Allah, and for the Messenger and for the kinsman (who
hath need) and orphans and needy ....}[^81].

The most High said: {Say: that which ye spend for good (must go) to
parents and near kindred and orphans and the needy ....}[^82].

The most High has forbade spending the orphan's wealth except in a best
form which has benefits and profitable to him {And approach not the
wealth of the orphan save that which is better, till he reach
maturity}[^83].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Who sustain
an orphan till he is in no need, Allah will make it obligatory because
of that to enter Paradise"[^84].

The prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Whoever
liable for the orphan enters him to his food and drinks, Allah will let
him enters Paradise except he committed unforgivable sin"[^85].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "He was
joining his fingers together and said: I and the guarantor of an orphan
are like this in the Paradise"[^86].

Islamic system considered the satisfaction of the orphan's spiritual
needs like doing well to him and equity with him. Allah the most High
said: {and (remember) when we made a covenant with the children of
Israel (saying): worship none save Allah (only), and be good to parents
and to kindred and to orphans and the needy ....}[^87].

The most High said: {And that ye should deal justly with orphans
.....}[^88].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said : "The best
house among the Muslims is the house having an orphan and they do good
to him and the worst house among the Muslims is the house having an
orphan and they do bad to him"[^89].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) Bequeath on
humoring the orphan, kindness to him and honoring him. The Prophet
(peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Allah urges us to do good
to the orphans for their detachment from their father, Allah will
protect whoever protect them and Allah will honor whoever honored them.
Whoever rub the orphan's head with his hand in kindness to him, Allah
will build a mansion for him in the Paradise wider than this world and
all that is in it equivalent to the numbers of hair his hand
touches"[^90].

Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) encourage us to deal kindly and
sympathize with the orphan and said: "There is no servant that rubs his
hand on the head of an orphan in sympathy with him except Almighty Allah
grant him Light on resurrection day equivalent to the number of his
hair"[^91].

Among the protection of the orphan is to solve the problems facing him
that can cause him pains, anxiety and disturbance. The Prophet (peace be
upon him and his descendants) said : "The Throne shakes for the cries of
an orphan when he cries, Allah the most High will say : O' my Angels be
my witness that I will pleased whoever make him to silent and I will
pleased him"[^92].

From The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) "If an orphan
cries on the earth, Allah will say who makes my servant to weep while I
have taken his father in to the soil?

To my Mighty and Majesty whoever pleased him even though with half
word, I will put him in Paradise"[^93].

Among the recommendation regards the orphan's affair is to make them
happy by satisfying their material or their spiritual needs, from
respect, love or praise, encouragement and others.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said : "Verily
there is a house in the Paradise known as House of happiness none will
enter it except those who make the believing orphan to happy" [^94] .

Giving good education to the orphan is among the care and protection to
them and prepares him to be a good member of the community. The
Commander of the Faithful Ali (peace be upon him) said: "Educate the
orphan the way that you educate your child ...."[^95].

An orphan that obtain care, protection, love and kindness feels at
rest, tranquil and leaves uprightly in his emotion and personality but
in a state of deprivation he will not become upright and may take up by
perverted ones and focus him to unrighteousness and will become a
harmful member to the society.

[^1] - Qaamoos Attifl Attibbi: 294.

[^2] - Manla yahdurhu faqeeh - by suduq vol-1:182/ 3rd ch - the
punishment for children regards prayer - printed by Daru Atta'aruuf lil
matbu'aat 1401 A.H.

[^3] - Ilmi Nnafs Attarbawi vol-2:132 -1407 A.H. By DR Ali Mansoor.

[^4]- Mashaakilil Aabaa'a fi Ttarbiyatil Abnaa'a: 248.

[^5] - Mashaakilil Aabaa'a fi Ttarbiyatil Abnaa'a: 251

[^6] - Kanzul Umaal vol-16: 456/45409.

[^7] - Tuhfal Uquul: 368.

[^8] - Taareekh Yaquubi vol-2:320.

[^9] - Qaamoos Attifl Attibbi: 328.

[^10] - Ilmi Nnafs: 264 by Abdul Azeez Al-Qusi.

[^11] - Ilmi Nnafs Attarbawi: 100- 101- by fakhir Aqil.

[^12]- Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol-2:618.

[^13] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol-2:626.

[^14] - Uddati Ddaa'i: 61.

[^15] - Al-kafi vol-6:50/6 Children's obedience.

[^16] - Ilmi Ijtimaa'a: 252- by Lanqula Al-Haddaad printed by Daru
Rraa'id 2nd edition 1982 A.D.

[^17] - Attarbiya WA binaa'il Ajyaal: 167.

[^18] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol -2: 625.

[^19] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol -2: 626.

[^20] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol -2: 626.

[^21] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 219.

[^22] - Al-kafi vol-6: 50 /6th ch- Good to the children.

[^23] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 220.

[^24] - Uddati Ddaayi: 79.

[^25] - Tuhfal Uquul: 267.

[^26] - Mukhtasar Taareekh Demeshq vol-7:14 by bn Manzoor printed by
Darul Fikr 1st edition 1405 A.H.

[^27] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol-2:69.

[^28] - Tuhfal Uquul: 337.

[^29] - Mashaakilil Aabaa'a: 141.

[^30] - aareekh Yaaquubi vol- 2:320. T

[^31] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol- 22:114.


[^32] - Attifl bainal wiraatha WA ttarbiya vol-2:180 from the book 'we
and the children: 39'.

[^33] - Ilmi Nnafs Attarbawi: 535 - by DR. Fakhir Aqil.

[^34] - Tuhfal Uquul: 84.

[^35] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol- 79: 102.

[^36] - Mashaakilil Aabaa'a: 75.

[^37] - Adwaa'i ala Nnafs bashariyyah: 302 - by DR. Zain Abbas
Ammarah -printed by Daruth thaqafah 1st edition 1407 A.H.

[^38] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 220.

[^39] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 221.

[^40] - Kanzul Amaal vol- 16: 445/ 45350.

[^41] - " " " - 16: 444/ 45346.

[^42] - " " " - 16: 444/ 45347.

[^43] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 221.

[^44] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 12: 626.

[^45] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol- 43: 261.

[^46] - " " "- 43: 275.

[^47] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol- 43: 284.

[^48] - Hadeeth Ila Umahaat: 68.

[^49] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 221.

[^50] - Qaamoos Attifl Attibbi: 221- 222.

[^51] - Al-ilaji Nnafs Al-jamaa'i lil Atfaal: 162 - by Kamiliya Abdul
Fataah printed by maktabatu Nnahdatil misriya 1975 A.D.

[^52] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 222.

[^53] - " " : 222.

[^54] - " " : 223.

[^55] - Mashaakilil Aabaa'a: 106.

[^56] - Attifl bainal wiraatha WA ttarbiya vol- 2: 64, from the book
Nahnu wal- Abnaa'a: 56.

[^57] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol-103: 189.

[^58] - Al-kafi vol- 1: 311 /15th-ch, Book of proof.

[^59] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol-43: 296.

[^60] - Mukhtasar Taareekh Demeshq vol- 7: 10.

[^61] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 2: 626.

[^62] - Qaamoos Attifl Attibbi: 222.

[^63] - Manla yahdurhul faqeeh vol- 3: 312 / 21st ch- The virtues of the
children.

[^64] - Attifl bainal wiraatha WA ttarbiyah vol- 2: 97

[^65] - Qaamoos Attifl Attibbi: 317.

[^66] - Ilmi Nnafs Ususihi watabaqaatihi Attarbawiyyah: 239 8th editions
1978 A.D. by AbdulAzeez Al-Qoosi.

[^67] - Ilmi Nnafs Al-ilaaji: 152 - by DR. Ijlaal Sirri printed by
Alaamul kutb 1st edition 1990 A.D.

[^68] - Mashaakilil Aabaa'a: 282.

[^69] - " " : 283.

[^70] - Ilmi Nnafs Al-Ilaaji: 106.

[^71] - Wasaa'ili sh-shiyyah vol- 20: 133/ 2 ch- 67.

[^72] - " " " - 20: 134/ 7 " .

[^73] - Attarbiya wabinaa'il Ajyaal: 166 - by Anwar Al-jundi 1st edition
printed by Darul kitaab Beirut 1975 A.D.

[^74] - Mashaakilil Abaa'a: 205.

[^75] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 223.

[^76] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 223.


[^77] - Mashaakilil Aabaa'a: 284.

[^78] - Qur'an 76: 8.

[^79] - Qur'an 90:14-15.

[^80] - Qur'an 2:177.

[^81] - Qur'an 8: 41.

[^82] - Qur'an2: 215.

[^83] - Qur'an 6: 152.

[^84] - Tuhfal Uquul: 198.

[^85] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol - 1: 148.

[^86] - Al-mahjatul badaa'i vol - 3: 403.

[^87] - Qur'an 2: 83.

[^88] - " 4: 127.

[^89] - Al-mahjatul badaa'i vol - 3: 403.


[^90] - Al-mahjatul badaa'i vol - 3: 403.

[^91] - Al-mahjatul badaa'i vol - 3: 403.

[^92] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol - 2: 623.

[^93] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol - 2: 623.

[^94] - Kanzul Umaal vol - 3 : 170/ 6008.

[^95] - Al-kafi vol- 6: 48/8 ch- educating the child.


