Chapter Five : the Forth Stage : the Youth and Idolescence Stage
================================================================

The stage commences from conclusion of the seventh year up till
fourteen years of the child's life. It is a stage of preparing the
personality to become a rightly guided, matured and a member of a great
society. From the beginning of this stage or a year before it the child
gradually put an end to imitating the elders and pay attention to what
is surrounding him. Then his mental ability is able to lonely imagined
and able to grasp spiritual understandings.

In this stage the child began to think personally and deem himself as
existing independent entity. He possess desire other than that of the
elders desire, he will try to (challenge by doing what will annoyed the
family to inform them that he is an existing independent entity)[^1].

he will also try to emphasize his independence in different ways and
stands that is contrary to what he was familiar with in the previous
stages, he will choose all that concern or specially for him in a
special form and in a way he understand, he will also possess special
taste in selecting dresses, he will wish to acquire mental and
scientific skillfulness single handed and try to establish social
relationship with other children the way he chooses.

This stage is the most important stage the parents should display
additional educational assistance to the child because this is the first
stage of the child entering in to the social relationship broaden than
before, that is the stage of entering school.

The child's relationship with the parents and the rest members of the
family are among the effective factors in preparing and building the
child's personality. All this relationships in detail leads to special
attributes that accompany the child till his old age. The school also
has a deeper effect on the child's personality where he found different
children of high level of education or less intelligent than him and
more or less active than him (he will obey them or over-come them or
comply with them, which will affect his personal set up)[^2].

There is another factors that has effect on the child's personality,
that is the physical attributions like, tall and short, in terms of huge
and weakness and in terms of healthy and sickness.

Another important factor is the effect of the thought that the child
learns in his building personality, in this stage the child increase his
needs, then it is incumbent on the parents to satisfy him on that[^3].

Among it is his vitality inducement like the need of foods, drinks,
dresses, and the need of psychological and emotional healthiness and
freedom from anxiety need of acceptance by the society during his
relationship with it and so on.

He is in need of care and commendation of his status; he is also in
need to learn necessary skills for his success in the new life.

In addition to that, he is in need of philosophy, thought and
understandings to conform with his level mentally.

This stage is the stage that need a condensed education and condensed
follow up with observation of the independent created by the child.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Child is a
master for seven years, servant for seven years and minister for seven
years"[^4].

The Commander of the Faithful Ali (peace be upon him) said : "Child is
languished for seven years, trained for seven years and engaged for
seven years"[^5].

Imam Jaafar Assadiq (peace be upon him) said: "Leave your child to play
for seven years, trained for seven years and compel him for seven
years"[^6].

This stage is a difficult training stage for the child's desire for
independence and spread of his relationship outside the family, and then
you need continuous struggles in training and supervision in all that
concern the child, in his thought, his emotion, his relationships, his
education and studies in order to satisfy his various needs. The child
need a continuous focusing, guidance, education and assistance to sketch
the ways of life to him and to endure all that occurs from him with
ampleness and open minded accompanied with determination most of the
time. The precise guide posts of this stage are as follows:-


****FIRSTLY: CONDENSED EDUCATION.****

Sound education and good manner are among the important responsibility
on the parents, it is the Right of the child that Islam has made
compulsory on the parents. Child of this stage before his maturity and
age of reasoning, he is in need of condensed education and additional
struggle.

Imam Ali bn Al-Hussein (peace be upon him) said: "As to the Right of
your child .... you are responsible for his guidance, in good manner,
guiding to his Lord and support him in obeying Allah, it is incumbent on
him and his child and he will be rewarded or punished for that, then act
in his issue an embellish action for good effect on him in the instant
world, to be excused before His Lord for what is between you and him
with a nice name teaching good manner and learning Qur'an"[^7].

The criticality of this stage is more need than other stages because
the child is passing through, the parent need divine protection to take
vital responsibility of training. Imam Ali bn Al-Hussein (peace be upon
him) said: "O' Allah favor me by surviving my child .... Control for me
the younger ones among them ....... rectify for me their body, their
religion and their ethics..... And make them men of obedience, Allah's
fearing and percipients.... assist me in educating them, training them
and doing good to them.... protect me and my progeny from the cursed
devil"[^8].

The narrations has emphasize that one should undertake the education
and good manner.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Honor your
children and give them good training"[^9].

The Commander of the Faithful (peace be upon him) said: "Verily the
child has Right on his father and also the father has Right on the
child, obeying the father in every thing except in disobeying Allah is
the father's Right on the child, the child's Right on the father is to
give him good name, good training and to teach him Qur'an"[^10].

Training of this stage is more important than any other stages because
the child's instinct is still fair and pure and accepts what will
deliver to him in directives, guidance and advices before it will be
polluted and intensification of the pollution. It is incumbent on the
parents to utilize the opportunity to take the responsibility of
educating him.

Imam the Commander of the Faithful (peace be upon him) in his Will to
Imam Al-hassan (peace be upon him) said: ".... Verily new mind is like
that of empty earth, it accept anything throws to it, hurry to train the
heart before it becomes hard, engage your mind to receive with
seriousness your view which has suffice you by people of experience in
his experience and purpose ....."[^11].

He (peace be upon him) said: "Educate yourself and your families with
goods and trained them"[^12].

In reality the training system that we want to establish is that of
Islamic system that rotates round the servitude and obedience to Allah
the most High in all aspects of life.

Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace be upon him) said: "Do good acts
and remind your families of it and educate them for obedience of
Allah"[^13].
He (peace be upon him) said: "Ordered them for what Allah has commanded
for and restrain them from what Allah has restrained them from"[^14].

These traditions comprise all of general rules that governed and
support fair training in every part of individual or social life
emotionally and spiritually. When the parents demonstrate excessive
attention to act with the light of educating method, the child will
become a good member of the society.

Verily the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) would do demonstrate special
attentions to educates their children of this stage till they completely
prepare them and they become top and higher exemplary in everything.

The Commander of the Faithful (peace be upon him) in his childhood
stage was trained in the house of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) before he was commissioned as Prophet, he believed in the
early call of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants), he
become sincere in his faith and obedience to Allah and His Prophet.

He was top in braveness and boldness, sacrifice and self sacrifice
generosity, humble, truthfulness and all other moral virtues, He(peace
be upon him)in his own role educates his children in this conformation
by rising to the top and high form of all humbleness and virtues, this
also applies to the rest Imams (peace be upon them).

We will get more responsibility of the parents in training and
educating when they becomes more societal distance form Islam or Islamic
community outwardly and did not adopt the practice of Islamic method in
reality. For the effect on the custom, limitation, thought and unfair
method of training especially media appliances like radio, television,
cinema and others.

spiritual, psychology and emotional training is supplemented with its
second half, that is physical training that is very necessary for child
to save their physical health and to prepare them for physical
activities where as the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants)
urged for physical training and said: "Educate your children how to swim
and how to shoot arrows"[^15].

Imam Musa bn Jaafar Alkazim (peace be upon him) makes taking and
teaching children strenuous issues as recommendation and said: "It is
recommended to train the children in his youth to become tolerant in his
old age"[^16].

Physical soundness has a clear effect on psychological soundness as it
was obvious with the psychologist and educationist[^17].

****SECONDLY: HASTE IN TEACHING.****

Teaching in this stage is necessary for the child it is the best stage
to hesitate in teaching in order to develop the mental ability the child
possess and for the desire with the child (to acquire intellectual
skills)[^18].

The child of this stage possess full preparedness to memorize all that
come to his hearing, therefore teaching in this stage help the stability
of the acquired knowledge in the brain and remain stored in his
memory.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "The example
of those learning in his childhood is like carving on the stone"[^19].

He (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Youth's memorization
is like stamp on the stone"[^20].

For the necessity of learning, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) bequeath the parents to: "Order your children to seek for
knowledge"[^21].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) makes teaching of
the child a door among the doors of divine blessing for the father, he
said : "May Allah bless a servant that assist his child for his
obedience by doing good to him, sympathize with him, teaches and
educates him"[^22].

Teaching is the child's Right on the parents, Imam Ali bn Al-Hussein
said: "...... As for the Right of the younger ones is to has mercy on
them, enlighten and to educate him"[^23].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "The children
possess three Right on his father: to give him a good name, teaches him
how to write and unites him in a wedlock when he is matured"[^24].

Teaching about how to read and write in our present days has been taken
up by educational institutes especially the schools, but that doesn't
mean the absence of the need of the presents from teaching but it is
necessary to have cooperation between the school and the parents in
education.

It is necessary that the teaching should not be confined to reading and
writing but should comprise all parts and aspect of knowledge.

and in different areas like physics, humanities, literature, history,
philosophy and other in addition to focusing at the side of spiritual
and worshiping. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) in
his emphasis on learning the holy Qur'an said: "Whoever teaches him
Qur'an, the parents will be prayed for and covered in two conditions and
the faces of the inhabitant of the Paradise will be shining from their
light"[^25].

Teaching the Qur'an comprise all its aspect starting from teaching how
to read perfectly base on linguistic laws, then encouraging for
memorization of the Qur'an by observing the child's mental standard.
Learning authentic Qur'anic Commentary of some verses and Chapters that
the child need at his stage especially those that has link with ethics
and Ideology and at the side of Juristic those that has link with
different Islamic laws from worshiping and transactions and dealings.

In this stage it is compulsory to teach the child how to worship and
its introduction like Ablution and prayer.

Imam Mohammad bn Ali Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: ".... Till he
complete his seven years of age it will said to him wash your face and
hands, if he has washed them it will be said to him to pray, then leaves
him till he completed his nine years of age, if he has completed his
nine years of age, he has learned Ablution ....."[^26].

The child needs to learn conversation to prevent him from being
affected by perverted movements. Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace
be upon him) said: "Quickly converse with your children before you are
been over taken by others"[^27].

Imam Al-Hassan (peace be upon him) while explaining what he learned
from the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Prophet
(peace be upon him and his descendants) my grand father has thought me
some words that I recite in (Witr-qunut) ...." O' Allah guide me to what
You have guide, protect me with whom You have protected and refrain me
from whom You have refrain from"[^28].

It is incumbent on the parents to teach the child all that is
beneficial to him in his life. In the preceding narration the Commander
of the Faithful (peace be upon him) has thought his son Al-hassan how to
address the public (Ali bn Abitalib (peace be upon him) said to
Al-hassan: "my son stand and make public address while hearing your
words, he said: O' my father, I feel shy of you, how can I address while
looking at your face? Then Ali bn Abitalib (peace be upon him) brought
together the mother of his children, he then hide from him while hearing
his speeches .....)[^29].

Among the substantiation of education is learning how to shoot arrows,
swimming as previously said because of the importance of education, the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) encourage the teachers,
child and the parents with the same degree, he (peace be upon him and
his descendants) said : "Verily when the teacher said (Bismillah) In the
name of Allah to the child, Allah will write for the teacher, the child
and the parents freedom from Hell-fire"[^30].

The Commander of the Faithful (peace be upon him) did encourage
teaching children with the poet of Abitalib (peace be upon him). From
Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace be upon him), he said: "The Commander
of the Faithful (peace be upon him) did amaze when the poet of Abitalib
is related and inscribed and he said: Learn it and teach it to your
children because he was in the religion of Allah and there is a lot of
knowledge in it"[^31].

**THIRDLY: TRAINING CHILD ABOUT OBEDIENCE.**

Obedience never the less is simple and easy except that one is in need
of training and practicing to conform to ones ability for execution. The
child is in need of training and practicing of how to obey in order to
low its difficulties to him and create cordiality between him and it. He
will be interacting with his emotion and feelings so that it will change
to his stable habit in his daily life. You present it to him with
interest and zeal without stress or force or fatigue or weariness.

Islamic method of education commence by laying down fundamental rules
that concord with the children's development for training about
obedience putting in to consideration the mental and physical ability
with the children.

Regards training for prayer the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) said : "Order your children for prayer when they attain
seven years of age and beat for leaving it when they attain nine years
of age"[^32].

In another narration : "Ordered your children for prayer when they
attain seven years of age and beat them when they attain nine years of
age"[^33].

What is meant by beating is either the real beating or psychological
punishment even though that the punishment is having a negative harm on
the child but the effect is temporal that will quickly seize to exist.
It is impossible to consider it a harm compare to the greater advantage
that is training for prayer.

The Commander of the Faithful (peace be upon him) said : "Educate the
younger ones in your house regards prayer (Salat) and purification by
your tongue, when they attained ten years of age and refuses to pray,
you beat them but not to exceed three"[^34].

It is better the training should not be difficult for the child because
it leads to disinclination from prayer and create psychological
partition between him and prayer. From Imam Ali bn Al-Hussein (peace be
upon him) (He would take children with him for Zuhr and Asr prayers at
the same time and Magrib and Ishaa'i prayer at the same time, it was
said to him in that same respect, he (peace be upon him) said : "It is
higher and suitable to them than they haste to it, they don't forfeit it
nor do they sleep on it and they don't feel engaged" and he don't take
them for recommended prayers and he (peace be upon him) said : "if they
can bear don't delay them more than obligatory prayers")[^35].

It is incumbent on the parents to observe the physical and
psychological preparedness of the child and don't burden him on what he
is not able, you should commence with him the compulsory prayers and not
recommended ones. If he has trained and familiarity occurs between him
and prayer, he will be able for others if he has advanced in age.

He will then commence training for fasting from the age of seven, he
gradually continue the more he advanced in age but you should consider
his power, physical ability and his psychological preparedness for it.

Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace be upon him) said: "We ordered
our children to fast when they were seven years of age base on their
ability in every day fasting, if it is up to half of the day or more or
less, they break their fasting when they were over-come with thirsty and
hunger till they were familiar, then command your children to fast when
they were nine years of age base on their ability for the fasting, they
break their fasting when they were over-come with thirsty"[^36].

On the authority of Sumaa'ah he said: I asked him when the children
fast? Imam Assadiq (peace be upon him) said: "When they were able to
fast"[^37].

If he was trained how to fast before the age of obligation (Takleef) he
will execute it in a best form without any difficulty.

On the authority of Muawiya bn Wahaab, he said: I asked Abu Abdullah
(peace be upon him) how do we oblige children for fasting? He said:
"between him and fourteen or fifteen years, you leave him if he fast
before then, verily my son fast before then and I leave him"[^38].

It is recommended to train child on pilgrimage, from the authority of
one of the two Imams Al-Baqir or Assadiq (peace be upon them), he said:
"If a man perform Pilgrimage with his son while he is young he should
order him to answer the call "Labayka" and make Pilgrimage compulsory,
if he can not answer the call, he answered on his behalf and
circumambulate for him and pray on his behalf .... he slaughtered on
behalf of the younger ones and fasting for the elders and prevent him
from all that the Pilgrims were prevented from like cloth and scent, if
he kills anything the penalty is on the father"[^39].

Imam Jaafar Assadiq (peace be upon him) in answering question regards
when one is in fear of cold for the child during (Ihraam) state of
ritual consecrations, he said: "Bring them on mounting and perform his
ritual consecration if you still have fear on them, bring them to
Juhfah"[^40].

He (peace be upon him) said: "Observe the children with you and forward
them to Juhfah or put them at the front of those passing by and perform
with them what those on state of ritual consecrations perform,
circumambulates with him and throw stone on their behalf, the guardian
should fast for those that doesn't possess sacrifice". Imam Ali bn
Al-Hussein would give knife to a youth supported with a man when
slaughtering"[^41].

It is recommended to train youth on good deeds like giving of Alms
(Sadaqah) to the poor and needy. Imam Ali bn Musa Al-Reza (peace be upon
him) said : "Ordered youth to give Alms with his hand whether small or
full of hand and anything even if it is little, because everything you
intend for the sake of Allah, the intention is great after giving it out
even though it is little"[^42].

He (peace be upon him) said: "Ordered them to give Alms even though it
is pieces of bread"[^43].

Training the youth regards Alms giving is the best way of training
youth from reliance to the world and minimizing love for wealth from the
child's mind. It is a training that will make him sympathize with the
poor and the needy.

Training child at his youth stage on obedience and worshiping makes him
to persist on it during his old age.

The history of the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) is the best evidence
to that, Imam Al-hassan bn Ali (peace be upon him) (performs Pilgrimage
from Medina by trekking for complete twenty times)[^44].

Imam Al-Hussein bn Ali (peace be upon him) demanded from an Umayyad
soldier to grant him the tenth night of the holy month of Muharam for
his devotion and worships with his companions (when the night comes they
pray, seek for forgiveness, pray humbly to Allah and supplicates)[^45].

For the excess worship of Imam Ali bn Al-Hussein (peace be upon him) he
was named as the pretty of the worshippers[^46].

(He didn't leave midnight prayers when at home and when on
journey)[^47].

When a questionnaire came to him he would say: "Welcome to those who
help him carries provisions to the day of Resurrection"[^48].

The rest members of the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) are the top in
connection with Allah and sincere in their worship, they were been
trained during their youth age and they have special familiarity with it
and they have interest for its execution.

It is incumbent on the parents to encourage their child for the
training of worships and obedience with a successful method,
commendation, laudation or by presenting material and spiritual gift to
him.

**FORTHLY: SUPERVISION OF THE CHILD.**

In this stage in order to the success of the child in his education,
the parents need to stand to supervise the conduct of the child and to
guide him towards good and straight forwardness. The same applies to the
supervision of his thought, imagination and emotion with a calm method
that is not stimulated. The parents should deal with the child like
friends in order to assist him in opening his ways of life.

Supervising the child's conduct in the society is more important than
in the house and select good friends for him and prevents him from
humoring with bad friends. Punishment should be in necessity if advices
and guidance did not benefit. It is compulsory to train child on self
accountability and to accept accountability from others in addition to
making firm the view regarding divine supervision deep inside him to
restrain him from perversion in the absence of the parent's
supervision.

The way and method of supervision is left for the parents and all are
based on his life awareness and experience. Both parents need to
cooperate in this aspect and the mother's supervision of the child
whether male or female is more important than that of the father because
he is always outside the house for his daily activities.

It is also important to make the child feel that he is not left alone
by the parent but his conduct is been observed and supervised. Possibly
can corroborates with other people in supervising the child like
reliance on the relations, friends in fields of life the parents did not
participates like the school and some other children gatherings.
Cooperation in this aspect is very fruitful in giving good training to
the child and to rescue him from perversion that do occurs in negligence
and in heedlessness situation.


**FIFTHLY: PROTECTION FROM SEXUAL PERVERTION.**

Sexual perversion is the most dangerous type of perversion that leads
to destruction of the community in all aspect, materially, health wise,
emotionally and morally. That is why Islam gives special care in order
to protect it before it occurs and remedy to when it occurs. Training
children to be decent is the most important responsibility of the
parents. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said :
"Among the Right of the child on his father is to named him with good
name when he is born, to teach him Qur'an when he is matured and to be
decent with his private part when he attain the stage of puberty"[^49].

Education on decency necessitates protection from perversion at the
stage before maturity.

The first means of protection is to distance the child from sexual
excitement and to distance him to have information about its picture.
The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "By He whom my
soul is in His hand a child is not successful if a man covers his wife
in a house where there is awaken child looking and hearing their
speeches and breath, if he is a boy he will be an adulterer and will be
adulteress if she is a girl"[^50].

Separation between the children during sleeping is among the method of
protecting sexual excitement. The Commander of the Faithful (peace be
upon him) said: "Separates between them in their bed, if they are
children of ten years of age"[^51].

Separation between children and women is more important, Imam Mohammad
bn Ali Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: "You separate between boys and
ladies in their bed if they have attained ten years of age"[^52].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: " you should
separate between boy and boy, boy and girl, girl and girl in their bed
for ten years"[^53].

Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace be upon him) forbids girls going
near to her none relation if she has attained six years of age, he said
: "If she has attained six years of age, don't put her on your
laps"[^54].

He forbids kissing girl and said: "If a girl has attained six years of
age it is not advisable to kiss her"[^55].

The prohibition of kissing, we mean that of the stranger and not that
of the father or the mother or the uncle or unmarriageable person to
her. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: ".....
When a boy is more than seven years of age, he should not be allowed
kiss a lady"[^56].

It is compulsory to apply punishment for continuous practices and when
sexual perversion occurs. Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace be upon
him) asked about a small boy of ten years that committed fornication
with a lady, he said: "The boy should be whipped less than the
prescribed punishment"[^57].

It is compulsory in our present time to prevent children from all that
will lead him to excitement. Like stories, narrations, pictures and
films that are contrary to decency, it is also compulsory to supervise
the children in their loneliness and in their relation with each other
in order to protect them from sexual perversion.

**SIXTHLY: CONNECTING THE CHILD WITH GOOD MODEL.**

The child in the later years of this stage tries to likening himself
with people that are more vital and efficient in the community. The
psychologist named the imitation notion as quick and sudden likening
which vanished when the effect elapse. This is like these present-days
likening. The slowly likening is

Named as adaptation [^58] that becomes intense in the intellect and
emotion. Among its substantiation is imitation and emulation. High model
from personality is the cause of likening. The youth do honor and
dignify the reputable and ideal people, (They are the ones the general
youth emulates)[^59].

The child most liken themselves with those that possess authority over
people, among them are kings, Rulers, the victorious and prosperous ones
in life and all those that has influence on people like teachers and
religious scholars. That is why you see some psychologist need to shaped
high model before the people [^60] (it is an important need). High model
is the view of the psychologist differs in different people and change
due to the change in material, psychological and societal atmosphere.
They consider high model embodied in a spiritual fundamental and desired
ambition in life.

High level of this concept is very necessary to every people especially
child in the later years of this stage but if high model did not
transfer from concept to substantiation and embody in person, this high
model then will remain limited to imaginations. The child then is in
need of likening and emulation with what is perceptible in a real
objectivity. The best that was embodied with high model is the highest
exemplar for human personality.

Emulating the past ones is (more than emulating those in higher
status)[^61].

From this point of view the prevailing necessity to emulate is that of
the past Righteous ones, they are the Prophets, the Imam from the
Ahlulbait, the Righteous ones among the companions and the followers and
the Righteous ones among the Religious scholars. They are top in
virtues, honor and magnanimous in status.

Among the factors that assist in likening and emulating them is their
spiritual effect on different categories of people that glorified and
sanctified them.

The life of the Righteous ones is full of fundamentals and honor which
people need to cling with it. Emulating is what makes the child a great
human being base on whom he is emulating. If emulation is lost the life
fire brand frost and weakens the ambition and perverted from his path,
he join and emulates the margins among ordinary people.

It is then compulsory for the parents to focus the sight of their
children's thought, emotion and stance towards exemplary personalities
commencing from Adam down to the present day great personalities. Every
Prophet or Imam from the rightly guided Imams has history full of honor,
fundamentals and prevailing stand in life. Good model has effect and a
honorable stands in all angles of life and emulating it reflect its
effect in part

of the child's personality like the emotion, the mental and the
conduct, it then let person reach high position that the Righteous ones
reached. (The emulate ones).


FIRSTLY AND LASTLY THANKS BE TO ALMIGHTY ALLAH.

[^1] - Hadeeth Ila Umahaat: 207.

[^2] - Ilmi Nnafs: 385 - by Jameel Saleeba.

[^3] - Ilmi Nnafs Attarbawi: 478 - 486.

[^4] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 222.

[^5] - " " : 222.

[^6] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 222.

[^7] - Tuhfal Uquul: 189.

[^8] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 2:625.

[^9] - Sahifa Assajjadiyyah Al-jaamiyah: 128 - 129 - printed by Imam
Almahdi press 1st edition, 1411 A.H. Qom.

[^10] - Nahjul Balaghah: 546 researched by Subhi Salih.

[^11] - Nahjul Balaghah: 393.

[^12] - Kanzul Umaal: 539/ 4675.

[^13] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 2: 362.

[^14] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol- 100: 74.

[^15] - Al-kafi vol- 6: 47/ 4 ch-Educating child.

[^16] - Al-kafi vol- 6: 51/ 2 from book of Aqeeq.

[^17] - Ilmi Nnafs: 383 by Jameel Saleeba.

[^18] - Hadeeth Ila Umahaat: 217.

[^19] - Kanzul Umaal vol- 10:294/ 29336.

[^20] - Kanzul Umaal vol- 10: 238/ 29258.

[^21] - Kanzul Umaal vol - 16: 854/ 45952.

[^22] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 2: 626.

[^23] - Tuhfal Uquul: 194.

[^24] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 220.

[^25] - Al-kafi vol- 6: 49/1 ch- doing good to children.

[^26] - Manla yahdurhul Faqeeh vol- 1: 182.

[^27] - Al-kafi vol- 6: 47/5 ch- educating the child.

[^28] - Mukhtasar Taareekh Demeshq vol -7: 5.

[^29] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol - 43: 351.

[^30] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol - 2: 625.

[^31] - " " "- 2: 625.

[^32] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 2: 624.

[^33] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol- 101:98.

[^34] - Tanbeehil khawaatir: 390 by Warram bn Abi Faraas printed by Daru
tta'aaruf.

[^35] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 2: 624.

[^36] - Al-kafi vol- 4: 124/1 ch- child's fasting.

[^37] - Al-kafi vol- 4: 125/3 ch- Child's fasting.

[^38] - Al-kafi vol 4: 125/2 ch- Children's fasting.

[^39] - " " 4: 303/1 " children and Slave Pilgrimage.

[^40] - Al-kafi vol 4: 304/3 children and Slave Pilgrimage.

[^41] - " " 4: 304/4 chaper: Children and slave's Pilgrimage

[^42] - Al-wasaa'il vol- 9: 376/1 chapter four.

[^43] - " "- 9: 376/2 " ".

[^44] - Mukhtasar Taareekh Demeshq vol- 7:23.

[^45] - Al-kaamil fi Taareekh vol- 4: 59 by Ibn Atheer printed by Daru
Ssadr 1399 A.H.

[^46] - Mukhtasar Taareekh Demeshq vol- 17: 234.

[^47] - Safwati Ssafwa vol- 2 : 95 by Ibn Jawzi - printed by Darul
Ma'aarif 1405 A.H. 3rd edition.

[^48] - Safwati Ssafwa vol-2: 95 by Ibn Jawzi - printed by Darul
Ma'aarif 1405 A.H. 3rd edition.

[^49] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 2: 626.

[^50] - Wasaa'ili Sh-shiyyah vol- 20: 133/2 chapter 67.

[^51] - Mustadrakil Wasaa'il vol- 2: 558.

[^52] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 223.

[^53] - Wasaa'ili Sh-shiyyah vol - 20: 231/1 chapter 128.

[^54] - " " " - 20: 229/1 ch- 127.

[^55] - " " " - 20: 229/1 ch- 127.

[^56] - Wasaa'ili Sh-shiyyah vol - 20: 230/4 " - 127.

[^57] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 320.

[^58] - Ilmi Al-Ijtimaa'i: 86 by Naqulal Haddaad.

[^59] - " " : 140.

[^60] - Ilmi Nnafs: 728 by Jameel Saleebah.

[^61] - Ilmi Ijtimaa'a: 146.


