Preface
=======

The family is the first fundamental institute what in the surplus
Social institutions that takes the responsibility of preparing the child
before reach in to the society so that he can become an active element
for its continuity base on competence, good and active construction. The
family is the first point where the origination of one as member of
human being, so it is where all positive and negative effect begins.
Therefore Islam gives a special consideration to the family that fit its
role while discharging his responsibility.

It has then laid down fundamental laws in organizing it and regulates
its affairs distributing the specialties and specifies the duties that
they are responsible to execute especially training the child with a
sound and fair education equilibrated in all aspects of personality,
thought, emotion and conduct.

Islam calls for the protection of the family entity and to distance its
members from devastation and destruction and all that will lead to
creation of confusion and chaos in the relation, which will leads to
forfeiture of the child with crumbling the entity which protect and
prepared them for future for those anticipating for them.

The Islamic teachings and guidance came to create sound atmosphere in
order to develop the child physically, emotionally, morally and his
concept. Through fair development it gives ability to the child or a
future human being a resistance of inconstancy of the life and rise
against its burden, because of this, Islamic method commence with the
child from early stages, with marriage relation pass through delivery
(birth) nursing and stage before the age of puberty ending when he gain
complete independence after self reliance.

We divided the discussion here on chapters:

In the first chapter we deal with the general method of training in
family relation. In the second chapter we deal with stages before
pregnancy and during pregnancy. For the third chapter we deal with the
stage after birth (the stage of breast feeding). In the forth chapter we
deal with things that connect with the stage of early childhood and
lastly we deal with the youth and Adolescence stage in the fifth
chapter.

We will benefit from the verses of the Holy Quran and Narration that
specially related from the Ahlulbait (Peace be upon them) and also we
will benefit from the modern facts.

{And from Him the most High we obtain help and settlement}


