Thirdly : Observance of the Right and the Obligations
=====================================================

Islamic system has stipulated Rights and Obligations for the spouses
and observing it has a surety of spreading constancy and tranquility in
the family's atmosphere. Then the restriction from both spouses with
stipulated Rights and obligations will contributes to the deepening
their periods, strengthening their peaceful relationship and refutes all
kinds of probable tensions and enmity which have negative impacts on the
role of the equilibral emotional feelings of the child.

Guardianship is the most important Right of the male spouse, Allah the
most High said: {Men are in charge of women, because Allah has made some
of them to excel others, and because they spend out of their property
(for the support of women).}[^14].

Then it is compulsory to the wife to observe this Right because family
will not move without guardianship. Men's guardianship is the
appropriate for the natural differences in body and emotional feelings
of both spouses. She needs to observe this guardianship in her dealings
with the children and to made them feel the position of their father.

The next important Right after guardianship is the assertion in the
sayings of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) while
answering question of a woman that asked about the Right of husband over
the women and he (peace be upon him and his descendants) said : "to
obeyed him and not to disobeyed him, don't be on voluntary fasting
without his consent, don't prevent him of herself even though she is at
the back of camel and don't go out of his house except his
permission"[^15].

Among the right of the male spouse the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his descendants) said:" Right of the male spouse on the women is to
switch on the lamp, to prepare the meals, to welcome and receive him at
the door of her house, to provide him with wash basin and handkerchief,
to purify him and not to prevent him of herself except any reason"
[^16]

For the important of observing this Right the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his descendants) said: "Women has not fulfill the Right of Allah
until she has fulfill the Right of her husband"[^17].

Islamic system has also laid down the Right of the wife that is
compulsory to the husband to observe.

On authority of Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace be upon him) why
answering the question of Ishaq bn Ammar regards the Right of women on
her husband, he (peace be upon him) said: "He should satisfies her
stomach, to shroud her dead body and forgives her ignorance" [^18]

The holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) answered a
question asked by khulat bint Al Aswad regards the Rights of women, he
(peace be upon him and his descendant) said: "to feed you with what he
eats is your Right on him, to clothes you with what he wears with, not
to slap you and not to shout on you"[^19].

Among her right is for the husband to honor her and his good
companionship with her. The Commander of the Faithful (peace be upon
him) in his Will to Mohammad bn Hanafiyah said: "Verily women is a sweet
basin, she is not a house keeper, then revolve her in all condition, and
make good companionship with her to purify your livings"[^20].

Among the Right of the wife and the rest members of the families is to
satisfy their material needs. The holy Prophet (peace be upon him and
his descendants) said:

"Who struggles for his families, is like those that fight the holy war
(Jihad) for the sake of Allah"[^21].

He (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Woe on to those that
forfeit his families"[^22].

He (peace be upon him and his descendants) said : "The women's Right on
her husband is to obstruct her hunger, to cover her nakedness and not to
distort her presence, by Allah if the husband does that he has observed
her Right"[^23].

Compliance to the Right of the male spouse by the wife and that of the
female spouse by the husband is compulsory as it leads to constancy of
the family's atmosphere, the positive reaction will made the both
spouses to work towards the bless of the family and that of the
children. Constancy of the women during pregnancy stage, breast feeding
and the early infancy has effect on the baby's constancy and his
tranquility. Moving towards the light of that premeditated from advices,
guidance and orientation will originate personal independence in the
child in terms of his thought, emotional feelings and his ways of
life.

**Forthly : Abstainance From Instigating Problems and Differences.**

The problems and differences in the family will create tense and
constricted atmosphere, threatening the family's constancy and firmness.
It may even in most cases leads to splitting and destroying the marital
relation of the family which will be the cause of anxiety to the whole
members of the family especially the children where as the differences
and the constricted situation between the parents will lead to the draw
back of the child stability and emotional in-balance in all the stages
of his life commencing from the early stage of his pregnancy, his
infancy and other preceding stages.

The intense atmosphere leave its impact on the child's future
personality (verily the behaviorism unrest and psychological ailments
that affected the child in his early stage and his future old age is a
result of wrong dealing of the parents like material friction which
create tense in family's atmosphere that do seize the child's
psychological safety) [^24]

Scholar Jirard Fujan says: (The mother in the house who did not possess
enough discretion as a human being, mother and wife will not be able to
induce the feelings of security)[^25].

Feeling secured and constancy are the most important factors for the
child's personality and his prudent building but in a condition where
there is a continuous differences and tense this feeling seize to exist
while the child will be in a state of dilemma and perplex ion, in this
type of situation,

he don't know what to do, he is not able to stop the conflict and the
controversy especially if it is accompanied with violence, he can't take
stand with one of the parent nor the other. In addition in order to take
the child near to every one of them, they will try to establish their
Right by accusing the opposite side for initiating the problems and the
differences, all this leaves a dark point in the mind, brain and in the
wishes of the child.

DR. Sapok says: (Verily the psychological clinics witness thousand of
situation from the children that were brought up from the midst of the
family that are full of severe differences, those children feel differ
from other human beings at their old age and lost trust from their soul.
They fear of establishing sound emotional relations because he deem the
meaning of formation of family was to create differences between each
other in the house and exchange of humiliation) [^26]These types of
differences and constrictions that do occur differ from one family to
the other and ways of expressing constrict in the family.

It can be harsh, abusive and continuous humiliations and it may be
beatings and physical punishment. The child at his own side will pick up
all these practices that occurred as a result of the differences in the
family and reflect in his present and future ways of life. That is why
we see some child humiliating or even beating their mothers or applies
the same method with his wife at his old age.

In order to protect this constrictions and differences between the two
spouses or to reduces its psychological and emotional effects or to
curtail and put an end to it, Islam has laid down a perfect method to
remove the differences and constrictions. It has passed in the previous
point which was emphasizing deepen of cordiality and blessing with in
the family and had laid down programs for the Rights and obligations
between the two spouses.

The most important of such program will free the method of selecting
ones spouse as it will soon comes. The Islamic method is depends on the
ways of urging and encouraging precaution against the occurrence of
difference or tackling its beginning or solving it after it has
occurred, a method to restrain and censured those practicing controversy
or things that leads to it.

The holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "the
best men among my nation are those who did not attack their families nor
be unjust with them and sympathize with them"[^27].

Imam Mohammad Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) has encourage endurance of
offence because retaliating offence with offence widening the circle of
controversies and constrictions.

He (peace be upon him) also said: "Allah will free him from hell fire
and make incumbent for him to enter paradise who ever endure an offence
from his wife"[^28].

And the prophet (peace be upon him and his decedents) has encourage men
to be patient for the bad conduct of his wife, he then said: "Allah will
reward who ever for bear the bad conduct of his wife like that of the
reward of Prophet Ayub (peace be upon him) in his affliction"[^29].

If not that the Prophet (peace upon him and his descendant) has
recommended us to be patient from the wife's misconduct it couldn't has
been usual.

Then it becomes dearest and desirable from the side of a religious male
spouse to be patient with contentedness and satisfaction through that
will not amount to humiliation of his dignity. Emulating the Prophet's
(peace be upon him and his descendants) ways of dealing with his wives
will reduce many constricts like wise by emulating the conduct of
Ahlulbait (peace be upon them).

Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace be upon him): "my father (peace
be upon him) had a wife did hurts him but he did forgives her"[^30].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) forbid using
violence with the wife, he said : "Any man that slap his wife, Allah
will command the Angel of the Hell fire to slap his face seventy times
in the Hell fire"[^31].

And Imam Jaafar Assadiq (peace be upon him) has encouraged mutual
understanding in order to abstain from intense controversies, he then
said: "The best among your women is she who said to her husband if she
is annoying or was annoyed, my hand is your hand, I will not use an
eyeliner on the twinkle of my eye until you are pleased with me"[^32].

On the authority of Imam Mohammad Al-Baqir (peace be upon him): "And
women's struggle is to endure from what she envisage from the husband
regards hurt ness and jealousy"[^33].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) has forbidden wife
from attitudes that will lead to encourage of controversies, he (peace
be upon him and his descendants) said : "The most wicked among your
women is she who is subservient to her family and feel nobility before
her husband, spiteful barren, who did not fear evil, adorning in absents
of her husband, descent in the presence of her husband, she don't hear
her husband's sayings and don't obey his ommandment, she seriously
rejected her Husband in their privacy from mounting on her, she doesn't
accept his excuses nor forgives his short comings"[^34].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) has also forbid
women from charging her husband more than his ability, he in this
respect said : "Any women enters with her husband about her expenditures
and demands more than his ability, Allah will not accept her spending
and justice except she returns and demands base on his ability"[^35] .

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) also forbids women
from reminding her favors on the husband, he (peace be upon him and his
descendants) said : "If a woman went to her spouse with the whole Gold
and Silver on the Earth and one day beat her husband's head and said to
him, who are you? The wealth is mine, Allah will destroy all her good
deeds even though she is the most subservient among the people except
she repents and returns to seek pardon from her husband" [^36]

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) has cautioned the
women from confronting her husband with bitter word in order to affect
his nerves. He (peace be upon him and his descendants) said : "Allah
will not accept the spending, justice and good deeds of any woman that
hurt her husband with her tongue until she pleased him"[^37].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) has forbidden
abandonment as it is considered to be introduction to splitting and
separation of relations. He (peace be upon him and his descendants)
said: "She is an oppressor who abandoned her husband and she will be
resurrected from the bottom of Hell fire with Fir'aun, Haamaan and
Qaarun except she repent and return"[^38].

If all these recommendations are completely observed it is enough to
quench all sorts of tenses and constrictions and if the two spouses were
not able to observe those recommendations their differences should far
away from the ears of the children like wise the exchange of negative
views, humiliation and accusation also should far away from their
hearings. They should made the children to understand that controversies
are natural events, that they like each other while both spouses should
try to put and end to their controversies in their earliest convenient
time.


