Fifthly : Caution From Divorce
==============================

Islam has cautioned from divorce and putting an end to marital
relations because of the negative effects that leaves on the two
spouses, the children and the society. Divorce is the fountain head of
anxiety, psychopath, illness in emotion and conduct of the children
where as the child is in needs of equal love and kindness from the both
parents.

Even by just pondering over divorce it originates unrest and anxiety
inside him and remains in continuous fears and troubles that negatively
reflect in his emotional and personal stability. Verily Islam has laid
down methods of relations and its continuation because of the obstacles
preventing reaching the decision which do destroy families and prevents
marital relationships, and caution from divorce in different places. The
holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Jibra'il
(peace be upon him) warns me of women until I deem it not necessary to
divorce them except in a clear atrocity"[^39].

Imam Jaafar Assadiq (peace be upon him) said: "There is nothing that
Allah has made lawful but dislike except divorce; Allah hates those that
derive pleasure from quick divorce"[^40].

He (peace be upon him) said: "Verily Allah the Great and Almighty loves
the house having two spouses and dislikes the house having divorce and
there is nothing more hateful to Allah other than divorce"[^41].

Islam has urged us to take and arrange objectivity to prevent the
occurrence of divorce and call for strengthening the love and cordial
relations and it also call for resolving the problems and controversies
that do lead to divorce and ordered for peace loving.

Allah the most High said: {.... But consort with them in kindness, for
if ye hate them it may happen that ye hate a thing where in Allah has
place much good}[^42].

And urge reconciliation and restoration of the family ties, Allah the
most High said: {If a woman fearth ill treatment from her husband, or
desertion, it is no sin for them twain if they make terms of peace
between themselves and peace is better}[^43].

Then reconciliations are better than non reconciliation, for the fact
that minds and feelings differs from one time to the other. Islam has
verily urge for reconciliation and negotiation before taking decision
for separation. Almighty Allah said: {And if ye fear a breach between
them twain (the man and wife) appoint an arbiter from his folk and an
arbiter from her folk. if they don't desire amendment Allah will make
them of one mind. Lo! Allah is ever Knower, Aware}[^44].

If all trial for reconciliation and restoration of the relation to its
normality is not beneficial and if the tenses and constrictions did not
need any thing other than divorce then possible divorce is a bliss for
the both spouses but it will have psychological effects on the child and
it will reflect in to his mode of life, that is why Islam granted
another ample chance for restoring the marital life once again. Islam
gives the Right of the restoration to the male spouse with the waiting
period (Iddah) for the women after the taking place of divorce without
new contract (Aqd) and after the said waiting period (Iddah) for the
women but with new contract (Aqd).

It has also given the Right of restoration to man after the first and
the second divorces if there is actual separation after all the
unsuccessful trial to restore the marital relationships, and then it is
incumbent on the parents to observe the feelings of the child and grant
him love and sympathy.

It is also incumbent on them to provide the atmosphere that will assist
the child regards his faith and safety of his parent's conducts.
Henceforth Islam has forbade slandering, backbiting and unveiling ones
short-comings, with these, the child will be able to endure the shock
that arise from the divorce.

But if all these styles are not observe while both parents always try
to unveil the short-coming of each other before the child, the child
will hate the life and despise himself and it will reflect in his
emotional feelings towards his both parents. He will love them but at
same time will hate them for knowing the parent's short-comings. He then
remain living in a continuous unrest and anxiety, his grief will
increase one day after the other and negatively reflect in his societal
and his future family relationships.

[^1] - Ilmi Nnafs Attarbawi: 111 - by Dr. Fakhir Aqil - printed by Darul
Ilmi malayeen 11th edition.

[^2] - Quran 30:21

[^3] - Mashaakilil Abaa fi ttarbiyatil Abnaa: 44 - by DR. Sapok -
printed by Mu'asasatul Arabiyah li dirasah wanashri 3rd edition-1980
A.D.

[^4] - Tuhfal uqul by Harrani: 188 printed by maktabatul haidariyyah-
Najaf 5th edition 1380 A.H.

[^5] - Manla yahdurhul faqeeh vol - 3: 281 - by suduq / 14th chapter-
Right of women on husband.

[^6] - Manla yahdurhul faqeeh vol-3:281 by Suduq - printed by Daru saab-
Beirut 1401 A.H.

[^7] - Mustadrakil wasaa'il vol - 1: 550 -by Nurri - printed by
maktabatul Islamiyah Tehran 1383 A.H.

[^8] - Manla yahdurhul faqeeh, by Suduq-vol-3:278/1st ch: women's right
on the husband

[^9] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 200 - by Tabrasi - printed by manshurati
sh-shareefil murtada- Qom 2nd edition 1410 A.H.

[^10] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 200.

[^11] - Manla yahdurhul faqeeh vol-3:278/ 6 ch- Men's right on the
wife.

[^12] - Al -kafi-vol; 5; 324/2 ch-Best women - Book of marriage - by
Kulaini - printed by Darul-Ta'aruf- Beirut 3rd edition 1401A.H.

[^13] - Tuhfal Uquul: 239.

[^14] - Qur'an 4:34.

[^15] - Manla yahdurhu faqeeh vol-3:277/1st ch- Men's Right on women.

[^16] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 215.

[^17] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 215.

[^18] - Manla yahdurhul faqeeh vol-3:279/ 2nd ch- men's right on
women.

[^19] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 218.

[^20] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 218.

[^21] - Uddatu Ddaayi: 72 - by Ahmad bn Fahd Al-hilli - printed by
maktabatul wijdaani Qom.

[^22] - Uddatu Ddaayi: 72 - by Ahmad bn Fahd Al-hilli - printed by
maktabatul wijdaani Qom.

[^23] - Uddatu Ddaayi: 81 - by Ahmad bn Fahd Al-hilli - printed by
maktabatul wijdaani Qom.

[^24] - Adwa'i Ala nnafsil Bashariyyah: 302 by DR. Zareen Abbas Emaran -
printed by Daruth-thaqafah- Beirut 1st edition 1407 A.H.

[^25] - Same as above.

[^26] - Mashaakilil Abaa'a fi tarbiyatil Abnaa'a:45

[^27] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 216-217

[^28] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 216

[^29] - Makaarimul Akh'laq:213

[^30] - Manla yahdurhul Faqeeh vol-3:279/ 4th-ch- women's Right on
men.

[^31] - Mustadrakil wasaa'il vol-2:550

[^32] - Makaarimul Akh'laq:200.

[^33] - Manla yahdurhul Faqeeh vol-3:277/ 4th ch - Men's Right on
Women.

[^34] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 202.

[^35] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 202.

[^36] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 202.

[^37] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 214.

[^38] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 202.

[^39] - Manla yahdurhul faqeeh vol-3:278/ ch- Women's Right on Men.

[^40] - Al-kafi vol-6:54/ 2nd ch- prohibiting divorce on agreement.

[^41] - Al-kafi vol-6:56/ 3rd ch- prohibiting divorce on agreement.

[^42] - Qur'an 4:19.

[^43] - Qur'an 4:128.

[^44] - Qur'an 4:35.


