Chapter Two : the First Stage : Stages Before Intercourse and During Pregnancy
==============================================================================

Islam wants us to have providence with the child and to protect their
psychological and physical soundness before their birth. This is by
preparing domain for his movement and to arrange the necessary factors
which will protect the child from psychological and physical weakness
commencing from the selection of the husband or the wife and the
circumstances surrounding the early stages of the child, that is the
womb of his mother which played a great and effective role on the
child's future and life movement. The features of this stage are
pinpointed as below:-


**Firslty : Stage Before Intercourse**

It has been socially and scientifically established in its detailed
research the inherited and societal effect in the composition and
development of the child. Those inherited reflections may be physically
or psychologically. [^1]

Most of the attributes are transferred to the children through the
father, mother or their grand fathers like intelligence, unrest conduct,
schizo phrenia, mental disorder, personal discipline, flexibility and
leniency. This become means that assist in transferring this attributes
to the children or the children will possess readiness to adopt them.
This is in addition to the customs and the imitation of the children
base on repetition of actions.[^2]

From this point of view Islam has emphasized on the selection of
spouse, that is selection of the spouses from righteous family and from
good environment.

**1- SELECTING WIFE.**

From the teaching of Islam, it has considered selecting wife from two
aspects: the heredity she descend from and the society where she lives
and its reflection on her ways of life and conduct. The Prophet (peace
be upon him and his descendants) said: "Choose for your semen because
the maternal uncle is one of the spouses"[^3].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Choose for
your semen because the vein is a schemer"[^4].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) does emphasize on
selection of wife from the family that possess noble attributes of the
hereditary effect it plays in the composition of the wife and that of
her progeny. He (peace be upon him and his descendants) chooses Khadijah
(peace be upon her) that delivered Fatima (peace be upon her) the best
of the women. The Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) also followed this
conduct by choosing their wives from descent families and making
selections base on hereditary.

Islam laid emphasis on selecting wife from sound society and
environment where she achieves good and sound conduct. It cautioned from
unsound environment she is living. It also cautioned from marrying a
beautiful ladies that was brought up from the fountain of evil. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Be aware of dung
hill under the green grass ..... A beauty Women are fountain head of all
evils"[^5].

Imam Sadiq (peace be upon him) also cautioned about prostitute and
said: "Don't get married with a woman known to be prostitute"[^6].

Because she will creates the preparedness for such a bad action in her
children.

Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) warned from getting married with a
mad woman fearing of transferring the attributes to the child, he was
asked of that, he (peace be upon him) said: "No but if he possess a mad
slave girl he can have sexual relation with her and should not seek from
her child"[^7].

Imam Ali (peace be upon him) has also warned from getting married with
a foolish woman because the attribute will transfer to the child and
also did not attain the ability to give a sound training to the child:
"Be aware of getting married to a foolish because her companionship is
affliction and her children are lost"[^8].

Tradition has made emphasis that religious person should be the
criterion for choosing a spouse and the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his descendants) do encourage that. A man came to the to him requesting
for marriage, he (Peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Be aware
of a religious woman, she will make your hand full"[^9].

Imam Assadiq (peace be upon him) gives precedence to religious before
wealth and beauty and said: "If a man marries because of her wealth and
beauty, he will deputize to that but if he marries because of her being
religious, Allah will provide him with beauty and wealth"[^10].

The woman that descend from sound family and lineage and was
accompanied with religiousness has preceded in stages of education and
her training to the children will be in line with the laid down Islamic
laws for that respect and the recognized method will be generally
accepted by the two spouses without contradiction nor opposition. The
wife will be desirous to succeed in training processes and considered it
an Islamic obligation before every thing. This obligation will made her
shun any negative practices that will have effect on the children's
emotional and psychological growth.

**2- SELECTING HUSBAND.**

For the development and preparation of the children spiritually and
psychologically the father has a great role to play that is why in the
early stage, Islam laid emphasis on the selecting husband for laid down
Islamic criterion to observe the hereditary and atmosphere that surround
his brought up, his good and noble attributes because he is the model
that the children follows; as his attributes and ethics reflected on
them. In addition through the continuous living with the wife (the
mother) also acquired some of his ethics and attributes.

The Prophet (Peace be upon him and his descendants) laid emphasis on
choosing a competent husband and describe him with his saying (peace be
upon him and his descendants) "Competency is to be modest and to has
opportunity"[^11].

Competency is the one that descend from sound lineage, religious and
elevated ethics.

Imam Assadiq (peace be upon him) has cautioned from getting marriage
with a man having psychological sickness and said: "Don't married them
but married on doubt lady because women takes from her moral, religion
and personality"[^12].

In choosing husband Islam put religiousness as the criterion. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Marry he that
comes to you if you are pleased with his ethics and religion"[^13].

It is clear that Islam prohibited getting Marriage to none Muslim in
order to protect the integrity of the children and the family in all
aspect like the ideology, conduct, spiritual and psychology for their
effect on the wife and the children through their emulating the husband
and his mode of life.

Islam has also forbids getting married to unreligious person and those
whose conduct has perverted from Islamic system in order to save guard
the family and the children from behavioral and psychological
perversion.

Imam Assadiq (peace be upon him) has forbid getting marriage with a
known fornicator. He (peace be upon him) said: "Don't marry a woman
known to be fornicator and don't marry a man known to be fornicator
expect you are aware of repentance from them"[^14].

Imam Assadiq (peace be upon him) has also cautioned from getting
marriage to an alcohol drinker. He (peace be upon him) said: "Whoever
gave marriage of his daughter to an alcohol drinker has cut her
kinship"[^15].

Perverted person negatively affect the soundness of the children's
conduct for the reflection of his conduct on them and his unwillingness
to train them.

This is in addition to the problem he created on the wife which prevail
the spread of unrest and psychological anxiety in the family's
atmosphere and has made the family's life distant from tranquility,
calmness and constancy that the children need for their physical and
spiritual growth.

Verily the mode of life of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) and the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) stood on the basis
of choosing well qualified person for their sons and daughters. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) did not give Fatima's
marriage (peace be upon her) to his great companions when they seek his
hand but he gave them answer that he is waiting for Allah's decision. He
later gave her marriage to Ali bn Abitalib (peace be upon him) with the
commandment of Allah the most High.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) encourages a Muslim
woman by name Zulfa'i known to be related to the family of Areeqah and
was very beautiful to get married to Jubair a Muslim who did not possess
wealth or handsomeness except religion.


**3- THE RELATION BEFORE PREGNANCY AND THE COMPOSITION OF THE
CHILD.**

After the process of selecting husband on basis of the noble Islamic
criterions it commence gradually step by step with the child, in every
step it has laid down a real foundation and laws for the child's
composition and sound upbringing and the two spouses has nothing to do
rather than to comply with the light of the laid down foundations and
laws.

The Perfect and Majesty said : {And one of His signs is that He created
for you mates from yourselves that ye might find rest in them, and He
put between you love and mercy}[^16].

It made love, cordiality, change of noble compassion and sharp feelings
as the relationship between the two spouses. In other for the continuity
of this relationship Islam has call for fastening the two spouses with
the measures which has been stipulated by the divine method in life.

The wedding eve is the first step for the relation and connection of
the husband and wife. Then Islam ordered us to comply with these divine
measures so that the relation will not be like that of animalistic one.
Observing two unit recommended prayer by the two spouses is the first of
this measure followed by praise, commendation of Allah and prayer for
the holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) and his house
hold (peace be upon them) then seeks prayer for continuity of love and
cordiality between them: (O' Allah provide me with her intimacy,
cordiality and her pleasure with me, join us together with the best
union, ease our harmony, verily you like lawful things and dislike
unlawful things)[^17].

Complying with that create tranquility, constancy and calmness in the
first step of meeting and there will be no chance for the wife to fill
unrest and anxiety hence the wedding eve is entertain able with love and
cordiality.

At the stage of sexual relation this prayer continues and it
recommended to say:(O' Allah provide me with a male child and make pious
and intelligence with out addition or subtraction and make his ending a
better one ).The best recommended prayer in the first sexual relation is
(In the name of Allah the beneficent the merciful)[^18].


