Secondly : the Pregnancy Stage
==============================

**1- COAGULATION OF THE FOETUS.**

For the physical and psychological safety of the embryo Islam has laid
dawn an easy program without hardship and difficulty.

The holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) has requested
to prohibiting women from taking the followings in first week of her
pregnancy, they are:-milk, vinegar, coriander and bitter apple because
the effect of these substances make her delaying delivery and make her
labor very difficult, It also causes her some sickness [^19] which has
effected on the pregnancy and the baby.

like wise the prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) and the
Ahlul Bait (peace be upon them) has prohibited from having sexual
relation in specified period though this caution has not reach the stage
of prohibition but it is offensive as it reflect negatively on the
embryo psychological and health wise. Those periods are as
followings:-

Between the rising of the fajr (Dawn) and sun rise, between the sun set
and the aurora time, immediately after-noon (zuhr), Beginning and middle
of the month, during the solar and lunar Eclipse, when red or black or
yellow wind are blowing and when earth quake is happening.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) has encouraged
relation at other time after the aforementioned ones. There are other
period which has effect on the child's emotional feelings especially
during a fearful time as it will cause the child to be indecisive,
unrest and fearful and other period which may cause madness,

leprosy and foolishness to the child.[^20]

There are other advices that have connection with sexual
relationship.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "don't
converse while having sexual inter-course because if child is granted
during that time he is not free to become dumb and none of you should
look at his wife's vulva, he should close his eye as looking at the
wife's private part during sexual inter-course may cause blindness to
the child"[^21].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said : "It is
offensive to have sexual-intercourse with ones wife after having a wet
dream until he takes bath from his wet dream, if he does that and the
child becomes mad then he should not blame anybody other than
himself"[^22].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Don't have
sexual inter-course with your wife in standing position because that is
the action of an ass, if child is granted during that time he will be
urinating on the bed"[^23].

the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Don't have
sexual inter-course with your wife with the desire derived from other
than her, I fear if child is granted during that time will become a
bisexual or a girl or will become mentally deranged"[^24].

It was understood from this narration that one should not imagine
another woman while having sexual inter-course with his wife.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "If your wife
is pregnant don't have sexual inter-course with her except you are on
Ablution because not observing that the child will be heartless and a
miser"[^25].

At all time Islam has encourage (Zikr), remembrance of Allah before the
sexual inter-course and mentioning (Bismillah) in the name of Allah
during the sexual inter-course, this is in addition to the uses of a
deeper means for the joint of love, cordiality and the holy bond like
embracing, kissing, soft speeches and pleasing her.[^26]

**2- THE FIRST ENVIRONMENT FOR THE CHILD.**

The mother's womb is the first environment from which one originates,
so this environment has positive and negative effect on the child
because where the child moves about and the fetus is considered part of
the mother all the circumstances of the mother are living reflected on
the child. It has been established through scientifically research the
efficiency of the mother on the embryo's physical and psychological
growth. Then the troubles, anxiety, suppression, fears and so on leave
its effect on the baby's emotional feelings[^27].

The embryo is affected by the mother's psychological attributes and all
that is positively occurred to the mother during the period of
pregnancy. Verily (the nervous problems of the mother gives a severe
blows to the gifted embryo before he was born, to extend it will change
to nervous existence. From this point of view it is necessary to have
inter-connection with the mother by giving importance to the pregnancy
in order to distance her from misguiding thought, grief, anxiety and to
maintain calm and constancy atmosphere)[^28]

The pregnancy period has its positive or negative effect on the
emotional stability of the child[^29]. That is why Islam has laid
emphasis to this reality before it was discovered by this day's
psychologist. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said:
"The unblessed is one of the wretched in his mother's womb and the
blessed is one of the fortunate in his mother's womb"[^30].

The meaning of the wretchedness and fortunate are the reflections that
occur to the embryo regards the healthy, physical and psychological
condition of the mother, then the baby has the preparedness to be
wretched or fortunate. Some of the physical sickness has effect on the
embryo and may be born affected with some of it which will accompanied
him till his old age and that will be the cause of his wretchedness or
may be saved from those sickness and will be accompanied with good
health, like wise the situation in terms of his psychological and
emotional condition.

The anxiety or tranquility, the unrest or constancy, the fear or rest
of mind and other attributes has effect on the embryo and accompanied
him if he is not in the midst of a good society to save guides him from
the previous effects or the society that will distanced him from having
physical and psychological safety.

The followings are the precautionary measures Islam has taken to
distance embryo from negative physical and psychological growth.

**A- CARES FOR THE MOTHER'S FEEDING:**

From the established reality is that the physical soundness of the
embryo depends on the mother's physical soundness.

Feeding is among the factors that contribute to the sound health of the
mother. We can observe the clear effect of starvation on babies in some
countries. The physical weakness and sickness, the deformations in
creation are all caused by starvation and mal-nutrition. Verily the
opposition is correct.

That is why the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) and the
Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) has cautioned to take care of the feeding
of a pregnant woman especially the foods that have effect on the
spiritual and psychological attributes of the embryo.

**QUINCE (SAFARJAL)**

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Eat quince
(safarjal) as it brightening the eyes and create cordiality in the mind
and feed your pregnant woman with it because it makes your son
handsome"[^31].

**MILK**

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Feed your
pregnant woman milk because it increases the child's
intelligence"[^32].

Imam Ali Ibn Musa Ar-Ridah (peace be upon him) said: "Feed your
pregnant woman milk, if there is a baby in her womb, he will comes out
brilliantly, scholarly and courageously. If she is a baby girl, she will
be beauty, possess good conduct, big buttock and honored by her
husband"[^33].

**DATES**

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Feed your
women dates in her last month to delivery, verily her child will be
tolerant and pure"[^34].

The Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) has laid down a complete time table
for the types of food that are beneficial for the physical soundness as
it was stated in the chapters of foods and drinking in Al-kafi and
Makarimul Akh'laq. Like pomegranate, fig, grapes, dried grapes,
herbaceous, chard and other fruits and again meat, mash and
vegetables.

This is in addition to the prohibition of some foods that are physical
and psychologically harmful like dead meat, blood, pig meat, wine and
all others that are mentioned in the Qur'an and traditions of the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) regards prohibited foods
and drinks.

**B- CARE FOR THE PSYCHOLOGICAL SOUNDNESS OF THE PREGNANT WOMAN.**


