Selecting a Spacious House
==========================

Imam Assadiq (peace be upon him) said: "Having spacious house is part
of happiness"[^35].

He (peace be upon him) said: "A believer has convenience in a spacious
house"[^36].

Possessing a spacious house is among the established fact that
contributes to human being's happiness and Islam has duly encourage
that. If one is in the midst of Islamic community that adopted Islamic
system of life, the societal guarantee will satisfy this need and other
ones.

In a situation where one can not afford to buy or rent a spacious
house, he is to plead the wife to work hard and struggle in order to
achieve that and give her hope on that or encourage her to be patient
for what Allah has provided for their poverty in terms of goods and
rewards.

Verily this will give her tranquility and rest of mind even if the
house is tight.

**PROVIDING ALL THE WOMAN'S NECESSITIES**

On the authority of Abdullah bn Ata, he said: I entered to Abu Jaafar
(peace be upon him) and I saw bed stead, pillows, fashions and other
things that accompanied it in his house, I said to him, what are all
this? He (peace be upon him) said: "It is women properties"[^37].

It is incumbent to provide all the necessities of the women in the
house like pillows, cushions and colored wool furnishing. This is in
addition to beautiful dresses and some other house equipments to give
her rest of mind and happiness. It is incumbent to provides all these,
base on the husband's ability but in a situation where he was not able
to provide all these or some of it, he should satisfy her with what
Allah the Most High has provided for her in the Paradise, this is in
addition to creation of hope in her mind for better condition for the
satisfaction of her needs.

**GOOD DEALINGS WITH THE WOMEN.**

Good dealing with the women especially the pregnant ones will made her
leave a happy life, full of relief, tranquility, spiritual and
psychological constancy of which there is no chance for anxiety and
psychological unrest to penetrate in her spirit and mind.

Imam Zainul Aabideen (peace be upon him) said: "Your right of
guardianship from what you have possessed through marriage is to know
that Allah has made her your residence, place of rest, intimacy and
defendant. Also it is for every one of the two spouses to thank Allah
for his companionship and to know that it is a blessing from Allah and
to make good friendship, respect and leniency with this blessing of
Allah because she possesses the Right of intimacy and place of rest, in
her your delectation"[^38].

Good dealings are to have good conduct, leniency and let her hear good
words from you. Honor her and kept her in a suitable place, considered
her a partnership in life and satisfies all her spiritual and material
needs. Treat her like human beings as honored by Islam and allow
happiness, smiling, cordiality and blessing to prevail in the house. Try
to create happiness in her mind and safe guide her secrecy and others
that Islamic teaching which it has laid emphasis on.

Among it is to assist her in some difficult domestic duties, be patient
of her mistakes and short-comings which did not affect her Islamic ways
of life. Make reconciliation in solving the daily problems in such a way
that it will not annoyed her and distance from any thing that will
psychologically affect her like unnecessary jealousy, frown of face
before her, beating her or abandoning her or reducing some of her
Rights[^39].

If you treat her very well, her spiritual and psychological condition
will be good and it will reflect on the embryo.

[^1] - Ilmi Nnafs Attarbawi: 45 - 57 -by DR. Fakhir Aqil (11th edition
printed by Darul Ilmi lil malaayeen 1985 A.D.)

[^2] - Ilmi Nnafsil Aam vol- 1: 94 - by Dr. Anthon Hamsi - printed by
Mat'ba'ah Demeshq 1407 A.H.

[^3] - Al-kafi by Kulaini vol-5:332/ 2nd ch- selecting spouse, Printed
by Daru Atta'aruf 3rd edition, 1401 A.H.

[^4] - Al-mahabba Al-baida'i vol- 3: 93 by Faidhi Kashaani, 3rd edition
Jaamiyatil mudariseen Qom.

[^5] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 304 -by Tabrasi - printed by Manshuraati
sh-sherifa Rridah 2nd edition 1410 A.H.

[^6] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 305 -by Tabrasi - printed by Manshuraati
sh-sherifa Rridah 2nd edition 1410 A.H.

[^7] - Wasaa'ili sh-shiyyah vol- 20: 85 /1st ch-34 - by Huril Aamuli -
printed by Muasasah Aali bait Qom 1st edition 1412 A.H.

[^8] - Al-kafi vol-5:354/ 1st ch prohibition from marrying foolish
woman.

[^9] - Al-kafi vol-5:352/ ch - Virtues of marrying religious woman

[^10] - Al-kafi vol-5:333/ 3rd ch- Virtues of marrying a religious
person

[^11] - Al-kafi vol-5:347/ 1st ch- The competency.

[^12] - Al-kafi vol-5: 348.

[^13] - Al-kafi vol-5: 348/ 2nd &3rd ch- last part.

[^14] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 305.

[^15] - Wasaa'il sh-shiyyah vol-20:79, Al-kafi vol-5: 347/ 1st ch- 29.

[^16] - Qur'an 30:21.

[^17] - Makarimul Akh'laq:208.

[^18] - Makarimul Akh'laq:209.

[^19] - Makaarimul Akhlaq: 209.

[^20] - Al-kafi vol-5:498/ 1st ch- The offensive time; Makarimul
Akh'laq: 208- 209.

[^21] - Makarimul Akh'laq:209.

[^22] - Makarimul Akh'laq:209.

[^23] - Makarimul Akh'laq:210.

[^24] - Makarimul Akh'laq:211.

[^25] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 211.

[^26] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 212.

[^27] - Ilmi Nnafs Attarbawi: 46-47 - by DR. Fakhil Aaqil.

[^28] - Al-tifl bainal wiratha WA ttarbawi vol-1:106 -by Mohammad Taqqi
Falsafi - printed by Daru Atta'aruf 1381 A.H. from the book "We and the
children: 27".

[^29] - Mashaakilil Aaba'a fi tarbiyatil Abna'i:263 - by DR. Sapok - 3rd
edition 1980 A.D.

[^30] - Bihaaril Anwaar: vol-3:44by Majlisi - printed by Muassasatul
wafa'i 2nd edition 1403 A.H.

[^31] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 172.

[^32] - Makarimul Akh'laq : 194.

[^33] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 194.

[^34] - Makarimul Akh'laq: 196.

[^35] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 125.

[^36] - Makaarimul Akh'laq : 131.

[^37] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 131.

[^38] - Tuhfal uquul: 188, by Haraani printed by Mat'ba'a Al-Haidariyya
Nnajaf 5th edition 1380 A.H.

[^39] - Irshaadil Quluub: 175; Makarimul Akh'laq: 245; Al-kafi
vol-5:511; Almahajjatul Baida'i vol-3:19.


