Chapter Three : Second Stage: the Stage After Birth
===================================================

This is the immediate preceding stage after pregnancy stage. It is
considered the first societal surrounding that surrounds the child,
being the foundation for orienting the child physically, mentally and
socially and it has decisive effects in formation of the passion and the
emotional growth. That is why Islamic system centralizes a special care
with the child of this stage to portray and execute the following
duties:-

**Firstly : Birth Day Cermonies**

Birth day ceremonies is commence right from the first birth day till
the seventh day in order to save-guide the child's health physically and
psychologically.

Making the child to hear the name of Allah is the first duty of the
parents.

From the authority of Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq (peace be upon
him) he said : The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said:
"Whoever have a new born baby should call for prayer (Azan) in his right
ear and call for beginning of prayer (Iqaamat) in his left ear, that
protect him from the devil"[^1].

For the importance of Azan and Iqamat in the child's ear, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his descendants) has bequeath the commander of
the faithful Ali bn Abitalib (peace be upon him) in many of his
testaments: "O' Ali if a baby boy or girl is born to you, you should
recite Azan in his right ear and Iqamat in the left ear, by so doing the
devil will not be able to harm him for ever"[^2].

Protection from the devil is the fortification on the child from
deviating from his wish. These advices even though the present
educationist and psychologist did not make any research on it but it is
among the experienced and repeated established fact for those that
implement it in their child's training and other advices in all the
child stages.

It is recommended to name your child with good names and there is no
any better name than Mohammad i.e. the name of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his descendants). From Imam Jaafar bn Mohammad Assadiq
(peace be upon him) : "A child is not born to us except we named him
Mohammad, after seven days if we wish we change it or we leave it at our
wish"[^3].

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) laid emphasis on
this naming by saying: "He has verily turn away from me who have four
baby boys without naming any one of them with my name"[^4].

The Imams from the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) do urge the Muslims
to named their baby boys and girls with the following names :-

(Abdurrahman and its type having 'Abdul, Mohammad, Ahmad, Al-hassan,
Al-Hussein, Jaafar, Talib and Fatima)[^5].

They did not encourage giving the following names :- (Al-Hakeem,
Hakeem, Khalid, Malik and Haarith)[^6].

The good names protect the child from mockery and ridicules from
others, so that it doesn't cause him to feel deficiency especially in an
ugly name.

Aqeeq i.e. slaughtering of a sheep to mark the occasion and barbing the
hair of the baby as it came from the sayings of Imam Jaafar Assadiq
(peace be upon him) is among the birth day ceremonies, he (peace be upon
him) said: "Slaughter on his behalf, barb his hair the seventh day and
gives Alms (sadaqah) of its equivalent in silver"[^7].

The offering which is the substantial of Alms giving (Sadaqah) prevent
the child from problems and save him from risks.

May be it has positive effect on the child by the time he grows up and
understand how the parents show their concern during his birthday. It is
a good remembrance for those that received the offering or part of it as
(Sadaqah) Alms giving.

Circumcision is among the birthday ceremonies. Imam Jaafar Assadiq
(peace be upon him) said : "Circumcised your children on the seventh day
after birth as it is more pure and quicker for growth of flesh"[^8].

**SECONDLY: CONCENTRATION ON BREAST FEEDING.**

In the first month of the child's life, milk is the basic and only
source the child feeds on, so the breast feeding is the best milk
because breast feeding has its emotional effect on the child. The mother
is in the best position to grant him sympathy and warmed emotion because
of the mother's instinct inducement which Allah has given to the women,
where as the child's feelings and sensation centered on the early days
breast feeding[^9].

Through breast feeding the bond of love between the child and the
mother will be more firm, then the child's tense will be little and
having rest of mind and blissful condition[^10].

Narrations and advices came from the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them)
emphasizing the concentration on the mother's milk.

The commander of the faithful Ali bn Abitalib (peace be upon him) said:
"There is no any milk having greater blessing in breast feeding the
child other than that of his mother's own"[^11].

Scientifically the best food for the baby is that of the mother's milk,
in addition through breast feeding the child will feel secured, safe and
protected. But in exceptional situations which affect the breast feeding
like insufficient milk of the mother or her sickness or loosing her
either by divorce or death, the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) has laid
emphasis on choosing a suitable and appropriate foster mother base on
the specified attributes. The commander of the faithful (peace be upon
him) said: "Observe her who gives breast feeding to your children
because the child grows on it"[^12].

The milk and the type of the foster mother have effect on the child in
terms of his physical and psychological growth. Verily an experience has
established the teachings of the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) in this
aspect. There are some attributes while choosing the foster mother that
has been approved by the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them).

Imam Mohammad Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: "Breast feed your
child with good milk and be aware of bad milk because milk
transits"[^13].

He (peace be upon him) said: "Be aware of pure wet nurse because milk
transits" [^14]

Prohibition came from breast feeding child by some foster mother.

Imam Jaafar Assadiq (peace be upon him) forbids breast feeding from
Magians. From the authority of Abdullah bn Halal, he said, I asked him
about magian wet nurse, "he said, no but the people of the book" [^15]

He conditioned breast feeding with the women of the book by preventing
them from drinking wine. He said: "If they breast feed for you, prevent
them from taking wine"[^16].

On the authority of Ali bn Jaafar, from Imam Musa bn Jaafar Al-kazim
(peace be upon them) he said: I asked him, is it polite for a Muslim men
to employed women Jews and Christian for breast feeding while they drink
wine? He (peace be upon him) said: "Prevent them from taking wine hence
they breast feed for you"[^17].

Imam Jaafar Assadiq (peace be upon him) prohibits breast feeding from a
prostitute whose milk originates from fornication, he (peace be upon
him) also said: "Don't seek breast feeding from her and her
daughter"[^18].

Imam Mohammad Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: "The milk of a Jews,
magian and a Christian is more preferable to me than that of fornicator
child's milk"[^19].

The effect of the milk in the child's innate is the wisdom behind the
prohibition because a prostitute leaves in anxiety, psychological
troubles, feeling of sin and short-comings right from the first day the
embryo convene, she remain in this condition through out the stages of
pregnancy and during her labor and delivery. All this anxiety and
troubles has its effect on the emotional feelings of the child.

The holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) has commanded
us to protect ourselves from the milk of a prostitute and a mad woman.
He (Peace be upon him and his escendants) said: "Protect your children
from the milk of a prostitute and a mad woman because milk
transits"[^20].

He (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Don't breast feed
from a foolish because the child grows with it"[^21].

Imam Mohammad Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: "Verily Ali as he
says: Don't breast feed from a foolish because her milk over-comes the
nature"[^22].

The doctors has emphasized that the mother should be at rest when
breast feeding and to touch with kindness and protection of the child.
It is incumbent on the mother not to force him to focus his face towards
her breast as that puts him in a state of disconcert and
confusion[^23].

The Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) have laid down programs for the
manners and period of breast feeding, that is breast feedings from both
sides and prolonging its period till twenty one months.

Imam Jaafar Assadiq (peace be upon him) said to the mother of Ishaq
daughter of Suleiman: "O' mother of Ishaq, don't breast feed with one
side of the breast rather breast feeds with both breasts, one of them
will serve as food while the other will serve as water"[^24].

He (peace be upon him) said: "Breast feeding is for twenty months; it
is a crime to an infant if the period is reduced"[^25].

Long period of breast feeding has positive effect on the psychological
and emotional feeling of the child. It is the most important stage for
the growing of the child's emotional feelings where as the mother laps
her child and let him closer to her chest while the child will then feel
the continuous sympathy and emotional warmness. In this respect a lady
psychologist LUIZ KABILAN says: "Verily the child who is blessed with
the flow of sympathy of his mother within the first and the second year
of his life feels of security and don't normally feels anxiety or fear
and spontaneously moves when he reaches his third or forth years. The
children that feel of tranquil psychologically enjoy deal and mix simply
with the child of his age grade"[^26].

Talking gently with the child of this stage has effect on his future
emotional and linguistic development. Fatima (peace be upon her) talks
gently with Al-hassan (peace be upon him) and says:

O' Hassan imitate your father!

Because he extract Right from wrong!

And worship the lord the Owner of favor!

And don't follow the people that feel malice!

She (peace be upon her) also speaks gently to Al-Hussein (peace be upon
him):

You resemble my father!

And did not resemble Ali![^27].

The Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) as we've previously said do
emphasize the establishment of cordiality and love between the parents
and to abstain from problems that will threaten them psychologically
especially the mother for the reflection of her emotion, constrictions
and psychological problems on the child during the stage of breast
feeding.

In this stage the Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) have cautioned us to
laid importance on the source of the mother's feeding in terms of the
type and quality as the only source the child feeds from.

There is concentration again on dates to be among the food the mother
feeds on because of its effects on the baby.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said: "Let the
first food after a child bed be a ripe dates ...." It was said to him,
O' the Prophet, what if the dates are not ripe? He said: "then seven
dates from the medina dates if not, seven from your cities"[^28].

Imam Jaafar Assadiq (peace be upon him) bequeath us to eat a type of
dates by name ALBARNI. He (peace be upon him) said: "Feed your women
after their child bed with ALBARNI as your children will be
prudent"[^29].

In a Narration from him (peace be upon him): "Feed your women after
their child bed with ALBARNI it beautified your children"[^30].

The Ahlulbait (peace be upon them) has laid down table for the
substance of food that are very important for the growth and health
soundness[^31].

Wheat flour grows the flesh, strengthens the bone and makes the
digestion very easy. Lentil flour pacifies the breaking out of blood and
lessens high temperature of the body. Meats especially that of francolin
lessen ones anger. Mashes make the body active and grant it liveliness.
The olive drives the odor, dried grapes lessens anger. The quince
strengthens the mind, the lettuce purifies the blood as they also
emphasize on taking honey, egg, milk, and other types of fruits.

The advantages of these food substances transferred from the mother to
the child through the milk that forms from it.

The summary of this discussion; it is incumbent to laid importance on
breast feeding from the mother's milk.

If it is not possible, then it is necessary to choose a believing wet
nurse that is free from physical and psychological sickness. If also it
is not possible, then none believing wet nurse but with condition of
preventing her from drinking wine and all other things that will affect
the health of the child. Given importance to the health of the mother
psychologically and physically, satisfies her needs in terms of
necessary foods for generating pure and riches milk to positively
reflect that on the child's health physically and psychologically.

[^1] - Al-kafi vol- 6:24/ 6th ch- Things to be done to a new born
baby.

[^2] - Tuhfal Uquul: 17.

[^3] - Al-kafi vol- 6: 18 / 4th ch- The naming and nick name.

[^4] - Al-kafi vol- 6: 19 / 6th ch- The naming and nick name.

[^5] - Al-kafi vol- -6:19 chapter of names and nicknames.

[^6] - Al kafi vol -6: 21 chapter of names and nicknames.


[^7] - Al kafi vol -6: 27 / 1st chapter: Slaughtering at the seventh day
from the birth day.

[^8] - Al kafi vol -6: 34/ 1st chapter: Purification.

[^9] - Al-tifl bainal wiraatha WA tarbiyah vol-2:82; by Mohammad Taqqi
falsafi, from the book Aqdatul Hiqaarah.

[^10] - Qaamoos Attifl Attibbi: 11-16.

[^11] - Al-kafi vol - 6:40/ 1st chapter - Breast feeding.

[^12] - Al-kafi vol - 6:44 / 1st ch- Those whose milk are offensive and
those not offensive.

[^13] - Al-kafi vol - 6:44 / 12th ch- Those whose milk are offensive and
those not offensive.

[^14] - Al-kafi vol - 6:44 / 13th ch- Those whose milk are offensive and
those not offensive.

[^15] - Al-kafi vol - 6:42 / 2nd ch- Those whose milk are offensive and
those not offensive.

[^16] - Al-kafi vol - 6:42 / 3rd ch- Those whose milk are offensive and
those not offensive.

[^17] - Wasaa'il sh-shiyyah vol-21:465/7 ch-76 book of marriage.

[^18] - Al-kafi vol-6:42 / 1st chapter - those whose milk are offensive
and those who are not.

[^19] - " " -6:42 / 5th

[^20] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 223.

[^21] - " " : 237.

[^22] - " " : 237.

[^23] - Qaamoos Attifl Attibbi: 33.

[^24] - Al-kafi vol-6: 40 / 2nd chapter of breast feeding.

[^25] - " " -6: 40 / 3rd

[^26] - Qaamoos Attifl Attibbi: 257.

[^27] - Bihaaril Anwaar vol- 43:286.

[^28] - Al-kafi vol-6:22 / 4th ch- Recommended foods for a pregnant
woman.

[^29] - " " -6:22 / 5th ch-

[^30] - Makaarimul Akh'laq: 169.

[^31] - Al-kafi vol-6:305 and after it.


