A Sermon Without Dots
=====================

*A sermon by the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali Ibn Abu Talib (ع)
all Arabic letters of which do not contain any dots at all.*

*\*\*\**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*
*
In the Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذه خطبة لأمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب (ع) جميع حروف كلماتها خالية من
ذكر "النقطة":
  </p>
</blockquote>

Following is a sermon by the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali Ibn Abu
Talib (ع) all Arabic letters of which do not contain any dots at all:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحمد لله الملك المحمود، المالك الودود، مصور كل مولود، ومآل كل مطرود،
ساطح المهاد وموطد الأطواد، ومرسل الأمطار ومسهل الأوطار، عالم الأسرار
ومدركها، ومدمر الأملاك ومهلكها، ومكور الدهور ومكررها، ومورد الأمور
ومصدرها، عم سماحه وكمل ركامه، وهمل، طاول السؤال والأمل، وأوسع الرمل
وأرمل، أحمده حمدا ممدودا، وأوحده كما وحد الأواه، وهو الله لا إله للأمم
سواه، ولا صادع لما عدل له وسواه، أرسل محمدا علما للإسلام وإماما
للحكام، سددا للرعاع ومعطل أحكام ود وسواع، أعلم وعلم، وحكم وأحكم، وأصل
الأصول، ومهد وأكد الموعود وأوعد، أوصل الله له الإكرام، وأودع روحه
الإسلام،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Praise to Allah Who is the praiseworthy, the affectionate owner of
everything, the One who forms everyone born, the ultimate end of
everyone who is expelled, the One Who spreads out the earth, Who firms
the mountains, Who sends out rain, who facilitates the attainment of
goals, Who knows the secrets and realizes them, Who destroys the
possessions and annihilates them, who folds out times and repeats them,
who causes matters and is their source.*
*His forgiveness covers all, His creation of the clouds is perfected:
Rain showers succeed it. He prolongs pursuits and hopes, broadens sands
and places them. I praise Him an extended praise, and I recognize His
unity just as those who love Him the most recognize: He is Allah, there
is no god for the nations besides Him, nor is there anyone to cause a
defect to what he straightens and does. He sent Muhammed as a banner for
Islam and an Imam for those who rule, a helper to the commoners and one
who puts an end to the judgments of Wadd and Siwa' (idols).*

*He knows and He informs, He rules and He perfects: He is the origin of
origins. He [Muhammed] paves the path [to the Almighty] and emphasizes
the Promised Day, warning about it. Allah has made honors to reach him,
depositing in his soul Islam,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورحم آله وأهله الكرام، ما لمع رائل وملع دال، وطلع هلال، وسمع إهلال.
إعملوا رعاكم الله أصلح الأعمال، واسلكوا مسالك الحلال، واطرحوا الحرام
ودعوه، واسمعوا أمر الله وعوه، و صلوا الأرحام و راعوها، وآعصوا الأهواء
وآردعوها، وصاهروا أهل الصلاح والورع، و صارموا رهط اللهو والطمع،
ومصاهركم أطهر الأحرار مولدا وأسراهم سؤددا، وأحلامكم موردا، وها هو
إمامكم وحل حرمكم مملكا، عروسكم المكرمه، وما مهر لها كما مهر رسول الله
أم سلمه، وهو أكرم صهر، و أودع الأولاد، وملك ما أراد، وما سهل مملكه ولا
هم ولا وكس ملاحمه ولا وصم، اسأل الله لكم أحمد وصاله، ودوام إسعاده،
وألهم كلا إصلاح حاله والأعداد لمآ له ومعاده، وله الحمد السرمد، والمدح
لرسوله أحمد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*blessing his honorable family and offspring so long as there is
anything that shines like lightning, anyone who hurries his pace towards
his pursuit, whenever a crescent appears and the announcement about it
is made.*

*Do, may Allah look after you, righteous deeds, tread the paths of what
is permissible, put what is prohibitive aside and abandon it, listen to
the command of Allah and realize it, keep in touch with your kinsfolk
and look after them, disobey your inclinations and curb them, give your
daughters by way of marriage to the people of righteousness and piety,
and stay away from the folks who sport and who covet, so your marriage
ties will produce the most pure of freemen, the most eminent descent,
those who will let you achieve your dreams.*

*This should be before your eyes, your domain will thus be rightful,
your brides honored, and let her [bride] dower be just as the Messenger
of Allah (ص) had paid to Umm Salamah, while he is the most honored of
all in-laws, the most kind of all sons, and he had whatever he wanted,
though having it was not easy, nor did it worry him, nor did his epics
ever diminish, nor was he ever stigmatized.*

*I plead to Allah to grant you the most praiseworthy of connection with
Him, the perpetuation of pleasing Him; may He inspire each of you about
that which reforms your condition and prepares you for what you shall
receive [in the Hereafter]. Eternal praise belongs to Him; lauding
belongs to His Messenger Ahmad (ص).*

**Sources:**

> [1] نقلناها عن كتاب سلوني قبل ان تفقدوني للشيخ محمد رضا الحكيمي، ج2،
> ص442- 443.

Quoted from the book "Salooni Qabla An Tafqidooni" (Ask me before you
lose me), for Shaykh Muhammed Rida Al-Hakeemi

> [2] ابي هاشم الجباني عن ابيه ابي علي عن ابي يعقوب الشحام عن ابي الهذيل
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العلاف عن ابي عثمان الطويل عن واصل بن عطاء عن ابي هاشم عبدالله بن محمد
بن علي عن ابيه محمد بن الحنفية عن علي (عليه السلام).
  </p>
</blockquote>

Narrated from Abi Hashim Al-Jabani from his father Abi Ali from Abi
Ya'qoob Al-Shahham from Abi Al-Hatheel Al-Allaf from Abi Othman
Al-Taweel from Wasil Bin Ataa from Abi Hashim Abdullah bin Muhammed bin
Ali from his father Muhammed bin Al-Hanafiyah from Ali.


