Translator's Note
=================

In undertaking the translation of this booklet, Alhijrah wal Jihad,
Immigration and Jihad, by Martyr Ayatollah Murtadha Mutahhari, I have
been keen on conveying the meaning to the English reader in Standard
English from the Arabic text that was translated from Farsi. I hope I
have succeeded in this task. I also hope that this translation will
benefit people who are interested in acquiring knowledge about Islamic
topics.

It is noteworthy, however, that the booklet is a record of a series of
lectures the late author had delivered in gatherings held in Tehran for
the annual commemoration of the martyrdom of Imam Hussain (a.s.). Thus,
and as has already been pointed out by the Arabic translator, the reader
may come across some repetitions, that are characteristic of a
sermon/lecture-delivering style, although I have done my best to
minimize these to a level that, I think, is acceptable.

Where I thought the meaning of the text would be enhanced or rendered
more intelligible, I have put the additional words, which do not
constitute part of the original text, between square brackets, thus [].
I did the same with other pieces of information I have provided that
are, in my judgment, beneficial to the reader. On certain occasions, I
felt the need to keep the Arabic word, which I enclosed between these (
) brackets, alongside its English equivalent, so as to reinforce the
meaning. On other occasions, I resorted to using them interchangeably.

In this translation, I relied on the first Arabic edition (1987),
published by the Office of International Relations, Organization for
Islamic Information, PO Box 1313/14155, Tehran, Iran.

**Najim al-Khafaji,**  
 BA, MIL.  
 London, UK, July, 2002


