Lecture One
===========

***In the Name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful***

Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds, the Creator of all beings, and may
peace be with the servant of God, His Messenger, friend, the chosen one,
the trustee of His secret and the transmitter of His Message, our master
and prophet, Muhammad and his pure and infallible progeny.

I seek refuge in God from the reviled Satan,

***“He who forsakes his home in the cause of God, finds in the earth
many a refuge, wide and spacious: Should he die as a refugee from home
for God and His Messenger, his reward becomes due and sure with God: And
God is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.” (4:100).***

Immigration and jihad are two cornerstones on which Islam relies on in
the social field. As is evident, the Holy Qur’an has, out of reverence
for their sanctity, held them in high regard, wherever they are
mentioned. Similarly, it has conferred great veneration and grandeur on
the rank of immigrants and mujahideen (the fighters back).

Immigration (hijra), means leaving one’s home, people, and homeland, for
a new place of abode, with a view to saving one’s faith from being
compromised. In many Qur’anic verses, you will notice that both words
are mentioned beside each other:

***“Those who believe, and adopt exile, and fight for the Faith, in the
cause of Allah as well as those who give (them) asylum and aid, - these
are (all) in very truth the Believers: for them is the forgiveness of
sins and a provision most generous.” (8:74).***

In the early days of Islam, Muslims used to be divided into two groups:
al-Muhajiroon (The migrants) and al-Ansar (The supporters or helpers).
Al-Ansar were the inhabitants of Medina, previously known as Yetherb,
who gave Al-Muhajiroon haven and aid. The latter were the ones who fled
their homes and travelled to Medina in order to preserve their faith.

In common with jihad, immigration is an Islamic sharia rule that is not
constant. That is, it becomes a performable religious obligation on
Muslims when certain circumstances emerge and certain conditions are
met.

To avoid misunderstanding and contradictions in understanding the rules
of both jihad and immigration, we set out here to discuss the subject in
some detail.

For both jihad and immigration different interpretations have been put
forward, i.e. different from the one we have just mentioned. Immigration
has been taken to mean, “the abandonment of misdeeds and sinning”; thus,
“the immigrant is the person who emigrated from the camp of
disobedience”.

How precise is this interpretation? Would the person, whose soul has
been tainted with sins, he then repented a true repentance, become a
deserter of misdeeds? If we accept this interpretation, all people of
the world who repented would fit this description for they forsook the
vile deeds they were committing, such as Faheel bin Ayyadh, Bishr
al-Hafi and others.

Ibn Ayyadh, used to be a thief. He turned his back to this type of
wrongdoing and turned to God in a true penitence. Having mended his
ways, he became a great man, turning into a famous teacher and
educationalist for many people. In the spell when he had taken to
stealing, Ibn Ayyadh was in the process of breaking into a house with
the intent to steal. While he was scaling the fence of the house, he
noticed that the owner of the house was in the middle of a devotional
prayer, reciting the Holy Qur’an in a submissive voice. He heard the man
recite,

***“Has not the time arrived for the believers that their hearts in all
humility should engage in the remembrance of Allah...” (57:16).***

While listening to this Qur’anic verse being recited, he somehow felt
that as though he were being addressed with those words. The words
shocked him to the core, so much so that he retorted, “O Lord! Yea. O
Lord! Yea. It is high time. And it’s up.” He then came down the fence,
after he had been dissuaded from carrying out his raid.

This was the last time he carried out an offending, be it a criminal
activity, consuming alcohol or gambling, and all other sins. He made a
clean break with his unsavory past. And in order to wipe the slate clean
and forget about his past, he made amends with the victims of his crimes
and reached a settlement with them, i.e. compensating them for what he
stole from them and asking their forgiveness. He further made amends
with his Creator. Therefore, Ibn Ayyadh fits the definition of
immigration, in that he abandoned the vile deeds he was hooked on.

In Baghdad, and during the lifetime of Imam Mousa al-Kadhim (a.s.),
there was a well know man called Bishr al-Hafi. One-day, al-Kadhim was
passing by the house of Bishr. It happened that one of his maids opened
the door to leave a bag of rubbish in front of the house. The Imam asked
her if the owner of the house was a slave or a freeman. She answered,
without hiding her bewilderment at his question, that he was a freeman.
The Imam said, “You are right. Had he been a slave he would have feared
his Lord”. [^1]

The Imam then left the scene. When the maid went back into the house,
Bishr, who was in a drinking session, asked her as to what kept her so
late. She told him the story. It seems that the words of the Imam
descended on him like a thunderbolt waking him up from his deep slumber
and forgetfulness.

After the maid had told him of the direction the Imam continued his walk
in, he quickly set off trying to catch up with the Imam, so much so that
he forget to wear his slippers. While he was in hot pursuit, he was
saying to himself that the man who uttered those words must have been
Imam Mousa bin Ja’far al-Kadhim (a.s.).

Indeed, he went to the house of the Imam and apologized to him. And
while still weeping, declared in his presence that he wanted to repent
and become a slave, not to anyone, but to God. He went on saying that he
did not want any more the type of freedom he was used to, i.e. that
which imprisoned in him his humanity and set forth the animal base
instigations; that he did not want any more to chase lofty positions and
repute; that he did not want to wade in the mire of sins and become
their hostage; that he did not want to suffocate inside him the good
innate nature and sound mind. He concluded that he wanted to be a true
slave to God and a freeman when dealing with others.

Thus, Bishr announced his repentance at the hands of Imam al-Kadhim.
From that point in time onward, he was never to relapse in his previous
bad ways, i.e. he discarded his sins (hajara thunubah) and began a clean
sheet, destroying all objects and symbols of wrongdoings, and turning to
submission to and worship of God. Accordingly, Bishr met the criterion
of immigration for he turned his back to all misdeeds and immoralities.

This definition of immigration (hijra) is similar to that of jihad for
the mujahid (lit. maker of a great effort) which is “the one who is at
odds with the inclinations of his tempting self”,[^2] especially its bad
suggestions. It is a known fact that the internal struggle is ever
present between the soul and its preferences on the one hand and reason
on the other; in other words, a constant warring between heart and mind.

Imam Ali (a.s.) has been quoted as saying,

**“The bravest of people is he who overcomes his leanings”**[^3]

The real courage is demonstrated in this incident, which took place
during the time of the Messenger of God, Muhammad (s.a.w.). He was
passing by a place where he saw a group of youth competing with one
another over who could lift the heaviest rock. Aiming to make use of the
occasion to preach to the youngsters, he approached them and offered to
act as a referee between them in their contest. They accepted his offer.

He said to them*,* “No one of you should be in need to lift any rock so
that they can be judged the strongest. Instead, I have a proposition for
you, in that whoever among you can muster the strength and plug the
courage to overpower his soul and prevent it from committing sins should
be declared the strongest.” It therefore follows that the mujahid is the
one who could win over his self and the brave is the one who could
overcome his desires.

There is another example and lesson, which demonstrates true bravery,
and which we could draw from the story of Poryay Wooly (sic), a famous
wrestling champion. He sets a parable for what a true champion should
be. He was the epitome of gentlemanly conduct and magnanimity. The story
goes like this: One day, our champion arrived in a town where he was
scheduled to meet in a contest with the top wrestler of that town. While
he was on a tour in that town, he came across an old woman who was
giving out pieces of sweets to passersby. She gave him a piece of
chocolate and asked him for a prayer.

He asked her whether there was anything in particular she wanted him to
pray for. She said to him that her son was the wrestling champion of
their town and that he was going to meet later in the week, another
wrestler who came from another town. She added that she felt
apprehensive about her son’s chances of winning, in that he might lose,
and that his defeat would not only be considered a setback for her son,
but it would mean that their source of income would dry up. In short,
his defeat would spell disaster for the family. Our champion told her to
have peace of mind, in that he would pray for her son to win the match.

After that conversation with the old woman, he was in a reflective mood,
calling to mind that “he who overcomes his inclinations is the bravest
of people”. At the appointed time of contest between him and his
opponent and as the contest progressed, he came to know that his
opponent was much weaker than him and that if he wanted to, he could
have defeated him in no time.

However, having reached a decision that he would let his opponent defeat
him, he overindulged in evasive movements to give the impression that
the contest was proceeding normally, and in the opportune time, he gave
way and let his opponent defeat him.

The storyteller went on to say that at the moment of defeat, our
champion felt that his heart became wide open for God, as though he were
in His dominion. And because that man did battle with his soul and
scored a victory over its inclinations, he had become among the friends
of God. You might ask, why? The answer is because “the true mujahid is
the one who does battle with his soul”, the “bravest of people is he who
overcomes his desires”, and lastly, because he demonstrated the kind of
courage and magnanimity that made him excel over all champions.[^4]

More significant of the previous story is that of Imam Ali (a.s.) and
Amr bin Wid, a battle-hardened fighter, who earned the nickname of “the
Knight of Yelyel.[^5] This story goes like this: At the battle of
Khandaq (the Trench) the army of Muslims was on one side of the trench
and that of the polytheists (mushrikeen) was on the other side. A group
of infidels, among them Amr bin Wid, managed to cross over to the side
of the Muslim army. Ibn Wid, mounting his horse, started yelling and
challenging the Muslim fighters to fight him in a duel.

The Prophet (s.a.w.) turned to his companions, enquiring whether anyone
of them was willing to fight the challenger. All were quiet, apart from
Ali, who stood up and said, “I am his match.” The Prophet said, “He is
Amr. Sit down.” Ibn Wid grew more vociferous, taunting the Muslims and
making fun of their assertion that whoever was killed among Muslims
would go to heaven.

For the second time, Ali stood up and volunteered to face him in combat.
He was asked by the Prophet to sit down. Amr bin Wid shouted for the
third time, throwing down the gauntlet. Ali picked up the gauntlet and
asked the Prophet to give him permission to fight Ibn Wid.

The result of the swordfight was in favor of Ali. The high point of the
combat came when Ali overcame Ibn Wid, by seriously wounding him, and
wanted to deal him the last blow. Ibn Wid spat in the face of Ali who
was sitting on his chest, prior to beheading him. Ali let go of him and
moved away to have a stroll before returning to finish him off. While
Ali was in the process of doing just that, Ibn Wid asked him as to why
he moved away and came back. Ali replied that he was hurt and offended
when Ib Wid spat at him, preferring to move away as not to let his
dealing him the last blow be considered as though it were for taking
personal revenge. That is, killing him would not count in the cause of
God.

So, the short time Ali took between the incident of spitting and moving
away from the fallen foe and coming back to finish him off was for
suppressing his anger, so that his killing him would be deemed in the
cause of God, and not for Ali’s personal vendetta.[^6]

In summation, the second definition of hijra (immigration) is forsaking
sins and misdeeds and the second interpretation for jihad is battling
with one’s own self, with a view to deterring it from driving one to
committing that which is vile or improper. However, is this
interpretation correct? The answer to this question is yes, in that in
itself it is correct and, yet, it has been misunderstood. Our statement,
“The immigrant is he who departs wrongdoings, and the mujahid (the
battler) is he who is at odds with his tempting self”, can be found in
the traditions (hadith) of the Infallibles (a.s.).

The Prophet (s.a.w.) describes battling one’s soul (jihadun nafs) as
“the major jihad”. And yet, the mix-up and misinterpretation has come
about as a result of some people’s resorting to annulling the first
meaning by suggesting that the import of hijra is departing one’s
misdeeds by mending their ways, and that the meaning of jihad is
battling with oneself to dissuade it from committing what is unlawful,
implying that there is no need for man to leave his home and kin when it
becomes necessary.

That is, there is no point in fleeing to other countries when needs be.
We should, instead, stay put; it would suffice that we abandon the
crooked ways that leads to the commissioning of sins and would therefore
be eligible for the definition of muhajir (immigrant).

As regards jihad, some would like to argue that since jihad is doing
battle with oneself, there remains no necessity for entering in war with
the enemies of Islam; it would, they further allege, suffice that we
stay at home and busy ourselves with wrestling with our internal
struggle. This, in their view, is the jihad in the cause of God
(aljihadu fi sabilillah). In their judgment, this type of jihad is far
superior to the other one because it is “the major jihad” (aljihadul
akbar) as opposed to the other one, which is “the minor jihad”
(aljihadul asghar).

As is evident, interpreting hijra, as abandoning committing what is
vile, has been taken as an alleged reason for dismissing as irrelevant
hijra (immigration) according to the first meaning. Similarly,
interpreting jihad as doing battle with oneself as an excuse for
rejecting as redundant the jihad according to the first meaning. This is
where deviation from the right reading of both the concepts has
occurred.

It goes without saying that there are two types of hijra (immigration)
in Islam; the same goes for jihad. Choosing [for convenience] any type
at the expense of the other, i.e. in both the cases – jihad and
immigration would entail departure from Islam and its injunctions.

Our great leaders of religion – the Prophet (s.a.w.), Imam Ali and the
rest of the Imams (a.s.) were all among the immigrants (muhajir) in the
Way of God in the sense of both types of hijra(immigration). And the
same goes for jihad. However, tackling the subject from a semantic
standpoint, we would come across gradations that cannot be reached
without going through both the categories of jihad as well as
immigration. That is, it is implausible that someone attains the rank of
mujahid (fighter) before experiencing combat in the battlefield.

Likewise, one cannot be deemed “immigrant” without going through the
process of real immigration, in the manifest meaning of term. This is
God’s law with His creation; He has made man’s attaining maturity and
advancement contingent on his passing educational/training courses.

For example, in the view of Islam, marriage is a sacred institution for
a number of reasons, unlike contemporary Christianity that considers
celibacy, [perhaps a reference to the institution of bachelorhood of the
Catholic priesthood] as a sacred deed. So, why does Islam regard
marriage a sanctified practice? The secret of attaching great importance
to this tradition lies in its immense influence in cultivating man’s
spirit.

For man’s soul to attain a sublime position of wisdom and perfection,
marriage would contribute immeasurably to reaching that rank.
Conversely, if men preferred to stay bachelor and women spinster till
death, they would remain lacking in spiritual prosperity.  
 The reason for this is the absence of the educational dimension of
marriage.

Such men and women will not be able to overcome this inadequacy even if
they spent their entire lives in worship, meditation, and battling with
their tempting selves. Islam has, therefore, considered the institution
of wedlock among its traditions, being one of positive influences on
man’s education and his pursuit of perfection. Thus, any effect of any
factor that contributes in shaping man’s character is limited to the
area where it can be effective. Equally, any alternative factor would
not have the same effect, if it were to be hoped to give the same
results. And by the same token, any of these factors that are
collectively taking part in the process of man’s cultivation cannot be
used interchangeably.

Immigration and jihad are among the factors that have a say in man’s
development towards perfection. It therefore follows that no other
factor can replace them. Using the same rationale, jihad, in the sense
of man’s struggle with oneself, has its place, so does immigrating, i.e.
turning one’s back to committing sins. And yet, practical immigration is
one of the educational factors that cannot be superseded by the type of
immigration in the sense of abandoning committing sins. Similarly,
jihad, in the sense of fighting back the enemies of God, can never be
replaced by the second type of jihad, i.e. doing battle with one’s
tempting self and vice versa. In the eye of Islam, both are in the same
rank of importance in Islamic education.

Here one may say that the living circumstances vary from one individual
Muslim to another and that a certain Muslim individual may not be
required to embark on either immigration or jihad against the enemies of
God. What would become of such an individual, given the important
positive influence of upholding these two tenets?

The Noble Messenger (s.a.w.) provides the answer for this question,
saying that the religious duty on such a Muslim in such circumstances
should be that he always has a true and sincere intention to embark on
such a duty should circumstances change, in that there may arise the
need for embarking on immigration or engaging in jihad as the case may
be.

Thus, provided there is such intention and determination, such an
individual should be able to meet the requirements of attaining the rank
of immigrant (muhajir) and fighter (mujahid). This meaning can be
gleaned from this prophetic tradition,

**“Whomever did not take part in battle [against the infidels] or did
not contemplate such an eventuality, would die a hypocrite.”**

The Holy Qur’an has this to offer in this regard:

***“Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and receive no hurt,
and those who strive and fight in the cause of God with their goods and
their persons. God hath granted a grade higher to those who strive and
fight with their goods and persons than to those who sit (at home). Unto
all (in Faith) hath God promised good: But those who strive and fight
hath He distinguished above those who sit (at home) by a special
reward, - Ranks specially bestowed by Him, and Forgiveness and Mercy.
For God is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.” (4:95-96).***

It is clear from this Qur’anic text that in its discussion, it does not
talk about those who preferred not join the fight [out of choice, and
not for a good reason]. The reference to those “who sit at home” is
confined to those believers who did not join others in the strife and
fight because there is a sufficient number of mujahidin (fighters). So,
when it comes to allotting ranks, the fighters are given loftier
positions or ranks over those who stayed behind for a reason.

However, in the same vein, the Qur’anic verse confirms that this
classification does not cover “Those who sit (at home) by a special
reward”, i.e. those who stayed behind by virtue of their physical
disabilities – such as blindness, paralysis, and illness. The Qur’an
reiterates that those too may attain the rank of the fighters. They may
as well overtake the fighters, should they have harbored sincere
intentions and true determination to join in the fight. That is, if
their valid reasons for not joining were lifted, they would have joined
the war effort in person and wealth. This principle is sound, when its
conditions are fulfilled.

On the return of Imam Ali (a.s.) from the battle of Siffeen [fought
against Mu’awiyah],[^7] a man, among the rank and file of his army,
asked him, “O Commandar of the Faithful! I have a brother whom I would
have loved that he be among us, so that he could achieve the favour of
your companionship.” The Imam replied, “What was the intention of your
brother, his resolution, the inclination of his heart? Had he a valid
reason that prevented him from joining us?” The Imam then provided the
answers for all these questions, saying, “Had he no valid reason and did
not join us, his not being with us is better for us.[^8]

Had he a good reason for not being with us and yet his heart was with us
and his resolution was to join us once the reasons that had prevented
him from joining us were lifted, he would be judged as though he were
with us.” The man answered in the affirmative. The Imam (a.s.) said,
“Not only your brother alone was with us. Verily, other men who are
still in the wombs of their mothers; rather, those unborn men [who are
still, in the form of sperm in the semen] of their fathers, are with
us.”

This is an unshakeable truth till the Day of Judgment, that any person
who is intent on wishing that he were at the time of Ali and that he
would have, with firm will, joined him in his army in Siffeen, he must
rest assured that he would be deemed among his supporters, even though
he did not witness the battle.

Awaiting relief from suffering
------------------------------

What does waiting for the happy ending mean? And what does the
statement, “The best of works is looking forward to the happy ending”
mean? Some people mistakenly believe that waiting for relief from
suffering (faraj), which is the best of deeds, means that we should look
forward to the reappearance of the Awaited Imam, al-Mahdi (May God
hasten his reappearance) who would do so with a group of his disciples,
totaling 313 men, with scores of followers.

And once they appeared on the scene, they would wage war against the
enemies of Islam, cleanse the earth of their uncleanness and vile deeds,
establish the rule of justice and security in the land, and make
available freedom and prosperity for all. And once this is done, they
would invite us to enjoy their toil!! It seems that some people would
like us to believe that this is what is meant by “Waiting for the happy
ending (faraj)”, describing it as the best of good deeds.

However, the true waiting for faraj is that we should expect the
reappearance of Imam al-Mahdi and be drafted in his army and fight under
his command even if we get martyred in the process. The genuine waiting
is in man’s whole aspiration to be party to the jihad in the cause of
God. That is, not the kind of waiting that entails dependency on the
Imam to solve our problems by performing all the intractable tasks, and
once these are out of the way and the time for reaping the fruit of the
toil comes we would then emerge to enjoy the harvest. This is not the
right approach.

This is the reasoning of the followers of Prophet Moses (a.s.). As for
the followers of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), they said to him: O
Messenger of God! We are not going to address you in the same manner the
Israelites did with Moses when they got to the approaches of Jerusalem,
Palestine and found out that there was an army waiting for them:

***“..O Moses! We shall never enter it as long as they are in it. Gof
thou, and thy Lord, and fight ye two, while we sit here.” (5:24).***

To that, Moses (a.s.) retorted: What is your responsibility then? You
should be liable to drive out the transgressors who occupied your land
and sent you into exile. In contrast, the followers of Muhammad
(s.a.w.), such as al-Miqdad, did not replicate the position of Moses’
followers. They said: We believed in you and bore witness that what you
call for is the truth, and swore allegiance to you to be obedient.

Therefore, set forth to wherever you have decided and we will be with
you. We swear by Him Who sent you with the truth, should you decide to
push your way in this sea we would have done so with you, without a
single one of us turning back. We are not averse to the orders to engage
in combat an enemy tomorrow.[^9]

As such, genuine “waiting for the happy ending” is that we should be
full of hope and determination to succeed in joining the army of the
Awaited Imam (May God hasten his reappearance), so that we be in a
position to contribute to reforming the world.

“We wish we were with you, so that we could have achieved a great
victory”. We always repeat this statement, addressing Imam Hussain
(a.s.). Yet, do we really pay attention to its actual meaning? It simply
means**,**

**“O Aba Abdillah! We wish we were with you so that we could have
attained the rank of martyrdom fighting on your side and under your
standard, and thus we would have achieved a great victory.”**

Are these just words or do they underline a sincere intension and a true
desire? Although there are people who utter the words and truly mean
what they are talking about, yet the majority of us recite these words
in the book of visitations, paying lip service to them.

Imam Hussain (a.s.) uttered these words, in commendation of the
sincerity of his companions,

**“I am not aware of any companions who are better than my companions
both in kindness and loyalty.”**[^10]

An outstanding Shia scholar used to cast doubt over the authenticity of
the statement, in that it might have not emanated from Imam Hussain. His
rationale for dismissing it as unauthentic goes thus, “Having pondered
the question, I have reached this conclusion: The companions of Imam
Hussain did not do an exceptional deed. It was the enemy who
demonstrated debased attitude and practice. Knowing that Imam Hussain is
the grandson of the Prophet, the son of Imam Ali and Fatima, the Imam of
his Age, etc., it goes without saying that any ordinary Muslim would
have come to his rescue, seeing him in that situation. So, the band of
people who fought beside him did not do anything out of the ordinary. On
the contrary, those who did not come to his aid were very bad people”.

He went on to say, “It seems that Allah wanted to deliver me from this
inattention, ignorance, and misguidance. In my dream, I saw myself
witnessing the battle of at-Taf, i.e. Karbala. In response to his appeal
for support, I declared to Imam Hussain my readiness to side with him
against his enemy.

The Imam asked me to wait for his instructions. In the meantime, the
time for prayer became due.[^11] The Imam said: We want to say our
prayer. You are required to keep a vigil in that corner, so that you can
forestall any attack by the enemy that could be coming from there. I
said: Go ahead O son of the Messenger of God! He started saying the
prayer. I stood in front of him. After a short while I saw an arrow
coming in my direction. I, unconsciously, ducked it. The arrow crashed
into the Imam. I said: I seek forgiveness from God and repent to Him,
what a preposterous act I have just committed.

This incident happened on three more occasions, where I, time and again,
took evasive action to avoid the arrow hitting me and instead let it hit
the Imam every time. On turning my head towards the Imam, I noticed that
he was looking at me with a smile on his face and said: (I have never
seen any companions better than my companions both in kindness and
loyalty)”.

The Imam then added, and the narrative is still that of the Shia scholar
was relating, “Sitting at home repeating the words: (We wish we were
with you, so that we would achieve a great victory) is worthless if you
do not put it into practice. Are you like this? My companions were
people whose actions spoke louder than words. They were not mincing
their words.”

[Going back to that part of the story of the martyrdom of Imam Hussain
(a.s.)], on the tenth of Muharram (Aashoura’), the Imam said the last
Dhuhr (noon) prayer before he was martyred. Most of his comrades in arms
were martyred earlier that day, in the exchanges of volleys of arrows
between the combatants. Thus, he was left with the immediate members of
his family and a small band of his companions.

The fighting force of the Imam totaled some seventy-two warriors. And
yet, despite their small number, they were enjoying high morale and
showing exemplary gallantry. Being the commander of this small army,
Imam Hussain did not show any sign of weakness or despondency.

He planned for the showdown with the enemy by positioning three main
groups of his soldiers into a central segment (the heart), right and
left flanks, as any other regular army did in those circumstances.
Zuhair bin al-Qayn was appointed commander of the right flank, Habib bin
Mudhahir was charged with the responsibility of defending the left
flank. His brother al-Abbas (a.s.) was made the standard-bearer.

The companions of Imam Hussain (a.s.) were eager to start the fight.
However, the Imam was insistent on not launching the first strike,
leaving it to the enemy to do so. That starting shot came at the hands
of Omar bin Sa’ad.

Ibn Sa’ad was keen on holding both the spiritual and the materialistic
at the same time. He was aspiring to securing Ibn Ziyad’s offer of
appointing him the governor of Ray, but without staining his hands with
the blood of al-Hussain. Because of this soul-searching and struggle to
subdue his inclinations, he embarked on a string of letters to Imam
Hussain with a view to avoiding the bloodshed.

When the news reached Ibn Ziyad, he wrote to him a stern letter,
ordering him to quickly kill the Imam. He threatened him that he would
sack him and appoint someone else in his place, should he choose to
ignore his instructions. Ibn Sa’ad could not rid himself of his bondage
to the materialistic world. So, since he was given a choice between this
world and the next, he opted for the former, selling his faith in
return. Thus, he acquiesced to the order of Ibn Ziyad. In so doing, he
demonstrated dishonorable qualities and treachery and committed one of
the most heinous crimes in the history of mankind.

Ibn Ziyad’s justifications for committing some of those atrocities was
that he was seeking to be seen taking a position of neutrality, i.e. by
not siding with Imam Hussain (a.s.). In order to show his loyalty to Ibn
Ziyad, especially in the light of the latter’s receiving many reports
accusing him of showing reluctance in fighting the Imam, he embarked on
a killing spree, massacring the Progeny of the Prophet (a.s.).

When the two adversarial armies pitched their fighters opposite one
another, Ibn Ziyad took a bow and arrow from one of his bowmen, or
archers, placed an arrow in the bow and shot in the direction of
al-Hussain’s camp, remarking, “Bear witness for me with the Prince [Ibn
Ziyad] that I was the first one to shoot”. [^12]

This is the story of the first arrow that was shot in the battle of
Karbala. However, whenever I reach thus far in telling the story of the
battle, I remember a saying by our friend the great scholar the late
Ayati. I either heard him say it or read his words somewhere. He used to
say,

**“The battle of Karbala was started with a shot of an arrow and was
ended with another shot of an arrow”.**

Indeed, it started with the shot/arrow of Ibn Sa’ad and ended with a
poisoned three-pronged arrow that was shot at Imam Hussain, who was
already badly wounded and very thirsty, which lodged into his heart,
putting an end to his jihad. The Imam was on the verge of collapsing,
but for his last few words, in which he was addressing his Lord*, “*In
the Name of God and by God, and on the religion of the Messenger of
God.”[^13]

Another of the Imam’s companions was Aabis bin Shibeeb ash-Shakiri, who
was filled with high spirit and valour. He took the centre stage of the
battlefield and issued a challenge to the army of Ibn Ziyad, if there
was any one among them who was prepared to fight him in one-to-one
combat. No one dared to respond to his challenge. Having repeated his
call several times, but to no avail, and realizing that the coat of arms
and headgear he was wearing were proving cumbersome, he parted with
them. Thus, he mounted attacks on the enemy soldiers who were fleeing
before him. They were not able to kill him, only by stoning him and
shooting him with torrents of arrows. Thus, he was martyred.

On the day of the Battle of Karbala, all the companions of Imam Hussain
(a.s.), men and women, depicted the most vivid portraits of gallantry
and sacrifice. They left their indelible marks in the chapters of
history of mankind, only to be revered and emulated. Had their
equivalent been found in the history of the West, they would have held
them in a very high regard.

Abdullah bin Omeir al-Kalbi was another of the companions of Imam
Hussain. In his company were his wife and mother. He was a gallant
warrior. When he wanted to join the battle, his wife, a newly wed woman,
tried to prevent him and pleaded with him, “With whom you are going to
leave me? Who is going to take care of me? Please do not leave me behind
for bereavement.” On hearing her, his mother intervened, “O my son! Do
not listen to her. Go and fight in defense of the son of the Messenger
of God, so that he would tomorrow, on the Day of Judgment, be your
intercessor. I will not be pleased with you until you got killed
fighting with al-Hussain.” He assaulted the enemy and got killed in the
process.

His mother plucked the courage, arming herself with a pole, and embarked
on attacking the enemy. Al-Hussain prevented her from doing so, saying,
“May all members of your family be rewarded with that which is best. Go
back and join the rest of the women. May God have mercy on you. Being a
woman, you are not required to do jihad.”

As the battle progressed, more massacres took place. The enemy beheaded
Abdullah bin al-Hussain, [who was just an infant], hurling the severed
head towards his mother. She held it and wiped the dirt off it, hugging
and kissing it, and saying, “O my son! I am pleased with you, I am
pleased.” She then tossed the baby’s head towards the camp of the enemy,
saying, “What we give away in the Way of God, we do not reclaim.”

Among the other supporters of al-Hussain was a boy, aged either ten or
twelve years, whose father was killed earlier on in the fighting. Armed
with his sword, he approached the Imam and asked for permission to enter
the fight. The Imam did not grant him permission out of sympathy for his
mother who had just been bereaved of her husband, saying, “The father of
this boy was killed in the first campaign, and maybe his mother does not
like him to be killed.” The boy replied that his mother had agreed to
his taking part in the fighting and that she would be pleased with him,
if he got killed in defense of al-Hussain.

That boy was of an outstanding character, demonstrating his moral fiber
in the battle. His way of joining the battle was different from the
manner the rest of the fighters, who were coming forward for their debut
in the battle. They introduce themselves and their lineage by way of
reciting war poetry in a roaring style (rajz). That boy did not follow
in the footsteps of the fighters who preceded him and introduced
themselves in that pattern. Instead, he recited a couplet, singing the
praise of his connection with al-Hussain (a.s.) and being one of his
soldiers per se,

“My lord is Hussain, the pleasure that descended on the heart of the
bearer of good tidings, the warner [Prophet Muhammad]. Ali and Fatima
are his parents. Do you know of anyone thus pure-bred?”

[Approaching the end of the lecture, it is customary to end it on this
note, i.e. a supplication],

**“O Lord! Grant us the success to be submissive to You, keep our
distance from committing what is vile, be truthful in our intensions,
and make us recognise that Your Mercy knows no bounds. Be gracious to us
by bestowing on us guidance and** **straightforwardness. Guide our
speech towards that which is right and wise. Fill our hearts up with
knowledge and mindfulness*****.***

**O Lord! Illuminate our hearts with the light of faith. Make us among
the true immigrants (muhajirs) and fighters (mujahids) in the way of
striving to make the word of Thy religion rule supreme.**

**O Lord! Grant the Muslims victory over their enemies in all the
fronts.”**

[^1]: When the maid opened the door, the sound of singing and clamor
could be heard by the passersby.

[^2]: Wasail’ush Shia, vol. 11, p. 124.

[^3]: Nahjul Balagha. Imam Ali (a.s.) has an adage, serving the same
theme, “It is not a winner whose sins catch up with him, and if the evil
one overcame, he would eventually taste defeat.” Nahjul Balagha, Beirut
new edition, Catalogued by Dr. Subhi as-Saleh, axiom No. 327, p. 533.

[^4]: No doubt many champions, heroes, and ordinary people find in Imam
Ali a role model, because, above all, he was fighting on two fronts –
The external enemy and the enemy within, i.e. his tempting soul.

[^5]: The reason why he earned that title is that he was in a caravan
with other members of the tribe of Quraish. When the caravan reached the
valley of Yelyel, near Badr, it was ambushed by a group of men of the
tribe of Banu Bakr. Amr bin Abdi Wid asked his travelling companions to
slip away. He single-handedly faced up to the attackers and defeated
them. (at-Tabataba’i, al-Mizan Qur’anic Commentary, Chapter 33, al-Ahzab
vol. 16, p. 297).

[^6]: The story we traced has been related by al-Majlisi in his Biharul
Anwar, vol. 41, p. 51, Beirut new edition, that goes like this: When he
gained the upper hand over Amr bin Abdi Wid, he did not deal him the
final blow. The companions of the Prophet criticized Ali for not
finishing him off. Huthaifa spoke in defense of Ali. The Prophet asked
him to keep quiet, adding that Ali would put them in the picture as to
why he paused before dealing his foe the last blow. When he finally
killed bin Abdi Wid and went back to join the other combatants, the
Prophet asked him about the delay in finishing his enemy off. Ali said
that bin Abdi Wid called his mother names and spat in his face, and that
had he killed him under the spur of the moment, it would have counted as
though he killed him in revenge of his honor. Thus, he added, that he
gave himself a respite to cool down in order that his killing him would
be in the cause of God.

[^7]: The story as it is told in Nahjul Balagha explains that this
dialogue took place while the Imam was returning from Basrah after God
granted him victory over the adversaries in the Battle of the Camel, and
not after Siffeen, as the author had mentioned. (Nahjul Balagha, Beirut
new edition, Catalogued by Dr. Subhi as-Saleh, vol. 1, p. 55).

[^8]: “If they had intended to come out, they would certainly have made
some preparation therefore; but God was averse to their being sent
forth; so He made them lag behind, and they were told, "Sit ye among
those who sit (inactive). If they had come out with you, they would not
have added to your (strength) but only (made for) disorder, hurrying to
and fro in your midst and sowing sedition among you, and there would
have been some among you who would have listened to them. But God
knoweth well those who do wrong.” (9/46-47). This is in respect of the
first group. As regards the second group, which the Imam made reference
to, the Holy Qur’an describes them, thus: “There is no blame on those
who are infirm, or ill, or who find no resources to spend (on the
cause), if they are sincere (in duty) to God and His Apostle: no ground
(of complaint) can there be against such as do right: and God is
Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful. Nor (is there blame) on those who came to
thee to be provided with mounts, and when thou said, "I can find no
mounts for you," they turned back, their eyes streaming with tears of
grief that they had no resources wherewith to provide the expenses.”
(9/91-92). In Sunan Ibn Majah, the Book of Jihad, vol. 2, p. 923, it has
been related from the Prophet, after his return from expedition of Tabuk
towards the approaches of Medina, “There are people in Medina, who,
whatever distance you have covered, they would be with you.” They asked,
“O Messenger of God! Even if they were in Medina?” He replied, “Yes,
even if they were in Medina. They have a good reason for not being with
us.”

[^9]: Those words were Sa’ad bin Ma’ath’s in reply to a question put by
the Prophet, who asked the opinion of the Ansar (Supporters, i.e. the
people of Medina) about the proposition of taking on the army of the
polytheists at the Battle of Badr. See Ibn Hisham’s Prophetic Biography,
the Battle of Badr, in the closing pages of vol. 2 of the Beirut
edition.

[^10]: This is the text the author has quoted, however, what we found in
the books of history is that Imam Hussain (a.s.) gathered together his
companions and members of his household on the eve of the tenth of
Muharram and gave an oration, among whose contents were these words,
“Now then, I am not aware of any companions more superior than my
companions, neither a household that are more caring and loving than my
family. May God reward you all on my behalf.”

[^11]: The historiographers of battles assert that Sa’eed bin Abdullah
al-Hanafi and a group of other combatants formed a circle around Imam
Hussain and his companions while they were saying their prayers.
(Abdullah Shubbar’s Jala’ul Uyoon, the Chapter concerning His Arrival in
Karbala until His Martyrdom.)

[^12]: It is worth noting that Sa’ad’s father was a companion of the
Prophet. He was a consummate archer and had a good reputation among
Arabs. He had a very good record in the battles of Islam and rendered
noble services to Islam in this regard.

[^13]: Abdullah Shubbar’s Jala’ul Uyoon, on which we relied heavily to
cross-check the text relating to the Battle of Karbala throughout the
three lectures.


