Lecture Three
=============

***In the Name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful***

Praise be to God, Lord of the worlds, the Creator of all beings, and may
peace be with the servant of God, His Messenger, friend, the chosen one,
the trustee of His secret and the transmitter of His Message, our lord
and prophet, Muhammad and his pure and infallible progeny.

I seek refuge in God from the reviled Satan,

***“He forsakes his home in the cause of God, finds in the earth many a
refuge, wide and spacious: Should he die as a refugee from home for God
and His Messenger, his reward becomes due and sure with God: And God is
Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.” (4/100).who***

Among the subjects that the Holy Qur’an paid attention to, as did
Islamic jurisprudence, is the question of immigration (hijra). In the
opinion of the majority of us, hijra revolves around a special
historical incident that took place in the early days of Islam. That
event was the migration of the Great Messenger (s.a.w.) and his
companions from Mecca to Medina. That event marked the Hijri calendar
[For those who want to have some idea of the date according to the
Western dating system, a rough guide is to add some 620 years to the
Islamic date.].

No doubt this event is very significant because it represents a
milestone in the history and development of Islam. However, is the
importance of hijra limited to this event?

Do all the references made in the Holy Qur’an to hijra and deeming the
muhajirs (migrants) in rank on a par with the mujahideen (fighters),
such as ***“Those who believe, and emigrate, and fight for the Faith, in
the cause of Allah..” (8:74)***, belong to that particular historical
event and that there is left no other signification to be inferred after
that event? Is this really the situation with hijra, or is it not, in
common with belief and jihad, governed by any particular time or place?

No doubt, there is no way the meaning of hijra (immigration), like jihad
and belief, can be confined to what happened in the early days of Islam.

Whatever meaning was attached to hijra in those days, and in the same
measure was true of jihad, makes both general and constant rulings. That
is, they are not the exclusive preserve of a particular time or place.

Imam Ali (a.s.) has discussed this topic in Nahjul Balagha (The Path of
Eloquence). [A collection of his sermons, letters, and axioms] and said,
“Hijra is commensurate with its first meaning.” (al-hijra qa’ima ala
haddihal awwal),[^1] meaning that hijra is not restricted to a
particular time or place. And as the Prophet (s.a.w.) found it necessary
to emigrate from Mecca to Medina, his followers must do the same, should
circumstances make it necessary for them to emigrate. Our reading of
Imam Ali’s statement is that we cannot argue that there are no practical
expressions for hijra post the Prophet era.

Now, let us dwell on the definition and significance of hijra. As we
have already mentioned, immigration means moving away from home, family
and friends in order to preserve one’s faith. What is self-evident is
that since this is the definition of the concept, you cannot restrict it
to a particular time or space.

This is the Islamic standpoint of hijra. Taking the cue from the
definition, it becomes obligatory on the person to flee his place of
abode where they may endanger their religious life if they stayed. So,
if you are presented with one of two alternatives, in that you either
lose your faith, or find somewhere else to practice it freely, Islam
obligates his followers to embark on hijra to protect their religion.

In the Holy Qur’an, there is a verse that discusses ‘force majeure’, [or
power that cannot be acted or fought against]. Many among our people,
who have grown accustomed to doing what is vile, seem to cite this
principle as an excuse for their going astray and being overwhelmed by
social custom. That is, even though some social norms go against the
grain of religion. So, when you take issue with someone and ask them why
they do not seem embarrassed by joining in parties where, for example,
alcohol is being served and consumed, an act that is unlawful (haraam),
their answer comes ready, “Society’s customs push us to do so. There is
nothing we can do. Society is afflicted with corruption and deviant
practices.”

Indeed, the pretext of “force majeure” has become a scapegoat for many
sinners. Islam rejects these reasons, on the whole and in detail. Islam
outlines for us clearly defined positions vis-à-vis corrupt societies,
making it a religious duty of the Muslim to do his level best to reverse
the decadence and degeneration of society and rehabilitate its members
to live a moral life in accordance with the path and ideals that have
been mapped out by Islam. Nevertheless, should it prove that we are
facing an uphill struggle, in that there is no hope in making the
profligate society in which we live mend its ways, that we reached a
conclusion that our present and future generation might be adversely
affected, Islam offers us a way out – immigration to some other place
where we can safeguard our religion.

It is noteworthy that immigration could prove sufficient if one moves
out from one’s usual place of abode to some other neighborhood. That is,
you do need to contemplate moving out from your own hometown or
homeland, for that matter. This is particularly true of metropolises
like Tehran, for example, where you can find neighborhoods where
children can be brought up in an Islamic climate. This is in contrast to
other areas within the same city where you can hardly come across any
hint of Islamic life. Families who moved houses to such districts would
be confronted with unsavory scenes, let alone the absence of Islamic
institutions, such as mosques and seminaries.

It is quite possible that such unbecoming environments might not
negatively influence the adult population among us, especially those who
have been brought up in Islamic climates and who have become immune to
such influences. Nevertheless, what would the consequences for young
children be? Those children will open their eyes on climates plagued
with deviation and corruption. So, there is a risk that such children
will not emerge true young Muslims.

Here, there is a question that begs for an answer. What is the religious
duty vis-à-vis this issue? The answer is that in the beginning every
effort should be made towards turning those societies into Muslim ones.
For example, if there was no mosque in that neighborhood, a real effort
should be made to build one. However, the mosque alone is not an end in
itself. It should be a hub for religious activity, i.e. in the form of
acts of worship, giving lectures, and holding preaching sessions.
Whoever discharged their duty in this regard, they will be deemed among
the propagators of Islam. However, if we cannot succeed in our mission,
what should our religious duty be? At this juncture, Islam orders us to
run away from that society that has become accustomed to immoral
practices, for we might get caught up in the state of things as they
are, if not become part of it. The Qur’anic logic rejects seeing us
remorseful, by hiding under the umbrella of ‘force majeure’, for losing
our religion. This has been made manifestly clear by this Qur’anic
verse:

***“When angels take the souls of those who die in sin against their
souls. They say: In what (plight) were ye? They reply: Weak and
oppressed were we in the earth. They say: Was it not Allah’s earth
spacious enough for you to move yourselves away (from evil)?” (4:97).***

The holy verse talks about that group of people, whose records the angel
found appalling, not least by doing themselves injustice, asking them:
What has happened to you? Why did the records of your deeds become so
disgraceful? Since they have nothing of substance to come up with, they
resort to the same old excuses: “we were deemed weak in the land”.

They go on to say, “We were living in corrupt societies, where it was
not possible for us to know about pristine Islam and what it stands for;
we lacked knowledge; there were no teachers of Islam we could turn to,”
The angelic answer comes crisp and clear, ”Was it not Allah’s earth
spacious enough for you to move yourselves away (from evil)?”

You have yourself only to blame, not least for condoning those corrupt
climates. Not all the corners of the world were as bad as the
environments you allowed yourselves to be hostage to. There were places
that were conducive to that which is good and commendable. So, why did
not you emigrate to them?

Just to reiterate that Islam attaches great importance to immigration,
in the sense of abandoning family and homeland, with a view to
preserving one’s religion and practicing it in freedom. According to
this meaning, immigration is a constant law, in that it is not limited
to a particular time or place and that it is not confined to the
immigrants of the early Islamic era.

However, it seems that some people have gone to extremes in interpreting
the meaning and the concept of hijra (immigration) as is mentioned in
the above-quoted verse. They argue that the verse has it, “Should he die
as a refugee from home for God and His Messenger”. That is, while the
verse mentions the point where the hijra takes place, it does not
mention the destination where the immigrant intends to go, mentioning
instead “God and His Messenger”. They further maintain that the latter
is an abstract destination and not material, i.e. it is in the mind and
the conscience.

Thus, they conclude that the significance of the word entails that this
type of hijra is a notional one in which man exerts himself towards
attaining that which is sublime and which brings him closer to God; in
other words, it is a journey towards God that does not require actual
physical travel away from family and homeland. That is, man could make
this journey from the coziness of his home through striving with his
tempting self to reaching perfection, not least by keeping up prayer,
fast, supplication, and other forms of worship that are capable of
bringing him closer to his Creator.

Yet, when the exponents of this brand of interpretation are asked as to
the objective of such a journey, they say God and his proximity, for
whose purpose man does battle with his own self and tries to cultivate
his spiritual life in order to be nearer to God. They, therefore,
maintain that there is no need to cover the distances, leaving behind
family and home, as, to their mind, the home mentioned in the verse is
not the real home; rather, a figurative one, i.e. the abode of the soul
and the boundaries of the ego.

To sum up, their interpretation of the verse can be put thus: Whoever
breaks free from the bondage of his own inclinations and emigrates to
God, his reward would come from Him. This, of course, is a misconception
and an erroneous reading of the verse.

In this verse, the Holy Qur’an talks about the two types of hijra
(immigration). Here, there is an example of the inimitable style of the
Qur’an; the home (house) which the Qur’an mentions in the verse is the
physical structure we all know. And yet, it wants to say to us: O you
who emigrate from your home! Be it from one neighborhood to another,
from one hometown to another, or from one homeland to another, let it be
known to you that your objective (final destination) should be God
alone. Otherwise, your immigration will not be of any value, even if you
travel from one end of the globe to the other, and sacrifice everything
in the process, i.e. your home, family and worldly possessions, and were
contented with poverty instead.

This is the Qur’anic logic that is corroborated by the Messenger of God
(s.a.w.) in this hadith, “Who intended his immigration for God and His
Messenger, then it would be deemed so. And yet, whoever embarked on
immigration, seeking a financial benefit or a [heart of a] woman he
wanted to win, his immigration would be judged by the intended end.
”[^2]

It looks as though the Prophet (s.a.w.) wanted to say, “I welcome the
immigrant who had a covenant with God that what he did was for His sake.
Physical migration of a group of people to the target destination, i.e.
Medina, shorn of good and pure intentions that their migration was in
His Cause alone, is worthless.” This is true of the concept of jihad,
for it is not sufficient for man to brandish his sword and fight the
enemies of God. This should go hand in hand with the intent and purpose
of seeking the pleasure of God and in His Cause.

It is possible that you find, in the ranks of Muslims, a combatant who
shows unparalleled zeal in the battle, and yet if you divulge his secret
you would find that his real purpose behind showing that fervor was
driven by self-aggrandizement; he sought to gain personal fame, in that
he aspired for his picture to be circulated and history sings his
praise. Another example is that of him who takes part in the war effort
in the hope that they do not get killed, only to enjoy the materialistic
privileges, and thus they would score victory on both the tracks, i.e.
that of this life and the hereafter.

All these appearances do not count as jihad in the cause of God. Of
course, man could win in this world by virtue of jihad, provided that
his ultimate end is not securing a place in it.

In one of the battles, some companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.) commended
the effort of one of the combatants, called Qazman, i.e. how good, brave
and sincere he was. The Prophet did not pay attention to such
commendations. He used to say, “He is among the inmates of hellfire.”
When the news of his death in the battle came to the Prophet, he
remarked, “God does whatever He wills.”

Another version of the story of how he was killed reached the prophet.
It was reported that he committed suicide. The Prophet said, “I am the
Messenger of God!” This is how the story was told: He fought very
valiantly, so much so that he killed some seven people among the
infidels. Having sustained serious injuries, he managed to stagger as
far as the neighborhood of Bani Dhafar.

The Muslims spoke good of his “heroism” and that he would be rewarded.
He retorted: I fought only in pursuit of personal fame and in defense of
the honor and pride of my kinsmen. Had it not been for that, I would
have never joined in the battle. Having, experienced severe pain due to
his serious wounds, he reached out for his arrow kit, pulled an arrow
and killed himself with it.[^3]

After the people heard about the fate of Qazman, they realized why the
Prophet was not impressed by all the reports about his heroism in the
battle. This should reinforce the true meaning of jihad, i.e. it has to
be purely in the cause of God. By the same token, immigration (hijra)
has to be so. In other words, immigration, in the sense of physically
removing oneself from their roots and moving away, should go hand in
hand with the intention of moving towards God to achieve His pleasure
and be closer to Him. Islam encourages both types of hijra, and the Holy
Qur’an mentions them both,

***“Should he die as a refugee from home for God and His Messenger”***

This verse talks about immigration on two levels, one in body and the
other in spirit. The immigrant travels in body from one place to the
other, while his spirit departs from the phase of egotism to the phase
of sincere loyalty to God Almighty. A refugee of this type is the one
whom God has promised with reward, “His reward becomes due and sure with
God.” How profound this description is! God means that the reward of
this refugee is far greater than that which the intellect can
comprehend; it is far greater than words can explain.

In one of the commentaries on this particular verse, it has been said
that a good example of the immigrant meant by the verse is a theology
student who leaves behind family and friends and travels to a new place
in pursuit of Islamic knowledge and scholarship. The aim of this
theology trainee is to attain new levels of learning, so that he becomes
better equipped to impart religious knowledge, revive the faith and
spread the Word of God, doing away with personal gain, fame, and looking
down on others. The said student is deemed an immigrant in the cause of
God, so long as his objective behind travel was God, and for the sake of
meeting the needs of Islam and Muslims.

That said, this is not confined to theology students; rather, it covers
the students in other fields, such as medicine and engineering, provided
the aim is discharging one’s religious duty, i.e. by way of wajibun
kifa’ie (A collective obligation imposed on the Muslim community, and
yet if any of its members discharged it, other Muslims become absolved
from the responsibility).

For example, a person moves out of his homeland to some other foreign
country to train to become a physician out of his feeling the need of
society for Muslim doctors and also out of a sense of duty (wajibun
kifa’ie). This student is deemed an immigrant in the cause of God,
provided that earning His pleasure was his intention, and not worldly
gains of this sort or the other, “Should he die as a refugee from home
for God and His Messenger, his reward becomes due and sure with God.”
So, should they meet their death while in the host town/country, their
reward would come from God, and their rank would be close to that of
mujahideen (fighters).

As we have already mentioned, the Holy Qur’an speaks about the two types
of immigration in the same breath. Now, let us pose this question: When
would the person qualify for both the descriptions, i.e. an immigrant
and a mujahid at the same time? The answer to this question is that the
description is true of the person who takes to immigration in the way of
God and whose aim is to come to the rescue of the faith and the
spiritual life of society. Thus, such a person would meet the criteria
set in this Qur’anic verse**,**

***“Should he die as a refugee from home for God and His Messenger, his
reward becomes due and sure with God.”***

By the same token such a person would be covered by all the Qur’anic
verses that talk about jihad, such as:

***“Allah hath purchased of the believers their persons and their goods;
for theirs (in return) is the Garden (of Paradise): They fight in His
Cause, and slay and get slain: A promise binding on Him in Truth,
through the Torah, the Gospel, and the Qur’an: And who is more faithful
to his covenant than Allah.” (9/111).***

Imam Hussain (a.s.) is the best of examples of a muhajir
(immigrant)/mujahid (fighter), in that he moved away from his hometown
and waged genuine jihad in the cause of God, i.e. in defense of Islam
not to undergo deviation and the faith of the Islamic umma (community),
lest it should be lost. Moses, son of Imran (a.s.), was another
immigrant in the cause of God for he left his country, Egypt, and headed
for Medyen. The same goes for Abraham, ***“He said: I will go to my
Lord! He will surely guide me!” (37/99).*** He left his homeland of his
own accord. However, what puts Imam Hussain (a.s.) in a different league
is that in his immigration, he was both an immigrant and a mujahid
(fighter).

The immigrants of the early days of Islam were immigrants per se. That
is, before the Divine order of jihad was issued, they were only
immigrants. However, after the Divine instruction, the description of
“mujahid – fighter” was applied to those of them who took part in jihad.

In a dream, the Messenger of God (s.a.w.) said to his grandson,
al-Hussain (a.s.) that God has promised him with a rank that was not
going to be achieved only with martyrdom by way of getting slain in His
cause”.

En route from Mecca [in present day Saudi Arabia] to Karbala [in Iraq],
Imam Hussain [and members of his family and some companions] spent
twenty-three days travelling. Before his departure from Mecca, he gave a
sermon to the people mentioning in it his immigration and jihad and
said, “The similitude of the inevitability of man’s death is that of a
necklace worn by a young woman. I therefore yearn to have reunion with
my predecessors in the same way Jacob was yearning to be united with
[his son] Joseph.”

What the lord of the free wanted to say is that he did not fear death
and getting martyred in the cause of God and His religion, and that
faith is a source of pride for man in as much as the necklace that
adorns a woman’s neck, and that he could not wait to join his
predecessors.

The Imam went on to tell them about how he was going to be martyred, “It
is better to meet my death, as I have a feeling that I will be torn to
pieces by the desert beasts between Nawawees and Karbala.” The Imam
(a.s.) moved to another topic to talk about how he, and members of his
household had been immersed in God’s love and said, “Seeking our, i.e.
the Progeny of the Prophet’s, pleasure is seeking the Pleasure of God.

We forbear His affliction, only to reward us with the recompense of the
forbearing. What He loved we love, what He allotted to us, we accepted.
Should He have chosen for us safety, we would love it. Yet, should He
have afflicted us with hardships and illness, we would accept.

Should He have chosen for us to keep silent, we would oblige. Should He
have wanted for us to talk, we would oblige. Should He have chosen for
us stillness, we would oblige, and yet, should He have decreed that we
should move around, we would oblige.”

After that, he declared that he was intent on emigrating in the way of
God, calling on the people to join him, if they had resolved that they
were doing it for God, provided that they were prepared for jihad and
sacrificing their blood for His cause, “Those of you who have reached a
conclusion that they are going to sacrifice themselves for our cause,
making their mind up that they will reunite with God, let them join us,
as I am determined to set forth tomorrow morning, God willing!”

In the beginning huge crowds accompanied the convoy of Imam Hussain
(a.s.), among whom some who were still reluctant to accept the statement
of the Imam about what would be in store for him and his companions, and
that there was still hope that they would scrape through.

On the way through his journey, other groups of people joined him. As he
had made it clear to everyone that whoever chose to accompany him in his
fateful journey should be ready for the ultimate sacrifice and the hope
to meet with one’s Lord, he did not want in his company any of the
fainthearted, who were not ready for martyrdom.

Accordingly, he used to remind everybody who was with him, on different
occasions and stages of the journey, as to the gigantic task ahead. This
was with the aim of winnowing the wheat from the chaff, giving the
chance for those who were not up to the responsibility to melt away. In
so doing, the Imam had wanted to ensure that those who would remain with
him to the end were those whose hearts God had tried with true faith, so
much so that they submit to His Will, come what may.

When it reached the crunch, none stuck it out with him other than a band
of loyal companions among the true believers, to whose bravery and
integrity he had these words of praise, “I do not know of any companions
who are more superior to mine.”

This testimony of the Imam means that he was trying to say to his
companions: If I were given an option to choose between you and the
companions of the Prophet in the battle of Badr, I would have chosen you
over them. Were I given a choice between you and the companions of Ali
in the battle of Siffeen, I would have preferred you to them. You are
the lords, and the crowns over the heads, of all martyrs.

On the eve of the tenth of Muharram [62 AH, 680 CE] Imam Hussain (a.s.)
gave permission to his companions to leave him under the cover of
darkness, saying to them, “I think our appointment with those (the
enemy) is tomorrow. So, I give you leave to go away, having no liability
on you. Darkness is spreading and engulfing you; so, why do you not make
use of it and slip away.

And let each one of you take a man of my household with them. May God
compensate you with the best of rewards. Scatter among the masses and in
the towns. Indeed, the enemy is after me; thus, if they were successful
in getting me, they would forget about you. Bring to mind the killing of
Muslim [bin Aqeel, his cousin, and emissary to Kufa], which would be
sufficient. Please leave.”

This was the last test the Imam put the loyalty and truthfulness of his
companions through. He absolved them from the covenant of allegiance
they made with him; he set them free from their religious obligation, in
that it was incumbent on them to be on his side in the war.

However, they all refused to accede to his request, insisting that they
preferred to die defending him. The first to declare that position was
his brother al-Abbas, who said, “May God let us not ever witness that!”
These were reassuring words for Imam Hussain for they demonstrated the
fact that they shared his aim, vision, belief and determination. At that
juncture, Imam Hussain (a.s.), once again made clear to them as to what
he was expecting to happen come tomorrow, “Tomorrow, I will be killed,
so will you. No one will be spared, even al-Qassim and Abdullah, the
infant.”

On the tenth of Muharram, Imam Hussain (a.s.) awarded his comrades in
arms medals and honor whose memory would not go away. In the dying
moments of the battle of Karbala and the last throws of his life, after
almost all male members of his family alongside his companions were
martyred, the Imam stood, amid the multitudes of the enemy, turning his
eyes around, only to see that there was neither a supporter nor a
helper, apart from the grisly sight of dead bodies strewn all over the
battlefield. At that point in time, he was reported as saying something
like this: I do not see on this ground a living person except those
mutilated bodies, in reference to the dead bodies of his companions.

Thus, the Imam considered those dead bodies the truly living beings that
were worthy of his cry for help, thus, “O heroes of Safa! And knights of
war! Rise from your sleep, O sons of the honorable ones! Fend off the
thugs from encroaching upon the noble ladies among the Progeny of the
Prophet.” That cry for help was made after the enemy attacked and
ransacked the tents where members of Imam Hussain’s family, mostly
women, were sheltering. And yet, the Imam responded to his own call for
help and apologized for them on their behalf, “How could they answer,
when they were turned into headless corpses.”

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha, Beirut new revised edition, catalogued by Dr.
Subhi as-Saleh, Sermon No. 189.

[^2]: al-Bukhari Authentic Compendia of Hadith, p.22, vol. 1.

[^3]: Ibn Hisham’s Prophetic Biography, vol. 2, p. 88.


