Vii. the World (cosmology)
==========================

In determining or defining the relationship of God with the world,
Aquinas departs not only from the doctrine of the Averroist
Aristotelians, but also from the teaching of Aristotle himself. For
Aristotle matter was uncreated and co-eternal with God, limiting the
divinity itself (Greek dualism). Aquinas denies this dualism. The world
was produced by God through His creative act, i.e., the world was
produced from nothing.

Besides, all becoming in matter is connected with God, since He is the
uncaused Cause and the immovable Mover of all that takes place in
created nature. God has created the world from nothingness through a
free act of His will; hence any necessity in the nature of God is
excluded. Again, we know that Aristotle did not admit providence: the
world was in motion toward God, as toward a point of attraction; but God
did not know of this process of change, nor was He its ordinator.

For Aquinas, on the contrary, God is providence: creation was a knowing
act of His will; God, the cause and mover of all the perfections of
beings, is also the intelligent ordinator of them" all that happens in
the world finds its counterpart in the wisdom of God. Now, how the
providence and the wisdom of God are to be reconciled with the liberty
of man is a problem which surpasses our understanding. It is not an
absurdity, however, if we keep in mind that the action of Divine
Providence is absolutely distinct and can be reconciled with the liberty
of man without diminishing or minimizing this latter.

**VIII. The Human Soul (Rational Psychology)**

Besides God, the spiritual substances are the angels and human souls.
Angels are not destined to inform any matter; the human soul, on the
contrary, is ordered to be the form of the body. Hence the question
arises as to the nature of the soul and its relations with the body. In
regard to the first question, at the time of Aquinas, the Averroists
held that "the agent intellect" was a form existent per se and that it
was separated from human souls, in which, however, it made its
appearance occasionally in order to impress the intelligibles on the
passive intellect. The logical conclusion in this theory is that the
human soul will perish when the conditions of the body make impossible
the presence of the Unique Intellect.

Aquinas was always a strong opponent of Averroism. He rejected the
unity and transcendence of the agent intellect not only for theological
but for philosophical reasons.

As Aquinas observes 1, he who receives an intelligible form does not
thereby become an "intelligent being." For instance, a house which
receives the intelligible form of the idea of the artist, is
intelligible but not intelligent.

Man not only is intelligible but also intelligent; he is intelligent,
because he make intelligent operations. The principle of these
intelligent operations, therefore, must be the soul itself and not a
separate intellect. 2 The second question deals with the relationship of
the human soul to the body. In man there are many operations --
vegetative, sensitive, and intellective. Now, unquestionably the
intellective operations are performed by the rational soul. But who
performs the others? Platonic-Augustinian philosophy solved the question
by admitting a multiplicity of inferior forms which are subordinated to
the rational soul. Thus there was a sensitive form as well as a
vegetative form.

Aquinas, following Aristotle in this matter, denies any multiplicity of
substantial forms in the same individual. The form for man is one as is
the form for any individual thing; in man this form is the rational
soul. It is the principle of all operations, whether material or
spiritual. We know that the one soul understands and performs all the
operations. We express this identity of the subject when we say: "I
understand and I feel, and I see."

Proper to the human soul is the understanding, which does not need the
cooperation of any organ in its operations. But the human soul is also
the "form of the body"; and just as every form is the principle of all
the operations of the informed matter, so also the human soul is the
principle of all operations performed by the body through its various
organs. 3 The doctrine that "the soul is the form of the body" gives
rise to another difficulty, which seems to spring from the same
principle of matter and form taken from Aristotelian metaphysics.

According to Aristotle, the forms of natural bodies depend on the
conditions of matter, so that when these conditions become unfit the
permanence of the form is no longer possible; then it will be corrupted
and another form will take its place. Hence the doctrine of the soul as
the unique form of the body seems to lead logically to the mortality of
the human soul. Aquinas overcomes the difficulty with the same
Aristotelian principles. The operations of any being follow from its
nature; thus any form leading only to organic operations is bound to
matter and follows the conditions of matter, as, for instance, the
animal soul, which is corrupted with the organism. But the human soul
has superorganic operations.

The intellect does not need any organ in its understanding; hence the
human soul is a superorganic substance, not dependent for its being upon
any matter. And despite the fact that the human soul is the form of the
body, it will last as a separate substance of intellectual nature, even
when the conditions of the body render impossible the functioning of the
soul as the form of the body. 4

Thus the doctrine of Aquinas concerning the soul in general and the
human soul in particular, may be summed us as follows:

When the form in matter is the origin of immanent actions, it gives
origin to life and as such is more particularly called the "soul." There
is a vegetative soul, such as the principle of plants, whose activity is
fulfilled in nutrition, growth, and reproduction. Superior to the
vegetative is the sensitive soul, which is present in animals; besides
the processes of nutrition, growth and reproduction the sensitive soul
is capable of sensitive knowledge and appetition. Superior still to the
sensitive soul is the rational soul.

The rational soul is created directly by God; it is distinct for each
man; it is the true form of the body. The human soul performs the
functions of the vegetative and sensitive life, but besides these
functions it has activities which do not depend upon the body, i.e.,
understanding and volition.

The intellect and the will are the faculties of the soul, the means
through which it operates. The intellect has for its object the
knowledge of the universal, and operates by judging and reasoning. The
will is free; that is, it is not determined by any particular good, but
it determines itself.

From an analysis of the intellect and the will, Aquinas proves the
spirituality, the simplicity, and the immortality of the soul. The
intellect has, in fact, for its proportionate object the universal, the
understanding of which is a simple and spiritual act. Hence the soul
from which the act of understanding proceeds is itself simple and
spiritual. Since it is simple and spiritual, it is by nature also
immortal.

The same conclusion is reached through an analysis of the will, which,
as we have said, is free, i.e., not determined by any cause outside
itself. In the physical world everything is determined by causal
necessity, and hence there is no liberty. The faculty which is not
determined by causal motives declares its independence of these causes
and hence is an immaterial faculty. The soul upon which such a faculty
depends must be of the same nature as the faculty; that is, the soul
must be immaterial.

The human soul, since it is immaterial and performs acts which are not
absolutely dependent upon the bodily organs, does not perish with the
body -- although, as Aquinas says, the soul separated from the body is
not entirely complete but has an inclination to the body as the
necessary instrument for its complete and full activity.


**IX. Ethics and Politics**

In opposition to the voluntarism of Augustinian thought, Aquinas holds
the primacy of the intellect over the will. Reason precedes volition.
Aquinas extends this law even to God. Creation is founded upon the
essence of God in so far as this essence is known by God's intellect and
can be produced through the creative act. The divine will freely selects
from among the possibilities in the divine essence. Thus even in God
this present order of creation has been willed because it was
reasonable, and not vice versa, reasonable because willed. Analogously,
in man the act of understanding precedes the movement of the will.
Nevertheless the will is free and hence is not constrained to select
necessarily what the intellect presents to it as reasonable.

In order to demonstrate the freedom of our will, Aquinas goes to the
very root of the will. The will is determined by good as is the
intellect by truth. Thus if the will were presented with an object which
is essentially good -- good under every aspect (God) -- the will in this
case would not be free, because it would find itself confronted with the
adequate object of its nature.

But our will is dependent on the intellect, and the intellect, as we
know, is dependent upon sensations, i.e., upon particular goods, which
may be good from one standpoint and evil from another. In this case the
will is free to select from among the various objects presented to it by
the intellect.

But all of this is not yet sufficient to form the moral act in its
entirety. Freedom of the will and the free volitional act are the
subjective part of morality. To complete the moral act, it is necessary
to have also the objective part, or the conformity of volition to the
supreme norm of morality. This supreme norm is called by Aquinas the
eternal law; it resides in God and is the norm of the order established
by God in the creature. The eternal law, in so far as it is manifested
and recognized by the intelligence, constitutes the natural law. This
latter, then, is none other than the eternal law in so far as it is
manifested to our conscience.

The morality of an act depends upon its conformity to the law of
conscience and hence to the eternal law; nonconformity brings about
moral evil, sin. The more regularly moral law is observed, the easier
such observance becomes; hence, virtue consists in the habitual and
conscious conformity of action to the moral law. The natural virtues,
for Aquinas as for Aristotle, are four: prudence, temperance, fortitude,
and justice. In opposition to Augustinian teaching, which affirmed that
society is not natural but is the consequence of original sin, and in
conformity with Aristotle, Aquinas discovers the necessity of society by
analyzing human nature.

Society is necessary for the perfection to which man by his nature has
been destined. Man is hence a political animal. The first form of
society is the family, an imperfect society because it is destined by
nature solely for the propagation of the species.

Society has for its end the common good, and man does not exist for
society, but society exists for man. The duties of society are of a
positive and a negative nature; i.e., the state not only must provide
for the defense of its citizens and for their free exercise (negative
duties), but must also provide educative and formative measures for the
elevation of the members of society.

Since the end of the state is the common good of material nature, the
state must recognize another society, the Church, to which has been
entrusted the spiritual good of the same citizens; and since the
material must be coordinated with the spiritual, the state, although
complete in itself, must recognize the rights of the Church in matters
of morality and religion.


**The Philosophy of John Duns Scotus**

1265 or 66-1308 "The Subtle Doctor"

I. Life and Works

John Duns Scotus (picture) was born in Scotland, probably in the
village of Maxton (now Littledean), in 1265 or 1266. While very young,
he entered the Franciscan Order. After his ordination to the priesthood
in 1291, he was sent to Paris to study at the famous university there,
and on his return to England he taught at Oxford. In 1303, as a student
at the University of Paris, he wrote his commentary on the Book of
Sentences. He returned to Oxford but by 1304 was teaching in Paris. Here
he propounded his celebrated thesis on the Immaculate Conception of the
Blessed Virgin. In 1308 Scotus was in Cologne as lector in the
Franciscan Scholasticate, and there on the eighth of November of the
same year he died.

His principal works are: Opus Oxoniense (named so from Oxford), his
great commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard (this work contains
the better part of Scotus' thought); Quaestiones subtilissimae in
metaphysicam Aristotelis; Reportata Parisiensia, which are new notations
on his commentary on the Sentences; Quaestiones quodlibetales, which
contains twenty-one questions; De primo principio, which contains a
profound exposition of Scotist theodicy.

**General Note on the Thought of Scotus**

Scotus is the greatest champion of Franciscan Augustianianism. The
reconstruction of Augustinianism by St. Bonaventure, likewise the
reconstruction of Aristotelianism by St. Thomas had already been made
before Scotus began to teach. But Scotus was not a mechanical repeater
of either of them. A serious and constructive thinker, he was convinced
that truth may shine more brightly as a result of profound
investigation: "In progressu generationis humanae semper crevit notitia
veritatis." Endowed with extraordinary subtle penetration of mind,
Scotus became the faithful servant of truth by undertaking the task of
criticism in regard to his predecessors' work. In his teachings he
abandons certain theses which were dear to the Augustinian tradition,
while he interprets others in the light of the new contribution of
Aristotelianism. From this treatment flows a new and original view of
the major philosophical problems which has come to be known as Scotism
or Scotist thought.

**II. Theory of Knowledge**

Scotus does not accept Augustinian illumination. Instead, he bolds that
intellectual cognition takes its origin from sensation through the
process of abstraction. He distinguishes, however, between the proper
object of the intellect and its de facto object. The proper object of
this faculty is "being" -- the entire field of being without restriction
("ens in quantum ens") -- through which the intellect can know
immaterial essences, even without the aid of sensations. In the field of
fact (Scotus' "objectum de facto") or in actual conditions and as a
consequence of original sin, what moves the intellect is only those
things that are presented to sensation ("quidditas rei sensibilis"). The
passage between sensation and intellectual cognition (ideas, concepts)
is abstraction.

Now, for St. Thomas abstraction consists in an act on the part of the
active intellect which illuminates the phantasm (sense image). But for
Scotus the universal concept is the result of causality by which the
phantasm itself supplies the physical universal. The intellect,
determined in a certain causal way by the physical universal, gives it
intentional being -- or in other words, makes it a real concept
predicable of many. From this mutual causality comes the logical
universal which exists in the intellect; the objectivity of this logical
universal is founded upon the physical universal that exists in
individuals outside the mind.

**III. Metaphysics

General Metaphysics**

As a general metaphysics Scotus accepts the Aristotelian principle of
matter and form, but to these two elements he gives a different
interpretation than St. Thomas does. For St. Thomas prime matter takes
its act of existence from the form. For Scotus existence belongs to the
matter, independent of the form, because one cannot conceive of a being
constituted outside its cause without the act of existence.
Consequently, according to Scotus, prime matter can exist as such,
separate from the form. Furthermore, there is no real distinction
between essence and existence. Matter, then, is a constitutive element
of every being, even of the separate forms, such as angels, in whom
spiritual matter is present.

Regarding the concept of being, Scotus holds that it is univocal, as
against St. Thomas, who teaches that it is an analogous concept. Still,
the division of the univocal concept of being into "ens a se" and "ens
ab alio," into substance and accident, is not to be conceived of as a
reduction of the genus to its specific differences. "Ens a se" and ens
ab alio" are not specific differences but transcendental notes which
clothe the entire essence of being under difference aspects.

More profound is the difference between St. Thomas and Scotus regarding
the principle of individuation. St. Thomas had affirmed that the reason
for the contraction of the form to the individual depends upon "materia
quantitate signata" -- matter signed with quantity. Scotus does not
accept this solution, but observes that quantity is an accident, that
therefore in St. Thomas' system individuality would be reduced to the
level of an accident. Thus, according to the Subtle Doctor,
individuality must be derived from the form, which is the basis of
being. This new entitative perfection, which comes to the species
(forma) and which indicates the passage from specific difference to
individual determination, Scotus calls "haecceitas" or "thisness." This
"haecceitas" is the ultimate step of the form (and hence of the entire
composite) toward real existence. "This reality of the individual is
never meant as a new form, but precisely as the ultimate reality of the
form."

Theodicy

Scotus, in opposition to the Augustinian doctrine and in accord with
Thomism, holds that the existence of God is not intuitive, but is only
demonstrable a posteriori. The proofs for the existence of God adopted
by Scotus can be reduced to two processes.

The first is entirely an a posteriori process. The objects of our
experience are changing realities, or beings in the course of
"becoming." Now that which changes possesses in itself neither the
sufficient reason for its existence nor for its activity. Hence we are
led to admit the existence of a being that is outside the chain of
succession and change, and that justifies the existence and action of
beings in various stages of becoming. Substantially, this process had
its philosophical development in the first three ways of St. Thomas.

The second process consists in a development of the argument of St.
Anselm. To give validity to this, Scotus inserts a posteriori elements,
i.e., the analysis of the possibility (contingency) that is affirmed by
our experience. For Scotus, to say that God is "Id quo majus cogitari
non potest" is to say that God is infinite. Now, according to Scotus,
the weakness of St. Anselm's argument does not rest with the transition
from possibility to real existence, but in this: that St. Anselm did not
prove that the concept of the infinite is possible. Scotus proves this
possibility negatively by showing that the concepts of an "ens
infinitum" involves no contradiction.

If it did involve a contradiction, our mind, which has for its object
"ens in quantum ens," would notice it. Positively, Scotus begins with
the data of experience, which tells us that many things are possible.
But all possible series of beings are related to the Uncaused Being,
which, since it is uncaused, is infinite Perfection. Hence an infinite
being not only is possible, but actually exists. "Thus, absolutely
speaking, the primary efficient cause can exist in its own right; hence
it exists by itself." (Opus Oxoniense, n. 16.)

Regarding the attributes of God, Scotus holds that the essential
attribute is His infinity. In regard to the other attributes, Scotus
does not differ from the common opinion of the Scholastics, i.e., that
God is one, uncaused, the Creator, and so forth.


**The World: Cosmological Doctrine**

In determining the relationship between the world and God, Scotus
accepts the common doctrine of Scholastic tradition. On certain points,
however, he withdraws from tradition and gives us a new and personal
contribution.

First of all, he is not in accord with St. Thomas on the foundation of
the essences of created and creatable things. Certainly God knows the
essences of real and possible beings; but what is their foundation? St.
Thomas had said that the essences, the "rationes aeternae," drew their
origin from the divine essence, which is by nature imitable in an
infinite manner; the divine intellect took cognizance of this
imitability. This manner of explaining the origin of essences is snot
accepted by Scotus for the simple motive that if it were accepted the
divine intellect would lose the dignity of its independence. Hence it
seems to Scotus that the origin of the possibles must be placed in the
very intellect of God, which, in knowing the divine nature, produces
such essences in their intelligible "esse"; as a consequence of this,
possibles are imitable "ad extra." The eternal ideal existence of things
is not distinct from the act by which God conceives them.

Furthermore, in opposition to Thomistic intellectualism, Scotus, at one
with the whole Augustinian tradition, affirms the primacy of the will, a
primacy which he extends also to God. God has created the world through
an act of His will. For Scotus there could not be free essences in
secondary causes (man) if these did not proceed from a free cause, i.e.,
from the divine will.

This Scotist voluntarism profoundly affects not only Scotus' cosmology
but also his theory of knowledge and psychology. Everything becomes
radically contingent. Thus God in creating has assigned to every thing
its own nature: to fire that of heating, to water that of being cold, to
the air that of being lighter than earth, and so forth. But since God is
free, His will cannot be bound to any object. Hence it is not absurd
that fire be cold, water hot, earth lighter than air -- in other words,
that the universe be ruled by laws opposite to those which presently
govern it.

Of Scotus' psychology we shall speak in a moment. Concerning the theory
of knowledge, Scotus' voluntarist doctrine reveals that many
metaphysical and theological truths which are for St. Thomas
demonstrable by reason are not so for Scotus once he advances the
principle that the passage or transition from effect to cause is not
always legitimate.

**The Human Soul**

Scotus, led by his doctrine that prime matter has a complete essence,
separate and distinct from that of form, admits that in every individual
there is a multiplicity of forms. In man there would be the form of the
body and that of the soul, and the unity of the person would result from
this: that the form of the body is coordinated with that of the soul.
The soul is complete in itself and hence can exist even without the
body; and granted, as we have said, that the proportionate object of the
intellect is "ens in quantum ens," the human soul can know the essences
of things even when the soul is separated from the body.

Concerning the immortality of the soul, the argument of St. Thomas and
of the entire Scholastic tradition is that the immaterial nature and
hence the spirituality and immortality of the soul are deduced from the
fact that the object of the intellect is the immaterial essences of
things. For Scotus this argument has the value only of possibility, of
non-repugnance. Since the will of God is not bound to any contingent
thing, and is free to do anything that does not imply contradiction,
Scotus concludes that the alternative is also possible; namely, that the
soul can perish with the body. Hence Scotus affirms that we must rely
upon faith for the truth of the immortality of the soul. It is faith
which gives us the assurance that the immortality of the soul has real
foundation.

Thus in Scotus we find a resurgence of the Augustinian doctrine that
there is no clear distinction between reason and faith, and that reason
needs the assistance of faith in many of the conclusions which for St.
Thomas are simply rational truths. Let us note that the voluntarism of
Scotus does not destroy the principle of contradiction but holds that
God is free to choose any alternative only in the field of the
contingent and provided the opposite is not contradictory; the will of
God is therefore not bound to one side more securely than to the other.
(Thus, for example, it would not be contradictory for fire to have a
different action, so that would not burn.) The absolute truths, which
are over and above the field of contingency, and whose opposite would be
contradictory, do not depend upon the will of God but upon His essence;
such truths are always valid, and their opposite is certainly false --
for example, the statement "Being is."

IV. Ethics

In his ethics, Scotus reaffirms the voluntarist doctrine against the
intellectualism of St. Thomas. However, Scotist voluntarism does not, as
has often been falsely charged, give place to moral positivism in which
the just and the unjust depend on the exclusive will of God. Indeed,
this mild voluntarism leads to principles and conclusions that are
common Church doctrine.

In God, as in man, the will has primacy over the intellect. This does
not mean that the will of God is blind and directed by caprice: God,
Scotus declares, is "intelligentissime et ordinatissime volens." This
means that the will of God is illumined by the divine intellect and that
the primacy of the will of God does not negate this natural order, which
is valid also in God.

Presupposing the action of the intellect, which points out to the will
all the possible modes of the divine essence, the actual realization of
one series of possibles rather than another depends not on the intellect
but on the divine will. God finds within His will the motives for
self-determination. But even in determining itself to the realization of
one series of possibles rather than another, the will of God does not
act capriciously.

First of all, says Scotus, "the will of God of necessity loves God's
goodness." Consequently, all that is essentially bound up with the
essence of God is also willed necessarily by the divine will -- as, for
example, the first three commandments of the Decalogue. Regarding the
rest of the entire field of possibles which forms, as we have noted, the
field of pure contingency, the will of God is free; but this is not to
say that it acts indeliberately.

From the moment God is "intelligentissime et ordinatissime volens," He
chooses that order in which His goodness is more greatly manifest,
without being necessarily bound to this particular order of contingency
(God is bound only to will His own essence). Hence He is always free to
will the opposite when this change contributes more greatly to His
goodness. Scotist voluntarism therefore contains nothing that
contradicts Church orthodoxy.

The moral act for Scotus is the result of due proportion between the
potency (the will which must be free), the object (which must be good in
itself), and the end (which must tend toward God in place, time, and
manner). While for St. Thomas an object which in itself is evil, but
which through ignorance is apprehended as good, is the object of a
morally good act, Scotus denies that this can be so: the object also
must be good. This is the basis for another point of divergence from St.
Thomas; in other words, for Scotus there is a third class lying between
morally good and evil acts: indifferent acts, that is, acts which have
nothing to do with progress or retrogression in the matter of attaining
the ultimate end.

Furthermore, Scotus, along with St. Augustine and in opposition to
Aristotle and St. Thomas, affirms that virtue is an act of love which
directs us to God. And finally he holds that the essence of eternal life
does not consist, as St. Thomas states, in the beatific vision of God,
but in love of God. There is no contradiction here, for love and
knowledge are not of the same order. Distinct acts of distinct faculties
cannot be opposed in such a way. In all created beings, the act of
loving is really distinct from the act of knowledge. One and the same
thing can be the object of knowledge and of love, but the viewpoint is
different; for as regards knowledge, the thing is "truth," and as
regards will, or love, it is "good."

So the question: Is God Truth before Goodness or Goodness before Truth,
does not make any sense. Considered as the object of love, God is
Goodness. Considered as the object of knowledge, God is Truth. Which
comes first? Again this question makes no sense. Considering the
rational subject in the act of his intelligence, he knows God as Truth.
Considering him in his act of love, he adheres to God as Goodness. There
is no priority, but merely a difference in viewpoint. The Beatific
Vision is an act of possession of the unity of God by the soul, in the
highest degree of its own unity.

To put the same thing in other words, do we know in order to love, or
do we love in order to know? Both these questions are wrongly directed.
We are, in order to possess. By being men, we have both rational
intellectual and rational appetitive faculties; these are coexisting and
simultaneous. By our knowledge we are informed of the object of our
love. By our love, we are attracted to the object of our knowledge. We
can love only what we know. We can know only what we are affectively in
contact with. Whenever we possess an object, we do so both through our
intellect, by understanding the object, and through our will, by
reacting affectively to it.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. Contra Gent., II, 76).
2. Summa Theol., Part I, q. 79, a. 4 and 5).
3. Summa Theol., Part I, q. 76, a. 1; Contra Gent., II, 57 and 58).
4. Summa Theol., Part I, q. 75, a. 6' Contra Gent., II, 78, 79 and
82).


