The Philosophy of St. Augustine
===============================

**I. Life and Works**

Aurelius Augustinus (picture) was born at Tagaste in preconsular
Numidia in 354. His father, Patricius, was a pagan; his mother, Monica,
a Christian. After his first studies in his native city, he went to
Carthage, with the financial aid of Romanianus, to complete his studies
in rhetoric. At the same time, however, he fell a slave to his youthful
passions and even became connected with the Manichaean religious sect.
After completing his studies, he first established his school at
Tagaste, and later at Carthage, where he taught rhetoric for eight
years, at the same time studying philosophy and the natural sciences.

In 383, desirous of honors and a more disciplined group of students, he
evaded his mother's vigilance, abandoned Carthage, and went to Rome. He
did not find there, however, the satisfaction he sought; nor did his
students bring him any remuneration. He therefore sought the
directorship of rhetoric in Milan. This he obtained, and transferred to
that city in 384. There his saintly mother joined him.

The Bishop of Milan at that time was Ambrose, and the prayers of
Augustine's mother, together with the eloquence of Ambrose, reportedly
triumphed over the tormented spirit of the young Augustine. In 387 he
asked to receive baptism. The sacrament was conferred by Ambrose on
Easter of that year.

Augustine's spiritual conversion had been preceded by an intellectual
one. Dissatisfied with the doctrinal vanity of Manichaeism, he abandoned
the sect. After a brief period in the Skeptic Academy, he had given
himself to the study of Neo-Platonism, in which he grasped the idea of
the spirituality of God and the concept of evil as the privation of
good. Thus his baptism signalized the complete and absolute conversion
of Augustine to Christianity.

Augustine had already renounced his teaching office, and now he left
Milan to return to Tagaste and live in solitude. He undertook the
journey home in company with his son, Adeodatus, Monica, and some
friends, and stopped en route at Ostia, where his mother died. After her
death, he resumed his journey toward Africa and arrived ultimately at
Tagaste, where he sold his worldly goods, distributed the proceeds to
the poor, and attempted to live the life of perfection according to the
standard of the Gospel.

In 391 Augustine went to Hippo, probably to select a suitable place for
himself and his friends who had been living a common life of study and
devotion at Tagaste in a monastery built by Augustine. In Hippo, at the
will of the people, Augustine was ordained a priest. The newly ordained
priest, while continuing his monastic life, entered into the mission of
the apostolate, preaching against vice and voicing his formidable
opposition to the heresies which at that time were harassing Africa.

Consecrated coadjutor Bishop of Hippo in 395 and titular Bishop of the
same city in the following year, Augustine transformed his episcopal
residence into a monastery, in which he lived together with his clerics,
who assisted him in giving religious instructions and carrying on all
forms of charitable works.

Always ready to argue on theological, philosophical and moral
questions, he took part in all the difficult theological disputes which
disturbed the Church in Africa. He opposed Donatism, which denied the
validity of sacraments administered by ecclesiastics in the state of
sin, and advocated a church of pure and perfect men, withdrawn entirely
from the life of the world. He vigorously argued against Pelagianism,
which exalted the absolute liberty of the human will and denied original
sin and the necessity of divine grace. He fought against Manichaeism,
the doctrine which he has formerly espoused, and the Skepticism of the
Academicians whom he had once joined when his mind was assailed by
doubt.

A fatal illness overtook Augustine in the year 430, at a time when the
Vandals, barbarians of exceptional ferocity, were laying siege to the
city of Hippo. Augustine was seventy-five years old, and had spent
thirty-four years as Bishop of Hippo.

The literary output of St. Augustine was prodigious. The prevalent
purpose of his writings is dogmatic and moral; i.e., he dwells on the
problems which most directly concern the answer to the question of life.
But because of his particular tendency to consider the problems of life
in connection with speculative knowledge, he treats philosophical
problems to some extent in every one of his works.

From the point of view of philosophy the most important are: the
Confessions in thirteen books, a profound and suggestive autobiography;
Soliloquia, in two books; De immortalitate animae; De libero arbitrio;
Contra Academicos; De beata vita; De magistro. His two masterpieces are
De civitate Dei (City of God) and De Trinitate (On the Trinity), and
despite the prevalent dogmatic and apologetic character of these works,
they are very rich in philosophical considerations. Augustine's style is
human and provocative, thus rendering his books suitable for all
times.

**II. Doctrine: General Ideas
Neo-Platonic**

philosophy was the field of exercise for the mind of Augustine previous
to his conversion, and it was the same philosophy which prepared him for
conversion. Even after his conversion, he remained a Platonist, and for
the solution of major problems he appealed to the Platonic concept. But
such adherence does not signify merely simple acceptance; rather, it
involves interpretation and a transformation of the very principles of
Platonism within the limits of the needs of Christian thought. In this
work of adapting ancient thought to Christianity, Augustine precedes
Thomas Aquinas, for just as Aquinas undertook to lay down the thought of
Aristotle as the rational basis of religion, so Augustine did the same
with the teaching of Plato and Platonism.

The central point of Platonism was the participation of the soul in a
supra-sensible world (Ideas, Nous). Through this participation the
intellect acquired the notion of the intelligible and hence was made
participant of wisdom. Augustine accepts this participation, but the one
who grants or imparts these intelligible notions to the soul is God, the
Truth of God, the Word of God, to whom are transferred all Platonic
Ideas. In the Word of God exist the eternal truths, the species, the
formal principles of things, which are the models of created beings. In
the intellectual light imparted to us by the Word of God we know both
the eternal truths and the ideas of real beings. This the famous
illumination to which Augustine makes appeal, as we shall see, in the
solution of major problems.

Furthermore, we observe that philosophy is considered by Augustine as
the science for the solution of the problem of life; hence his thought
mainly revolves around God and the soul, and consequently also around
the problem of evil, which must be solved in order that one may know the
nature of the soul. In a word, the thought of Augustine is more
concerned with the solution of religious, ethical and moral problems
than with those of pure speculation.

**III. Theory of Knowledge (Epistemology)**

Augustine, who during his formation in philosophy had made contact with
the Skepticism of the Academicians, knew that the problem of knowledge
involved two difficulties, one regarding the existence of the knowing
subject (which fact was denied by the Academicians), and the other
regarding the origin of knowledge itself. As for the first question,
Augustine overcame the Skepticism of the Academy and arrived at the
affirmation of the existence of the knowing subject with the famous
argument: "If I doubt, I exist -- Si fallor, sum."

Regarding the second question, i.e., the origin of knowledge, Augustine
as a Platonist underrates sensitive cognition, which he does not make
the foundation of intellective knowledge. (Thus he differs radically
from Aristotle and Aquinas in this important question.)

Whence, then, does intellective cognition draw its origin? From
illumination. As the eyes have need of the light of the sun in order to
see sensible objects, so the intellect needs the light of God to know
the world of intelligible beings. Eternal truths, ideas, species, formal
principles are imparted to our intelligence by Wisdom, the Word of God.
Intellectual knowledge is not the result of the acquisitive operation of
the intellect, but a participation or grant of God. It is in this
participation that Augustine's innatism with regard to ideas consists.

It follows from this that the intellect, considered in itself, is
incapable of acquiring knowledge of intelligible beings, but is made
capable of such knowledge through illumination. The mystic schools of
the Middle Ages were to appeal to this natural inability of the
intellect in order to affirm that humility and prayer are the best means
to acquiring wisdom.

**IV. Metaphysics

Theodicy**

Augustine proves the existence of God through a priori and a posteriori
arguments. However, if we keep in mind what has been said about
illumination, the more convincing arguments for Augustine will be those
a priori proofs drawn from the presence within us of this special
illumination. In fact, the presence of this illumination is proof of the
existence of God. Such a priori arguments can be reduced to the
following formula: We are conscious of possessing within ourselves ideas
and formal principles which are by nature universal and necessary,
outside the confines of time and space, eternal.

But such universal and necessary principles cannot take their origin
from the external world nor from us, who, as contingent beings, are
devoid of these characteristics of universality and necessity.
Therefore, such universal principles presuppose God, who is a necessary
being, unlimited by space and time. The universal principles are
communicated to us by Him, by the Wisdom of God, the Word of God. As we
said above, Augustine also appeals to a posteriori arguments, when, for
instance, from change and the imperfections of beings he rises to the
perfect being, the being above all change, God.

Regarding the nature of God, Augustine assumes a position opposed to
all the errors of Platonism. For Augustine, God is immutable, eternal,
all-powerful, all-knowing, absolutely devoid of potentiality or
composition, a pure spirit, a personal, intelligent being. The mystery
of the Trinity of God induces Augustine to consider God as being,
knowledge, and love; and since the world has been created by God, it
reveals a reflection of these three attributes of God: every creature
should consist essentially of being, knowledge, and volition.

**Cosmology**

Against the dualism of Plato and against the pantheism of the Stoics
and the Neo-Platonists, for whom the world was a physical derivation or
emanation of God, Augustine affirms that the world was created by God
from nothing, through a free act of His will. With regard to the manner
in which creation was effected by God, Augustine is inclined to admit
that the creation of the world was instantaneous, but not entirely as it
exists at present.

In the beginning there were created a few species of beings which, by
virtue of intrinsic principles of reproduction, gave origin to the other
species down to the present state of the existing world. Thus it seems
that Augustine is not contrary to a moderate evolution, but that such a
moderate evolution has nothing in common with modern materialistic
evolutionist teaching.

Connected with the creation of the world is the problem of time, for
time has its beginning with creation. But what is time? What is its real
nature? Augustine observes that time is essentially constituted of a
past, a present, and a future; without this division it would be
impossible to speak of time. But the past is not existent, for it has
passed; nor does the future exist, for it has yet to come; the present
is the moment which joins the past with the future.

Now it would be foolish to deny the reality of time. We speak of time
as long or short, and that which has no reality cannot be either long or
short. To solve the difficulty Augustine has recourse to the
intellective memory, which records the past and foresees the future.
Thus both the past and the future are made present to the memory, and
here time finds its reality of length and brevity. For Augustine, then,
as the Scholastics were to say later, time is a being of reason with a
foundation in things which through becoming offer to the mind the
concept of time as past, present, and future.

**Psychology**

Augustine affirms the absolute unity and the spirituality of the human
soul. And yet, considering Augustine's Platonic tendency, the union of
the soul with the body is somewhat extrinsic. In regard to the origin of
the soul, Augustine's teaching varies from creationism to traducianism.
According to creationism, the soul of each man is created immediately by
God in the very moment it comes to animate the body. On the other hand,
according to traducianism the soul of every man proceeds from the souls
of the parents. Augustine, for polemical motives in his controversy with
Pelagius (who denied original sin), leans toward traducianism.

In regard to the nature of the soul he affirms that the soul is simple
and immortal. The sensitive soul, besides having the five senses, is
endowed also with a sensitive cognition which is common to animals and
which judges the proper object of each of the senses. The intellective
soul has three functions: being, understanding, and loving,
corresponding to three faculties: intellective memory, intelligence, and
will. The primacy among these three faculties is given to the will,
which in man signifies love.

The will of man is free. United to the question of the liberty of man
is the problem of evil, which for many years tormented the mind of
Augustine. Three kinds of evil can be distinguished: metaphysical,
physical, and moral, and each of them consists in a deficiency in being,
a descent toward non-being.

Metaphysical evil is the lacking of a perfection not due to a given
nature and hence is not actually an evil. Under this aspect, all
creatures are evil because they fall short of full perfection, which is
God alone.

Physical evil consists in the privation of a perfection due to nature;
e.g., blindness is the privation of sight in a being which ought to have
sight according to the exigencies of its nature. Augustine, under
Platonic and Stoic influence, justifies the presence of physical evil in
the general order of nature, in which dissonance serves to greater
accentuate the general harmony. The solution, certainly, is not very
pleasant.

The only true evil is moral evil; sin, an action contrary to the will
of God. The cause of moral evil is not God, who is infinite holiness,
nor is it matter, as the Platonists would have it, for matter is a
creature of God and hence good. Neither is the will as a faculty of the
soul evil, for it too has been created by God. The cause of moral evil
is the faculty of free will, by which man is able to deviate from the
right order, to oppose himself to the will of God.

Such opposition gives moral evil reality -- negative, metaphysical
reality in the sense of decadence of the order established by God, and
hence decadence of being or descent toward non-being. Sin, from the very
fact that it is a decadence of being, carries in itself its own
punishment. By sinning man injures himself in his being; for he falls
from what he ought to be. As a result of this fall there exist the
sufferings which he must bear, such as remorse in the present life, and
the sufferings which God has established in the life to come for those
who violate the laws laid down by His will.

**V. Liberty and Grace**

Augustine sustained a long debate against Pelagianism. Pelagius, who
gave origin to the heresy which bore his name, held that the freedom of
the human will is a gift of God, a grace of God. But from the moment he
has received free will man no longer has need of further graces to
attain his moral perfection: the powers of his nature are sufficient for
this. Human nature has not been corrupted by original sin, but remains
integral, and is able of itself to attain the perfection that is due to
it.

Augustine hence found it necessary to defend orthodox doctrine
regarding both the redemptive work of Christ and the necessity of grace
for attaining moral perfection. The teaching of Augustine is summarized
in the following points: Adam was created by God in integrity of nature,
and was further enriched with preternatural and supernatural gifts.
Although more inclined to good than to evil, there remained in Adam the
possibility of committing sin. Adam abused this power and sinned, and
since in him were the beginnings of all mankind, all humanity has sinned
with him. Thus evil took its beginning with original sin.

As a consequence of original sin, the human race has not only been
deprived of preternatural and supernatural gifts, but the whole of
nature has been upset, so that after original sin man is naturally
unable not to sin. Christ, by his death on the cross, has remedied this
disorder. But if the Redemption worked by Christ has given us once more
the possibility of regaining supernatural goods, still it has not
restored to us the preternatural gifts. It has left human nature
unchanged from what it was a consequence of sin; all the sufferings
which entered the world with original sin remain as a means of
purification and mortification.

Hence, granted this natural weakness of human nature, the will, in
order to attain moral perfection, needs grace. Now grace comes from God
and is external to the will. How is grace to be reconciled with liberty?
This was one of the problems which disturbed the mind of Augustine, and
he, in order to uphold the efficacy of grace, neglected the second
element, liberty.

VI. Ethics

We have already had occasion to explain certain basic points of
Augustine's moral or ethical doctrine when we spoke of the human will as
the sole cause of moral evil. Augustine's theory concerning evil is his
greatest philosophico-theological discovery -- particularly his
distinction between metaphysical evil, which is a deficiency or lack of
being, and moral evil, which is a deficiency or lack of good.

Another important point in Augustine's moral teaching is his doctrine
of voluntarism, or the primacy of the will over the intellect. The will
is love, and according to Augustine it is necessary to love in order to
know, and not vice versa. The primacy of the will is the intrinsic law
of being, which finds its first actuation in God, who has created out of
love.

This love or desire reaches down even to inferior beings, in which it
is manifested as instinct and blind appetition or appetite. Since the
first love must be love of God, and all other loves must be subordinated
to this first love, Augustine teaches that love signifies order. Action
is activity according to love. Any sin is an act of hatred, for sin is
separation (aversion) from the order or love which has its center in
God.

Because sin is an act of hate, the man who sins, not being able to
destroy the order established by God, harms himself and falls from his
being. Every good action is an action according to love: "Love," says
Augustine, "and do what you wish -- Ama et fac quod vis."

The voluntarism of Augustine indicates the clear separation of the
Latin ethical concept from the Greek. Greek genius, theoretical,
speculative, creator of philosophy, makes the intellect -- conscience --
the basis of morality; theory takes precedence over practice. Augustine,
representing the genius of Rome, which loved the practical and active
life, and created law, defends the greater value of activity over
speculation, prefers fact to theory, and hence the primacy of the will
over the intellect. The voluntarism of Augustine found in the Middle
Ages great champions in the mystics and in the Franciscan School.

VII. Politics: The City of God

Augustine wrote his masterpiece, The City of God, while the Roman
empire was falling into ruin under the barbarian invasions and the
Church was rising from the imperial remains. There was need of
justifying these two events, which disturbed the spirits not only of
pagans but of believers as well. With this purpose in mind, Augustine
undertook his work, which can be considered the first in the philosophy
of history.

Augustine's view of the history of humanity is organic and unified, but
it is also ascetic and Christian. Christ is the very soul of history.
The coming of Christ presupposes another truth of Christianity, original
sin. In consequence of original sin, men are divided into two distinct
cities: one of God, the other earthly. Both, however, are at the service
of Christ.

The city of God, prior to the coming of Christ, was represented by the
people of Israel; the earthly city was represented by the Roman empire.
The two cities had a different purpose, the one religious and the other
political. The first had the task of preparing for the coming of Christ
with prophecies; the second was to prepare for his coming politically.

After the coming of Christ and the founding of the Church, the purpose
of the Roman empire had been fulfilled, and hence it fell under the
assaults of the barbarians. If in the Christian era the Church
represents the city of God, moral evil, wherever it be found, will be
the representative of the earthly, the satanic city.

These two cities now are politically unseparated and only religiously
diverse, for the Church has a universal task and must embrace the elect
and the predestined of all times and of all races. The complete division
will be made on the Great Sabbath, when the good will be made eternal
citizens of the city of God, the eternal Jerusalem, and the evil will be
confined forever to the city of Satan, hell. But who are those who will
end in glory and who will end in torment? This, too, was one of the many
problems that tortured the mind of Augustine. The answer to this is
among the secrets of God.

VIII. Summary

St. Augustine affirms that the world was created by God from nothing,
through a free act of His will. Time is a being of reason ("rens
rationis") with a foundation in things which through becoming offer to
the mind the concept of time as past, present, and future. Augustine
affirms the absolute unity and the spirituality of the human soul. In
regard to the nature of the soul he affirms that the soul is simple and
immortal. Then sensitive soul, besides having the five senses, is
endowed also with a sensitive cognition which is common to animals and
which judges the proper object of each of the senses. The intellective
soul has three functions: being, understanding, and loving,
corresponding to three faculties: intellective memory, intelligence, and
will. The primary among these three faculties is given to the will,
which in man signifies love. The will of man is free.

Three kinds of evil can be distinguished: metaphysical, physical, and
moral, and each of them consists in a deficiency in being, a descent
toward non-being. Metaphysical evil is the lack of a perfection not due
to a given nature and hence is not actually an evil. Under this aspect,
all creatures are evil because they fall short of full perfection, which
is God alone. Physical evil consists in the privation of a perfection
due to nature, e.g., blindness is the privation of sight in a being
which ought to have sight according to the exigencies of its nature. The
only true evil is moral evil; sin, an action contrary to the will of
God.

The cause of moral evil is not God, who is infinite holiness, nor is it
matter, as the Platonists would have it, for matter is a creature of God
and hence good. Neither is the will as a faculty of the soul evil, for
it too has been created by God. The cause of moral evil is the faculty
of free will, by which man is able to deviate from the right order, to
oppose himself to the will of God. Such opposition gives moral evil
reality -- negative, metaphysical reality in the sense of decadence of
the order established by God, and hence decadence of being or descent
toward non-being. Sin, from the very fact it is decadence of being,
carries in itself its own punishment. By sinning man injures himself in
his being, for he falls from what he ought to be. As a result of this
fall there exist the sufferings which he must bear, such as remorse in
the present life.


