Foreword
========

The form of research varies and the outlook differs in investigations
about the religious matters and those of the faith of those who believe
in God and the unseen world, The acceptance of this truth, or in other
words, such a view of the universe that the world is created by God, in
it is a subject that entails research. With regards to Islam we hold
belief in God’s existence and His being omnipotent, All Knowing,
Almighty, All Wise and that He sent the Messengers for the guidance of
the people.

Obviously in such a way of investigation we connect the Mission of
Muhammad to God Himself. Now the validity of this connection is to be
explored.

On, the issue of Imamate and Mehdism; we faithfully and unanimously
make inquiry into the relation of these two (Imamate and Mehdism) with
the reality so that to understand as to whether these two subjects are
based on an Islamic Pedestal or only attributed to Islam.

The forms of research differ even in that of belief in God. In order to
reach the truth and the correct view of the universe, one seeks to
launch an inquiry.

This occasions him to conquest the view of the universe held by those
who know God and those who ignore God. Now, such an inquirer or
investigator deals with both sides of the coin, negatively and
positively, because he has not yet formed a belief. He is still in a
search. So, this is a way of research and study. Another way of research
about the events and beliefs is, in a historical term, the material view
of the universe. Although, he himself might not be materialist, but
wants to know the materialistic causes. This and such a type of study is
valid only in the ambit of the material view of the world and could
provide causes and effects within the limits of its range, but does not
stand authentic to establish the fact or deny it because from the aspect
of the Divine view of the universe it is not a standard. Besides, it
would not go beyond a concatenation of feeble guess.

It would only crawl like a centipede but could not run with the impetus
of the gallop of a horse. Here we are not in the situation of making a
comparison between these two aspects of viewing the universe and to
prove the Divine view of the universe. Nor can we say that the material
view of the universe or historical one, whatever it may be called, if it
is to be considered to be the absolute one towards negating God and the
unseen world, then they are mistaken because the material view of the
universe is short to constitute a consummate scope of all truth and can
not pose itself as a reality to be believed. One may reject the divine
view of the universe; but his path terminates at ignorance - absence of
knowledge and not the knowledge of absence.

In such a disquisition of the material view despite the severance of
the connection between this visible world with the absent one, the
invisible causes that give birth to an incident or a belief or a
thought, because the butt of their question. As such, they are after a
material and historical cause for the birth of a thought, a system, a
school, a movement and so forth. So, this outlook in the causes that
lead a belief or an opinion to appear in a circle of unbelievers is
nothing but a series of presumptions which carry, even to themselves
only a value not more than the worth of a guess. It is not a viewpoint
believable o of its own entity in the subject matter. It is neither
consummate nor compendious nor far stretching one even to those who are
wandering in the wilderness of conquest and have not yet reached the
oasis of any particular view of the universe. It is, indeed, void for
those who hold an Islamic and Divine view of the universe.

When such a fundamental difference exists between the two methods of
study and disquisition one should avoid the conjugation of these two in
discussions and arguments. There are many that are quite inadvertent to
this fact, and therefore, become victims of the error that is the
consequence of the coition between these two different ways of
disquisition. Therefore they fell prey to mistakes when they study the
Divine view of the universe, without a belief in it they will classify
it as a second or third grade issue.

They make their research in the issue of messengers and apostles and,
the belief in its essentiality; in the same fashion, that is, from the
historical aspect. They bring forth other issues, those of economical
and material ones; and conjugate them although there exist no relation
with the invisible world. A Divine view of the universe or the belief in
God is, in fact, a cardinal issue. But they treat it on the same basis
dwelling on the causes, which are ended by the element of time or
succumb to it.

So, such they proceed and such they pay no heed to these points, and,
accordingly by fall in the abyss of error which to them appears as a
valley of principles, where their imagination which had given link
between the historical event takes the shape of facts. Thus they float
distant from the shore of the Divine view of the universe because not
being in its current they can not enter into its flow. Great issues such
as the prophet hood and Imamate to them are a true history of the events
that once occurred.
So, here we can conclude that the respected scholar, Mr. Abdul Azeez
Sachedina, has endeavored greatly and toiled much but only to attain the
outlook of the second category; what he saw from Shia and Mehdism has
been written in this book; The knowledge about him that I have, tells me
that he is an ardent Shia and a Staunch believer in “WILAYAT” and
“IMAMAT of Mahdi.”

That a series of historical effects caused the events, and that Imamate
and Mehdism among them which precede the belief in the prophet hood, to
presume such and attribute this to the writer it will be unfair. It is
not so. He has chosen this method of analysis from the historical aspect
because of his own foresumption to make the Shia religion and Mahdism
comprehensive for those who regard the growth of the schools in line
with the material view of the universe and on such a foundation rest
their analysis. This he has done because of his knowledge o them to whom
realities are only a historical series of events, interlinked and
interwoven, chained in the continuity of time only to become the cause
for the effect of the other. In other words, whatever the history it is
a fact and a reality; and, which therefore, can not be denied.

He has adopted such method of analysis although in principle wrong and
erroneous to present the gist so that the thought might not be looked
improbable and not excite wonder, astonishment nor tempt them the
vilification. By such an analysis we infer that the writer has made an
attempt to elevate the Shiasm and the school of Mahdism in their
understanding as a consummate, complete, and advanced one with
participation in revolutions and changes which can not be ignored.

Yet, this should be said as we pointed out earlier that this way of
study and investigation neither attains truth nor does it reflect the
facts. The outlook of the universal Divine view is at difference with
it. The Divine view is not mentioned, neither openly or indirectly, in
the book. Reflecting these points and the method of raising the issues
and the difference between the outlooks towards these issues are not
known to many.

There is every likelihood of a mistake. To divert the attention of such
ignorant to the gist of the issue and to divert their sight to the
original point and to acquaint them with the Imamate and Mahdism, we
will present our readers a few explanations about the issues raised in
that book. We hope our readers will at least acquire some advantages and
benefits that he may use latter on. What we have explained, is the need;
there is not need to depend upon the matters about which we have
explained.

Each chapter that occurs to us we shall explain by the help of God.


