B. History of Leadership and Caliphate
======================================

This issue has always been much in attention. The prophet hood was
still in its start and the Revelations had started coming down, this
issue too made its appearance as a matter of no less magnitude. There is
a story of a man who approached the Prophet and told him that he would
embrace his faith on one condition and that was that he becomes leader
after the Prophet (SAW). The Prophet (SAW) rejected the man.

In the meantime, it is true that in the current of some great events of
historical significance the religions view of Shiasm sometimes used to
palpitate and sometimes the Islamic rays have had so glared through the
prism that its reflection has astonished the viewers and captured their
attention.

It is a historical fact that governments came to power, which were
quite incompetent and not fit for the leadership. Although bad they were
imposed on the people because they facilated the ground which became
easily accessible for the leadership. Leadership thus obtained they
ruled over the people. People were helpless. They could do nothing
beyond disdaining and cursing them. The governments in spite of the
power could not rule over the dominion of hearts. In the lifetime of the
Prophet (SAW) nobody dared to show his true identity.

As there was no opposition openly, the underground movements took root.
What they could not accept was the leadership of Ali (AS), announced
time and again by the Prophet. Secret plots were concocted. The Prophet
himself was to be assassinated.

After the death of the Prophet (SAW) what was underground became
open.

The Prophet was no more to be feared; but his house and its members
were there. The opposition had a plan, and they proceeded with it. Now
the front was the very house of the Prophet (SAW). Whoever was a member,
friend or sympathizer to the Holy Prophet’s household was to be crushed,
so that their opposition should gain ground. Thus the division became
wider and the opposition reached every house, if that house was a friend
of the Prophet’s house. Those who were supporters of the Prophet’s
household were called Shia. In other words, those who adhered to the
Prophet’s household or remained in his camp, became Shia. Wherever a
Shia be, he had to confront this opposition.

The only daughter of the Prophet (SAW), Zahra, was not excluded. They
came to her house and tortured her and showed the people that they could
go to that extreme and beyond. Thereafter the events took their course.
Some of the followers of the Prophet went astray and a split was now the
rule.

This deviation from the original course became a school and whoever
adhered to it became a Sunni. And a Sunni was to oppose a Shia who
remained in the line of the Prophet (SAW) which was under the protection
of his household. Although such was the case however face to face
confrontation was very prudent by avoided in the time of Abu Bakr and
also in the regime of Omar. What did the people do? The legality or the
legitimacy of the government a mattered to some, which others remained
indifferent. Some people rather enjoyed the opportunity as they
affiliated themselves to the ruling junta. There were also three who
considered the issue as finished and settled.

But a few among them, like Omar, never considered themselves safe and
secure, because the legitimacy of their rule was under question by some.
As long as doubt existed the danger too existed that the people might
return to the original track. Therefore Omar adopted very calculated
policies in which to keep Ali (AS) at a distance from power. So, Omar
wrote a plan, which introduced the proposal of a six men committee.
Othaman carried out the plan. As a result Ali once again stayed away
from power. In the meantime, this occasioned for the people to recall
the words of the Prophet (SAW) about Ali (AS) when he had introduced him
as the one who would succeed him. An outpour of memory excited the
passions in such an effective way that they, the people, showed and
expressed their disappointment as they saw the deviation from the track
of the Prophet (SAW) was getting wider. The hatred and abhorrence
towards Othaman was in such abundance that Muslims could not restrain
their anger and anguish.

The huge fire, which had erupted, was fueled by the irregularities and
injustice of Othaman himself. The original Islam was in need of the
rightful successor of the Prophet. As there was no other than Ali, huge
crowds of Muslims gathered around to support him. After twenty-five
years of straying off the right path, people were once again shown the
correct path. Ali (AS) and a holy war under his command were considered
by Muslims a great honor. Allegiance to him was pledged and his
succession to the Prophet’s place was celebrated. Shiasm considers
nothing wrong with this, but quite the contrary; this was done in
compliance with logic and reason.

This is a fact that the faith of the Shia was never forgotten. The
hearts of the people have always hung to the Prophet’s household. They
were victims and deprived of their right. People gave their support as
the occasion arose and the opportunity invited. Poets have narrated this
faith. Farazdog is a good example of one of these poets whose famous
laudation addresses Husham telling him as to who Imam Zainulabedeen was.
Mosa Bin Naseer was the governor of Africa.

He had a slave by the name of Tariq. Tariq conquered Spain. Eventhough
they held offices in the government of Bani Ommiya, they were Shia.
Because of his being a Shia, Tariq’s properties were confiscated and he
himself was dismissed, regardless of his services. The Shia belief had
penetrated even into Mawiya’s family. Mawiya’s grandson, Yazid, was a
Shia. He openly accused his father and grandfather and announced his
allegiance to Ali and other members of the Prophet’s House. Likewise was
the situation in the Bani Abbas dynasty.

It is the Truth and the originality that the Shia faith has survived
throughout ages in spite of the ups and downs that has disturbed it and
posed as a threat to its holder. From the political aspect, any Shia was
restricted from holding any office in the government. The tyrant and
cruel rulers of the Bani Abbas dynasty like Mansoor, Haroon and Mamun
had knowledge of Shiasm, however contrary to their knowledge they
crushed the Shia thought in order to obtain and keep their power.

Going down the line of the Bani Abbas dynasty we see another ruler,
Muntasar, who held the Shia thought. Again, another by the name of
Naser; he too was Shia. At Samerre (Iraq), the place of disappearance of
Mahdi (AS), the twelfth Imam, had been entrusted to and was repaired by
Naser. There are narrations from Shia sources, which say that Naser was
Shia and regarded himself as a deputy of the twelfth Imam, Mahdi (AS).
The Shia faith is Islam. Neither greed corrupted nor ambition has
polluted it. They did not desert the Prophet. When he was no more the
tradition of THADALAIN goaded them to the Prophet’s household - the
Imams, twelve in succession. Nothing was added there to; nothing was
reduced there from.

It was the same in the Prophet’s lifetime and remained the same
throughout the fourteen centuries. What had history to do with it? They
attribute it to history. What we do understand is that the Shia faith
has been the cause for uprisings, movements either open or underground
ones, revolts, and revolutions. The Shia faith has always stood against
tyrants. It is quite contrary to what some think and say. Of course,
there who think such are men of no knowledge or little information. They
do not know; and those who know conceal; but history knows and tells and
does not conceal. There were Shia governments in Egypt, Dialama, North
Africa, Iran, and Iraq. The upraising of the Safavis was an event caused
by Shiasm. All these dominions were under Shia rule. There were the
events that the Shia faith caused; and not the other way around.


