C. Sunnism and Its Sectarian Term Against Shiasm After the Lifetime of the Prophet
==================================================================================

The analysis of the writer in his book in this chapter is such as to
indicate that Shiasm as well as Sonnism were political forms and that
they gradually took the status of a religions support which was
necessary to their political ends. Failure of Shiasm in political
avenues, the writer attributes to the lack of a corresponding ideology.
In this respect, that is, the ideology we would like to correct the
writer because he has made himself free to tell what is not a reality.

The Shia was opposed to accepting the successor to the Prophet who had
been wrongly appointed. This is itself a political dimension. This very
policy and the reason for this policy resulted in the division; this
division, in fact, stretches to the difference of belief in leadership.
To make it short, a new belief came into existence against the belief of
a divinely fixed or established Imamate. As a result, the real followers
of Islam or the adherents to real Islam were cornered into taking the
guise of a group or a party or a sect under the name of Shia to oppose
the politics by listing and leaning to a particular quarter.

But why is this fact deliberately overlooked? The policy the Shia as a
political group introduced after that undesired division for the
administration of society was itself a real Islamic ideology. It is
untrue to say that Shia lacked an ideology.

They had one; this was a religion, a faith, a belief before it took a
political tint. It was so rich that it provided shade to politics.
Politicians were against this belief. So, their effort was to create a
group so as to face the belief of Shia. They gave to that adversary
group a religion form. What was the most valuable treasure to them was
the caliphate, which they had already snatched from its rightful owner
and had diverted it in their own direction. In order to keep it they
spent money, dissipated their tactics in creating terror among the
people and purchasing the silence of those whose voice was a threat to
them. To hold the administration of society in their hands as long as
possible; this was the fundamental of their politics. It is quite simple
that a group by the name of Sunni would have never been invented had the
Shia not opposed the point where they had departed from. The only
element of opposition with Shiasm is the politics.

On the other hand, it was they who did not have an ideology. Had they
one they would have announced it or introduced it. In that confused hour
of time they only captured the moment without announcing what their
ideology was.

They could have at least prevented an armed conflict between the
religions rivalry groups for the safety of Islam. There was no interest
of any ideology at their hearts except to capture the opportunity. Later
on which ideology did they follow? The writer is mistaken. The people
had already long ago accepted Ali (AS) as the successor to the Prophet
(SAW) at Ghadir, however this decision had not been respected by the
rivalry group (Sunniasm). The ideology they had was, Yes, that of terror
and fear which stood as the base of their government.

Why has the writer forgotten the sword of Omar? Abubakr was nominated
at SAQIFA. Later, Omar started sauntering, loitering and roaming about
in the streets with a naked sword in hand calling the people to yield to
the authority of Abu Bakr or choose to taste the blade. People were dumb
founded. Such a force and violence was their ideology. He continued his
rampage through the streets until he approached the house of Zahra, the
only daughter of the Prophet (SAW), demanding Ali’s surrender to Abu
Bakr’s authority. Ali (AS) retrained from doing that. He was tortured
and dishonored at his door; and taken away by force to the mosque in
order to acknowledge Abu Bakr’s caliphate. At the end of his life on the
verge of death he wrote a will. Abu Bakr was rarely in his senses, he
wrote the names of Othaman and Omar leaving it a guess as to which are
of the two was to succeed him. When he came to his senses he was asked
as to whom he actually meant. In reply he confirmed both.

He died. Omar succeeded him. No one pointed out that “the man is
uttering nonsense” or “The pain has overtaken him.” A man who has lost
his senses can not make a will. But when Prophet (SAW) wanted to write
down his will they did not allow him by refraining to give him pen and
paper. In the progress of all these events we do not see any fixed
ideology. Omar came to power without any rival and any opposition. Omar
too appointed a committee of six men. Till here there seems to be no
ideology or any respect to the public opinion. Only after Othaman had
been killed did the people rush to Ali’s house and yield to his
authority and acknowledge him as caliph. This they did with their own
will, as there was no force, no compulsion and no violence. From the
view point of Shia Ali (AS) had been the caliph since the moment the
Prophet had died.

Regardless to what they have written in their books the fact is that
the people were compelled to accept whom the caliph had appointed in
advance. Therefore, the Sunni people had no ideology in their
government. Even to this day of ours one of their scholars says that
Islam has no specific method in appointing a ruler.

**D. The Factor of Religious difference by dividing Islam (Muslims)
into two sects Shia and Sunni:**

Love to govern and to attain pomp and ostentation is the prime factor.
They pondered and saw nothing would avail them nor would they avail a
thing if they left things go as they were in the preaching and the
teachings of the Prophet.

In his lifetime they should plough so as to harvest after his death:
Ambition held them together and the secrecy of intentions brought a
confederation between them. They contrived a plan. What the Prophet says
or orders or permits or prohibits should not constitute a binding upon
them nor should it have a bearing on what they wished. Such a line
suited the trend and fitted to the taste. So a thought void of the
Prophet’s teachings should be pushed ahead side by side along the
Prophet’s line, a banner, a slogan, a title that could deceive much and
do nothing was a necessity to push the thought ahead. “The book of God
is enough for us”, this they chose and adopted as their mission. The
name of God and the name of His book served as a tool. They turned it in
whatever direction the need was. The screw was tightened and loosened.

Whatever direction it turned, the banner stood a justification for it.
In other words, so to say, it actually served as a fortification for
them where they were quite safe. They obeyed and disobeyed the Prophet;
they accepted and rejected the Prophet; they believed and disbelieved in
the Prophet; they were the Prophet’s friends and also his enemies. Such
was the banner and such was the use they drew out of it. It was through
this means that they invalidated the sayings of the Prophet. Thus they
were preparing for the great event which was yet to come. They put it to
test when the Prophet (SAW) in his last days demanded a pen and paper to
write down his will. They said; “Pain has overtaken him. The Book of God
is enough for us.” According to some narration they said; “The man is
uttering nonsense.”

So, by this slogan they stood up against the Prophet. We need not go
into long discussion. It is quite obvious that their lust for power was
the prime factor of the division in Islam. It is true; it was the
Prophet (SAW) who gave the name of Shia to the followers of Ali (AS).
But this did not create nor did it cause a division. The presence of
close friends of Ali (AS) like Salman, Abuzar, Migdad had no part in
creating a sect by the name of Shia. When the Prophet called the
followers of Ali (AS) by the name of Shia he meant it for all.

His desire was that all should be Shia. All should follow Ali (AS). It
is not even forcibly convincing that the Prophet himself should divide
his own nation. If we reflect back we see the division actually took
place and came into being the moment the Prophet died. Who was to
govern? Who was to succeed? This was the issue. This issue was a long
awaited one; and long anticipated; and some had toiled hard for it.
Although the Prophet (SAW) had introduced Ali (AS) as his successor, yet
they were still hopeful to steal it. At the cost of division among
Muslims they attained their goal.

If at all we ignore this division and find a justification for it, we
can not overlook a factor, which did play a part. Some of the Muslims
held a view which justified their disobedience the Prophet or to discard
his orders. They did not regard the sayings or the instructions of the
Prophet (SAW) as Divine revelations. As such, according to them, there
was no binding. The Book of God they sufficed on and they saw no need
for the Prophet’s (SAW) words. They regarded themselves in the same
level of that of the Prophet (SAW) in conceiving the Quranic text. So
why should they remain in the very same line prescribed by the Prophet
(SAW)?

Whatever they thought necessary with reports to their personal interest
or that of a group stood in preference to the Prophet’s words. With such
a view, the instructions of the Prophet (SAW) became to them amendable
in accordance with the time, place, circumstance or the condition. In
the administration of Society the word of the Prophet to them was not
final nor did it constitute an obligation upon them to its obedience.
The lawful and the unlawful to them were not a divine legislation.
Likewise, the issue of the caliphate too was in the same category.
Although the Prophet had appointed his successor, they felt they were
not obliged to accept his choice because they wrongfully thought it had
no validity of a divine revelation.

Therefore, to oppose him was lawful. Such was their reason and such was
their belief; and such they have even proved. They changed the whole
cause immediately after the Prophet’s death by appointing their own man
as the caliph. They had said that for the administration of a society it
was not prudent to have one as the caliph even though he should be the
Prophet’s candidate or appointed by him. They can go against his
choice... On the other hand, in several matters they insisted that the
Prophet’s instructions should be carried out strictly. But, with regards
to the caliphate they did quite the opposite.

This shows that personal interests mattered to them much. There is
another instance where they openly disobeyed the Prophet (SAW). The
Prophet (SAW) had appointed Asama as the commander in chief; however
they refaced to accept him as their chief. They gave themselves the
right to either obey the Prophet or to disobey him. They did both. They
obeyed him and also disobeyed him.

When the Prophet’s orders were contrary to their interests, they did
not obey him. Now we ask; who was the opposing group? Followers of Ali?
They believed in the Prophet’s words. What the Prophet said was a divine
word to them. In this respect their point was this verse of the Quran:
“And he does not utter upon lust; but it is a Revelation that he is
vested with.” This argument sounds reasonable. So they regarded the
Prophet’s (SAW) word a binding upon them because of its being a Divine
Revelation. This Quranic verse too is put forward in support of their
thought: “What is brought to you by the Prophet, take it, and what he
prohibits you refrain from it.” Therefore, the orders of the Prophet, to
them, were to be obeyed and followed.

They believed that every instruction of the Prophet (SAW) was and is
valid and can not be ignored. This group of believers was also called
‘people of the text’. They also believed that the interpretation was
beyond their understanding. To them the caliphate of Ali (AS) and his
guardianship over the Muslims was a thing desired by God. They depended
upon this Quranic Verse in support to their belief: “O, Messenger!
Announce what has descended to you from your such is a brief sketch of
the start of the division. It can be well noticed that the name of ‘AHL
SUNNAT’ people of tradition) to those ones who actually did not adhere
to it is not fair. The more deserving ones to this name are those who
saw incumbent upon them to stick to the Quran and the tradition of the
Prophet (SAW). They are Shia. Some clamored “The Book of God is enough
to us”; and some maintained that in addition to the Book of God the
Prophet’s instructions too are necessary. For the sake of one we can not
forego the other. In the absence of either, one falls short of the
other.

Anyway, these two thoughts are fundamental ones. The belief of the Shia
rests on the second one. “The Book of God is enough” is a thought that
rejects the dimension of what the Prophet said and did. And this thought
resulted in the division of Muslims. Well, in exploring this thought
“The Book of God is enough” we come across disagreement among some of
this very school. There are some that openly campaigned against the
Prophet’s word and his text so far as Ali was concerned. Some insisted
that in politics or in the political field there was no necessity to
follow the Prophet. Some on some occasions resorted to the Prophet’s
tradition because they well knew that the thought “The Book of God is
enough” was bleak and barren that it could not hold long.

Little by little it dawned that the thought “The Book of God is enough”
was void of a sense. It was only an approval to invalidate the divine
legislation. In the beginning this slogan worked well to their
advantage. In deceiving the people who generally were illiterate and not
well informed, this thought went a great deal of length. It was under
this pretext that they prevented the Prophet (SAW) from writing down his
will. And, they stood against those who used to say that the Prophet’s
decree was essential for the office of caliphate by saying that only a
Quranic text could determine such an issue. So, the events of GRADEER as
well as that of YUM AL-DAAR were both overlooked. As time went on,
experience told them that the affairs could not be ruled or administered
without the backing of the Prophet’s traditions; they resorted to
interpretation. This paved the way for them to deduce from the Divine
Decrees and the Prophet’s words as the demand suggested or as the need
stood. They justified; they interpreted; and they expounded God’s laws;
and had it been possible they would have even questioned the very text
of the Holy Quran.

**E. Not a correct analysis:**

The religious matters are viewed from both a material and political
dimension. For instance, they say that the Shia did not see things to
their advantage; therefore they refused to yield to the caliphate and
choose a different way.

The prime error that entails several other subsequent errors is that
they do not consider Shiasm a religious reality or an entity of a
belief. They regard it as a political phenomenon. The writer says that
it gathered support as people joined the movement even though at times
it was given different names. The name of AFILUL BAIT (The Prophet’s
household) gave them a push. As time advanced they too advanced. But
this theory is wrong. The existence of the Shia belief has no relation
to any historical episode. The writer considers historical events as a
proud for the birth of the Shia thought, likewise the Sunni. The writer
struggles his way through such blunders till he reaches the occultation
(the disappearance) of the twelfth Imam, Mahdi. Amidst the conditions
and circumstances he sees the gleam of reason. The mist rises and he
sees the light!

There has always been this fact - that people will mingle in political
events, or take no part in the governmental posts, or oppose openly, or
flouting a proposal, or scouting an idea. But, in no way could this have
a link will a religion, as a religion can not be founded or established
or propagated on such a ground.

According to some narration, the disappearance of Mahdi happened in
order that some could avoid the obligation of yielding to his authority.
However, such a thing has happened, has taken place, has occurred. It is
a fact. It is a reality. It is a tyrannical conjecture or a wounding
lies, that the Shia had no other way but to switch their belief in such
an event after the death of the eleventh Imam, Hasan Askari.

One, who is a stranger to religions, is totally ignorant to the
realities of the invisible or unseen world, who has seen only matter or
any other tangible thing; he wants to see, justify and even interpret
the religious matters, no matter of its magnitude, and then decide or
pass judgment. Every thing he thinks is the effect of a cause or a
policy in a political class. Similar is the argument of Marxists too.
Such should be, because of no acquaintance, no awareness.

From the ancient times they have questioned, because they want to see
the matter and they have rejected, because they know not of anything or
something beyond. Ulterior dimensions are sealed to their sight. It
would be accepted if he shouts that he has seen; but, no, the cry of a
blind has always been that he has DISCOVERED.

Of course, such type of analysis we see runs in all religions, true or
otherwise. Such analysis is only workable in religions, which are not
true because there is no other way. The viewpoint of the Sunni is vague.
According to them there was no text nor was there a religions basis. The
appointment of Abubakr to the caliphate was the consequence of the
turmoil and confusion among Muslims that followed the death of the
Prophet (SAW). A gathering took place at SAQIFA and to avoid a conflict
or a civil disorder or any other danger it was important that Abubakr be
appointed. Abu Bakr too in his turn with the same intention appointed
Omar. Omar created a six men committee to decide after his death. These
events were influenced by outside causes and which were gestant with
historical aspects too. But political ends supervised and exercised
guidance upon them.

In the light of these analysis’s it is acceptable that the governments
that came into being after the Prophet (SAW) were absolutely due to the
causes and effects which were never religious. But with regards to the
Shia belief, these interpretations are not true nor are they acceptable
because they believed in Imamate as they believed in the prophet hood.
Their belief was in that which was a reality and their religion was a
fact. They did not go beyond that. F. To support the Leadership of AHLUL
BAIT (Members of the Prophet’s house) a religious Fundamental:

In this chapter the writer has composed comments which history and
traditions reject. Documentary evidences and historical events repudiate
his conclusions.

For instance, says he: “The support to the leadership of Alavees was at
first not on the basis of any planning...” The fact is opposite. The
religious basis pushed the people to the support of the Alavees. Those
who opposed the events took place at SAQIFA and consequently rejected
the authority of Abu Bakr, did so on a religion ground. Else, there was
no other motive. The Prophet’s (SAW) words, his recommendations in this
respect stood obligatory to them for their obedience.

People embraced the Shia faith only on a religion basis. The motive was
religion. The instigation was the obedience to the Prophet (SAW). One
has to refer to the books “Reality of Shiasm and its principles” (ASL
AL-SHIA WA ASOOLOHA), “The History of Shiasm” (TAREEQ AL-SHIA) and
“Shiasm in History" (AL-SHIA FIL TAREEQ). To become convinced of the
facts. The speeches of Ali Bin Abi Taleb compiled in NARJUL BALAGHA (the
tone of eloquence) throw light on this fact that the position of ARLUL
BAIT (Members of the Prophet’s House) was that of leadership morally and
materially. The angle of government is subordinate to it.

The writer in this chapter gives this opinion that it was exaggeration
that gave shape to Imamate and brought forward the belief in the
guardianship of Ali Bin Abi Taleb. Why in this respect and in this
particular regard has he not studied or searched or collected the
sayings of the Prophet (SAW). Had he too heard as others had heard
directly from the mouth of the Prophet (SAW) would have never told what
is false and would have respected the truth? Since history has recorded
every word uttered by the Prophet (SAW) he could have made himself
acquainted with the Prophet’s trend or tendency. But the writer appears
to be prejudice; not willing to take his look beyond the angle he has
chosen.

Since l0 A.D writers have collected the sayings and the conversations
and the speeches of the prophet (SAW); all point to the way Shiasm and
all indicate what is an established fact Shiasm. To turn a blind eye to
all these and to say that till the tenth and twelfth century there was
no sign of the Shia belief, is not only injustice but a shere lie. The
blood that was shed prior to this period of those who were Shia by Ziad
and his like is also neglected and ignored. Why were they martyred? They
adhered to this belief. Such a type of research into the history of Shia
the writer has made and with such an outlook he has emerged that one can
not but doubt his honesty and fear his intention which is full of
venom.

Since the beginning, the Shia have acknowledged, the Imamate. “OULIL
AMR” (Master of command) he attributed to the twelve Imams individually.
It is an irrefragable fact that ever since the beginning the Shia has
had a religions fundamental. Denial of this fact is to deny the
existence of historical personalities. To reject is to admit.

Sometimes the writer says that Shiasm from the very beginning was a
party, which stood opposing the Sunnism. How wrong he is! The very Islam
in its pristine purity and in its virgin originality is the Shiasm -
Committed to the sayings of the Prophet (SAW) and adhered to the text.
On the other hand, Sunnism came into being in the periods subsequent to
Islam and subject to the circumstances that were forced into existence
immediately after the Prophet’s death. The text was not important to
them. It was a party created to oppose a prescribed program of Islam. It
was a party only to impede the progress of Islam. In order to not hurt
the feelings of our Sunni brothers we will not go further. It was a
deliberate creation to stop the current of a religion; up not be
stopped, to divert its flow; or if not, to deviate the people and to
confuse the thing for them.

Finally we should pronounce that party which balanced the text of the
Prophet’s words and that of the Quran in the scale of interests,
fostered its own conclusions against the authority of the Prophet, and
preferred its own interpretation to justify its ends. This was a
particular class grouped together with a deliberation; as the time
elapsed, their scholars who were courtiers worked out an ideology to it.
Theirs is an invention and Shia’s is the religion. G. Many Mistakes:

The writer has made so many mistakes that to point them out one by one
is indeed a great task.

For instance, one is this. Re says that the radical Shias, as he has
them termed, who believed in the armed upraisal, were too lavish in
attributing extraordinary tributes to Imam. To give him information we
would like to comment here:

Those who had insisted on an armed upraisal were the Shias of the Zaidi
sect. They thought that the Imam should carry a sword and he should
carry the armed upraisal. Unlike the Shia, that is common Shia, they had
some particular specification and tributes for the Imam, which was
special to themselves.

The revolution that took place against Bani Ommaiya can not be
attribute to any group among the groups of Shia. The atrocities
committed by them and the cruelties, which they showed against the
people of the Prophet’s House (AHLULBAIT) constitute the real reason,
the cardinal cause and the fundamental factor of their downfall. A
general tumult and a common turmoil had already emerged every where and
had established a ground of uncertainty. The situation was that of
excitement either to deliver a revolution or to lead people to revolt.
As is usually the case every opponent tried to gain benefit of the
situation. Of course, the most zealous of all was the ZAIDAIA faction.

Besides, there was also another faction by the name of BANI ABASS who
considered themselves heir to Ali Bin Abi Taleb because of the link to
Abu Hashim Abdulla Bin Mohhamad Hanefi. In these groups and factions
there was, indeed, one who had the right to the leadership and to whom
the leadership had been offered however he rejected the offer. He was
Jafar al-Sadiq, the sixth Imam. This policy which he adopted and
practiced was what the Prophet (SAW) had fixed for him was to the
greater interest of Islam. The Islamic justice, the Islamic teaching
were promoted by not accepting the political leadership. He re-opened
the school for lessons long forgotten and corrected those, which were
wrong.

The flurry settled down and the turmoil ended as the government of Bani
Abbas came into being. They came as one should have come. The ground
itself paved the way for an armed revolt; they did not pave the way for
the armed upraisal. All counted the armed revolt effective but the Zaidi
faction thought that the armed revolt effective but exercised by the
Imam. He who does so is the Imam, no matter whether he comes out a
victor vanquished.


