H. Imam Jafer Al-sadiq and Religion
===================================

The prime factor for the disappointment of the Shia was the lack of a
uniform or coherent ideology; and this continued to be so till the time
of the great Imam of the Shias, Jafer al-Sadiq. This is what the writer
says.

We do not know what he actually means. If he means, positively, that
the uniform ideology of Shia as it was, the friends and the supporters
of AHLUL BAIT (The Prophet’s Household) had not known it or were not
aware of it or had not recognized it correctly but they were made
acquainted with it by the Imam Al-Sadiq. And that he, Imam Al-Sadiq,
subsequently due to the awareness, which he had brought about amongst
them, could establish that great school of knowledge, which educated the
people with the true Islam to follow Ali and his offspring, the AHLUL
BAIT, was its reality and entity. In his time, Al-Sadiq’s, the knowledge
was spread and made within the reach of all those to whom mattered the
facts. Many misconceptions. Wrong conclusions, and mistaken ideas about
Islam that were propagated earlier were revised for the people reputed,
rescinded, repudiated and retained only realities. This was a great
achievement.

Now, if the writer means, negatively, that Imam Jafer Al-Sadiq was the
inventor of the ideology; it is not true.

Who was he to invent one? The ideology of Shia is what Islam is. From
the very beginning, from the days of the Prophet (SAW) it was at a
uniformity. The Prophet’s words his sayings and his addresses had
already made it clear.

The passage of time had no bearing on them. It was in itself complete
and consummate. The Shia ideology was the element that made the
propagation perfect. The events which occurred, in themselves carry the
element of truth, goes a long way to establish the truth of this
ideology and manifests the mistaken aspect of the opponents and
adversaries. The behavior and the conduct of Bani Ommiya, who led the
government in their hands, itself gave the awakening to the people. They
as successors to the Prophet (SAW), adopted wicked ways and deeds which
made the people hate them because their actions were not coherent with
the seat of the Prophet they had occupied. The more they hated them the
more they pondered the position of ARLUL BAIT (The Prophet’s Household
members). There was not the remotest resemblance with the teachings of
Islam. Soon it became obvious that the leadership must go to its
rightful owners, those of the ARLUL BAIT. The very difference in the
mode of life of the Members of the Prophet’s household and that of the
caliphs of Bani Ommiya was quite open to the observation of the people,
it brought the Shia ideology closer to their hearts.

**4. The Shia and the meaning of Mahdism:**

As he earlier proceeded, here too he proceeds on the same basis of the
materialistic aspect. The historical causes, social trend and the
political ground to him is the reason for the belief of the Shia in
Mehdism. Political defeats and victories, in his view, have a part in
the build up of this belief. It is quite easy to deny what is not seemed
or to doubt what is not found in a material search. In religions studies
a belief is a fundamental. First to avoid the belief and then to search
is to first become blind and then to set out on sightseeing. In such a
way even the prophethood and even the presence of God can be discussed
in order to deny or can be put to question so as to obviate its
credibility. To believe wrong could be the consequence of social causes
or of the illiteracy. The real belief is above these things because it
is in the root of human nature. There were many who claimed to be Mehdi.
Their claim did not gain ground because they were after a political end.
These interpretations, deviations and analysises do not touch the root
but show the prejudice.

God, revelation, and prophet hood is a fact; there is a motive in man
to accept this fact. Since it is so, on the other hand, persons have
lied and have claimed to be God or a prophet.

Between those two can there be a parallel?

The matter of Mehdism was told by the Prophet (SAW). His associates and
companions heard it. It is a fact foretold by the Prophet (SAW). Here it
attains authenticity. It has been utilized for personal gains towards a
political end. But it is not true that this issue was the product of
events which later took the shape of belief and immuned its object with
a sin, that is, ‘MASOOM’ Events, happenings or incidents sometimes guide
a man towards truth. For example, Abraham, the prophet, that great
believer in the oneness of God, educated the people to believe in one
god in a very odd and at the same time very effications way. As the
night fell and the stars glittered, he said it is god. When it
disappeared he was disappointed and said, “I do not like that which
vanishes.” He made it clear that the star is not god. Then in the next
stage the moon ruled the sky with its serene and silent light. Abraham
said; “This is god.”

The moon too disappeared. Abraham again became disappointed and said
that he could not love what does not stay. Then in the day when the sun
shone brightly, Abraham said; “This is god.” But in the evening the sun
too disappeared. Here Abraham shouted; “The sun is not god. I worship
the God who never disappears.” Yes, incidents can lead to facts. But the
truth of a belief is never the effect of a cause and nor is it a second
grade fact.

If we persist in our denial under some pretext or the other, the
philosophy of true religions and their schools shall confront us. As
time lapsed people became more ardent towards Ali and his offspring, and
the Shia ideology penetrated deeper and deeper into the hearts; this we
can say as a fact. But that the very ideology, the very religion, the
Shiasm, the occultation of Mahdi, all was a consequence of events or a
product of age or a built up structure, is wrong to say and not correct.
It purports to say that evidence matters not. The Prophet (SAW) had more
than once told about the twelve Imams. He had foretold their names
individually. He had also prognosticated (predicted) the conditions that
would prevail in that time of each one of the twelve Imams.

He foretold all these details when at the time only three of the future
Imams existed. All heard this and recorded it. Along the passage of time
the Imams too ended at twelve as the Prophet had foretold. As such there
remains no margin of doubt nor room to surmise. No one can say that it
was made-up. Anyone with some information of history and a scant
knowledge of traditions and a fundamental knowledge of Islam will not
believe what the writer has argued. For example, the Prophet (SAW) had
predicted that Ammar would be martyred. In fact, Ammar was killed by
Mawiya. There are several such examples.

Then, what is correct to do? To lie aside such method of analysis and
to search the tributes and particulars of Mehdi in traditions and the
narration that have descended to us so as to find out whom these
qualities correspond and specifications apply to. Destinations are
pawned in the right roads. A journey is in the mortgage of a path. If
the path is wrong the journey shall ever wander. 5. Mahdi, a term and a
sense, and the false claimers:

The word MAFIDI means one who is guided. Anyone guided by God is Mahdi.
The word is common and general in its sense. According to the sense that
this word reflects, all the apostles, messengers, and prophets of God
were - the guided ones. If we term the Prophet (SAW) himself and Ali Bin
Abi Taleb and every other Imam as ‘Mahdi’ we have not committed a
mistake. Of course, all of them were guided ones; so they were Mehdis.’
Even this word (MAHDI) can be applied to those who were taught in the
schools of the Prophet or the Imams. For instance, the companions of
Imam Hussain or of any other Imam or the particular ones among the Shia
or any other Shia who attained the guidance or were guided to the path
if called ‘Mahdi’ it is not an exaggeration. But, all know that it is
confined and limited to one. When the Prophet (SAW) disclosed the
tidings he did not mean it in a general sense. His words specify a
particular one as he says to his daughter, Zehra (AS); “Mahdi is from
your sons; give the tidings.” “AL-Mahdi is from my sons.” “AL Mahdi is
from the sons of Fatima.” So, this is a title or a distinction for one
particular person, extra ordinarily dear to the prophet (SAW) who has
kept the members of his house and the Muslim in waiting for him.

The word ‘Mahdi’ embraces a range of sense that could be extracted from
guidance. To show the way, to take to destination, or any other thing to
which guidance could be applied; is among the meanings. This word also
applies to other than human. The Quranic verse says: “Our Lord who
bestowed to every thing its creation then guided.” In the research of
this word it appears that it has been applied only to those whom God has
guided and whose guidance overflows in him. He has consumed the guidance
to the extent that he can show the path to others. The guidance has so
overtaken him that he becomes a prism reflecting it from every angle.
His conduct, his character, his behavior, his word, and his life as a
whole become a beacon for others to be followed. In such a sense this
word is generally applied to the apostles of God and the Imams. As per
the traditions that abound in this respect, Mahdi is the very same one
whom the Prophet (SAW) has identified as having every good quality. He
is the Redeemer from God and to do justice to all is his task, other
synonyms too are his titles.

In case, Mukhtar or any other bestowed this title on Mohammed Hanafia
is only to seek blessing out of it, and not in a trust that he was
Mahdi. There were reasons for the upraisal of Mukhtar. Important of them
was that Maitham Tammar in prison had informed him that he would escape
from the prison of Ibn Ziad and that he would take the revenge of Imam
Hussain’s blood and that Ibn Ziad would be killed by him. The upraisal
that developed was on the ground and the pretext of revenge for the
bloodshed of Imam Hussain. This pretext brought together all those who
were ashamed of their participation against Imam Hussain and, therefore,
they wanted to amend their mistake or purge the stain from their
record.

They thought it obligatory on them to join the movement against Bani
Ommiya. For this very reason Bani Ommiya could not crush the movement.
Mas’ab on behalf of his brother Abdullah, who regarded himself a caliph,
fought with Mukhtar and defeated him. Abdullah Zubair after the
martyrdom of Imam Hussain took the issue of Imam Hussain’s blood as a
pretext. The martyrdom of Imam Hussain was the greatest weak point of
Bani Ommiya. This shows how distant they were from Islam.

Indeed, this fact can not be denied that the title of Mehdi was
misused. Under this brand personal interests have had been transacted.
The writer has elaborated what we too admit, that is that the
occultation of Mahdi and his reappearance again stood for some to take
an undue advantage. Some claimed that Mohammed Hanafla would take
reappearance. For the first time a trade was established with the
capital of this belief. But the belief remains in its original entity.
It is an evergreen, which never looses its leaves, but is forever green.
The prophet (SAW) first talked about it. Ali Bin Abi Taleb has also
spoken on it. Mawiya too, according to the book “MALAHEM WA FITAN” is
reported to have discussed this issue with Abdullah Bin Abbas. He on his
part regarded Mahdi to be from Bani Ommiya.

In any case, it is not new that there have been persons who claimed
themselves to be Mahdi and even a prophet. There have also been some
that have claimed to be god! In our age we of different movements, human
rights, justice, democracy, social equality and so forth. These are the
ladders for some climb to their political ends. In the past the belief
of Mahdi too has served a ladder for many who have aspired a political
elevation or a social altitude, to attain a station higher than
others.

Anyway, these claims did not fool the people because they were fully
aware that the qualities Mahdi has these claimers have not. Generally
the term of Mahdi remained open. Although Shia and non-Shia know the
family root of Mahdi, There are some who still believe those claiming to
be Mahdi even though Imam Mahdi’s background is well known. Likewise,
such allegations with regards to Mohammed Hanafia do not establish that
Mehdism is a recent product. This belief is coeval with Islam. This
belief held such a strong hold on the people that they became to
enthusiastic, too zealous, and too staunch towards it. They were ready
to welcome and embrace him who could rescue them from tyranny and
deliver justice. Therefore, the claims although met the acceptance of
the people. In some cases, this claim furnished an avenue for various
revolts and scattered upraising.

**6. BELIEF OF THE MAFIDISM OF IMAMS:**

The writer’s claim is groundless as he says that all the Imams since
the victory of Abbasies were regarded as Mahdi and that their death was
not taken for granted and that their return was held in a constant
expectation and a fervent anticipation. Yes, there was one incident in
which the seventh Imam, Mosa Bin Jafer, died in prison where he was
being held by the orders of Haroon al- Rasheed. Some refused to
acknowledge him dead. They consoled themselves by fancying Mehdism in
him, which naturally entailed a waiting for his reappearance.

In their grief they imagined that he would soon reappear. It is likely
that some mischievous elements might have injected such a pang into
their minds. There were very few who went wrong; and the wrong itself
was so evident that it could not deceive many more. The Shia believed in
the demise of the Imam, from Ali to the eleventh one Hasan Askari. Why
not take evidence from history. Later those few who had believed in Imam
Musa Bin Jafar’s reappearance realized their mistake and acknowledged
his death. In the case of the sixth Imam Jafer al-Sadiq, he himself time
and again declared that he was not Mahdi the awaited one. The qualities
of Mahdi he had repeatedly disclosed.

**7. The Sons of Imam Hussain; the Reason for their coming to
front:**

The sons of Imam Hussain came to be noticed not because of Imam
Hussain’s compaign against tyranny but due to their own ability and
capacity. In knowledge, in practice, in endurance and partitude they
stood perfect, each in his time and age. No other one than they were
more befitted to the leadership. The nine sons, one after the other,
from Zainulabedeen to the twelfth one Mahdi became Imams due to their
own deservation. Of course the sacrifice done by Imam Hussain and his
martyrdom at Kerbala enhanced the popularity of his sons. God too as a
reward to his martyrdom settled the Imam hood in his progeny. As the
Quranic Verse says: “Indeed, God purged Adam and Noah and the progeny of
Abraham and the house of Omran over the worlds;" it can be deduced that
the same might have been the Divine intention with regards the turn of
Imam Hussain; “God knows as how and where to house His Mission.” 8. The
title of MEFIDI is applied on all the Imams:

As we said earlier this title in its general sense is also applied on
all the Imams; on Imam Hussain and so forth. The traditions also
indicate that all the Imams are Mahdi: However there was only one whose
particular qualities and condition pointed to, and that was the twelfth
Imam.

**9. The Shia Doctrine and Ideology:**

The writer says that the conflicts, which confronted Bani Ommiya,
provided the opportunity for the Imams to prescribe a doctrine and
arrange an ideology framing, its rules and regulations. He says that
under the supervision of Imam Baqer and Imam Jafer al-Sadiq an ideology
for a sect of Imamia was arranged. If the writer means to say that the
ideology of Imamate or Shiasm was invented by the sixth Imam, he was
mistaken or he is deliberately telling what is not true. Shiasm is in
the womb of Islam; and, hence, delivered only by the Prophet (SAW). The
sayings and the Lectures of Imam Ali in NAHJUL BALAGHA point to this
fact.

Imam Baqer and Imam Sadiq only explained its aspects and dilated its
corners and expounded its angles to the people. In other words they
brought to attention what had been neglected and re-established what had
been ignored. Indeed, the sense of Shiasm became complete in their
times. Deviations were steered to the fight direction and the extreme
ideas were nullified by their teachings. This ideology proved to be a
right one and made it clear that it was the same in which Islam proposes
or points to. They also made it known to the people that only an Imam
was competent enough to give interpretations, fix the limits or expound
the boundaries.

People too acknowledged that their knowledge was a Divine deposit with
them; and the vast hidden meanings of the Quranic literature was made
known only to them. People also experienced that no scholar among them
equaled or stood parallel to them. But, the writer has acknowledged the
unique and the elevated position of Imam Zainul abedeen. This means that
the similar position of the other Imams could easily be proved. In
support of this we can refer to the book “AL-BA’ETH AL-HATHEETH” written
by Ahmad Shaker in which he says that the most authentic and creditable
narrations are those narrated by Imam Zainulabedeen, Imam Mohammed
Baqer, and Imam Jafer al-Sadiq.

With regards to the fact that the Imams were the speaking Quran the
writer says that this belief was invented during the time of Imam Baqer.
He should know that it was not an invention. It was told by Imam
Zainulabedeen, Imam Hasan, Imam Hussain, Imam Ali and finally the
Prophet himself. The Imams were introduced as equal the Quran, parallel
with the Quran. If the Quran is a book, they are its utterance. If the
Quran is Divine they too are Divine figures. What they say and what they
practice is within the frame of the Quran. Their deeds correspond to the
Quran and do not contradict it. In other words they are as sacred as the
Quran. Why should we doubt it?

**10. Support to the Imams:**

Either the writer has not understood the events or evil intentions are
his. When a mischief is made deliberately it is with a preplanned
design. He says that Imam Baqer and Imam Sadiq at various intervals were
invited by the people to revolt against the governments of the time.
Both the Imams in their respective periods did not accept the
invitation. They, the Imams - each in his time, knew that the support of
the people could not be relied upon because their support did not go
beyond the terrestrial government. The Imams knew that the people
desired the regime to change hands from the Abbasies to the Alavies.

It was not possible to establish a rule or government of the Imamate.
For example the upraising of Abu Muslim and his like to take the affairs
in their own hands and to establish the government of the Imam; such a
thing never entered the remotest of possibilities. In order to correct
his misunderstanding we should furnish him with some explanation. Not
only did Imam Baqer and Imam Sadiq refrain from undertaking the
establishment of another government but all of the Imams did. Why? They
knew that the support that was being offered was no more than a
transaction. Bani Ommiya and then Bani Abbas had both established an
example, which attracted and tempted all to taste its sweetness. Under
the pretext of the caliphate they had turned it into an empire and ruled
as dictators not in accordance with the Prophet’s (SAW) teachings and
the Quran but in line with their own lust, desires, and sinful ways. The
exaggerated show of dignity that had taken shape, indeed, was a good
temptation for others. But the Imams could not go that way.

They were to help establish the government of God under the strict
rules of the Quran and within the boundaries of the Prophet’s tradition.
So, if any Imam accepted the support, he was to give favor in return to
those who gave their support. Therefore, they refused the offer because
of the unworkability of the bargain. People were not ready for the rule
of Imamate because they would receive that justice had to give. For this
reason Imam Ali also rejected the support offered by Abu Sufyan. The
support was in anticipation of worldly gains, which contradicted the
Divine justice, which was in them (the Imams). When one misses the
opportunity or rejects a support he should assume something lies within
and beyond one’s understanding of knowledge. The Imams have had the
obligation vested to them by the Divine and prescribed by the Prophet.
Each had his duty assigned according to the conditions and circumstances
surrounding him at the time. As it was a Divine design so they
prognosticated the advent of Mehdi whose responsibility is to establish
the government of God.

**11. Knowledge of the Imams about the unseen:**

Sometimes even among Shia people have emerged to damage. Their
ignorance acquits them of their mischief but can not prevent its effects
that remain. They knew nothing about the status of an Imam. Since they
knew nothing, to have them comment on the status of the Imams be an
absurdity. Therefore the Sixth Imam, Jafer Sadiq, distanced himself from
such people. Mohammad Bin Abi Zainab known as Abul Khattab is one of
them. He has written what mostly disturbed Imam Sadiq. When one quotes
such people, or their writings, as the writer has, it would have been
wiser for him to check things out more thoroughly. The Imam of his time
has cursed such narrators lose their authority.

When they are void of any credibility then the argument that points to
them holds no water. The knowledge of the unseen is Divine. The Prophet
(SAW) and the Imams were Divine figures holding the Divine office.
Knowledge of God is this quality. Knowledge to the quality, of the
quality, as ancient as the entity of God is to be immediate or direct
without the need of a media, to be infinite and stintless, and to be the
absolute is a subject which can not be dealt here; but the Prophet (SAW)
Ali Bin Abi Taleb and his sons the Imams wore all gifted with such
knowledge which others were not acquainted with. A rotating chain of the
sayings of the Prophet (SAW) support this thing. 12. Various phases of
the Deeds of the Imams:

The activities of all Imams are one and the same. According to their
circumstances and the demand of that particular time they acted
accordingly. So we can not frame them in the terms presently known to us
such as ‘radicals’, ‘liberals’, ‘exteremists’, ‘modertes’ and so on.
Each one adopted a strict policy to avoid any division among the Shias.
Likewise, the Prophet (SAW) and Ali Bin Abi Taleb. Of course, we notice
the actions of some as being conservative while the other’s as
extremist. Their school of thought was the same although it might have
posed as being different as per the circumstances of the time. They were
strict followers of the instructions of the Quran such as; “Take to
forgiveness, order the good and confront the ignorants.” “The good is
not at equity with evil. Do what is good.” And, “Whosoever offends you,
you too offend him in the same which he has offended you.” “Pity should
not overtake you in the religion of God.”

In general the situation and the environmental condition in the era of
the Imams caused them to act for the safeguard and protection of Islam.
The Shia did adhere to the original line of Islam, which the Imams knew
and defined for all. As they were better qualified to know the position
and to rescue the religion from taking a different turn, they did not
move an inch in their advises and admonishment; and that few were called
Shia. Imam Sadiq did nothing new except that he explained and taught the
religious boundaries obligations, duties etc. which was, of course, for
all but only Shia acted thereon and adhered thereto.

**13. Division of the Dominion of Leadership:**

The writer again here too speaks wrongly. He says that in the days of
Imam Sadiq the leadership split into two - that of terrestrial and the
other of spiritual.

Each one separated from the other. Shias have never thought nor did
they ever consider that the Imams should not possess a worldly
leadership and that they are fit only for a spiritual leadership. They
did and do consider that they hold both offices, that is, the leadership
of worldly affairs and the spiritual leadership. Both positions are
combined in their authority. Shias, therefore, regard those who seized
power out of the hands of the Imams as tyrants. They could not revolt
without the Imam’s permission. They took to propagate the facts. They
confronted the tyrants. They acted prudently and with caution so as not
to provide the slightest pretext that could result in a general massacre
of Shias. Shia conduct has always been such as to make the rulers of
their time sympathetic towards them.

It was unacceptable that the leadership be divided into sectors. It can
be said that before the martyrdom of Imam Hussain both dimensions were
combined in the leadership. For example, Omar Bin Khathab and Osman Bin
Offan were regarded as such. But when the martyrdom of Imam Hussain
occurred the Muslims themselves regarded the leadership as forming two
separate angles, which was a result of that unique Holy war. They gave
the most important one, that of religion and its issues to the Imams
because they never considered the caliphs as their real spiritual
leaders. They respected the caliphs as a symbol towards maintaining the
unity and preserving the existing state. The advantage of the influence
which the blood of Imam Hussain exercised on the preservation of Islam
can not be computed neither by the Shia nor by the Sunni.

In some cases if this be said, it will sound reasonable, that the
readers were satisfied that the Imam would not create a danger of
upraising against them. For example, to some extent we see such a
conviction in Mansoor with regards to Imam Jafer Sadiq. But, still he
was not convinced because he adopted provisionary measures such as to
keep a vigilant watch on the Imam and to have spies watch over him.
Finally in order to relieve himself of this suspense of danger he
poisoned him Imam Sadeg and ended his life. Likewise did Haroon to Imam
Mosa Bin Jafer. He imprisoned him for years and finally got rid of him
by terminating his life. This clearly indicates that the Shia regarded
both the dimensions of leadership, of worldly and spiritual, in the
person of the Imam.

The Imams were individuals who worked and toiled to the benefit and
profit of all Muslims. A dead earth is brought to life by rains and the
naked trees of autumn are clad by spring in a new dress of a uniform and
universal green. It is befitting similitude to provide a resemblance for
our easy comprehension of the task and toil of the Imams for Islam and
common good to all. Therefore’ such a project could not have progressed
without inspirations from the Divine or a secret plan designed and given
to them by the Prophet (SAW). Why should it not be a divine decree
communicated to them?

We can not find any other possibility. The best argument is to question
the very performance itself. Ali Bin Abi Taleb sat home for twenty five
years, Imam Hasan adopted the policy of peace, Imam Hussain did not take
rest till his and his sons, nephews and friends’ blood was not shed,
Imam Zainulabedeen adopted a language of supplication in his gospel
“SAHIFA SAJJADIA,” Imam Mohammed Baqer and Imam Jafer Sadiq broke the
beds of the fountain of knowledge which inundated all the dry lands -
even the deserts, and the other Imams, each acted uniquely,
independently and differently. Why? What for? Why was there uniformity
in their policies or methods? They acted only on instructions beyond
common vision and far from a general comprehension. Whatever their ways
and whatever their methods their variety preserved the unity.

What else could one do if he were to have a treasure amidst robbers and
thieves? Gangsters, spies, enemies, hypocrites, fake and feign friends,
were like snakes crawling under grass: and one had to make a movement!
How hard an ordeal for one not to be robbed, cheated and deceived, not
be fooled and not to be bitten by the renomous snakes and cobras hidden
under his paces - sometimes hissing in a friendly tone and sometimes
hissing in hatred. Danger and terror waited always at the steps of the
door. To call for help was to declare helplessness and encourage the
enemy; and to fight was to be exposed to certain and annihilate the very
signs for future generations. Still, in spite of those hardships, and
regardless of those setbacks, they kept Shiasm safe and secured so that
the sweet smell of the original Islam could fill the air. When a putrid
stench disturbs the senses there should be an ever-fresh flower in the
shape of an everlasting lili or an eternal rose to refresh the mind and
redress the nerves. This flower shall ever remain reminding that a Mehdi
is to come and what is taken will be returned.


