14. the Practical Ideology of Shiaism
=====================================

The Shia ideology was always smooth and practicable. Imamate being the
base, and the fundamental of this base being that in a Muslim Society,
leadership should be in the hands of one who should succeed the Prophet.
The Prophet’s successor, should be form every angle and aspect a perfect
man - better than and superior to others in knowledge, ability,
capacity, reason and cognosence, awareness, nearness with the Prophet.

These qualities in all their dimensions are not to be found in any
other than Ali (AS). It is a fact. Ali (AS) was the best qualified one
for the job. Besides, the Prophet himself had already installed him as
his successor and on many occasions had introduced him as his successor.
And beyond this he also introduced his successors’ successors the twelve
Imams. This is not to interpret that it was a bodily or physical
inheritance of one another. But it was the inheritance of qualities too.
What God had distinguished in the Prophet (SAW) was inherited by his
AHLUL BAIT the twelve Imams. The Quran says: “Indeed, God chose Adam and
Noah and Abraham’s progeny over the worlds.” Therefore, obedience to the
Imams is obligatory, and equal to obedience to the Prophet. The Imams
would be regarded as guardians, leaders and obeyed.

This program was proclaimed. The path was shown. The guidance was thus
framed. All in line with God’s will. It was not a desire, nor an
ambition, nor an imagination. But a robbery does not justify that the
robbed one had no possession over the belonging. In political dimension
it was deviated and put into different turn. But the real guidance is
not an impracticable one. The guidance remains there.

What the apostles have pronounced or proclaimed is that they have told
the truth, shown the way and indicated the end, which is resurrection.
Whether the people accept or reject this does not mean that it is not
workable.

The program is made open. If there are people too misfortunate to adopt
and accept it, does not justify in alleging that it is unworkable. If
one charts a plan and wants to implement it but the conditions do not
favor, then it can be justified in saying that it was a fiction and not
workable. But, here a religious program, a spiritual plan, a celestial
timetable is made by one who says; “We guided him the path; whether he
be grateful or ungrateful.” The workability of such a program does not
depend upon one’s taste or pleasure. One rejects it under an excuse of
fiction. The plan is made public; the program is made known to all. This
is in the first place important. The belief in Imamate like the other
pillars of religion, oneness of God, the prophet hood of all the
apostles sent by God, Judgment Day, is an independent entity which
stands firm as other religious fundamentals do. To have faith in it or
in them or not is not the condition of its proclamation. If people
accept it, it is for their own good. If they reject it, it is in their
own misfortune. But the program is there - neither rescinded nor
nullified.

Likewise same logic governs the proceeds of the Imams. Their policies
were not fiction. Whatever Ali Bin Abi Taleb did was quite in line with
the circumstances of his time. He remained aloof for twenty-five years.
Yes, the necessity was so. Imam Hassan and so Imam Hussain and so his
sons the other Imams, were not leaders of some fictious ideology. They
were quite aware of the conditions and knew very well what they had to
do and what they were doing. Every deed of theirs stands a fact and
every practice of theirs a paragon of their far sightedness.

Therefore, they attained the good and achieved the aim.

Imam Hussain was aware of the consequences if he were to reject Yazid’s
authority. Yet, he did not yield. He endured the ordeal and surrendered
to the sword but remained stubborn in opposing the tyranny. It was up to
him to depend the Prophet’s seat. So he did. The choice of the way was
to his prudence. If it was a fictious ideology then why did he give up
his life? One does not undergo such an ordeal for himself and sufferings
for his family and friends for a thing, which he knew to be untrue. Only
the truth attracts the men of truth. Only truth is worth the sacrifice.
In ancient days nations too alleged that it was false what the prophets
of those days had declared. These allegations are not new. They shall
continue as long as man is ignorant.

Imam Hussain did not restrict Yazid and his followers from occupying
the Prophet’s seat. But he dismissed, discarded and dethroned him from
the hearts of the people. This was the reason that Mawiya at length
failed in uprooting Islam. The Prophet Mohammed (SAW) proclaimed Islam
but Hussain made it permanent. Every Imam had his own way towards
protecting Islam. No one among them toiled for an imaginatory thing. It
is far from reason to suffer for a thing which has no existence as it is
quite a reason to suffer for a thing, which has an existence and the
existence has no guard. The Shia ideology is false! Then the ideology of
Islam too is the same. People gathered round the Imamate because of the
atrocities and crimes the rulers committed. The more their cruelty the
more the people banked their belief in Imamate.

There were those among the people who later understood what they had
earlier misunderstood. Those who remained indifferent in the days of the
caliphs immediately after the Prophet’s death thought that the change if
Imamate would not change the path of Islam. But gradually they realized
that by the change of Imamate everything had changed completely. The
very Islam was obliterated; a mist was covering it making its vision
vague and infuscated, about to vanish. The seat of the Prophet (SAW) had
turned into a throne, over it everything undesirable was allowed and
everything unlawful was legitimate. To occupy the seat under the title
of caliph was the sanction to do what lust dictated and what greed
dictated. The traditions and the customs of the bygone days of Kasra,
Khaisaz, and the courts of their oppressors were returning into
practice.

To re-adjust the things, to setup this upset, to bring back what had
gone, to put right the course, and to correct the wrong, was not
possible by any means other than to put the course on its original track
and to follow the line of Imamate.

Another thing, the sinful actions of life led by the tyrant rulers
helped the people to believe more in Imamate and become Shia because
they, on the other hand, saw the piety, simplicity, honesty, truth,
openness, frankness, of the Imams. The life of an Imam stood for them a
page in which to compare the caliph. His gambling, debauchery, tricks,
lies, and etc. pushed the people to think and ponder a little and
enabled them to revise their understanding, this revisal was their
Shiasm. Imam Sadiq spread the Shia teachings and the original Islamic
knowledge. It is not an imaginary ideology. These are the facts, how
long will the writer ignore them and fancy otherwise?

**15. The salubrity and Islamic tendency in the behavior of Shia
towards Sunni**

As far as religious footings are concerned there cannot be any
similarity between a Shia and a Sunni. The religious understanding can
not be a platform common to both. “Argue them with that which is good”;
is the beacon that the Shia follows in their behavior with Sunnis. TAQIA
that is to show a face favorable or to behave in correspondence with
theirs or to act in a way not to wound the feelings, these dimensions
and its like is in itself a religious and Quranic one, stands a ground
for confronting a Sunni. It is a religious duty to behave well. The Shia
should take care to behave pleasantly towards a Sunni and have such a
matual understanding that could teach him the real fundamentals of Islam
and could attract him to the real entity of Islam. He may find guidance
as he transacts with a Shia. The minimum that could be expected from a
Sunni is that he distances himself from tyrant rulers and their junta.

If one takes a look he can clearly see inside. Speaking without seeing
is always contrary to the facts. To revolt is not prudent; to do what is
in the interest of Islam; to hold the interest of Islam high, is and has
had been the motive of a Shia Imamia. To revolt is not the absolute
necessity; such is the Shia conception. We have examples and we follow
them. Ali Bin Abi Taleb preferred to remain silent rather than to fight
without support. Had he fought the very name of Islam would have
vanished. Of course, he argued and debated; but his endeavors availed
nothing. No one heeded what was right. They had surrendered to the
authority of Abu Bakr and then Omar and then Othman.

Likewise, Imam Hasan made peace with Mawiya. What they did was not to
their own benefit but to the advantage of Islam. However hard they paced
and however difficult the toleration, they endured with fortitude. The
school of AHLUL BAIT was protected with a great many sacrifices.

The episode of Karbala is some thing exceptional. Its type is of its
own neither preceded nor can it ever be repeated. It is such a paragon
that a Muslim or non-Muslim, anyone, however disappointed, distressed,
depressed, disgruntled and deprived would become hopeful and would find
a way out. Although that upraising was crushed and seemingly repeated
but at length it turned victorious and eradicated the very dynasty of
Bani Ommiya and preserved Islam in its originality. After this upraising
of Imam Hussain (AS) no other episode took place that should have had
been the cause for Shia distress or disappointment. Shia governed the
dominion of faith, knowledge, and belief in AHLUL BAIT. To confront
tyranny in any age is the only power of Shiasm among Muslims, even alone
Shia is the dread of a tyrant no matter whether a ruler or a caliph or a
king.

**16. Extraordinary Qualities of Imams and the Knowledge of Secret:
**
The writer is again uneasy here. He said, that the Imams felt happy
when their followers attributed them with super natural and
extraordinary qualities and that they did not protest nor did they try
to stop them. The arcanum knowledge or the concealed knowledge is
another thing that has discomforted the writer. In order to comfort him
we shall here try to be kind to him, only reminding him that he might
have either forgotten or might not have studied enough to obtain the
knowledge in which to speak and write.

There is a general law in which it is said that where there is no wrong
there is no protest. Yes, the Imams have even cursed them who happened
to attribute them with divine qualities or any other exaggerated
particularities. They, the Imams, were never happy of such ignorance.
They corrected the mistake. What contradicts Islam has no link with
Shiasm. The treasures of knowledge in every aspect was deposited with
them by God, that is, knowledge to them was God’s gift. But, if they
claimed any divinity on the strength of the huge funds of knowledge, the
writer’s discomfort is justifiable. They have always stressed on the
need of worship to God and not one among the Shia has ever fancied in
his remotest imagination that they are equal to God; they are created
ones not the creator; they need to be fed -hence, needy; they depend on
God - hence, not on themselves; they are men like us - hence, no
similitude with God; such is the belief of a Shia. God has vested them
with the knowledge not common to all.

So, they were superior to all in knowledge. This is a fact. Where is it
wrong? Does the writer mean to say that they should have protested to
God for having given them (the Imams) the gift of knowledge? Ibn
Khaldoon believes that the knowledge of the unseen was with Imam Sadiq.
In NAHJUL BALAGHA too we see evidences that knowledge of the invisible
world was with the Imams. 17. Division of religious principle. Shia and
the religion of ETEZAAL.

The writer says that the founders of Imamate have split the faith of
Shia into five fundamentals; unity of God, Justice, prophet hood,
Imamate, and resurrection. How long can he persist in his prejudice or
demonstrate his ignorance? What we know is that all his studies have
gone with winds. In each nook he enters and comes out telling things
which were never there. He sees what is not and what is he sees not. He
wanders in the wilderness and avoids the rich shadows of huge trees and
the cool of fountains. He is a vagabond in the desert hit by the
sinister heat of the sun, fatigued, wearied, tired, and stricken by
thirst and hunger. To guide such a traveler to rest and ease is not
easy.

‘Founders of Imamate’; what does he mean? ‘Founders of Islam’; if we
were to say would it not sound strange and senseless? If he is in search
of founders we point to God and the Prophet (SAW). The fundamentals,
five in number, mentioned by him are the real and basic owes. Every
Muslim should have faith in them. They are in line with reason. Among
these fundamentals the JUSTICE of God and IMAMAT are ignored by the
Sunni sect. They do not believe in that.

Among the Sunni sect there is a sect or a group by the name of Ash’ari
who strictly refuse these two pillars. To make it plain and simple we
should say that whatever the Shia believes in whether it be the JUSTICE
of God or it be the IMAMAT, it is directly taken from the Quran and
immediately based on the Quran and at once spoken by the Imams. We can
not understand as to why a link is given or a relation is established
with the MOTAZELA sect. This sect of MOTAZELA or its faith ETEZAAL goes
congruous with Shiasm only to the extent and length of what they have
grasped and held in their grip the very Shia faith. As such “AL-JABR WAL
TASHBEEH AMAWIAN WAL ADL WAL TOWHEED ALAWIAN”, that is, the similitude
of Bani Ommiya and the justice and Oneness of God of the Alawies, forms
a ground common to them. Here those writers who have not studied widely
thus not gaining enough information about Shiaism and the past of
Shiaism have confused themselves with the terms MOTAZELA and ASHAYERA.
Although they have made research in this respect and in spite of their
research they still do not know the religion of Seyed Mortaza, the most
renown scholar of the Shia sect, whom they suspect of being a MOTEZAL
because of his disagreement with ASH’AERI belief.

**18. DOCTRINE OF IMAMAT AND SUPER EXAGGERATION:**

As the writer takes rest he enjoys the relief which is in his
conclusion that the fundamental of Imamate and its doctrine is at
congruity with the birth of Shiasm of Imamia then its growth into a
belief full of exaggeration, and from a belief to a roll of a redeemer
taking a form and shape of a leader and that leader is the Imam,
qualified in divinity or divinity giving him quality. What a perfect
plan it is and how nicely designed and delicately determined! This can
not be but the result of efforts abortive and vain, which Shiasm had
undergone to find the ALAWI caliphate and which deservedly crushed and
brought a political defeat for them. But their defeat in the political
arena took their Shiasm to higher and writer plains of expansion in
spite of the hindrances that impeded their way from the Sunni side. Such
is his rumination.

Firstly, he should know that the fundamental of Imamate is among the
original fundamentals of Islam. It is a spring of faith and a fountain
wherefrom flows the faith. The Quranic verses and the repeated
conversations of the Prophet further establish this faith. The passage
of time has no part in it. The victories neither added there on nor did
the defeats reduced there from. It is solid; it is pure; it is real; it
is original.

Secondly, the belief in Imamate has no relation with exaggeration. It
is an evil design to administer a relation with exaggeration. The
qualities of an Imam are described by the specifications given by the
Prophet (SAW). The constant traditions are there in this respect. What
the Prophet (SAW) says is authentic and the authority incontrovertible
and irrefragable. The tributes of the Imams are fixed, are told,
indicated, shown and proved. The Imam is a creature of God like others;
He is dependent upon God like others. “He does not possess for his self
any gain or any loss unless it should be from God.

” The Imam is not a prophet. In other words, no religion is revealed to
him nor is any Divine Decree communicated to him nor does descend upon
him any Revelation. Unlike an apostle or a prophet he is not in contact
with the Angel who constantly used to descend with God’s commandments.
Since the Imam succeeds the prophet he is the guardian of the religion
brought down by the Prophet (SAW). The divine communication through
angels or revelations terminates at the prophet upon who descends a
mission or a religion to be delivered to people. Therefore, there
remains no necessity for this communication with the Imam because of his
care taking office for that religion or mission introduced by his
predecessor the prophet.

It is quite likely that the pens of animosity misinterpreted the office
of the Imam and his status while it is quite a plain and simple thing
within the frame of reason.

It is obligatory and incumbent upon one to recognize the Imam of his
time and acknowledge his authority. By the Imam we mean him who is
installed by a Divine Decree through the Prophet. Such an Imam has
absolute worldly and religious authorities. He represents the qualities
of those possessed by the Prophet (SAW), except the prophet hood. He is
immune of sin. He is the rightful successor of the Prophet and a
legitimate occupant of his seat. The writer has obfuscated the things,
which are plain and easy. Mahdism and the absence of the present time
Imam too is made complicated, as he seems to have been confused. Mahdism
is a thing foretold by the Prophet Sunni scholars have acknowledged this
thing. There exists an Imam in our time whether present or absent,
visible or invisible. The traditions have established it. So why the
argument? Why so much confusion? To believe the Prophet but not to
believe his words is a deplorable act. We can not believe in some and
reject others. Partly we believe in the Prophet’ sayings and partly we
deny them. What kind of Muslims are we? Religion is wholesome. Belief
too should be wholesome, total, full, consummate and complete.

The writer exaggerates. If he himself is a believer he should not tell
such things. Belief is an exaggeration not to a believer but to him who
sees only matter and investigates matter alone. A believer no matter in
what faith he believes, Christianity, Judism, Islam, he has taken for
granted what is invisible to him, remote to him, not tangible to him. A
divine and a divinity; is it an exaggeration? For a materialist the very
religion itself is an exaggeration. What to a believer is a tangible
fact, although out of vision, although invisible, although remote to
touch; to a materialist is an exaggeration. Well, the miracles of Moses,
Abraham, Jesus and the other apostles or Imams are only exaggeration to
one who has no belief in the other world which for the present is unseen
to us. If we deny the Prophet as a partner in divinity; yet, it is
contrary to faith and tantamount to pagan hood. But when we do not
trespass the boundaries and believe within the frame fixed by God and
His Prophet (SAW) where is the falsehood? An Imam is not a prophet or a
prophet God. Stations are known; positions are prescribed; status
stated; ambit is put there to avoid the ambition; so how can deception
creep in?

**19. Discrepancy in the date of birth of Mahdi:**

The difference in the date of birth of the twelfth Imam is of very
little vaniance comparing to that of the other Imams. Some narrations
say the date of Mehdi’s birth is at parity with the number of letters in
the word NOOR that is light according to the ‘ABJAD’ calculations. The
more acceptable statement is that of MR. Fazl Bin Shazan, coeval with
Imam Hasan Askari, who indicates 255.

The 12th Imam birth was surrounded by conditions not usual or normal.
His absence was more than his appearance. His father, Imam Askari
allowed only a few chosen associates of his own to see his son and
become blest by his appearance. His short absence commenced as soon as
he became Imam. In his absence he appointed deputies who were his
agents. This was immediately after the death of his father Imam Hasan
Askari. 20. The Issue of absence or occultation is a reality and not a
theory or a fancy:

The writer has this to say. The atrocities of Bani Abbas towards the
progeny of Ali and the sons of Imam Jafer Sadiq had created unrest and
confusion as well as the problem of succession to Imam Hasan Askari
(260, 874 AD). At Samerra there rendered elements and factors, which as
a result brought on the theory of the Imam’s occultation.

However it was not a theory but a reality, a fact, a truth. It was
written in books before Imam Hasan Askari had become Imam that the
twelfth Imam would take shelter in absenting himself and that he would
take refuge in his own disappearance and that for his safety he would
resort to his own occultation under God’s command. Some took advantage
of the opportunity. Jafer claimed that he was the awaited one. People
did not believe him because of his reputation. The hers’ claim further
strengthened the belief of the Shia in the Imamat of Mehdi. Their trust
nullified the false claims.

What we can understand from the writers tone, is that in a sense from
the time of Imam Sadiq and onward the term IMAMAT did not carry any
political meaning, that is, IMAMAT was bleak of political platform and
barren of political performance. The Imams and their followers remained
safe to a certain extent.

The writer should know that the Imams possessed the combined offices,
that of political leadership and that of the religious one. Both the
Imams and the Shias knew that the Imams held both offices. In addition,
the Shia views them as the sole heirs of the Prophet. The rulers of Bani
Abbas were no more than the robbers and confiscators of their right and
what belonged to them. The rulers too were alive to this fact that they
were transgressers and trespassers to that which was not theirs. Time
and again Mansoor, Haroon, Mamun, and other rulers had acknowledged the
fact that the religious position was not theirs to hold, nor that of the
political position. They were only occupants while the right was that of
the Imams.

**21. BELIEF IN A REDEEMER:**

In the view of the writer the belief in a redeemer is merely a Shia
belief which was rendered advantageous to Bani Abbas as well. As the
Sunni school of thought emerged, they held on to this belief which at
times was to their interest. This belief of a redeemer was that of all
Muslims. Who actually was and is this Redeemer? This stood the dispute
that divided the opinion among Muslims. Bani Abbas tried to show that
the Redeemer was one from them. They could only try when there existed a
general belief. It is a good proof that the Muslims commonly were
holding this belief without any reservations. Mansoor tried to introduce
his son Mohammad Bin Abdullah as the Redeemer. For this purpose he gave
him the title of MEHDI. The efforts in this field regardless from where
it came from did not succeed, because the people did not approve of
their reputation for such a post.

**22. IMAMAT OF IMAM MOSA BIN JAFER:**

The writer writes that there was a dispute about who would succeed as
imam. He twists and turns the understanding of the reader and tries to
make the subject as much murky as possible. Dispute is a common thing to
occur when a matter happens to be of importance. The more important the
matter the more deeper the dispute. The outcome is important. The
Imamate of Kadum took its seat in the hearts. A general love surrounded
him and a certain respect was rooted in the hearts, which received him.
His succession became authentic and legitimate by his own life, which
was in the eyes of the people. His straightforwardness, simplicity,
truth, humbleness, worship, piety, generosity, and charity, all these
qualities gave the proof of his right to succession and his deseruation
to be the Imam-His death in the prison which was obtained by means of
poison, left far reaching effects on the regime of Haroon.

Shafeyee, the founder of the Shafeyee sect among Sunnis left Baghdad in
protest for Egypt. All have praised the personality of Imam Kadum.
Similarly the death of Imam Reza which too was by poison and likewise
the death of Imam Jawad which too was by poison. The martyrdom of these
Imams left a very bad reflection on the regime of the day. Another
blunder of the writer is that he consider Imam Hadi and Imam Hasan
Askari to have had witnessed the total downfall of the Bani Abbas
dynasty. The fact is that the collapse of the Bani Abbas dynasty took
place in theera of Mostasam, as he was killed by Halako in the year 656
Hijra. So, in the time of these two Imams the Bani Abbas dynasty was
fast going down, and the military officers were handling the
installation of a caliph and again dismissing or discarding him.

**23. The appearance of the Imam and his administration of Justice
worldwide.**

That the Imams through their own agents or elements acquired
information and knowledge current with the affairs of their time is not
to be debated. However, the writer claims that they became aware of the
fact the Alawi Imam by the name of Mahdi would come, and that he would
not be able to stop the flow of events due to the severe corruptness in
general. Therefore says the writer, they decided to postpone the
reappearance of the “Awaited One” indefinitely. Yes, the events had
become such, however the writer fails to understand that the
reappearance of the twelfth Imam was not postponed by Imam Hadi nor Imam
Askari, for they had no such power. It was a Divine secret in which only
Allah himself knew and planned. According to various narrations, those
of Shia and those of Sunni, nobody knew nor does know the person who is
to appear and when he will appear.

Even the Imams, except Mahdi himself, knew not the specified man. It is
a Divine responsibility. And, it is in Divine hand. Its knowledge is
with God. Its delay or its urgency is the concern of God. The writer
fails to dig any deeper. For it is the insight that probes and opens the
horizons of a vast sight to see. What we know is that which the Prophet
(SAW) and the Holy Quran has taught us. That is a redeemer will come to
rescue the world from tyranny and to spread therein justice is a promise
committed by God to mankind; and it has been foretold by the Prophet.
But no one is competent to set its timing. It is not a human programme.
Hence, it is not for human to decide. When one can not decide he can
deny. Here denial is not important, because to deny facts does not
uproot them.

**24. The House of ALI and MOTAWAKKIL:**

Alhamdolelah, the writer, sees and accepts the cruelty, and tyranny of
Motawakkil. He says without reservation; and this is, indeed,
appreciable. In the court, Motawakkil became upset, very much so that he
wept under the crushing strokes of his soul. The writer attributes his
inner disturbance to the recitation of Quranic Verses. He is wrong. Imam
Hadi spoke to him in poetry. Because part of the verse has been
translated from Arabic to English, some of the beauty has been lost;

“Over the peaks of mountains, guarded they lived; Never saved them the
peaks they were deceived.” 25. ‘TAQIA’ A strong command from the Divine
in the Holy Quran: Again the writer goes astray. “Why do not you fear
them a dread?” “Lo, he who hates him and his heart is satisfied with
belief.” These are the Verses of the Quran.

It pertains to Ammar to conceal his faith. To conceal one’s faith or to
hide one’s religion if the conditions demand so; is God’s order. To
avoid danger in any respect, either to life, property, reputation, or to
personal prestige one should conceal his true belief. Reason and logic
says so. To do otherwise is wrong as it is to expose one to danger. The
writer says that the Shia invented TAQIA in order to protect themselves
against the Sunni who were a majority and also from the rulers who were
too Sunni. So under the pretext of TAQIA. The writer is short o of
knowledge in this subject. As we pointed out earlier it is a clear
commandment from God. To obey God is not wrong.


