26. the First Writer Who Wrote the Book About the Occultation
=============================================================

The Imam’s scholars have classified political and social grades. From
Qulaini to Tosi Nomani who are regarded as some of the first ones to
write about the absence of the Imam. Prior to them there was a group of
doctors who dealt with this subjects and wrote books. Fazl Bin Shozan
(died in 260) and still farther back there were Abrahim Bin Husham Abil
Fazl Al-Nasheri and others constitute a class of writers.

**IMAMAT OF TWO BROTHERS:**

Imam Hasan (AS) and Imam Hussain (AS) were two brothers and at the same
time Imams. In that period and age both were Imams one obeyed the other;
the younger brother obeyed his elder, as he became Imam. Imam Hasan (AS)
actually held the political authority as well as the religious one. He
administered social affairs and held the government over them. Imam
Hussain (AS) had no say as long as his brother Hasan was alive. The
writer now tries to establish a link on this precedent and suggests that
the Imamate was of Abdulla Ajta instead of Mosa al-Kadum or to the both
of them and similarly to Jafar brother of Imam Hasan Askari. The office
of Imamate is Divine.

As such, the Imamate is not dependent on our pleasure. It is not our
right to suggest one for the Imamate or not to approve the others. When
Mosa al-Kadum became Imam, Abdullah goes out of question. Likewise Jafar
is not Imam because Hasan Askari is the Imam. The Imamate of Hasan and
Hussain can not be a base for any who happens to be a brother of the
Imam to become Imam. To avoid such a kind of mischief or this type of
interpretation the Prophet (SAW) in his life time had repeatedly
disclosed the names of the Imams individually. He had even specified the
characteristics of them. So, that neither doubt nor suspicion would
remain.

**27. Division of Groups**

Regarding the Imam after the martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari a man by
the name of NOU BAKHATI had written a book under the title “HREQ
AL-SHIA” (sects of Shia). This man says strange things never heard
before nor will be heard anymore. A few examples of his findings: After
the martyrdom of Imam Hasan Askari the Shia divided into groups and
sects. They split into fourteen sects although it is not a fact he says.
His book “HREQ al-SHIA” gives a wide range of sections, groups, and
divisions. As one goes farther into this book he sees that the word
GROUP can not be applied at all since there was none. A SECT can not be
called a SECT since that SECT did not exist at all. A DIVISION can not
be named a DIVISION since there were not one or two persons who differed
or said anything different. But all such trifles and superfluous
conjectures have gone a great deal to give bulk to the book. In what
times they existed; he does not say. What were the names of those
DIVISIONS or SECTS or GROUPS; he himself knows not because he does not
say. How long did they remain in their difference?

Why didn’t their GROUP or their DIVISION gain ground so as to attract
followers? Who was their leader a chief? All these and such questions
remain without answer. There is nothing real in the hook. The great
scholars Shaik Mofeed and Shaik Akbar Tosi have rejected the existence
of divisions. They replied in “A story of NOU BAKHTI” it was “ALFOSOOL
AL-MUKHTARA” (The selected chapters). In a book by Shaik Mofeed he says
in its second volume, “There is no sect, no group in existence. In our
times till the year 372 there has been no sect other than the twelve
Shia Imamia.” This is an introduction for our readers to form a
background for themselves, for their own judgment or opinion because the
writer has brought forward NOU BAKHTI’s book in his argument.

There are books written about nations, creeds, and so on. But these
books were written under a prejudice of exaggeration and not on fact.
Whatever one sees in print does not mean it has authority behind it
therefore be accepted. History can not show any trace of any of those
sects. No date can be fixed as to when; no location can be pointed to as
to where; then the very debate on it is of no sense nor of any use
discussing. Probabilities do not become facts. A man might have existed
who deviated, divided, disgruntled, deprived, and depraved; but surely
he was not a SECT, GROUP nor DIVISION.

There is no evidence to show that Jafar had a following. There is
likelihood that political and or animosity of some might have given a
wider range to Jafar. But he neither gained nor established a following.
The only sect that was there and that is still there in spite of the ups
and downs of the passage of time, regardless of the vicissitudes of
political events, and despite the changes that are common to man is the
sect which believes in the Imamate of the 12th Imam, son of Imam Hasan
Askari. The Shia Imamia which as said, did not surrender to temptation
but adhered to faith and preserved the belief, although however
difficult. Great scholars appeared in this sect. A great many books have
been written in this field.

Whatever differences might have happened concerning the person of
Mahdi, it was not so wide as is pretended and not so serious as is said.
There were no fourteen sects as is now claimed. The writer can not
gather a hundred men as the followers. To tell, one can also tell that
Omar caused a division or created a division among Muslims as, after the
Prophet’s death he shouted and clamored that the Prophet had not died.
This divided the Muslims into two groups - one who believed in the
eternal life of the Prophet taking his death for his absence and the
other one who believed in his death. But a lunatic opinion, single and
alone, uttered with a calculated mischief aimed at a particular
deliberate purpose or intention can not be a criterion on which an
ideology can be rested. As soon as it is said, it is dismissed because
it reflects the mind of the sayer. The sect that acknowledges the
Imamate or the Imam hood of Mahdi, son of Imam Hasan Askari has existed
for centuries. From the 3rd century the sects that are mentioned in the
book have had been without existence. They have vanished. They never
existed. Leaving aside the alleged sects, the truth is that the
Authority of God can not be absent from the earth. This authority is
vested in the person of Mahdi, the Imam of our time. The Shia can not
ignore the Imam. Here ends the circuit of fictious sects.

**28. Books about the Sects:**

“MILEL WA NAHAL” of Shahrastani “AL-FASAL” of Iban Hagam; these books
speak of divisions and describe the sects or groups with full mistakes
and deliberate errors. To rely on them is irresponsible because they
have been written without study. Every prejudice is gratified in it and
malice has taken a breath of relief as it speaks about Shia without
knowledge. No information, no knowledge seems to have been necessary to
write this book. Another book “ALFARAKH BAIN ALFIREQ” and another book
“AL-TAISEER” carries a theme which ignorance could be proud of. Where
there is no literacy, there is fancy; where there is no information,
there is imagination; and the books are written. These books are deal,
thus should they be left.


