Traditions That Are Told About the Imamate of Thirteen Ones
===========================================================

In our article “JILA AL-BASAR LE MAN YATAWALLA AL-AIYEMME AL-ISNAESHAR”
(glisten of sight to one who yields to the twelve Imams) we have dealt
over this subject. The traditions that indicate that there are thirteen
Imams are not authentic ones. The narration should be constant, that is,
heard by many; hence, told by many or circulated mouth by mouth. Such
narration of any tradition is gestant with credibility. If it is told by
one person it does not stand credible.

When the Prophet (SAW) spoke, he spoke among his associates or in a
gathering or amidst a few people. So, his conversation was heard by more
than one man; and accordingly narrated by more than one. If a tradition
is narrated by only one source and there is no second to it; it is void
of any authenticity. This is a standard or a law for gaining certainty
about the issue pertaining to belief and other religious matters. On the
other hand, the traditions that indicate the number of Imams as twelve
are many and related by several and told by various sources.

In the book MASNAD of Ahmad al-Hanbali there are above thirty sources
mentioned having had heard from the Prophet (SAW) the number of Imams to
be twelve. Muslim in his “SAHEER” quotes eight sources who have related
the traditions indicating the number twelve. In the Shia books there are
hundreds of sources who have mentioned the Prophet’s sayings the
traditions, that fix the number of twelve. Besides, the sources form the
man of good reputation. There remains no doubt in the authencity of the
very subject. However the traditions or tradition quoting the number of
Imams to be thirteen has been invented. Since it is a lie it is
dismissed.

**29. SALEEM RELATES NEWS:**

What is attributed to Saleem does not exist in his (SALEEM’S) book.
Saleem is reported to have narrated that the Prophet (SAW) had told Ah
Bin Abi Taleb that he and twelve ones from his progeny are the rightful
and legitimate Imams. The very authentic copies of the book of SALEEM
BIN QAIS mostly possessed by scholars do not have what it is alleged to
him. What the book of Saleem Bin Qais carries is the various narrations
of several sayings of the Prophet (SAW) all to the effect that the Imams
are twelve and their names starting from Ah Bin Abi Taleb down to Mahdi
are indicated. This book came into being in the first century of Hijra
and remains till now well credited and well trusted. The names of the
twelve Imams were mentioned at a time when they were not yet born. So
what is a false accusation or an unfounded allegation merely attributed
to Saleem Bin Qais is only a matter of prejudice, to obfuscate the very
subject and infuscate the understanding.

It is common practice to fabricate a fiction and then set out in
conquest of a writer who may transact this counter note on his credit
because of the customers who bank in him their trust. Better than Saleem
Bin Qais they could not have found. As his notes are plenty, one counter
can easily be mixed therein. If at all it is deducted, a general clamor
would stout that it is Saleem’s; since Saleem’s would obtain currency
and circulate from hand to hand. Such a fraud is also played with Abi
SAHAL NOUBAKHTI. This silly trick has persisted deliberately. Writer
should have checked them. Translators also proved negligent in this
respect. Anyway, we should pronounce here that such a stratum will not
be of benefit to any nor will it serve as a religious cause nor will it
advance any religion forward. It would only create a mist on the
understanding of readers. The root of belief in a ‘MEHDI’ is also to be
found in the Tora and that of the Bible prior to Islam. Any literature
that could be traced in the distant past will say something of this
kind. This is the pedestal of the Divine Religion.

**30. TITLES OF THE TWELFTH IMAM:**

The writer sees everything from a material aspect. He has not yet
reached a destination. Everywhere he stops and wanders again and says
something in the pain of fatigue. Moslems believe generally in Mahdi; it
is a political belief. The Shia believes in Mahdi particularly; it is a
political effect. What is a belief? He has several titles such as MEHDI,
REDEEMER and etc.; they are invented by history. Let him at least for
once tell something of sense. Any link with the world, the other one, is
out of question to the writer. He compares natural phenomenon with
religion. The moon, earth, sun and animals all appear and disappear in a
cycle, come and go; likewise religion too is to him. He wants to reach a
religion after having lost the religion. The world that is next, the
self that is in a man, the ulterior influence of invisible on visible,
the unseen on the seen, the spirit and its environment, the soul and its
surroundings; all these things carry no sense to him. What holds a
matter matters to him.

So, he is altogether on quite a different track, which never joins the
straight path of belief. He displays a series of historical events as
his discoveries. He has assorted the events, adjusted the episodes,
rejected and accepted some while misplacing others in an order prove his
point. When he offers his cargo he misleads the customer. The titles
such as MEHDI, GHAYEB, HUJJAT which are rooted in the Quran and
transplanted in the Prophet’s sayings are regarded by him as the names
that came into being due to certain incidents or events in history.

Had he cared for traditions he would have come to know that the titles
‘AL-QAYEM’, ‘HUJJATULLAH’, ‘KHALEEFATULLAH’, ‘AL-MENDI’ belong to the
twelfth Imam. But the language of tradition is strange to him nor is he
familiar with the tone of the Prophet (SAW).

In some time or some era one title might have been widely spoken. Again
in certain conditions some other title might have given more consolation
or satisfaction to the people. For this reason some among the titles of
the twelfth Imam are more famous. We observe this in the names of God
also. AL-SHAFI, AL-SALAAM, AL-HAHZ, AL-RAHMAN, AL-REZZAGH are more
uttered. The personal circumstance has a bearing on this as one resorts
to a particular tribute or quality moves them to the other. But this
could not mean that God was lacking those qualities in ancient times and
got them as time progressed. Such results are the natural outcome of the
analysis done on the basis of matter. Therefore, the very method of
analysis, that is, the material one, is wrong and will lead one astray.
The belief in God is the consequence of a centipede of things and a
train of suppositions. Before that, there was no belief in God.
Likewise, the qualities which are the names of God. This is the result
of a materialistic view of the things. Finally, one has to deny all God
and prophets. Such a result of such a wrong method of analysis can not
convince one nor could it be justified in rejecting God. It will not
succeed to shake the belief of a believer.

The moment Mahdi came into being the titles were fixed to him because
of the qualities he possessed. Mehdi the rescuer, fixed one, good doer,
master of the command, master of time, master of age, and master of
moment is he. Each of those titles reflects a particular dimension of
his personality and of his task. The possessor of those titles is the
twelfth Imam. Mahdi is the same twelfth Imam and the 12th Imam is the
same Mahdi that the scholars of Sunni have acknowledged. Abu Davood is
one of them. He in his book “AL-MEHDI” says that the twelfth Imam is the
seal of the Imams.

**31. THE TITLE “AL-QAYEM”**

Although the writer’s uproar, this time he quotes page 282 from the
book “GHEEBAT” (absence) of Tosi that, “QAYEM means he will upraise
after meeting his death.” About this sufficient explanation Tosi has
provided; “but to deal this subject we first should necessarily speak of
the Imamate.” As the ramification is getting wider we shall speak about
the Imamate only briefly because its short summary suffices to take in
the details.

Imamate in Shiasm is based on the Holy Quran. There are numerous
traditions of the Prophet that support the establishment.

1. Imamate is a Divine obligation. Persons competent enough become the
choice of God. They are vested by God with this mission. God’s choice of
the person to this office is pronounced to the people by the Prophet at
God’s desire.

2. The prime and the supreme condition for an Imam that qualifies him
to be the Imam is his infallibility, that is, immunity from sin or wrong
doing, and his superiority in knowledge with the others so that all
could obey his instructions and follow his guidance. Khaleel Bin Ahmad
narrates a description of Imam by Ali Bin Abi Taleb: “All need him while
he needs no one. This is an indication that he is the Imam of all.”

3. The earth can not be without an Imam or the Authority of God.
Everyone should know and recognize the Imam of his time. If he dies
without knowing his Imam, he has died as though in ignorance.

4. Imams are twelve as per the sayings of the Prophet.

5. All the Imams are from the Prophet’s House. They do not exceed
twelve including Ali. According to the Prophet’s words, repeatedly said,
they are at parity with the Quran and as heavy (important) as the Quran
itself. They never part with the Quran. They remain always associated
with it.

6. All Imams individually possess the worldly and the spiritual
leadership. The only thing that they do not share nor possess is the
prophet hood, which was terminated at the Prophet himself. NAHJUL
BALAGHA describes them as God’s Authority over His creatures. They are
the boat of safety. They are the refuges for the nation. They are the
guards to protect the people from divisions and deviations. He who does
not recognize them and they do not recognize him shall not enter heaven.
He who denies them and they who denies him shall enter hell.”

7. The Imams were introduced before hand by the Prophet (SAW) who
disclosed their names and specifications individually. Each Imam has
introduced the following one his successor indicating his name and his
person.

These are the fundamentals of principle belief. There is no likelihood,
no possibility for any mistake or confusion in the order and the person
of the Imam, because of the precautions already taken by the Prophet
(SAW) in his time in disclosing their names individually. Also each Imam
pointed out to the people his successor (the next Imam). One should take
these matters into consideration if he were to know something of the
Imamate. For a believer who acknowledges God and the Next world the
ground is reason on which the pillars of belief rest. These fundamentals
are irrefragable and incontrovertible because they are supported by the
Quran and the constant circuit of the Prophet’s traditions.

This subject that the IMAMAT is a Divine obligation has been
established by the Quran and the tradition that took the wing of
constancy. Dr. Allama Hilli in his book “TWO THOUSANDS” (ALFAIN) has
brought forward two thousand arguments and evidence to prove this
subject only. Basically this subject springs from TOWHEED (oneness of
God) and it is the oneness of God that gives origin to this subject.
Imamate is so basic and so fundamental that it is deeprooted in Towheed.
Towheed is the essence of Islam. And, it is this Towheed that
establishes Imamate thereby making it obligatory upon all Muslims. The
importance of Imamate is reflected form this where we suffer:

“To Him is the Command and to Him is the order and He is the Sultan and
He is the Ruler and He is the Guardian and He is the cognizant of the
interests of the creatures. There is no order nor is there a dismissal
to any one without Him.”

The matter of immunity from sin gives strength to this subject besides
the superiority of knowledge. The Quran here says: “He who guides to the
truth more deserves to be followed; he who does not guide should be
guided.” The Imam should necessarily be infallible. Reason requires so.
Dr. Allama Huh has established this fact through two thousand arguments.
One many refer to book ALFAIN.

There should be God’s Authority over the earth. “To each nation there
is a leader.” “And we have reached the word to them.” “A day (in which)
we call every people with their Imam.” These Quarnic verses with due
consideration to their interpretation and the sayings of the Prophet
thereon prove that the earth can not be empty of an Imam. The books,
those of Sunnis, Shias, Zaidias, and those of Imamias all say
collectively the same. There is uniformity of opinion at this point.
TAZ-KARAT AL-HOFFAZ of the Sunnis has acknowledged the necessity of the
presence of an Imam on earth. Whether the Imam is hidden or apparent,
concealed or absent or open he is there as should be.

In the book SAWAYEQ and other books of Sunni scholars a long statement
of Imam Zainulabedeen is narrated. The Imam in his long statement says
that the earth can not remain without an Imam from the House of the
Prophet (SAW). If there happens to be any word coming to this
fundamental it is worthless and groundless.

Imam Zainulabedeen says in his supplication in his SAHEEFA SAJJADIA:
“O, God, you have supported your religion in all times by the Imam whom
you made a banner to your servants and a tower in your dominion after
making his rope to reach yours and you made him a medium to your
paradise. And obedience to him you made obligatory. And you warned about
disobedience to him. To carry on his orders, you ordered; and to stop at
what he stops the action, you commanded. No advancer advances from him
nor does a delayer lag behind him. He is the Fortress of seekers and the
cave of believers and the path of adheres and the worth of the
worlds.”
In this supplication the Imam is well sketched. The states and the
station of the Imams is made clear. Shiasm can be observed in this
supplication. After all these discussions it is a wonderful thing to say
“The upraising of QAYIM after death was acknowledged earlier but later
on this thought was rejected by scholars.”

Any thought in a Shia atmosphere if expressed by the Prophet (SAW) and
Ali Bin Abi Taleb and all other Imams are a fixed truth. Any other
thought contrary to it is of no credit and is void of truth. In an
analysis some seek to find out a trifle and enlarge it magnifying it in
order to avoid the truth or to reject the fact. Some non-Muslim Islamic
scholars have done this to serve their venom. It is not our point to
overlook the loophole. What we say is, do not overlook the important
ones. One should examine and compare both and see which one is
acceptable.

The Imam first dies and the upraises. This is contrary to the
fundamental. The earth in that case would remain without an Imam, which
is not possible. The age of the Imam is lengthy as his occultation too.
If we accept his death first and then his becoming a redeemer, we have
to reject what the Prophet (SAW) and Ali (AS) and the other Imams have
told us. A narrator by the name of Mosa Bin Sadan Hannat (whom is not
regarded as a man of reputation) quotes another man by the name of
Abdulla Bin Qassim. Abdulla Bin Qassim was called ‘the her’. Such a man
can not be trusted. This liar hero quotes his source as Abu Saeed
Qurasani. Abu Saeed Qurasani’s whereabouts are not known. Besides this,
there is not other source to have had told the same thing or a similar
one to it.

If we look at the word QAYIM we understand it to mean that an upraising
is ahead, and this Imam is to be the doer or possessor of that ‘QIYAM’.
An upraising which is to be against the political conditions and
religious perversion and social depravations of that time. He will
uproot every root of tyranny and fill the world with justice. Generally
the word ‘QIYAM’ (upraisal) is contemporary with surmise. All Imams were
QAYIM that is ‘responsible’. But each of them was in accordance with the
conditions of his time. The situation he was in was one concerned to
him. But in a broader view and a broader sense this title QAYIM is
particular to Mehdi because the QIYAM is going to be a wider, universal
one not confined to a specified time and place. His QIYAM (upraisal)
will embrace the conditions of individual, social, political, and
economical ones. The application of this title brings to mind that of
only the 12th Imam and no other one.

Saddookh has narrated a tradition. His source is Kamaluddin. Kamaluddin
narrates that he (Kamaluddin) heard the 9th Imam, Mohammed al-Taqi
(A.S.) say: “The Imam after me is my son. His word is my word. His order
is my order. To obey him is to obey me. The Imamate will run to his son,
Hasan Askary. What he says is to be obeyed. His word is his father’s
word. His order is the order of his father.” Then he became quiet.
Kamaluddin asked; “Oh, son of the Prophet of God! Who is the Imam after
Hasan?” The Imam wept. Then he said; “Imam Hasan Askari’s son, AL-QAIYM
AL MONTADER.” Then Kamaluddin asked; “Oh, son of the Prophet of God, why
is he called ALQAYIM?” The Imam answered; “Because he will bring an
upraising.” Kamaluddin asked; “Why is he called the awaited one?” The
Imam replied: “Because there will be an absence that wilt be very long.
Faithful ones will await his appearance. Those who have doubt will
reject him. Those who believe in him will be redeemed.”

In another source “MA’ANI AL-AKHBAR”, the same is also mentioned.

Some have indicated other reasons too for his title ‘QAYIM’. One is
that he will appear and raze a war against tyranny with his sword. Now,
for his other title, Mahdi, there are several interpretations. AL-MEHDI
is as independent a title as is AL-QAYIM. One whom God has guided is
called Mahdi.

According to predictions, the reforms and the deeds that Mahdi will
perform will suit the title AL-QAYIM. It is also known that these
titles, “AL-QAYIM” and “AL-MEHDI” were heard from the Prophet’s mouth.
There is no sense in arguing that one title is superior to the other.
Both belong to one and both were given and pronounced by one.

**32. MAHDI AL-ANAM THE TWELFTH IMAM:**

The writer in this chapter has written what reflects his prejudice or
ignorance. The Imam will appear; the Imam will rescue the world from
tyranny; all this imagination is the product of the last decades of Bani
Ommiya’s rule. The tyranny of Bani Ommiy’s government invigorated this
belief more deep. But in no way did it create this supposition or this
fancy as the writer says. It is as old as Islam itself The Prophet (SAW)
himself had disclosed MEHDISM and told the people what we now know. It
is a promise given by the prophet (SAW) and as is known, the Prophet
(SAW) did not utter out of his own desire or lust. It is God’s word and
Divine Revelation from which he speaks. So, it is a promise given to us
by God through the Prophet (SAW).

The writer says that the title of MEHDI was given to rescue the Shia
from dullness and hopelessness. To inject them with ray of hope or a
beam of anticipation towards a better future. As we have repeatedly said
it is a reality. The title has nothing to do with the disappointment of
a man or a group of men. The title does not add anything to the
personality of the Imam. His responsibility is already foretold by the
Prophet (SAW). The Shia did not invent anything so far as religion is
concerned. The title MAHUI is also acknowledged by Sunni scholars. It
was heard on the tongue of most well known Sunni authorities. As such,
it seems that it is the writer who is trying to invent something at this
stage.

**33. MIRACLOUS BIRTH AND THE DATE:**

It is not bad to give a summary about the event of Mahdi’s birth. The
birth of Mahdi the son of Imam Hasan Askari is recorded by historians as
being a simple event.

However the birth is surrounded by some strange signs. The writer is
not willing to see or accept the strange signs because he says that no
such events were recorded. Which records he uses for his research, we do
not know. An event of birth is not to be elaborated - generally
speaking. Sources that are close to the house of Imam Hasan Askari (AS)
should also be contacted to see what they know and have to say.
Historical science has gone too flaccid as its scholars have shown
prejudice in recording the events or the facts. However, facts do remain
unchanged although the attitude of a historian is however changeable.

The birth of messengers is gestant with unusual events, extra ordinary.
Adam’s birth for example was a strange thing. The birth of Abraham,
Is’haq, Moses, and Jesus were all strange, Jesus (AS) still in a cradle
spoke. All these events were super natural and extra ordinary. If these
events are not historical, then the birth of Mahdi too is not one. If
those events are regarded as being historical, the birth of ‘Mahdi’ too
is one. The negligence of some historians do not spoil the event. As a
figure of speech, no matter how many veils are hung to hide or conceal
something, if a candle is placed beyond the veils even the slightest
light will still pass through those veils. Often is the case that an
unauthentic source says something ignorant and it becomes history; but
an occurrence of importance and magnitude which took place and is told
by persons of repute and renown, still is not considered history! What a
portentous display of prejudice and partiality it is! The writer says
that the biographies of the Imams of the Shia have been so written that
they are like the stories of the SOHS. The stories of the SOFIS are far
from sense and reason. The writer could have said that the biographies
of the Imams are like the stories of the births of prophets like
Abraham, Is’haq, Ismaeel, Moses, Jesus and Yehya. But, taste is needed
to install a similitude. Delicacy is the demand, wit is the want and
vigilance is the vitality, needed to bring a similarity of the same
sanctity. The stories of the SOFIS are fabricated in order to attain the
level of godly figures so as to make them credible. They are fake,
false, and feigned. But the facts of the prophets or the Imams do not
break apart by false statements as a shadow can not eradicate a light.
It is the evil that proves a virtue. A dark night is the indication of a
bright day, which dawns from within its folds.

The very sense the word history imparts should be defined here. Some
events are perhaps narrated in the books of philosophy or medicine and
not in the book of history. Although irrelevant of its place it is still
history or an historical event. Whether it be the prophet of God or
kings what they do goes down as history. Therefore, history can not be
confined to a man or a particular group or a particular performance. As
a result there is no classification or category to which certain events
are regarded as historical or non historical. The writer is wrong. The
birth of the twelfth Imam was history in itself as well as a historical
event.

**34. THE CREATION OF THE PROPHETS AND THE IMAMS:**

About the creation of the Imams and the Prophets, that is, how they
were created or the nature of their creation. Shias are not different
with others in its conception or conviction. About the creation of the
Prophet (SAW), the Sunni sect has a great deal of narration and
traditions. The same Sunni sources have much to say with regards to the
creation of Ali Bin Abi Taleb, Imam Hasan, Imam Hussain, and Fatima
daughter of Mohammed. As to the reason of the creation of the prophet
(SAW) and the Imams the Quran gives a root. “Indeed, God has chosen you
and purged you and selected you over the men of the worlds.”

As for the prophet Moses the Quran says: “And, We revealed to the
mother of Moses to feed him with her milk and if she happened to fear
about him, throw him into the river and not fear nor grieve. We shall
return him back to her and make him among the messengers.” From this we
infer that the mother of Moses was informed about the return of her
child back to her and that he would become a prophet of God.

In his book AL SIFWA Zaid Bin Ali Bin Hussain describes the issue of
AHLUL BAIT (members of the Prophet’s (SAW) House) their being chosen
ones. He lists from the Quran to support his statement. From a viewpoint
of Islamic principle and belief, the extra ordinary type of creation of
the Imams can not be waired of taking into consideration the miracle in
the birth of Jesus Bin Maryem.

**35. MEHDISM AFTER THE MARTYRDOM OF IMAM HUSSAIN (AS)**

The writer concludes that because Mahdi will appear on the day of
ASHORA he will, therefore, make his headquarters either in Kofa or in
Kerbala. Also because Mahdi descends from the progeny of Ah his
upraising too will be in Kofa and Karbala. However let us stop here and
look a little closer into the matter.

First, it is an acknowledged fact that Mahdi hails from the Prophets
(SAW) House because he is the twelfth Imam. But what relation is there
with Kerbala and Kofa? We can not limit his range of activity for the
whole earth is in his range of activity. All predictions indicate such
as we have repeatedly pointed out, the traditions of the Prophet (SAW).
The writer has connected Mahdi’s appearance to the martyrdom of Hussain.
This he has done deliberately so as to limit the whole issue and to
prove it has a background of revenge. The writer knows very well that
the Imams were all from the House of the Prophet (SAW), that is, his
offspring. So, the twelfth Imam too, Mahdi. Nobody has limited Imamate
to the Household of the Prophet (SAW), it is God’s design, His desire,
His deed, and His determination because Imamate is His office and an
Imam is His choice as to who to be and from where. Mahdi hails from the
progeny of the Prophet, it is a fulfillment of a condition among the
conditions concomitant with the office of Imamate. As such he should be
from AHLUL BAIT (from the Prophet’s house). This ensures that all his
doings and deeds will all be in the line of the Prophet (SAW) himself.

**36. ABSENCE OF MAHDI:**

Under this title or leading the following may be said; A. the
disappearance of the Imam was an event of most importance. Shias became
upset and much disappointed they were uncertain as to what would happen
politically, religiously and socially. It’s far reaching effects in
every as peek at every field was alarming. Some remained dumbs founded,
perplexed and confused knowing not what to do. A true Shia’s concern was
as to how to confront the adversary who was a staunch appetent, a Sunni,
and how to protect his own strategy in that political hurricane; and to
this added his worry as to how to guard an ordinary Shia whose belief
was their hunt in which it was a moving object in the jungle that had
engaged their arrows and could fell prey to the beast of their
propaganda. The safety of a common Shia, and the danger of the security
of a learned Shia was the anxiety of the hour. Although they saw
themselves exposed to an ambush from behind a tree in that society,
which to them had turned into a forest ruled by wild and bestial
animals, yet the most learned scholars of Shia were safe in their
hidings. They were armed by the Prophet’s (SAW) traditions and the
verses of the Holy Quran, which had established the truth of Imamate to
rescue them and to guard a common Shia against the danger.

As a result we now see that Shiasm has survived every risk of
eradication. It has preserved its originality rejecting any deviation.
Whose make up is her original face and whose ornaments are her natural
features. Indeed, malice incited the ugly to abnubilate her beauty by
any fuliginous way or to fash its admirers. But her admirers stood a
grueling test and her own numinous beauty stood a palladium. However, no
matter their practice the Shiasm deranged its entity. The learned ones
gave refuge to the thought of the people. The NAWABS took the affairs of
the Shia in their hands.

While everything was in order, the belief in the twelfth Imam was never
shaken; NOUBAKHTI says that in the town of Qum, there existed a sect
that believed in thirteen Imams. We have heard nothing of that kind, and
know that all there believed and believe in twelve Imams. Everyone in
books of narration claim that there existed scholars during the past two
and half centuries to tell people about the Imamate of the twelve
Imams.

Yes, a deeper look will show that a few who had turned aside from the
original path in search of personal gains or to whom a deliberate
deviation had taken far away from the track, later regret persuaded them
and repentance returned them back to their right path and to which they
adhered in fealty and stuck in faith.

B. Earlier to Ibn Babway and Nomani others like Fazi Bin Shazan (died
260) have written books about both the periods of the absence of the
twelfth Imam. These books had appeared before the birth of Imam Hasan
Askari. Mashikha Hasan Bin Mahboob (died 224) has also written about
this subject. The writer too maintains that the two periods of the
absence of the Imam has brought forward changes in the views. We should
point out here that both periods were of importance and of a new kind in
the history of Shiaism but not in the sense that the theme of Shiaism
varied with that of the past. These two periods further cemented the
faith of those who were having a pre knowledge through the sayings of
the Prophet (SAW) and the Imams.

The way of installing a proof or housing evidence was at variance among
the lecturers. But at the same time they all depended on the traditions,
that is, the sayings of the Prophet (SAW). Side by side they used reason
as well. This method of presenting or producing evidence of reason or
logical proofs became wider and wider during the space of time. From the
time of Shaikh Mofeed to the time of Allama Hilli and toward this method
took an entity to itself. The proof for divinity, the evidence for
prophet hood attained a wider range. Likewise, there is still a
possibility that it may still go beyond. But the evidence of narration,
that is, the narrative proofs remains what they had been because the
words could be invented to install in the prophet’s (SAW) sayings.

C. The absence of the Imam is reflected in a way to give an impression
that to revolt against tyrant rulers is not an obligation on the people.
Therefore, the scholars, that is, the Shia clergymen and their
jurisprudents in association with the family of Boway did not oppose the
caliphate of the Bani Abbas dynasty.

They propagated Shiasm. If the Boway family (AALBOWAY) committed
atrocities, Shias had no obligation to oppose it. It was only the right
of the Imams to revolt or upraise against the tyrant rulers and their
governments. If the occultation of the twelfth Imam makes an upraising
impossible then no upraising should take place and the concern should be
only towards the protection of Shiasm. To bring down a government is the
only right of the twelfth Imam.

Such an impression is quite wrong and misleading. First: Shias were in
no circumstances and under no conditions obliged to bring down the
governments of the Bani Abbas dynasty. Shias were and are obliged to
obey the Imam. The Shia ponders, thinks and considers himself under the
yoke of twelve Imams, individually and collectively. Even to this day
the yoke of the Imamate of the twelfth Imam is around the neck of the
Shia. Bani Abbas knew this. They knew that to bring down their
government was not the responsibility of a Shia. It depended on the
stand and outlook of the Imam of that time. Obedience of the Shia to
their Imam, their love, affection, and faith in him was to Bani Abbas a
dread and a matter to take into calculations and something to bestow
consideration to.

On the other hand, the conduct, character, behavior, abundant
knowledge, truth, honesty, up righteousness, straightforwardness,
endurance, tolerance, forbearance, and forgiveness of the Imam was in
itself an element and a factor that weakened the Bani Abbas politically,
socially and morally. This the Bani Abbas well knew that they very
presence of the Imam, whoever he be, was their own weak point because
his existence demonstrated what he possessed and what they were deprived
of. Whatever qualities and abilities they had, the Bani Abbas caliphs
were short of. They lacked. The people too witnessed the same what the
Bani Abbas saw. The ability of the people to judge and compare could not
be taken away from them. As they compared, they hated one and liked one;
they hated one and honored one; they hated one and obeyed the other.

This being out of their power, the Bani Abbas remained always uneasy,
harassed, confused, and uncertain. To secure their own rescue from this
harassment the easiest thing to do was to detain the very object of
fear. This they did. They imprisoned the Imams. They put them under home
arrest. They implied secret agents, police to keep a watch on them. They
broke the link of the people with them. Motawakkal brought the tenth
Imam, Ali Al-Naqi, from Madina to Samerra so that he may keep a direct
watch on him and control his every movement.

In any circumstance there was never the question that the Shia would
revolt. In the days of the tenth and eleventh Imams, Ali Al-Naqi and
Hasan Askari, there was no probability of any such thing. It was a
general belief that it was up to the Imam to decide what to do. But
there was a strong belief running among Shias that each Imam did what he
was under commission to do. The Prophet (SAW) had a charted and the
programme by the command of God for every Imam, framing his
responsibility. So, every Imam in his time acted and behaved
accordingly. This secret chart was transferred from one Imam to the
other. The other factor to be considered is this, that in those days
conditions had become so bad and the people were in such a low mentality
that there was no preparedness on their half to consume a change. In
such a probability of failure it was wise to avoid the upraising. Its
consequences would have been more futile and reverse rather prolific and
useful.

The Bowihian’s stand did not totally discard the caliphates of the Bani
Abbas dynasty although they took the helm of affairs in their hands.
They installed a caliph and they even dismissed a caliph. But they did
not declare their disagreement with the machinery of the caliphate. Had
they done so they would have had to confront a huge front of opposition
of Sunnis. A total chaos would have entailed posing a general danger to
Shias. Any change in their stand would have reflected a religious basis
for that change. To avoid Bani Abbas and appoint an Alawi caliph was
tantamount to the continuation of the same trend.

Some say that the interests of AALBOWAY was in keeping the Bani Abbas
dynasty in order to retain their own power. Anyway, AALBOWAY was neither
to do nor think of any other way. This should not be forgotten that in
the time of the absence of the twelfth Imam some of the Bani Abbas clan
was not bad towards the Shia. They even pretended to be Shia. Naseruddin
Allah was a scholar among the caliphs of Bani Abbas. He believed in the
Imamate of the twelfth Imam and in his absence. He even considered
himself as the deputy of the 12th Imam.

There runs a theory that no one has a right to revolt against tyrant
governments during the absence of the 12th Imam. This is absolutely
wrong. To upraise against tyranny in the event of possible conditions is
in jurisprudence an obligation. This obligation becomes a general one in
case the tyranny of a ruler happens to consume one’s property, life, or
one’s honor so that all people should go to the victim’s help. To defend
against a tyrant needs no sanction of a religious jurisprudent.

Defense is a sacred liability. To defend a Muslim, or to defend a
Muslim society is obligatory no matter whether the enemy be an outsider
or one from inside. For example the ex-shah of Iran wanted to change the
Islamic identity of Iran. So to defend such a danger becomes a
liability. In jurisprudence these questions are discussed, the defense
or the effort to oppose the tyranny of a ruler who is not a jurisprudent
or a believer. These issues during the period when the Imam is absent
are decided by the Shia of jurisprudence. In the span of the absence of
the twelfth Imam the tyrant governments in certain conditions become
compulsory to be brought down.

**D. The motive of ALLBOWAY in their upraising obviously was
political**

with lust for power. But it can not be waived off that originally they
should have been motivated by religious matters or the atrocities
committed against the Shia might have incited them to revolt against the
tyrant rulers.

On the ground that their upraising was contrary to Shia religious
standards we can not condemn them. There are several considerations.
When their upraising had succeeded their behavior in general and that of
some of them in particular was far better than all their predecessors.
They even surpassed in their competency and good conduct with others.
The rulers among them showed no enmity with the Shia. They were jealous
and very much enthusiastic towards propagating the Shia belief and at
the same time advertent enough to not encroach the Sunni sanctity.

In other words they had brought freedom for the Shia and obliterated
those conditions that necessitated the TAQIA (concealing one’s belief).
In any case, their policy was not to invalidate the Sunnism or to crush
any other religion. They did quite the opposite to what their
predecessors had done. They provided liberty for Shias and also opened
avenues for them to enter any government service. AAL BABWAY nullified
the previous policy for restricting Shias in every aspect of social
life. So, they in fact protected Shiasm and helped it. What they gave to
others by way of freedom they gave to Shias as well. Because of the
equity, which they maintained with the Shia, they were accused of
religious bigotry. However, we are not here to defend the AAL BABWAY\>’s
policies. This can not be denied that they too were a dynasty, which
appeared on the political scene and became recorded in history.

They differed with their previous rulers who were Sunnis and did
everything against the Shias by way of harm. One of them was Motawakkel
who even tried to annihilate the Shia belief. But the BABWAY dynasty did
not act to take revenge nor did they adopt any negative attitude towards
the Suni. They opened opportunities of jobs and propaganda to them. They
were more human comparing to their predecessors like Motawakkel,
Salahuddin Ayubi and Taqhrool Saljokhi. The Babway dynasty was in fact
Shia. They believed in IMAMAT and also the disappearance of the twelfth
Imam. But they did not intervene nor did they interfere in religious
matters. What they pondered they used to pronounce openly. The Shia
clergymen coordinated with the BABWAY’s harass on the basis that, in the
politics people should not take part nor they should participate in
revolts against the governments. This is wrong. The Shia religion does
not dictate such a thing.

If we look from a political angle, the Babways were Shia. Therefore
they felt themselves secure from any Shia revolt against them. Since
they were good with the Sunnis if by any case the Shia were to make any
upraising it would have been crushed by the forces adversary to the Shia
thought. All the political fronts of the Shias would have been lost. If
Shia clergy would have revolted the result would have been the same. On
the other hand, Babways had paved the way for the Shias to enter into
jobs and have well stations in society. So, the Shia thought it prudent
to support the BABWAY rules. In such circumstances the Shia clergy took
to serve the expansion of knowledge and the propaganda of the Shia
ideology and at the same time made it obligatory upon them to support
the BABWAYS.

As things took shape an understanding opened its umbrella shadowing the
Shias and the BABWAYS without these being a contract or an agreement.
Their understanding was the result of the security which the BABWAY
rulers felt at the hands of Shia, and the contemplation of the Shia
clergy that the harm of a revolt would be more than the gain. To not
make a movement was a religious conviction to one party while to the
other a good prudent policy to honor that conviction.

In any case let us pronounce that we can not repudiate the legitimacy
of their rule, at least, some of them.


