Age of Disenlightenment
=======================

The meaning and importance of the Prophet's message can best be
comprehended against the background of pre-Islamic Arabia. Historians
refer to this period as the "era of ignorance" (Jahiliyah).

Before the inception of Islam the Arabian peninsula was a scene of
social disorder. Depending on their localities its inhabitants had
adopted various beliefs such as Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism
etc. Idol-worshippers, however, constituted the majority.

It is reckoned that twenty centuries before the advent of Islam,
Prophet Ismael was sent to guide the tribes of Hijaz, Yemen and \`
Amaligah. During this long span of time, how- ever, most of his
teachings were obliterated.

Only the concept of Oneness of God had lived for a considerable time -
six or seven centuries before the beginning of the Muslim Era, Hijrah.
\`Amr ibn Luwayy, the then Mec- can chief brought an idol from Balga
where he had been for medical treatment.

Later on, some three hundred and sixty idols were made and erected in
and around the Ka'bah. As time went by even idol-worshipping
deteriorated to the extent that an idolator would eat his idol made of
dates when he felt hungry and use the stones to clean himself in
toilet.

(5) This should serve as an unforgettable lesson present generation and
those to come to the as to how negligence and the absence of remem-
brance of God, and the authority emanating from His message led an
otherwise capable nation to the depth of darkness.

Some of the Arab tribes regarded daugh- ters as a nuisance and when
they attained the age of five or six they would be buried alive. Some
killed their children for fear of poverty.

In that lawless society morals had become very loose indeed. When a man
died, his wife or wives were inherited by the nearest male relation. In
this way one could take his step mother as his wife.

There was no law pertain- ing to marriage or divorce. Hence a man could
acquire as many wives as he wished and di- vorce them when he pleased.
To divorce his wife it was sufficient for a man to say to her "you are
to me as the back of my mother;"

but she would not be permitted to marry another man. Thus women used to
be treated like articles of trade to be bought, sold or bartered away.

Slaves, female and male alike, were the victims of that cruel society
which held un- limited power over their life and death. Gambling,
drunkenness and fornication, cruelty and plunder were objects of pride
for the Arabs. Such was their daily life. The pre-Islamic Arabs led a
tribal life.

The concept of nationhood or government was foreign to them.
Inter-tribal relations were worse than could be imagined. In the fifty
years before Islam one hundred and thirty two battles took place between
the tribes.

This warlike character of the Arabs is reflected in their ancient
poetry. One Arab poet wrote:

"If an enemy tribe we do not find, We go to war with a related or
friend tribe, And our war-lust is thus quenched." (6) Arabs were not
people of letters. "Even in a large town like Mecca, where commerce
flourished and traders required to consign to writing a memorandum of
their transactions on credit, there were no more than fifteen or twenty
persons who knew to read and write... al-Baladhuri even names these
seventeen in- dividuals". (7)

Despite all that has been said so far and the scores of other
shortcomings which the pre-Islamic Arabs had, they also possessed cer
tain admirable qualities. They were outspoken, hospitable, generous,
brave, and never yielding to their enemies. However in the absence of
sound instructions even the best of qualities are bound to be misused.

But was this social decadance peculiar to the Arabs alone? Certainly
not. Their con- temporaries might have led a more luxurious and
civilised life but were in, more or less, the same state otherwise. Thus
ignorance had brought mankind to the brink of destruction from which
only something miraculous could save them.


**The Messenger**

When mankind was so deeply engrossed in futile and harmful practices,
Allah most high out of His endless mercy raised a Prophet from among
them to purify them and restore their lost dignity. Muhammad
(p.b.u.h.a.h.p.),

the posthumous son of \`Abdullah, the youngest son of \`Abd
al-Muttalib, a most important leader of Mecca, and Aminah, daughter of
Wahab, son of \`Abd Manaf, son of Zuhrah, the chief of Banu Zuhrah, was
born, according to the majority, on 12th Rabi\` al-Awwal, (probably 22nd
April) 571 A.D.\* The name "Muhammad" (meaning "The praised one") was
given to him by his grandfather \`Abd al- Muttalib. When questioned
about his choice of this uncommon name the latter replied.

"I desire that he may be praised in the heav- ens for the sake of God
and in the earth for the sake of His creatures." A week or two after his
birth, Muhammad (p.bx.h.a.h.p.) was given in charge of a wet-nurse
called Halimah, from Banu Sa'd, as this was the custom of the nobility
of Mecca.

Halimah nursed Muham- mad (p.bx.h.a.h.p.) for five years, who in return
honoured and showed deep affection towards her and her family,
throughout his life. It is related that once there was a year of famine
and Halimah paid a visit to him.

He gave her a camel burdened with goods and \*According to the majority
of Shi'ah historians, the Prophet's birthday was on 17th Rabi\`
al-Awwal. forty sheep.

Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) was about six years old when his mother died.
From then onward he was brought up by his grandfather \` Abd
al-Muttalib, an affectionate old man. And upon the death of \`Abd
al-Muttalib two years later the guardianship of Muhammad
(p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) passed to Abu T~lib a kind and generous uncle.

Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) was liked and respected by all since his
youth for his noble character, charming manners and exceptional
qualities; and his relations with the people earned him the appellations
"al-Amin " and "as-sadiq " meaning the "trustworthy" and the "truthful"
respectively.

\`Abdullah ibn Abi al- HamsaÂ° reports that long before Muhammad
proclaimed his mission he had some transaction with him. The transaction
was not completed when the former left Muhammad, promising to be back.
\`Abdullah forgot about the affair completely. "Three days later," says
\`Abdullah "when I was walking past the place I found him still waiting
for me. He was not annoyed with me at all for my carelessness. All that
he said was: \`you put me to the trouble of waiting here for three
days'."

Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) was about twenty-three years old when the
four leading families of the Quraysh undertook the recon struction of
the Ka'bah, the sacred House of God, after its walls were damaged by
flood.

All went well until the stage was reached when the sacred black stone
had to be installed in its proper place. The four, unable to share the
honour of placing the stone, were soon at each other's throats. The
argument had gone so far that Mecca seemed to be at the brink of a civil
war. Observing the serious situation AN Umayyah ibn al-Mughirah
al-Makhzum Bab as-

suggested that the first person entering Safa be made arbitrator. And
when they saw Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) entering there was a unanimous
agreement to abide by the judgment of the "Trustworthy". Muhammad
(p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) ended the quarrel quite simply:

He placed the Black Stone in the centre of a piece of cloth spread out
and let the chief of each tribe hold one corner of this cloth. On
Muhammad's (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) order the chiefs raised the cloth up to the
required height;

he then fixed the stone in the appropriate position. He thus prevented
what seemed to be an in- evitable war. But some forty more years had to
elapse before he made the Arabs bury the hatchet which they so often
used to chop each other's head.

At the age of twenty-five he married Khadijah, daughter of Khuwaylid
ibn Asad ibn \` Abd al-\`Uzza ibn Qusayy. She was forty then and had
been married twice before. Khadijah ranked high among the women of
Quraysh. She was kindhearted, elegant, noble and attractive.

And having inherited considerable property \_ from her second husband,
she was wealthy. But above all she was renowned as "at-Tahirah" (meaning
"the pure"). Although a number of celebrities from the Quraysh had
expressed the desire to marry her, they all met with refusal.

Therefore Muhammad's (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) mar- riage with Khadijah was to
be regarded as another feather in his cap. Khadijah never ceased to be
an ideal wife till she breathed her last. And Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.)
always remembered her after her passing away with sorrow and deep
affection.

At the age of forty he began to receive the Divine Revelation. Muhammad
(p.b.uh.- a.h.p.) who, was thus assigned to convey God's Message to
people began to preach the "new faith" quietly and patiently to whoever
would be likely to accept.

In the first three years forty people embraced Islam. When the Mess-
age was proclaimed publicly it met with fierce opposition. The Meccans
did not fail to discern the fact that the new religion aimed at a
complete reformation of the society, to which they would not subscribe.
Disbelievers began to think of ways and means to render the call to
Islam ineffective.

They fast tried to bribe the Prophet by offering him wealth and
leadership; they were refused. They threat- ened and attempted to kill
him, yet they did not succeed. They called him a madman. But in the very
depth of their hearts they admired him and admitted the fact that they
were un- fair to him..

So when Caesar, the Roman em- peror questioned the Meccan chief Abu
Sufyan, who at the time was a deadly opponent of the Prophet, regarding
Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) the former replied: "Muhammad, the son of \`
Abdullah, is nobly born.

His followers are on the increase. He is honest and truthful, has never
told a falsehood, nor ever broken a pledge. He enjoins the people to
worship one God and pray to no other deity. He preaches kindness, piety
and tolerance towards all." (8) "Why then" one might ask "did the Mec-
cans not follow the Prophet but instead fought him?" The answer to this
is quite evident.

The Message of Islam was aiming at changing the course of their lives,
transforming their person- alities, remoulding their manners and behav-
iour.

Above all the new faith demanded that they should abandon their idols,
which they held to be sacred. Besides, the boastful Arabs, who regarded
the rest of mankind as " \`ajam", inferior to them, could not simply
swallow the concepts of "equality of men", "social justice", "human
rights" etc. while Islam preached that man's superiority was not to be
judged by race, rank, ancestry or the number of camels and slaves one
possessed. Righteousness alone was to count.

As Islam continued to spread, the anger and anxiety of the Meccans grew
too. They threatened the Prophet with dire consequences if he did not
put an end to his preaching.

This did not carry any weight with the Proph- et. But the cruelty of
the disbelievers to the Muslims was now beyond endurance. It was then
that Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) ad- vised some of his companions to
migrate to Abyssinia. The lesson to be derived from this departure of
the Muslims from their mother- land to a totally foreign country is
important.

This incident indicates the degree of their faith in Islam and the
extent to which they would go in their sacrifice for their religion.

Life in Mecca was miserable, hard and cruel to Mus- li ms. Sa'd ibn Abi
Waqqas relates that on an occasion out of acute hunger he was forced to
wash and eat a piece of dry camel skin which he discovered while passing
water.

Believers were molested, tortured, killed; some fled abroad but the
struggle continued. No one gave in.

When all methods failed the eminent personalities of Quraysh gathered
together in the hope that they would convince Muhammad (p.b.h.a.h.p.).
Their spokesman \`Utbah spoke to him in the Ka'bah ".......... If you
have created this upheaval because you want wealth and riches, say so,

and we shall make you the richest man in the land. If you want power
and authority tell us and we shall make you our ruler .........."
Muhammad (p.b.h.a.h.p.) replied "I want no wealth nor riches. I have no
desire to be crowned a king ........ I am a humble -servant of God.

He has sent me to you as His Apostle. He has revealed to me His Book
and He has commanded that I warn you against His wrath if you reject
Him, and to bring you a promise of His blessings, if you believe. So I
have given you His Message and no power on earth will stop me from
propa- gating it.........." These words uttered by the Prophet in a way
forecast the future success of Islam in the definite statement
"........and no power on earth will stop me from propagating
it........"

The remarkable thing is the fact that when these words were uttered the
whole Mus- lim population was negligible in comparison with that of
disbelievers. The Prophet's words much angered Quraysh who decided to
boy- cott the Muslims.

Accordingly no one in Mecca would be allowed to do business with the
Prophet, his family or his :followers, sell food to them, pay a visit or
even. talk to them. Thus the Messenger and his followers were compelled
to abandon Mecca and settle in a nearby valley.

Nevertheless the Prophet con- tinued to go to the Ka'bah and to pray
pub- licly. And whenever he had the opportunity he preached to strangers
visiting Mecca for business or pilgrimage.

Muslims lived in misery and utter discomfort for more than two long
years feeding practically on grass for scarcity of food until some
relenting Meccans lifted the ban. Shortly after this the Prophet lost
his wife and his uncle Abu Talib who had been of great help to him. The
Prophet went on striving hard for the dissemination of the Message. One
day, accompanied by Zayd, he walked up the rugged mountains to the city
of Td'if, some fifty miles away from Mecca.

Overcome by fanaticism and ignorance the people of this town brutally
attacked and stoned the Prophet who had come to deliver them from
darkness to light.

As Ghulam Sarwar puts it: "If there was any just occa- sion for any man
to curse his enemies, it was now for Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) to do so
with regard to the people of Ta'if. He was bleeding, and his heart was
almost broken at the cruel treatment he has so unjustly received.

He might have said, \`O God! destroy these people who are so wicked and
not one of them has any sense of fairness.' He did nothing of the kind."
(9) Instead of condemning and com- plaining about his enemies he sought
refuge in God in humility of heart and utmost sincerity.

In the eleventh year of Prophethood a happy incident took place. Six
pilgrims from the city of Yathrib, later named Madinat an Nabi, became
Muslims and swore allegience to Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.).

These new con- verts spread Islam in Medina in quite fast so that in
the following year a group of 72 Yathribite Muslims presented themselves
to the Prophet and secretly pledged themselves and their people "to
stand by him as they would stand by their own children."

Intensified persecution of the Muslims by Quraysh made it impossible
for the former to dwell in Mecca any longer. In this difficult period
the Prophet was divinely ordained to leave Mecca. He left for Medina
shortly before the Quraysh broke into his house intending to kill him.


