The Messenger in Medina
=======================

The migratory journey of the Prophet to Medina in the year 622 A.D.
marks the begin- ning of a new era. "Hijrah" as this migration is
referred to is regarded as a turning point in the Muslim history.

After the warm welcome accorded to him by the people of Medina the
Prophet set to work to establish a city state in Medina. He called for
consultation all the inhabitants of the place, Meccan immigrants,
Medinite con- verts, Jews and the Arabs who had not yet embraced Islam
and promulgated a state con- stitution.

This is the first written constitution of any state in the history of
the world. It contains details of the rights and duties of both the
ruler and the ruled ........... (10) "In the second year of Hijrah the
Prophet initiated mobile defense."

(11) As it can be seen from these two examples "organising the
community" was one of the first activities of the Prophet in Medina.
Muslims thus began to live a disciplined life and were kept on the
alert.


**The Battle Of Badr**

It must be borned in mind that the migra- tion of Muslims to Medina was
a forced flight, hence a state of belligerency existed from the very
outset between the Muslims and the Meccan disbelievers. That the two
com- munities had to clash sooner or later was anybody's guess - But
when? A very rich Meccan caravan carrying goods worth 50,000 dinars -
under Abu Sufyan was on its way from Syria and heading towards Mecca.

And once they strengthened their economic situ- ation Quraysh were most
likely to launch a massive attack on Medina, where, with the help of
jews rebelling against the Prophet they could exterminate the Muslims
totally. There had already been a number of incidents that had added to
the ever-existing tension.

Under the circumstances the condition of the Muslims was rather
precarious. Noticing the seriousness of the situation the Prophet sent
out Talhah ibn \`Ubaydallah and Said ibn Zayd to al-Hawra' for
reconnaissance. The two em- issaries hurried to Medina when Abu Sufyan's
caravan drew near.

Abu Sufyan a cunning man leaving the caravan behind went to Badr in
person where he soon found out that the place had been visited by men
from Medina and was quick at dispatching a man to Mecca for help. It
must have seemed natural and easy for the Muslims to intercept the
caravan in question, which if allowed to reach its destination, would
strengthen the armed forces of Quraysh considerably. Further, an attempt
to seize the caravan would force Quraysh to fight an untimely war.

When the news reached Mecca Abu Jahl, an influential leader, summoned
the people to the Ka'bah and instructed them to get ready for the march.
When the Quraysh army left Mecca it consisted of about 1000 soldiers,
700 of whom rode camels and the rest were on horse back.

They were fully armed with all the fashionable weapons of the time.
Mean- while Abu Sufyan managed to change his route and thus escape from
the Muslims. The crisis should have ended when this new development was
conveyed to Abu Jahl, who refused to retreat. Instead, he insisted on
making a dis- play of strength to demoralize the Muslims. He marched on
until finally he encamped his forces on one side of the valley of Badr,
six marches from Medina.

Muslims, under the command of the Proph- et, however, formed quite a
contrast when compared to their enemies. To start with they were not
more than about 300 men poorly clad and ill equipped. Only a few had
armour and the rest just a sword. They possessed two horses and seventy
camels each of which had to carry three men. But most serious of all,
they were outnumbered by three to one.

Evidently this small band of Muslims was neither prepared nor had the
intention to fight an army like that of the Quraysh at that stage;
everyone had Abu Sufyan's caravan in mind, and excepting the Prophet,
none had taken into consideration the possibility of facing the whole
population of armed Quraysh in the battlefield so unexpectedly. It was a
big surprise, therefore, for the Muslims, to hear of Abu Jahl's army on
their arrival in the valley of Dhahran.

To deal with this new situation, the Prophet returned to his starting
point, nearby Medina, where he could consult his companions. A section
of the companions stated that they were with him for fighting. After
some moments of silence and hesitation, however, there was a unanimous
agreement to fight.

Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) ordered: "March on and be glad that God has
promised me one of two parties". (that is either Abu Sufyan's caravan or
victory over Abu Jahl's army). A day later, however, the Muslims
discovered that the caravan was out of reach.

The two armies clashed on Friday, 17th Ramadan in the second year of
Hijrah. (prob- ably 14th January 624 A.D.) After arranging the Muslims
in battle lines the Prophet turned towards the Ka'bah in supplication.
He ended his prayers in the following words: "O God! these Quraysh have
come with their friends to belie thy messenger.

O' God! we need thy help which thou hast promised. O God! should this
small band of ours perish, there would be none left to worship thee."
(12) Quraysh started the fight when Shaybah and \`Utbah sons of Rabi ah,
and Walid, \`Ut- bah's son, advanced to challenge the Muslims to single
combat. On the Prophet's order Hamzah, the Prophet's uncle, \`Ubaydah
son of Harith and \`Ali son of Abu Talib met the three men
respectively.

Hamzah and \`Ali soon killed their opponents, while \`Ubaydah was
wounded by \`Utbah who met his end soon with 'Ali's sword. After this
victory of the Muslim com- batants a raging battle ensued. The Muslims
fought with unprecendented spirit and valour. In the end the infidels
were utterly routed leaving behind seventy dead and seventy pris- oners.
Among those slain were eleven of the fourteen Meccans chieftains who had
con- spired to kill the Prophet shortly before he left Mecca.

Their death dealt a severe blow to the Quraysh leadership. As to the
Muslims; their losses were fourteen dead in all. But they had been
instrumental in winning the most i mportant victory in their history.

This was a divine victory as God said in the Qur'an: "You (Muslims)
slew them not, but Allah slew them". (Qur an, 8:17) The Prophet was
merciful and com- passionate not only to Muslims but also to his
enemies. The treatment accorded to the pris oners of Badr amply confirms
this fact.

The prisoners were fed while some of the Muslims remained hungry, "an
act of benevolance which hardly finds any parallel in the history of
mankind." The ransom fixed for the pris- oners was that those who knew
to read and write should each teach ten Muslim boys the art. (13)


**The Battle Of Uhud**

Although the battle of Badr had resulted in a victory for the Muslims
no peace or a treaty of any kind was concluded between the Meccans and
the Muslims.

Not only the state of belligerency between the two com- munities
continued to prevail, but also prepara- tions by Quraysh for a war of
greater dimen- sions were to commence soon. \`Ikrimah the son of Abu
Jahl, who was killed in the battle of Badr, and many other chiefs of the
Quraysh paid a visit to Abu Sufyan and proposed to take revenge from the
Muslims if only he were to meet the cost of the expedition.

Abu Sufyan agreed. Accordingly the entire profits of Abu Sufyan's
caravan were spent in prepa- ration for the coming war. The clans of
Kina- nah and Tahamah also joined Quraysh against Muhammad
(p.b.u.h.a.h.p.).

At the same time much intrigue and sedition were being con- cocted with
the Medinite Jews. The Prophet, however, was not oblivious of the
circum- stances. He too, through covenants brought all the coastal
tribes of Arabia into alliance.

This severed the easy access of the Quraysh to Syria and Medina, and
forced them to open commerce with \`Iraq. In the meantime a rich Meccan
caravan on its way to \`Iraq was inter- cepted by Zayd ibn Harith with
one hundred riders from Medina and a big booty acquired.

By the month of Shawwal (January) in the third year of Hijrah Quraysh
had com- pleted their preparation for war. Their forces consisted of
3000 soldiers (700 of whom wore mail armour) 3000 camels, 200 horses.

Shortly, before the Meccan Army set forth, \`Abbas, the Prophet's uncle
and his only sympathiser among the Meccans sent him a letter with a man
from the tribe of Ghifar to inform him about the Meccan's plan to invade
Medina. Upon this the Prophet warned the people to withdraw their
animals 'from the outskirts of Medina and dispatched, his own men to
investigate the authenticity of the news.

Alarming as it was the news was con- firmed. The next thing to be heard
was that the Meccan army reached Uhud; about three miles northeast of
Medina.

The question of "how to confront the enemy" was debated. The Prophet
was of the opinion that if Medina be fortified and defend ed against
Quraysh, it could prove easier to repel the enemy from there. Leaders of
the Muhajirun (immigrants) and Jews as well as were of the same
opinion.


(helpers)
Ansar

But the rest who constituted the majority had a different opinion.
These were mainly young Muslims who wanted to fight the enemy in the
open. The Prophet agreed to the majority's decision.

After the Friday congregational prayers, Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) gave
the glad news of the victory to those who were persevering and ordered
the army to march.

But they were not far from Medina when \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy and his 300
jewish com- rades betrayed the Muslims. Ibn Ubayy left the Muslims after
making the flimsy excuse that the Prophet had not taken his advice but
was following "boys". Thus when the Muslims arrived at Uhud only 700 men
were left with the Prophet.

Muhammad (p.b.u. h.a.h.p.) positioned his troops at the foot of Mount
Uhud so that the mountain remained at their back. He lined up his forces
in battle array and posted \`Abdullah ibn Jubayr with fifty archers to
guard the rear of the Muslim army against a possible onslaught of the
enemy from that direction.

The Prophet sternly warn- ed the archers thus: "Guard our rear for we
fear that they may attack us from that side, and remain in your
positions and do not move therefrom. Even if you see us defeating the
enemy and entering his camp, do not depart from your positions.

And if you see us being killed do not come to our help to defend us.
And it is for you to shoot their horses, for the horses cannot win
against arrows." (14) Quraysh were the first to start the fight.
Following this Zubayr led an attack on the right wing of the Quraysh
army and outmaneu vered them. Then Hamzah, \`Ali and Abu Dujanah with
lightning speed made a shat- tering dash into the ranks of the enemy.
Under the irresistable onslaught of the three, the became demoralised
and began to be enemy The Muslims who at scattered in confusion.

the start gained the upper hand and controlled the strategy of the
battle overwhelmed their foes in all directions. To most Muslims the to
be over, the enemy was battle seemed retreating in disorder; Victory was
theirs! It was at this crucial stage that the Muslims committed a most
serious mistake; taking vic- tory for granted they fell upon the
spoils.

Most of the archers too, observing the scene from the mountain pass
thought that the fight was over and despite the Prophet's clear instruc-
tions and stern warning not to abandon their positions at all costs and
events went to join in securing the booty. The Muslims paid for this
second mistake very dearly.

A cavalry division of the enemy under- the command of Khalid ibn Walid
noticing the departure of the archers lost no time in launching an
attack from the very position the archers were sup- posed to guard and
inflicted heavy casualties on the Muslims. What contributed most to the
chaos among the Muslims however was perhaps the false news that the
Prophet had been killed. Shocked by this news some of the Muslims fled
in panic. But the rest fought with unequalled courage and
determination.

Especially the bravery of the many martyrs who laid down their lives in
defending the person of the Prophet would move one to tears and ecstasy.
Whatever the mistakes and the losses of the Muslims on the day of Uhud
these should not mask the fact that Muslims who rallied round the
Prophet fought the enemies with perseverance until the latter retired
from the battle field.

The events of Uhud, however provided the Muslims with a precious moral
victory.

Referring to what happened in Uhud says the Qur'an:

"And Muhammad is but a Messenger, surely (many) messengers have gone
before him; if then he dies or is killed, will you turn upon your
heels?". (Qur'an, 3:144)

"And most certainly Allah made good His promise to you, when you
blasted them by His leave, until when you flinched and disputed about
the command, and you disobeyed, after He had shown you what you had
loved (victory); of you were some who desired this world (booty) and of
you were some who desired the next world; then He turned you away from
them, that He may try you; and He pardoned you; and Allah is bounteous
to the believers". (Qur'an, 3:152)


