The Jews
========

The Prophet had concluded peace with several Jewish tribes residing in
Medina! Of Banu Qaynuqa' violated their side of these the treaty by
committing hostile acts against the Muslims openly. Not long after the
battle of Badr an event took place which taxed the patience of the
Muslims. A Muslim woman was insulted by some men of Banu Qaynuqa'.

A Muslim man passing by the scene had to interfere. In the fight that
ensued he killed the offender, the Muslim man too was killed. This
worsened the relation between the Mus- ms and Banu Qaynuqa'. The Prophet
request- ed Banu Qaynuqa' to respect the agreement and refrain from
harming the Muslims. But the Jews would not listen. They grew arrogant
and said:

"O, Muhammad! Let not the victory over a people who did not know the
science of war deceive you. By God, if you fight us, you shall know that
we are men." Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.) was left with no alternative; he
laid siege to the quarters of Banu Qaynuqa'.

After fifteen days the Jews surrendered. With the intercession of
'Abdullah ibn Ubayy and few others the Prophet let the Jews emigrate
leaving their arms behind. They left Medina for Wadi-l-Qura, north
Arabia, Syria, and other places.

Banu an-Nadir was the other Jewish clan which lived in Medina. They too
were bitter enemies of the Muslims. In the fourth year of Muslim Era
they plotted to kill the Prophet. Upon this treason they were asked to
leave the city. They refused to do so.

They were how- ever defeated in a skirmish that took place and promptly
deported. While some repaired to Syria others established a state of
their own at Khaybar. After a while, the Jews of Khaybar established
diplomatic ties with the Meccans against Muhammad (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.).

At the same time they concluded agreement with all the tribes of Arabia
against the Muslims. Thus in a few days they succeeded in rallying some
10,000 men under the banner of the Quraysh and leadership of Abu Sufyan
to invade Medina. The Jewish intrigues continued until Khaybar was
conquered by the Muslims and the Jews routed completely in the seventh
year of the Hijrah. The siege of Medina lasted for two weeks and ended
in a complete fiasco.

The enemy tried in vain to overcome the trenches \* and barricades
surrounding the city - The trenches that were dug by the Muslims
constituted a new technique not known to the Arabs before.

And the enemy was taken by surprise. Then a severe wind blew which was
followed by a dust storm pulling down the enemy's tents.

This confused and demor- alised the tribes who began to argue among
themselves and ultimately left Medina. In the sixth year of Hijrah a
ten-year truce was concluded with the Quraysh, at Hudaybiyah. Then the
Meccans violated the \* "On the advice of Salman al-Farsi, the Prophet
ordered trenches to be dug round Medina and filled with fire".

treaty by attacking the Khuza'ah tribe which was an ally of the
Muslims. The Prophet decided to march on Mecca. In the eighth year of
Hijrah Mecca was conquered peacefully. The Prophet asked the Meccans:
"What do you think I will do to you?" They answered:

"you are a generous brother and the son of a generous brother': (12)
Muhammad (p.b.u.h. a.h.p.) pardoned his bitterest enemies, those who for
years had tormented, tortured and killed Muslims, finally turning them
out their own hearth and homes, then rot allowing them to rest even in
Medina. Despite all these he granted them all, except a few hardened
criminals, general amnesty. He was indeed in words and deeds "a mercy to
mankind".

Old tribal and personal enmities were re- placed by an unprecedented
peace, tranquility, feeling of unity and fraternity. The old warring
Arabs who knew no nationhood in all their history become united for the
first time by the bond of "Islamic brotherhood".

This had not been easy to achieve. It took twenty-three years of
ceaseless striving and sacrifices to see the success of the Proph- et's
mission (p.b.u.h.a.h.p.)


THE END


