Editor’s Foreword
=================

Islam is a unique and indivisible system that provides a complete and
comprehensive set of teachings that address the issues of concern to
mankind for his life in this world and in the hereafter.

Adherence to the teachings of Islam, which are devised by the designer
and creator of mankind, brings about bliss and happiness in this world
and prepare the individual for the eternal life in the hereafter.

Furthermore, when one looks at the teachings of Islam, one will find
they are not difficult or cumbersome to implement. This is because those
teachings come from the same source that brought man into existence, and
therefore one finds them to be in harmony with the nature of mankind and
his natural disposition.

It is clear from the evidence before us that mankind – even in non-
Muslim communities – gradually and by piecemeal is implementing the
teachings of Islam, but without realising it. Left to his own devices,
he would probably continue doing so until he ultimately comes to realise
the truth of the teachings of Islam.

The teachings of Islam are revealed to help mankind attains his perfect
achievement both in this world and the hereafter.

In part one of this discourse the author discusses Os}ool al-Deen or
the fundamental principles of Islam, which are tawh}eed or the
indivisible Oneness of God, ‘adl or Divine Justice, nobowwah or
Prophethood, ima\>mah or leadership, and mi‘a\>d or Resurrection.

In the section on ima\>mah, the author gives a brief biography of the
12 Imams or leaders divinely appointed to lead mankind after the Prophet
Muhammad until the end of time.

To facilitate the reader with a better perception of the prophet and
his household, Ahl al- Bayt, some of their sayings (h}adith) are
presented following the brief biography of each imam. This has been
included by the editor with the prior permission of the author.

The author also addresses the issue of the eternal miracle or legacy
the Messenger of Islam presented to mankind; namely the glorious Qur’an,
presenting h}adith from Prophet Muhammad (S)2, and the infallible Imams
(A)3.

In part two of this work, the author addresses Foroo‘ al-Deen or the
essential rulings and practices of Islam, which are not only the famous
ten acts of worship such as the daily prayers, fasting, hajj but other
aspects of the teachings of Islam that are significantly relevant in
modern times; issues such as the human community and social order,
politics and economy,

the army and the armed forces, the justice system, culture and mass
media, education, health and medical issues, individual and social
freedoms. Through this discussion the author establishes that a
government based on the teachings of Islam would provide the most
favourable system of government for mankind.

In the final part of this work, the author discusses the third
component that a Muslim is required adhere to; namely the Islamic morals
and etiquettes (Akhla\>q and Ab). Here the author outlines and discusses
the ‘four pillars’ of Islamic ethics and the ‘two pillars’ of its
etiquettes. The author then lists conducts and behaviours that Islam
prescribes as being obligatory, forbidden, the unethical conducts, as
well as the recommended moral conducts. These are presented under the
four separate headings.

Almost all footnotes are by the editor. Texts between [] are from the
editor. Verses from the Qur’an are given between ... The citation of
Qur’anic verses is in the form of: The Qur’an, The Star (53):3-4, where
‘The Star’ is the name of the surah, ‘53’ the order number of the surah,
and ‘3-4’ are the verses’ number within the surah. The short form
citation is 53: 3-4.

lih, meaning Allah’s Peace and Blessings be upon him and his progeny.
This invocation is always made after the mention of the name of Allah’s
messenger as taught by the Prophet, and out of respect and devotion for
the Prophet Muhammad (S).

3 alayhum as-sala\>m (plural) or alayhis-sala\>m (singular), meaning
“peace be upon them or him/her”. This invocation is always made after
the mention of the name of a prophet or infallible Imam, or an
immaculate individual (A).

**Introduction**

It is imperative that any Muslim is not contented with Islam by name
only, and with the Qur’an by the recitation and the script only, but
rather it is obligatory to act according to Islam and to implement the
rulings of the Qur’an in all aspects of his life, and in all his
affairs; personal, social, economical, political, and suchlike so that
s/he would be a Muslim in the true sense of the word; happy, prosperous
in this world, and triumphant and content in the hereafter.

It is needless to say that happiness in this world and triumph in the
hereafter is not achieved by title only, and is not obtained by
supplication only, but rather the thing that brings them about and
facilitates for the Muslim individual is – and this is after firm belief
in the fundamentals of Islam and its true doctrines – to act upon the
excellent teachings of Islam, and implement the true and progressive
rulings of the Qur’an.

It is from this viewpoint that it becomes essential for every Muslim
who loves to live happy and prosperous in this world and victorious and
content in the hereafter – and all of us love that – to endeavour to
learn the true and right Islamic beliefs, become familiar with the
exalted teachings of Islam, acquire knowledge of the excellent rulings
of the Qur’an, develop a firm belief in the doctrines and a relentless
and serious endeavour to act according to the teachings of Islam and
complete implementation of the rulings of the Qur’an, so Almighty Allah,
His messenger, and the ma‘s}oom Ahl al-Bayt of the messenger peace be
upon them all, may be contented with us, and we are happy in this world
and victorious in the hereafter.

In facilitating what is mandatory for every Muslim to know in this
respect, the following outlines are presented.

The excellent teachings of Islam and the exalted rulings of the Qur’an
may be divided into the three following categories:

1. Os}ool al-Deen; the fundamental principles or beliefs of Islam,

2. Foroo‘ al-Deen; the essential rulings and practices of Islam,

3. The Islamic Akhla\>q and Ab or the Islamic ethical morals and
etiquettes.

Therefore, whoever believes in Os}ool al-Deen of Islam, acts upon its
Foroo‘ al-Deen, and adorns himself with its ethical morals and
etiquettes (Akhla\>q and Ab) would attain happiness in both worlds, and
wins both lives, lives happy and dies while being praised.

The following are a brief outline of each of these three categories.


