Islam and the Army
==================

Q. Does the Islamic system of government have an organised army?

A. Yes, it has an organised army in the best form.

Q. Is there compulsory draft system?

A. No. Serving in the Islamic army is voluntary.211

Q. How would that work?

A. The Islamic government would arrange for training opportunities in
the various weapons and devices for members of the public so that
everyone, young and old, and during their free time such as the weekends
and suchlike, receive all the necessary training.

In this way the majority of the nation would receive the training and
readiness, and through this it would reduce the expenses for the army.
In this way members of the army would remain with their families and at
their jobs. Everyone will attend training every day for some hours and
then go to their jobs, and stay with their families. When there is an
attack on the country it would be mandatory upon everyone to defend the
Islamic State. Those who 209 Al-Ka\>fi, vol.7, p138, Wasa\>’el
al-Shi‘ah, vol.26, p36, etc. 210 “Man La Yah}d}uruhu al-Faqih”, vol. 4,
p100.

would like to serve in the military may do so if they wish to stay in
the military permanently and they would receive salary on that basis.

**Military Weaponry**

Q. What is Islam’s opinion about the modern tools of warfare?

A. Islam considers it necessary for the Islamic State to manufacture
and possess whatever is required to defend itself and to protect the
sanctities of Islam and the security and safety of the Muslims212, as
the Almighty has said, .and prepare for them whatever you can of
power.213.

Q. What the Islamic government would do for the relatives of those
killed in the battlefield?

A. If they are needy and not able to make their living the government
will help them with whatever they may need and according to their status
and dignity, and if they are not needy they will not be given anything,
unless there is a certain interest in helping them.

Q. What is the position of Islam on the issue of peace and war?

A. Islam is the religion of peace and tranquillity, as the Almighty
says; .O ye who believe enter into peace all together.214. Islam works
towards proliferating and disseminating security, safety, peace and
tranquillity throughout the world, and equally endeavours to extinguish
the hostility of war, put out its flames, root out its cause from
amongst the people through uprooting and 211 The determination of this
is in the hands of the Council of the Jurist Authorities – Shawra
al-Fuqaha\>’ al-Maraje’.

212 In parallel, and as a long term policy, it is also mandatory to
prevent the manufacture and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
such as nuclear weapons that harm all of humanity, for “there is neither
harm nor being harmed in Islam”. [Wasa\>’el al-Shi‘ah, vol.26, p14]

213 The Qur’an, Public Estate (8): 60
214 The Qur’an, The Heifer (2): 208

destroying the factors that cause wars, and instead seed the elements
that encourage love, harmony, peace and good will. Islam pushes for
abandoning war and promotes truce even if the enemy calls for them out
of trickery, for the Almighty instructs, .and if they [the enemy]
incline towards peace, then you incline towards it [too].215. At the
same time, Islam prohibits violence, terrorism, treachery, and
assassination, and fights anything that leads to fear and apprehension,
terror and trepidation in the people.

**Freedoms in Islam**

Q. Is there freedom in Islam?

A. Yes. Islam provides the best form of freedom. A freedom that the
world has not dreamt of even in the best of civilisations it has come
across.

Q. What are the Islamic freedoms?

A. They are many and we shall only mention a few in the following:

**Freedom of Earning and Trade**

1. Freedom in career and trade, in which every member of the nation can
choose for himself any career, profession or job he wishes in order to
earn his living; so he can earn through hunting, mining for any ore or
precious stone or product, procurement of any of the permissible and
suchlike. For example, one can import or export any goods he wishes, and
buy or sell without restrictions at all. There are no custom charges or
tariffs, and no conditions, in Islam. Of course, there is the condition
that the goods must be lawful for buying and selling and not prohibited
like liquor, and that there is no usury involved, or that the
transaction is unlawful. 215 The Qur’an, Public Estate (8): 61

The trader may not monopolise, or that it does not constitute harm to
the people and their economy.

**Freedom in Manufacture and Agriculture**

2. Freedom in manufacture and agriculture. One would be entitled to
farm any amount of land and in any manner that he wants, and there is no
“land reform” in Islam – in the ‘imported’ sense. However, if the land
were “conquered by force” by the government then the farmer has to pay a
small amount of rent to the government, this rent is called Khiraj.

If the farmer is poor the government must see to his need according to
his status and dignity. One is allowed to farm as much land as he can,
provided one does not deny others the opportunity, and any crop one
wants, with the exception of the harmful ones such as opium. The
government may not demand any taxes other than Khums and Zaka\>h with
all their preconditions as mentioned before. The same is applicable to
all manufacturing; they are all free – in the full meaning of the word –
with the exception of those prohibited in Islam such as the manufacture
of liquors and narcotics.

**Freedom of Construction and Development**

3. Freedom in construction and development. One is allowed to develop
the land in any way one wants. Under the Islamic government an
individual may take any piece of free216 land and build anything one
wants whether a house, shop, factory, mosque, religious centre, school,
clinic, hospital, and suchlike, with all freedom [from any restriction
or condition] and there are absolutely no charges on any development.
The government has no right to make him pay even a single penny for the
land or other things. Islam has decreed that “Whoever develops a barren
land it 216 By free it is meant the land that is not owned, developed or
assigned for development by others. Ed.

is his”217, except if the land has been taken forcibly by the
government from the enemy in which case the developer would pay rent to
the government.

[As an example of implementing the teachings of Islam] if this one law
[of the Islamic laws] were applied to land development, that alone would
have been sufficient to meet the needs of the people in housing,
eradiating the housing crisis that is prevailing in many countries, not
to mention all the Muslim countries.

**Freedom of Residence and Travelling**

4. Freedom of residence and travelling. One may reside wherever one
wants or travel to wherever one wants, without any restriction or
condition. There are no geographical borders (between Muslim countries)
in Islam, no racial conditions, no discriminations due to colour or
language, etc. With this freedom there will be no identity cards, or
nationalising certificate, permits, passports and all other related
things – just as the European Union has done and has eradicated this
loathed innovation from its peoples and countries.

**Freedom of Social and Political Activities**

5. The total freedom of all forms of social services and political
movements with the exception of those prohibited in Islam, which are
very few. Thus there are absolutely no spying agencies, for spying upon
an individual is prohibited, and there is nothing in Islam called spying
agency and suchlike, with the exception of an agency or a department for
collecting information for the benefits of the nation, and for the
protection of its security and its benefit. Thus in the Islamic
government everyone is free to speak, write, express his view and
opinion, and to form societies and 217 For “the land belongs to Allah
and to whoever develops it” as taught by Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon
him and his pure progeny. See Wasa\>’el al- Shi‘ah, vol.25, p412

associations, groups and political parties, to raise fund and support,
to publish magazines and newspapers, setting up radio and television
broadcasting stations, etc.218

**Freedom of all activities**

6. Freedom of all forms of personal and social activities. For example,
anyone who is qualified to drive is free to drive without having to pay
any fees or charges and suchlike. Similarly, a deceased is not required
a permission to be prepared for burial and to be buried, but rather his
relatives may prepare him for burial and bury him in any place they want
or that which the deceased instructed, without having to pay any taxes,
charges, or fees and suchlike. The same is applicable for all other
matters.

Q. The issues mentioned here would require dismantling many of the
government departments we see today.

A. That is correct. This is how the Islamic government used to be.
There were very few government departments, and as we mentioned
previously the number of civil servants in the Islamic government is
very small indeed, an absolute minimum, and because of the small number
of the civil servants the government’s burden is light and its shoulders
are not loaded by large sums of money.

**The Islamic Justice System**

Q. Is there a judicial system in Islam?
A. Yes. In Islam there is best form of judicial system, and the judges
are the most just men.

Q. How are the judge and the Islamic system of Justice? 218 See for
example “If Islam were to be Established” by the late Imam Muhammad
Shirazi.


A. In Islam the judge must be a believer and a just man, learned in
Islamic judicial law, and expert (mujtahid) in its rules and cases.
Judgement must be based on evidences and oath, without complication and
bureaucracy and without fees, charges, or costs at all. There are no
formal protocols and bureaucracies in the Islamic judicial system, no
requirement for formal applications for the hearing, or creating special
files for the claimant, and all such bureaucracies that is prevalent
today in the courts of law and the judiciary.

So because of this simplicity in the Islamic system of justice, and the
required justness and fairness of the judge in Islam, one judge is able
to deal with all categories of claims and cases, and judge between them
and issue their verdicts in the quickest time possible. And all that is
on the basis of [laws of] Islam, and the testimony of just witnesses219,
and thus one judge used to make judgments for a city of millions such
that there was no case unresolved.220

Q. Where from does the judge receive his salary?

219 The criterion for just witnesses is that they must be a practicing
Muslim. 220 This might be surprising, but given the simplicity of
Islamic rules and regulations, and their non-bureaucratic and
uncomplicated nature, a single judge could see to all the cases of the
time. Today, with more elaborate cases, a single judge – together with
his specialist advisors – could also perform a similar task thanks to
the ‘crystal clear’ nature of the Islamic laws and rulings.

For more details see al-Qad}a\>’, volumes 84-85 of al-Fiqh series, by
the late Imam Muhammad Shirazi, and Politics from the Islamic
Perspective, by the author Grand Ayatollah S{a\>diq Shirazi. In Islam
the degree of one’s freedom in every aspect of life is far greater than
what we have today in any modern ‘free and democratic’ society, and
therefore many of the actions or ‘inactions’ that are considered as
‘crime’ and require ‘legal considerations’, ‘appearing before a judge’,
and issuing a ‘verdict’ are not considered as a crime at all, and
therefore there is no need for any of that (i.e. to appear before a
judge, etc.) in the first place. For example the various taxes we have
today in modern societies are not called for in Islam and therefore not
giving taxes does not constitute a crime.

Acquiring licences for import/export activities, or for setting up
businesses is not required and thus not acquiring them is not a crime,
and thus this does not force one to appear before a judge etc. and thus
a judge has far less to do; as the saying goes ‘why complicate matters
when they are so simple?’ - Editor.

A. He will be paid from Bayt al-Mal, or the treasury department.

Q. What is the duty of a judge?

A. With the help of his assistants he would perform what many
government departments perform in present day governments. He would
supervise the affairs of charitable properties, religious endowments and
their staff, manage the properties and affairs of underage individuals
and returning them to them when the right conditions are met, perform
marriage and divorce as required, supervises transactions, leases,
rents, etc. He would also be involved in settling disputes among
individuals, and executing the penalties and punishments to be carried
out.

**Attorney in Islam**

Q. Is there in Islam a system of attorneys like we have it today?

A. In Islam there is not a system of attorneys like we have it today,
and in the Islamic system there is no need for such a massive body of
attorneys, since under the Islamic government matters in general and
those of the judiciary in particular run with ease, simplicity, and
soundness.221

221 Islam encourages faith, conscientiousness, and individual
responsibility in society. Islam relies on people’s natural disposition;
their faith, and their honesty, and thus oath and evidence is
sufficient. In a legal case brought before a judge, the claimant brings
forth witnesses to prove his case, otherwise – if he has no witnesses –
the defendant swears an oath to counter the claimant’s claim, and the
case is concluded in favour of the defendant. There is no need for
lawyers and attorneys. For more details see al-Qada’, volumes 84-85 of
al-Fiqh series, by the late Imam Muhammad Shirazi. In today’s societies,
if one is required by the authorities to pay taxes, and he cannot, he
would end up having to go through the process of seeking an attorney,
and spending time and money, and he may or may not win his case, whereas
in Islam the case is concluded when he declares his inability to pay.
Similarly if one owes money, for example, and cannot repay it, he needs
to hire a lawyer and appear before a judge, etc. whereas in Islam the
case is concluded by his inability to pay. If there were cause for
concern on the truth of the claim, then a judge would require him to
produce two witnesses to confirm the truth of his claim. When the author
states that “there is no need for

Q. What will [the government of] Islam do with the attorneys and the
civil servants that are not required if took charge?

A. Islam does not surprise the nation with its reforms, but rather it
implements them gradually and in stages at their pace. So it will
facilitate for those whose jobs it does not recognise with alternative
appropriate jobs, and it will provide them from the treasury to help
them start another career.

And after this will one whose job is not required by Islam allow
himself to rebel against Islamic government after Islam had facilitated
for him with a useful job that suits his status, and provided for him
until his new career with all dignity and comfort? Similarly Islam will
dissolve and annul all places and activities involving production and
consumption of liquor and prostitution and suchlike while paying great
attention to their living matters and expenses, and facilitating job
opportunities appropriate to their status and traits to enable them to
make decent and lawful living and to make them needless to the vice and
the illegal.

**Health in Islam**

Q. Is there a health service program in Islam?

A. Yes. It has the best of preventive and treatment systems, and the
most precise programs in broadness and comprehensiveness, for it covers
the health of the body and the soul, the wellbeing of the individual and
the society, and the fitness of the climate and the environment.

Q. How does this system work?

A. Islam bases the general guidelines for health care program on three
policies:

such a massive body of attorneys”, it does not mean that there is a
need for a small body of lawyers, it is meant there is a need for
none. - Editor.

1. Prevention; for this protects the individual, the society, and the
environment against the spread of disease and infections to anyone of
them, and that is through the following:

(a) through the prohibition of the causes of diseases and infections
such as liquor, narcotics, adultery, homosexuality, and other harmful
things; music and practices that bring about anxieties; liquor shops,
brothels, and suchlike.

(b) through encouraging the etiquettes and traditions of the individual
and social way of life such as cleanliness, bathing, h } ija\>mah which
is blood-letting by cupping, fas}d222 which is the piercing and removing
of blood from the veins, fasting, marriage, use of body creams and oils,
use of herbal treatment such as so‘ut}223, wearing kohl, removal of
unwanted body hair, particular manners of eating, drinking, wearing of
clothes, housing, sleeping, and while being awake, and suchlike.

2. Treatment; and that is by referring to herbal medicine and dietary
procedures beneficial for treating diseases, all of which are simple and
easy. Such measures although may not be comprehensive but they would
stop diseases especially at the outset of the disease. Detailed health
care and dietary programs are given in the books such as “Medicine of
the Prophet” and “Medicine of the Imams” peace be up on them.

3. Supervision: Islam supervises the welfare and cleanliness of the
environment and pursues its protection against pollution, and also
monitors the health of the individual and protects 222 hijamah and fas}d
are procedures for removing blood from the body in aid of medical
benefits. The procedure of hijamah is to remove and dispense of ‘old’
blood from the body by cutting the skin in specific parts of the body.
The procedure fas}d is remove ‘fresh’ or ‘old’ blood from the veins.
hijamah is encouraged by the prophet and is normally done twice a
year.

223 Herbal drug used for sniffing.

him against infection. Furthermore it carefully monitors the
physicians, and fires in them the restraint of the conscience, and the
fear of Allah and His retribution. The Islamic law holds a physician
responsible for any misconduct, even if he is an expert. This creates a
strong sense of responsibility in the physician such that he would not
allow himself to be complacent in the diagnosis and treatment, and in
turn that makes the physician more observant when diagnosing and
treating the disease, and prescribing the medicine.


