The Qur’an, the Prophet’s Eternal Miracle
=========================================

The holy Qur’an is the Prophet’s living and eternal miracle, since it
is the only divine scripture that the divine will wished it to remain
immune from addition, deletion, and changes despite the great number of
those who attempt to distort it or the scribes who attempt to forge it,
so that it remains the eternal book, and the timeless constitution for
life until the day of judgement, so long as there is man living on the
planet earth. This is because of what it contains between its covers in
terms of excellent rulings and outstanding teachings the implementation
of which guarantees man’s happiness, progress, development and
achievement.

In addition to being the book of knowledge and education, rules and
rights, morals and etiquettes, politics and economics, the holy Qur’an
is the miracle of the heavens that carries great spiritual and
metaphysical influence.

The Qur’an challenged the eloquent writers of the Arabs who had hanged
their seven magnificent masterpieces [on the walls of the Ka‘bah] to
produce something resembling its verses. They were not able to produce
the like of one surah of the holy Qur’an. But instead, having being put
to shame, they went on to remove their hanging masterpieces in total
defeat before the Qur’an that is compelling in eloquence and style, and
if they were able to produce one surah like that of the Qur’an, they
would not have resorted to those wars that reflected on their
personalities, destroyed their power and establishment, and rendered
them living in hunger and fear, destitution and humiliation.

This compelling Qur’an, and this eternal divine book, in which there is
that that brings happiness for mankind, and opulence for his life, and
disseminates good and blessing, and spreads peace and tranquillity
throughout the land, various traditions have been narrated on the virtue
of learning it, reciting and memorising it, and implementing its
teachings, urging one to pay particular attention to it. Here we will
point to some of them by the will and power of Almighty Allah.

The virtue of learning and teaching the Qur’an In the following we
quote some hadith from Wasa’el al-Shi‘ah,18 on the topic of the
prominence of the holy Qur’an: Sa’ad al-Khaffaf reports Imam Sadiq
saying, “O Sa’ad, learn the Qur’an, because on the day of judgment the
Qur’an will come in the best form that people may have ever seen.”

(The Imam continued . . .) “until the holy Qur’an comes to Allah, the
Most high, and Allah, addressing the Qur’an, says, “O my authority on
earth and my true spoken words, look up and ask for your wishes shall be
granted, and intercede for your intercession shall be accepted. How did
you find my servants?” The holy Qur’an replies, “My Lord, some of them
kept my teachings and did not lose anything from me, but some of them
lost me and disrespected me and did not believe me even though I was
your authority to all your creatures.” Allah then replies, “I swear by
My Majesty, Greatness and Highness that today I shall give the best
reward for your sake, and I shall punish severely because of you.”

The Imam (A) continued, “Then the Qur’an approaches a follower of ours
and says to him, “do you know me I am the Qur’an for which you kept
awake the whole night and faced sufferings in your life. Come let us go
to Almighty Allah.

” The Qur’an then will say, “Lord, this servant of yours was very close
to me and very careful about me. He would love others because of me and
would hate others just because of me.” Allah, the most High, will then
say, “Let my servant enter Paradise and let him be dressed from the
garments of the heaven and be crowned.” Then he is presented to the
Qur’an.

Then the Qur’an is asked “Are you happy with the rewards given to your
friend” The Qur’an will say, “Lord, I see this as a small reward, give
him all the good things.” Allah then will say, “I swear by my Majesty,
Honour and Highness I shall reward him and others like him with five
things with all the good things: I shall give them eternal youth,
health, richness, happiness and life.”19

Imam Sadiq (A) said: ‘The faithful son of Adam will be summoned for the
reckoning and the Qur’an will go before him in the most beautiful of
form and say: ‘O Lord, I am the Qur’an and this is your faithful servant
who used to tire himself by reciting me and spend long nights reading me
and his eyes would stream when he spent the nights in prayer, so please
him just as he has pleased me.’ Almighty Allah will say: ‘My servant
open your right hand, then he will fill it with Allah’s Ridwan and he
will fill his left hand with the Allah’s mercy then he will be told:
‘This garden of 18 Wasa’el al-Shi‘ah ila-Tah}s}eel Masa’el al-Shari‘ah,
compiled by Muhammad ibn Hasan al-H{urr al-Ameli, volume 6, from p165
onwards. The work is also referred to as “Wasa’el” for short.

19 ibid, p165 Paradise is free to you so recite and ascend, so for
every verse he recites he will ascend a station.’20

**The Believer and the Qur’an**

Imam S{a\>diq (A) said: ‘it is imperative that the believer does not
die before learning the Qur’an or be in the process of learning it.’21
Allah’s Messenger (S) said: ‘Allah does not punish the heart which is a
vessel for the Qur’an.’22 Allah’s Messenger (S) said: ‘The best of you
is the one who learns the Qur’an and teaches it.’23

In one of his speeches cited in Nahj-ul-Bala\>ghah, sermon 110, Imam
Ali (A) said: “Learn ye the Qur’an for it is the best of speech, and
study it for it is the springtime of the heart. Seek cure by its light
for it heals the breast, and recite it beautifully for it is the most
beneficial of narratives.

The learned man who acts without using his knowledge is as the confused
ignorant man who does not awake and rid himself from his ignorance; in
fact the case against him is greater, and regret is more fitting for
him, and in the sight of Allah he is the most blameworthy.”

Allah’s Messenger (S) said: “Allah will crown the parents of the one
who teaches his child the Qur’an with a kingly crown and clothe them in
robes the like of which has never been seen before.”24

Allah’s Messenger (S) said: “The people of the Qur’an are the people of
Allah and His elect.”25 Allah’s Messenger (S) said: “The best worship is
the recitation of

the Qur’an.”26
20 ibid, p166
21 ibid, p167
22 ibid, p167
23 ibid, p167
24 ibid, p168
25 ibid, p168
26 ibid, p168

The Imam (A) said: “The Qur’an is riches; there are no riches without
it, and no poverty after it.”27 Allah’s Messenger said: “The most noble
and honourable of my nation are those who bear the Qur’an, and the
people of the night (who worship Allah during the hours of
darkness).”28

Allah’s Messenger (S) said: “This Qur’an is the etiquette of Allah so
learn his etiquette as much as you can.” He also said: “This Qur’an is
the Rope of Allah and it is the Elucidating Light, and the Beneficial
Cure . . . it is the stronghold for those who adhere to it and salvation
for those who follow it.”29

Allah’s Messenger (S) also said: “Whoever reads the Qur’an in order to
learn it by heart, Allah will allow him to enter the garden and his
intercession will be accepted for ten of his family who had been
condemned to the fire.”30 The Imam (A) said: “The bearers of the Qur’an
in this world are the wise men of the people of paradise on the day of
resurrection.”31

Imam Ali (A) said: “If the teacher says to a boy: say: ‘In the Name of
Allah The Beneficent The Merciful’ and the pupil says:

‘In The Name of Allah The Beneficent The Merciful’ Allah will give
absolution to the boy and to his parents, and to the teacher.”32 The
Qur’an – the Interceder Isha\>q ibn Gha\>lib narrates from Imam
S{a\>diq, (A), who said, “On the day of judgement when all people are
brought back to life at one place, a person will appear in such a
beautiful form that no one would have ever seen such beauty before. The
faithful will look at the individual, who is in fact the Qur’an, and
will say that

27 ibid, p168
28 ibid, p168
29 ibid, p168
30 ibid, p169
31 ibid, p169
32 ibid, p169

he is from our people but he has the best form that we have ever seen.
This individual goes to the Divine throne and stands to its right. The
Almighty Lord will say to the Qur’an, “I swear by My Majesty, Greatness
and Highness that I shall honour those who have honoured and respected
you and disgrace those who disrespected you.”33

Abil-Ja\>rood narrated from Imam Ba\>qir (A) who has narrated from the
holy Prophet who has said, “On the day of judgement I will be the first
to come to Almighty Allah then the holy Qur’an then my family – the Ahl
al-Bayt –and then my nation. Then I will ask them about how they treated
my family and the holy Qur’an.”

The holy Prophet (S) said, “One who reads the holy Qur’an and then
thinks that someone else has received something better, such person has
belittled what Allah has made great, and has considered great what Allah
has belittled.”34

T{alh}ah ibn Zayd has narrated from Imam S{a\>diq (A) who said, “In
this Qur’an is the torch of guidance and the light for darkness. So let
one who wishes to polishes his [heart’s] vision do so [by the light of
Qur’an to enable him to gain clear understanding], and open his eyes for
the light [of the Qur’an], for thinking is the lifeline of heart of the
alert just as one with light torch walks in the darkness with the
light.”35

Soma’ah has narrated from Imam S{a\>diq (A) who has said, “while
reading the Qur’an, when one comes across a verse of the Qur’an that
contains warning or about making a request, one should pray to Allah for
salvation, and for protection from punishment and Hell fire and request
Allah the best.”36

33 ibid, p169
34 ibid, p170
35 ibid, p170
36 ibid, p171

Al-Sakooni has narrated from Imam S{a\>diq (A) who narrates from his
fathers from the holy Prophet who said, “When commotions envelope you
like a dark night, seek refuge in the holy Qur’an, for it is an
interceder and is interceded, and it is a claimant whose testimony is
held true. Whoever puts it ahead of him [as his guide] it will guide him
to Paradise, and whoever [ignores it and] puts it behind his back it
will drive him to Hell.

It is the guide that guides to the best path, and it is a book in which
there is detail, explanation, and proof. It is the discerner but not in
jest. It has an outward and an inward [dimension]37, its outward
dimension is judgement, and its inward is knowledge. Its outward is
elegant, and its inward is deep.

It has stars and further to those stars there are [further] star.38 Its
marvels cannot be tallied, and its wonders never cease. In it are the
lanterns of guidance, the lighthouses of wisdom, and the guide to
understanding for those who seek the description [of the Qur’an]. So let
one who wishes to polishes his [heart’s] vision do so [by the light of
Qur’an to enable him to gain clear understanding] and let his eyes see
the fact.

He will thus be saved from destruction, and freed from entanglement.
Thinking is the lifeline of the heart39of the alert just as one with
light torch walks in the darkness with the light. So make sure that seek
your salvation in the best form, and stop approaching and dealing with
doubtful [or devious issues].”40

37 In a hadith from Imam Ba\>qir peace be upon him, it is stated: the
Qur’an’s da\>hir (outward manifestation) is its tanzeel (revelation),
and its inward) is its ta’weel (interpretation).

38 In the original Arabic, by the term ‘stars’ it is probably meant
‘illuminating’ and ‘guides’. So the hadith probably means: “It has star
or illuminating verses that guide to others, and one follows from
another. They guide to the laws of Allah that in turn guide the people
to His Pleasure.” Allah and His messenger know best. Editor.

39 i.e. the mind. 40 ibid, p171

The Prophet and the Qur’an Allah’s Messenger said: “I am astonished at
how I do not grow old when I read the Qur’an.”41 The People of the
Qur’an and their Merit Imam S{a\>diq has narrated from Imam Ali, (A),
who said in a long statement about the pious people, “At night they
array their feet, stand up (for prayers) and recite the holy Qur’an one
part (juz’) after another, reciting it beautifully. They make their
souls to feel sad and reading the holy Qur’an makes their sadness
increase.

They weep for their sins and the pains of the cuts in their wounded
feelings. Whenever they come across a verse of the holy Qur’an that
speaks of warnings they open wide the ears of their hearts to them,
their hairs standing on end, their hearts frightened as they imagine the
roaring and the pounding of the flames of the Hell fire striking against
their ears. And whenever they come across a verse of the holy Qur’an
that speaks of good news and encouragements they incline on them with
hope and their souls filled with delight of reaching such goals.”42

Imam Ba\>qir, (A), said: The Commander of the Faithful, (A), said:
“Shall I inform you about the true learned scholar? He is the one who
does not invoke in the people a despair of the mercy of Allah, nor does
he invoke in them a sense of security from the punishment of Allah, nor
does he invoke hopelessness from the soothing mercy of Allah. He does
not give licence to disobey Allah and does not neglect the Qur’an
seeking other than it.

Indeed there is no good in a knowledge in which there is not a deep
understanding, nor is there any good in a recital of the

41 ibid, p171
42 ibid, p172

Qur’an in which there is no pondering, nor is there any good in an act
of worship in which there is no heartfelt comprehension.”43 Allah’s
Messenger said: “The people of the Qur’an have reached the highest
degree of all the children of Adam, apart from the prophets and
messengers. Therefore do not belittle their rights for they have been
assigned by Almighty Allah a lofty station.

”44 Allah’s Messenger (S) said: “The noble and honourable people of my
nation are those who bear the Qur’an, and the people of the night [who
worship Allah during the hours of darkness]”45 Allah’s Messenger said:
“The bearers of Qur’an are the people with best knowledge of the truth
in Paradise.”46

Imam Hasan al-Askari (A) has said in his commentary of the holy Qur’an
narrating from his grandfathers, from the holy Prophet (S), “The bearers
or upholders of the Qur’an are specially favoured with the mercy of
Allah, they are clothed from the light of Allah, are taught the words of
Allah, and have been drawn near to Allah.

Whoever loves them has loved Allah and whoever is hostile to them is
hostile to Allah. Allah repels the misfortunes of the world from one who
listens to the Qur’an, and repels the misfortunes of the hereafter from
the one who recites it. I swear by the One in Whose hands is Muhammad’s
soul, that listening, with faith and understanding,

to the Qur’an being recited is of greater reward than gold the amount
of [mount] Thabir spent for a good cause, and the reward for reciting
the Qur’an, with faith and understanding, is greater than whatever there
is between the Throne and below the centre of the earth.”47 Fodayl ibn
Yasar has narrated from Imam S{a\>diq (A) who has said, “One who
memorizes the Qur’an and lives according to its

43 ibid, p173
44 ibid, p174
45 ibid, p174
46 ibid, p175

guidance will have equal ranks with the honourable and virtuous divine
ambassadors.”48

It is narrated from Imam S{a\>diq (A) who said, “One who memorizes the
holy Qur’an with difficulty, because of weaker memory, receives twice as
much reward.”49 The Youths and Reciting the Qur’an

Related from Imam S{a\>diq (A) who said: “If one reads the Qur’an in
his youth as a true believer, the Qur’an will blend with his flesh and
blood, and Allah places him alongside the pious and noble ambassadors,
and on the day of resurrection the Qur’an will be his protector saying:
‘O Lord, every doer of deeds has received the reward for his deeds
except for him whose work was with me, so let him have the noblest of
your gifts.

Then Almighty Allah will clothe him in two robes of Paradise and the
crown of honour will be placed upon his head. Then the Qur’an will be
asked: ‘Is this to your satisfaction?’ The Qur’an will answer: ‘O Lord I
desire for him something better than this.’ So he will be given security
in his right hand and everlasting life in his left then he will be
ushered into Paradise and will be told: ‘Recite a verse and for every
verse ascend a station.

’ Then the Qur’an will be asked: ‘Have We treated him to your
satisfaction?’ The Qur’an will answer ‘Yes.’ (The Imam went on to say):
‘Whoever recites of the Qur’an a great amount, keeps [reciting] it and
undergoes hardship due to the difficulty of memorisation Allah will give
him the reward of this twice over.”50

Aba\>n ibn Taghlib has narrated from Imam S{a\>diq (A) who said, “He
who has both the Qur’an and the faith his example is like that of the
citron with nice taste and aroma, and the example of he who

47 ibid, p175
48 ibid, p176
49 ibid, p176
50 ibid, p177-178

does not have the Qur’an and the faith is like that of h}andalah
(colocynth) which is bitter and has no good aroma.”51 Fod}ayl ibn Yasar
has narrated from the Imam Sadiq (A) who has narrated from the holy
Prophet who said, “Learn the Qur’an; for on the day of judgement it will
come to his companion in the form of a most beautiful young person of
pale complexion and will speak to him saying, “I am the Qur’an for which
you kept awake so often and endured thirst during the heat of midday,
dried up your mouth and let your tears flow ... I have good news for
you. Then the man will receive a crown,

and peace and security will be placed on his right hand and eternal
life in Paradise in his left, and he will be dressed with two dresses of
Paradise and then he will be told, “recite and rise.” For each verse
that he recites he will ascend one degree, and his parents, if they are
of the believers, each will receive two garments of Paradise and they
will be told that this is because of your teaching your child the holy
Qur’an.

”52 AlAsbagh ibn Nabatah narrates from Amir al-Mo’mineen - Imam Ali -
saying: “Allah, seeing people of the earth knowingly committing sins,
decides to punish them all, but when He finds the old people going for
prayer and the children learning the holy Qur’an, He then treats them
with His mercy and postpones the punishment.”53


