The Trader and the Qur’an
=========================

Imam Sadiq said, “What stops a trader, when he returns home from work,
from reading a surah of the Qur’an before he goes to sleep? For he will
be accredited with ten good deeds for each verse he reads, and ten bad
deeds erased from him.”96

Imam Sadiq has narrated from the holy Prophet who said, “One who reads
ten verses a night he will not be registered among the ghafileen
[heedless], and one who reads fifty verses a night be will be registered
with the dha\>kireen [those who remember Allah], and one who reads one
hundred verses every night he will be registered with the qaniteen [the
worshiper], and one who reads

93 ibid, p199
94 ibid, p200
95 ibid, p200
96 ibid, p201

two hundred verses he will be registered with the kha\>she‘een [those
who are humble and fearful before Allah], and one who reads three
hundred verses, he will be registered with the fa\>’ezeen [the
victorious ones], and one who reads five hundred verses he will be
registered with the mujtahideen [those striving for the cause of Allah],
and one who reads one thousand verses one Quint}a\>r will be registered
for him and a Quint}ar is fifteen thousand (in some texts it is stated
as being fifty thousand) Mithqa\>l of gold and a Mithqa\>l is twenty
four Quira\>t}, the smallest of which is the size of the mount Oh}od and
the biggest is that of the expanse between heaven and earth.”97

Abu H{amza al-Thama\>li narrates from Imam Ba\>qir, “One who reads the
entire Qur’an in Mecca in one week or less than a week or more and
completes it on Friday, Allah will write for him the reward of all the
good deeds that have taken place since the first Friday in this world to
the last Friday that will come. The same would be if reading is
completed on other days.” 98

Ja\>bir al-Ans}a\>ri narrates from Imam Ba\>qir, “everything has a
spring, and the spring of the Qur’an is the month of Ramad}a\>n.” 99
Reciting the Holy Qur’an from the Script Imam S{a\>diq, (A), said, “One
who recites the Qur’an from a copy of the Qur’an he will enhance his
insight and lighten his parents’ burden even if they were
non-believers”.100

It is narrated from the holy Prophet (S) who said, “There is nothing
more difficult for the Satan (to tackle) than someone’s reading the
Qur’an from a copy (of the Qur’an)”.101

97 ibid, p202
98 ibid, p203
99 ibid, p203
100 ibid, p204
101 ibid, p204

Isha\>q ibn Amma\>r said, I asked Imam S{a\>diq, (A), “Sir, I have
learnt the holy Qur’an by heart. Which would be more rewarding, reciting
the Qur’an from memory, or from a mus}-h}af (copy of the holy book)?”
The Imam, (A), said, “indeed read it while looking at the mus}-h}af for
it is more rewarding [than from reciting it from memory]. Don’t you know
that looking at the mus}-h}af is an act of worship?”102

It is narrated from Abu Dharr who narrated from the Prophet, who said,
“Looking at Ali ibn Abi T{a\>lib is an act of worship, looking at one’s
parents affectionately and kindly is an act of worship, looking at the
pages of the Qur’an is an act of worship, and looking at the Ka‘bah is
an act of worship.”103 Imam S{a\>diq, (A), quotes his father who said,
“I admire that there be a mus}-h}af [copy of the holy Qur’an] in the
house with which Allah repels the devils.”104

Imam S{a\>diq, (A), said, “Three things complain to Allah, the Most
Glorious: a derelict mosque where people of the mosque do not pray in, a
scholar among the ignorant people, and mus}-h}af left on a shelf covered
in dust that no one reads from.”105

**Reciting the Qur’an**

Abdullah ibn Sulayma\>n has said, “I asked Imam S{a\>diq, (A), about
the verse .recite the Qur’an distinctly.106 The Imam said Amir-ul-
Mu’minin Imam Ali, (A) has said, “read it clearly, not in a rapid and
hectic form like in reciting poetry, nor scatter it like grains of sand,
but strike with it your hardened hearts, and your concern should not be
[reaching] the end of the surah”.107

102 ibid, p204-205
103 ibid, p205
104 ibid, p206
105 ibid, p206
106 The Qur’an, (73):4
107 ibid, p207

Abu Bas}ir has narrated from Imam S{a\>diq, (A), who said about the
verse .recite the Qur’an distinctly., “It means that you should pause,
[as and when punctuation rules require] and recite it in a nice
voice.”108

Imam S{a\>diq said, “Read the Qur’an with correct diacritics for it is
Arabic, [and diacritics preserve its accuracy]”.109 Imam S{a\>diq said,
“It is discouraged to read the whole surah of ‘tawh}eed’ in one breath
[without a pause between its verses]”.110 It is narrated from Omm
Salamah who has said, “The Prophet, (S), used to read the Qur’an pausing
between the verses.”111 Imam S{a\>diq, (A), said, “The Qur’an is
revealed in sorrow and it should be read in the same way.”

Abdullah ibn Sinan has narrated from Imam S{a\>diq, (A), who said,
“Allah, the Most High, told Moses “Whenever you stand before Me, stand
as a humble deprived person and when you read Torah let me hear it in a
sorrowing voice.”112

It is narrated from H{afs} who said, “I never saw anyone more afraid
(of Allah) about himself than Mossa\> al-Ka\>dim, (A), nor anyone more
hopeful (for Allah’s mercy) than him. He would recite the Qur’an with
sorrow, and when he recited it, it was as if he was addressing
someone.”113

**Reading the Qur’an silently or aloud**

Imam Baqir, (A), said, “One who recites the surah “al-Qadr” (\#97) with
a loud voice, he would be like one who has drawn his sword for Allah’s
cause and one who reads it silently, he would be like

108 ibid, p207 109 ibid, p206 110 ibid, p207 111 ibid, p208 112 ibid,
p208 113 ibid, p209 43 one who is killed in Allah’s cause, and one who
reads it ten times has one thousand of his sins deleted.”114 Mo’a\>wiyah
ibn Ammar has said, “I told Imam S{a\>diq, “one does not think that he
has read anything from the Qur’an or the prayers unless he says them
loudly.” The Imam, (A), said, “It does not matter. Imam Zayn al-Abidin,
(A), would recite the holy Qur’an in the most pleasant tune and he would
read it loudly such that every one in the house would hear him. Imam
Ba\>qir, had the best reciting tune and he would recite the holy Qur’an
loudly during the night and whoever would pass by would stop to listen
to his recitation.”115

It is narrated from Abu Dharr who narrated from the Prophet, who said
in his recommendations to him, “O Aba Dharr! Lower your voice when
walking in a funeral procession, in combat, and when hearing the
recitation of the Qur’an.”116

Abdullah ibn Sina\>n has narrated from Imam Sadiq who has narrated from
the Prophet, who said, “Read the holy Qur’an in Arabic cadence and
voice, and never recite it in the cadence of the sinful and people
committing major sins; for after me will come people who reverberate
their tune when reciting the Qur’an as in singing, and as in the hymns
of monks, going no further than their throats; their hearts are
perverted and so too are the hearts of those who are impressed by their
state.”117

Ali ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali narrates from Imam Mossa al- Ka\>dim, who
said, “When ‘voice’ were mentioned before him, upon this he said, “when
one passed by when Ali ibn al-Husayn

114 ibid, p209
115 ibid, p209
116 ibid, p210
117 ibid, p210

[Zayn al-Abidin] was reciting the Qur’an, the person would be enchanted
by the Imam’s beautiful recitation.”118 Abdullah ibn Sina\>n has
narrated from the holy Prophet who said, “For everything there is an
ornament and the ornament of the Qur’an is fine reciting.”119

Imam Ali Rid}a\>, said, “The holy Prophet said, “beautify the Qur’an
with your voice, for a nice voice gives beauty to the Qur’an.”120 The
Etiquettes of reciting and listening to the Qur’an It is narrated from
Ja\>bir who said, “I asked Imam Baqir about a people who on hearing some
of the Qur’an or anything about it faint to an extent that even if the
hands or legs of one of them were amputated they would not notice.” The
Imam, (A), said, “Glory be to Allah. They were not told to behave as
such. It is only serenity, soft heartedness, tears, fear and
sorrow.”121

Imam S{a\>diq, (A), was asked, “When one reads from the holy Qur’an is
it obligatory for others to keep silent and listen to it?” The Imam
replied, “Yes, when the Qur’an is recited it is mandatory for you to
keep silent and listen to it.”122

Ali ibn Mughirah said, “I asked Imam Ka\>dim (A), “My father asked your
grandfather about reading the whole Qur’an in one night”, so your
grandfather said to him, “[yes] every night.” Then he said, “in the
month of Ramad}a\>n?” so your grandfather said to him, “[yes] in the
month of Ramad}a\>n.” My father said, “Yes, according to my ability.” So
my father used to read the holy Qur’an forty times in the whole month of
Ramadan. Then after my father I would read the holy Qur’an some times
more and

118 ibid, p211
119 ibid, p211
120 ibid, p212
121 ibid, p213
122 ibid, p214, this is in reference to the Qur’anic verse 7:204 .when
the Qur’an is being recited, listen to it and be silent, may be you will
receive mercy..

some time less than him according to my time, work, energy, and
laziness. On the day of Eid after the month of Ramad}a\>n, I would
assign the [reward for] reading the holy Qur’an once for the holy
Prophet, one for Imam Ali, one for Lady Fatimah and one for each Imam
until yourself and I assigned the reward for reciting the holy Qur’an
once for you, and this is from the time I have been doing this. Will
there be any thing for me in this?” The Imam said, “because of this, on
the Day of Judgment, you will be with them.” I said: Allah is great!
This [honour] is for me? The Imam said, “Yes” three times.123

Imam S{a\>diq (A) narrated that Allah’s messenger came to some youth
from Ans}a\>r and said to them, “I want to recite to you, and whoever
weeps, Paradise will be for him, and then he recited .the disbelievers
will be driven into Hell in groups.... to the end of the surah. Every
one wept except one young man who said, “O messenger of Allah I tried to
weep but no tears came out.” The holy Prophet said, “I repeat for you,
if any one who would try to weep, Paradise will be for him.” He repeated
and people wept and the young man made himself to weep and they all went
to Paradise.”124

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far al-S{a\>diq from his forefathers who
have narrated from the holy Prophet, peace be up on them, who said,
“learn the Qur’an in its Arabic form”.125 Imam S{a\>diq, (A), said,
“Learn Arabic for it is the speech in which Allah has spoken to His
creatures and talked to the people of the past.”126

Narrated from Imam al-Jawa\>d, who said, “There are no two people who
are equal in position and religion except that the preferred one in the
sight of Allah is the well mannered one

123 ibid, p218
124 ibid, p219
125 ibid, p220
126 ibid, p220

amongst them.” I said, “I can see his virtue in the eyes of the people
in gatherings and meetings but what is his virtue in the sight of
Allah?” The Imam said, “By his reading the Qur’an the way it was
descended, and by his supplication without tunes; for supplication with
tunes are not ascended to Allah.”127

Imam S{a\>diq, said, “The Prophet said, “A non-Arab of my nation reads
the Qur’an in his non-Arabic way but the angels raise his reading in its
Arabic form.”128

**4. Imam ah**

The ima\>mah – as it is defined – is the general leadership in matters
of the religion and the affairs of the world for an individual in lieu
of the prophet peace be upon him and his pure progeny. It is mandatory
from the rational view point,

for it, the imamah, is a grace. And we know with certainty that if the
people have a guiding leader who is obeyed and who applies justice to
defend the victim against the offender and discourages the offender from
his offence and aggression, those people are closer to righteousness and
happiness, and most distant from corruption and misfortune.129 The
discussion of ima\>mah follows from that of

127 ibid, p221
128 ibid, p221

129 The following example may be considered to elucidate on this
matter. It is said that after the end of World War II, Iraq and Japan
were in similar conditions from the viewpoint of destruction, ruin, and
under-development. But after a period of time, Japan managed to catch up
and even surpass the most powerful western states in technology,
manufacture, progress and prosperity.

Iraq on the other hand remained ruined, backward, impoverished, and
underdeveloped needing to import everything it needs even its wheat,
meat, and even thread and needle. Analysts say that the reason for this
difference between these two countries lies with the leaders’ competence
in Japan on the one hand, and the incompetence of those who ruled Iraq,
on the other. In her famous speech . . .

Lady Fatimah al-Zahra\>’, the immaculate daughter of the Prophet
Muhammad, said “if the governance were left to its rightful owners, and
they had not snapped up khila\>fah [or the leadership of the Muslim
Ommah after the Prophet Muhammad], all aspects of people’s life in this
world and in the hereafter would have prospered and perfected, and no
two would have disputed”.

prophethood and its details, for it is a continuation to prophethood
and an extension to it, and it is mandatory in it everything that is
mandatory in prophethood such as infallibility [‘es}mah], purity

[t}aharah] and such matters as his appointment by Almighty Allah, and
identification by name. In a nut shell, the imam has everything common
with the prophet except for revelation [wah}y], for the imam does not
receive wah}y in the common sense of the word.

So, just as Almighty Allah appoints the prophets and the messengers
peace be upon them, He also appoints the ima\>m as the was } i (deputy,
heir, and executor of his will and the teachings revealed to) the
Prophet peace be upon him and his pure progeny, and his caliph
(successor).

Indeed Almighty Allah appointed for our prophet Muhammad, peace be upon
him and his pure progeny, twelve was } i (executor of his
will/heir/deputy) and caliph (successors), and they are the renowned
Twelve Imams known to all the Muslims.130 In order they are as
follows:

130 This is in reference to the speech of the prophet Muhammad peace be
upon him and his pure progeny who said, “The caliphs after me are 12”.
This hadith is accepted by all Muslims. See for example al-Khis}a\>l
vol. 2, p467 under the heading “the caliphs and the imams after the
prophet”, al-Irsha\>d vol. 2, p345, Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 2, p 447,
A‘la\>m al-Wara\>, rukn 4, part 1, p 381, The Book of Sulaym, p 141, and
the six Sunni Sih}ah} reference books. For example, in S{ah}ih} Muslim,
vol. 3, book of Ima\>rah, pp 1452-1453, it is reported the prophet said,
“Islam is established until the day of resurrection, or there will be
upon the Muslims twelve caliphs all of them from Quraysh.” This hadith,
and many like it,

is reported in the Sunni S{ih}a\>h} reference books such as S{ah}ih
Bukha\>ri, book of Ah}ka\>m, hadith \# 6682, Sunan al-Tirmidhi, book of
Fitan, hadith \# 2149, Sunan Abi Dawood, book of al-Mahdi, vol. 4, p106,
hadith 3731, [Dar al-Fikr], Musnad Ahmad, book of al-Muktherin min
al-S{ah}a\>bah, hadith 3593, Musnad Ahmad, book of al-Basriyeen, hadith
19875, Musnad Ahmad, vol. 5, pp 86-90, 92, 93, 98, 10, 101, [Qurtubat
Misr] etc. The prominent Sunni scholar al-H{a\>fid al-Qunduzi al-H{anafi
quotes the prophet in his book, Yana\>bi’ al-Mawaddah, p 529, as saying,
“I am the master of the prophets and Ali is the master of the
successors, and indeed my successors after me are twelve, the first of
whom is Ali and the last is al-Qa\>’em al-Mahdi.”

1. Imam Amir al-Mo’mineen,131 Ali ibn Abi-Talib, the Prophet’s cousin
and the husband of his daughter Fa\>t}imah al-Zahra’, peace be upon them
all.

2. Imam Hasan, son of Imam Ali and Fa\>t}imah al-Zahra\>’, daughter of
the Prophet, (A).

3. Imam Husayn, the Martyr, son of Imam Ali and Fatimah al-Zahra’,
daughter of the Prophet, (A).

4. Imam Zayn-al-Abidin, Ali son of al-Husayn, (A).

5. Imam al-Ba\>qir, Muhammad son of Ali, (A).

6. Imam al-S{a\>diq, Ja’far son of Muhammad, (A).

7. Imam al-Ka\>dim, Mossa\> son of Ja’far, (A).

8. Imam al-Rid}a\>, Ali son of Mossa\>, (A).

9. Imam al-Jawa\>d, Muhammad son of Ali, (A).

10. Imam al-Ha\>di, Ali son of Muhammad, (A).

11. Imam al-Askari, Hasan son of Ali, (A).

12. Imam al-Mahdi, Muhammad son of Hasan, al-Qa’em (The Upholder of
Allah’s command), al-Muntadar (The Awaited One) (may Allah hasten his
reappearance).132 131 On instructions from Almighty Allah, the prophet
exclusively awarded Imam Ali (A) the title of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen, meaning
“the Commander of the Believers”.

132 Note: All the Imams after Imam Hussain (A) are his descendants. On
various occasions the prophet Muhammad defined himself, his daughter
Fa\>t}imah al- Zahra\>’ (A), and all these twelve Imams as the
Ahl-ul-Bayt (A). Thus every time Ahl-ul-Bayt is mentioned, only these
fourteen infallible individuals are being referred to. They are also
referred to in the Qur’an in 33:33.

In his last days the prophet used to say to the people: ‘I leave with
you the two momentous entities, as long as you adhere to them two you
will never go astray - the book of Allah, and my kin the people of my
household. Indeed these two will never separate from one another until
they arrive at the well (of Kawthar in Paradise)’. This hadith and many
others similar to it have been reported by many These Imams are Allah’s
authorities upon all creation, and His Messenger’s blessed successors.
They are all from the sacred light of Allah’s Messenger, peace be upon
him and his pure family.

They were like Allah’s Messenger in knowledge, forbearance, moral
excellence, piety, justice, immunity from sin or error, high moral
values, noble disposition, and all other praiseworthy attributes . . .
and how can it be otherwise while they are his successors and deputies,
and leaders of all creation and Allah’s authorities over all mankind
after the prophet.

Describing the role and the significance of Imam and Ima\>mah, Imam
Rida (A) states:

‘It is only by the means of the Ima\>mah that Islam is established and
its aims achieved. Through it the order of the Muslims is accomplished,
the prosperity of the world attained, and the honour and the glory of
the faithful are safeguarded. Ima\>mah is the growing and ongoing root
of Islam as well as its exalted branch.

It is only through the leadership of the Imam133 that completeness is
attained in daily prayers, zaka\>h, fasting, hajj, jiha\>d, tribute,
income, executing the H{odood and jurisdictions, and safeguarding the
borders of the Muslim lands.’

In addition to numerous prophetic hadith in this respect, there are
many verses in the holy Qur’an regarding the vital issue of Ima\>mah.
One such verse that the above hadith is referring to, and therefore it
is supported by, is: .O Messenger! Convey that that has been revealed to
you from your Lord, and if you do not, you will not have conveyed His
Message.134

S{ah}a\>bah, and narrators and have been quoted in major references,
e.g. the S{ih}a\>h, such as: S{ah}ih} Muslim, volume 4 page 123,
Dar-al-Ma’a\>rif, Beirut. Musnad Ahmad ibn H{anbal, vol. 3, pp 17, 26,
59, Dar-Sadir, Beirut. Al-Tirmidhi, vol. 5, pp 662-663,
Dar-Ihya-al-Turath-al-Arabi.

133 i.e. the Imam who has been chosen by Allah.

134 The Qur’an: The Table Spread (5): 67.

In this holy verse Almighty Allah is equating the proclamation of a
particular message to the fulfilment of His entire message, and Allah
warns that failure to make this proclamation is tantamount to failing
His entire mission. This holy verse was revealed to Prophet Muhammad (S)
at Ghadir Khum on the 18th of Dhil- H{ijjah year 10 H, only two months
before the death of the Prophet of Islam (S). The particular message or
revelation concerned the appointment of Imam Ali (A) as the immediate
successor or caliph of Allah’s messenger (S).

Prophet Muhammad (S) had always, and throughout the 23 years of his
mission stated that Ali is his successor. After this revelation, and on
direct instructions from Almighty Allah, the prophet (S) appointed Ali
ibn Abi Talib (A) as Amir-ul-Mo’mineen and his first caliph and Imam of
his Ommah135. The significance and importance of this appointment is
indicated by the comparison Almighty Allah makes between this
appointment and the mission of the prophet (S), which is Islam.

In this holy verse Almighty Allah equates the appointment of Imam Ali
(A) to the entire mission of the prophet (S), which is the final
revelation for mankind. Furthermore Almighty Allah then goes on to
emphasise that without the Ima\>mah (of Imam Ali (A)), the mission of
the prophet (S) is to no avail, and thus the above hadith by Imam Rida
(A).

In the following section, a brief biography of them is presented
starting with that of the gracious daughter of the holy Prophet and the
wife of the was } i, Fatimah al-Zahra’ (A). The Prophet’s Daughter,
Fatimah al-Zahra She is Fatimah al-Zahra’, her father was the Prophet
Muhammad ibn Abdullah, her mother was the great Lady Khadijah – the
Mother of the Believers. Sayyidah Fa\>t}imah’s husband was the 135 On
instructions from Almighty Allah, the prophet exclusively awarded Imam
Ali (A) the title of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen, meaning the “Commander of the
Believers”.

master of the Aws } iya\>’ Commander of the Believers [Amir-ul-
Mo’mineen136] Ali ibn Abi-T{a\>lib peace be upon them, and all the pure
Imams are her sons and grandsons and great grandsons, peace be upon them
all.

She was born on 20th of Jama\>di-II forty-five years after the birth of
the holy Prophet (S). She died a martyr and oppressed on Tuesday the 3rd
of Jama\>di-II137 in the year 11 Hijrah, when she was only eighteen
years. Imam Ali (A) prepared her body for burial and buried her in the
holy city of Medinah, and concealed her grave and kept its location
secret in accordance with her specific will [to her husband Imam Ali] as
a protest against those who wronged her and usurped her right.

She was like her father in worship and asceticism, moral excellence and
piety, and Almighty Allah has revealed many verses of the holy Qur’an in
her praise and about her station.138 Allah’s Messenger gave her the
title Sayyidatu Nisa’ al-Alameen [meaning “Master of the ladies of the
worlds”], and gave her the agnomen Ommo\_Abeeha\> [meaning “mother of
her father” out of his sheer love for her]. He loved her immensely and
he used to greatly glorify and respect her. When she used go to him, the
Prophet would stand up, out of respect for her, lovingly greet her and
would give her his place to sit, and kiss her hands, and he used to
say,

“Whatever pleases Fa\>t}imah, pleases Allah, and whatever angers
Fatimah, angers Allah”.139 136 On instructions from Almighty Allah, the
prophet exclusively awarded Imam Ali (A) the title of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen,
meaning the “Commander of the Believers”.

137 There are also reports that state that her death was 75 or 95 days
after the prophet’s death. 138 See “Fatimah al-Zahra’ in the holy
Qur’an” by the author Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Sa\>diq Shirazi.

Lady Fat}imah and Imam Ali had two sons; Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn,
and also a third son, Moh}sen, who was miscarried because of the
horrific injuries his mother sustained.140 They also had two daughters;
Lady Zaynab and Lady Omm-Kulthoum (A). Anyone who follows the sirah or
way of life of Sayyidah Fa\>t}imah al-Zahra\>’ would find that this lady
is a perfect paradigm, and a school in the various domains of life ...
and therefore an ideal exemplar for every woman, and every man.

She was the one who supported her father in his call to Islam, and she,
together with a few other faithful believers in the valley of Abu Talib,
sustained severe hardship perpetrated by the idolaters of Quraysh . . .
she was the one who supported Amir-ul-Mu’minin Ali (A), who strengthened
the foundation of Islam, after the death of the Prophet (S).

She suffered the severe pains and cruelty of the difficult
circumstances that surrounded her when she chose the path that leads to
the hereafter instead of that leading to this world.

She married her cousin Amir-ul-Mu’minin, Ali (A) and joined him along
with her father Prophet Muhammad (S), in the support and strengthening
of both the Mission (Risalah) and the Leadership (Ima\>mah), as well as
forming the foundation of an Islamic society 139 al-Ih}tija\>j, Ahmad
ibn Ali al-T{abarsi, vol. 2, p 354. In another narration the Prophet
addresses Sayyidah Fatimah herself saying, “O Fatimah! Indeed Almighty
Allah, angers to your anger, and contents to your contentment.”

140 When the house of Fa\>t}imah al-Zahra\>’ (A) was stormed by a group
of the “companions” of the Prophet Muhammad, she sustained horrific
injuries, which led to the immediate death of her unborn baby son
Moh}sen, and her death later on. The attack on the family of the prophet
Muhammad (S) took place almost immediately after the burial of the body
of the prophet Muhammad. The attack on the house of Fa\>t}imah
al-Zahra\>’ (A) was in aid of dragging Imam Ali (A) out of the house to
force him to pay homage to the newly imposed ruler under the pretext
that he is the Prophet’s successor contrary to the Prophet’s specific
instructions during his lifetime. The prophet Muhammad, on specific
instructions from the Almighty, appointed Ali ibn Abu Talib as his
immediate successor to lead the Ommah after the prophet. Translator.


and conveying the Message of Allah . . . and this is the best model and
example Muslim women could possibly follow. Lady Fatimah (A) divided the
duties of their married life with Imam Ali (A). Her responsibility was
the duties within the house and his was those without.

Imam Ba\>qir (A), said that:

“Fa\>t}imah (A) guaranteed Ali (A) the duties inside the house,
(preparing) the dough, (baking) the bread and house keeping. Ali (A)
guaranteed Fatimah all that is needed from outside the house, such as
providing the firewood and food. One day he said to her: O Fatimah do
you have something (to eat in the house)? She replied: By He who
glorified you we do not have anything to give you since three days. He
said: Why did you not inform me?

She said: Rasulollah (S) always advised me against asking you for
anything. He said to me ‘Do not ask your cousin for anything. If he
brought you something, fine! and if not then do not ask him for
anything.’

Then Imam Ali (A) left the house (seeking to provide something for the
home). He met someone and borrowed one Dina\>r from him. On his way
back, and it was night time, he met Miqda\>d al-Aswad. He said to
Miqda\>d; What brings you out at this hour? Miqda\>d replied: By He who
has glorified you, it is hunger O Amir-ul-Mu’minin!

The narrator interrupted Imam Baqir (A) and asked ‘and Rasulollah was
alive (at that time)?’ Imam Ba\>qir (A) replied ‘Yes Rasulollah was
alive.’ Imam Ali (A) said to Miqda\>d: ‘It is what brought me out too. I
have borrowed one Dina\>r which I shall give to you.’ And he gave it to
him.

Imam Ali (A) returned home and found Rasulollah (S) sitting and Fatimah
(A) praying and something covered with a cloth between them. When she
finished her prayers, she brought that thing which was some bread and
meat. He (A) said: O Fatimah! From where this comes to you? She (A)
replied: From Allah! Verily Allah provides sustenance to whom He pleases
without measure.

Rasulollah (S) said to Imam Ali (A): Shall I tell you of the like of
you and her? Imam Ali (A) replied: Yes.

Rasulollah (S) said: Your example like Zacharias when he came to see
Mary in the chamber he found her supplied with sustenance, he asked: .O
Mary! From where this comes to you? She (A) replied: From Allah! Verily
Allah provides sustenance to whom He pleases without measure.141.

Some of the other attributes that Lady Fa\>t}imah decorated herself
with, which should be the model for every society and nation who wants
to progress forward, are Zuhd or non-attachment to material things,
kindness and graciousness, altruism and selflessness, perseverance in
the face of severe hardship, and many other highly noble characters.

The story of feeding the needy referred to in the holy Qur’an in the
Surah of Mankind (76) is the best evidence for it. They gave their food,
which were only a few pieces of bread to three needy people on three
consecutive days. This is after they had vowed to fast three days for
Allah for the recovery of their two sons Hasan and Husayn from illness.
On the first day, when they wanted to break their fast, a destitute
person knocked on the door asking for some food. They all gave all their
food, leaving themselves nothing to eat that night. They did the same
thing on the next day when an orphan came to their door asking for food,
and on the third day in row they gave all their food to a captive who
came to them for 141 The holy Qur’an: The Family of ‘Emran (3): 37

help. Almighty Allah revealed an entire Surah, Mankind (76) in this
regard praising their conduct. Verse eight of the Surah reads: .And they
feed, for the love of Allah, the indigent, the orphan, and the
captive..


