Hadith From Fatimah Al-zahra(as)
================================

‘He (Allah) invented all things not from a thing which existed before,
and designed them not by emulating other samples. He created them by His
might, and gave them life by His will; not because of a need He had for
their creation, or a benefit He had for their design, except for the
establishment of His wisdom, awareness (of His creation) about His
obedience, appearance of His might, (to invite) His creation to
servitude and worship, and to glorify His invitation.

‘ . . . So my father (Muhammad (S)) rose amongst the people to guide
them. He saved them from perversion and aberration, and turned their
blindness into enlightenment, and guided them towards the right
religion, and invited them to the straight path.’

‘The holy Qur’an . . . following it leads to the pleasure of Allah,
listening to it (implementing its teachings) results in salvation.
Through it can be achieved the clear and enlightening proofs and
evidences of Allah, His forewarned prohibitions, His conspicuous
arguments, His comprehensive reasoning, His desired virtues, His
bestowed permissions, and His written divine laws.’

‘Therefore Allah set faith as the purifier, for you, from polytheism,

And (He set) the daily prayers to distance you from arrogance and
egoism, And the (giving of) Zaka\>h as the purity of your soul and the
growth of your sustenance, And rendered fasting for the firm
establishment of sincerity, And the Hajj pilgrimage for the
consolidation of the religion, And rendered justice for the
harmonisation of the hearts, And (He set) the obedience of us (the
Ahl-ul-Bayt) as the order (organising factor) for the religion, and our
leadership (the Ima\>mah) as the guarantor against disunity and
division, And Jiha\>d as the honour for Islam, and humiliating for the
infidels and hypocrites,

And perseverance as an aid for obtaining reward, And the ‘Enjoining
good and forbidding evil’ for the interest and correction of the society
and the public, And He rendered kindness to the parents as a shield from
displeasure,

And (He set) keeping bond with the kinship the cause for lengthening of
life span, ‘O Allah! Belittle myself in my eyes, and glorify and magnify
Your Station to me. Inspire me Your obedience, and the practice which
brings about Your pleasure, and (inspire me) the avoidance of anything
which may bring about Your wrath, O most merciful of all.’

**The First Imam: Imam Ali**

Imam Ali (A) is the son of Abi-T{a\>lib (A) and Fa\>t}imah daughter of
Asad (A). He is the cousin and the son-in-law of the Prophet (S), his
was } i, and the first successor of the Prophet as leader of mankind
after the prophet, and father of all the ma‘s}oom Imams (A).

Imam Ali was born – uniquely – inside the holy Ka‘bah142 on Friday the
thirteenth of Rajab, thirty years after the birth of the holy Prophet
(S) and he was fatally wounded by the sword of Ibn Muljim al-Mura\>di
(curses of Allah be upon him) – one of the Kha\>ridjites – on Friday,
the nineteenth of the holy month of Ramad}a\>n in the Mosque of Kufah,
and joined the company of the Almighty three days later at the age of
sixty three.

His body was prepared for burial by his sons Imam Hasan (A) and Imam
Husayn (A) and he was buried in Najaf where his shrine stands today.
They kept the location of his burial site secret as he instructed, in
order to be safe from transgressions and desecration by the
Kha\>ridjites, and al-H{ajja\>j, which subsequently proved valid.143
Later on, [some one hundred years later] Imam S{a\>diq and Imam Ka\>dim
made it known to the people.

He has virtues and excellent attributes that are not countable. He was
the first person to believe in the Allah’s Messenger, peace be upon him
and his pure family, and he never attributed any partner to Allah not
even for a blink of the eye, nor did he ever prostrate before an idol,
such that it became the norm to say, after the mention of his name,
karram Allah wajhah, meaning “Allah has protected and purified his
face”. In all battles victory depended on his participation and
contribution. He was a relentless and repetitive attacker, and not a
deserter [karra\>r and not farrar, he never gave his back to fighting,
and never run away, not even once. He was immaculate as a judge, such
that the Prophet said about him, “Ali is the best judge among you”.144

142 This is a measure by the Almighty to point to the station of Imam
Ali in the sight of Allah, for no other individual has ever been allowed
to be born inside the holy Ka’bah.

143 History records that al-H{ajja\>j exhumed more than one hundred
thousand graves in search of Imam Ali’s grave/coffin. Rawdat al-Jannat,
vol.2, p54. 144 Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 1, p 263. al-Ih}tija\>j, vol. 2,
p 391.

About his vast knowledge the Prophet (S) said, “I am the city of
knowledge and Ali is the gate of this city”.145 In relation to his
adherence to the Truth the Prophet (S) said, “Ali is with the Truth and
Truth is with Ali”.146 He was just in his dealings with people. He
treated people equally. He never indulged himself in the worldly
matters. He would go to the public treasury and would look at the gold
and silver and say, “O yellow (meaning gold) and O white (meaning
silver), deceive and delude other than me”.147 He would then distribute
them among the people until none remains.

He would treat the destitute with mercy and would accompany the poor
and spend time with them and would help people in need. He would speak
the truth out loud and make judgement fairly and justly. He would rule
according to the laws Almighty Allah has revealed, implement Allah’s
rules, and follow the way the Prophet followed, until goodness,
blessing, welfare and comfort became widespread and covered all the
people throughout the land.

In short, Imam Ali was like the Prophet Muhammad (S) in virtuous traits
and attributes – except for revelation and prophethood – such that
Allah, the Most High, considered Imam Ali (A) – in the verse of
muba\>halah in the Qur’an – as the Prophet himself (S).148

145 al-Amali, by al-S{aduq, p 343
146 Bih}ar al-Anwar, vol. 29, p 343.
147 Bih}ar al-Anwar, vol.39, p69, vol.40, p333.

148 The ayah of muba\>halah is as follows: .If anyone disputes with you
after the knowledge has come to you (O Muhammad) say: ‘Come! Let us
summon our sons and your sons, our women and your women, and ourselves
and yourselves, and then let us earnestly pray and invoke the curse of
Allah on those who lie’. - The Qur’an: The Family of Emran (3): 61. This
verse refers to the dispute between the Nazarenes of Najra\>n and
Allah’s messenger about the truth of his mission, and after the Prophet
presented all evidence to them and they stubbornly refused to accept all
proof of reason, Almighty Allah instructed His Messenger through this
verse to hold ibtihal with the other party, i.e. the two parties come

**Hadith from Amir-ul-Mu’minin (AS)**

On the Almighty’s attributes Imam Ali peace be upon him states:

“He cannot be conceived of by the imagination and He cannot be
determined by comprehension. He cannot be perceived by the senses and He
cannot be compared with any person. He is One but not numerable and He
is Eternal without end. He is the One who supports without being
supported.” Imam Ali (AS) also said:

‘He is Allah, the Clear Truth, truer and clearer than the eyes
perceive. The intellects cannot reach Him by any definition, since that
would be to compare Him; and the imagination cannot reach Him by any
evaluation; since that would be to give Him a likeness. There is no
beginning to His primacy and there is no end to His eternity. He is the
First and the Eternal, and He is the Everlasting without end. Foreheads
bow down before Him and lips declare His Oneness. He gave all things
limitations when He created them, so as to make it clear that He is not
like them.’ Amir-ul-Mu’minin (AS) also said:

together bringing along with them their most pious people as support,
invoking Allah’s curse against those who lie. According to this
instruction from the Almighty, Prophet Muhammad summoned the most pious
individuals he could possibly get for this cause; they were Imam Hasan
and Imam Hussain, Sayyidah Fatimah, and Imam Ali (representing ‘our
sons’, ‘our women’, and ‘our selves’ referred to in the verse). It can
be seen from this act of Allah’s messenger, who was complying with the
orders of the Almighty that Allah refers to Imam Ali in the holy Qur’an
as the ‘self of the Prophet Muhammad’. This goes to show the position
and status of Imam Ali in the sight of Almighty Allah.

Needless to say when Allah’s messenger arrived with these four
individuals (known collectively as Ahl-ul-Bayt) for the ibtihal, and the
Nazarenes saw this array of most pious and holy personalities, their
chief priest said to his fellow Nazarenes, “I see persons that the
Almighty Allah would answer any prayer or call they make! If you go
ahead with this ibtihal, all the Nazarenes would be annihilated from the
face of this earth.” It is reported that the Nazarenes decided therefore
to surrender to Allah’s messenger without going through the ibtihal.

‘Time never changes for Him so as to cause a change in His state, and
He is never in any particular place so as to entail His moving to
another place. He knows of the secrets in the minds of the secretive,
and the intimate meetings of those who meet behind closed doors, and the
thoughts and opinions of those who speculate.’

Amir-ul-Mu’minin, Imam Ali (AS) also said:

‘The eyes cannot perceive Him with the sense of sight, but the heart
can perceive Him through the realities of trust. He is close to all
things without being associated with them. He is remote from them
without being distanced from them. He speaks yet without speech. He
wills yet without wanting. He creates yet without physical means. He is
Subtle yet obscurity cannot be attributed to Him. He is Great yet
aloofness cannot be attributed to Him. He is Seeing yet sensory
perception cannot be attributed to Him. He is Compassionate but
sentimentality cannot be attributed to Him.’

Imam Ali (AS) also said:

‘The first part of the deen is knowledge of Him. The perfection of
knowledge of Him is affirmation of Him. The perfection of affirmation of
Him is affirming His Oneness. The perfection of affirming His Oneness is
being sincere towards Him. He who makes a comparison to Him has set up a
second with Him. He who sets a second with Him has divided Him.

He who divides Him is ignorant of Him. Whoever tries to indicate to Him
has given Him limitations, and whoever gives Him limitations has
rendered Him finite.’ [On another occasion Imam Ali (A) says ‘The
perfection of sincerity is avoiding disobedience’.] ‘No one accompanies
the Qur’an except that when he departs from it he does so with a gain
and a loss. (He leaves with) a gain of guidance (to the truth) and a
loss of ignorance. Rest assured that there is no destitution for anyone
after (knowing) the Qur’an, and no one has any riches before (knowing)
the Qur’an.’

‘Do not enslave yourself to another person, for Allah has made you a
free person.’

‘Make your own self as a judge between yourself and others. Therefore,
love for others whatever you love for yourself, and dislike for others
whatever you hate for yourself. Do not transgress just as you do not
like to be transgressed upon, and be kind to others just as you like to
see kindness from others.

What you regard as bad and ugly to come from others also regard it bad
and ugly (if it were) to come from yourself. If it pleases you what you
do to others, then be pleased with that if they do it to you.

Do not talk about what you do not know, still do not say all that you
know.

Do not say (to others) what you do not like to be told.’ ‘Do not look
at who is talking but look at what is said.’ ‘He who corrects his covert
affairs, Allah would correct his overt (aspects of life). He who worked
for his religious affairs, Allah would take care of his material life.
He who enhances what is between him and Allah, Allah would improve what
is between him and other people.’

‘The example of the world is that of a snake; it is soft to touch but
inside it carries a deadly poison. The ignorant one may be charmed by
it, but the sage and the sane person would avoid.’ ‘How plenty are the
lessons to learn from and how few are those who would learn from
them.’

‘Get rid of your wrong actions before they get rid of you.’ ‘Being
thankful for every blessing is being careful to avoid what Allah has
forbidden.’ ‘The least of what Allah demands of you is that you do not
use His blessings to disobey Him.’

‘Be in awe of Allah in your dealings with His servants and His lands,
for surely you are responsible, even if it is for a small piece of land
and a few animals. Obey Allah and do not disobey Him. if you see good
then take hold of it, and if you see evil then turn away from it.’

‘Beware of being disobedient to Allah when you are alone, for surely
the One who witnesses is also the One who judges.’ ‘Well-being consists
of ten parts; nine of them are in being silent – except in the
remembrance of Allah – and one of them is in leaving the company of the
foolish.’

‘Supplication is the key to divine mercy.’ ‘Deflect the waves of
misfortune by supplication.’ ‘Fortunate is he who remembers the promised
Day of Judgement, and who acts with the Reckoning in mind, and who is
content with what is just enough, and who is pleased with Allah.’

‘Perfect happiness comes with knowledge, and partial happiness comes
with abstinence. Worship without knowledge and without abstinence merely
exhausts the body.’ ‘The most excellent worship is refraining from
disobedience...’ ‘Wherever there is wisdom, there is fear of Allah, and
wherever there is fear of Allah, there is His mercy.’ ‘The most glorious
thing to come down from the heavens is divine succour, and the most
glorious thing to rise up from the earth is sincerity.’

‘There are three things that set you free:

Fear of Allah in secret and in public, Moderation in times of poverty
and wealth, and Being just in times of anger and contentment.’ ‘He who
takes his self into account will profit, and he who is heedless of it
will loose. He who is fearful will be secure, and he who reflects will
discern, and whoever discerns will comprehend, and whoever comprehends
will have knowledge.’ ‘The best way of life is the one that does not
make you do wrong or make you distracted.’

‘Always observe your appearance in the mirror, and if it looks good
consider it repulsive to associate an ugly action with it and so spoil
it, and if it looks ugly consider it even more repulsive by combining
the two forms of ugliness!’ ‘Train yourself in good behaviour with
regard to what you dislike in others.’

‘The devil of everyone is his own self.’

‘I am amazed at the heart of man: It possesses the substance of wisdom
as well as the opposites contrary to it . . . for if hope arises in it,
it is brought low by covetousness; and if covetousness is aroused in it,
greed destroys it. If despair possesses it, self-pity kills it; and if
it is seized by anger, this is intensified by rage.

If it is blessed with contentment, then it forgets to be careful; and
if it is filled with fear, then it becomes preoccupied with being
cautious. If it feels secure, then it is overcome by vain hopes; and if
it is given wealth, then its independence makes it over-extravagant. If
want strikes it, then it is smitten by anxiety.

If it is weakened by hunger, then it gives way to exhaustion; and if it
goes too far in satisfying its appetites, then its inner becomes clogged
up. So all its shortcomings are harmful to it, and all its excesses
corrupt it.’ ‘Ask your hearts about friendship, for surely it is a
witness that cannot be bribed.’ ‘Kindle your heart with courteous
behaviour just as you kindle a fire with fuel.’

‘Surely hearts grow tired just as bodies grow tired, so seek out the
novelties of wisdom for them.’

‘The most self-sustaining wealth is the intellect.’ ‘The intellect is a
king and the characteristics are its subjects, so if it is weak in
governing them, disorder overtakes it.’ ‘The intellect is better than
desire, for the intellect makes you king over your destiny, and desire
makes you a salve of your destiny.’

‘Bodies are sustained by food, and intellects are sustained by wisdom,
and whenever either of them is deprived of its sustenance then it
perishes and disintegrates.’ ‘Keep company with the people of intellect,
whether they are your enemies or your friends; for surely one intellect
is only confirmed by another intellect.’

‘If the intellect is given a free reign, and if it is not imprisoned by
the desires of the self or by religious customs or by partisanship, then
it will lead the one who possesses it to salvation.’

‘When Allah wishes to remove a favour from His servant, the first thing
He changes in him is his intellect.’ ‘The spirit gives life to the body,
and the intellect gives life to the spirit.’

‘Knowledge is the most precious of treasures, and the most beautiful.
It is easy to carry, tremendously useful, beautiful in its completeness,
and delightful in its uniqueness.’ ‘Life is too short for you to learn
all the knowledge that find attractive, so learn what inspires you, only
what inspires.’ ‘Knowledge is accompanied by action, for whoever has
knowledge (should) act (accordingly). Knowledge calls out for action: if
it responds to the call then it lives on . . . otherwise it perishes.’

‘Nobility of characters consists of ten qualities: generosity, modesty,
sincerity, and fulfilment of trust, humility, selfesteem, courage,
forbearance, patience, and gratitude.’

**The Second Imam: Imam Hasan**

Imam Hasan (A) is the elder son of Imam Ali (A) and Fatimah al- Zahra
(A) daughter of the holy Prophet (S). He is the Prophet’s elder grandson
and his second successor and leader of the people after his father Imam
Ali.

He was born in the holy city of Medina on Tuesday the fifteenth of the
holy month of Ramad}a\>n in the third year of Hijrah. He died a martyr
by the poison administered by Mo‘a\>wiyah ibn Abi Sufya\>n through his
wife Jo‘dah bint al-Ash‘ath on Thursday the seventh of the month of
S{afar149 in the year fifty after Hijrah. His brother, Imam Husayn
prepared his body for burial and buried him in the Baqi’ cemetery in the
holy city of Medinah where his shrine stood until recently when,
unfortunately, the [Saudi] Wahha\>bies destroyed it along with its
courtyard.

He excelled all others of his time in worshipping Allah, in knowledge
and in spiritual perfections. He was more like the Prophet than all
other people. He was seen as the most noble and 149 or the 28th day of
Safar, according to some other reports.

kind-hearted person in his family at his time and the most forbearing
amongst the people. Prophet Muhammad (S) said, while hugging his
grandson Imam Hasan (A) ‘O Allah love him for I dearly love him.’150 The
Messenger of Allah (S) used to say about Imam Hasan and his brother Imam
Husayn (A):

‘they are my sweet basil of this world, whoever loves me should love
them, and whoever angers them, he angers me and whoever anger me Allah’s
anger will be upon him and He enter him in Hell, For they are the
masters of the youth of Paradise.’ On many occasions Imam Hasan divided
all of his wealth and possession in two; giving one half of it to (the
cause of) Allah. He did so to the extent that if he had just one pair of
sandals, he gave one of the sandals away and kept the other.

On one occasion Imam Hasan (A) was passing by when he saw a group of
destitute people sitting on the ground and eating bread. They invited
the Imam to join them and he duly did, saying .Verily Allah does not
like the arrogant.151. When they finished, the Imam (A) then invited
them to his hospitality and fed them and gave them clothing.

A man approached Imam Hasan (A) hinting at seeking help from him. In
order to save the man the embarrassment of going through his request,
the Imam asked him to write down his wishes. On receiving the request
letter, the Imam gave him double the amount the man had requested. The
people sitting in the vicinity of the Imam said ‘what a blissful letter
this was for him, O son of Rasulollah!’ Imam Hasan (A) said ‘its bliss
is greater for us, for He has made us the people of nobility. Did you
not know that 150 This hadith has been reported in many s}ih}a\>h} and
hadith reference books such as s}ah}ih} Bukha\>ri, Tirmidhi, and Muslim,
and in the book al-Beda\>yah wal Naha\>yah by Ibn Kotheyr.

151 The holy Qur’an, The Bees (16): 23.

nobility is to give to someone and fulfil his needs while protecting
his honour and dignity by sparing him the embarrassment of making his
request in detail?’

On another occasion a Bedouin man approached Imam Hasan (A) wishing to
seek assistance from him . . . the Imam told his assistants to give to
the man whatever there was in coffer. There were twenty thousand
Dirhams, which they gave to the Bedouin man. The man said lord give me a
chance to state my request and praise you . . . replied the Imam (A):

We are a people whose grace and grant is spattered, In which hope and
wish revel.

We wish to give abundantly before the request (is made), Anxious about
the honour and dignity of the seeker. On one occasion a servant gave him
a bunch of followers, so in return the imam said to her, “You are free
for the sake of Allah”, and then the imam said, “this is how Almighty
Allah has taught us” .and if you were greeted, greet with that that is
better than it, or return it likewise..152

On another occasion a man from the province of Sha\>m153 came across
Imam Hasan (A). He started to verbally assault and curse the Imam. Imam
Hasan (A) remained silent and did not respond to him. After the man
finished his assault and name calling, Imam Hasan smiled to him and,
said:

‘May peace be with you. O Sheikh! I guess you are a stranger in this
territory, and you might have mistaken me. If you seek 152 The holy
Qur’an, Women (4):86.

153 The province of Sha\>m in today’s geography covers Syria, Lebanon,
Palestine and parts of Jordan. The province was ruled by Mo‘a\>wiyah ibn
Abi Sufya\>n, one of the archenemies of Imam Ali. In a massive
disinformation campaign by Mo‘a\>wiyah during his reign, the people of
the Sha\>m had systematically been fed with hatred towards Imam Ali and
his descendants.

contentment we would gratify you, if you ask us anything we shall give
it to you, if you seek any guidance from us we shall guide you, if you
seek any help from us we shall help you, and if you are hungry we shall
feed you, if you need any clothing we shall give you them, if you are
deprived we shall give you money, if you have been expelled (from your
home town) we shall accommodate you, if you had any need we shall fulfil
your need . . .’

When the man from Sha\>m heard the response of the Imam, he broke in
tears saying: “I now truly believe that you are Allah’s caliph and
vicegerent on earth, .indeed Allah knows best as to whom He entrust His
Message.154.

**Hadith from Imam Hasan (AS)**

‘He who claims he does not like wealth is, to me, a liar, and if his
truth is established in this respect, then, to me, he is stupid.’ ‘Have
you seen an oppressor who is more like an oppressed one? The Imam was
asked: ‘How is that O son of Rasulollah?’ The Imam (A) replied: ‘He is
the jealous person who is in perpetual anguish whereas the envied is in
comfort.’

Imam Hasan (A) used to encourage the people to gain more and more
knowledge, and used to say: ‘Teach others and learn from others’
knowledge, in this way you would have perfected your knowledge and
learnt things you did not know . . . and to ask a question is half of
the knowledge.’

‘He who does not have intellect, does not have etiquette, and he who
does not have determination, does not have goodwill, and he who does not
have a belief does not have morality. The peak of intellect is to
socialise with, and treat the people nicely 154 The holy Qur’an, The
Cattle (6): 124.

and kindly. Through intellect you can achieve the prosperity of both
worlds and without it you would loose all.’

Someone asked Imam Hasan (A) about politics, the Imam replied ‘Politics
is to attend to the rights and duties of Allah and to protect the rights
of the people; dead or alive. As for the rights of Allah, it is to
fulfil what He ordered and abstain from what forbade.

And as for the rights of the living it is to discharge your duties
towards your Muslim brethrens and not to hesitate serving your
community, to be sincere towards leader as long as he is sincere to the
Ommah, and to raise your objection to him if he deviated from the
straight path. As for the rights of the dead, it is to commemorate their
good deeds and conceal their bad deeds, for they have their Lord to deal
with them.’ ‘There is no poverty like ignorance.’

‘The peak of wit and intelligence is the good conduct with the
people.’

‘The distance between right and falsehood is (the width of) four
fingers (i.e. the distance between the eye and the ear). What you see
with your eyes is the truth, whereas you could hear many false things.’
‘The people who practice consultation are guided (towards perfection).’
‘(The beneficences of) both worlds are achieved through reasoning.’

‘Do not hasten punishment for offence, and allow room for reason for
the offence.’

‘I am surprised at one who takes care at what he eats, but does not do
so about what he believes in. He avoids that which hurts him from
entering his stomach, but allows that which makes him inferior to enter
his heart (and mind).’

**The Third Imam: Imam Husayn**

Imam Husayn (A) is the son of Imam Ali (A) and Fatimah (A) daughter of
the holy Prophet (S), and the grandson of Allah’s messenger (S) and the
third of his successors, and the father of the nine ma‘s}oom imams who
come after him, and the leader of the people after his brother Imam
Hasan peace be upon them.

He was born in the holy city of Medina on the third of Sha‘ban of the
fourth year of Hijrah, and he was brutally killed while suffering
extreme thirst at the hands of the Omayyads on the orders of Yazeed ibn
Mo‘a\>wiyah on the Day of Ashura on Saturday the tenth day of the holy
month of Muharram, in year 61 after Hijrah in the desert now known as
Karbala’.

His son Imam Zayn al-Abidin (A) prepared his decapitated and mutilated
pure body, and of those who were martyred along with him, after being
left on the battlefield for three days. He performed the prayer of the
deceased, and buried him where his mausoleum stands today in the holy
city of Karbala, Iraq. His virtues are beyond mention, for he is the
rayh}a\>nah155 of Allah’s messenger about whom he said, “Husayn is from
me and I am from Husayn”156.

The prophet also said about him and his brother Imam Hasan peace be
upon them:

“They are my two rayh}a\>nah of this world”157 “Hasan and Husayn are
the masters of the youth of the people of Paradise”158

“Hasan and Husayn are both Imams whether they rise up (to publicly
assume the position of leadership) or not”159 155 rayhanah is any sweet
smelling flower.

156 Al-Irshad, vol. 2, p127
157 Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 2, p 11
158 Al-Amali, by al-Sdooq, p57

He was the most knowledgeable and the best worshipper among the people
of his time. He would pray one thousand Rak‘ahs every night like his
father Amir al-Mo’mineen peace be upon him, and on many nights he would
carry sacks of food to the needy, to the extent that the marks of
carrying heavy sacks were visible on his back after his death. He was
very kind, had a great and forbearing personality, and was severe on
those who disobeyed Allah.

When a Bedouin Arab came to Imam Husayn seeking help he recited the
following poem for the Imam:

Disappointed will not be he who makes a request from you, For you are
generous and trustworthy and your father was the killer of the
profligate and the corrupt, were it not for the former (family members)
of yours160, we would still have been in hell. Then Imam Husayn (A)
while avoiding eye contact with the man, gave him four thousand gold
coins (Dinars) and apologized to him saying:

Take this for I apologise to you, and rest assure that you have my
sympathy Were I in a different position and I had more to offer you, I
would have given you far more.

Throughout his life the Muslims used to revere and adore Imam Husayn
(A), and used to see in him what they had seen in his grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (S). Their adoration for Imam Husayn was not just
because he was the grandson of the prophet (S), but also because he was
the manifestation of the teachings of Islam and the conducts of the
Messenger of Allah (S), 159 Elal al-Shara\>’e‘, vol. 1, p211 160 i.e.
the Prophet Muhammad, Imam Ali, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra, and Imam Hasan.

no one could fail to see examples of the highest moral qualities in his
behaviour.

The holy Prophet has said in the praise of Imam Husayn (A): “Husayn is
from me and I am from Husayn.”

Chroniclers and historians have individually remarked that Imam Husayn
was the manifestation of the best examples of noble manners and conduct,
as well as his vast knowledge, which he inherited from the Messenger of
Allah (S). His actions spoke before his words. Imam Husayn (A) was
humbly gracious and generous to the poor and those in need. He used to
support what is right and fight what was wrong.

People always noticed such attributes in his conduct and behaviour as
perseverance, forbearance, and magnanimity. He was the most pious and
Godfearing of all people of his time.

Through his courageous uprising, the like of which there has been none
in the world, he revived the Islamic teachings and law, and the religion
of his grandfather Allah’s Messenger peace be upon him and his pure
progeny. In fact he revived the whole world until the Day of Judgment.
He is the Master of the Martyrs and the best among the people after his
elder brother.


