Hadith From Imam Husayn (as)
============================

‘I do not see death except prosperity and life along with the
oppressors except anguish.’ ‘O Allah! You know that all there was from
us was not in competition to seek power, nor to gain refuse of the world
(i.e. wealth), but it was nothing other than to present the signs and
essence of Your religion, and to promote reform in Your land, (so that)
oppressed members of your servants find safety and security, and Your
laws, orders and obligations are acted upon.’

‘I have not arisen for the purpose of exuberance, arrogance,
corruption, or oppression, but I have done so in order to seek reform in
the nation of my Grandfather, Muhammad (S). I want to enjoin Good and
forbid Evil, and I want to go down the path and tradition of my
Grandfather, Muhammad (S), and the path of my father Ali ibn Abi Talib
(A).

‘There are people who worship Allah out of desire (for reward), and
this is the worship of traders, and there are people worship Allah out
of fear (of punishment), and this is the worship of slaves. Whereas
certain people worship Allah out of gratitude, and this is the worship
of the free, and this is the best of the worships.’

‘There are seventy benefactions for saluting, sixty nine for the one
who initiates it and one for the replier.’ ‘Do not say about your
brother in his absence other than that which you would like him to say
about you in your absence.’ ‘(O Allah) . . . How can You be reasoned
about with that that is in need of You in its existence?

‘(O Allah) . . . What did he find he who lost You? And what did he
loose he who found You? Truly he has failed who is contented with other
than You.’

**The Fourth Imam: Imam Zayn al-Ab idin**

Imam Ali Zayn al-Abidin (A) is the son of Imam Husayn (A) and princess
Shahr Banu the daughter of Yazdgerd, king of Persia. He used to be
called the son of the best two, on the basis of the words of Allah’s
messenger peace be upon him and his pure progeny who said, “From amongst
his servants, Allah has made two choices; his choice from the Arabs is
the Quraysh, and from amongst the non-Arabs the Persians”.161

He was born in Medina on Thursday the fifth of Sha‘ba\>n in the year
thirty-eight after Hijrah. He died a martyr after being poisoned on
Saturday the twenty fifth of Muharram,162 in the year ninety five after
Hijrah, at the age of fifty seven. His son Imam Ba\>qir prepared his
body for burial and buried him next to his uncle Imam Hasan in Baqi’
cemetery in the holy city of Medina.

He excelled all others of his time in knowledge, worshipping Allah,
spiritual perfections, piety, and helping the needy, and all other
virtues. Jurists and scholars have narrated from him extensively such
that it cannot be counted, and there are many aspects of
words-of-wisdom, spiritual guidance, prayers, and invocations that have
been recorded as his legacy. Because of his extensive prayers and
invocations he became known as Zayn al- Abidin, meaning the best of the
worshipers. He is also known as al-Sajjad, meaning the prostrater, for
his frequent and prolonged prostrations.

Very often he would carry on his back, at night, money and sacks of
food or fire log, to the needy, and nock on the door one by one and give
it to the person answers the call, with his face covered so that the
person would not recognise him. When he left this world, then people of
Medina realised that the person who used to deliver to them food etc.
with his face covered, was none other than Imam Zayn al-Abidin. He loved
to see the orphans and destitute join him for food, and eat his food
sitting next to them. 161 Bih}a\>r al- Anwa\>r, vol. 46, p8.

162 Other reports put the date of his martyrdom on 12th or 18th of
Muharram. Every month he would call upon his servants and would offer
them help if any of them needed to get married or if anyone wanted to be
set free.163 Whenever a needy person would come to him asking for help
he would say this, “welcome to he who carries my supplies to the
hereafter.”

It is said that he would pray a thousand rak’ahs of prayer in every
twenty-four hours. At the time of prayer his face would change, and he
would shiver like a leaf out of realisation of the greatness of Allah,
the Most High. Due to his extensive and prolonged prostrating before the
Almighty his forehead and knees were clearly marked.

Once a person spoke rudely to him using offending words that were
hurting, the Imam remained silent not uttering a word. After a while the
Imam went to the person, and recited this verse from the holy Qur’an,
.... and those who control their anger and forgive people, Allah loves
those who do good..164 The Imam then said to that person, “Brother, I
heard all that you said to me.

If all that you said about me is true, then I ask Allah to forgive me
and if all that you said about me is not true, then may Allah forgive
you”165 163 At the time of the prophet (S) and the Imams (A) slavery was
common in society. One of the most important values in Islam is freedom
and therefore it always aimed to gradually eliminate slavery from
society.

Islam encouraged people to set their slaves free, and many rewards are
prescribed for setting a slave free. The Prophet and the Imams lead the
way in this process in two ways. One was to set examples for the Muslims
by buying salves from their masters and setting them free at the first
possible opportunity. The second policy of the Imams was to buy as many
salves as they could, educate them and then free them into society as
free, well mannered, and well-educated responsible adults. In this way,
this policy gave a good chance to a slave to attain his/her freedom, set
an example for others to practice, and give less chance to those who
wanted to see the concept of slavery continue in society.

164 The Family of Emran (3): 134 165 Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p54.
al-Irshad, vol. 2, p145.

In the course of his supplications which he became best known for, Zayn
al-Abidin (A) left behind a magnificent intellectual and doctrinal
masterpiece known as the Sahifah al-Sajjaddeyyah. Of course the Sahifah
does not include all of his supplications, as many others are found in
other reference books.

The supplications of Imam Zayn al-Abidin (A) are well known for their
immense influence on the soul of the reader, and that of the listener.
The choice of words and meaning of the supplications move the reader in
such a way that change one’s life and give his life purpose and
direction.

The collection of the supplications of Zayn al-Abidin (A) is a great
school for he who seeks the truth. It is a school, which points to the
love, wisdom and power of Almighty Allah. It points man to the values
and the qualities of the teachings of Islam. It teaches him how to
repent and how to talk to Allah.

Imam Zayn al-Abidin (A) is also responsible for the creation of the
book of rights, which includes fifty fundamental rights one has, or is
responsible for. This book of rights served as a guide to the Muslims as
well as a challenge to the society and the ruling circumstances.

In his book Manaqib, ibn Shahr Ashub reports that Imam Zayn al- Abidin
(A) received some guests, and the servant was rushing to serve the
guests when some of the hot cooking cutlery fell on the Imam’s child,
killing him. The servant was extremely disturbed and frightened. When
the Imam saw him in that state said to him ‘You did not intend this! Go
for you are free for the sake of Allah.’

Zayn al-Abidin (A) used to buy a thousand slaves at a time and then he
used to educate them with the teachings of Islam and within a year free
them into the society as well mannered, educated, and honourable members
of the society. It is reported 77

that he directly bought, educated and freed some fifteen thousands
slave during his lifetime.

**Hadith from Imam Zayn al-Ab idin (A)**

Imam Zayn al-Abidin (A) said to his son, al-Baqir (A)

: ‘Do good to whoever seeks it from you. For if he deserved it then you
have achieved your goal, and if he did not deserve it, you are the kind
to do so. If someone swore at you, and he is on your right hand side,
and he then turns to your left and apologised to you, accept his
apologies.’

On the subject of trustworthiness and honesty, Imam Zayn al- Abidin (A)
says:

‘By He who sent Muhammad (S), with the Truth (I swear that) if the
killer of my father al-Husayn (A) entrusts me with the sword which he
killed him (A) with, I would return it back to him.’ ‘Contemplate and
strife for what you have been created for, for Allah did not create you
in vain.’

‘Do not have animosity towards anyone even if you thought he would not
harm you, and do not fail to befriend anyone even if you thought he
would not benefit you.’

‘Indeed the ultimate knowledge and the perfection of the religion (and
way of life) of a Muslim is to avoid talking about things which do not
concern him, lack of his boasting, his forbearance, perseverance, and
well-manners.’ ‘Do not stop from refraining from evil even if you have
been known to commit it.’

‘The best keys to (one’s) affairs is truthfulness, and the best endings
is faithfulness and loyalty.’

**The Fifth Imam: Imam al-Baqir**

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) is the son of Ali ibn al-Husayn (A) and his
mother is Fatimah daughter of Imam Hasan (A).

He was born in the holy city of Medina on Friday the first day of Rajab
in the year fifty seven after Hijrah. He is the first Alawite of Alawite
parents, and Hashemite of Hashemite parents, and Fatimid of Fatimid
parents, for he is the first to born to parents who were descendants of
Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn, peace be upon them.

He died a martyr by poisoning on Monday the seventh day of the month of
Dhil-H{ijjah in the year one hundred fourteen after Hijrah, at the age
of fifty seven. His son Imam S{a\>diq prepared his body for burial and
buried him next to his father’s grave, and that of his grandfather Imam
Hasan Mujtaba\> in the Baqi’ cemetery in the holy city of Medina.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (A) was a man of great virtue and leadership, a
man of vast knowledge, great forbearance, great moral discipline,
worship, generosity, humility and kindness. A Christian man,
[deliberately mispronouncing Imam’s name], once said to him, “Are you
baqar? (meaning, a ‘cow’). The Imam said, “No, I am Ba\>qir.” The man
then said, “Are you the son of a female cook?” The Imam said, “That is
her profession.”

The man then said, “Are you the son of the bad Negro woman?” The Imam
said, “If what you say is true, then may Allah forgive her, and if what
you say is not true then may Allah forgive you.” This transformed the
Christian man, and became a Muslim. Imam Muhammad al-Ba\>qir (A) had
profound knowledge and he would answer every question when asked without
delay. Ibn ‘Ataal-Makki said about the Imam, “I never saw the scholars
look so small as they did in the presence of Imam Muhammad Ba\>qir. I
saw al-H{akam ibn ‘Otaybah, with all his prestige and majesty amongst
the people, looked just like a child in the presence of his teacher.”

Muhammad ibn Muslim said, “I asked Imam Muhammad al-Ba\>qir all the
questions that would come to my mind, until I had asked him about thirty
thousand matter.” Imam al-Ba\>qir used to practice remembrance (dhikr)
of Allah constantly, such that his son Imam Ja’far al-S{a\>diq said, “My
father used to practiced remembrance of Allah very often; I used to walk
with him and he would practice dhikr of Allah, I would eat with him and
he used to practice dhikr of Allah, and if he talked to people that
would not distract him from the dhikr of Allah”. He used to pray for
long hours at night and his tears would flow tremendously during his
worshipping.

Imam al-Ba\>qir (A) may be credited to have established the first
Islamic university in the history of Islam. Given the turmoil in
political situation of the time, the Omayyad rulers had less time to
suppress Imam al-Ba\>qir (A) and therefore he had more breathing space
to teach those who sought the teachings of Islam in the sciences of the
Qur’an, Fiqh, doctrine, etc.

**Hadith from Imam Baqir (A)** ‘The practice of Islam is founded on
five matters: upholding of the daily prayers, purification of the wealth
(giving the Khums and Zaka\>h), performing the Hajj pilgrimage, Fasting
during the holy month of Ramadan, and allegiance to the authority
(wala\>yah) of the us the Ahl-ul-Bayt. Exceptions are given in four of
them but none is given for the wala\>yah. He who does not possess
sufficient wealth, does not give Khums/Zaka\>h. He who does not possess
sufficient wealth, is not obliged to go to Hajj. He who is ill can
perform the daily prayers in sitting mode, and does not fast during the
month of Ramadan.

However the walayah is obliged upon him regardless of his health and
wealth.’

‘Three are amongst the noble values of this world and the hereafter: To
forgive he who transgresses against you, To bond ties with he who severs
ties with you, To forbear he who insults you.’ ‘The most regretting
individual on the Day of Judgement is he who preaches to others to do
good but does not practices it himself.’

‘He who says the truth, his acts would be purified, and he whose
intention is good, his sustenance will be increased, and he who is kind
to his family his lifespan would increase.’ ‘He who teaches guidance,
will have a reward similar to the rewards of all of those who act upon
it without reducing anything from their reward. He who teaches
misguidance, will have a punishment similar to the punishments of all of
those who act upon it without reducing anything from their
punishment.’

**The Sixth Imam: Imam Sadiq**

Imam Ja’far al-S{a\>diq (A) is the son of Imam Muhammad al-Ba\>qir (A)
and his mother is Fatimah, agnomen Omm Farwah. He was born in Medina on
Friday the seventeenth of the month of Rabi’-I – which is the birthday
of the prophet – in the year eightythree after Hijrah. He died a martyr
after being poisoned on Monday twenty-fifth day of the month of Shawwal
in the year one hundred forty eight after Hijrah at the age of
sixty-five. His son Imam Ka\>dim prepared his body for burial and buried
him in the Baqi’ cemetery next to the graves of his father Imam Ba\>qir
and his grandfathers Imam Sajja\>d and Imam Hasan Mujtaba\> peace be
upon them all.

Imam Ja’far al-S{a\>diq (A) possessed unquestionably vast knowledge,
wisdom, and piety. He lived abstinently and piously, and his qualities
and traits such as truthfulness, justice, graciousness, generosity and
bravery were beyond reach.

Sheikh al-Mofid166 said, “scholars have reported from no one of his
household as much they have reported from him, and people of hadith and
narrators of reports have not known any one like Muhammad ibn Ja’far
al-S{a\>diq, peace be upon him. Indeed researchers have gathered
together and collated the names of the reliable narrators [of hadith]
from him, notwithstanding their differing views and opinions, whose
numbers have been at four thousands167”. .

Abu H{anifah, the founder and leader of the H{anafi sect, [one of the
four Sunni sects nowadays] was one of Imam S{a\>diq’s students, who
attended his lessons.168 While Abu H{anifah studied directly at the
hands of Imam S{a\>diq, the founders and leaders of the other sects
learned of Imam S{a\>diq’s teachings via those who had attended Imam
Sadiq at first hand.

Many of the new sciences such as chemistry, physics, astronomy,
mineralogy and deposit-exploration, and other sciences which is 166 Abu
Abdullah Muhammad al-Harithi al-Baghdadi, known as sheikh al-Mofid, and
also ibn al-Mo‘allim, 336-413H, 948-1022 CE. He is one of the foremost
figures of Shi’a history. A student of ibn Babuyah al-Quommi, the great
teacher of theology in the 4th/10th century, sheikh al-Muffid was in
turn the teacher of such celebrated Shi’a theologians as sheikh
al-Murtadha. The author of some 170 treatises concerned almost entirely
with theology, jurisprudence, hadith, and the sacred history, sheikh
al-Mofid soon became one of the main figures of Shi’a scholars.

167 There are also reports that put the number at twenty thousands.

168 Having studied for more than two years at the hands of Imam Sadiq
peace be upon him, Abu H{anifah, whose [Arabic] name was al-Nu‘man ibn
Tha\>bit al-Kufi al-Taymi, the mawla\> (adopted member) of the Bani Taym
clan, is famous for saying “If it were not for the two years,
al-Nu‘ma\>n would have perished.” [al- Khilaf, by Sheikh al-T{ousi, vol.
1, p33; Jame‘ al-Maqa\>s}id, by al-Karaki, vol. 1, p21 of the
researcher’s introduction, al-Mora\>j‘a\>t, by Sharaf al-Deen, p 15.]
too long to mention, were founded or guided to by Imam S{a\>diq peace be
upon him.

The Imam used the ensuing conflict within the Abbasids, who were
spearheading a revolt against the ruling Omayyads, and the ongoing power
struggle within the Omayyad dynasty, who were on the verge of collapse,
to establish his mammoth scholarly school. He engaged in teaching and
educating his students and seekers of truth, elucidating the teachings
and essence of Islam the traits of the shari‘ah – the Islamic Law. He
clarified the falseness of the imported thoughts and the invalidity of
the spurious and sinister doubts raised, until the foundations of the
shari‘ah were fortified and the structure of Islam erected. He became
known as the leader and chief of the Ja’fari madh-hab or school, just as
his followers became known as the Ja’fari Shi‘a.

Imam Ja’far S{a\>diq lived a simple life. He used to eat bread with
vinegar or oil169, used to wear a coarse shirt, which often used to be
with patches, and he used to work in his orchard himself. He would pray
extensively and with great deal of attention and concentration to the
extent that he would loose consciousness during prayer.

One night al-Mans}oor al-Dawa\>neeqi, the tyrant ruler of the time,
wanted to meet him and he sent for him. The servant who sent to call the
imam said that when he arrived at the imam’s house, he found the Imam in
his private room in the state of prostration before Allah with his hands
and face on the ground and his forehead and the sides of his face having
dust on them.

Imam Ja’far al-S{a\>diq (A) had generous nature, excellent moral
perfections and of very polite manners in his social dealings. 169 Imam
S{a\>diq said, “Oil and vinegar is the diet of the prophets”, al-Ka\>fi,
vol 6, p328.

Like his father, Imam S{a\>diq (A) lived during a period when the
political situation was going through turbulence stages and therefore
the rulers did not have the time to target the Imam to the extent of
preventing him from any activity. This gave Imam al- S{a\>diq (A), just
like his father, the opportunity to continue the task Imam al-Ba\>qir
(A) started, which was the managing of the Islamic university and the
teaching of Islamic sciences such as Qur’an, jurisprudence (Fiqh), etc.
It is reported that more than four thousand scholars graduated from the
school of Imam Ja’far al- S{a\>diq (A), and between them, up to ninety
thousand hadith have been reported from Imam S{a\>diq (A).

**Hadith from Imam Sadiq (A)
**
‘Nothing other than three matters continue to bring an individual
rewards after death. A charity that Allah helped him establish during
his life and this (charity) continues after his death, a good practice
acted upon (by others), and an offspring who prays for him.’

‘The right of a Muslim upon another is that he is not full when his
brother goes hungry, and he does not quench his thirst when his brother
is thirsty, and he is not clothed when his brother is naked; it is most
great the right of a Muslim upon his brother.’ ‘Love for your Muslim
brother what you love for yourself.’ ‘Amongst the manners of the
ignorant is to answer before he hears (the argument), to oppose before
he understands, and to give a judgement upon what he does not know.’

‘He who acts not in accordance with a vision, is like he who is going
down the wrong way, and then speeding does not give him anything other
than distancing him further from the truth.’ ‘The most beloved of my
brothers to me is he who presents me my mistakes.’

‘Seventy sins of the ignorant are forgiven before one is forgiven for
the scholar.’

‘Make bonds with he who sever ties with you, give to he who denies you,
be kind to he who was bad to you, salute he who swore at you, be fair
and just to he who fought you, forgive he who oppressed you just as you
would like to be forgiven, learn from Allah when He forgives you; do you
not see the sun shines upon the believers and the non-believers, and the
rain comes down upon the good and the bad?’

**The Seventh Imam: Imam Kadim**

Imam Mossa\> al-Kadim (A) is the son of Imam Ja’far al-S{a\>diq (A) and
his mother was H{amidah al-Mus}affah.

He was born in Abwa’, a place between Mecca and Medina on Sunday the
seventh of S{afar, in the year one hundred twenty eight after Hijrah. He
died at the age of fifty-five after being poisoned while imprisoned in
the jail of the Abbasid ruler Haroon, after fourteen years of unjust and
hostile confinement therein, on Friday the twenty-fifth day of the month
of Rajab, in the year one hundred eighty three Hijrah. His son Imam Ali
al-Rid}a\> prepared his body was for burial and was buried where his
shrine stands today in Ka\>dimiyyah, Iraq.

He was the most knowledgeable person of his time and the best of them.
He was very generous and brave, apparent and evident in his virtue and
learning, of great station and magnificent standing. He was of excellent
spiritual perfections, worship extensively and prolonged prostrations
before Allah. His immense control over his anger was as such that he
became known as al-Ka\>dim, which means one who curbs or contains one’s
anger, and for his good deeds and putting things right he used to became
known al-‘Abd alSaleh , the Righteous Servant.

The extent of the Imam’s knowledge and learning became obvious and
apparent in the various fields of learning such that people were
astonished and amazed of. One case is that of the famous Christian
scholar Borayha, and at the end of the debate the Imam overwhelmed
Borayha, and as a result he embraced Islam and became a devout
Muslim.170

Once a poor person asked him for one hundred and the Imam, in order to
test the man’s knowledge and understanding, asked him a question. When
the man answered them, the Imam gave him two thousand Dirhams (gold
coins).

He had the most beautiful voice in reciting the holy Qur’an, and he was
most of the people in reciting the Qur’an, worshiping, and in his
prolonged bowing and prostration before Allah, and more than anyone else
in weeping out of fear of the Almighty Allah; so much so that he
attained martyrdom while prostrating before Allah.


**Hadith from Imam Kadim (A)**

‘Allah has given the people two proofs, an apparent one and a hidden
one. The apparent one is His messengers, prophets and Imams, and the
hidden one is the intellect.’

‘Learn thoroughly the teachings of Islam for this learning is the key
to the (correct) vision, perfect worship, the means to elevated
stations, and honourable ranks in this world and the hereafter. For the
merit of the learned scholar (Faqeeh) over the lifelong worshiper (Abid)
is that of the sun over the planets. And he who does not seek knowledge
about his religion, none of his achievements would be accepted by
Allah.’

‘Endeavour to divide your time into four categories: one for the
supplication with Allah, another to make a living, the third for
socialising with the brethrens and those trustworthy individuals who are
honest to you and point out to you your mistakes in 170 Al-Tawh}eed, by
al-S{adooq, p270.

confidence, and the fourth to seek in seclusion non-forbidden
pleasures, and with this you gain strength and vigour for the other
three.’

‘. . . and the believer is the brother of the believer even if not born
by the same parents. Cursed is he who accuses his brother, cursed is he
who cheats his brother, cursed is he who does not admonish and advise
his brother, cursed is he who backbites his brother.’

‘He whose two days are equal is a looser, and he whose second day is
worse than his first is cursed. He who does not observe progress in
himself is in retreat and he who is in retreat, death is better for him
than life.’ Addressing one of his disciples:

‘O Hisha\>m! If you had a nut in your hand and the people said you have
a pearl, it would be of no benefit to you and you know it is a nut. And
if you had a pearl in your hand and the people said you have a nut in
your hand, it would be of no detriment to you and you know that it is a
pearl.’ ‘Any word of wisdom is sought after by the faithful Muslim, so
always seek knowledge . . .’

**The Eighth Imam: Imam Rida**

He is Imam Ali al-Rida (A), son of Imam Mossa al-Ka\>dim (A) and his
mother was Lady Najmah.

He was born on Thursday the eleventh day of the month of Dhilqa’dah, in
the year one hundred forty eight in the holy city of Medina, and he died
a martyr after being poisoned on Friday on the last day of Safar in the
year two hundred and three. His body was prepared for burial by his son
Imam Muhammad al-Jawa\>d and buried him in Khura\>sa\>n, Iran where his
shrine stands today. His knowledge, virtue, nobility, generosity, moral
perfections, humility, and worship of Allah are too well known to
require mentioning.

Ma’mun, the Abbasid ruler of the time, as part of his devious plot,
requested Imam Rid}a\> leave the holy city of Medina and go to
Khura\>sa\>n and called upon him to take charge of the administration of
the Muslim government instead of Ma’mun, but Imam Rida refused the
offer, because he was aware of the intrigue and devious intention behind
it, just as his great grandfather Amir-ul- Mo’mineen refused the offer
of khilafah [i.e. leadership of the Muslim nation] – in the case of the
shawra 171 – when it was offered to him by Ibn ‘Awf on the condition
that he runs the government according to the policies of the
sheikhayn.172 Imam Ali could see that acceptance of the offer of
khilafah hinges on one of two scenarios both of which necessitate lying
and are contrary to Allah’s contentment.

The first is that for him to accept the condition and not act upon it –
just as Othman did – and this is verbal lying, and loathed by the
Almighty, and as for the second possibility, that the imam accepts 171
The shawra\> here is in reference to the so called consultation
committee that was set up by the second ruler Omar ibn al-Khat}t}a\>b to
choose the leader after him, with some pre conditions.

172 Sheikhayn literally means the ‘two sheikhs’, which is in reference
to the two rulers – Abu Bakr and Omar. In turn they took over the reign
of the Muslim nation after the martyrdom of the Prophet Muhammad, peace
be upon him and his progeny. This was contrary to the specific
instructions of Allah’s Messenger when the prophet – on instructions
from the Almighty – appointed Imam Ali to lead the Muslim nation after
him, and subsequently he instructed those present – at the Ghadir Khumm
who were more than 120,000 – to swear oath of allegiance to Imam Ali as
the Commander of the Believers before Allah and His messenger. Once they
had a firm grip on power each one of them continued to devise policies
and govern contrary to the teachings of the prophet of Islam throughout
their reign. Their followers wanted this to continue.

Hence the precondition that the new ruler is to abide by and continue
with the policies of the sheikhayn, as prescribed by ibn ‘Awf. Imam Ali
wanted to govern according to the Book of Allah and the teachings of His
messenger only, and thus he was refused the opportunity to govern
accordingly. [While on his deathbed, Omar appointed a seven-man shawra\>
committee to appoint the new leader after him, and dictated that the
final say is with Ibn ‘Awf.] Translator.

the condition and acts accordingly, which means accepting the policies
of the sheikhayn while he opposed them, which is practical lying and
condemned by the Almighty. So the imam had no option to please Allah
other than rejecting the offer and not accepting the precondition.173

When Imam Ali al-Rida (A) did not accept the offer of heading the
government, Ma’mun could see his plot disintegrating and his whole plot
failing; the very plot he had called the imam upon to go to
Khura\>sa\>n. As a last resort, he offered the imam to be his successor,
and he forced the imam to accept the offer. The imam accepted on the
precondition that he would never be asked to partake in any aspect or
business of the government.

Imam Ali al-Rid}a\>, peace be upon him, inherited his knowledge from
his noble fathers and his grandfather Allah’s messenger peace be upon
him and his pure family. Some of his vast knowledge with respect to
religions, beliefs, and principles came to light in debate sessions when
Ma’mun invited him and scholars from various religions and different
schools of thought to attend a seminar of debate over the theological
issues and matters of the doctrines of faith.

This particular event became known as al- Rukba\>n seminar. History
books report the details of the debates that took place between the Imam
and the other scholars and how Imam Ali al-Rid}a\> (A) provided
convincing and irrefutable proofs and evidence to their questions and
arguments.

For his worship he would stay many nights awake keeping vigil in
prayers and worship and would complete reading the holy Qur’an in three
days. Very often he would pray one thousand rak’ahs in twenty-four
hours, with prolonged prostrations lasting many hours and he would fast
very often.


173 See for example the commentary of Ibn Abi al-H{adeed on Nahj
al-Bala\>ghah, vol. 1, p188, on the issue of the shawra . He was very
generous and he would help people particularly during the night.

He never did any injustice to anyone in words or deeds. He would never
speak harshly. He would never sit back leaning in the presence of
someone sitting.174 He would never laugh loudly. He would call upon all
the members of his family and servants to have food together.


