Hadith From Imam Rida (a)
=========================

‘Socialise with one another, so that you get friendlier.’ ‘He who
repents is as he who has no sin.’ ‘Cleanliness and hygiene is one of the
traits and manners of the prophets.’

‘The most superior knowledge is the knowledge of the self.’ ‘(In the
Qur’an) Allah has commanded (us to do) three things which are linked to
another three. He ordered (us to perform) the daily prayers and Zakah,
and he who performs the prayers but not the Zakah, his prayers would not
be accepted. He ordered (us) to be thankful to Him and to the parents,
and he who is not thankful to his parents is not thankful to Allah. He
ordered (us) to be pious and have fear of him, and keep close ties with
the relatives, and he who does not keep close ties with his relatives is
not pious.’

‘He who likens Allah to His creations is a Mushrik (polytheist), and he
who attributes to Him something which He has forbidden is a Ka\>fir
(infidel).’

‘The merit of Ema\>n (faith) is a grade higher than that of Islam
(Submission to Allah’s will), and the merit of Taqwa (Fear-of- Allah) is
a grade higher than that of Ema\>n, and the merit of Yaqeen (conviction)
is a grade higher than that of Taqwa, and the sons of Adam (or human
beings) are not given anything better than Yaqeen.’

‘Ema\>n has four pillars: Trusting and relying on Allah, Contentment
and pleasure with the will of Allah, Submitting to the ordinance of
Allah, and Delegation and turning over (the affairs) to Allah.’

‘Ema\>n is to discharge the obligatory duties and to refrain from
committing forbidden acts. Ema\>n is recognition by heart, admission by
tongue, and practicing, by all limbs, everything that has been
ordered.’

‘The Qur’an is the sturdy rope of Allah and His firm grip, and His
perfect road that leads to paradise, and delivers from the fire. It does
not pall despite the passing of aeons, and does not dissipate despite
being oft repeated, because it was not created for one time rather than
another but it is the argument and proof for all humanity. Falsehood
does not approach it from before or from behind, a revelation from The
All Wise, The All Praised.’

A narrator reports, I asked Imam al-Rid}a\> (A) ‘What do you say about
the Qur’an?’ Imam Rid}a\> (A) replied: ‘It is the word of Allah, and so
do not surpass it, and do not seek guidance in anything else, for you
will be deviated and go astray.’

**The Ninth Imam: Imam al-Jawad**

Imam Muhammad al-Jawa\>d (A) is the son of Imam Ali al-Rid}a\> (A) and
his mother is lady Sabikah. He was born on Friday the tenth of Rajab in
the year one hundred and ninety-five after the Hijrah in the holy city
of Medina. He died a martyr in Baghdad after being poisoned at the end
of Dhi- 174 i.e. he would always sit upright in their presence out of
respect. Ed..

Qqa’dah in the year two hundred and twenty after Hijrah. His son Imam
Ali al-Ha\>di prepared his body for burial and he was buried in the
Quraysh cemetery – as it was then known – next to the grave of his
grandfather Imam Mosa al-Ka\>dim where his shrine stands now, currently
in the Ka\>dimiyyah district of Baghdad, Iraq. Imam Muhammad al-Jawa\>d
excelled all others of his time in knowledge, spiritual perfection,
generosity, social and moral manners, and in the art of eloquent
communications.

He would carry gold and silver with him to give to the needy. If he was
asked for assistance by any of his uncles Imam al-Jawa\>d (A) would give
them no less than 50 gold coins, and if any of his aunts asked him for
assistance, he would give them no less than 25 gold coins.

More people became aware of the vast knowledge of Imam al- Jawa\>d when
some eighty scholars from different places met with him on his way back
from Hajj and asked him various questions, to all of which the Imam
provided convincing and irrefutable answers. On one occasion an amazing
event is reported that many people gathered around him to ask him
various questions, which numbered around thirty thousand, and he
answered all of them correctly, and at that time he was only nine years
old. Age factor, however, is not an issue in the case of the members of
the Family Revelation [of the Prophet], in particular when the holy
Qur’an speaks of giving the Book and Prophethood to Jesus son of Mary
while he was a toddler in the cradle.175

In appreciation to the Imam’s station, Ma’mun, the ruler of the time,
gave to him his daughter in marriage after the Imam answered all the
questions that the ruler had asked him for trial purposes.

175 The holy Qur’an, Mary (19):30. And similarly the case of John the
Baptist (Yah}ya\>) who was given the book and prophethood while he was a
young boy, as mentioned in the Qur’an, Mary (19): 12.


**Hadith from Imam Jawad(A)**

‘He who trusts upon Allah, He guides him to felicity and happiness. He
who depends upon Allah, He suffices him the matters of his life.

The trust in Allah is a fortress where no one other than the
trustworthy believer is housed. Reliance on Allah is salvation from all
evil and protection from all enemies. Islam is a source of honour.
Knowledge is treasure. Silence is light.

The utmost degree of Zuhd (abstinence) is avoiding sin. There is no
destruction for Islam like innovations (heresy). Nothing is more
decadent for man then greed. Through (the pious) ruler the people are
guided. Through supplication calamities are repelled. . . .’ ‘If the
ignorant keeps silent, people would not differ.’ ‘As the beneficences of
Allah upon a person increase, the needs of the people towards him
enhance. Thus he who does not meet those needs, exposes those
beneficences to annihilation.’

‘You should know that you never go out of sight of Allah, so watch in
what state you are.’ ‘The one who commits aggression and tyranny, and
the one who helps him to it, and the one who condones it, they are all
partners in crime.’

‘Forbearance is the garment of the scholar, make sure you clothe
yourself with it.’ ‘The believer needs three qualities; facility from
Allah, selfadmonishing, and acceptance of constructive criticism.’
‘Three practices enable an individual to reach the pleasure and approval
of Almighty Allah: frequent repentance, leniency, and giving to charity
regularly.

And (there are) three qualities which if one possesses, he would never
regret: avoiding hastiness, consulting (with others), and to rely on
Allah once a decision is made.’ The Tenth Imam: Imam Ha\>d\> i Imam Ali
al-Ha\>di (A) is the son of Imam Muhammad al-Jawa\>d (A) and his mother
was Sama\>nah.

He was born in the holy city of Medina on the second of Rajab in the
year two hundred and twelve after Hijrah. He died martyr after being
poisoned on Monday the third of Rajab in the year two hundred fifty four
after the Hijrah in Samara, Iraq, and his son Imam Hasan al-Askari
prepared his body for burial and buried him in his house in Samara where
his shrine stands today.

Imam al-Ha\>di remarkably excelled all others of his time in the fields
of human perfections, knowledge, generosity, politeness of manners,
worshipping Allah, moral qualities, way of life, and discipline.

One example of his generosity is the case when the Abbasid ruler of his
time sent him thirty thousand Dirhams, the imam gave the lot to an Arab
from Kufah, saying, “pay your debts out of this and spend the rest on
your family and relatives, and accept our apologies.” The man, thanking
the Imam, said, “Sir, the debts on me are less than one third of it but
.Allah best knows to whom He entrusts His message.176 and took the money
and left.


**Hadith from Imam Hadi(A)**

‘Better than the good-deed is he who performs it. More striking than
the beautiful words is he who says them. More worthy than knowledge is
he who conveys it. More evil than evil is he who causes it. More
frightening than fear is he who brings it.’

‘Allah cannot be defined except with what he has defined himself. How
can He be defined when wits are unable to perceive Him, imaginations
fail to reach Him, minds cannot explain Him, and the visions cannot
encompass Him?’

‘When justice is dominant, one may not suspect another unless he is
sure of his suspicion about him, and when injustice is dominant, one
should not assume good thing about another unless he is sure of it.’

‘Jealousy erodes the good deeds and brings about the bad fortunes.’

‘Beware of jealousy for it will work against you and will have no
effect on your foe.’ ‘Indeed, both the scholar and the student share in
prosperity.’ ‘Allah has made the world a place of calamity and the
hereafter a place of outcome. He has set the calamities of the world to
be the cause of the reward of the hereafter, and has made the reward of
the hereafter a substitute for the calamities of the world.’

‘Self-conceit restrains (one) from seeking knowledge and brings about
scorn and ignorance.’ 176 This is in reference to Qur’anic verse
[6:124].


**The Eleventh Imam: Imam Askari**

Imam Hasan al-Askari is the son of Imam Ali al-Ha\>di and his mother is
lady H{udayth.

He was born in the holy city of Medina on Friday the tenth177 of
Rabi’-II in the year two hundred thirty two after the Hijrah. He died a
martyr after being poisoned on Friday the eighth of Rabi’-I in the year
two hundred and sixty Hijrah. His son Imam al-Mahdi prepared his body
for burial and buried him next to the grave of his father Imam al-Ha\>di
in Samara where his shrine stands today.

His noble qualities such as his knowledge, generosity, perfect manners,
servitude to Allah and excellent personality are well known and are
ideal examples for others to follow. In physical terms, he was
beautifully tall, had a handsome face, and was perfectly shaped. He
generated great awe in the hearts and electrifying station in the souls.
In his manners, way of life, and the beautiful treatment with people he
used to resemble his great grand father Allah’s messenger peace be upon
them.

On the matter of his generosity Ismael narrates:

“Once I sat on the way waiting for the Imam to pass by and when he did
I complained about my difficulties and asked him for financial help. The
Imam said, “You swear by Allah falsely while you have buried 200 Dinars
as a saving! What I say is not to deny you financial help.” Then the
Imam asked his servant to give him all he had. So his servant gave me
100 Dinars.”178 Having heard about his grace and generosity, a man, who
needed 500 Dirhams, approached Imam al-Askari (A) and the Imam gave him
500 Dirhams, and another 300 Dirhams on top of that.179 177 Some reports
state the eighth.

178 Al-Irsha\>d, vol. 2, p 332
179 ibid

Everyone testified to his beautiful and righteous attributes
magnanimous traits, such that the Christians testified that he resembled
Jesus Christ in his knowledge, noble virtues, and miracles.

The Imam was known for his extensive worship to Allah, continuous night
prayers, his good deeds as well as his nobility and awe.


**Hadith from Imam Askari (A)**

‘No respectful individual abandons the truth unless he becomes debased,
and no abject individual pursues the truth unless he becomes
honourable.’

‘He who advices and criticises his brother covertly, has decorated him.
He who does so in public has rebuked him.’ ‘The best of your brothers is
the one who forgets your sins and remembers your favour to him.’ ‘The
heart of the fool is in his mouth, and the mouth of the wise is in his
heart.’ ‘He who uses false means to achieve his ends would regret his
policy.’

‘Rage is the key to every evil.’ ‘It is sufficient politeness and
courtesy for you to refrain from what you dislike to see from others.’
‘Be cautious about seeking fame and power for they lead to
annihilation.’

**Twelfth Imam: Imam Mahdi**

Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi, al-H{ujjah – the Proof or Authority (of Allah
over mankind) – is the son of Imam Hasan al-Askari peace be upon him and
may Allah hasten his honourable reappearance, and his mother is Lady
Nargis peace be upon her. He was born in Samarra\>’, Iraq, on the eve of
the fifteenth of Sha’ba\>n, in the year two hundred fifty five after
Hijrah. He is the last of the authorities (H{ujjah) of Allah on earth
and the seal of the caliphs or successors of Allah’s messenger peace be
upon him and his progeny. He is the last of the twelve Imams or leaders
of the Muslims.

By His will, Almighty Allah has prolonged his honourable life span in
this world so that the earth is not left without an authority (H{ujjah),
for if it were not for the h}ujjah, “the earth would have subsided and
swallowed its people”180. He is hidden from views, and Almighty Allah
shall permit him to reappear when the earth has been filled with wrong
and oppression, in order to fill it with justice and righteousness181.
The holy Prophet peace be upon him and his pure family, and the ma‘s}oom
Imams peace be upon them, have stated that Imam Mahdi will have a long
occultation, when no one remain steadfast and adhere to his wala\>yah
except those whom Allah has tested their hearts. His benefit to the
people of the earth during his occultation will be like that of the sun
from behind the clouds.

Almighty Allah will keep him alive, but hidden from views, until the
time of his reappearance, when he will reappear by the leave of Almighty
Allah and have total sovereignty over the entire world and spreads
justice and righteousness throughout, and extends Islam through its
every corner, and implements the Qur’an over all and in every aspect of
life; thus goodness, happiness, and prosperity will cover all lands, all
creatures, and then will be realised the Almighty’s word, .to proclaim
it over all religions, though the polytheists may resent.182.

180 Al-Ih}tijaj, vol. 2, p317
181 This is in reference to the Prophetic hadith that Imam Mahdi will
certainly appear to fill the earth with justice and righteousness, after
it has been filled with wrong and oppression. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 26,
p262.
182 The holy Qur’an, [9:33], and [61:9]

O Allah! Hasten his reappearance, ease his immergence, make us amongst
his supporters and helpers.

When Imam Mahdi came to prepare his father body for burial and
performed the deceased-prayer for him, the tyrants of the time learned
of there being a successor to Imam al-Askari, and thus they feared for
their throne, plotted to detained him and eliminate him – just as they
did to his pure forefathers – in a bid to rid themselves of what is
awaiting them, according to the prophecies made by Allah’s messenger
about the news of the 12th imam who will terminate the reigns of the
tyrants and overcome them.

However, Imam Mahdi was commanded by Allah Almighty to go into
occultation and hide from the views of the people. So when Abbasid spies
located his whereabouts, and they stormed his house, he hid from their
views, through exiting from the other door, of the basement of his
house, to outside the house, without any one of them seeing him. And
since the place of his disappearance from views was his house, the
Muslims took the place attributed to him – in the holy city of Samarra’
– which is known as “sirda\>b al-ghaybah” as a shrine and a mosque.

Abu Sa’id al-Khidri reports that when Rasulollah (S) was ill, which led
to his death, Fa\>t}imah al-Zahra\>’ (A) entered the room he was laying
in to nurse him (S) and I was sitting on the right of Rasulollah (S).
Noticing his weakness Fatimah (A) was upset by his state she started to
cry. Rasulollah (S) said to her (A):

‘Why do you cry O Fatimah? Do you not know that Allah sought for the
best on earth and chose your father as His Messenger, and then sought
again He chose your husband and advised me to marry him to you and
instructed me to appoint him as my successor. Do you not know that by
the grace of Allah upon you, Allah married you to the most knowledgeable
of all, and the most forbearing of all, and the foremost of all having
the faith of Islam? Fatimah (A) smiled and Rasulollah (S) went on to
inform her about what Allah has given to the Ahl-ul-Bayt (A) by
saying:

Allah has given us we the Ahl-ul-Bayt six qualities which have not been
given to anyone before us and or to anyone after us the Ahl-ul-Bayt.

1. Our prophet is the best of the prophets and he is your father,

2. and our was}i, or caliph, is the best was}i and he is your
husband,

3. and our martyr is the best martyr and he is your father’s uncle
H{amzah,

4. and from us is al-Hasan the Sibt} (grandson of the prophet) of this
Ommah , and he is your son,

5. and from us is al-Husayn the Sibt} (grandson of the prophet) of this
Ommah , and he is your son,

6. and from us is the Mahdi, Saviour, of this Ommah, behind whom Jesus
will pray.

Then the prophet patted the shoulder of al-Husayn (A) and said ‘and
from him is the Mahdi of this Ommah’’ Ibn Abbas reports that Rasulollah
(S) said:

‘Indeed Ali ibn Abi T{a\>lib is the Imam of my Ommah and my caliph and
successor upon this Ommah after me, from his sons is the Qa\>’im
(al-Mahdi) the Awaited, who would fill the world with justice after it
had been overcome by tyranny and injustice. By He who sent me with Truth
as a Bearer of glad tidings and a Warner, those who remain steadfast and
believe in him are dearer than red sulphur.

Then Ja\>bir ibn Abdullah al-Ans}a\>ri stood up and asked: ‘O
Rasulollah! Will the Qa\>’im from your descendants go into an
occultation?’ Rasulollah (S) replied, ‘Yes by my Lord. For Allah shall
test and purify the believers and wipe out the non-believers. O Ja\>bir!
This matter is one of the secrets of Allah, hidden from the servants of
Allah. Thus I warn you about doubting about this for doubting the wish
of Allah is Kufr (disbelief).’


**Hadith from Imam Mahdi (A):**

‘Almighty Allah sent Muhammad peace be upon him as a Mercy to the
worlds, and with him He perfected His beneficence, and sealed His
prophets, and He sent him (with His message) to all people (to come).’

‘And as for the reason of the occultation, Almighty Allah says, .O ye
who believe! ask not questions about things which, if made plain to you,
may cause you trouble.183 ‘My benefit (to the people) during my
occultation is similar to that of the sun when it disappears from sight
behind the clouds.’

‘I am the Mahdi, and I am the leader of the time, I am the one who
would fill it (the earth) with justice after it has been overcome with
injustice and aggression. Indeed the earth never remains without a Proof
and Authority (of Allah).’ ‘I am the seal of the aws}iya\>’ (successors)
and through me Allah would remove the hardship from my people and my
followers (Shi’a).’

‘We have not ignored your consideration, and have not forgotten your
mention; otherwise hardship would have descended upon you and your
enemies would have exterminated you.’

‘. . . and if Allah give us the permission of speech, then truth will
manifest and falsehood would disappear.’ 183 The holy Qur’an: The Table
Spread (5): 101.

‘As for the ongoing events, refer to the narrators of our hadith (i.e.
the Fuqaha\>’), for they are my claim and proof upon you and I am the
claim and proof of Allah upon them.’ ‘Let every one of you do what
brings closer to our love, and abstain from what brings about our
displeasure and anger.’ ‘Increase and maintain the Du’a for the Faraj
(the reappearance of the Imam) for that is the relief for you too.’

‘Allah insists that eventually Truth must hold and Falsehood must
decline.’

‘Nothing like the daily prayers forces the nose of the Satan to the
ground, so perform the daily prayers and force his nose to the
ground.’

‘If our Shi’a (followers), may Allah help and succeed them to His
obedience, were united in wholeheartedly honouring the promise and
obligation that is upon them, there would have been no delay in meeting
us (i.e. in our reappearance), and bliss and felicity for them would
have hastened by seeing us with full knowledge and certainty of
testifying to our (leadership)’ ‘As for the Dawn of the Relief (i.e. the
reappearance of the Imam), this is for Allah to say, and those
foretellers (about the time of the dawn) say lies.’

‘None of my fathers, peace be upon them, but each of them had
(enforced) upon him an allegiance to the tyrant of his time. However
when I arise there will be no allegiance upon me for any of the
tyrants.’

‘O My Master! You are the One who bestowed upon me this position and
station, and with it favoured me over many of Your creatures. I ask You
to send your mercy and bliss upon Muhammad and his household, and to
fulfil what You promised, for You are truthful and You do not break Your
promise, and You are able upon everything.’

**5. Resurrection**

Resurrection means that Almighty Allah will bring human beings back to
life in the hereafter after having caused them to die in the world, to
reward those who did good for their good deed, and punish those who did
evil for their evil acts.

One who has faith, and does the good deeds, praying, fasting, speaking
the truth, maintaining sincerity, giving shelters to the orphans and
feeding the destitute and suchlike, the Almighty will admit him/her into
Paradise wherein rivers flow; in vast mercy, magnificent palaces,
devoted spouses, and the Ridwan (contentment) from Allah is the greatest
bliss184.

But those who disbelieved, committed evil deeds, spoke lies, broke
promises, committed murders, stole others’ properties, committed
adultery or consumed intoxicants, and suchlike, the Almighty will reward
them a Hell filled with fire and torment, its food is bitter, its drink
boiling, [they are] in permanent suffering, and eternal and demeaning
torture, we seek refuge to Almighty Allah from all that.

Of course, before Paradise and Hell there are two stations: 1. The
Grave, which is the first of the many stages of the Barzakh world to
which ‘death’ is the gateway. In the grave every one will be questioned
about his or her deeds, and the person will be rewarded for his good
deeds, and punished for his bad. For this, Allah’s messenger, peace be
upon him and his pure family, said “The grave is either a pit of Hell’s
pits, or a garden of the gardens of Paradise.”185 As an elucidating
example, one’s condition in the grave is similar to one’s state when
dreaming during sleep; one would either have a pleasant dream that makes
him happy, or have a bad dream causing him stress and torment, while a
person who might be in the vicinity of the sleeping one and sees him
does not realize whether the 184 In reference to the Qur’anic verse
[9:72].

185 Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 6, p275.

sleeping person is in comfort or in torment. In the same way the living
do not see from the dead other than the lifeless bodies; and they do not
realize whether a dead person is in torment or in bliss. This is because
the criteria of the world of Barzakh are governed by new equations, and
they do not resemble any of the equations of the world that we have come
to know and get used to.

2. The Resurrection takes place after these bodies are brought back to
life and resurrected from their graves, when Almighty Allah will bring
together all the people in a vast desert for requital and reward.
Therein the great court of justice will be assembled and the balances
[of measuring or weighing up deeds] established, and the judges – who
are Allah’s messengers and their appointed successors – will come, and
the s}uh}uf or the books of deeds will be disseminated.

The witnesses will come to give witness, and the limbs and the body
parts of the individual will admit to what they did and commit, thus the
believers who did good in the world will prosper by gaining the
Paradise, and the criminals who used to do evil deeds in the world will
suffer the Fire.

Thus it is imperative for one to strive with all one’s ability to do
good deeds, and to refrain from any bad deed, so that one would not
suffer in the hereafter eternal suffering from which there is no refuge
and nowhere to run; where the criminals will remain in permanent
imprisonment and perpetual torment. Almighty Allah states, .So whoso
does a speck’s weight of good will see it, and so whoso does a speck’s
weight of evil will see it.186.
186 The holy Qur’an, the Quake (99): 7-8


