Chapter 18: ’Abd Al-Qadir Jilani and Shihab Al-Din Suhrawardi
=============================================================

By B.A. Dar

Abd Al-Qadir Jilani
-------------------

Shaikh 'Abd al-Qadir Jilani (470-561/1077-1166) was born at a period
when Malikshah the Saljuq (465--485/1072-1091) ruled over a vast Muslim
Empire. This period is famous for great patronage of learning. It was
during this period that the great Nizamiyyah University was founded in
Baghdad by Nizam al-Mulk. But after Malikshah's death in 485/1092, fight
for succes­sion started which brought about anarchy and disorder in the
country. In 513/1119 Sanjar succeeded in securing the throne and was
crowned at Baghdad. But after his death in 552/1157, there was once
again the same anarchy and disorder. Constant wars between the different
factions of the Saljuqs destroyed the peace and security of the Empire.

But there are two events which stand out prominently. They contributed
much towards the disintegration of the social and political structure of
the Muslims of this period. The first was the rise and gradual spread of
the group of people called Assassins under the leadership of Hasan bin
Sabbah. Thousands of people, great and small, fell to the dagger of
these fanatics. The second was the starting of the Crusades.

The first Crusade lasted from 488-489/1095 to 493/1099. The Christian
hordes succeeded in occupying Jerusalem in 492/1099, and putting to
death thousands of innocent Muslims and Jews. News of the disaster and
huge processions of refugees entered Baghdad where people clamoured for
revenge. But the Saljuq rulers were too busy in their wars to take up
the challenge. The Christian invaders were allowed, for a long time, to
rob and destroy the country. Life became unsettled and there was no
peace or security.

It was amid such circumstances that Shaikh 'Abd al-Qadir lived at
Baghdad where he had come from far off Jilan. Being a man of great
intelligence he was soon able to acquire what the usual system of
education had to offer. He then became a pupil of a Sufi saint Hammad
under whose spiritual care he acquired great proficiency in the mystic
lore. For eleven years he spent his life in total seclusion from worldly
affairs. After this period of retirement and spiritual discipline he
came back to Baghdad and adopted the career of a preacher to the people
in response to what he calls the “inner command.”

The students and the people in large numbers began to gather round him
and within a short time the premises where he had started lecturing had
to be enlarged and expanded. At the age of 51, he got married, and died
at the ripe age of 91. He was a man of charming personality and by his
eloquent speech exerted great influence on the people. He stands in the
forefront of the Muslim mystics of all ages, and is the founder of the
Qadirivyah school of Sufism which includes within its fold many renowned
Sufis of the Muslim world.

*Futuh al-Ghaib* (Revelations of the Unseen), a collection of eighty
sermons which he delivered on different occasions, reflects the unstable
condition of the times. He emphasizes in almost every sermon that social
ruin and instability is the result of excessive materialistic outlook on
life; true well-being is the result of a harmonious development of an
individual's personality whose material as well as spiritual demands are
being properly looked after. But as a reaction against the prevalent
materialism he emphasizes religious values to an extent which seems to
be exaggerated.

In the fifty-fourth Discourse, for instance, he advises people in
general to adopt an attitude of total and com­plete indifference towards
the world, to kill desires and ambitions of all kinds. In order that his
indifference in worldly life may become complete and un­alloyed, it is
proper for an individual to remove all things from his heart and
cultivate pleasure in annihilation, abiding poverty, and want, so that
there may not remain in his heart even so much pleasure as that of
sucking the stone of a date.[^1]

With regard to the question of free-will he adopts an attitude of
determinism, though sometimes he tries to avoid the extremes of
deterministic position by resort to what has come to be known in Muslim
scholastic circles as acquisition (*kasb*). He says, “Do not forget the
position of human efforts so as not to fall a victim to the creed of the
determinists (Jabriyyah) and believe that no action attains its
fulfilment but in God. Nor should you say that actions of man proceed
from anything but from God, because if you say so you will become an
unbeliever and belong to the category of people known as the
indeterminists (Qadariyyah). You should rather say that actions belong
to God in point of creation and to man in point of acquisition
(*kasb*)[^2].

But in a later Discourse (sixteenth), he points out that to rely on
*kasb* is *shirk*, i.e., association of partners with God. There is a
verse in the Qur'an[^3] which refers to a particular episode in the life
of Abraham. While denouncing idol-worship, he says that it is God who
created you as well your handiwork (*ta\`malun*).

Muslim pantheists and determinists have always used this verse in
support of their contention, rendering *ta\`malun* as “what you do,”
instead of correct rendering, “what you make.” Shaikh Jilani here
follows the same line, arguing for total determinism, though he does not
advocate cessation of all activities.[^4]

There is another verse of the Qur'an in which God says, ***“Enter the
garden of paradise because of what you have been doing.***”[^5] Here,
the text unequi­vocally points out that paradise is the reward of
actions. But this being incompatible with the creed of determinism,
Shaikh Jilani hastens to add, “Glory be to Him, how generous and
merciful of Him! He ascribes the actions to the people and says that
their entry into paradise is on account of their deeds, whereas their
deeds owe their existence to His help and mercy.”[^6]

Good and evil are the twin fruits of a tree; all is the creation of
God,[^7] though we should ascribe all evil to ourselves[^8]. There is,
however, the question of undeserved suffering which a man of conscience
has to undergo. Shaikh Jilani thinks that the spiritual peace which is
indispensable for a mystic cannot be said to be complete unless he is
trained in the school of adversity. The degree of the undeserved
suffering, according to him, determines his spiritual rank.

He quotes a tradition of the Holy Prophet in this respect: “We prophets
are beset with the greatest number of trials and so on according to
rank.”[^9] What is essential is to hold fast to faith for the ultimate
victory of good over evil. This victory is possible not only in the
hereafter but also in this world. If a man has faith and is grateful,
these things will put out the fire of calamity in this life.

Men can be divided, according to the Shaikh, into four categories. The
first category includes those who have neither tongue nor heart. They
are the majority of the ordinary people, who do not care for truth and
virtue and lead a life of subservience to the senses. Such people should
be avoided except when they are approached and invited to the path of
righteousness and godliness. In that case you shall be following in the
honourable foot­steps of the prophets.[^10]

The second category includes people who have tongue but no heart. They
are people of great learning and knowledge and possess eloquent tongue
with which they exhort people to live a life of piety and righteousness.
But, they themselves lead a life of sensuality and rebellion. Their
speech is charming but their hearts are black.

To the third category belong people who have a heart but no tongue. They
are the faithful and true believers. They are aware of their own
shortcomings and blemishes and are constantly engaged in purifying
themselves of all dross. To them silence and soli­tude are far safer for
spiritual health than talking to and mixing with people.

To the last category belong people who have heart as well as tongue.
They are in possession of the true knowledge of God and His attributes
and are able to reach and understand the ultimate truth. Equipped with
this wisdom and truth they invite people to the path of virtue and
righteousness and, thus, become true representatives of the prophets.
They are at the highest stage, next only to prophethood, in the
spiritual progress of mankind.[^11]

With reference to mystical states, he gives us four stages of spiritual
development. The first is the state of piety when man leads a life of
obedience to the religious Law, totally reliant on God and without any
recourse to the help of other people.

The second in the state of reality which is identical with the state of
saintliness (*wilayah*). While in this state, man obeys God's
com­mandment (*amr*). This obedience is of two kinds. The first is that
an individual strives to satisfy his basic needs, but abstains totally
from any luxurious indulgence in life and protects himself against all
open and hidden sins. The second obedience is to the inner voice, to
what is directly revealed to him. All his movements and even his rest
become dedicated to God.

The third is the state of resignation when the individual submits
completely to God. The fourth and last is the state of annihilation
(*fana'*) which is peculiar to *Abdal* who are pure unitarians and
Gnostics. [^12]

The state of annihilation is the unitive state in which the individual
attains nearness[^13] to God, which implies discarding one's own desires
and purposes and identifying oneself with the cosmic purpose of God. In
this state man comes to realize that there is nothing in existence
except God[^14] - a position which is characteristic of pantheistic
mysticism, though we do not find in the *Futuh al-Ghaib* this statement
associated with the usual metaphysical implica­tions that we find, for
instance, in Ibn 'Arabi and his followers. It is only an expression of
psychological experience of the individual traversing the mystic Path. A
man who reaches this stage acquires the creative power (*takwin*) like
God's, and his ordering a thing to be (*kun*) becomes as effective as
God's.[^15]

Shaikh Jilani holds that mystic intuition gives the recipient knowledge
of reality that is not possible to gain through reason. Not only that,
vision (*kashf*) and experience (*mushahadah*) overwhelm the reasoning
power of man. This manifestation reveals two aspects of God: (a) His
majesty (*jalal*) and (b) His beauty (*jamal*), both of which are
revealed to one at different times.[^16]

But in another Discourse he approaches the problem in a truly empirical
way. He says that the only way to know Reality is to look to the self
(*nafs*) as well as to observe nature (*afaq*). It is only through this
approach that we can arrive at a true conception of God. He quotes with
approval the following statement of Ibn al-'Abbas, the famous Companion
of the Holy Prophet:

“Everything reflects one or other of the attributes of God and every
name signifies one of His names. So surely you are surrounded by His
names, His attributes, and His works. He is manifest in His attributes
and concealed in His person. His person is concealed in His attributes
and His attributes are concealed in His actions. He has revealed His
knowledge through His will and His will is manifest in His continuous
creative activity. He has concealed His skill or workmanship and has
expressed it only when He has so willed. So He is hidden is His aspect
of *ghaib* (unseen) and He is manifest in His wisdom and power. [^17]

Mysticism, according to the Shaikh, is not the result of discussion and
talk but of hunger and privation. It consists of generosity, cheerful
submission, patience, constant communion with God through prayer,
solitude, wearing of woollen dress, globe-trotting, and *faqr*,[^18] and
also of humility, sincerity, and truthfulness.[^19]

Shihab Al-Din Suhrawardi
------------------------

Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi (539-632/1144-1234) was born at a time when the
fate of the whole Muslim world was hanging in the balance. The last king
of the Saliuqs, Sultan Sanjar, died in 552/1157. Soon after the Ghuzz
came on the scene, and carried fire and sword wherever they went; peace
was, however, restored by the Khwarizm Shahs. But in 615/1218 started
the Mongol invasion under Chingiz Khan. One town after another was
ravaged and people were indiscriminately massacred. There was nobody to
check this advance. The people had lost all morale.

It was during this period of insecurity and fear that Shaikh. Suhrawardi
lived. He died in 624/1226, eight years after the death of Chingiz Khan.
These events must have influenced the mind of the Shaikh; hence the note
of pes­simism often met with in his work *Awarif al-Ma'rif*, in which he
expresses with a sad heart the decline in moral character of his
contemporaries. He passed the major part of his life at Baghdad where he
now lies buried. He founded the school of mysticism which is known as
Suhrawardiyyah - after his name. His work *'Awarif al-Ma'rif* is a
standard treatise on mysticism exten­sively used in all mystic circles.

### Origin of Sufism

According to him, the word *sufi* is etymologically derived from
“*suf*,” the coarse woollen cloth which, as he says, was worn by the
Holy Prophet.[^20] He enumerates several other views: (i) The Sufis are
those who stand in the first rank (*saff*) before God; (ii) the word was
originally *safawi* and was later on changed into *sufi*; (iii) it was
derived from *suffah*, the mound where a group of Muslims used to spend
their time in religious learning and ascetic ways of life.

According to Suhrawardi, these derivations are etymologically incorrect,
though with regard to the third it may be said that the life led by the
people of the *suffah* resembled the pattern of life adopted by the
Sufis. He also refers to a particular group of the people of
Khurasan[^21] who used to live in caves far off from inhabited places.
They were called *Shaguftiyyah*, from *Shaguft*, the name of the cave.
The people of Syria used to call them *Jau’iyyah*.

A detailed discussion about the origin of the word *sufi* has already
been given in Chapter XVI, where, on the authority of Sarraj, it has
been main­tained that the word *sufi* was in use in Arabia even in
pre-Islamic days. Suhra­wardi, however, thinks that this word was not
used in the time of the Holy Prophet. According to some people, it
became current during the third genera­tion after the Prophet (*Taba\`
Tabi'in*).

According to others, it came into use in the third century of the
Hijrah. The titles of *Sahabah* (Companions of the Prophet) and
*Tabi'in* (their Successors) were held in great esteem and, therefore,
the word *sufi* - a title of honour, no doubt - did not make its
ap­pearance during their times. But when these peaceful times
disappeared and gave place to turbulent periods of unrest and political
intrigue, pious people found it convenient for their peace of mind to
shun society and live in seclusion and pass their time in meditation and
spiritual exercises.[^22]

### What is Sufism?

Suhrawardi tries to establish a very intimate relationship between
Sufism and knowledge. According to him, knowledge that is followed by
moral behaviour is the main characteristic of Sufi life. Such knowledge
is called by him *Fiqh* which is not used in the usual legal sense but
for spiritual insight as it is used in the Qur'an. He refers to several
Qur'anic verses to prove this point. First, he quotes the verse; ***“He
(God) taught man what he did not know,”***[^23] and concludes that the
spiritual status of man is based solely on knowledge. [^24]

Secondly, he holds that Sufis are the people who acquire spiritual
insight into religion and this helps them lead people to the right path.
This spiritual perception, according to him, pertains to the sphere of
the heart and not to the sphere of the head [^25] He argues that,
according to the Qur'an, knowledge and moral uprightness are the
characteristics of the truly learned persons. He holds that knowledge is
the consequence of *taqwa*, i, e., piety and moral integrity. In a verse
it is said that “those of His servants only who are possessed of
knowledge have *taqwa*.”[^26] This verse is very signi­ficant in
establishing the relationship between knowledge and moral behaviour,
for, as Suhrawardi puts it,[^27] it excludes knowledge from those who
are not characterized by moral integrity (*taqwa*).

But to what kind of knowledge does Suhrawardi refer? In this connection
he enumerates different views. According to some, it is the knowledge of
the psychological states of an individual, for, without this kind of
knowledge, it is contended, it is not possible for a person to
distinguish between different types of revelations and experiences.[^28]

According to others, it is the knowledge concerning worldly matters,
for, without proper information in this respect, a person is liable to
be misled in his religious pursuits. According to Abu Talib of Mecca, it
is the knowledge of the five religious duties of a Muslim.

But, according to Suhrawardi himself, the knowledge which is incumbent
on all Muslims is the knowledge of religious commandments. and
prohibitions. And yet true knowledge, which manifests itself in practice
and moulds and informs the life of the individual possessing that
knowledge, is not formal knowledge that is imparted in schools and
colleges but a state of the heart that grasps the truth of things
without thereby becoming the master of details.

Such a person is called in the Qur'an the one firmly rooted in knowledge
(*rasikh fi al-'ilm*).[^29] He calls it the knowledge which one receives
as a legacy (*'ilm al-wirathah*) from the prophets and saints. He
distinguishes it from the know­ledge gained through formal education
(*'ilm al-dirasah*).[^30] Their relation, according to him, is like the
relation of butter and milk. It is not milk but butter that is the
object of man. We take milk only because it yields butter and fat.

This type of knowledge is usually divided into three stages: knowledge
by inference, knowledge by perception (or observation), and knowledge by
personal experience or intuition (*'ilm al-yaqin,'ain al-yaqin*, and
*haqq al-yaqin*). A person who attains to the stage of intuition, though
less careful in observing ritualistic formalities, is far superior to a
man who has many ritualistic prac­tices to his credit but whose
knowledge is not of the highest type.[^31]

Sufism, according to Suhrawardi, is characterized by two things. It
consists in following the practice of the Holy Prophet (*Sunnah*) and in
inculcating purity of motives and attaining the highest integrity of
character. There are two different categories of Sufis.

The first includes those persons in whom mystic illumination (*kashf*)
is followed by exercise of personal effort (*ijtihad*). He quotes the
example of Pharoah's magicians. When they realized the spiritual stature
of Moses in comparison with their petty tricks, they were overwhelmed by
the effulgence of spiritual illumination as a result of which they
decided there and then to break with the Pharaoh in favour of Moses.
This decision of theirs for which they willingly bore all the terrible
consequences with which the Pharoah threatened them came to them with an
ease that follows spiritual illumination.

To the second category belong those people who lead a hard ascetic life
spending their days in prayers and nights in meditation. It is only
after a long struggle spread over days, months, and years that they
receive divine illumination. Here illumination is the fruit and crown of
personal efforts and hard ascetic life. He quotes a saying of Junaid:
“We did not gain access to the domain of Sufism through discursive
reasoning or intellectual discussion but through hunger, abdication of
worldly lust and prestige, and discarding of even lawful things.”

There are two other kinds of people usually called Sufis but, according
to Suhrawardi, they cannot be included among mystics at all. The first
are the *majdhubs*, i.e., those who receive spiritual illumination
through divine grace but cannot reap the full fruit of their
illumination because they are not able to supplement it with their
personal efforts. The others are the ascetics who spend their whole life
in self-mortification and meditation but whose efforts are not crowned
with illumination.[^32]

In another place, discussing the qualities of a spiritual guide, he
divides persons into four categories:
(1) Pure or absolute ascetic (*salik*). (2) Pure or absolute *majdhub*.
People belonging to these two categories do not deserve to be adopted as
spiritual guides. The absolute ascetic retains the consciousness of self
to the last. He starts with ascetic practices but, unfortunately, he is
not able to ascend to the stage of *kashf*. The absolute *majdhub*, on
the other hand, receives through divine grace a little illumination, and
some veils from the face of Reality (God) are removed for him, but he
does not put in the requisite labour that forms an indispensable part of
mystic discipline.

(3) First *salik* and afterwards *majdhub*. Such a person is fit for
becoming a guide. He starts with ascetic practices and reaches the goal
of his endeavour, viz., spiritual illumination, which relieves him of
the severity of his earlier discipline. He becomes the repository of
divine wisdom.

(4) But the most perfect stage, according to him, is the fourth, viz.,
first *majdhub* and afterwards *salik*. Such a person receives divine
illumination in the beginning and veils are removed from his heart. His
interest in the material world vanishes and he looks to­wards the
spiritual world with eagerness and joyful expectations. This inner
transformation affects his outward life and the antagonism between love
and Law ceases for him. His outward and inward life, this world and the
other world, wisdom and power, all become one. His faith is so deep that
even if all the veils that hide the face of the Real were removed, he
will gain nothing thereby.[^33]

Suhrawardi makes a distinction between a person of the third rank and a
person of the fourth rank. The former who follows the path of a lover
(*muhibb*) is freed from the bonds of the lower self (*nafs*) but is
tied down in the bondage of the heart. The latter who traverses the way
of the Beloved (*Mahbub*) is freed both from the lower self and the
heart.[^34]

Again, the former follows the forms of action (*suwar al-a'mal*) and
thinks that just as a man cannot do with­out a body so long as he is
alive, so action of one sort or other is indispensable for him. But the
man belonging to the fourth category passes beyond all these. He leaves
behind everything - lower self (*nafs*), heart, states, and actions -
and achieves complete unity with God to the extent that God be­comes his
ears and eyes so that he hears with God's ears and sees with God's
eyes.[^35]

Sufism covers both poverty (*faqr*) and continence (*zuhd*), but is
identical with neither. *Faqr* is a difficult term to translate. Usually
it means poverty, but in mystic morality it signifies the positive
attitude of total independence from worldly needs. Suhrawardi quotes
different definitions and descriptions of *faqr* in Sufism given by
several eminent mystics.

Ruyam says that Sufism is based on three principles, the first of which
is attachment to poverty. Ma'ruf of Karkh says that he who does not
possess *faqr* is not a Sufi. *Faqr*, according to Shibli, is
indifference towards all except God. [^36] According to usage of the
terms in Syria,[^37] there is no difference between Sufism and *faqr*.
They argue on the basis of the Qur'anic verse that ***“(alms are for)
the poor (fuqara') who have devoted themselves to the way of
God,”***[^38] which, according to them, is the description of the Sufis.

But Suhrawardi disagrees with this view. He thinks that a person's
constant attachment to poverty and fear of riches is a sign of weakness;
it amounts to reliance on external causes and conditions and dependence
on expected reward. But a true Sufi is above all these things. He is
motivated neither by fear nor by rewards; he is above all such
limitations. Again, adoption of poverty and avoidance of riches imply
exercise of personal will and freedom of choice which is contrary to the
spirit of Sufism. A true Sufi has subjected his will to the will of God
and, therefore, he sees no difference in poverty or riches.

Sufism is, thus, distinct from *faqr*, though the latter forms the basis
of the former - in the sense that the way to Sufism passes through
*faqr*, not in the sense that both are identical or indispensable to
each other. The same is the case with asceticism (*zuhd*), which may be
a preparatory stage for Sufism but cannot be identified with it at all.
There is a Qur’anic verse which says to the believers, to be ***“upright
(qawwamin) for Allah and bearer of witness with justice.***”[^39] This
uprightness (*qawwamiyyah*), according to Suhrawardi, is the essence of
Sufism.

There are three stages in the mystic process; first, faith (*iman*);
secondly, knowledge (*'ilm*); and lastly, intuition (*dhauq*). When a
person is at the first stage, he is called “one who is like a true Sufi
in appearance and dress (*mutashabih*).” When he attains to the second
stage, he is called “one who pretends to be a Sufi (*mutasawwif*).” Only
he who reaches the last stage derserves to be called a true Sufi.[^40]

Suhrawardi again refers to a Qur'anic verse[^41] where three different
kinds of persons are mentioned who have been chosen by God as the
repositories (*warith*) of the knowledge of the Book: ***“Of them is he
who makes his soul suffer a loss, of them is he who takes a middle
course, and of them is he who is foremost in deeds of goodness.”***

The Qur'an uses the word *zalim* for the first, *muqtasid* for the
second, and *sabiq* for the third. According to some, *zalim* is the
ascetic (*zahid*), *muqtasid* is a gnostic (\`*arif*), and *sabiq* is
the lover (*muhibb*). According to others, the first is one who cries
when any calamity befalls him, the second is one who patiently bears it,
while the third feels positive pleasure in it. According to another
version, the first are those who worship God carelessly and as a matter
of routine, the second do it with hope and fear, while the third are
those who do not forget God at any time. These three categories of
people accord­ing to Suhrawardi are identical with the three types of
mystics: *Muta­shabih*, *Mutasawwif* and the Sufi, respectively.[^42]

He refers to two other groups. The first are *Malamitiyyah* who do not
manifest good deeds and do not hide evil. But they are inferior to a
true Sufi who is so engrossed in his experiences and illumination that
he does not know what to hide and what to manifest.[^43] The second are
*Qalandariyyah* who are people of integrity but who do not subject
themselves to full ascetic discipline. They have no ambition for further
spiritual progress and lead a life of happiness and contentment.[^44]

He mentions a group of people who claim that *Shari\`ah* (the religious
Law) is binding only up to a certain stage. When reality manifests
itself to a gnostic, the bonds of the Law disappear. Suhrawardi holds
that these are misguided people, for Law and reality (*Shari'ah* and
*haqiqah*) are not antagonistic but interdependent. He who enters the
sphere of reality (*Haqiqah*) becomes bound to the rank of slavehood
(*'ubudiyyah*). Those who subscribe to the doctrine of incarnation
(*hulul*) and employ the Christian terms *lahut* and *nasut* [^45]
without understanding their real significance are all misguided people.

He holds that the saying attributed to Bayazid, viz., *subhani, ma
a'zamu sha’ni* (all praise to me, how exalted is my position!), if
spoken by him at all must have been said about God and not about himself
as is commonly held. The *ana al-Haq* (I am the Truth) of Hallaj must be
similarly interpreted according to the true intention of the statement.
Suhrawardi adds that if it were known that Hallaj by this statement
implied incarnation (*hulul*), he would condemn him outright.

There are some people who think that they receive words from God and
often converse with Him; and, as a result of this conversation, they
claim to receive messages which they attribute to God. Such people,
according to Suhra­wardi, are either ignorant of the true nature of
their experience or are deceived by their intellectual conceit. The
words they hear are mere words which appear in their mind and in no way
can be attributed to God. Such things appear when a man due to excessive
ascetic practices is morally uplifted. Their attribution to God should
be like attribution of everything to the Creator and not as a result of
any kind of conversation with Him.

He mentions another group of people who claim to be submerged in the sea
of Unity and deny man's free-will and look upon each human action as the
direct conse­quence of God's will or act. It seems that the Shaikh is
referring to those mystics who were later called pantheists, for they
were the people who claimed to be the followers of the true doctrine of
*tawhid*, interpreted by them as the denial not only of any gods besides
God but the denial of any existence besides His.[^46]

Suhrawardi thinks that mystics must live in monasteries (*khanqahs*)
quite unconcerned with the problem of earning their bread. Without
complete break with the world, it is not possible for them to turn their
attention to God and to the purification of their hearts. As this seems
to be incompatible with the generally held view, he tries to justify his
stand by reference to certain Qur'anic verses and the Prophet's
traditions.

There is a verse which says: ***“Be patient and vie you in patience and
be steadfast (rabitu).”***[^47] Suhrawardi interprets the word *rabitu*
in his own way. He says that *ribat* was originally a place where horses
were tied, then it came to be used for a fortress the residents of which
gave protection to the people. Later on, it came to be employed for
monasteries, for the people of monasteries by their godliness are able
to protect people from the influence of evil.

So the word *rabitu* in this verse stands, according to Suhrawardi, not
for struggle against the enemies but for struggle against the self, not
for smaller *jihad* but for greater *jihad*, as a tradition puts
it.[^48] But the Qur'anic verse[^49] that he quotes in the beginning of
the chapter conclusively disproves the whole tenor of his stand. It is
clear that the Qur'an refers to the houses, the inmates of which have
not turned their back upon the world but are engaged in full worldly
pursuits, and these pursuits never stand in the way of their
remem­brance of God.

If monastic life is accepted as an ideal for the mystic, as Suhrawardi
does, it follows naturally that begging and celibacy should be adopted
as the basic principles governing the life of the mystics. Naturally,
therefore, we find him defending both these principles in spite of his
view that they are not in complete accord with the Islamic way of life,
as enunciated by the Qur'an and sanctioned by the Holy Prophet. While
discussing begging, he refers to several traditions which prohibit a man
from begging and yet he insists that a Sufi who is en­gaged in a life of
total dedication to *dhikr-Allah* (remembrance of God) is compelled to
satisfy his minimum physical needs of hunger and thirst by resort to
begging. For justifying his point of view he misinterprets the
traditions.

There is a saying of the Prophet that the most lawful of foods for a
Muslim is what he earns by his own hands. Many mystics tried to explain
it away by holding that “earning by hand” means stretching hand in
prayers to God for sending them food through other persons. He refers to
Abu Talib of Mecca who rejected this misinterpretation and still clings
to it.[^50] There is another tradition according to which the upper hand
(of the giver) is better than the lower hand (of the beggar). But
Suhrawardi, following Hujwiri, interprets it again in his own way.
According to him, the upper hand is the hand of the beggar who by
receiving alms gives blessing to the alms-giver.[^51]

Similarly, discussing the question of celibacy, he wavers between the
two positions. On the one hand, he feels inclined towards celibacy as a
logical con­sequence of the conception of mysticism that he holds. On
the other hand, there are many traditions to the effect that he who does
not marry does not belong to the Muslim community. Ultimately, he leaves
the question to the discretion of the individual mystic or to the advice
of the spiritual guide.[^52]

On the question of listening to music, again, his attitude is
non-committal. On the one hand, he quotes several eminent Sufis who were
fond of music and who referred to several traditions in their support.
On the other, there were several eminent persons who did not like it
because, according to them, there was no scriptural support for it.

While discussing the question of musical assemblies, he points out that
some people look upon these assemblies as innovations. But he adds that
not all innovations are religiously blameworthy and, therefore, the
question under discussion cannot be decided on this ground.[^53] Again,
he quotes a tradition in support of the mystic dance (*wajd*) and
tearing of the mystic robe (*khirqah*) in these assemblies and yet adds
that traditions invariably reject them as unlawful,[^54] and, therefore,
the matter stands where it is. But on the whole he seems to be in favour
of music.[^55]

With regard to travel, Suhrawardi thinks that a Sufi cannot be expected
to conform to any particular pattern of life. He divides Sufis into four
classes in this respect:

First those who start their mystic career as travellers but then change
into stays-at-home. Their travelling is for several purposes ­for
acquiring knowledge, which,: as the Shaikh quotes different traditions,
is incumbent on all Muslims; for visiting people versed in knowledge
(*rasikhun fi al-'ilm*) and benefiting from their company; for observing
the various forms of natural phenomena, for, according to the Qur'an,
God shows ***“His signs in the objective world and in the subjective
world of the self till the truth is clear to them”***[^56]; for moral
and spiritual discipline which will season them and train them to
achieve self-control and other virtues.

The second are those who start their mystic life with a retreat to
solitude and end up with travelling. Such persons happen to enjoy the
company of a perfect saint and under his guidance cover several stages
of the mystic discipline and then after maturity try to consolidate
their position by travelling from place to place.

To the third category belong people who start their mystic life in
solitude and retirement and end with it. “Such people keep their heads
on the knees and find therein the Mount of Sinai.” In other words, they
enjoy the nearness and see the light of divine illumination. It is said
that water if stationary begins to stink. To this the mystics reply that
one should become as vast as an ocean and thereby become protected from
stagnation and nasty smell.

To the fourth category belong people who are always on the move and with
them travelling is the beginning and end of mystic discipline.

### Psychology: Soul, Appetitive Self, Heart

The Shaikh bases his account of the soul (*ruh*) on two verses of the
Qur'an. In the first it is held[^57] that man was created by God from
fine clay, then it successively changed into a moist germ, a clot of
blood and flesh, till all of a sudden this compound of apparently
chemical changes assumed a form beyond the material plane, acquired the
new spiritual dimension and became a new creation (*khalqan akhar*).
Beginning as a piece of matter, man acquires at a certain stage of
development charac­teristics which as if push him out of this plane into
the plane of life. This stage, according to Suhrawardi, was reached when
soul was breathed into him. But what is this soul which changes a piece
of clay and matter into a being of a different dimension? He refers to
the second verse: ***“They ask you of the soul (ruh). Say, the soul is
from the command (amr) of my Lord.”***[^58]

On the basis of this verse, some mystics regard the.soul as eternal - as
being an emanation of God's *amr*, which, as an attribute of God, is
eternal. Suhrawardi, however, thinks that the soul is not eternal but
created (*hadith*), though it is the most subtle of all things and purer
and lighter than all else.

The next question is to determine whether it is an attribute (\`*ard*)
or a substance (*jauhar*). In a tradition it is mentioned that the souls
have the capacity to move here and there, fly to different places, etc.
On this basis some mystics are inclined to the view that soul is a
substance characterized by some definite attributes. But Suhrawardi does
not accept this interpreta­tion.

He holds that the account of the soul in the traditions is only
symbolical and, therefore, cannot be taken in a literal sense. Soul is
neither eternal nor is it a substance but created (*hadith*) and is an
attribute (\`*ard*). It is a created thing which acts according to its
nature; it keeps the body alive as long as it is associated with it; it
is nobler than the body; it tastes death when it is separated from the
body; just as the body meets death when it is separated from the soul.

There are, according to him, two stages of the soul. The first is that
of the animal soul (*ruh al-hayawan*i) which is a subtle body. It is the
source of movement in the human body and produces in it the capacity of
receiving sensations from the outside world. This soul is common to all
animals and is intimately connected with the digestive organism of the
body.

The other grade of the soul is what Suhrawardi calls the heavenly soul
of man. It belongs to the world of command *(\`alam al-amr*). When it
descends upon the animal soul, the animal soul is totally transformed.
Now it acquires the characteristic of rationality and becomes capable of
receiving inspiration (*ilham*).[^59]

The appetitive self (*nafs*) is the source of all undesirable
activities. It has two dominant impulses, rage and avarice. When in
rage, it is like a circular substance which is by its nature always on
the move. When avaricious, it is like the moth which, being not
satisfied with a little light, throws itself headlong into the flame of
the candle and burns itself to death.. A man is able to attain true rank
of manliness when he tries to purify his self (*nafs*) of these gross
characteristics by bringing into play reason and patience.

The self passes through three different stages of development. The first
stage of the Self is evil-prompting (*ammarah*), the second is repentant
(*lawwamah*), while the third is satisfied (*mutma'innah*).[^60]

Heart (*qalb*) is a spiritual principle (*latifah*) and has its locus in
the heart of flesh. It comes into being as a result of mutual attraction
between the human soul and the appetitive self. According to a tradition
of the Holy Prophet (narrated by Hudhaifah), there are four kinds of
hearts. The first is like a pure soil free from all kinds of vegetation.
It is illumined as if by a shining lamp. It is the heart of a true
believer (*mu'min*). The second is a dark, inverted heart which belongs
to an unbeliever. The third belongs to a hypocrite and is enveloped in a
veil. The last is a pure but many-faceted heart, with an inclination
towards good as well as evil.[^61]

### Mystery (Sirr)

There is difference of opinion among the mystics with regard to the
exact place which the secret occupies in the psychological make­up of
man. According to some, it is prior to the soul (*ruh*) and posterior to
the heart (*qalb*) as a spiritual principle. To others it is posterior
to the soul, though higher and subtler than it. According to these
mystics, *sirr* is the locus of spiritual observation (*mushahadah*),
soul is the locus of love, and heart is the locus of gnosis
(*ma\`rifah*).[^62]

Suhrawardi, however, thinks that secret (*sirr*) has no independent
being like the soul and heart. It refers to a particular stage in the
spiritual development of man. When man is able to free himself from the
dark prison of the appetitive self, and looks towards the spiritual
soul, his heart acquires a new characteristic which is called mystery
(*sirr*). Similarly, at this stage his soul also attains a special
position which again is called mystery. At this stage, man acquires the
satisfied self and he acts and wills what God wishes him to do or will;
he loses his individual power of action and freedom of choice and
becomes a perfect servant (\`*abd*).

### Reason ('Aql)

It is the essence of the heavenly soul, its tongue, and its guide. The
Shaikh quotes the usual traditional account that reason was the first
creation of God. God asked it to come forward, to turn back, to sit, to
speak, to become silent in turn, and it obeyed God's orders to the very
letter. At this God said, “I swear by My majesty and power that I did
not create a being dearer and more honourable than you. I shall be
known, praised, and obeyed through you. I shall give as well as take
through you. My pleasure and wrath shall follow deeds through you.
People shall be rewarded or punished in accordance with you.”

Some people think that reason develops from the study of sciences
(\`*ulum*), especially those which are necessary and axiomatic. But
Suhrawardi does not seem to agree to this, for, as he argues, there are
many people who are not versed in any art or science and yet possess
abundance of reason and common sense. It is the inborn capacity of man
which helps him in acquiring different kinds of arts and sciences. There
is placed in man a natural power which prompts him to acquire different
kinds of knowledge. It is thus truly established that reason is the
tongue of the soul which is the Word of God (*amr Allah*). From this
flows the light of reason which then leads to the discovery of
know­ledge, science, and art.

Some people think that reason is of two kinds. By the one, man looks to
the affairs of this world, and its seat is brain. The other reason has
its place in the heart (*qalb*) with which a man looks to the affairs of
the other world. But, according to Suhrawardi, this division is
meaningless and unnecessary. Reason as the vehicle of the soul (*ruh*)
is one. When it is sup­ported and supplemented by the light of the
*Shari’ah* and spiritual perception (*basirah*), it helps a man traverse
the straight path of guidance and tread the middle course of the golden
mean.

Such a person gets knowledge of the heavenly spheres (*malakut*) which
is the innermost secret (*batin*) of the universe. This illumination is
the peculiar characteristic of the elect. Such men are capable of
looking to the affairs of both the worlds, the world of matter and space
and. the world of spirit, the present world and the next world. When
reason is not supplemented and supported by the *Shari'ah* and
*basirah*, a man may be able to do well in this world, but he shall be
deprived of the blessings of the world of spirit.[^63]

As the goal of the mystics is thoroughly practical, their excursion as
novices into the psychological field is really for the purpose of
securing a good ground on which to build an edifice of moral and
spiritual develop­ment. Their aim is to attain a vision of God and enjoy
communion with Him. This involves the necessity of the destruction of
vices and elimination of imperfections, which often raise their head
imperceptibly.

The main cause is the wrong interpretation which a man puts on the
revelations (*ilhamat*) he receives after undergoing mortification. A
true mystic is one who is able to discriminate between the sources of
these experiences (*khawatir*). With regard to the sources, he divides
these experiences into four kinds: (1) those that flow from the
appetitive self (*nafs*), (2) from God (*Haq*), (3) from Satan, and (4)
from the angels. There must be one of the following causes why a person
cannot discriminate between the sources of experiences: (a) weakness in
faith, (b) lack of proper knowledge with regard to the appetitive self
and morals, (c) following the dictates of the appetitive self, and,
lastly, (d) love of the world and material goals.

Anyone who protects himself from all these causes will surely be able to
distinguish between revelations from God and those from Satan. It is an
established fact, according to Suhrawardi, that he whose source of
livelihood is not pure cannot be safe from evil in­fluences. An attitude
of balanced detachment from the material world, morti­fication of flesh,
and constancy in ascetic practices are essential for a true mystic, and
it is only then that a mystic can hope to achieve the beatific
vlsion.[^64]

### State and Station (Hal wa Maqam)

Suhrawardi thinks that most mystics confuse state with station because
there is a great similarity between the two, and yet these must be
distinguished, for otherwise there is a possibility of a
misunderstanding the true nature of the mystic experience.

State (*hal*) as a technical term is indicative of a psychological
condition which is implied in its etymology, viz., its liability to
change and progress, while station (*maqam*) implies a psychological
condition which is relatively permanent. A psychological attitude that a
mystic adopts at a particular stage of his mystic experience may be
called state because the mystic is not yet used to it, but when later on
through practice it becomes a permanent feature of his mystic life, it
becomes a station.

Take, for instance, the attitude of critical examination (*muhasabah*)
of one's self from a moral point of view. When a mystic adopts this
attitude first, it is a state which recurs at different periods; it
comes and goes at intervals. By constant practice, however, he is able
later on to make it a permanent feature of his normal life. Then it is a
station.

Again, the mystic tries to adopt the attitude of meditation or
contemplation (*muraqabah*) which becomes his state. Sometimes he is
able to contemplate but, due to negligence and other distractions, he
cannot find it possible to make it a permanent feature of his life. But
steadily and gradually he gains his desired end and a day comes when
contemplation becomes a station.

Then he advances to the third stage, of observation (*mushahadah*),
where he perceives with his own eyes the secrets of the spiritual world.
This, again, is first a state and only gradually by personal effort
passes into a station. Thus it follows that “station” is a psychological
state which is the result of personal effort, while “state” is the
result of divine grace. Every moral attitude is characterized by both.

Continence (*zuhd*), complete reliance on God (*tawakkul*), and
submission to God's pleasure (*rida'*), for instance, have both these
aspects - at one stage, they are acquired after a constant and toil­some
effort and, at another stage they become a permanent feature of the life
of a mystic due to divine grace.[^65]

Among the states Suhrawardi discusses love, feeling of nearness to God
(*qurb*), bashfulness, reverence, union (*ittisal*), contraction
(*qabd*) and ex­pansion (*bast*), annihilation (*fana'*) and abiding
(*baqa'*), etc.

#### Love

There is an instinctive love in man for wife, wealth, and children, but
the love at which the mystics aim is not instinctive. It flows from the
heart of an individual after he has reached a particular level of moral
develop­ment where all his capacities and tendencies are directed
towards the realization of union with God. It is then that the sentiment
of love appears in him and all inclinations are subordinated to it. He
begins to feel love for God with the full force of instinctive impulse
as well as conscious purpose. There are four kinds of love, according to
Suhrawardi: (1) love of appetitive soul (*nafs*), (2) love of reason,
(3) love of heart as a symbol of spiritual perception, and (4) love of
soul (*ruh*). The love for God which is the ideal of the mystics
combines all these loves.

When love appears in a mystic on the basis of the first three sources,
it is called general love which is the result of direct apprehension
(*mushahadah*) of God's attributes. But when he passes from attributes
to God's essence (*dhat*), his love assumes a new dimension; it flows
from his soul, and he is thus enabled to attain his goal. At this stage
the mystic acquires and appro­priates all the divine attributes. His
position becomes what God says: “When I love a person I become his eyes
and ears, etc. “

#### Nearness (Qurb)

This is not physical nearness but only a psychological state in which
the mystic feels a profound consciousness of intimacy with the Ultimate
Reality. The Qur'an says***: “And prostrate and draw near (to
Him).”***'[^66] On this basis Suhrawardi thinks that attainment of
nearness depends upon concentration on God which enables the individual
to surpass levels of normal consciousness. There are two stages in this
process. In the first place, the mystic falls as if into a trance and is
overcome by intoxication (*sukr*); his consciousness of self (*nafs*)
disappears in the spiritual light of his soul (*ruh*). The next phase
begins when both *nafs* and *ruh* regain their separate identities and
the individual feels the consciousness of nearness intimately and yet,
in spite of it, the consciousness of otherness, which is involved in his
relation of slavehood (*'ubudiyyah*) to God, is also conspicuously
present. He quotes a mystic as saying: “By following the Sunnah one
attains gnosis (*ma\`rifah*), by observing the obligatory duties
(*fara'id*) one reaches nearness, while by practising daily ‘extra’
prayers (*nawafil*), one attains love.”.

#### Bashfulness (Haya')

There is a saying of the Holy Prophet: “Be modest with God as it is due
to Him.” Suhrawardi explained it as follows: “He alone can be called
modest in relation to God who is careful of his daily behaviour towards
Him and remembers his death and the hereafter, with the result that his
heart cools off towards this world and its entanglements.”

But this modesty or bashfulness, being acquired, is a station (*maqam*),
while bashfulness of a special quality is a state. In order to define
it, Suhra­wardi quotes certain sayings of some mystics. One says:
“Bashfulness and attachment (*uns*) hover about the heart, and when they
find that it is possessed of continence (*zuhd*) and piety (*war'*),
they descend into it, otherwise they move away.”

This bashfulness is the submission of one's soul to God for maintaining
the grandeur of His majesty (*jalal*), while attachment is the soul's
experience of pleasure in the perfection of His beauty (*jamal*). When
both bashfulness and attachment combine, it is the end of a mystic's
ambition. According to Abu Sulaiman, there are four different motives of
action: fear, hope, awe, and bashfulness, and that action is the best
which is motivated by the last.

#### Union (Ittisal)

As Nuri says, union is the revelation of the heart and the observation
of secrets. There is a person who attains union through his personal
efforts but loses this position as soon as there is slackness in his
efforts. This is all but natural, for human efforts cannot be kept up at
the same degree of intensity for a long time. Such a person is called
*mufassal*. But the union that Suhrawardi commends is one which is the
result not of personal effort but of divine grace. A person who receives
it is called united (*wasil*). But there are several grades of this
union.

There is a person who receives illumination from divine actions. To such
a person, actions, his own as well as those of others, cannot be
attributed, for his role is only passive. It is God who does all actions
through him and he loses all freedom of choice or independence of
action. Secondly, there is illumination from divine attributes. Here the
recipient through revelation of divine attributes of majesty and beauty
stays at the stations of awe (*haibah*) and attachment (*uns*).

Then there is the illumination of divine essence (*dhat*) which is a
stage towards annihilation (*fana'*). A person at this stage is
illumined with the divine light of faith and in the observation of God's
face loses his individuality. This is a further stage in union
(*ittisal*). It is open only to a few, the *muqarrabin*, who enjoy
nearness to God.

Above it is the stage of spiritual perception (*haqq al-yaqin*) which is
vouchsafed to very few persons and that only for the twinkling of an
eye. It is the complete permeation of divine light in the recipient, so
much so that his self (*nafs*) and heart both feel overpowered by it.
And, in spite of its being a very rare experience attainable by a few
select persons, the recipient feels that he is perhaps at some
preliminary stage of his journey towards union. It is a long and
toilsome journey for which perhaps a life of eternity may not suffice.

#### Contraction and Expansion (Qabd wa Bast)

These two emotional states are dependent for their appearance on certain
preliminary conditions. They are usually experienced by a mystic when he
is traversing the early stages of what Suhrawardi calls the states of
special love.[^67] They appear neither at the stage of general love, nor
at the termination of the stage of special love.

There are some emotional experiences in the state of general love which
seem to correspond to contraction and expansion, but which in reality
are nothing more than fear (*khauf*) and hope (*raja'*), while at other
times they are what he calls grief (*hamm*) and pleasure (*nishat*)
which the experient confuses with contraction and expansion. Grief and
pleasure emanate from the self (*nafs*) which is yet at the appetitive
stage (*nafs-i ammarah*), a stage susceptible to the promptings of evil.
*Hamm* is the feeling of dissatisfaction experienced at the failure of
attaining the object of self-love while *nishat* is the crest of the
wave when the sea of self-indulgence is all astorm.

It is only when the mystic enters the next stage which is connected with
the stage of special love and when his appetitive self becomes the
repentant self (*nafs-i lawwamah*) that the true moods of contraction
and expansion make their appearance. The mood of contraction is the
result of a psychological state when the self (*nafs*) is in ascendance,
while the mood of expansion follows when the heart (as an organ of
spiritual perception) is in ascendance.

When the appetitive self becomes repentant (*lawwamah*), there is a
constant up and down in the urges towards evil; sometimes the urge
towards good has the upper hand, while at others there is a tendency
towards the other pole. The appearance of contraction and expansion
corresponds to these two poles of the life of the self. *Nafs* is the
veil of darkness and heart is the veil of light, and as long as an
individual is in the sphere of these veils, he continues to experience
these two moods of contraction and expansion. But as soon as he passes
beyond these veils, these moods also disappear. In the experience of
annihilation (*fana'*) and abiding (*baqa'*), there is neither
contraction nor ex­pansion; they are intimately connected with the
consciousness of selfhood.

According to some Sufis, the mystic first experiences contraction in his
spiritual development and then it is followed by expansion. Suhrawardi
also holds the same opinion. But there are certain situations where this
order is reversed. Under the mood of expansion, the experient feels
overjoyed and happy. This happiness then filters down to the self
(*nafs*) which is by nature inclined to interpret it appetitively so
that this mood of expansion degenerates into an attitude of pleasure. At
this stage the mood of contraction of necessity makes its appearance to
bring the self to the state of sanity and equilibrium. If the self were
to be free from a tendency towards the extremes, the mystic would be in
a perpetual state of expansion (*bast*) and blessedness.

When the self passes into the last stage and becomes the satisfied soul,
it attains complete harmony and passes beyond the bi-polar strife of
good and evil. For such a person the moods of contraction and expansion
are non­existent.

#### Annihilation and Abiding (Fana' wa Baqa')

According to Suhrawardi, what most mystics describe as the state of
annihilation (*fana'*) is in reality not *fana’* but something else.
According to some, *fana’* is the annihilation of all attach­ment,
absence of all urges towards satisfaction of worldly desires, etc. This
state, according to Suhrawardi, is what is implied in repentance of a
true type (*taubat al-nasuh*).

To some *fana'* is the annihilation of evil attributes and *baqa'*, the
abiding of good attributes. This, again, according to Suhrawardi, is not
true *fana’* and *baqa'* but the result of moral transformation and
purification (*tazkiyah*). There are many phases of *fana’*, but the
state of absolute *fana’* is one where the Being of God is so
overpowering and overwhelming that the consciousness of the finite self
is totally obliterated.

He quotes with approval the following event as a true representation of
the state of annihilation (*fana'*). A person greeted 'Abd Allah b.
'Umar while he was engaged in circumambula­tion (*tawaf*) of the Ka'bah
to which he made no response. Later on he heard that the man had
complained to someone at the absence of his response. At this 'Abd Allah
b. 'Umar replied that in that state he was in communion with God and,
therefore, did not have any consciousness of himself, not to speak of
others.

There are two kinds of *fana’*. The first is the apparent annihilation
(*fana’ al-zahir*). Here the mystic receives illumination through divine
action with the result that freedom of action and choice disappears from
him. He sees all actions, his as well as those of others, emanating
directly from God. At the stage of the real annihilation (*fana'
al-batin*), the mystic receives illumination from God's attributes and
His essence (*dhat*) with the result that he is over­whelmed by the
divine *amr* so much so that he becomes totally immune from evil
promptings of all kinds.

Some people in the state of annihilation lose all consciousness but,
according to Suhrawardi, it is not an essential phase of this state.

In the state of abiding (*baqa'*), the mystic is restored the power of
action which had been annihilated previously. God allows him full
freedom to act as he likes and as the situation demands. In this state
he is conscious of the obligations both to the world and to God and none
of these becomes a hindrance to the other. His duty to the world does
not make him oblivious of his duty to God, nor does his communion with
God debar him from turning his attention to the worldly matters.

The apparent annihilation (*fana' al-zahir*) is for those who are at the
station of heart and are busy with emotional states, while the real
annihilation (*fana' al-batin*) is for those who have passed beyond that
station and attained union with God and who are what he calls *bi-Allah*
(with God).[^68]

#### Union and Separation (Jam' wa Tafriqah)

According to Junaid, near­ness to God in ecstasy (*wajd*) is union while
the sense of selfhood (*bashriyyah*) and absence from God (*ghaibah*),
i.e., awareness of self, is separation (*tafriqah*). Suhrawardi accepts
this position and says that the state where the mystic feels himself
united with God (*tauhid al-tajrid*) is denoted by union (*jam'*), while
ordinary and normal state of consciousness, where the mystic feels the
separate individuality of his own self as well as of other things, is
called sepa­ration (*tafriqah*).

He adds that both these states are complementary; if we ignore union, we
are landed in negation of the divine attributes (*ta\`til*) and if we
ignore separation, it leads to heresy (*ilhad*) and denial of God
(*zandaqah*). Union is annihilation in God (*fana' bi-Allah*), while
separation (*tafriqah*) is relationship of an obedient servant to God
(\`*ubudiyyah*). Union is the result of man's possession of a soul,
while separation is due to his possession of a body, and as long as the
combination of the soul and the body persists, these two states must
equally be emphasized in the life of the mystic.

There is another state which is called by mystics the union of the union
(*jam' al-jam'*). When a mystic looks towards God's action, he is in the
state of separation; when he looks towards God's attributes, he is in
the state of union; and when he looks towards God's essence, he is in
the state of union of the union.[^69]

### Process of Self-Purification

The ideal life, according to Suhrawardi, is the life of a perfect man
who, in spite of the highest spiritual attainments, is yet conscious of
his subservience to the Law of *Shari\`ah*. But this stage of
purifi­cation cannot be attained without a long process of
self-mortification which demands self-examination, introversion,
contemplation, patience, submission to God's will, and an attitude of
complete detachment.

The spark of life that is kindled within the heart of the mystic has a
charm of its own, but it cannot be kept burning unless it is fed
constantly on the oil that flows from continuous efforts towards
asceticism. He receives wayward glimpses of the Infinite Beauty and is
charmed, but they prove fleeting; he wants this experience to be
broadened in extensity and deepened in intensity; be wants this
experience to be stabilized and enriched - hence the necessity of the
whole process of self-purification. The result is second birth out of
the womb of spirit into the kingdom of the re-awakened spirit.

Suhrawardi gives the details of this process of gradual enlightenment.
There are four preliminary stages: Faith, repentance (*taubah*),
continence, constancy in unblemished virtuous actions. These four must
be supplemented by four other things which are essentials of asceticism,
viz., minimum conversation, minimum food, minimum stay-at-home, and
minimum contact with people.

Repentance (*taubah*) over past shortcomings and determination to avoid
them in future are effective only when a person keeps a constant check
over his thoughts and actions and is fully awake to all situations.[^70]
But to maintain this psychological state of repentance there are certain
essential requirements. The first is self-examination (*muhasabah*) and
the other is introversion or meditation (*muraqabah*.). A person asked
Wasti, “Which is the best virtuous action?” He said, “Outwardly
self-examination and inwardly meditation; both are perfected by each
other and help to maintain the attitude of repentance in the mystic
which leads to concentration on and communion with God (*inabah*) “

The other thing that is essential for a mystic is patience (*sabr*)
without which it is not possible for him to continue his life. This
moral quality enables him to endure the vicissitudes of life. It is far
more easy for an individual to show his mettle in adversity than in
prosperity and hence the mystics have emphasized the importance of
patience in a state of affluence which is regarded superior to patience
shown in a state of want.

The next state is that of *rida'* which is in a way the fruit of
conversion (*taubah*) where the mystic enters the sphere of fear and
hope. He feels shocked at the tendency towards evil and, being morally
at a higher stage of development, he fears succumbing to these
temptations. This feeling of fear, therefore, serves to keep him aware
and make him watchful of any fall towards the satisfaction of his baser
self. He is repentant and feels hopeful of ultimate victory over these
evil forces. Thus, the life of the mystic moves between these two poles
of fear and hope and gradually attains the stage of what Suhrawardi
calls continence (*zuhd*), which in a way sums up all that he has
achieved so far.

The stage of continence, in other words, is the stage where the fruits
of conversion (*taubah*) with its constituents of self-examination and
meditation, patience and voluntary sub­mission to God, piety, hope, and
fear, all converge and make the mystic into a perfect ascetic who lives,
moves, and has his being in complete communion with God and in total
reliance (*tawakkul*) upon Him. This second stage of continence is
distinct from poverty (*faqr*). A *faqir* is one who is forced by
circumstances to lead a life of poverty, while the continent person
(*zahid*), on the other hand, adopts this life of detachment of his own
free-will even when the state of affluence is open to him.

The third stage is that of stability in morally virtuous actions.
According to Suhrawardi, a *zahid* who does not follow the Law of the
Shari\`ah is liable to be led astray. It is only through constancy in
action for God (*'aml li-Allah*), remembrance (*dhikr*), recitation from
the Qur'an, prayers, and meditation (*muraqabah*) that a mystic can hope
to attain his objective which is *'ubudiyyah*, perfect obedience to God.

Sahl b. 'Abd Allah Tustari said about this stage: “When a man after
passing through repentance, continence, and con­stancy in virtuous deeds
reaches the stage of slavehood, he becomes totally passive towards the
divine will and of his own free-will decides no longer to exercise his
freedom of choice and action. Then he is granted full power of activity
and freedom of action because he has identified himself with the will of
God. His self-determination is equivalent to God-determination; the
liability of his falling prey to evil temptations and ignorance are
totally obliterated.”

According to Suhrawardi, the stage of giving up freedom of choice and
action is the stage of annihilation, while the second stage where the
mystic freely acts, because his will follows the will of God, is the
state of abiding in God. It is the shedding of the mortal self for the
eternal, material for the spiritual, human for the divine. The mystic at
this stage is the perfect servant.[^71]

Bibliography
------------

Shaikh 'Abd al-Qadir Jilani, *Futuh al-Ghaib*, Urdu translation, Lahore,
1344/ 1925;
Shaikh b. Shihab el-Din Suhrawardi, *'Awarif al-Ma'arif*, Urdu
translation, Newal Kishore Press, Lucknow, 1926;
*Islami Tasawwuf*, Urdu translation of Ibn al-Qayyim's *Tariq al
Hijratain w-al-Bab al-Sa'adatain*, al-Hilal Book Agency, Lahore, n.d.;
Percy Sykes, *A History of Persia*, Vol. II, Macmillan & Co., London,
1951;
E. G. Browne, *A Literary History of Persia*, Vol. II, Cambridge
University Press, 1951.

[^1]: Futuh al-Ghaib, Discourse 54, pp.102-104.

[^2]: Ibid., Discourse 10, pp.23-24.

[^3]: Qur’an, xxxvii, 96.

[^4]: Futuh al-Ghaib, Discourse 27, pp.56-58; see also Discourse 13, p.
29, and Discourse 70, pp. 129-30.

[^5]: Qur’an, xvi, 32.

[^6]: Futuh al-Ghaib, Discourse 27.

[^7]: Ibid., Discourse 27, p. 56.

[^8]: Ibid, Discourse 70, p.130.

[^9]: Ibid., Discourse 27, p.59.

[^10]: Shaikh Jilani extols in many sermons the role of a mystic saint
who, after completing his spiritual discipline and attaining proficiency
in mystic lore, assumes the onerous duty of leading the people to the
way of God. The ideal type of a mystic in his eyes is not one who
becomes a recluse or anchorite but a man of the world who by the example
of his life and the words of his mouth helps the ignorant and misguided
to the way of taqwa, righteousness.

[^11]: Futuh al-Ghaib, Discourse 33, pp.66-69; see also Discourse 77
where a different division is presented.

[^12]: Ibid., Discourse 10, pp.23-26; see also Discourse 18, p.40.

[^13]: Shaikh Jilani is careful to point out that the term union (wusul)
is only symbolical, for this union is something totally different when
applied to human individuals. See Futuh al-Ghaib, Discourse 17, p.36.

[^14]: Futuh al-Ghaib, Discourse 40, p.81; Discourse 17, p.37.

[^15]: Ibid., Discourse 46, p.93; Discourse 13, pp.40-42; Discourse 18,
p.60. Discourse 28, etc.

[^16]: Ibid., Discourse 9, p.21.

[^17]: Ibid., Discourse 74, pp.135-6.

[^18]: Ibid., Discourse 75, p.137.

[^19]: Ibid., Discourse 76.

[^20]: According to the tradition translated by Ans b. Malik, cf. Awarif
al-Ma’arif, Chapter 6.

[^21]: Khurasan had been one of the centres of Buddhist missionaries
before Islam, where, it seems, people adopted the practice of Buddhist
Bhikshus in later times.

[^22]: Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi, Awarif al-Ma’arif, Urdu translation,
Newal Kishore Press, Lucknow, Chapter 6.

[^23]: Qur’an, xcv, 5.

[^24]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chapter 1, p.17.

[^25]: In another place he explicitly says that this knowledge is
intuitional. Only he who experiences it can fully realize its import.
You may describe the sweetness of sugar in any way you like, but it can
be realized only by one who tastes it. Ibid., Chap. 3, p. 43.

[^26]: Qur’an, xxxv, 28.

[^27]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap.3, p.46.

[^28]: Reference is to what is theologically called as interpolations of
Satan in the reve­lations of saints. See the Qur'an, xxii, 51, and also
'Awarif al-Ma'arif, Chap.3, p. 36.

[^29]: Qur’an, iii, 6.

[^30]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap.9, p.21; Chap.6, p.14; Chap.25, p.50.

[^31]: Ibid. Chap.3, p.54.

[^32]: Ibid., pp. 61-64. He adds that any revelation or ecstatic
experience (kashf or wajd) which is contrary to the Sunnah of the Holy
Prophet is unacceptable to the Sufis.

[^33]: Ibid., Chap.10, pp. 103-07. But Ghazali thinks otherwise.
According to him, the third category is the perfect specimen of
spiritual leaders. See B.A. Dar's article, “Intellect and Intuition,” in
Iqbal, Vol. IV, No. 3, pp. 97-99.

[^34]: He defines nafs as a dark earthly veil and qalb as a veil of
heavenly light.

[^35]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap.10, pp.103-107.

[^36]: One mystic, Abu al-Muzaffar Farmaisi, said that faqir is one who
is independent even of God. Such a saying is, of course, a blasphemy,
but almost all mystics have tried to explain away its sting. Qushairi in
his Risalah and Suhrawardi in his book both try to justify this saying,
but Ibn al-Qayyim is not satisfied with any of these explanations and
rejects this definition in two. See Islami Tasawuruf, al-Hilal Book
Agency, Lahore, pp. 124-26

[^37]: Syria here does not stand for the geographical area which is now
called Syria. Previously, nearly all the land now including Iraq,
Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, etc., was called Syria.

[^38]: Qur’an, ii, 273.

[^39]: Ibid., v, 8.

[^40]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap.7, pp.80ff.

[^41]: Qur’an, xxxv, 32.

[^42]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap.7, p.82.

[^43]: Ibid., Chap.8, pp.85-90.

[^44]: Ibid., Chap. 9, pp.90-92.

[^45]: Lahut and nasut are terms for the divine and human aspects of
Christ's personality. This doctrine became the basis of many
controversies in the Christian Church and many sects like the Nestorians
and Monophysites (or Jacobites) appeared in Syria and Egypt
respectively. But in spite of Suhrawardi's protests, these terms were
used first by Hallaj and then by Ibn 'Arabi and even Ghazali, after
which they were accepted by almost all later mystics.

[^46]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap.9, pp. 93-96.

[^47]: Qur’an, iii, 199.

[^48]: He quotes the story of two brothers, one of whom was a Sufi and
the other a soldier. The latter wrote to his brother inviting him to
join war against the enemy because the times were critical. The Sufi
brother refused to accept his advice for he preferred his way of life to
that of his brother's, with the remarks: “If all people were to follow
my path and remember Allah sitting on their prayer-carpets, they would
have conquered Constantinople.”' Awarif al-Ma'arif, Chap. 13, pp.
125-26.

[^49]: Qur’an, xxiv, 36-37. “In houses which Allah has permitted to be
exalted so that His name may be remembered in them; they glorify Him
therein in the morning and evening, men whom neither merchandise nor
selling diverts from remembrance of Allah ....”

[^50]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap.19, pp.178-179.

[^51]: Ibid., Chaps. 19, 20, pp. 173, 186.

[^52]: Ibid., Chap. 21, pp. 192-206. It appears that, in his estimation
of women, he is influenced by the Christian doctrine that woman is the
source of all evil. See p.195.

[^53]: Ibid., p.224.

[^54]: Ibid., p.248.

[^55]: Ibid., Chaps. 22, 23, 24 and 25.

[^56]: Qur’an, xli, 53.

[^57]: Ibid., xxiii, 12-14.

[^58]: Qur’an, xvii, 85.

[^59]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, p.552.

[^60]: Ibid., pp.555-558.

[^61]: Ibid., p553.

[^62]: The Shaikh points out that the Qur’an mentions only soul (ruh),
self (nafs), reason (‘aql), heart (fu’ad), but there is not reference to
what Sufis call sirr. See Awarif al-Ma’arif, p.558.

[^63]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap. 56, pp.541-64

[^64]: Ibid., Chap.57, pp.565-78.

[^65]: Ibid., Chap. 58, pp.578-82.

[^66]: Qur’an, xcvi, 19.

[^67]: As previously stated in this chapter, general love is the result
of observation of divine attributes as distinguished from special love
which appears when the mystic passes to the observation of divine
essence (dhat).

[^68]: Awarif al-Ma’arif, Chap. 61, pp.623-53.

[^69]: Ibid., pp.655-57.

[^70]: He calls them scolding of one's self (zajr), warning (intibah),
and awakening (bidari).

[^71]: 'Awarif al-Ma arif, Chap. 59, pp. 585-600.


