Chapter 19: Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi Maqtul
===========================================

By Seyyed Hossein Nasr

The intellectual life of Islam and that of Christianity - the two sister
civili­zations in the Middle Ages can be compared with each other to a
large extent through the role that Aristotelian philosophy played in
them. Peripatetic science and philosophy entered the Western world
through translations from Arabic in the seventh/thirteenth century and
eventually became dominant to such an extent as to replace the
Augustinian and Platonic wisdom of the earlier period only to be
overthrown itself by the humanistic rationalism of the Renaissance.

In Islam the attack of Sufis and theologians upon the ratio­nalistic
aspect of Aristotelian philosophy weakened its hold at the very time
when that philosophy was gaining strength in the Christian West and was
replaced in the Muslim world by two elements, the doctrinal Sufism of
Muhyi al-Din ibn 'Arabi and the *Hikmat al-Ishraq*[^1] or illuminative
wisdom of Shaikh al-Ishraq Shihab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash ibn Amirak
Suhrawardi,[^2] both of which aimed at an effective realization of the
“truth” and replaced the rationalism of Peripatetic philosophy by
intellectual intuition (*dhauq*).

Life, Works and Sources of Doctrines
------------------------------------

Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi, whose *ishraqi* wisdom has played such a great
role in the intellectual and spiritual life of Islam and especially of
Shi'ism, was born in Suhraward, a village near the present city of
Zinjan in northern Persia, in 549/1153. He studied at first with Majd
al-Din Jili at Maraghah and later with Zahir al-Din Qari at Ispahan.
Having finished his formal studies, he began to travel through Persia,
meeting various Sufi masters and benefiting from their presence and
teachings. During this period he spent much time in meditation and
invocation in spiritual retreats. He also journeyed during the same
period through the regions of Anatolia and Syria and acquired great love
for the cities of these countries.

On one of his journeys, he went from Damascus to Aleppo and met Malik
Zahir, the son of Salah al-Din Ayyubi, the celebrated Muslim ruler.
Malik Zahir became much devoted to Shihab al-Din and asked him to stay
at his Court. It was here that the master of *ishraq* fell into disgrace
with the religious authorities in the city who considered some of his
statements dangerous to Islam. They asked for his death, and when Malik
Zahir refused, they petitioned Salah al-Din himself who threatened his
son with abdication unless he followed the ruling of the reli­gious
leaders. Shihab al-Din was thereby imprisoned and in the year 587/1191,
at the age of 38, he was either suffocated to death or died of
starvation.[^3]

Many miraculous features have been connected with the life of Suhrawardi
and many stories told of his unusual powers. His countenance was
striking to all his contemporaries. His illuminated and ruddy face and
dishevelled hair, his handsome beard and piercing eyes reminded all who
met him of his keen intelligence. He paid as little attention to his
dress as he did to his words. Sometimes he wore the woollen garb of the
Sufis, sometimes the silk dress of the courtiers. His short and tragic
life contains many similarities to the life of Hallaj, whom he quoted so
often, and to that of the Sufi poet 'Ain al­-Qudat Hamadani who was to
follow a similar career a few years later.

The writings of Suhrawardi are numerous despite his short and turbulent
life. Some of them have been lost, a few published, and the rest remain
it manuscript form in the libraries of Persia, India, and Turkey.[^4]
Unlike his predecessors, Ibn Sina and al-Ghazali, he was never
translated into Latin and, therefore, never became well known in the
Western world. Yet, his influence in the East can almost match that of
Ibn Sina, and any history of Islamic philosophy written without
mentioning him and the school of *Ishraq* is, to say the least,
incomplete.

Histories of Muslim philosophy written by Western­ers, like Munk and de
Boer, usually end with Ibn Rushd because the authors have considered
only that aspect of Muslim philosophy which influenced Latin
scholasticism. Actually, the seventh/thirteenth century, far from being
the end of speculative thought in Islam, is really the beginning of this
most impor­tant school of *Ishraq*. Suhrawardi's writings came to the
East at the same time as Peripatetic philosophy was journeying westward
to Andalusia and from there through the influence of Ibn Rushd and
others to Europe.

There are altogether about fifty titles of Suhrawardi's writings which
have come down to us in the various histories and biographies.[^5] They
may be divided into five categories as follows: [^6]

1. The four large doctrinal treatises, the first three dealing with
Aristotelian (*masha'i*) philosophy with certain modifications and the
last with *ishraqi* wisdom proper. These works, all in Arabic, include
the *Talwihat*, *Muqawwamat*, *Mutarahat*, and the *Hikmat
al-Ishraq*.[^7]

2. Shorter doctrinal treatises like *Hayakil al-Nur*, *al-Alwah
al-\`Imadiyyah*, *Partau-Nameh*, *I\`tiqad al-Hukama'*, *al-Lamahat*,
*Yazdan Shinakht*, and *Bustan al-Qulub* [^8] all of which explain
further the subject-matter of the larger treatises. These works are
partly in Arabic and partly in Persian.

3. Initiatory narratives written in symbolic language to depict the
journey of the initiate towards gnosis (*ma\`rifah*) and illumination
(*ishraq*). These short treatises, all written in Persian, include
*'Aql-i Surkh*, *Awaz-i Par-i Jibra'il*, *al-Ghurbat al-Gharbiyyah*
(also in Arabic), *Lughat-i Muran*, *Risalah fi Halat al-Tufuliyyah*,
*Ruzi ba Jama\`at-i Sufiyan*, *Risalah fi al-Mi\`raj*, and *Safir-i
Simurgh*.

4. Commentaries and transcriptions of earlier philosophic and initiatic
texts and sacred Scripture like the translation into Persian of the
*Risalat al-Ta'ir* of Ibn Sina, the commentary in Persian upon Ibn
Sina's *Isharat wa Tanbihat*, and the treatise *Risalah fi Haqiqat
al-\`Ishq* which last is based on Ibn Sina's *Risalat al-\`Ishq* and his
commentary upon the verses of the Qur'an and on the Hadith.[^9]

5. Prayers, litanies, invocations, and what may be called books of the
hour, all of which Shahrazuri calls *al-Waridat w-al-Taqdisat*.

These works and the large number of commentaries written upon them
during the last seven centuries form the main corpus of the tradition of
*ishraq* and are a treasure of traditional doctrines and symbols
combining in them the wisdom of Sufism with Hermeticism, and
Pythagorean, Platonic, Aristotelian, and Zoroastrian philosophies
together with some other diverse elements. There is little doubt that
Suhrawardi is greatly indebted to the Muslim philosophers, especially
Ibn Sina, for the formulation of many of his ideas.

Moreover, inasmuch as he is a Sufi as well as a philosopher or, more
properly speaking, a theosophist, [^10] he is in debt, both for
spiritual inspiration and for his doctrines, to the great chain of Sufi
masters before him. More specifically he is indebted to Hallaj whom he
quotes so often and to al-Ghazali whose *Mishkat al-Anwar* played so
important a role in his doctrine of the relation of light to the Imam.

Suhrawardi came also under the influence of Zoroastrian teaching,
particu­larly in angelology and the symbolism of light and
darkness.[^11] He identified the wisdom of the ancient Zoroastrian sages
with that of Hermes and, there­fore, with the pre-Aristotelian
philosophers, especially Pythagoras and Plato, whose doctrines he sought
to revive.

Finally, he was influenced directly by the vast tradition of Hermeticism
which is itself the remains of ancient Egyptian, Chaldaean and Sabaean
doctrines metamorphosed within the matrix of Hellenism and is based on
the primordial symbolism of alchemy. Suhrawardi considered himself to be
the reviver of the perennial wisdom, philosophia perennis, or what he
calls *Hikmat al-Ladunniyyah* or *Hikmat al-\`Atiqah* which existed
always among the Hindus, Persians, Babylonians, Egyptians, and the
ancient Greeks up to the time of Plato.[^12]

The concept of the history of philosophy for Suhrawardi and his school
is itself of great interest. This school identifies philosophy with
wisdom rather than with rational systematization. Philosophy for it does
not begin with Plato and Aristotle; rather, it ends with them.
Aristotle, by putting wisdom in a rationalistic dress, limited its
perspective and separated it from the unitive wisdom of the earlier
sages.[^13]

From the *Ishraqi* point of view, Hermes or the Prophet Idris is the
father of philosophy, having received it as revelation from heaven. He
was followed by a chain of sages in Greece and in ancient Persia and
later in Islam which unified the wisdom of previous civilizations in its
milieu. The chain of transmission of *ishraqi* doctrines, which must be
understood symbolically rather than only historically, may be
schematized as follows:

In the introduction to his *Hikmat al-lshraq*, Suhrawardi states
explicitly the nature of *ishraqi* wisdom and its relation to ancient
doctrines. As he writes: “Although before the composition of this book I
composed several summary treatises on Aristotelian philosophy, this book
differs from them and has a method peculiar to itself. All of its
material has not been assembled by thought and reasoning; rather,
intellectual intuition, contemplation, and ascetic practices have played
an important role in it.

Since our sayings have not come by means of rational demonstration but
by inner vision and con­templation, they cannot be destroyed by the
doubts and temptations of the sceptics. Whoever is a traveller (*salik*)
on the way to truth is my companion and a help on this Path. The
procedure of the master of philosophy, the divine Plato, was the same,
and the sages who preceded Plato in time like Hermes, the father of
philosophy, followed the same path.

Since sages of the past, because of the ignorance of the masses,
expressed their sayings in secret symbols (*rumuz*), the refutations
which have been made against them have concerned the exterior of these
sayings and not their real intentions. And the *ishraqi* wisdom the
foundation and basis of which are the two principles of light and
darkness as established by the Persian sages like Jamasp, Far­shadshur,
and Buzarjumihr is among these hidden, secret symbols. One must never
think that the light and darkness which appear in our expressions are
the same as those used by the infidel Magi, or the heretical Manichaeans
for they finally involve us in idolatry (*shirk*) and dualism.”[^14]

The Meaning of Ishraq
---------------------

The Arabic words *ishraq* meaning illumination and *mashriq* meaning the
east are both derived etymologically from the root *sharq* meaning the
rising of the sun. Moreover, the adjective illuminative, *mushriqiyyah*,
and Oriental, *mashriqiyyah*, are written in exactly the same way in
Arabic. This symbolic identification of the Orient with light which is
inherent in the Arabic language and is employed often by the Ishraqi
sages, has given rise to many difficulties in the interpretations of
that wisdom which is both illuminative and Oriental.

Already in his *Mantiq al-Mashriqiyyin* most of which is lost, Ibn Sina
refers to an Oriental wisdom which is superior to the commonly accepted
Peripatetic (*masha'i*) philosophy.[^15] Due to the fact that the word
*mashriqiyyun* could also be read as *mushriqiyyin* in Arabic, the
latter meaning illuminative, one could interpret the esoteric teachings
which Ibn Sina proposes as being illu­minative as well as Oriental.

Since the famous article of Nallino,[^16] it has become common opinion
that the reading is Oriental and has nothing to do with illumination.
Yet, this opinion, however correct it may be linguistically, is
essentially limited in that it does not take into account the profound
sym­bolism inherent in the language and does not consider the great debt
which Suhrawardi and *ishraqi* wisdom owe to Ibn Sina.

Suhrawardi writes that Ibn Sina wanted to recapture Oriental philosophy
but did not have access to the necessary sources.[^17] Yet, if we
consider how the sacred geography of the Orient of light and the
Occident of darkness in the initiatory trilogy of Ibn Sina, *Hayy Ibn
Yaqzan*, *Risalat al- Ta'ir*, and *Salaman wa Absal*, is followed by
Suhrawardi, how the Shaikh al-Ishraq translated several of the treatises
of Ibn Sina into Persian, and how parts of *Hikmat al-Ishraq* resemble
closely the commentary of Ibn Sina upon the *Theology of Aristotle*, it
will become clear how profoundly the roots of Ishraqi philosophy lie in
certain of the later non-Aristotelian works of Ibn Sina and how
illumina­tion and the Orient are united in this form of wisdom.

The unification of the meaning of illumination and the Orient in the
term *ishraq* is connected with the symbolism of the sun which rises in
the Orient and which illuminates all things so that the land of light is
identified with that of gnosis and illumination.[^18]

Inasmuch as the Occident is where the sun sets, where darkness reigns,
it is the land of matter, ignorance, or dis­cursive thought, entangled
in the mesh of its own logical constructions. The Orient is, on the
contrary, the world of light, of being, the land of knowledge, and of
illumination which transcends mere discursive thought and rational­ism.
It is the land of knowledge which liberates man from himself and from
the world, knowledge which is combined with purification and
sanctity.[^19]

It is for this reason that Suhrawardi connects *ishraqi* wisdom with the
ancient priest-kings of Persia like Kai Khusrau and with the Greek sages
like Ascle­pius, Pythagoras, and Plato whose wisdom was based on inner
purification and intellectual intuition rather than on discursive
logic.[^20]

In a historical sense, *ishraqi* wisdom is connected with
pre-Aristotelian metaphysics. Jurjani in his *Ta’rifat* calls the
Ishraqis “the philosophers whose master is Plato.” 'Abd al-Razzaq
Kashani, the celebrated Sufi, in his com­mentary upon the *Fusus
al-Hikam* of Ibn 'Arabi writes that the Ishraqis derive their chain from
Seth, often identified with Agathodemon, from whom craft initiations and
Hermetic orders also derive their origin. Ibn Wahshiyyah in his
*Nabataean Agriculture* mentions a class of Egyptian priests who were
the children of the sister of Hermes and who were called *Ishraqiyyun*.
[^21]

Suhra­wardi himself writes in his *Mutarahat* that the wisdom of Ishraq
was possessed by the mythological priest-kings of ancient Persia,
Kiumarth, Faridun, and Kai Khusrau and then passed on to Pythagoras and
Plato, the latter being the last among the Greeks to possess it, and was
finally inherited by the Muslim Sufis like Dhu al-Nun Misri and Bayazid
Bistami.[^22]

Both metaphysically and historically, *ishraqi* wisdom means the ancient
pre-discursive mode of thought which is intuitive (*dhauqi*) rather than
dis­cursive (*bahthi*) and which seeks to reach illumination by
asceticism and puri­fication. In the hands of Suhrawardi it becomes a
new school of wisdom integ­rating Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy
with Zoroastrian angelology and Hermetic ideas and placing the whole
structure within the context of Sufism.

In reading the texts of Suhrawardi one is particularly struck by the
large number of quotations from the Qur'an, Hadith, and the sayings of
earlier Sufis and by the profound transformation into the Islamic mould
of all the diverse ideas which Suhrawardi employs. It is by virtue of
such an integration and transformation that the *ishraqi* wisdom could
come to play such a major role in Shi'ism.

In the introduction to *Hikmat al-Ishraq*, Suhrawardi outlines the
hierarchy of those who know in a manner which demonstrates how he
integrates ancient wisdom into the perspective of Islam. There are,
according to this scheme, four major types of “knowers”: -

1. The *hakim ilahi*, or *theosophos*, who knows both discursive
philosophy, i.e., Aristotelianism, and gnosis (*ta'alluh*). Suhrawardi
considers Pytha­goras, Plato, and himself among this group.

2. The sage who does not involve himself with discursive philosophy but
remains content with gnosis, like Hallaj, Bistami, and Tustari.

3. The philosopher who is acquainted with discursive philosophy but is a
stranger to gnosis like Farabi or Ibn Sina.[^23]

4. He who still seeks knowledge (*talib*) but has not yet reached a
station of knowledge.

Above all these degrees is that of the Pole (*Qutb*) or Leader (*Imam*)
who is the head of the spiritual hierarchy and of his representatives
(*khulafa'*).[^24]

The stations of wisdom are also described in a purely Sufi fashion as
degrees of penetration into the divine unity expressed by the
*shahadah*. In his initiatory treatise, *Safir-i Simurgh* (Song of the
Griffin), Suhrawardi enumerates five degrees of unity [^25]: *la ilaha
il-Allah*, none is worthy of worship but God, which is the common
acceptance of the oneness of God and rejection of any other divinity;
*la huwa illa huwa*, there is no he but He, which is the negation of any
otherness than God, i, e., only God can be called “He”; *la anta illa
anta*, there is no thou but Thou, which is the negation of all thouness
outside of God; *la ana illa ana*, there is no “I” but the divine “I”,
which means that only God can say “I”; finally, the highest station of
unity which is that of those who say *wa kullu shai'-in halikun illa
wajhahu*, i.e., all things perish except His face (essence) [^26].

The formulations of Sufism become, therefore, the framework of his
classification of knowledge into which he tries to place the heritage of
universal gnosis and philosophy inherited by Islam.

The Orient and Occident in Sacred Geography
-------------------------------------------

As already mentioned, the term *ishraq* is closely connected with the
symbol­ism of directions and sacred geography which are essential
elements of the traditional sciences. In the trilogy of Ibn Sina to
which we have already re­ferred, the disciple passes from the Occident
which is the world of matter, through intermediate Occidents and Orients
which are the heavens and separate substances, to the Orient proper
which symbolizes the world of archangels.

A similar division of the cosmos occurs in the writings of Suhrawardi.
The Occident is the world of matter, the prison into which man's soul
has fallen and from which he must escape. The Orient of lights is the
world of archangels above the visible cosmos which is the origin of his
soul (*ruh*). The middle Occident is the heavens which also correspond
to the various inner faculties of man.

It is important to note that, contrary to Peripatetic philosophy, the
Ishraqis hold that the boundary between the Occident and the Orient is
set at the *primum mobile*; all that is visible in the cosmos including
the celestial spheres is a part of the Occident, because it is still
connected with matter, however subtle it may be. The Orient, properly
speaking, is above the visible cosmos; it is the world of informal
manifestation with its boundary at the heaven of the fixed stars.

In his treatise *al-Qissat al-Ghurbat al- Gharbiyyah*, “the Story of the
Occidental Exile,” in which Suhrawardi seeks to reveal the secrets of
the trilogy of Ibn Sina, the universe becomes a crypt through which the
seeker after truth must journey, beginning with this world of matter and
darkness into which he has fallen and ending in the Orient of lights,
the original home of the soul, which symbolizes illumination and
spiritual realization.[^27]

The journey begins at the city of Qairawan in present-day Tunis, located
west of the main part of the Islamic world.[^28] The disciple and his
brother are imprisoned in the city at the bottom of a well which means
the depth of matter. They are the sons of Shaikh Hadi ibn al-Khair
al-Yamani, i, e., from the Yaman, which in Arabic means also the right
hand and, therefore, symbolically the Orient, and is connected
traditionally with the wisdom of the Prophet Solomon and the ancient
sages as the left is connected with matter and darkness.[^29]

Above the well is a great castle with many towers, i.e., the world of
the elements and the heavens or the faculties of the soul. They will be
able to escape only at night and not during the day which means that man
reaches the intelligible or spiritual world only in death, whether this
be natural or initiatory, and in dream which is a second death. In the
well there is such darkness that one cannot see even one's own hands, i,
e., matter is so opaque that rarely does light shine through it.
Occasionally they receive news from the Yaman which makes them homesick,
meaning that they see the intelligible world during contemplation or in
dreams. And so, they set out for their original home.

One clear night an order is brought by the hoopoe from the Governor of
the Yaman telling them to begin their journey to their homeland, meaning
the reception of a revelation from the intelligible world and the
beginning of asceticism. The order also asks them to let go the hem of
their dress, i.e., become free from attachment, when they reach the
valley of ants, which is the passion of avidity. They are to kill their
wives, i.e., passions, and then sit in a ship and begin their journey in
the name of God.[^30] Having made their preparation they set out for
their pilgrimage to Mount Sinai.

A wave comes between the disciple and the son, meaning that the animal
soul is sacrificed. Morning is near, that is, the union of the
particular soul with the universal soul is approaching. The hero
discovers that the world in which evil takes place, meaning this world,
will be overturned and rain and stones, i.e., diseases and moral evils,
will descend upon it. Upon reaching a stormy sea he throws in his
foster-mother and drowns her, meaning that he even sacrifices his
natural soul.

As he travels on still in storm, i, e., in the body, he has to cast away
his ship in fear of the king above him who collects taxes, meaning death
which all mortals must taste. He reaches the Mount of Gog and Magog, i,
e., evil thoughts and love of this world enter his imagination. The
jinn, the powers of imagination and meditation, are also before him as
well as a spring of running copper which symbolizes wisdom. The hero
asks the jinn to blow upon the copper which thus becomes fiery, and from
it he builds a dam before Gog and Magog.

He takes the carnal soul (*nafs ammarah*) and places it in a cave, or
the brain which is the source of this soul. He then cuts the “streams
from the liver of the sky,” i. e., he stops the power of motion from the
brain which is located in the head, the sky of the body. He throws the
empyrean heaven so that it covers all the stars, the sun, and the moon,
meaning all powers of the soul become of one colour, and passes by
fourteen coffins, the fourteen powers of *ishraqi* psychology,[^31] and
ten tombs, the five external and the five internal senses. Having passed
through these stages he discovers the path of God and realizes that it
is the right path.

The hero passes beyond the world of matter and reaches a light, the
active intellect which is the governor of this world. He places the
light in the mouth of a dragon, the world of the elements, and passes by
it to reach the heavens and beyond them to the signs of the Zodiac which
mark the limit of the visible cosmos. But his journey is not yet at an
end; he continues even beyond them to the upper heavens. Music is heard
from far away, and the initiate emerges from the cavern of limitation to
the spring of life[^32] flowing from a great mountain which is Mount
Sinai. In the spring he sees fish that are his brothers; they are those
who have reached the end of the spiritual journey.

He begins to climb the mountain and eventually reaches his father, the
archangel of humanity, who shines with a blinding light which nearly
burns him. The father congratulates him for having escaped from the
prison of Qairawan, but tells him that he must return because he has not
yet cast away all bonds. When he returns a second time, he will he able
to stay. The father tells him that above them is his father, the
universal intellect, and beyond him their relatives going back to the
Great Ancestor who is pure light. “All perishes except His
essence.”[^33]

From this brief summary we see how *ishraqi* wisdom implies essentially
a spiritual realization above and beyond discursive thought. The cosmos
be­comes transparent before the traveller and interiorized within his
being. The degrees of realization from the state of the soul of fallen
man to the centre of the soul freed from all limitation corresponds
“horizontally” to the journey from the Occident of matter to the Orient
of lights, and “vertically” to the ascent from the earth to the limits
of the visible universe and from there, through the world of formless
manifestation, to the divine essence.

Hikmat al-Ishraq
----------------

*Ishraqi* wisdom is not a systematic philosophy so that its exposition
in a systematic fashion is hardly possible. What Suhrawardi says in one
text seems at first sight to be contradicted in another work, and one
has to discover the point of view in each case in order to overcome the
external contradictions. In expounding the major points of *ishraqi*
wisdom we will, therefore, follow the outlines of *Hikmat al-Ishraq*,
the most important text in which this wisdom is, expounded, drawing also
from the shorter treatises which Suhrawardi wrote as further
explanations of his major work.

*Hikmat al-Ishraq* is the fourth of the great doctrinal works of
Suhrawardi, the first three dealing with Aristotelian philosophy which
is the necessary prerequisite and foundation for illuminative wisdom. It
deals with the philosophy of Ishraq itself which is written for those
who are not satisfied with theoretical philosophy alone but search for
the light of gnosis. The book which in the beauty of style is a
masterpiece among Arabic philosophical texts was composed during a few
months in 582/1186, and, as Suhrawardi himself writes at the end of the
book, revealed to him suddenly by the Spirit;[^34] he adds that only a
person illuminated by the Spirit can hope to understand it.[^35]

The work consists of a prologue and two sections: the first concerning
logic and the criticism of certain points of Peripatetic philosophy, and
the second composed of five chapters (*maqalat*), dealing with light,
ontology, angelology, physics, psychology and, finally, eschatology and
spiritual union.

In the section on logic he follows mostly the teaching of Aristotle but
criticizes the Aristotelian definition. According to the Stagirite, a
logical definition consists of genus plus differentia. Suhrawardi
remarks that the distinctive attribute of the object which is defined
will give us no knowledge of that thing if that attribute cannot be
predicated of any other thing. A definition in *ishraqi* wisdom is the
summation of the qualities in a particular thing which when added
together exist only in that thing.

Suhrawardi criticizes the ten categories of Aristotle as being limited
and confined only to this universe. Beyond this world there is an
indefinite number of other categories which the Aristotelian
classification does not include. As for the nine categories of
accidents, he reduces them to four by considering relation, time,
posture, place, action, and passivity as the one single category of
relation (*nisbah*) to which are added the three categories of quality,
quantity, and motion.

Suhrawardi alters several points of Aristotelian philosophy in order to
make it a worthy basis for the doctrine of illumination.[^36] A major
point of difference between the Ishraqis and the Muslim followers of
Aristotle (*Masha'is*), also a central issue of Islamic philosophy, is
that of the priority of Being or existence (*wujud*) to essence
(*mahiyyah*).[^37]

The Masha'is like the Sufis consider Being to be principal and
*mahiyyah* or essence to be accidental with respect to it. Suhrawardi
objects to this view and writes that existence does not have any
external reality outside the intellect which abstracts it from objects.
For example, the existence of iron is precisely its essence and not a
separate reality. The Masha'is consider existence to have an external
reality and believe that the intellect abstracts the limitation of a
being which then becomes its essence.[^38]

The argument of Suhrawardi against this view is that existence can be
neither substance nor accident and, therefore, has no external reality.
For if it is an accident, it needs something to which it is an accident.
If this something is other than existence, it proves what we sought,
i.e., this something is without existence. If existence is a substance,
then it cannot be accident, although we say accidents “are.” Therefore,
existence is neither substance nor accident and consequently can exist
only in the intellect.

The issue involved, which is essential to the understanding of all
medieval and ancient philosophy, is the relation between Being and
existence, on the one hand, and the archetypes and limitations on the
other. The Masha'is and Sufis consider the universe to consist of
degrees of Being and limitations which distinguish various beings from
one another. The Sufis, particularly those of the school of Ibn 'Arabi
who are concerned essentially with metaphysical doctrines, transpose
these limitations into the principial domain and consider them the same
as the archetypes or the Platonic ideas.

The traditional inter­preters of Shaikh al-Ishraq interpret his doctrine
in a way which does not destroy the principiality of Being [^39] but
rather subordinates the existence of a thing which is temporary and
“accidental” to its archetype which with respect to the terrestrial
existence of the thing is principial. In other words, essence
(*mahiyyah*) is subordinated to Being (*wujud*), if we understand by
this term Being *qua* Being; but as archetype, it is superior to
particular existence which is an “exteriorization” of Being.

The Ishraqis believe in fact that it is useless to discuss about the
principiality of *wujud* and *mahiyyah*, of Being and essence, because
the essence or *mahiyyah* is itself a degree of Being. The Ishraqis
differ from the Masha'is in that the former considers the world to be
actual in its being and potential in its qualities and attributes, and
the latter believes, on the contrary, that the world is potential in its
being and actual in its qualities and perfections.[^40]

Another important criticism of the Aristotelians by Suhrawardi is that
of the doctrine of hylomorphism, of form and matter, which is the
foundation of Aristotle's philosophy. As we shall see later, Suhrawardi
considers bodies to be darkness and transforms the Aristotelian forms
into the guardian lights or angels which govern each being. He defines a
body as an external, simple substance (*jauhar basit*) which is capable
of accepting conjunction and separa­tion.[^41] This substance in itself,
in its own essence, is called body (*jism*), but from the aspect of
accepting the form of species (*surah nau'iyyah*) it is called the
*materia prima* or *hyle* (*hayula*).

He also differs from the Aristotelians in defining the place (*makan*)
of the body not as the internal surface of the body which contains it
but as the abstract dimension (*bu\`d mujarrad*) in which the body is
placed. Suhrawardi follows Ibn Sina and other Masha'is in rejecting the
possibility of a void and an indivisible particle or atom, and in
considering the body to be indefinitely divisible even if this division
cannot be carried out physically.

Other elements of Peripatetic philosophy which Suhrawardi condemns
in­clude its doctrine of the soul and arguments for its subsistence
which he be­lieves to be weak and insufficient;[^42] its rejection of
the Platonic ideas which are the cornerstone of *ishraqi* wisdom and
upon the reality of which Suhra­wardi insists in nearly every doctrinal
work; and its theory of vision.

This last criticism is of interest in that Suhrawardi rejects both of
the theories of vision commonly held during the Middle Ages. Regarding
the Aristotelian theory that forms of objects are imprinted upon the
pupil of the eye and then reach the senses communis and finally the
soul, Suhrawardi asks how the imprinting of large objects like the sky
upon this small pupil in the eye is possible. Since man does not reason
at the time of vision which is an immediate act, even if large objects
were imprinted in smaller proportions, one could not know of the size of
the object from its image.

The mathematicians and students of optics usually accepted another
theory according to which a conic ray of light leaves the eye with the
head of the cone in the eye and the base at the object to be seen.
Suhrawardi attacks this view also by saying that this light is either an
accident or a substance. If it is an accident it cannot be transmitted;
therefore, it must be a substance. As a substance, its motion is
dependent either on our will or it is natural. If dependent on our will,
we should be able to gaze at an object and not see it, which is contrary
to ex­perience; or if it has natural motion, it should move only in one
direction like vapour which moves upward, or stone which moves downward,
and we should be able to see only in one direction which is also
contrary to experience. There­fore, he rejects both views.

According to Suhrawardi, vision can occur only of a lighted object. When
man sees this object, his soul surrounds it and is illuminated by its
light. This illumination (*ishraq*) of the soul (*nafs*) in presence of
the object is vision. Therefore, even sensible vision partakes of the
illuminative character of all knowledge.

With this criticism of the Aristotelian (*masha'i*) philosophy,
Suhrawardi turns to the exposition of the essential elements of
*ishraqi* wisdom itself beginning with a chapter on light, or one might
say the theophany of light, which is the most characteristic and
essential element of the teachings of this school.[^43]

Light (*nur*), the essence of which lies above comprehension, needs no
definition because it is the most obvious of all things. Its nature is
to manifest itself; it is being, as its absence, darkness (*zulmah*), is
nothingness. All reality consists of degrees of light and darkness.[^44]
Suhrawardi calls the Absolute Reality the infinite and limitless divine
essence, the Light of lights (*Nur al-anwar*).[^45] The whole universe,
the 18,000 worlds of light and darkness which Suhrawardi mentions in his
*Bustan al-Qulub*, are degrees of irradiation and effusion of this
Primordial Light which shines everywhere while remaining immutable and
for ever the same.[^46]

Suhrawardi “divides” reality according to the types of light and
darkness. If light is subsistent by itself, it is called substantial
light (*nur jauhari*) or incorporeal light (*nur mujarrad*); if it
depends for its subsistence on other than itself, it is called
accidental light (*nur \`ardi*). Likewise, if darkness is subsistent by
itself it is called obscurity (*ghasaq*) and if it depends on other than
itself for its subsistence it is called form (*hai'ah*).

This division is also based on the degrees of comprehension.[^47] A
being is either aware of itself or ignorant of it. If it is aware of
itself and subsists by itself it is incorporeal light, God, the angels,
archetypes, and the human soul. If a thing has need of a being other
than itself to become aware of itself, it is accidental light like the
stars and fire. If it is ignorant of itself but subsists by itself, it
is obscurity like all natural bodies, and if it is ignorant by itself
and subsists by other than itself, it is form like colours and smells.

All beings are the illumination (*ishraq*) of the Supreme Light which
leaves its vicegerent in each domain, the sun in the heavens, fire among
the elements, and the lordly light (*nur ispahbad*) in the human soul.
The soul of man is essentially composed of light; that is why man
becomes joyous at the sight of the light of the sun or fire and fears
darkness. All the causes of the universe return ultimately to light; all
motion in the world, whether it be of the heaven, or of the elements, is
caused by various regent lights (*nur mudabbir*) which are ultimately
nothing but illuminations of the Light of lights.

Between the Supreme Light and the obscurity of bodies there must be
various stages in which the Supreme Light weakens gradually to reach the
darkness of this world. These stages are the orders of angels, personal
and universal at the same time, who govern all things.[^48] In
enumerating these angelic orders Suhrawardi relies largely upon
Zoroastrian angelology and de­parts completely from the Aristotelian and
Avicennian schemes which limit the intelligences or angels to ten to
correspond to the celestial spheres of Ptolemaic astronomy.

Moreover, in the Avicennian scheme, the angels or intellects are limited
to three intelligible “dimensions” which constitute their being, namely,
the intellection of their principle, of the necessity of their
existence, and of the contingence of their essence (*mahiyyah*).[^49]
Suhrawardi begins with this scheme as a point of departure but adds many
other “dimensions” such as domination (*qahr*) and love (*mahabbah*),
independence and dependence, illumination (*ishraq*) and contemplation
(*shuhud*) which open a new horizon beyond the Aristotelian universe of
the medieval philosophers.

Suhrawardi calls the first effusion of the Light of lights (*nur
al-anwar or nur al-a\`zam*) the archangel *Bahman* or the nearest light
(*nur al-aqrab*). This light contemplates the Light of lights and, since
no veil exists in between, receives direct illumination from it. Through
this illumination, a new triumphal light (*nur al-qahir*) comes into
being which receives two illuminations, one directly from the Supreme
Light and the other from the first light.

The pro­cess of effusion continues in the same manner with the third
light receiving illumination four times, twice from the light preceding
it, once from the first light and once from the Supreme Light; and the
fourth light eight times, four times from the light preceding it, twice
from the second light, once from the first light, and once from the
Light of lights or Supreme Light.[^50] In this manner the order of
archangels, which Suhrawardi calls the longitudinal order (*tabaqat
al-tul*) or “world of mothers” (*al-ummahat*) and in which the number of
archangels far exceeds the number of intelligences in Aristotelian
cosmology, comes into being.[^51]

Each higher light has domination (*qahr*) over the lower and each lower
light, love (*mahabbah*) for the higher. Moreover, each light is a
purgatory or veil (*barzakh*) between the light above and the light
below. In this manner the supreme order of angels is illuminated from
the Light of lights which has love only for Itself because the beauty
and perfection of Its essence are evident to Itself.

The supreme hierarchy of being or the “longitudinal” order gives rise to
a new polarization of Being. Its positive or masculine aspect such as
dominance, contemplation, and independence gives rise to a new order of
angels called the latitudinal order (*tabaqat al 'ard*) the members of
which are no longer generators of one another; rather, each is integral
in itself and is, therefore, called *mutakafiyyah*. Suhrawardi
identifies these angels with the Platonic ideas and refers to them as
the lords of the species (*arbab al-anwa'*) or the species of light
(*anwa' nuriyyah*).

Each species in the world has as its arche­type one of these angels, or
to express it in another manner, each being in this world is the theurgy
(*tilism*) of one of these angels which are, therefore, called the lords
of theurgy (*arbab al-tilism*). Water is the theurgy of its angel
*khurdad*, minerals of *shahrwar*, vegetables of *murdad*, fire of
*urdibihisht*, etc. [^52]

Suhrawardi uses the names of the *Amshaspands* (*Amesha Spentas*), the
separate powers of Ahura Mazdah in Zoroastrianism, to designate these
arche­types, and in this way unites Zoroastrian angelology with the
Platonic ideas. These longitudinal angels are not, however, in any way
abstract or mental objects, as sometimes the Platonic ideas are
interpreted to be. They are, on the contrary, concrete as angelic
hypostases and appear abstract only from man's point of view who,
because of his imprisonment in the cage of his senses, considers only
the object of the senses to be concrete. These angels are the real
governors of this world who guide all of its movements and direct all of
its changes. They are at once the intelligences and principles of the
being of things.

From the negative and feminine aspect of the longitudinal order of
arch­angels, that is, love, dependence, and reception of illumination,
there comes into being the heaven of fixed stars which these angels
share in common. The stars are the crystallization into subtle matter of
that aspect of the archangels which is “Non-Being” or removal from the
Light of lights. This “material­ization” marks the boundary between the
Orient of pure lights or the archan­gelic world which lies beyond the
visible heavens and the Occident which is comprised of increasing
condensations of matter from the luminous heavens to the dense earthly
bodies.

The latitudinal order of angels or the archetypes gives rise to another
order of angels through which they govern the species. Suhrawardi calls
this intermediary order the regent lights (*anwar al-mudabbirah*) or
sometimes *anwar ispahbad* using a term from ancient Persian chivalry.
It is this intermediary order which moves the heavenly spheres the
motion of which is by love rather than by nature,[^53] and which governs
the species as the agent of the arche­types for which the species are
theurgies (*tilismat*) or “icons” (*asnam*).

The *ispahbad* lights are also the centres of men's souls, each light
being the angel of some individual person.[^54] As for mankind itself,
its angel is Gabriel. Humanity is an image of this archangel who is the
mediator between man and the angelic world and the focus in which the
lights of the Orient are concentrated. It is also the instrument of all
knowledge inasmuch as it is the means by which man's soul is
illuminated.[^55]

This archangel as the Holy Spirit is also the first and supreme
intelligence and the first as well as the last prophet, Muhammad (upon
whom be peace), the archetype of man *(rabb al-nau' al-insan*) and the
supreme revealer of divine knowledge.

The physics and psychology of *Hikmat al-Ishraq* treat of the world of
bodies and the world of souls which, along with the world of the
intelligences or angels, comprise the totality of this universe.[^56] As
already mentioned, Suhra­wardi does not divide bodies into form and
matter. Rather, his division of bodies is based on the degree in which
they accept light.

All physical bodies are either simple or compound; the simple bodies are
divided into three classes: those that prevent light from entering
(*hajiz*), those which permit the entrance of light (*latif*), and those
which permit light to enter in various degrees (*muqtasid*) and which
are themselves divided into several stages.[^57]

The heavens are made of the first category in the luminous state. As for
the elements below the heavens, they consist of earth belonging to the
first category, water to the second, and air to the third.[^58] Compound
bodies belong likewise to one of the above categories, depending on
which element predominates in them. All bodies are essentially
purgatories or isthmus (*barzakh*) between various degrees of light by
which they are illuminated and which they in turn reflect.

Suhrawardi rejects the view that the change of bodies is due to
particles of one element entering into those of another. As a reason
against this view he cites the example of a jug full of water that has
been heated, i. e., according to this view particles of fire have
entered into it. The volume of the water, how­ever, does not change
since it does not spill over; therefore, particles of fire cannot have
entered into it.

Qualitative change is due rather to the coming into being of a quality
which is intermediate between the qualities of the original bodies and
which is shared by all the particles of the new compound. For example,
when water is heated a new quality between the cold of the water and the
heat of the fire is brought into being by the light governing the
change.

In the explanation of meteorological phenomena, Suhrawardi follows
closely the teachings of Ibn Sina and Aristotle in accepting the
exhalation and vapour theory. He differs, however, from them in the
importance he attaches to light as the cause of all these changes. For
example, the heat which is responsible for evaporation is nothing but
one of the effects of reflected light. All changes in fact which one
observes in the world are caused by various hierarchies of light. [^59]

The elements are powerless before the heavens, the heavens are dominated
by the souls, the souls by the intelligences, the intelligences by the
universal intellect, and the universal intellect by the Light of lights.

The elements or simple bodies combine to form compounds which comprise
the mineral, plant, and animal kingdoms, each of which is dominated by a
particular light or angel. All that exists in the mineral kingdom is
“lighted body” (*barzakh nuriyyah*) the permanence of which is like that
of the heavens.[^60] Gold and various jewels like rubies make man happy
because of the light within them which is akin to the soul of man. This
light within the minerals is governed by is *isfandarmudh* which is the
master of theurgy for earthy sub­stances.

With greater refinement of the mixture of the elements, plants and
animals come into being having their own faculties and powers which are
so many “organs” of the light governing them. In higher animals and in
man who is the most complete terrestrial being these faculties appear in
their perfection. Man as the microcosm contains in himself the complete
image of the universe, and his body is the gate of life of all elemental
bodies. This body in turn is the theurgy for the *ispahbad* light which
governs each man.

All the faculties of the soul are aspects of the light which shines upon
all elements of the body and illuminates the powers of imagination and
memory for which it is the source. This light is connected with the body
by means of the animal soul (*ruh hayawaniyyah*) the seat of which is in
the liver and leaves the body for its original home in the angelic world
as soon as death destroys the equilibrium of the bodily elements. It is
the love (*mahabbah*) of the light which creates the power of desire as
it is its domination (*qahr*) which brings about anger.[^61]

Suhrawardi draws heavily upon the psychology of Ibn Sina for the
enumera­tion of the faculties of the various souls.[^62] It may be said
in fact that with a few changes his classification is the same as that
of his famous predecessor, despite the different role which the
intellect or light plays in governing and illuminating the various
faculties in each case.

The classification of the various faculties of the soul by Suhrawardi
may be outlined as follows:[^63]

Vegetative soul (*al-nafs al-nabatiyyah*):
feeding (*ghadhiyyah*), growth (*namiyyah*), reproduction
(*muwallidah*), attraction (*jadhibah*), retention (*masikah*),
digestion (*hadimah*), repulsion (*dafi’ah*)

Animal soul (*al-nafs al-hayawaniyyah*):
power of motion (*muharrikah*), power of desire (*nuzu’iyyah*), power
of lust (*shahwah*), power of anger (*ghadb*).

Man, besides the above faculties and the five external senses, possesses
five internal senses which serve as a bridge between the physical and
the intelligible worlds and have their counterpart in the macrocosmic
order. These senses consist of:

*Sensus communis* (*hiss mushtarik*): The centre in which all the data
of the external senses are collected. It is located in the front of the
frontal cavity of the brain.
Fantasy (*khayal*): The place of storage for the *sensus communis*. It
is located in the back of the frontal cavity.
Apprehension (*wahm*): Governs sensible things by what does not belong
to the senses. It is located in the middle cavity.
Imagination (*mutakhayyilah*): Analyses, synthesizes, and governs forms
and is sometimes identified with apprehension. It is located in the
middle cavity.
Memory (*hafizah*): The place of storage for apprehension. It is
located in the back of the middle cavity.

These faculties are crowned by the intellectual soul (*nafs natiqah*)
which belongs to the spiritual world and which, through the network of
these faculties, becomes for a period attached to the body and
imprisoned in the fortress of nature. Often it is so lost in this new
and temporary habitat that it forgets its original home and can be
re-awakened only by death or ascetic practices. [^64]

The last section of the *Hikmat al-Ishraq* concerning eschatology and
spiritual union outlines precisely the way by which the spirit returns
to its original abode, the way by which the catharsis of the intellect
is achieved. Every soul, in whatever degree of perfection it might be,
seeks the Light of lights, and its joy is in being illuminated by it.
Suhrawardi goes so far as to say that he who has not tasted the joy of
the illumination of the victorial lights has tasted no joy at all.[^65]
Every joy in the world is a reflection of the joy of gnosis, and the
ultimate felicity of the soul is to reach toward the angelic lights by
purification and ascetic practices.

After death the soul of those who have reached some measure of purity
departs to the world of archetypes above the visible heavens and
participates in the sounds, sights, and tastes of that world which are
the principles of terrestrial forms. On the contrary, those whose soul
has been tarnished by the darkness of evil and ignorance (*ashab
al-shaqawah*) depart for the world of inverted forms (*suwar
mu\`allaqah*) which lies in the labyrinth of fantasy, the dark world of
the devils and the *jinn*.[^66] As for the gnostics or the *theosophos*
(*muta'allihin*) who have already reached the degree of sanctity in this
life, their soul departs to a world above the angels.

After leaving the body, the soul may be in several states which
Suhrawardi outlines as follows:[^67]
Either the soul is simple and pure like that of children and fools who
are attracted neither to this world nor to the next.
Or it is simple but impure and as such is attracted more to this world,
so that upon death it suffers greatly by being separated from the object
of its desire; gradually, however, it forgets its worldly love and
becomes simple as in the first case.
Or it is not simple but perfect and pure and upon death joins the
intelligible world to which it is similar and has an undescribable joy
in the contemplation of God.
Or it is complete but impure, so that upon death it suffers greatly
both for separation from the body and from the First Source; gradually,
how­ever, the pains caused by alienation from this world cease and the
soul enjoys spiritual delights.
Or the soul is incomplete but pure, i.e., it has a love for perfection
but has not yet realized it; upon death, therefore, it suffers
cease­lessly, although the love of this world gradually dies away.
Finally, the soul is incomplete and impure, so that it suffers the
greatest pain.

Man should, therefore, spend the few days he has here on earth to
transform the precious jewel of his soul into the image of an angel and
not into that of an animal.

The highest station to be reached by the soul is that of the prophets
(*nafs qudsiyyah*) who perceive the forms of the universals or
archetypes naturally. They know all things without the assistance of
teachers or books. They hear the sounds of the heavens, i. e., the
archetypes of earthly sounds, and not just vibrations of the air, and
see the intelligible forms. Their souls and those of great saints also
reach such degree of purity that they can influence the world of the
elements as the ordinary soul influences the body.[^68] They can even
make the archetypes subsist by will, that is, give them existence.

The knowledge of the prophets is the archetype of all knowledge. In his
nocturnal Ascension (*mi\`raj)* the Prophet Muhammad - upon whom be
peace­ - journeyed through all the states of being beyond the universe
to the Divine Presence or microcosmically through his soul and intellect
to the Divine Self.­[^69] This journey through the hierarchy of Being
symbolizes the degrees of know­ledge which the initiate gains as he
travels on the Path in imitation of the bringer of revelation who has
opened the way for him. A prophet is absolutely necessary as a guide for
the gnostic and as a bringer of Law for society.

Man needs a society in order to survive and society needs law and order
and, therefore, prophets to bring news of the other world and to
establish harmony among men. The best man is he who knows, and the best
of those who know are the prophets, and the best prophets are those who
have brought a revelation (*mursilin*), and the best of them are the
prophets whose revelation has spread over the face of the earth, and the
completion and perfection of the prophetic cycle is the Prophet
Muhammad - upon whom be peace - who is the seal of prophethood.[^70]

The Initiatory Narratives
-------------------------

In a series of treatises written in beautiful Persian prose, Suhrawardi
expounds another aspect of *ishraqi* wisdom which is the complement of
the metaphysical doctrine. These works which we have called initiatory
narratives are symbolic stories depicting the journey of the soul to God
much like certain medieval European romances and poems such as
*Parsifal* and the *Divine Comedy* although of shorter length.
Unfortunately, in this limited space we cannot deal with all of these
narratives each of which treats of a different aspect of the spiritual
journey using various traditional symbols such as the cosmic mountain,
the griffin, the fountain of life, and the lover and the be­loved.

Some of the more important of these narratives are the *Risalah fi
al-­Mi\`raj* (The Treatise on the Nocturnal Journey), *Risalah fi Halat
al-Tufuliyyah* (Treatise on the State of Childhood), *Ruzi ba Jama'at-i
Sufiyan* (A Day with the Community of Sufis), *Awaz-i Par-i Jibra'il*
(The Chant of the Wing of Gabriel), *'Aql-i Surkh* (The Red Intellect),
*Safir-i Simurgh* (The Song of the Griffin), *Lughat-i Muran* (The
Language of Termites), *Risalah al-Tair* (The Treatise on the Birds),
and *Risalah fi Haqiqat al-'Ishq* (Treatise on the Reality of Love).

The titles alone indicate some of the rich symbolism which Suhra­wardi
uses to describe the spiritual journey. Each narrative depicts a certain
aspect of the spiritual life as lived and practised by sages and saints.
Some­times theory and spiritual experience are combined as in the
*Awaz-i Par-i-Jibra'il* [^71] where in the first part of the vision the
disciple meets the active intellect, the sage who symbolizes the
“prophet” within himself who comes from the “land of nowhere”
(*na-kuja-abad*), and asks certain questions about various aspects of
the doctrine.

In the second part, however, the tone changes; the hero asks to be
taught the Word of God and after being instructed in the esoteric
meaning of letters and words, i, e., *jafr*, he learns that God has
certain major words like the angels, as well as the supreme Word which
is to other words as the sun is to the stars. He learns furthermore that
man is himself a Word of God, and it is through His Word that man
returns to the Creator. He, like other creatures of this world, is a
chant of the wing of Gabriel which spreads from the world of light to
that of darkness. This world is a shadow of his left wing as the world
of light is a reflection of his right wing. It is by the Word, by the
sound of the wing of Gabriel, that man has come into existence, and it
is by the Word that he can return to the principial state, the divine
origin, from which he issued forth.

The Ishraqi Tradition
---------------------

The influence of Suhrawardi has been as great in the Islamic world,
particu­larly in Shi\`ism, as it has been small in the West. His works
were not translated into Latin so that his name hardly ever appears
along with those of Ibn Sina and Ibn Rushd as masters of philosophy. But
in the East from the moment if his death, his genius in establishing a
new school of traditional wisdom was recognized and he was to exercise
the greatest influence in Shi’ism. With the weakening of Aristotelianism
in the sixth/twelfth century the element that came to replace it and to
dominate Islamic intellectual life was a com­bination of the
intellectual Sufism of Ibn 'Arabi and the *ishraqi* wisdom of
Suhrawardi.

These two masters who lived within a generation of each other came from
the two ends of the Islamic world to Syria, one to die in Damascus and
the other in Aleppo, and it was from this central province of Islam that
their doctrines were to spread throughout the Muslim East, particularly
in Persia. The main link between these two great masters of gnosis was
Qutb al-Din Shirazi who was, on the one hand, the disciple of Sadr
al-Din Qunawi, himself a disciple and the main expositor of the
teachings of Ibn 'Arabi in the East, and, on the other, the commentator
of *Hikmat al-Ishraq*.[^72]

Throughout the last seven centuries the tradition of *Ishraq* has
continued especially in Persia where it played a major role in the
survival of Shi'ism during the Safawid period. Among the most important
commentaries written on Suhrawardi's works are those of Shams al-Din
Shahrazuri and Qutb al­-Din Shirazi in the seventh/thirteenth century,
Wudud Tabrizi in the tenth/ sixteenth century, and Mulla Sadra in the
eleventh/seventeenth century on the *Hikmat al-Ishraq*, the commentaries
of Shahrazuri, Ibn Kammunah, and \`Allamah Hilli in the seventh and
eighth/thirteenth and fourteenth centuries on the *Talwihat*, and the
commentaries of Jalal al-Din Dawwani in the ninth/ fifteenth century and
Maula 'Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji in the eleventh/seven­teenth century on the
*Hayakil al-Nur*.

These commentaries and many others which we have not been able to
mention here present a veritable treasure of *ishraqi* wisdom which has
influenced so many philosophers, theologians, and gnostics from Khwajah
Nasir al-Din Tusi and Dawwani to Mir Damad, Mulla Sadra, Shaikh Ahmad
Ahsa'i, and Haji Mulla Hadi Sabziwari. Some of the works of Suhrawardi
were also to influence the sages and philosophers in the Mughul Court in
India where parts of his writings were even translated into
Sanskrit,[^73] as they were translated into Hebrew some time earlier.

*Ishraqi* wisdom has, therefore, been one of the universal elements of
Eastern intel­lectuality during the past centuries and, as it is a
version of the perennial philosophy, it is touched by the breath of
eternity which, as in the case of all expressions of truth, gives it a
freshness and actuality that make this wisdom as essential today as it
has been through the ages.

Bibliography
------------

Suhrawardi, *'Aql-i Surkh*, Anjuman-i Dustdaran-i Kitab, Teheran, 1332
Solar; “Le bruissement de 1'aile de Gabriel (Risaleh Awaz-i Par-i
Jibra'il)” translation and introduction by H. Corbin and P. Kraus.
*Journal Asiatique*, July-Sept. 1935, pp. 1-82; *Kitab Hayakil al-Nur*,
ed. Mohamed Abou Rayan, Grande Librairie Commerciale, Cairo, 1376/1957;
*Kitab Hikmat al-Ishraq*, Teheran, lithographed edition, 1316/1898, with
the commentaries of Qutb al-Din Shirazi and Mulla Sadra; The Lovers'
Friend (*Risalah Mu'nis al-‘Ushshaq*), ed. O. Spies, Jami'ah Press,
Delhi, 1934; *Opera Metaphysica et Mystica*, ed. H. Corbin, Vol. I,
Ma'arif Mathaasi, Istanbul, 1945, Vol. II, Institut Franco-Iranien,
Teheran, 1952; *Risaleh Yazdan Shinakht*, Matba'-i \`Ilmi, Teheran, 1316
Solar; *Three. Treatises on Mysti­cism*, ed and tr. O. Spies and S. K.
Khattak, Stuttgart, 1935;

Jalal al-Din al-Dawwani, *Shawakil al-Hurfi fi Sharh-i Hayakil al-Nur*,
Madras Government Oriental Series, Madras, 1953.
M. Bayani, *Dau Risaleh-i Farsi-i Suhrawardi*, Teheran, 1325 Solar;
H. Corbin, *Avicenne et le recit visionnaire*, 3 Vols., Institut
Franco-Iranien, Teheran, 1952-54; *Les motifs Zoroastriens dans la
philosophie de Sohrawardi*, Editions du Courrier, Teheran, 1325 Solar;
*Suhrawardi d'Alep foundatuer de la doctrine illuminative (ishraqi)*, G.
P. Maisonneuve, Paris, 1939;
A. Danasrisht, *Afkar-i Suhrawardi wa Mulla Sadra*, Teheran, 1316
Solar;
M. Horten, *Die Philosophie der Erleuchtung nach Suhrawardi*, Halle a.
S., 1912; *Die Philosophie des Islam*, Verlag Ernst Rhein­hardt,
Munchen, 1924;
S. M. Iqbal, *The Development of Metaphysics in Persia*, Luzac & Co.,
London, 1908;
H. Ritter, “Philologika, IX. Die vier Suhrawardi; I. Shihab al-Din ...
al-Suhrawardi al-Maqtul,” *Der Islam*, 1937, pp. 270-96.

[^1]: The Arabic word hikmah is neither philosophy as currently
understood in modern European language, i.e., one form or another of
rationalism, nor theology. It is, properly speaking, theosophy as
understood in its original Greek sense and not in any way connected with
the pseudo-spiritualistic movements of this century. It is also
sapiential inasmuch as the Latin root Sapere, like the Arabic word dhauq
by which this wisdom is known, means taste. Moreover, it can be
designated as speculative wisdom because speculum means mirror and this
wisdom seeks to make man's soul a mirror in which divine knowledge is
reflected.

[^2]: Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi is often called al-Maqtul, meaning he who
was killed, since he was put to death for certain indiscreet
formulations. We, however, refer to him as Shaikh al-Ishraq by which
name he is universally known among his disciples.

[^3]: The best source for the biography of Shihab al-Din is the Nuzhat
al-Arwah wa Raudat al-Afrah of his disciple and commentator Shams al-Din
Shahrazuri. See also O. Spies and S. K. Khattak, Three Treatises on
Mysticism, Verlag W. Kohl­hammer, Stuttgart, 1935, pp. 90-101; H.
Corbin, Suhrawardi d'Alep fondateur de la doctrine illuminative
(ishraqi), G. P. Maisonneuve, Paris, 1939.

[^4]: We are most grateful to Prof. M. Minovi and Mr. M. Daneshpazhuh of
the University of Teheran and to Dr. M. Bayani, the head of the Teheran
National Library, for making these manuscripts available to us.

[^5]: See the introduction in M. Bayani, Dau Risaleh-i Farsi-i
Suhrawardi, Teheran 1925.

[^6]: We follow in part the classification of H. Corbin, however, with
some modifi­cations. See Suhrawardi, Opera Metaphysica et Mystica, ed.
H. Corbin, Vol. I, Ma\`arif Mathaasi, Bibliotheca Islamica, Istanbul,
1945, “Prolegomene,” pp. xvi ff.

[^7]: The metaphysical sections of the first three treatises have been
published in the first volume of the Opera by Corbin and the complete
Hikmat al-Ishraq in the second volume entitled Oeuvres philosophiques et
mystiques (Opera Metaphysica et Mystica, II), Institut Franco-Iranien,
Teheran, and Andrien Maisonneuve, Paris, 1952. Henceforth we shall refer
to the two volumes as Opera, Volumes I and II.

[^8]: The treatise Yazdan Shinakht has often been attributed to Ain
al-Quddat Hamadani and its authorship remains in any case doubtful.
Bustan al-Qulub has also appeared under the name Raudat al-Qulub and has
been occasionally attributed to Sayyid Sharif Jurjani.

[^9]: A commentary upon the Fusus of Farabi of which no trace has as yet
been found is also attributed to him.

[^10]: The hakim muta'allih which Suhrawardi considers himself and other
sages before him to be is exactly theosophos by which the Greek sages
were designated. See the Prolegomene by H. Corbin to Suhrawardi's Opera,
Vol. II, p. xxiv.

[^11]: Suhrawardi is careful in distinguishing between exoteric
Zoroastrians and the sages among Zoroastrians whom he follows. As he
writes in Kalimat al-Tasawwuf: “There were among the ancient Persians a
community of men who were guides towards the Truth and were guided by
Him in the Right Path, ancient sages un­like those who are called the
Magi. It is their high and illuminated wisdom, to which the spiritual
experiences of Plato and his predecessors are also witness, and which we
have brought to life again in our book called Hikmat al-Ishraq.” MS.,
Ragip, 1480, fol. 407b, Istanbul, cited in H. Corbin, Les motifs
zoroastriens dans la philosophie de Sohrawardi, Editions du Courrier,
Teheran, 1946, p. 24. Also Teheran University Library MS. 1079, pp. 34ff

[^12]: Mutarahat, Physics, Book VI, cited by H. Corbin in Suhrawardi,
Opera, Vol. I, p. x1i.

[^13]: Originally, philosophy like all forms of wisdom consisted of a
doctrine, a rite, and a “spiritual alchemy.” In Greek civilization the
first element gradually separated from the others and became reduced to
a theoretical form of knowledge which came to be known as philosophy. In
the 55th section of Talwihat, Suhrawardi writes how he saw Aristotle,
who is most likely Plotinus, the author of the Theology of Aristotle, in
a dream and asked if the Islamic Peripatetics were the real
philosophers. Aristotle answered, “No, a degree in a thousand.” Rather
the Sufis, Bistami and Tustari, are the real philosophers. Aristotle
told Suhrawardi to wake into himself and to pass beyond theoretical
knowledge ('ilm suri) to effective realization or the “knowledge of
presence” (\`ilm huduri or shuhudi). See the Prolegomene of H Corbin in
Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. I, p. lxx.

[^14]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 10-11. Some modem interpreters of
Suhra­wardi have considered him to be anti-Islamic and of Zoroastrian
sympathy. A. von Kremer in his Geschichte der Herrschenden Ideen des
Islam, Leipzig, 1868, pp. 89ff., writes that Suhrawardi was part of the
current directed against Islam. On the other hand, the scholarly and
sympathetic interpreter of Suhrawardi, H. Corbin, insists on the role of
Shaikh al-Ishraq in reviving the philosophy of Zoroastrian Persia and on
his sympathy for Zoroastrian and Manichaean ideas, although he does not
consider this revival to be a movement against Islam but rather an
integ­ration of ancient Persian myths in “the prism of Islamic
spirituality.” In any case, all views which consider ishraqi wisdom to
be simply a revival of Zoroastrianism or Manichaeism confuse the form
with the spirit. There is no doubt that Suhrawardi makes use of Mazdaean
symbols especially with regard to angelology, but that is no more reason
for calling him Mazdaean than it is to call Jabir ibn Hayyan a follower
of Egyptian religion, because he used Hermetic symbols. The only
criterion of orthodoxy in Islam is the first shahadah (la ilaha
ill-Allah) and, according to it, Suhrawardi cannot be said to lie
outside the pale of Islam, no matter how strange his formulations may
be. Furthermore, the disciples of the Ishraqi school consider the
Persian sages of whom Suhrawardi speaks to have lived before Plato and
Pythagoras and not during the Sassanid period. The genius of Islam to
integrate diverse elements into itself is evident here as elsewhere and
should not be interpreted as a sign of departure from the straight path
(sirat al-mustaqim) or the universal orthodoxy which embraces all the
perspectives within the tradition. The vocation of Islam is the
re-establishment of the primordial tradition so that all the streams of
the ancient religions and cultures have flowed into it without in any
way destroying its purity.

[^15]: Ibn Sina, Mashriq al-Mantiqiyyin, Cairo 1338/1919, pp.2-4.

[^16]: A. Nallino, “Filosofia 'orientali' od \`illuminativa'
d'Avicenna,” Rivista degli studi orientali, Vol. X, 1925, pp. 433-67. H.
Corbin rightly emphasizes the illu­minative as well as the Oriental
aspect of Ibn Sina's Oriental wisdom and its pro­found connection with
the Ishraqi school of Suhrawardi. See Corbin, Avicenne et Lericit
visionnaire, Institut Franco-Iranien, Teheran, 1952-54, Vol. I,
Intro­duction, p. iii.

[^17]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. I, p. 195

[^18]: In European languages the word “orient” means both the east and
the placing of onself in the right direction, and refers to the same
symbolism.

[^19]: As Corbin states, “Ishraq is a knowledge which is Oriental
because it is itself the Orient of knowledge.” Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol.
I, p. xxix.

[^20]: Throughout our writings we use the word “intellect” as the
instrument of gnosis, of direct intuitive knowledge where the knower and
the known become identical, and distinguish it from reason which is its
passive reflection.

[^21]: Ibn Wahshiyyah, Ancient Alphabet and Hieroglyphic Characters,
London, 1806, p. 100. These historical connections are discussed by H.
Corbin in Les motifs zoroastriens dans la philosophie de Sohrawardi,
Editions du Courrier, Teheran, 1325 Solar, p. 18, and the Prolegomene to
Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol.I, pp. xxv ff. We are indebted to him for drawing
our attention to them.

[^22]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. I, pp. 502-03.

[^23]: Suhrawardi is considering only the Peripatetic aspect of Ibn
Sina.

[^24]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 10-11. Actually, the stations
mentioned are more numerous; we have described only the major ones.

[^25]: Suhrawardi, Risaleh Safir-i Simurgh, MS. Teheran National
Library, 1758, pp. 11-12

[^26]: In this same treatise Suhrawardi writes that the most noble
knowledge is gnosis which lies above human reason. As he says, “To seek
the knowledge of God through reason is like seeking the sun with a
lamp.” Ibid., p. 14

[^27]: There is a profound correspondence between the microcosm and the
macro­cosm in all traditional wisdom so that the inward journey of man
through the centre of his being corresponds to a journey through the
various stages of the universe and finally beyond it. To escape from the
prison of the lower soul (nafs ammarah) is also to pass beyond the crypt
of the cosmos.

[^28]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 274ff

[^29]: It is said that when Christian. Rosenkreutz, the founder of the
order of the Rosy-Cross, abandoned Europe, he retired to the Yaman.

[^30]: Suhrawardi indicates here the main technique of Sufism which is
the invo­cation (dhikr) of one of the names of God and which Sufi
masters call the sacred barque that carries man across the ocean of the
spiritual path to the shore of the spiritual world.

[^31]: These fourteen powers are: Attraction, retention, purgation,
repulsion digestion, growth, sleep, imagination, anger, lust, and the
four humours

[^32]: The inward journey beyond the carnal soul (nafs) corresponding
externally to the journey beyond the visible universe is described by
the Ishraqis symbolically as reaching the fountain of life in which
there are found the jewels of the purely spiritual world.

[^33]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, p. 296.

[^34]: The inspiration for the book came to the author on an auspicious
day when all the seven planets were in conjunction in the Sign of the
Balance.

[^35]: Suhrawardi writes that he who wishes to understand the essence of
this work should spend forty days in a retreat (khalwah) occupying
himself only with invo­cation (dhikr) under the direction of the
spiritual guide whom he calls in several places qa'im bi al-Kitab.

[^36]: For his criticism, see Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 46ff

[^37]: The term mahiyyah in Arabic is composed of ma meaning “what” and
hiyyah derived from the word huwa (“it”). It is the answer given to the
question “What is it?” It is used to denote the essence of anything
whether the existence of that thing is certain or doubtful, while the
word dhat is used to denote the essence of something which possesses
some degree of being. In Islamic philosophy reality is understood in
terms of wujud and mahiyyah, the latter meaning the limitation placed
upon Being and identified with the Platonic ideas. See. S. H. Nasr, “The
Polarisation of Being” [Proceedings of the Sixth] Pakistan Philosophical
Congress, Lahore, 1959, pp. 50-55.

[^38]: For a general discussion of this subject in the philosophy of the
master of the Masha'is, Ibn Sina, see A. M. Goichon, La distinction d
l'essence et de l’existence d'apres Ibn Sina (Avicenne), de Brouwer
Descles, Paris, 1937.

[^39]: In fact, as Mulla Sadra asserts, Subrawardi substitutes light
(nur) for Being, attributing the former with all the features which the
latter term possesses in other schools. We are deeply indebted for the
knowledge of this interpretation and many other essential elements of
ishraqi doctrines to one of the greatest masters of traditional wisdom
in Persia, Sayyid Muhammad Kazim \`Assar.

[^40]: Although in his Hikmat al-Ishraq, Suhrawardi does not speak of
the necessary and possible beings, in many of his other treatises like
the Partau-Narneh, I\`teqad al-Hukama' and Yazdan Shinakht, he speaks of
the masha'i categories of Necessary Being. (wajib at-wujud), possible
being (mumkin al-wujud), and impossible being (mumtani' al-wujud).

[^41]: Suhrawardi defines a substance in masha'i fashion as that
possible being (mumkin) which has no place (mahall), and accident as
that possible being which does have a place. He also defines a body as
that substance which has height, width, and depth. Partau-Nameh, MS.,
Teheran National Library, 1257, pp. 190ff.

[^42]: In his works Suhrawardi insists on the perishable nature of the
body and its being a prison into which the soul has fallen. In the
Bustan al-Qulub, MS., Teheran Sipahsalar Library, 2911, he gives as
argument for the permanence of the soul and its spiritual nature, the
fact that the body of man changes its material every few years while
man's identity remains unchanged. The masha'i doctrine of the soul is
essentially one of defining its faculties; the ishraqi view is to find
the way by which the soul can escape its bodily prison.

[^43]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 106-21.

[^44]: As the quotations we have already cited demonstrate, Suhrawardi
insists that he is not dealing with the dualism of the Zoroastrians.
Rather, he is explaining the mysterious polarization of reality in this
symbolism. The Ishraqis usually interpret light as Being and darkness as
determination by ideas (mahiyyah). They say that all ancient sages
taught this same truth but in different languages. Hermes spoke of
Osiris and Isis; Osiris or the sun symbolizes Being and Isis or the
moon, mahiyyah. They interpret the pre-Socratic Greek philosophers in
the same fashion.

[^45]: Actually this term means both the divine essence and its first
determination which is the archangel or the universal intellect.

[^46]: “The immense panorama of diversity which we call the Universe is,
therefore, a vast shadow of the infinite variety in intensity of direct
or indirect illuminations of rays of the Primary Light.” Iqbal, The
Development of Metaphysics in Persia, Luzac & Co., London, 1908, p. 135.

[^47]: In his Risaleh Yazdan Shinakht, Matba\`-i \`Ilmi, Teheran, 1316
Solar, pp. l3ff., Suhrawardi divides comprehension (idrak) into four
categories: - (i) Sense of sight which perceives external forms like
colours, etc. (ii) Imagination (khayal) which perceives images not
depending upon external objects. (iii) Apprehension (wahm) which is
stronger than the other two and which perceives the meaning of sensible
things, but, like the other two, cannot be separated from the matter of
bodies. (iv) Intellectual apprehension ('aql) the seat of which is the
heart, the instrument which is a bridge between the human being and the
intellectual world, and perceives intellectual realities, the world of
angels, and the spirit of prophets and sages.

[^48]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 131-32

[^49]: Ibn Sina, Najat, MS. al-Kurdi, Cairo, 1938, pp. 256-57.

[^50]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 133ff. Also Prolegomene, II, pp.
42ff. In ishraqi wisdom all of the cosmic hierarchies are understood in
terms of a series of illumi­nations (ishraqat) and contemplation
(shuhud), the first being a descent and the second an ascent.

[^51]: Usually in medieval cosmology the elements, the acceptors of
form, are called the 'mothers” and the celestial orbits, the givers of
form, the “fathers.” The term “mothers” used by Suhrawardi to designate
the archangelic world should not, therefore, be confused with the
elements.

[^52]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 157ff. Also H. Corbin, Les motifs
Zoroastrien dans la philosophie de Sohrawardi, Editions du Courier,
Teheran, 1325 Solar, Chap. I.

[^53]: The governing light of the heavens moves each heaven by means of
the planet attached to it, which is like the organ of the light.
Suhrawardi calls this mover hurakhsh which is the Pahlawi name for the
sun, the greatest of the heavenly lights. Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, p.
149. Regarding the motion of each heaven, Suhrawardi writes, “Its
illumination is the cause of its motion, and its motion is the cause of
another illumination; the persistence of the illuminations is the cause
of the persistence of motion, and the persistence of both the cause of
the persistence of the events in this world.” Hayakil al-Nur, MS.
Istanbul, Fatih, 5426, Part 5.

[^54]: Each being in this world, including man is connected to the
Supreme Light not only through the intermediary angels but also
directly. This light which connects each being directly to the Divine
Light and places that being in the hierarchy of beings at a place proper
to it is called khurrah. In ancient Persia it was believed that when a
new king was to be chosen, the royal khurrah would descend upon him and
distinguish him from the other pretenders to the throne.

[^55]: Suhrawardi describes Gabriel as one of the supreme archangels who
is the archetype of the “rational species” (nau\` natiq), the giver of
life, knowledge, and virtue. He is also called the giver of the spirit
(rawan bakhsh) and the Holy Spirit (ruh al-qudus). Suhrawardi, Opera,
Vol. II, p. 201.

[^56]: In the I’tiqad al-Hukama’ and Partau-Nameh, Suhrawardi divides
the universe into the world of intelligences (\`alam al-'uqul or \`alam
al-jabarut), the world of souls ('alam at-nufus or \`alam al-malakut),
and the world of bodies (\`alam al-ajsam or \`alam al-muluk). Also
ibid., p. 270

[^57]: Ibid. p.187.

[^58]: Suhrawardi considers fire, the fourth of the traditional
elements, to be a form of light and the theurgy of urdibihisht, and not
one of the terrestrial elements.

[^59]: Suhrawardi gives a different meaning to causality than the
Aristotelians' whose four causes which he does not accept. For
Suhrawardi all these causes are really nothing but light, i, e.,
everythting is made of light and by light, and is given a form by the
archangelic light whom he calls the “giver of forms” (wahib al-suwar)
and seeks the Light of lights as its goal and end.

[^60]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, pp. 199-200

[^61]: Ibid., pp.204-09.

[^62]: Ibn Sina, Psychologie v Jehe dile as-Sifa, ed. J. Bakos, Editions
de l'Academie Tchecoslovaque des Sciences, Prague, 1956, Vol. I, pp.
53ff.

[^63]: Suhrawardi, Partau-Nameh, pp.190ff.

[^64]: Suhrawardi, Hayakil al-Nur, Sections 6 and 7. In certain other
writings Suhrawardi avers that the light of each man is created with his
body but survives after it. By creation, however, Suhrawardi means
essentially “individualization” and “actualization” rather than creation
in the ordinary sense. There is no doubt that his basic teaching is that
the spirit or soul comes from the world of light and ultimately returns
to it.

[^65]: Suhrawardi, Opera, Vol. II, p. 225

[^66]: This is, properly speaking, the world of the unconscious which
has become the subject of study for modem psychologists. It should be
clearly distinguished from the world of archetypes which, rather than
the “collective unconscious,” is the source of symbols.

[^67]: Suhrawardi, Risaleh Yazdan Shinakht, pp.53-63.

[^68]: Ibid, pp. 66ff. Since human souls are brought into being by the
celestial souls they are able to acquire the knowledge which these
heavenly souls possess when they are put before them as a mirror. In the
dreams of ordinary men this effect occurs occasionally since the
external and internal senses which are the veils of the soul are
partially lifted. In the case of prophets and saints such effects occur
in awakening, i.e., they always reflect the intelligible world in the
mirror of their souls so that they have knowledge of the unmanifested
world even when awake.

[^69]: The journey to the spring of life which lies at the boundary of
the visible heavens symbolizes the journey through the soul (nafs),
while the journey to the cosmic mountain Qaf from which the spring flows
and the ascent of this mountain which lies above the visible heavens
symbolize the inner journey to the centre of one's being. In his
Mi\`raj-Nameh, Suhrawardi describes the symbolic meaning of the
nocturnal Ascension of the Prophet which is the model that all Sufis
seem to imitate.

[^70]: Suhrawardi, Risaleh Yazdan Shinakht, pp. 81-82

[^71]: For the translation into French and analysis of this work, see H.
Corbin and P. Kraus, “Le bruissement de l'aile de Gabriel,” Journal
Asiatique, July-Sept.1935, pp. 1-82.

[^72]: This commentary, finished in 694/1295, appears on the margin of
the standard edition of Hikrnat al-Ishraq which is studied in all the
theological schools in present­ day Persia. It has been the means by
which the doctrines of Suhrawardi have been interpreted through the
centuries.

[^73]: Corbin and certain other European scholars have also emphasized
the role of ishraqi wisdom in the tenth/sixteenth-century Zoroastrianism
and the movement connected with the name of Azar Kaiwan. This curious
eclectic movement in which elements of Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam, and
Zoroastrianism are combined but which differs greatly from original
Zoroastrian doctrines has left behind several works like the Dabistan
al-Madhahib and the Dasatir some passages of which seem to be forged.
Such a leading scholar of Zoroastrianism as I. Poure-Davoud considers
the whole work to be purposeful falsification. See his article
“Dasatir”, Iran-i Imruz, second year, No. II. Whatever importance this
syncretic movement which is so similar to the religious movements at the
Court of Akbar may have had, its followers paid great attention to the
writings of Hikmat al-Ishraq. In fact, one of the disciples of Azar
Kaiwan by the name of Farzanih Bahram ibn Farshad translated several
works of Suhra­wardi into Persian. For a discussion of the school of
Azar Kaiwan, see M. Mu\`in, “Azar Kaiwan wa Pairuwan-i ,u,” Revue de la
Faculte des Letters, Teheran Uni­versity, Vol. IV, No. 3, 1336,/1917,
pp. 25-42.


