Chapter 20: Ibn `Arabi
======================

By A.E. Affifi

Life And Works
--------------

A fair and critical account of the life and thought of Shaikh Muhyi
al-Din ibn al-'Arabi (or Ibn 'Arabi as he was known in the East)
presents certain difficulties. Biographical material is not lacking; he
is given great prominence in many of the biographical and historical
books, both in Arabic and Persian. Some whole books and chapters of
books have been written in defence of his orthodoxy or against his
alleged heterodoxy. Many of his own works, parti­cularly the *Futuhat*,
*Risalat al-Quds*, and the “Memorandum” in which he enumerates his works
and describes the conditions under which they were written, throw
abundant light on some of the obscure aspects of his life as a man, and
above all as an eminent Sufi and Sufi author.

But the account we derive from all these various sources is conflicting,
and the real problem that faces us lies in drawing a true picture of his
personality, his pattern of thought, and his works, based on such
account. Yet as far as his personal life and his mental and spiritual
make-up are concerned, our best source should be his own works to which
we have already referred; for in such works we have first-hand
information about his mental and spiritual progress.

There are also abundant details concerning his early masters in the Sufi
Path, his personal contacts with the men and women he encountered on his
vast travels. Here and there we come across a vivid description of his
mystical experiences, visions, and dreams. Without the help of such
material which has hitherto been neglected, Ibn 'Arabi's true
personality, both as a thinker and a mystic, would remain considerably
unknown to us.

The task is by no means easy. It means hunting through his voluminous
*Futuhat* and other works for the biographical details we have just
described. An outline of the main historical facts of his life is easy
enough to give, but it would be no complete or scientific biography in
the full sense of the word.

Ibn 'Arabi was born at Murcia - South-east of Spain - on the 17th of
Ramadan 560/28th of July 1165. His *nisbah* - al-Hatimi al-Ta'i - shows
that he was a descendant of the ancient Arab tribe of Tayy - a fact
which proves that Muslim mysticism was not the exclusive heritage of the
Persian mind as some scholars maintain. He came from a family well known
for their piety. His father and two of his uncles were Sufis of some
renown.

He received his early education at Seville which was a great centre .of
learning at the time. There he remained for thirty years studying under
some of the great scholars of that city such as Abu Bakr b. Khalaf, Ibn
Zarqun, and Abi Muhammad 'Abd al-Haqq al-Ishbili. At Seville he also met
a number of his early spiritual masters such as Yusuf b. Khalaf al-Qumi
who was a personal disciple of Shaikh Abu Madyan,[^1] and Salih
al-\`Adawi whom he describes as a perfect ascetic. He refers to such men
in terms of admiration and gratitude in his *Futuhat* and *Risalat
al-Quds*, and acknowledges, his debt to them for the initiation he had
received from them into the Path of Sufism.

While making Seville his permanent place of residence, he travelled
widely throughout Spain and Maghrib establishing wherever he went fresh
relations with eminent Sufis and other men of learning. He visited
Cordova, while still a lad, and made acquaintance with Ibn Rushd, the
philosopher, who was then the judge of the city.[^2]

In 590/1194 he visited Fez and Morocco. At the age of 38, i.e., in
589/1193, he set out for the East during the reign of Ya\`qub b. Yusuf
b. 'Abd al-Mu'min, the Sultan of Africa and Andalusia. His apparent
intention was to perform his pilgrimage, but his real aim was perhaps to
seek settlement in another country far away from the very much troubled
West. The political and religious atmos­phere there was stifling, and
men like Ibn 'Arabi. were looked upon with suspicion both by the
narrow-minded theologians and the ruling monarchs. The Sultans of the
Muwahhids and Murabits feared them for the influence they had over their
followers and the possible danger of using these followers for political
purposes as was the case with Abu al-Qasim b. Qasi, head of the Muridin,
who was killed in 546/1151.

The Malikite theologians of the West were most intolerant towards the
new school of thought that was beginning to take shape at the time. Even
al-Ghazali's teaching was rejected and his books committed to the
flames. The East, on the other hand, was more tolerant and more ready to
accept new ideas and movements. Yet not the whole of the East can be
said to be so, for when Ibn 'Arabi visited Egypt in 598/1201, he was
ill-received by some of its people and an attempt was made on his life.

After leaving Egypt he travelled far and wide throughout the Middle East
visiting Jerusalem, Mecca (where he studied and taught Hadith for a
time), the Hijaz, Baghdad, Aleppo, and Asia Minor. He finally settled
down in Damascus until he died on the 28th of Rabi al-Thani 638/17th of
November 1240. He was buried in Mount Qasiyun in the private sepulchre
of Qadi Muhyi al-Din b. al-Dhaki.[^3]

Ibn 'Arabi is one of the most prolific authors in Muslim history. He is
adequately described by Brockelmann [^4] as a writer of colossal
fecundity. There are at least 140 extant works which bear his name,
varying from short treatises of some few pages to voluminous books like
the *Futuhat*. The exact number of his works is uncertain. Sha\`rani
gives the figure of 400, [^5] and the Persian author Jami, the much
exaggerated figure of 500. [^6] Muhammad Rajab Hilmi, in a book entitled
*al-Burhan al-Azhar fi Manaqib al-Shaikh al-Akbar*, enume­rates 284
books and tracts.

In the “Memorandum” which Ibn 'Arabi himself drew up in the year
632/1234, six years before his death, he gave the titles of 251 of his
writings and said that that was as far as he could remember. The writing
of the “Memorandum” has its significance. It provides a written evidence
against anyone who might attempt to forge books in his name; and there
must have been many amongst his enemies in the East who made such
attempts.

To establish the identity and authenticity of all the works that have
been ascribed to him is a task which has not been undertaken by any
scholar yet. But we know within limits the genuineness of most of his
major works, although doubt might arise with regard to certain parts of
their contents. If what Sha\`rani says about the *Futuhat* is true, it
would make us wonder how much of this most important book is genuinely
Ibn 'Arabi's and how much of it is foisted upon him.[^7]

When he tried to summarize the *Futuhat*, Sha’rani said, he came across
certain passages which he thought were in conflict with the established
opinions of the orthodox Muslims. He omitted them after some hesitation.
One day, he was discussing the matter with Shaikh Shams al-Din al-Madani
(d. 955/1648) who produced a copy of the *Futuhat* which had been
collated with Ibn 'Arabi's own MS. of the book at Quniyah. On reading it
he discovered that it contained none of the passages which he had
omitted. This convinced him, he goes on to say, that the copies of the
*Futuhat* which were in current use in Egypt in his time contained parts
which had been foisted upon the author as done in the case of the
*Fusus* and other works.[^8]

This may very well have been the case, but having not yet read the
Quniyah MS. of the *Futuhat* which is still extant, one is unable to say
how it compares with the printed texts of our time. A critical edition
of the book based on the Quniyah MS. is of utnlost importance. Indeed it
might considerably alter our knowledge of Ibn 'Arabi's mystical
philosophy.

What seems more certain is that many works or parts of works were
written by later disciples of Ibn 'Arabi's school and attributed to him;
and many others were extracted from his larger works and given
independent titles. All these exhibit the same strain of thought and
technique which characterize his genuine works. Such facts account,
partly at least, for the enormous number of works which are usually
attributed to him.

Although his output was mainly in the field of Sufism, his writings seem
to have covered the entire range of Muslim scholarship. He wrote on the
theory and practice of Sufism, Hadith, Qur'anic exegesis, the biography
of the Prophet, philosophy, literature, including Sufi poetry, and
natural sciences. In dealing with these diverse subjects he never lost
sight of mysticism. We often see some aspects of his mystical system
coming into prominence while dealing with a theological, juristic, or
even scientific problem. His mystical ideas are imperceptibly woven into
his writings on other sciences and make it all the more difficult to
understand him from a mixed and inconsistent terminology.

The dates of only ten of his works are definitely known, but we can
tell, within limits, whether a work belongs to his early life in Spain
and al-Maghrib, or, to his later life in the East. With a few
exceptions, most of his important works were written after he had left
his native land, principally at Mecca and Damascus; and his maturest
works like *Futuhat*, the *Fusus*, and the *Tanazzulat* were written
during the last thirty years of his life.

His earlier works, on the other hand, are more of the nature of
monographs written on single topics and show no sign of a comprehensive
philosophical system. It seems that it is his contact with the resources
and: men of the East that gave his theosophical speculations their wide
range, and his mystical system of philosophy its finality.

His *opus magnum*, as far as mystical philosophy is concerned, is his
celebrated *Fusus al-Hikam* (Gems of Philosophy or Bezels of Wisdom)
which he finished at Damascus in 628/1230, ten years before his death.
The rudiments of this philosophy are to be found scattered throughout
his monumental *Futuhat* which he started at Mecca in 598/1201 and
finished about 635/1237. The general theme of the *Fusus* was
foreshadowed in the *Futuhat* in more places than one, and more
particularly in Vol. II, pp. 357-77.

Pattern Of Thought And Style
----------------------------

The extraordinary complexity of Ibn 'Arabi's personality is a sufficient
explanation of the complexity of the manner of his thinking and his
style of writing. It is true that sometimes he is clear and
straightforward, but more often - particularly when he plunges into
metaphysical speculations - his style becomes twisted and baffling, and
his ideas almost intractable. The difficulty of understanding him
sometimes can even be felt by scholars who are well acquainted with the
characteristic aspect of his thought. It is not so much what he intends
to say as the way in which he actually says it that constitutes the real
difficulty.

He has an impossible problem to solve, viz., to reconcile a pantheistic
theory of the nature of reality with the monotheistic doctrine of Islam.
His loyalty to both was equal, and indeed he saw no contradiction in
holding that the God of Islam is identical with the One who is the
essence and ultimate ground of all things. He was a pious ascetic and a
mystic, besides being a scholar of Muslim Law, theology, and philosophy.
His writings are a curious blend of all these subjects.

He is for ever trying either to interpret the whole fabric of the
teaching of Islam in the light of his pantheistic theory of the unity of
all being, or to find justification for this theory in some Islamic
texts. The two methods go hand in hand, with two different languages, i.
e., the esoteric language of mysticism and the exoteric language of
religion, used con­currently. Logically speaking, Islam is
irreconcilable with any form of panthe­ism, but Ibn 'Arabi finds in the
mystic experience a higher synthesis in which Allah and the pantheistic
One are reconciled.

Interpretation within reasonable limits is justifiable, but with Ibn
'Arabi it is a dangerous means of converting Islam into pantheism or
vice versa. This is most apparent in the *Fusus*, and to a certain
extent in the *Futuhat*, where the Qur'anic text and traditions of the
Prophet are explained mystically or rather pantheistically. Furthermore,
while he is thus occupied with eliciting from the Qur'anic text his own
ideas, he gathers round the subject in hand material drawn from all
sources and brings it all into the range of his meditation. This
accounts for the very extensive and inconsistent vocabulary which makes
his writings almost un­intelligible.

Whenever he is challenged or he thinks he would be challenged about the
meaning of a certain statement, he at once brings forth another meaning
which would convince the challenger. He was asked what he meant by
saying:

“O *Thou who seest me, while I see not Thee, How oft I see Him, while He
sees not me*!”

He replied at once, making the following additions which completely
altered the original sense, by saying.

“*O Thou who seest me* ever prone to sin, *While Thee I see not* willing
to upbraid: *How oft I see Him* grant His grace's aid *While He sees me
not* seeking grace to win.”[^9]

Similarly, when his contemporaries read his *Tarjuman al-Ashwaq*, which
is supposed to be written on divine love, they could see in the *Diwan*
nothing but erotic poems describing beautiful women, lovely scenes of
nature and ordinary human passions. They accused the Shaikh of being in
love with Shaikh Makin al-Din's daughter whose physical and moral
qualities he describes in the introduction of the *Diwan*.

On hearing this he wrote a commentary on the work explaining it all
allegorically. He did not deny that he loved al­-Nizam, the beautiful
daughter of Makin al-Din. What he denied was that he loved her in the
ordinary sense of human love. For him she was only a symbol, a form, of
the all-pervading beauty which manifests itself in the infinite variety
of things.

“Every name I mention,” he says, “refers to her; and every dwelling I
weep at is her dwelling ... Yet the words of my verses are nothing but
signs for the spiritual realities which descend upon my heart. May God
guard the reader of this *Diwan* against entertaining thoughts which do
not become men with noble souls and lofty aspirations, for the hearts of
such men are only occupied with heavenly things.”[^10]

It is not improbable that Ibn 'Arabi made a deliberate effort to
complicate the style, as Professor E. G. Browne remarks, in order to
conceal his ideas from the narrow-minded orthodox and the uninitiated.
He certainly succeeded, partly at least, in covering his pantheistic
ideas with an apparel of Qur'anic texts and Prophetic traditions - a
fact which is largely responsible for the controversy which raged
throughout the Muslim world regarding his orthodoxy. But it is also
possible, as we have already remarked, that he was equally con­vinced of
the truth of Islam and of his own philosophical system which was
verified by his mystical experience. In this case there is no need to
talk about concealment of ideas or intentional complexity of style.

It would be a mistake to judge Ibn 'Arabi by the ordinary canons of
logic He is undoubtedly a thinker and founder of a school of thought,
but he is pre-eminently a mystic. His mystical philosophy, therefore,
represents the union of thought and emotion in the highest degree. It is
a curious blend of reasoned truths and intuitive knowledge. He is also a
man of colossal imagi­nation. His dialectical reasoning is never free
from forceful imagery and mystic emotions. In fact, his thought seems to
be working through his imagination all the time. He dreams what he
thinks, yet there is a deep under-current of reasoning running through.

He does not always prove his ideas with a formal dialectic, but refers
his readers to mystic intuition and imagination as the final proof of
their validity. The world of imagination for him is a real world;
perhaps even more real than the external world of concrete objects. It
is a world in which true knowledge of things can be obtained. His own
imagination was as active in his dreams as in his waking life.

He tells us the dates when and the places where he had the visions, in
which he saw prophets and saints and discoursed with them; and others in
which a whole book like the *Fusus* was handed to him by the Prophet
Muhammad who bade him “take it and go forth with it to people that they
may make use thereof.”[^11] He calls this an act of revelation or
inspiration and claims that many of his books were so inspired.[^12]

“All that I put down in my books,” he says, “is not the result of
thinking or discursive reasoning. It is communicated to me through the
breathing of the angel of revelation in my heart.”[^13] “All that I have
written and what I am writing now is dictated to me through the
breathing of the divine spirit into my spirit. This is my privilege as
an heir not as an independent source; for the breathing of the spirit is
a degree lower than the verbal inspiration.”[^14]

Such claims point to a supernatural or supermental source by which Ibn
'Arabi's writings were inspired. Yet in discussing the problem of
revelation (*kashf* and *wahi*) in general, he emphatically denies all
outside supernatural agents, and regards revelation as something which
springs from the nature of man. Here are his own words:

“So, if any man of revelation should behold an object revealing to him
gnosis which he did not have before, or giving him something of which he
had no possession, this \`object' is his own *'ain* (essence) and naught
besides. Thus from the tree of his ‘self’ he gathers the fruit of his
own knowledge, just as the image of him who stands before a polished
mirror is no other than himself.”[^15]

Revelation, therefore, is an activity of man's, soul, when all its
spiritual powers are summoned and directed towards production. It is not
due to an external agent, neither is it the work of the mind as we
usually know it. What is sometimes seen as an “object” revealing
knowledge to an inspired man is nothing but a projection of his own
“self.”

Ibn 'Arabi is quite consistent with himself when he denies an outside
source of divine inspiration, for man, according to him, like everything
else, is in one sense divine. So there is no need to assume a duality of
a divine revealer and a human receiver of knowledge.

Another very important aspect of his thought is its digressive
character. He has offered the world a system of mystical philosophy, but
nowhere in his books can we find this system explained as a whole or
with any appreciable degree of unity or cohesion. He goes on from one
subject to another with no apparent logical connection, pouring out
details which he draws from every conceivable source. His philosophical
ideas are widely spread among this mass of irrelevant material and one
has to pick them up and piece them together.

That he has a definite system of mystical philosophy is a fact beyond
doubt. It is hinted at in every page in the *Fusus* and in many parts of
the *Futuhat*; but the system as a complete whole is to be found in
neither. It is extraordinary that he admits that he has intentionally
concealed his special theory by scattering its component parts
throughout his books and left the task of assembling it to the
intelligent reader. Speaking of the doctrine of the super­elect (by
which he means the doctrine of the Unity of all Being), he says:

“I have never treated it as a single subject on account of its
abstruse­ness, but dispersed it throughout the chapters of my book (the
*Futuhat*). It is there complete but diffused, as I have already said.
The intelligent reader who understands it will be able to recognize it
and distinguish it from any other doctrine. It is the ultimate truth
beyond which there is nothing to obtain.”[^16]

The third aspect of his thought is its eclectic character. Although he
may rightly claim to have a philosophy of religion of his own, many of
the com­ponent elements of this philosophy are derived from Islamic as
well as non-­Islamic sources. He had before him the enormous wealth of
Muslim sciences as well as the treasures of Greek thought which were
transmitted through Muslim philosophers and theologians. In addition, he
was thoroughly familiar with the literature of earlier Sufis.

From all these sources he borrowed what­ever was pertinent to his
system; and with his special technique of interpre­tation he brought
whatever he borrowed into line with his own ideas. He read into the
technical terms of traditional philosophy and theology - as he did with
the Qur'anic terms - totally different meanings. He borrowed from Plato,
Aristotle, the Stoics, Philo, and the Neo-Platonists terms of which he
found equivalents in the Qur'an or in the writings of the Sufis and
Scholastic Theo­logians. All were used for the construction and defence
of his own philo­sophy from which he never wavered.

Controversy About His Orthodoxy
-------------------------------

There has never been in the whole history of Islam another man whose
faith has been so much in question. The controversy over Ibn 'Arabi's
ortho­doxy spread far and wide, and occupied the minds of the Muslims
for centuries. We may even say that some traces of it are still to be
found. Muslim scholars in the past were not concerned with his
philosophy or mysticism as such, but with how far his philosophical and
mystical ideas were in harmony or dis­harmony with the established
dogmas of Islam. Instead of studying him objectively and impartially,
and putting him in the place he deserves in the general frame of Muslim
history, they spent so much time and energy in trying to prove or
disprove his orthodoxy. No work could have been more futile and
unrewarding.

The difference of opinion on this subject is enormous. By some Ibn
'Arabi is considered to be one of the greatest figures of Islam as an
author and a Sufi, while others regard him as a heretic and impostor.
His peculiar style perhaps is largely responsible for this. The
ambiguity of his language and complexity of his thoughts render his
ideas almost intractable, particularly to those who are not familiar
with his intricate ways of expression. He is a writer who pays more
attention to ideas and subtle shades of mystical feel­ings than to
words. We must, therefore, attempt to grasp the ideas which lie hidden
beneath the surface of his conventional terminology. Again, we must not
forget that he is a mystic who expresses his ineffable experience - as
most mystics do - in enigmatic language. Enigmas are hard to fathom, but
they are the external expression of the feelings that lie deep in the
heart of the mystic.

People who read Ibn 'Arabi's books with their eyes fixed on the words
mis­understand him and misjudge him. It is these who usually charge him
with infidelity (*kufr*) or at least with heresy. Others who grasp his
real intention uphold him as a great mystic and a man of God. A third
class suspends their judgment on him on the ground that he spoke in a
language which is far beyond their ken. They have nothing to say against
his moral or religious life, for this, they hold, was beyond reproach.

It seems that the controversy about his religious beliefs started when a
certain Jamal al-Din b. al-Khayyat from the Yemen made an appeal to the
\`*ulama'* of different parts of the Muslim world asking them to give
their opinion on Ibn 'Arabi to whom he attributed what Firuzabadi
describes as heretical beliefs and doctrines which are contrary to the
consensus of the Muslim community.

The reaction caused by the appeal was extraordinarily varied. Some
writers condemned Ibn 'Arabi right out; others defended him with great
zeal. Of this latter class we may mention Firuzabadi, Siraj al-Din
al­-Makhzumi, al-Siraj al-Balqini, Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, Qutb al-Din
al-Hamawi, al-Qutb al-Shirazi, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, and many others.
Both Makhzumi and Suyuti wrote books on the subject. They could see no
fault with Ibn 'Arabi except that he was misunderstood by people who
were not of his spiritual rank.

Suyuti puts him in a rank higher than that of Junaid when he says that
he was the instructor of the gnostics (\`*arifin*) while Junaid was the
instructor of the initiates (*muridin*). All these men are unanimous in
according to Ibn 'Arabi the highest place both in learning and spiritual
leadership. They recognize in his writings a perfect balance between
*Shari’ah* (religious Law) and *Haqiqah* (the true spirit of the Law),
or between the esoteric and exoteric aspects of Islam.

The greatest opposition appeared in the eighth and ninth/fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries when an open war was declared against speculative
Sufism in general and that of Ibn 'Arabi and Ibn al-Farid in particular.
The Hanbalite Ibn Taimiyyah (d. 728/ 1328), with his bitter tongue and
uncompromising attitude towards the Sufis, led the attack. He put these
two great mystics in the same category with Hallaj, Qunawi, Ibn Sab\`in,
Tilimsani, and Kirmani as men who believed in incarnation and
unification. In this respect, he said, they were even worse than the
Christians and the extreme Shi\`ites.[^17]

He does not even distinguish between the mystical ravings of Hallaj, the
deeply emo­tional utterances of Ibn al-Farid, the cold-blooded and
almost materialistic pantheism of Tilimsani, and the monistic theology
of Ibn 'Arabi. They were all guilty of the abominable doctrines of
incarnationism and pantheism. Curiously enough, he was less violent in
his criticism of Ibn 'Arabi's doctrine which, he said, was nearer Islam
than any of the others.

By far the worst enemy of Ibn 'Arabi and Ibn al-Farid and most insolent
towards them was Burhan al-Din Ibrahim al-Biqa'i (d. 858/1454). He
devoted two complete books to the refutation of their doctrines, not
sparing even their personal characters. In one of these books entitled
*Tanbih al-Ghabi 'ala Takfir Ibn \`Arabi* [^18] (Drawing the Attention
of the Ignorant to the Infidelity of Ibn 'Arabi) he says:

“He deceived the true believers by pretending to be one of them. He made
his stand on the ground of their beliefs; but gradually dragged them
into narrow corners, and led them by seduction to places where
perplexing questions are lurking. He is the greatest artist in confusing
people; quotes authentic traditions of the Prophet, then twists them
around in strange and mysterious ways. Thus, he leads his misguided
followers to his ultimate objective which is the complete overthrowing
of all religion and religious beliefs. The upholders of such doctrines
hide themselves behind an outward appearance of Muslim ritual such as
prayer and fasting. They are in fact atheists in the cloaks of monks and
ascetics, and veritable heretics under the name of Sufis.”[^19]

These accusations are unjust as they are unfounded. Ibn 'Arabi, it is
true, does interpret the Qur'an and Prophetic traditions in an esoteric
manner, and he is not the first or the last Sufi to do it, but his
ultimate aim is never the abandonment of religious beliefs and practices
as Biqa'i maintains. On the contrary, he did his utmost to save Islam
which he understood in his own way. The charge of pretence and hypocrisy
is contradicted by the bold and fearless language in which Ibn 'Arabi
chooses to express himself. He does not pretend to be a Muslim in order
to please or avoid the wrath of true believers to whom Biqa\`i refers.

He believes that Islam which preaches the principle of the unity of God
could be squared with his doctrine of the unity of all Being, and this
he openly declares in the strongest terms. He may have deceived himself
or expressed the mystical union with God in terms of the metaphysical
theory of the unity between God and the phenomenal world, but he
certainly tried to deceive no one.

In contrast to Biqa'i's terrible accusations, we should conclude by
citing the words of Balqini who had the highest opinion of Ibn 'Arabi.
He says

“You.should take care not to deny anything that Shaikh Muhyi al-Din has
said, when he - may God have mercy upon him - plunged deep into the sea
of gnosis and the verification of truths, mentioned towards the end of
his life in the *Fusus*, the *Futuhat*, and the *Tanazzulat* - things
which are fully understood only by people of his rank.”

Influence On Future Sufism
--------------------------

Although Ibn 'Arabi was violently attacked by his adversaries for his
views which they considered unorthodox, his teachings not only survived
the attacks, but exercised the most profound influence on the course of
all future Sufism. His admirers in the East, where he spent the greater
part of his life, called him al-Shaikh al-Akbar (the Greatest Doctor), a
title which has never been conferred on another Sufi since. It pointed
to his exceptional qualities both as a great spiritual master and a Sufi
author - and it is held to be true of him to this-day. He marks the end
of a stage where speculative Sufism reached its culminating point.

The centuries that followed witnessed the rapid spread of Sufi orders
all over the Muslim world; and Sufism became the popular form of Islam
with much less theory and more ritual and practice. The founders of
the.Fraternities were better known for their piety and spiritual
leadership than for their speculation. This is why Ibn 'Arabi's
theosophy and mystical philosophy remained unchallenged. They were in
fact the only source of inspnration to anyone who discoursed on the
subject of the Unity of all Being, whether in Arabic-speaking countries
or in Persia or Turkey.

Some writers of his own school, such as 'Abd al-Karim al-Jili and 'Abd
al-Razzaq al-Kashani, did little more than reproduce his ideas in a
different form. Other schools of Sufis were not entirely free of his
influence, at least as far as his terminology was concerned. The
tremendous commentary of Arusi on Qushairi's *Risalah*, which is the
classical model of Sunni Sufism, abounds with ideas and terms borrowed
from Ibn 'Arabi's works.

His influence seems to show itself most markedly in the delightful works
of the mystic poets of Persia from the seventh/thirteenth to the
ninthififteenth century. 'Iraqi, Shabistari, and Jami were all inspired
by him. Their wonderful odes are in many respects an echo of the ideas
of the author of the *Fusus* and the *Futuhat*, cast into magnificent
poetry by the subtle genius of the Persian mind. They overflow with the
ideas of divine unity and universal love and beauty.

God is described as the source and ultimate ground of all things. He is
for ever revealing Himself in the infinite forms of the phenomenal
world. The world is created anew at every moment of time; a continual
process of change goes on, with no repetition and no becoming. The
divine light illumi­nates all particles of Being, just as the divine
names have from eternity illuminated the potential, non-existent
realities of things. When these realities become actualized in space and
time, they reflect, like mirrors, the divine names which give them their
external existence. The phenomenal world is the theatre wherein all the
divine names are manifested. Man is the only creature in whom these
names are manifested collectively.

These are but a few of the many ideas which the mystic poets of Persia
borrowed from Ibn 'Arabi and to which they gave an endless variety of
poetical forms. It is said that 'Iraqi wrote his *Lama’at* after hearing
Sadr al-Din Qunawi's lectures on the *Fusus*, and Jami who commented on
the same book wrote his Lawa'ih in the same strain. The following is an
extract from \`Iraqi's *Lama'at* which sums up Ibn 'Arabi's theory of
the microcosm (man):

“Though Form,” he said, “proclaims me Adam's son,
My true degree a higher place hath won.
When in the glass of Beauty I behold,
The Universe my image doth unfold:
In Heaven's Sun behold me manifest­
Each tiny molecule doth me attest....
Ocean's a drop from my pervading sea,
Light but a flash of my vast Brilliancy:
From Throne to Carpet, all that is doth seem
Naught but a Mote that rides the sunlit Beam.
When Being's Veil of Attributes is shed,
My Splendour o'er a lustrous World is Spread ... “.[^20]

Doctrines
---------

### Unity of All Being

The most fundamental principle which lies at the root of Ibn 'Arabi's
whole philosophy, or rather theologico-philosophical and mystical
thought, is the principle of the “Unity of All Being” (*wahdat
al-­wujud*). Perhaps the word “pantheism” is not a very happy
equivalent, partly because it has particular associations in our minds,
and also because it does not express the full significance of the much
wider doctrine of the Unity of All Being as understood by our author.
From.this primordial conception of the ultimate nature of reality all
his theories in other fields of philosophy follow with an appreciable
degree of consistency.

Much of the criticism levelled against Ibn 'Arabi's position is due to
the misunderstanding of the role which he assigns to God in his
system­ - a fact which attracted the attention of even Ibn Taimiyyah,
who distinguishes between Ibn 'Arabi's *wahdat al-wujud* and that of
other Muslim pantheists. He says that “Ibn 'Arabi's system is nearer to
Islam in so far as he discriminates between the One who reveals Himself
and the manifestations thereof, thus establishing the truth of the
religious Law and insisting on the ethical and theological principles
upon which the former Shaikhs of Islam had insisted.”[^21] In other
words, Ibn Taimiyyah does not wish to put Ibn 'Arabi in the same
category with Tilimsani, Isra'ili, and Kirmani whom he condemns as
atheists and naturalists.

Ibn 'Arabi's pantheism is not a materialistic view of reality. The
external world of sensible objects is but a fleeting shadow of the Real
(*al-Haqq*), God. It is a form of acosmism which denies that the
phenomenal has being or mean­ing apart from and independently of God. It
is not that cold-blooded pantheism in which the name of God is mentioned
for sheer courtesy, or, at the most, for logical necessity or
consistency. On the contrary, it is the sort of pantheism in which God
swallows up everything, and the so-called other-than-God is reduced to
nothing. God alone is the all-embracing and eternal reality. This
position is summed up in Ibn 'Arabi's own words

“Glory to Him who created all things, being Himself their very essence
(*'ainuha*)”;

and also in the following verse:

“O Thou Who hast created all things in Thyself,
Thou unitest that which. Thou createst.
Thou createst that which existeth infinitely
In Thee, for Thou art the narrow and the all-embracing.”[^22]

Reality, therefore, is one and indivisible. We speak of God and the
world, the One and the many, Unity and multiplicity, and such other
terms when we use the language of the senses and the unaided intellect.
The intuitive knowledge of the mystic reveals nothing but absolute unity
which - curiously enough­ - Ibn 'Arabi identifies with the Muslim
doctrine of unification (*tauhid*). Hence the further and more daring
identification of his pantheistic doctrine with Islam as the religion of
unification.

“Base the whole affair of your seclusion (*khalwah*),” he says, “upon
facing God with absolute unification which is not marred by any (form
of) polytheism, implicit or explicit, and by denying, with absolute
conviction, all causes and intermediaries, whole and part, for indeed if
you are deprived of such *tauhid* you will surely fall into
polytheism.”[^23]

This, in other words, means that the real *tauhid* of God is to face Him
alone and see nothing else, and declare Him the sole agent of all that
exists. But such a view points at once to a fact long overlooked by
scholars of Muslim mysticism, i.e., that Muslim pantheism (*wahdat
al-wujud*) is a natural - ­though certainly not a logical - development
of the Muslim doctrine of *tauhid* (unification). It started with the
simple belief that “there is no god other than God,” and under deeper
consideration of the nature of Godhead, assumed the form of a totally
different belief, i. e., there is nothing in existence but God.

In Ibn 'Arabi's case, the absolute unity of God, which is the
monotheistic doctrine of Islam, is consistently interpreted to mean the
absolute unity of all things in God. The two statements become
equivalent, differing only in their respective bases of justification.
The former has its root in religious belief or in theological or
philosophical reasoning or both; the latter has its final justification
in the unitive state of the mystic. We have a glimpse of this tendency
in the writings of the early mystics of Islam such as Junaid of Baghdad
and Abu Yazid of Bistam, but they speak of *wahdat al-shuhud* (unity of
vision) not of *wujud* (Being), and attempt to develop no philosophical
system in any way comparable to that of Ibn 'Arabi's.

It is sufficiently clear now that according to Ibn 'Arabi reality is an
essential unity - substance in Spinoza's sense; but it is also a duality
in so far as it has two differentiating attributes: *Haqq* (God) and
*khalq* (universe). It can be regarded from two different aspects. In
itself it is the undifferentiated and Absolute Being which transcends
all spatial and temporal relations. It is a bare monad of which nothing
can be predicated or known, if by knowledge we mean the apprehension of
a thing through our senses and discursive reason. To know in this sense
is to determine that which is known; and determination is a form of
limitation which is contrary to the nature of the Absolute. The Absolute
Monad is the most indeterminate of all indeterminates (*ankar
al-­nakirat*); the thing-in-itself (*al-shai*) as Ibn 'Arabi calls it.

On the other hand, we can view reality as we know it; and we know it
invested with divine names and attributes. In other words, we know it in
the multiplicity of its manifestations which make up what we call the
phenomenal world. So, by knowing ourselves and the phenomenal world in
general, we know reality of which they are particular modes.

In Ibn 'Arabi's own words “we” - and this goes for the phenomenal world
as well - “are the names by which God describes Himself.” We are His
names, or His external aspects. Our essences are His essence and this
constitutes His internal aspect. Hence reality is One and many; Unity
and multiplicity; eternal and temporal; transcendent and immanent. It is
capable of receiving and uniting in itself all conceivable opposites.

Abu Said a1-Kharraz (d. 277/890) had already dis­covered this truth when
he said that God is known only by uniting all the opposites which are
attributed to him. “He is called the First and the Last: the External
and the Internal. He is the Essence of what is manifested and of that
which remains latent.... The Inward says no when the Outward says I am;
and the Outward says no when the Inward says I am, and so in the case of
every pair of contraries. The speaker is One, and He is identical with
the Hearer.”[^24]

Thus, Ibn 'Arabi's thought goes on moving within that closed circle
which knows no beginning and no end. His thought is circular because
reality as he envisages it is circular. Every point on the circle is
potentially the whole of the circle and is capable of manifesting the
whole. Looking at the points with an eye on the centre of the circle
(the divine essence), we can say that each point is identical with the
essence in one respect, different from it in another respect. This
explains the verbal contradictions with which Ibn 'Arabi's books abound.

Sometimes he comes nearer the philosophers than the mystics when he
explains the relation between God and the universe. Here we have
theories reminiscent of the Platonic theory of ideas and the Ishraqi
doctrine of intelligible existence (*al-wujud al-dhihni*) and the
scholastic theory of the identification of substance and accidents (the
theory of the Ash\`arites).

“Before coming into existence,” he says, “things of the phenomenal world
were poten­tialities in the bosom of the Absolute.” They formed the
contents of the mind of God as ideas of His future becoming. These
intelligible realities are what he calls “the fixed prototypes of
things” (*al-a\`yan al-thabitah*). God's knowledge of them is identical
with His knowledge of Himself.

It is a state of self-revelation or self-consciousness, in which God saw
(at no particular point of time) in Himself these determinate “forms” of
His own essence. But they are also latent states of His mind. So they
are both intelligible ideas in the divine mind as well as particular
modes of the divine essence. Hence the *a’yan al-thabitah* are
identified, on the one hand, with the quiddity (*mahiyyah*) of things,
and, on the other hand, with their essence (*huwiyyah*). The former
explains the first aspect of the *a’yan* as ideas; the latter, their
second aspect as essential modes.

He calls them non-existent in the sense that they have no external
existence, on the one hand, and no existence apart from the divine
essence, on the other. They are the prototypes and causes of all
external existents because they are the potential relations between the
divine names as well as the potential modes of the divine essence. When
these potentialities become actualities we have the so-called external
world. Yet, there is no real becoming, and no becoming in space and
time. The process goes on from eternity to everlastingness.

This complicated relation between the One and the many is nowhere
syste­matically explained in Ibn 'Arabi's works, not even in the
*Fusus*. A certain formal dialectic can be detected in the *Fusus* where
the author attempts to explain his metaphysical theory of reality, but
the thread of the formal reason­ing is often interrupted by outbursts of
mystic emotion. Ibn 'Arabi is essen­tially a mystic, and in the highest
degree a dreamer and fantast as we have already observed. He often uses
symbols and similes in expressing the relation between the multiplicity
of the phenomenal world and their essential unity.

The One reveals Himself in the many, he says, as an object is revealed
in different mirrors, each mirror reflecting an image determined by its
nature and its capacity as a recipient. Or it is like a source of light
from which an infinite number of lights are derived. Or like a substance
which penetrates and permeates the forms of existing objects: thus,
giving them their meaning and being. Or it is like a mighty sea on the
surface of which we observe count­less waves for ever appearing and
disappearing. The eternal drama of existence is nothing but this
ever-renewed creation (*al-khalq al-jadid*) which is in reality a
perpetual process of self-revelation. Or again, he might say, the One is
the real Being and the phenomenal world is its shadow having no reality
in itself.

But beautiful as they are, such similes are very ambiguous and highly
mis­leading. They are at least suggestive of a duality of two beings:
God and the universe, in a system which admits only an absolute unity.
Duality and multiplicity are illusory. They are due to our incapacity to
perceive the essential unity of things. But this oscillation between
unity and duality is due to confusing the epistemic side of the issue
with its ontological side.

Ontologically, there is but one reality. Epidemically, there are two
aspects: a reality which transcends the phenomenal world, and a
multiplicity of sub­jectivities that find their ultimate explanation in
the way we view reality as we know it. To our limited senses and
intellects the external world undergoes a process of perpetual change
and transformation. We call this creation but it is in fact a process of
self-unveiling of the One Essence which knows no change.

### Notion of Deity

In spite of his metaphysical theory of the nature of reality, Ibn 'Arabi
finds a place for God in his system. His pantheism, like that of
Spinoza, is to be distinguished from the naturalistic philosophy of the
Stoics and the materialistic atheists. God that figures in his
metaphysics as an unknowable and incommunicable reality, beyond thought
and descrip­tion, appears in his theology as the object of belief, love,
and worship. The warmth of religious sentiment displayed in his writings
attaches itself to his conception of God in the latter sense which comes
close to the monotheistic conception of Islam. Indeed he tries his
utmost to reconcile the two concep­tions; but his God is not in the
strict religious sense confined to Islam or any other creed. He is not
the ethical and personal God of religion, but the essence of all that is
worshipped and loved in all religions

***“God has ordained that ye shall worship naught but Him***. “[^25]

This is interpreted by Ibn 'Arabi to mean that God has decreed that
nothing is actually worshipped except Him. This is an open admission of
all kinds of worship, so long as the worshippers recognize God behind
the external “forms” of their gods. They call their gods by this or that
name, but the Gnostic (*al-‘arif*) calls his God “Allah” which is the
most universal of all names of God. Particular objects of worship are
creations of men's minds, but God, the Absolute, is uncreated. We should
not, therefore, confine God to any particular form of belief to the
exclusion of other forms, but acknowledge Him in all forms alike. To
limit Him to one form - as the Christians have done - is infidelity
(*kufr*); and to acknowledge Him in all forms is the spirit of true
religion.

This universal religion which preaches that all worshipped objects are
forms of One Supreme Deity is the logical corollary of Ibn 'Arabi's
meta­physical theory that reality is ultimately one. But it has its deep
roots in mysti­cism rather than in logic. It is nowhere better expressed
than in the following verse:

“People have different beliefs about God
But I behold all that they believe.”[^26]

And the verse:

“My heart has become the receptacle of every 'form';
It is a pasture for gazelles and a convent for Christian monks.
And a temple for idols, and pilgrims' Ka'bah,
And the Tablets of the Torah, and the Book of the Qur'an.
I follow the religion of love whichever way its camels take,
For this is my religion and my faith.”[^27]

So, all paths lead to one straight path which leads to God. It would be
a gross mistake to think that Ibn 'Arabi approves of the worship of
stones and stars and other idols, for these as far as his philosophy is
concerned are non-existent or mere fabrications of the human mind. The
real God is not a tangible object; but one who reveals Himself in the
heart of the gnostic. There alone He is beheld.

This shows that Ibn 'Arabi's theory of religion is mystical and not
strictly philosophical. It has its root in his much wider theory of
divine love. The ultimate goal of all mysticism is love; and in Ibn
'Arabi's mystical system in particular, it is the full realization of
the union of the lover and the Beloved. Now, if we look deeply into the
nature of worship, we find that love forms its very basis. To worship is
to love in the extreme. No object is worshipped unless it is invested
with some sort of love; for love is the divine principle which binds
things together and pervades all beings. This means that the highest
manifestation in which God is worshipped is love. In other words,
universal love and universal worship are two aspects of one and the same
fact. The mystic who sees God (the Beloved) in everything worships Him
in everything. This is summed up in the following verse

“I swear by the reality of Love that Love is the Cause of all love.
Were it not for Love (residing) in the heart, Love (God) would not be
worshipped.”[^28]

This is because Love is the greatest object of worship. It is the only
thing that is worshiped for its own sake. Other things are worshiped
through it.

God, as an object of worship, therefore, resides in the heart as the
supreme object of love. He is not the efficient cause of the
philosophers or the transcen­dent God of the Mu'tazilites. He is in the
heart of His servant and is nearer to him than his jugular vein.[^29]
“My heaven and my earth contain Me not,” says the Prophetic tradition,
“but I am contained in the heart of My servant who is a believer.”

### God and Man

It was Husain b. Mansur al-Hallaj (d. 309/922) who first laid down the
foundation for the theory that came to be known in the writings of Ibn
'Arabi and 'Abd al-Karim al-Jili as the Theory of the Perfect Man. In
the final form in which Ibn 'Arabi cast it, it played a very important
role in the history of Muslim mysticism. Hallaj's theory was a theory of
incarnation based on the Jewish tradition which states that “God created
Adam in His own image” - a tradition which the Sufis attributed to the
Pro­phet.

He distinguished between two natures in man: the divine (*al-lahut*),
and the human (*al-nasut*). The two natures are not united but fused,
the one into the other, as wine is fused into water. Thus for the first
time in the history of Islam a divine aspect of man was recognized, and
man was regarded as a unique creature not to be compared with any other
creature on account of his divinity.

The Hallajian idea was taken up by Ibn 'Arabi, but completely
transformed and given wider application. First, the duality of *lahut*
and *nasut* became a duality of aspects of one reality, not of two
independent natures. Secondly, they were regarded as actually present
not only in man but in everything what­ever; the *nasut* being the
external aspect of a thing, the *lahut*, its internal aspect. But God
who reveals Himself in all phenomenal existence is revealed in a most
perfect and complete way in the form of the perfect man, who is best
represented by prophets and saints.

This forms the main theme of the *Fusus al-Hikam* and *al-Tadbirat
al-Ilahiyyah* of Ibn 'Arabi, but many of its aspects are dealt with in
his *Futuhat* and other works. Each one of the twenty ­seven chapters of
the *Fusus* is devoted to a prophet who is both a Logos (*kali­mah*) of
God and a representative of one of the divine names. They are also cited
as examples of the perfect man. The Logos par excellence is the Prophet
Muhammad or rather the reality of Muhammad, as we shall see later.

So man in general - and the perfect man in particular - is the most
perfect manifestation of God. The universe which, like a mirror,
reflects the divine attributes and names in a multiplicity of forms,
manifests them separately or analytically. Man alone manifests these
attributes and names collectively or synthetically. Hence he is called
the microcosm and the honoured epitome (*al-mukhtasar al-sharif*) and
the most universal being (*al-kaun al-jami'*), who comprises all
realities and grades of existence. In him alone the divine pre­sence is
reflected, and through him alone God becomes conscious of Himself and
His perfection. Here are Ibn 'Arabi's own words:

“God, glory to Him, in respect of His most beautiful names, which are
beyond enumeration, willed to see their *a'yan* (realities), or if you
wish you may say, His (own) *'ayn*, in a Universal Being which contains
the whole affair - inasmuch as it is endowed with all aspects of
existence - and through which (alone) His mystery is revealed to
Himself: for a vision which consists in a thing seeing itself by means
of itself is not the same as that of the thing seeing something else
which serves as a mirror... . Adam was the very essence of the polishing
of this mirror, and the spirit of this form (i.e., the form in which God
has revealed Himself: which is man).”[^30]

Here Ibn 'Arabi almost repeats the words of Hallaj who says:
“God looked into eternity, prior to all things, contemplated the
essence of His splendour, and then desired to project outside Himself
His supreme joy and love with the object of speaking to them. He also
created an image of Himself with all His attributes and names. This
image was Adam whom God glorified and exalted.”[^31]

Yet, the difference between the two, thinkers is so fundamental. Hallaj
is an incarnationist; Ibn 'Arabi, a pantheist. On man as the microcosm
he says:

“The spirit of the Great Existent (the Universe)
Is this small existent (man).
Without it God would not have said:
'I am the greatest and the omnipotent.'
Let not my contingency veil thee,
Or my death or resurrection,
For if thou examinest me,
I am the great and the all-embracing.
The eternal through my essence,
And the temporal are manifested. “[^32]

This is why man deserves the high honour and dignity of being God's
vice­gerent on earth - a rank which God has denied all other creatures
including the angels. This superior rank goes not to every individual
man, for some men are even lower than the beasts, but to the perfect man
alone, and this for two reasons:

a) He is a perfect manifestation of God in virtue of unity in himself,
of all God's attributes and names.

b) He knows God absolutely through realizing in some sort of experience
his essential oneness with Him.

Here Ibn 'Arabi's metaphysical theory of man coincides with the theory
of mysticism.

### Ethical and Religious Implications

We have already pointed out that Ibn 'Arabi's pantheistic theory of the
nature of reality is the pivot round which the whole of his system of
thought turns. Some aspects of this philo­sophy have been explained; and
it remains now to show its bearing on his attitude towards man's ethical
and religious life.

Everything in Ibn \`Arabi's world is subject to rigid determinism. On
the ontological side we have seen that phenomenal objects are regarded
as the external manifestations of their latent realities and determined
by their own laws. Everything is what it is from eternity and nothing
can change it, not even God Himself. “What you are in your state of
latency (*thubut*) is what you will be in your realized existence
(*zuhur*),” is the fundamental law of existence. It is self-determinism
or self-realization in which freedom plays no part either in God's
actions or in those of His creatures.

Moral and religious phenomena are no exception. God decrees things in
the sense that He knows them as they are in their latent states, and
pre-judges that they should come out in the forms in which He knows
them. So He decrees nothing which lies outside their nature. This is the
mystery of predestination (*sirr al-qadar*).[^33]

Belief and unbelief, sinful and lawful actions, are all determined in
this sense and it is in this sense also that men are the makers of their
own destiny for which, Ibn 'Arabi says, they are responsible. “We are
not unjust to them,” says God, “but it is they who are unjust to
themselves.” “I am not unjust to My servants.”[^34]

On this Ibn 'Arabi comments as follows: “I (God) did not ordain
infidelity (*kufr*) which dooms them to misery, and then demand of them
that which lies not in their power. Nay, I deal with them only as I know
them, and I know them only as they are in themselves. Hence if there be
injustice they are the unjust. Similarly, I say to them nothing except
that which My essence has decreed that I should say; and My essence is
known to Me as it is in respect of My saying this or not saying that. So
I say nothing except what I know that I should say. It is Mine to say,
and it is for them to obey or not to obey after hearing My
command.”[^35]

There is, therefore, a difference between obeying one's own nature and
obeying the religious command, a distinction which was made long before
Ibn 'Arabi by Hallaj. On the one hand, all men - indeed all creatures -
obey their own law which he calls the creative law (*al-amr
al-takwini*). On the other, some obey and others disobey the religious
Law (*al-amr al-taklifi*). The first is in accordance with God's
creative will (*al-mashiyyah*) which brings things into existence in the
forms in which they are eternally predetermined. The second is something
imposed from without for some ulterior reason, ethical, religious, or
social.

Everything obeys the creative commands in res­ponse to its own nature,
and by so doing obeys God's will, regardless of whether this obedience
is also obedience or disobedience to the religious or ethical command.
When Pharaoh disobeyed God and Iblis (Satan) refused the divine command
to prostrate himself before Adam, they were in fact obeying the creative
command and carrying out the will of God, although from the point of
view of the religious command they were disobedient. To express the same
thing in different words, an action-in-itself, i. e., irrespective of
any form whatever, is neither good nor evil, neither religious nor
irreligious. It is just an action pure and simple. It comes under one or
another of these categories when it is judged by religious or ethical
standards.

The whole theory reduces obedience and disobedience in the religious
sense to a mere formality, and denies moral and religious obligations.
It tells us that man is responsible for his actions, but affirms that he
is not a free agent to will his actions. Responsibility and complete
absence of freedom do not go together. Theoretically, there are
different alternatives out of which man may choose his actions, but
according to this theory he is so created that he chooses the only
alternative which is determined by his own necessary laws. So he
actually chooses nothing and has no more freedom than a stone falling
down to the earth in obedience to its own law.

Thus, we go on moving within that closed circle of thought which is so
typical of Ibn 'Arabi's reasoning. He has one eye on his pantheistic
doctrine with all that it entails, and the other on Islamic teachings,
and oscillates between the two all the time. His pantheistic doctrine
implies that God is the Ultimate Agent of all actions, and Islam insists
on the moral and reli­gious responsibility of man for his actions. The
two conflicting points of view cannot be reconciled, and Ibn 'Arabi's
way of reconciling them is full of paradoxes.

He is more consistent when he says that all actions are created by God
and there is no real difference between the Commander and the
command­ed.[^36] There is no real servantship (\`*ubudiyyah*), for the
servant is one who carries out the commands of his master. But in
reality the servant of God is a mere locus (*mahall*) through which
God's creative power acts. So the servant is the Lord and the Lord is
the servant.[^37]

This seems to contradict what we have already said, i, e., that,
according to Ibn 'Arabi, actions belong to man and spring directly from
his nature in a determined way. Actually, there is no contradiction when
we think of the distinction he makes between the One and the many. In
fact, all his paradoxes can be solved when considered in the light of
this distinction. When he says that God is the doer of all actions, he
is regarding the question from the point of view of the One, for God's
essence is the essence of men to whom actions are attributed. And when
he asserts that men are the doers of their actions, he is regarding the
question from the point of view of the many.

Having reduced obligation, obedience, disobedience; and similar other
con­cepts to mere formal relations, it was natural enough for him to
give the concepts of punishment and reward a positive content. Heaven
and hell and all the eschatological matters connected with them are
described in the. minutest details, but no sooner does he give a
constructive picture of one of them than he uses his allegorical method
of interpretation to explain it away.

His method bears some remarkable resemblance to that of the Isma’ilians
and the Carmathians, used for the same purpose. All eschatological terms
such as punishment, reward, purgatory, the Balance, the Bridge,
intercession, heaven, hell, and so on, are regarded as representations
of states of man, and corporealizations of ideas. What we learn from
Tradition, he says, are words, and it is left to us to find out what is
meant by them,[^38] i.e., to read into them whatever meaning we please.

This is precisely what Ibn 'Arabi him­self has done. Heaven and hell,
according to him, are subjective states, not objective realities. Hell
is the realization of the individual “self”; it is self­hood. Heaven is
the realization of the essential unity of all things. There is no real
difference between the two. If any, the difference is one of degree, not
of kind. Salvation is the ultimate end of all. Speaking of the people of
hell and heaven, Ibn 'Arabi says: -

“Nothing remains but the Fulfiller of Promise alone;
The threat of God has no object to be seen.
When they enter the Abode of Misery they experience
Pleasure wherein lies a bliss so different
From that of the Gardens of Everlastingness.
It is all the same: the difference is felt at the beatific
vision.”[^39]

This means that when the truth is known and God reveals Himself as He
really is, everyone, whether in heaven or in hell, will know his
position, i.e., will know how near or how far he is from the truth.
Those who fully realize their essential oneness with God are the blessed
ones who will go to paradise. Those who are veiled from the truth are
the damned ones who will go to hell. But both parties will enjoy in
their respective abodes happiness proportionate to their degree of
knowledge.

Conclusion
----------

In the foregoing pages an attempt has been made to give a bird's-eye
view of a tremendously vast field. We have concentrated on the most
important features of Ibn 'Arabi's life and thought; many important
facts have of necessity been omitted for lack of space. If Ibn 'Arabi
experienced - as we must assume he did - some sort of strain while
writing his mystical philosophy, we are placed under greater strain
while writing about him. There is more than one way of interpreting his
ideas and fathoming his intricate and obscure style. This makes it
possible for scholars to give not only different but conflicting
accounts of his teachings.

The present account deals with him as a thorough-going pantheist who
tried his best to reconcile his pantheistic doctrine with Islam. In
doing so he had to read new meanings into the tradi­tional Muslim
concepts, and change Islam from a positive into a mystic religion. It is
true he never lost sight of the idea of Godhead, but his God is not the
transcendent God of revealed religions, but the Absolute Being who
manifests Himself in every form of existence, and in the highest degree
in the form of man.

People may agree or disagree with some of his theories, but the fact
re­mains that in production and influence he is the greatest
Arabic-speaking mystic Islam has ever produced. It has been said that he
has annulled religion in the orthodox sense in which it is usually
understood. This is not altogether true. He has done away with a good
many concepts which were so narrowly understood by Muslim jurists and
theologians, and offered in their place other concepts which are much
deeper in their spirituality and more compre­hensive than those of any
of his Muslim predecessors. His ideas about the universality of
everything - being, love, religion - may be considered land­marks in the
history of human thought.

Bibliography
------------

Ibn 'Arabi, *Futuhat al-Makkiyyah*; *Fusus al-Hikam*; *Risalat
al-Khalwah*, MS. India Office, London; *Tarjuman al-Ashwaq*, ed. R. A.
Nicholson, London, 1911;

Ibn al-Jauzi, *Mir'at*;

Ibn Taimiyyah, *Rasa'il*;

al-Sha'rani, *al-Yawaqit w-al­ Jawahir*, Cairo;

Qutubi, *Fawat al-Wafayat*;

Jami, *Nafahat al-Uns*;

Hammer­-Purgstall, *Literaturgeschichte d. Araber*;

Von Kremer, *Gesch. der herrsch.* *Ideen des Islams*;

R. A. Nicholson, “The Lives of 'Umar Ibn al-Farid and Ibn al-'Arabi,”
*Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*, 1906; *A Literary History of the
Arabs*; *The Mystics of Islam*. London, 1914;

M. Schreiner, *Beitr. z. Gesch. d. Theol. Bewegungen im Islam in
Zeitschr. d. Deutsch. Morg. Gesellsch*;

Asin Palacios, *La psicilogia segun Mohidin Abenarabi in Actes du XVI
Congres intern. des Orient*, Algier, 1905;

Goldziher, *Vorlesungen*;

Macdonald, *Development of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and
Constitutional Theory*;

A. J. Arberry, *Sufism*, London, 1950.

[^1]: Futuhat al-Makkiyyah, Vol.1, p.327.

[^2]: Ibid., p.199.

[^3]: Qutubi, Fawat al-Wafayat, Vol. II, p. 301

[^4]: Brockelmann, GAL, Vol. I, p. 44

[^5]: Yawaqit, p.10.

[^6]: Nafahat, p.634.

[^7]: Published in the Bulletin of the Faculty of Arts, Alexandria, Vol.
VII, December 1954, by A.E. Affifi.

[^8]: Yawaqit, p.3.

[^9]: Futuhat, Vol.II, p.646, and Maqqari, p.407. The translation is by
E.G. Browne, Literary History of Persia, Vol.II, p.499.

[^10]: Introd. to the Com. on the Tarjuman.

[^11]: Fusus al-Hikam, p.47

[^12]: See Ibn \`Arabi's works in the light of a memorandum ... by A. E.
Affifi, Bulletin of the Faculty of Arts, Vol. VIII, pp. 112f.

[^13]: Quoted by Sha’rani, Yawaqit, p.24.

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Fusus, p.66.

[^16]: Futuhat, Vol.I, pp.47, 48.

[^17]: Ibn Taymiyyah, Rasa’il, Vol.I, pp.166, 167.

[^18]: MS. in the special collection of Ahmad Dhaki Paasha, Cairo

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: A.J. Arberry, Sufism, pp. 102-03.

[^21]: Rasa’il, Vol.I, p.167.

[^22]: Fusus, p.88.

[^23]: Risalat al-Khalwah, MS. India Office, London

[^24]: Fusus, p.77.

[^25]: Qur’an, xvii, 24.

[^26]: Futuhat, Vol.III, p.175.

[^27]: Tarjuman al-Ashwaq, pp.30-40.

[^28]: Fusus, p.194.

[^29]: Qur’an, L, 16

[^30]: Fusus, p.48.

[^31]: Tawasin, p.130.

[^32]: Fusus, p.152.

[^33]: Ibid., p.131.

[^34]: Qur’an, xxii , 10.

[^35]: Fusus, p.131.

[^36]: Futuhat, Vol.II, p.286.

[^37]: Fusus, p.92.

[^38]: Futuhat, Vol.I, p.412, ll, 4ff.

[^39]: Fusus, p.94.


