Chapter 21: Al-Kindi
====================

By Ahmed Fouad El-Ehwany

Life
----

Al-Kindi (c. 185/801- c. 260/873) was the first Muslim philosopher.
Philo­sophical studies in the second/eighth century were in the hands of
Christian Syriacs, who were primarily physicians. They started, through
encourage­ment by the Caliph, to translate Greek writings into Arabic.
Being the first Arab Muslim to study science and philosophy, al-Kindi
was rightly called “the Philosopher of the Arabs.”

His full name is: Abu Yusuf Ya\`qub ibn Ishaq ibn al-Sabbah ibn \`Imran
ibn Isma\`il ibn al-Ash\`ath ibn Qais al-Kindi. Kindah was one of the
great Arab tribes before Islam. His grandfather al-Ash\`ath ibn Qais
adopted Islam and was considered one of the Companions (*Sahabah*) of
the Prophet. Al-Ash\`ath went with some of the pioneer Muslims to
al-Kufah, where he and his descend­ants lived. Ishaq ibn al-Sabbah,
al-Kindi's father, was Governor of al-Kufah during the reign of the
\`Abbasid Caliphs al-Mahdi and al-Rashid. Most probably al-Kindi was
born in the year 185/801,[^1] a decade before the death of al-Rashid.

Al-Kufah and al-Basrah, in the second/eighth and third/ninth centuries,
were the two rivalling centres of Islamic culture. Al-Kufah was more
inclined to rational studies; and in this intellectual atmosphere,
al-Kindi passed his early boyhood. He learnt the Qur'an by heart, the
Arabic grammar, literature, and elementary arithmetic, all of which
formed the curriculum for all Muslim children. He, then, studied *Fiqh*
and the new-born discipline called *Kalam*. But it seems that he was
more interested in sciences and philo­sophy, to which he consecrated the
rest of his life, especially after he went to Baghdad.

A complete knowledge of Greek science and philosophy required
proficiency in Greek and Syriac languages into which latter many Greek
works had already been translated. It seems that al-Kindi learnt Greek,
but certainly he mastered the Syriac language from which he translated
several works. He also revised some of the Arabic translations, such as
al-Himsi's translation of Plotinus' *Enneads*, which passed to the Arabs
as one of the writings of Aristotle. Al-Qifti, the biographer, says that
“al-Kindi translated many philosophical books, clarified their
difficulties, and summarized their deep theories.”[^2]

In Baghdad he was connected with al-Ma'mun, al-Mu'tasim, and the
latter's son Ahmad. He was nominated tutor of Ahmad ibn al-Mu'tasim, to
whom he dedicated some of his important writings. Ibn Nabatah says:
“Al-Kindi and his writings embellished the empire of al-Mu\`tasim.”[^3]
He flourished also under the reign of al-Mutawakkil (r.
232-247/847-861). A story related by Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah indicates the
great fame of al-Kindi at that time, his advanced knowledge, and his
famous private library.

This is the full account: “Muham­mad and Ahmad, the sons of Musa ibn
Shakir, who lived during the reign of al-Mutawakkil, were conspiring
against everyone who was advanced in know­ledge. They sent a certain
Sanad ibn 'Ali to Baghdad so that he might get al-Kindi away from
al-Mutawakkil. Their conspiracies succeeded to the point that
al-Mutawakkil ordered al-Kindi to be beaten. His whole library was
confiscated and put in a separate place, labelled as the 'Kindian
Library.”[^4]'

Al-Kindi's notoriety for avarice was equal to his fame for knowledge.
This bad repute was due to al-Jahiz's caricature of him in his *Kitab
al-Bukhala'*. However, al-Kindi lived a luxurious life in a house, in
the garden of which he bred many curious animals. It seems that he lived
aloof from society, even from his neighbours.

An interesting story related by al-Qifti shows that al­-Kindi lived in
the neighborhood of a wealthy merchant, who never knew that al-Kindi was
an excellent physician. Once the merchant's son was attacked by sudden
paralysis and no physician in Baghdad was able to cure him. Some­one
told the merchant that he lived in the neighborhood of the most
brilliant philosopher, who was very clever in curing that particular
illness. Al-Kindi cured the paralyzed boy by music.

Works
-----

Most of his numerous works (numbering about 270) are lost. Ibn al-Nadim
and following him al-Qifti classified his writings, most of which are
short treatises, into seventeen groups: (1) philosophical, (2) logical,
(3) arithmetical, (4) globular, (5) musical, (6) astronomical, (7)
geometrical, (8) spherical, (9), medical, (10) astrological, (11)
dialectical, (12) psychological, (13) political, (14) causal
(meteorological), (15) dimensional, (16) on first things, (17) on the
species of some metals, chemicals, etc.

This account shows to what extent al-Kindi's knowledge was encyclopedic.
Some of his scientific works were translated by Gerard of Cremona into
Latin and influenced very much the thought of medieval Europe. Cardano
considered him to be one of the twelve greatest minds.

Scholars studied al-Kindi, until his Arabic treatises were discovered
and edited, merely on the basis of the extant Latin translations. His
*De Medici­narum Compositarum Gradibus* was published in 938/1531.
Albino Nagy[^5] in 1315/1897 edited the medieval translations of these
treatises: *De intellectu*; *De Somno et visione*; *De quinque
essentiis*; *Liber introductorius in artem logicae demonstrationis*.

Since the discovery of some of his Arabic manuscripts, a new light has
been thrown on al-Kindi's philosophy. A compendium containing about 25
treatises was found by Ritter in Istanbul. Now they have all been edited
by different scholars, Walzer, Rosenthal, Abu Ridah, and Ahmed Fouad
El-Ehwany.[^6] There are other short treatises discovered in Aleppo, but
they have not yet been edited. It has become possible, to a certain
extent, to analyse al-Kindi's philo­sophy on more or less sure grounds.

Philosophy
----------

It was due to al-Kindi that philosophy came to be acknowledged as a part
of Islamic culture. The early Arab historians called him “the
Philosopher of the Arabs” for this reason. It is true that he borrowed
his ideas from Neo­-Platonic Aristotelianism, but it is also true that
he put those ideas in a new context. By conciliating Hellenistic
heritage with Islam he laid the foundations of a new philosophy. Indeed,
this conciliation remained for a long time the chief feature of this
philosophy. Furthermore, al-Kindi, specializing in all the sciences
known at his time - of which his writings give sufficient evidence -
­made philosophy a comprehensive study embracing all sciences.

Al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, and Ibn Rushd were first scientists and then
philosophers. For this reason Ibn al-Nadim placed al-Kindi in the class
of natural philosophers. This is his full account: “Al-Kindi is the best
man of his time, unique in his knowledge of all the ancient sciences. He
is called the Philosopher of the Arabs. His books deal with different
sciences, such as logic, philosophy, geometry, arithmetic, astronomy,
etc. We have connected him with the natural philosophers because of his
prominence in science.”[^7]

Philosophy is the knowledge of truth. Muslim philosophers, like the
Greek, believed that truth is something over and above experience; that
it lies immutable and eternal in a supernatural world. The definition of
philosophy in al-Kindi's treatise on “First Philosophy” runs like this:
“Philosophy is the knowledge of the reality of things within man's
possibility, because the philosopher's end in his theoretical knowledge
is to gain truth and in his practical knowledge to behave in accordance
with truth.”

At the end of the treatise, God is qualified by the term “truth,” which
is the objective of philo­sophy. “The True One (*al-Wahid al-Haq*) is,
then, the First, the Creator, the Sustainer of all that He has created.
...” This view is borrowed from Aristotle's metaphysics, but the
Unmovable Mover of Aristotle is substituted by the Creator. This
difference constitutes the core of the Kindian system.

Philosophy is classified into two main divisions: theoretical studies,
which are physics, mathematics, and metaphysics; and practical studies
which are ethics, economics, and politics. A later writer, quoting
al-Kindi, gives the classification as follows: “Theory and practice are
the beginning of the virtues. Each one of the two is divided into the
physical, mathematical, and theological parts. Practice is divided into
the guidance of one's self, that of one's house, and that of one's
city.” [^8]

Ibn Nabata, quoting also al-Kindi, mentions only the theoretical
divisions. “The philosophical sciences are of three kinds: the first in
teaching (*ta\`lim*) is mathematics which is intermediate in nature; the
second is physics, which is the last in nature; the third is theology
which is the highest in nature.”[^9] The priority of mathematics goes
back to Aristotle, but the final sequence of the three sciences
beginning with physics came from the later Peripatetics. Most probably
al-Kindi was following Ptolemy, who gave a division of sciences in the
beginning of *Almagest*.[^10] Mathematics was known to the Arabs from
that time on as the “first study.”

The definition of philosophy and its classification, as mentioned above,
remained traditional in Muslim philosophy. As Mustafa 'Abd al-Raziq puts
it: “This attitude in understanding the meaning of philosophy and its
classification according to subject-matter directed Muslim philosophy
from its very outset.”[^11]

First philosophy or metaphysics is the knowledge of the First Cause,
be­cause all the rest of philosophy is included in this knowledge.[^12]
The method followed in the study of first philosophy is the logic of
demonstration. From now on, logic will be the instrument of the
philosophers in their quest for truth.

Al-Kindi's value as a philosopher was debated in ancient times because
of the lack of logical theory in his system. Sa'id al-Andalusi says:
“Al-Kindi wrote on logic many books which never became popular, and
which people never read or used in the sciences, because these books
missed the art of analysis which is the only way to distinguish between
right and wrong in every study. By the art of synthesis, which is what
Ya\`qub meant by his writings, no one can profit, unless he has sure
premises from which he can make the synthesis.”

It is difficult for us to give an exact idea concerning this charge
until his logical treatises are discovered. But the fact that al-Farabi
was called the “Second Master” because of his introducing logic as the
method of thinking in Islamic philosophy[^13] seems to corroborate the
judgment of Sa'id just mentioned.

Harmony Between Philosophy And Religion
---------------------------------------

Al-Kindi directed Muslim philosophy towards an accord between philosophy
and religion.[^14] Philosophy depends on reason, and religion relies on
revelation. Logic is the method of philosophy; faith, which is belief in
the realities mention­ed in the Qur'an as revealed by God to His
Prophet, is the way of religion. From the very outset, men of religion
mistrusted philosophy and the philo­sophers. Philosophers were attacked
for being heretics.

Al-Kindi was obliged to defend himself against the accusation of
religious spokesmen that “the acquisition of the knowledge of the
reality of things is atheism (*kufr*).”[^15] In his turn, al-Kindi
accused those religious spokesmen for being irreligious and traders with
religion. “They disputed with good men in defence of the untrue position
which they had founded and occupied without any merit only to gain power
and to trade with religion. “[^16]

The accord between philosophy and religion is laid down on the basis of
three arguments: (1) that theology is part of philosophy; (2) that the
pro­phet's revelation and philosophical truth are in accord with each
other, and (3) that the pursuit of theology is logically ordained.

Philosophy is the knowledge of the reality of things, and this knowledge
comprises theology (*al-rububiyyah*), the science of monotheism, ethics,
and all useful sciences.

Furthermore, the prophets have ordained the pursuit of truth and
practice of virtue. “The totality of every useful science and the way to
attain it, the getting away from anything harmful and taking care
against it - the acquisition of all this is what the true prophets have
proclaimed in the name of God ....
The prophets have proclaimed the unique divinity of God, the practice
of the virtues accepted by Him, and the avoidance of the vices which are
contrary to virtues-in-themselves.”

Again, the pursuit of philosophy is necessary for it “is either
necessary or it is not necessary. If theologians (those who oppose its
pursuit) say that it is necessary, they should study it; if they say
that it is not necessary, they have to give the reason for this, and
present a demonstration. Giving the reason and demonstration is part of
the acquisition of the knowledge of reality. It is necessary then that
they should have this knowledge and realize that they must obtain
it.”[^17]

In his treatise on “The Number of the Works of Aristotle,” al-Kindi
makes a sharp distinction between religion and philosophy. The fact that
he discussed this point in this particular treatise proves that he was
comparing the religion of Islam with Aristotle's philosophy. The divine
science, which he distinguished from philosophy, is Islam as revealed to
the Prophet and recorded in the Qur'an.

Contrary to his general view that theology is a part of philosophy, here
we find (1) that theology occupies a rank higher than philosophy; (2)
that religion is a divine science and philosophy is a human one; (3)
that the way of religion is faith and that of philosophy is reason; (4)
that the knowledge of the prophet is immediate and through inspiration
and that of the philosopher is by way of logic and demonstration. We
quote in full this interesting and very important passage:

“If, then, a person does not obtain the knowledge of quantity and
quality, he will lack knowledge of the primary and secondary substances,
so that one cannot expect him to have any knowledge of the human
sciences which are acquired by man through research, effort, and
industry. These sciences fall short in rank of the divine science
(*al-'ilm al-ilahi*)[^18] which is obtained without research, effort,
and industry, and in no time.

This latter knowledge is like the knowledge of the prophets, a knowledge
bestowed by God; unlike mathematics and logic, it is received without
research, effort, study, and industry, and requires no period of time.
It is distinct in being obtained by the will of God, through the
purification and illumination of souls, so that they turn towards truth,
through God's support, assistance, inspiration, and His messages.

This knowledge is not a prerogative of all men, but only of the
prophets. This is one of their miraculous peculiarities, the distinctive
sign which differentiates them from other human beings. Men who are not
prophets have no way of attaining knowledge of the secondary substances
or that of the primary sensible substances and their accidents without
research and industry through logic and mathematics, and without any
period of time.

“Hence, men of intelligence draw the evident conclusion that since
this[^19] (knowledge) exists, it comes from God; whereas (ordinary) men
are unable by their very nature to attain to a similar knowledge,
because it is above and beyond their nature and the devices they use.
Thus, they submit themselves in obedience and docility to it and
faithfully believe in the truth of the message of the prophets.”[^20]

The Muslims follow the Word of God stated in the Qur'an and are
convinced by its sure arguments. Philosophers refer to logical
demonstration, i, e., their reason. Philosophical arguments depend on
the self-evident first principles of demonstration. In al-Kindi's view,
the Qur'anic arguments, being divine, are more sure, certain, and
convincing than the philosophical arguments which are human. The Qur'an
gives solutions of some very important problems, such as the creation of
the world from nothing, and resurrection.

Al-Kindi holds that the Qur'anic arguments are “beliefs, clear and
comprehensive.” Thus, they lead to certainty and conviction. Hence, they
are superior to the philosopher's arguments. An example of such sure
arguments is to be found in the answer to the infidels who asked, “Who
will be able to give life to bones when they have been reduced to dust?”
The answer is: “He who produced them originally will give life to them.”

Thus, al-Kindi opened the door for the philosophical interpretation of
the Qur'an, and thereby brought about an accord between religion and
philosophy. In his treatise “The Worship (*sujud*) of the *Primum
Mobile*,” the verse: “Stars and trees are worshipping” is interpreted by
reference to the different meanings of the word “*sajdah*.” It means:
(1) prostration in praying; (2) obedience; (3) change from imperfection
to perfection; (4) following by will the order of a person. It is this
last meaning that applies to the worship of the stars. The heavenly
sphere is animated and is the cause of life in the world of generation
and corruption. The movement of the *primum mobile* is called worship
(*sujud*) in the sense that it obeys God.

To sum up, al-Kindi was the first philosopher in Islam to effect an
accord between religion and philosophy. He paved the way for al-Farabi,
Ibn Sina, and Ibn Rushd. Two quite different views are given by him. The
first follows the way of the logicians and reduces religion to
philosophy. The second, considering religion a divine science, raises it
above philosophy. This divine science can be known by a prophetic
faculty. However, through philosophic interpretation religion becomes
conciliated with philosophy.

God
---

An adequate and sure knowledge of God is the final objective of
philosophy. Philosophy by its very name was a Greek study. For this.
reason, al-Kindi made a great effort to transmit Greek philosophy to the
Arabs. As Rosenthal rightly puts it: “Al-Kindi himself states that he
considered it his task to serve as an Arab transmitter and interpreter
of the ancient heritage.”[^21] In Theon's commentary on the *Almagest*
of Ptolemy, we find God described as immutable, simple, of invisible
nature, and the true cause of motion.

Al-Kindi in his treatise *al-Sina'at al-'Uzma* [^22] paraphrases the
same idea. He says: “For God, great is His praise, is the reason and
agent of this motion, being eternal (*qadim*), He cannot be seen and
does not move, but in fact causes motion without. moving Himself. This
is His description for those who understand Him in plain words: He is
simple in that He cannot be dissolved into something simpler; and He is
indivisible because He is not composed and composition has no hold on
Him, but in fact He is separate from the visible bodies, since He ... is
the reason of the motion of the visible bodies.”[^23]

Simplicity, indivisibility, invisibility, and causality of motion are
the divine attributes stated by Theon. When al-Kindi mentions them he is
simply a transmitter of the Hellenistic conception of God. The
originality of al-Kindi lies in his conciliation of the Islamic concept
of God with the philosophical ideas which were current in the later
Neo-Platonism.

The basic Islamic notions concerning God are His unicity, His act of
creation from nothing, and the dependence of all creatures on Him. These
attributes are stated in the Qur'an in a manner which is neither
philosophical nor dialectical. Al-Kindi qualifies God in new terms. God
is the true one. He is transcendent and can be qualified only by
negative attributes. “He has no matter, no form, no quantity, no
quality, no relation; nor is He qualified by any of the remaining
categories (*al-maqulat*).[^24] He has no genus, no differentia, no
species, no proprium, no accident. He is immutable.... He is, therefore,
absolute oneness, nothing but oneness (*wahdah*). Everything else is
multiple.”[^25]

To understand the position of al-Kindi, we must refer to the
Traditionalists and the Mu'tazilites. The Traditionalists - Ibn Hanbal
was one of their chief representatives - refused to interpret the
attributes of God. They simply called them “the names of God.” When, for
example, Ibn Hanbal was asked whether the Qur'an, being the Word of God,
is eternal (*qadim*) or created (*makhluq*), he gave no answer. His only
answer was that the Qur'an is the Word (*kalam*) of God. The
Traditionalists accepted the literal meaning of the Scripture, i. e.
without any further interpretation.

The Mu'tazilites, such as were the contemporaries of al-Kindi,
rationally interpreted the attributes of God to establish His absolute
unicity. They solved the problem on the basis of the relation between
the essence (*dhat*) of God and His attributes (*sifat*). The main
attributes in their view amount to three: knowledge, power, and will.
These they negate, for, if affirmed of God, they would entail plurality
in His essence. The Mu'tazilites and the philosophers shared this denial
of the divine attributes. Al-Ghazali rightly says in the *Tahafut
al-Falasifah* that “the philosophers agree exactly as do the
Mu'tazilites that it is impossible to ascribe to the First Principle
knowledge, power, and will.”[^26]

Al-Kindi, the first philosopher in Islam, followed the Mu'tazilites in
their denial of the attributes. But his approach to the solution of the
problem is quite different. First, it is not the essence of God and His
attributes with which he is concerned; it is rather the predicability of
the categories - as we have seen above - to the substance of God.
Secondly, all things can be defined, hence known, by giving their genera
and differentiae, except God who has neither genus nor differentia. In
other terms, al-Kindi follows in his quest the “way of the logicians.”

The Kindian arguments for the existence of God depend on the belief in
causality. Everything that comes to be must have a cause for its
existence. The series of causes are finite, and consequently there is a
prime cause, or the true cause, which is God. Causes, enumerated by
Aristotle, are the material, the formal, the efficient, and the final.
In al-Kindi's philosophy, as repeated in many of his treatises, God is
the efficient cause.

There are two kinds of efficient causes; the first is the true efficient
cause and its action is creation from nothing (*ibda'*). All the other
efficient causes are intermediate, i.e., they are produced by other
causes, and are themselves the causes of other effects. They are called
so by analogy; in fact, they are not true causes at all. Only God is the
true efficient cause. He acts and is never acted upon.

Given that the world is created by the action of *ibda'* in no time, it
must be in need of a creator, i.e., God. Nothing which is created is
eternal; God alone is eternal. Beings come to be and pass away. This is
clear in the case of corporeal sensibles which are in perpetual flux and
change. Also the world as a whole, the celestial bodies, and the
universals, such as genera and species, are not eternal, because they
are finite and composed. Everything which is finite in space and time is
not eternal. The notion of infinity occupies an important place in the
philosophy of al-Kindi, and will be discussed later in detail.

Another proof for the existence of God is the order observed in all
natural beings. The regularity inherent in the world, the hierarchical
degrees of its parts, their interactions, the most perfect state in
every being realizing its highest goodness - all this is a proof that
there is a Perfect Being who manages everything according to the
greatest wisdom [^27]

Beings are in continuous need of God. This is so because God, the
Creator *ex nihilo*, is the sustainer of all that He has created, so
that if anything lacks His sustainment and power, it perishes.[^28]

Infinity
--------

The world in Aristotle's system is finite in space but infinite in time,
be­cause the movement of the world is co-eternal with the Unmovable
Mover. Eternity of the world was refuted in Islamic thought, since Islam
holds that the world is created. Muslim philosophers, facing this
problem, tried to find a solution in accord with religion. Ibn Sina, and
Ibn Rushd were accused of atheism because of their pro-Aristotelianism;
they assumed that the world is eternal. In fact, this problem remained
one of the important features of Islamic philosophy, and al-Ghazali
mentioned it at the beginning of his twenty points against the
philosophers in the *Tahafut al-Falasifah*.

Al-Kindi, contrary to his great successors, maintained that the world is
not eternal. Of this problem he gave a radical solution by discussing
the notion of infinity on mathematical grounds.

Physical bodies are composed of matter and form, and move in space and
time. Matter, form, space, movement, and time are the five substances in
every physical body. (*Res autem quae sunt in omnibus substantiis sunt
quin­que, quarum una est hyle, et secunda est forma, et tertia est
locus, et quarta est motes, et quinta est tempus*.) [^29]

Being so connected with corporeal bodies, time and space are finite,
given that corporeal bodies are finite; and these latter are finite
because they cannot exist except within limits.

Time is not movement; it is the number which measures the motion
(*Tempus ergo est numerus numerans motum*) for it is nothing other than
the prior and posterior. Number is of two kinds: discrete and
continuous. Time is not of the discrete kind but of the continuous kind.
Hence, time is definable as the supposed instants which continue from
the past to the future. In other words, time is the sum of anterior and
posterior instants. It is the continuum of instants.

Time is part of the knowledge of quantity. Space, movement, and time are
quantities. The knowledge of these three substances and also the other
two is subordinate to the knowledge of quantity and quality. As
mentioned above, he who lacks the knowledge of quantity and quality will
lack knowledge of the primary and secondary substances. Quality is the
capacity of being similar and dissimilar; quantity, of being equal and
unequal. Hence, the three notions of equality, greater, and less are
basic in demonstrating the concepts of finitude and infinity.

The arguments against infinity are repeated in a number of al-Kindi's
treatises. We give from his treatise “On the Finitude of the Body of the
World” the four theorems given as proofs for finitude: -

(1) Two magnitudes[^30] of the same kind are called equal if one is not
greater than the other.[^31]
(2) If a magnitude of the same kind is added to one of the two
magnitudes of the kind, they will be unequal.
(3) Two magnitudes of the kind cannot be infinite, if one is less than
the other, because the less measures the greater or a part of it.
(4) The sum of two magnitudes of the kind, each of which is finite, is
finite.

Given these axioms, every body, being composed of matter and form,
limited in space, and moving in time, is finite, even if it is the body
of the world. And, being finite it is not eternal. God alone is eternal.

Soul And Intellect
------------------

Al-Kindi was confused by the doctrines of Plato, Aristotle, and Plotinus
concerning the soul, especially because he revised the parts translated
from Plotinus' *Enneads*, a book which was wrongly ascribed to
Aristotle. He borrowed from Plotinus the doctrine of the soul, and
followed the model of Aristotle in his theory of the intellect. In a
short treatise “On the Soul,” he summarizes, as he says, the views of
“Aristotle, Plato, and other philo­sophers.” In fact, the idea expounded
is borrowed from the *Enneads*.

The soul is a simple entity and its substance emanates from the Creator
just as the rays emanate from the sun. It is spiritual and of divine
substance and is separate and distinct from the body. When it is
separated from the body, it obtains the knowledge of everything in the
world and has vision of the supernatural. After its separation from the
body, it goes to the world of the intellect, returns to the light of the
Creator, and sees Him.

The soul never sleeps; only while the body is asleep, it does not use
the senses. And, if purified, the soul can see wonderful dreams in sleep
and can speak to the other souls which have been separated from their
bodies. The same idea is expounded in al-Kindi's treatise: “On Sleep and
Dreams,” which was translated into Latin. To sleep is to give up the use
of the senses. When the soul gives up the use of the senses and uses
only reason, it dreams.

The three faculties of the soul are the rational, the irascible, and the
appetiti­ve. He who gets away from the pleasures of the body and lives
most of his life in contemplation to attain to the reality of things, is
the good man who is very similar to the Creator.

Another treatise on the intellect played an important role in medieval
philosophy, both Eastern and Western. It was translated into Latin under
the title *De Intellectu*. The purpose of this treatise is to clarify
the different meanings of the intellect (\`*aql*) and to show how
knowledge is obtained.

Aristotle in his *De Anima* distinguished between two kinds of
intellect, the possible and the agent. The possible intellect receives
intellection and the agent intellect produces intelligible objects. The
latter intellect is described by Aristotle as separate, unmixed, always
in actuality, eternal, and uncorrupted.

Alexander of Aphrodisias in his *De Intellectu* holds that there are
three kinds of intellect : the material, the habitual, and the agent,
thus adding a new intellect which is the *intellectus habitus* or
*adeptus*. The *intellectus materialis* is pure potentiality and is
perishable. It is the capacity in man to receive the forms. The
intellect *in habitu* is a possession, which means that the intellect
has acquired knowledge and possessed it, i, e., has passed from
potentiality into actuality. To bring a thing from potentiality to
actuality needs something else to act as an agent. This is the third
intellect, the agent intellect, also called the *intelligencia agens*
and considered by some interpreters to be the divine intelligence which
flows into our individual souls.

When we come to al-Kindi we find not three intellects but four. He
divided the intellect *in habitu* into two intellects, one is the
possession of knowledge without practising it and the other is the
practising of knowledge. The first is similar to a writer who has learnt
handwriting and is in possession of this art; the other is similar to
the person who practises writing in actuality.

We quote the opening paragraph of his treatise:
“The opinion of Aristotle concerning the intellect is that it is of
four kinds:
(1) The first is the intellect which is always in act.
(2) The second is the intellect which is potentially in the soul.
(3) The third is the intellect which has passed in the soul from
potentiality to actuality.
(4) The fourth is the intellect which we call the second.”[^32]

What he means by the “second” is the second degree of actuality as shown
above in the distinction between mere possession of knowledge and
practising it.

A complete theory of knowledge is expounded in the rest of the treatise.
There are two kinds of forms, the material and the immaterial. The first
is the sensuous, because the sensibles are composed of matter and form.
When the soul acquires the material form, it becomes one with it, i. e.,
the material form and the soul become one and the same. Similarly, when
the soul acquires the rational forms which are immaterial, they are
united with the soul. In this way, the soul becomes actually rational.
Before that it was rational in potentiality. What we call the intellect
is nothing other than the genera and species of things.

This intellectual operation is again illustrated in al-Kindi's treatise
on “First Philosophy.” He says: “When the genera and species are united
with the soul, they become intellectibles. The soul becomes actually
rational after its unity with the species. Before this unity the soul
was potentially rational. Now, everything which exists in potentiality
does not pass to actuality save by something which brings it from
potentiality to actuality. It is the genera and species of things, i.
e., the universals... which make the soul which is potentially rational
to be actually rational, I mean, which get united with it.”[^33]

Al-Kindi abruptly passes from the above epistemological discussion to an
ontological one concerning the oneness of the universals and their
origin. The universals are the intellect in so far as they are united
with the soul. Thus the question arises whether the intellect is one or
many. It is one in one respect and many in another.

This is his full account: “And as universals are many, as shown above,
so is the intellect. It seems to us that the intellect is the first
plurality. But it is also one, because it is a whole, as shown above and
oneness is applied to the whole. But the true oneness (*wahdah*)[^34] is
not of the intellect.”

Following the doctrine of Plotinus, al-Kindi passed on to the
metaphysical plane of the One. As mentioned above, he confused
Aristotle's metaphysics of Being with that of Plotinus.' For this reason
he was unable to elaborate a coherent system of his own. This was what
al-Farabi, the Second Master, was able to do.

Bibliography
------------

Mustafa \`Abd al-Raziq, *Failasuf al-'Arab w-al-Mu'allim al-Thani*,
Cairo, 1945;
Ahmed Fouad El-Ehwany, “Al-Kindi, Treatise on First Philosophy,” Cairo,
1948; *Islamic Philosophy*, Cairo, 1957;
Abu Ridah, *Rasa'il al-Kindi*, Cairo, 2 Vols., 1950, 1953;
Al-Qifti, *Tarikh al-Hukama*.', Cairo;
Ibn Nabatah, *Sharh Risalah Ibn Zaidun*, Cairo;
Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah, *Tabaqat al-Atibba'*, Cairo;

Madkour, *La Place d'Al-Farabi dans l'Ecole Philosophique Musulmane*;
G. Furlani, “Una risala di Al-Kindi sull'anima,” *Rivista trimestrale
di Studi Filosofici e Religiosi*, Vol. III, 1922;
M. Guidi and R. Walzer, “Studi su al-Kindi, 1. Uno scritto introduttivo
allo studio di Aristotele,” *Memorie R.. Accademia dei Lincei*, ser. 2,
Vol. IV, fasc. 5, Roma, 1940; “Studi su Al-Kindi, 2. Uno scritto morale
inedito di Al-Kindi,” *ibid*., ser. 6, Vol. VIII, fasc. I, Roma, 1938;

L. Gauthier, *Antecedents Grieo-Arabes de la Psychophy­sique (Al Kindi
De rerum gradibus)*, Beyrouth, 1939; *Die philosophischen Abhand­lungen
des al-Kindi*, first published by von Albino Nagy, *Beitr. zur Gesch. d.
Philos. des Mittelalters*, Vol. II, Munster, 1897. This contains the
following medieval translations (some at least by Gerard of Cremona):
*De intellectu*; *De somno et uisione*; *De quinque essentiis*; *Liber
introductorius in arten logicae demonstrationis*; and also a study of
the original texts and the translations and elaborate notes;
G. Flugel, *Al-Kindi genannt “der Philosoph der Araber,”* Abhdl. f. die
Kunde des Morgenlandes, Leipzig, 1857.

[^1]: Mustafa 'Abd al-Raziq, following de Boer, gives this date. On the
biography of al-Kindi the best article is that of Mustafa 'Abd al-Raziq
in Failasuf al-\`Arab w-al-Mu\`allim al-Thani, Cairo, 1945, pp. 7-50.
See also Ahmed Fouad El-Ehwany's “Introduction” to the edition of
al-Kindi's treatise on “First Philosophy,” Cairo, 1948, pp. 3-49, and
Abu Ridah's “Introduction” to Rasa'il al-Kindi, Cairo, 1950, pp. 1-80.

[^2]: Al-Qifti, Tarikh al-Hukama', Cairo ed., p. 241

[^3]: Ibn Nabatah, Sharh Risalah Ibn Zaidun, Cairo, p. 113.

[^4]: Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah, Tabaqat al-Atibba', Cairo, Vol. I, p. 207.

[^5]: Albino Nagy, Die philosophischen Abhandlungen des al-Kindi, 1897

[^6]: Ahmed Fouad El-Ehwany edited his important and long treatise on
“First Philosophy” in 1948; his De Intellectu with Kitab al-Nafs of Ibn
Rushd in 1950; his treatise “On the Soul” in al-Kitab, 1949. Abu Ridah
edited all the treatises in two volumes in Cairo, the first in 1950, the
second in 1953. M. Guidi and R. Walzer edited in 1940 his treatise “On
the Num­ber of Aristotle's Books,” and translated it into the Italian,
in Real Academia Nazionale dei Lincei, ser. VI, Vol. VI, fasc. 5.
Rosenthal in 1956 edited in the Journal of the American Oriental
Society, Vol. LXXVI, No. 1, pp. 27-31, his treatise “On Atmospheric
Phenomena” (Risalah fi Ahdath al-Jaww).

[^7]: Ibn Nadim, al-Fihrist, Cairo, p.255.

[^8]: Rosenthal, op.cit, p.27.

[^9]: Ibn Nabatah, op. cit., p. 125

[^10]: A full discussion of this question is found in the article of
Rosenthal referred to above.

[^11]: Mustafa 'Abd al-Raziq, op. cit., p. 47.

[^12]: El-Ehwany. Ed..”First Philosophy,” Cairo, 1948, p. 79

[^13]: El-Ehwany, Islamic Philosophy, Cairo, 1957, pp. 35-36

[^14]: Mustafa 'Abd al-Raziq, op. cit., p. 47

[^15]: “First Philosophy,” p. 82.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: In Oriens, Vol. X, No. 2, 1957, “New Studies on al-Kindi,” Walzer
translates this term by “divine knowledge.” We guess what is meant in
this context is the divine science as compared with human science. Guidi
and Walzer edited this manuscript and translated it into Italian: Il
Numero dei Libri di Aristotle. In the Italian translation the term is
scienza divina which corresponds to divine science.

[^19]: “This” either refers to the divine science, the divine knowledge
of the prophet, or the prophetic faculty. Walzer in his translation of
this passage gives the latter interpretation. Cf. Oriens, p. 206.

[^20]: M. Guidi and R. Walzer, op. cit., p. 395. Except at some places,
we follow in the main the translation given by Walzer in Oriens, p. 206.

[^21]: Rosenthal, “Al-Kindi and Ptolemy,” Studi Orientalistsci, Vol. II,
Roma, 1956, p. 455. The view that al-Kindi was not a true philosopher,
but simply a translator, was held by some ancient writers. Madkour, in
his book La Place d'Al-Farabii dans l'Ecole Philosophique Musulmane,
considers him rather a mathe­matician. Abu Ridah, in his “Introduction”
to al-Rasa'il, considers him to be a true philosopher in the full sense
of the term. We rather adhere to Rosenthal's view. Cf. Ahmed Fouad
El-Ehwany's “Introduction” to al-Kindi's “First Philosophy.”

[^22]: This treatise is not yet edited.. Rosenthal, in the above article
on “Al-Kindi and Ptolemy,” gave some excerpts and analysed it.

[^23]: Rosenthal, “Al.Kindi and Ptolemy,” Studi Orientalistici, p. 449.
The author has compared Ptolemy's text with both Theon's commentary and
al-Kindi's text

[^24]: With Abu Ridah we understand this term to be intelligibles or
concepts (al­-ma'qulat), but categories is more suitable in this
.context.

[^25]: “First Philosophy,” p. 141; in Abu Ridah's edition, p. 160. The
term wahdah means either unity or oneness, but in this context it is
oneness.

[^26]: Van den Bergh, The Incoherence of the Incoherence, London, 1954,
Vol. I, p. 186.

[^27]: Abu Ridah, Rasa'il, “On the Efficient Cause of Generation and
Corruption,” p. 215.

[^28]: “First Philosophy”, p.143.

[^29]: Liber de Quinque Essentiis. This treatise was translated into
Latin in the Medieval Ages.

[^30]: Magnitudes apply to lines, surfaces, or bodies. A magnitude of
the same kind means one applying solely to one of the three kinds
mentioned. Cf. Abu Ridah, Rasa'il, Vol. I, “Treatise on the Finitude of
the Body of the World,” p. 187.

[^31]: We quote the example given by al-Kindi and the proof of this
theorem as a specimen of his mathematical method. “Example: Given A and
B are magnitudes of the same kind, and the one is not greater than the
other, we say that they are equal. Proof: If they are unequal, then one
is greater than the other, say A is greater than B. But since A is not
greater than B, as mentioned above, this leads to a contradiction. It
follows that they are equal.” Ibid., p. 188.

[^32]: El-Ehwany, Islamic Philosophy, Cairo, 1951, pp. 51-52

[^33]: “First Philosophy.” p. 134

[^34]: The term wahdah means here oneness, not unity. At the beginning
of this same paragraph he speaks about “the true one,” and says it is
not soul.


