Chapter 22 : Muhammad Ibn Zakariya Al-Razi
==========================================

By Abdurrahman Badawi

Life
----

According to al-Biruni,[^1] Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariya ibn Yahya
al­-Razi was born in Rayy on the first of Sha\`ban in the year 251/865.
In his early life, he was a jeweller (Baihaqi), money-changer (Ibn Abi
Usaibi'ah), or more likely a lute-player (Ibn Juljul, Said, Ibn
Khallikan, Usaibi'ah, al-Safadi) who first left music for alchemy, and
then at the age of thirty or (as Safadi says) after forty left alchemy
because his experiments in it gave him some eye disease (al-Biruni),
which obliged him to search for doctors and medicine. That was the
reason, they (al-Biruni, Baihaqi and others) say, he studied medicine.

He was very studious and worked day and night. His master was 'Ali ibn
Rabban al-Tabari (al-Qifti, Usaibi\`ah), a doctor and philosopher, who
was born in Merv about 192/808 and died some years after 240/855. [^2]
With Ibn Rabban al-Tabari he studied medicine and perhaps also
philosophy. It is possible to trace back al-Razi's interest in religious
philosophy to his master, whose father was a rabbinist versed in the
Scriptures.

Al-Razi became famous in his native city as a doctor. Therefore, he
directed the hospital of Rayy (Ibn Juljul, al-Qifti, Ibn Abi
Usaibi\`ah), in the times of Mansur ibn Ishaq ibn Ahmad ibn Asad who was
the Governor of Rayy from 290-296/902-908 in the name of his cousin
Ahmad ibn Isma\`il ibn Ahmad, second Samanian ruler.[^3] It is to this
Mansur ibn Ishaq ibn Ahmad that Razi dedicated his *al-Tibb al-Mansuri*,
as it is attested by a manuscript[^4] of this book, as against Ibn
al-Nadim's assumption,[^5] repeated by al-Qifti[^6] and Ibn Abi
Usaibi\`ah,[^7] that this Mansur was Mansur ibn Ismail who died in
365/975.

From Rayy al-Razi went to Baghdad during the Caliph Muktafi's times [^8]
(r. 289/901-295/907) and there too directed a hospital.

It seems that after al-Muktafi's death (295/907) al-Razi came back to
Rayy. Here gathered round him many students. As Ibn al-Nadim relates in
Fihrist,[^9] al-Razi was then a Shaikh “with a big head similar to a
sack”; he used to be surrounded by circle after circle of students. If
someone came to ask something in science, the question was put to those
of the first circle; if they did not know the answer, it passed on to
those of the second, and so on till it came to al-Razi himself if all
others failed to give the answer. Of these students we know at least the
name of one, i, e., Abu Bakr ibn Qarin al-Razi who became a doctor.[^10]

Al-Razi was generous, humane towards his patients, and charitable to the
poor, so that he used to give them full treatment without charging any
fee, and even stipends.[^11] When not occupied with pupils or patients
he was always writing and study­ing.[^12] It seems that this was the
reason for the gradual weakening of his sight that finally brought
blindness to his eyes. Some say[^13] that the reason for his blindness
was that he used to eat too much of broad beans (*baqilah*). It began
with cataract[^14] which ended in complete blindness.

They say that he refused to be treated for cataract saying that he “had
seen so much of the world that he was fed up.”[^15] But this seems to be
more of an anecdote than a historical fact. It was one of his pupils
from Tabaristan that came to treat him, but, as al-Biruni says, he
refused to be treated saying that it was useless as his hour of death
was approaching.[^16] Some days after, he died in Rayy, on the 5th of
Sha'ban 313/27th of October 925. [^17]

Al-Razi's Masters and Opponents
-------------------------------

We have already mentioned that al-­Razi studied medicine under 'Ali ibn
Rabban al-Tabari. Ibn al-Nadim says[^18] that he studied philosophy
under al-Balkhi. This al-Balkhi, according to Ibn al-Nadim had travelled
much, and knew philosophy and ancient sciences well. Some even say that
al-Razi attributed to himself some of al-Balkhi's books on philosophy.
We know nothing else about this al-Balkhi, not even his full name.

Al-Razi's opponents, on the contrary, are known better. They were the
following:

1. Abu al-Qasim al-Balkhi, chief of the Mu'tazilah of Baghdad (d.
319/931), was a contemporary of al-Razi; he composed many refutations of
al-Razi's books, especially his *'Ilm al-Ilahi* .[^19] He had
controversies with him especially on time.[^20]

2. Shuhaid ibn al-Husain al-Balkhi,[^21] with whom al-Razi had many
contro­versies;[^22] one of these controversies was on the theory of
pleasure.[^23] His theory of pleasure is expounded in his *Tafdil
Ladhdhat al-Nafs* from which Abu Sulaiman al-Mantiqi al-Sijistani gives
some extracts in *Siwan al-Hikmah*.[^24] Al-Balkhi died before 329/940.

3. Abu Hatim al-Razi, the most important of all his opponents (d.
322/933-­934) and one of the greatest Isma\`ili missionaries.[^25] He
reproduced contro­versies between him and al-Razi in his *A\`lam
al-Nubuwwah*.[^26] Thanks to this book, al-Razi's ideas about prophets
and religion are preserved for us.

4. Ibn al-Tammar, whom Kraus believes to be perhaps Abu Bakr Husain
al-Tammar.[^27] He was a physician and had some controversies with
al-Razi as is reported by Abu Hatim al-Razi in *A\`lam
al-Nubuwwah*.[^28] Ibn al-Tammar refuted al-Razi's *al-Tibb al-Ruhani*
and al-Razi answered this refutation.[^29] In fact, al-Razi wrote two
refutations: (a) refutation of al-Tammar's refutation of Misma\`i
concerning matter; (b) refutation of al-Tammar's opinion on the
atmosphere of subterranean habitations.[^30]

5. Those of whom we know from the titles of the books written by
al-­Razi: (a) al-Misma'i, a Mutakallim who had written against the
materialists and against whom al-Razi wrote a treatise;[^31] (b) Jarir
the doctor who had a theory about the eating of black mulberry after
water-melon;[^32] (c) al-Hasan ibn Mubarik al-Ummi, to whom al-Razi
wrote two epistles;[^33] (d) al-Kayyal, a Mutakallim, against whose
theory of the Imam, al-Razi wrote a book; [^34] (e) Mansur ibn Talhah,
who wrote a book on “Being” refuted by al-Razi;[^35] (f) Muhammad ibn
al-Laith al-Rasa'ili whose writing against alchemists was answered by
al-Razi.[^36]

6. Ahmad ibn al-Tayyib al-Sarakhsi (d. 286/899), an elder contemporary
of al-Razi. Al-Razi refuted him on the question of bitter taste;[^37]
Al-Razi refuted also his master, Ya\`qub ibn Ishaq al-Kindi, who had
written against the alchemists.[^38]

7. We should add to all those known by names many others who were
refuted by al-Razi, especially the Mu'tazilah and different
Mutakallimin.[^39]

Works
-----

AI-Razi's books are very numerous. He himself prepared a catalogue of
his books, reproduced by Ibn al-Nadim.[^40] Here we find: 118 books, 19
epistles, then 4 books, 6 epistles, and one *maqalah*, the total being
148 works.

After Ibn al-Nadim, al-Biruni wrote an epistle on the bibliography of
al­-Razi. This epistle, found in a unique manuscript in Leiden,[^41] was
edited by Paul Kraus,[^42] and translated into German by J. Ruska in his
article: “al-­Biruni als Quelle fur das Leben and die Schriften
al-Razi's.”[^43] This catalogue is preceded by a short note on al-Razi's
life.

The books are classified as follows: (a) on medicine (1-56 books); (b)
physics (57-89); (c) logic (90-96); (d) mathematics and astronomy
(97-106); (e) commentaries, abridgments, and epitomes (107-13); (f)
philosophy and hypothetical sciences (114-30); (g) metaphysics (131-36);
(h) theology (137-50); alchemy (151-72); (i) atheistic books (173-74);
(j) miscellaneous (175--84). In al-Nadim's and al-Biruni's lists, there
are some common and some non-common titles.

Ibn Abi Usaibi\`ah (Vol.I, pp.315-19) mentions 236 works of which some
are certainly apocryphal.

The different titles given by al-Biruni, Ibn al-Nadim, al-Qifti, and Ibn
Abi Usaibi'ah were assembled by Dr. Mahmud al-Najmabadi in his book:
*Sharh Hal Muhammad ibn Zakariya* published in 1318/1900. He gave 250
titles.

As extant manuscripts of al-Razi's books, Brockelmann (Vol. I, pp.
268-­71, *Suppl*., Vol. I, pp. 418-21) gives 59 titles.

Of his philosophical works, we have: -

1. *Al-Tibb al-Ruhani* (Brit. Mus. Add. Or. 25758; vat. Ar. 182 Cairo
2241 Tas).
2. *Al-Sirat al-Falsafiyyah* (Brit. Mus. Add. Or. 7473).
3. *Amarat Iqbal al-Daulah* (Raghib 1463, ff. 98a-99b, Istanbul).

These three were published by Paul Kraus: “Abi Bakr Mohammadi Filu
Zachariae Raghensis,” *Opera Philosophica*, fragmentaque quae supersunt,
Collegit et edidit Paulus Kraus. Pars Prior. Cahirae MCMXXXIX. In this
edition Kraus published also fragments or exposes of the following
books: -

4. *Kitab al-Ladhdhah*.
5. *Kitab al-'Ilm al-Ilahi*.
6. *Maqalah fi ma ba'd al-Tabi\`ah*.

The last one is spurious; it is attributed falsely to al-Razi in a
manuscript (Istanbul, Raghib 1463, f. 90a-98b). Kraus gives also the
exposes of different authors of al-Razi's ideas on: (a) The five
eternals (God, universal soul, first matter, absolute space, and
absolute time); (b) matter; (c) time and space; (d) soul and world. At
the end of the volume he gives extracts from *A'lam al-Nubuwwah* of Abu
Hatim on prophecy, followed by extracts from *al-Aqwal al-Dhahabiyyah*
of Ahmad ibn 'Abd Allah al-Kirmani on the same subject.

7. Besides these books and extracts contained in the first volume (the
only one published by Kraus), Kraus published in *Orientalia* some other
extracts concerning al-Razi's ideas on prophecy (Vol. V., Fasc. 3/4,
Roma, 1936).

8. *Al-Shukuk 'ala Proclus* which was prepared by Kraus to be edited and
was found among the papers he left after his suicide.

Nothing of these philosophical books was translated into Latin. All
Latin translations of his works were confined to medicine and alchemy.

Philosophy
----------

### 1. Method

Al-Razi is a pure rationalist. He believes in reason, and in reason
alone. In medicine, his clinical studies reveal a very solid method of
investigation based on observation and experimentation. In *Kitab
al-Faraj ba'd al-Shiddah* by al-Tanukhi (d. 384/994) and *Chahar
Maqalah* of Nizami \`Arudi Samar­qandi written about 550/1155, we find a
lot of cases attributed to al-Razi where he shows an excellent method of
clinical investigation. E. G. Browne, in his Arabian Medicine, has
translated a page supposed to be taken from al-Razi's *Hawi* [^44] which
shows this method. It runs as follows:

Al-Razi's exaltation of reason is best expressed on the first page of
his *al-Tibb al-Ruhani*. He says: “God, glorious is His name, has given
us reason in order to obtain through it from the present and future the
utmost benefits that we can obtain; it is God's best gift to us.... By
reason we perceive all that is useful to us and all that makes our life
good - by it we know obscure and remote things, those which are hidden
from us. .. by it, too, we succeed to the knowledge of God, which is the
highest knowledge we can obtain.... If reason is so highly placed and is
of such an important rank, we should not degrade it; we should not make
it the judged while it is the judge, or con­trolled while it is the
controller, or commanded while it is the commander; on the contrary, we
should refer to it in everything and judge all matters by it; we should
do according as it commands us to do.”[^45]

Even the most rationalistic mind could not exalt reason so clearly and
so highly. There is no place for revelation or mystic intuition. It is
only logical reason which is the unique criterion of knowledge and
conduct. No irrational force can be invoked. Al-Razi is against
prophecy, against revelation, against all irrational trends of thought.

Men are born with equal dispositions for knowledge. It is only through
cultivation of these dispositions that men differ, some cultivating them
by speculation and learning, others neglecting them or directing them to
a practical way of life.[^46]

### 2. Metaphysics

When one begins to expound al-Razi's metaphysics, one at first comes
across a small treatise attributed to him: *Maqalah li Abi Bakr Muhammad
Ibn Zakariya al-Razi fi ma ba\`d al-Tabi'ah* (Raghib MS. No. 1463, ff.
90a-98b, in Istanbul). There is much doubt about the authenticity of
this treatise, because its contents do not agree entirely with al-Razi's
otherwise known doctrines. So, either it may belong to another period of
al-Razi's intellectual development, as Pines supposes,[^47] or it may
contain only a systematic historical expose of other people's ideas
without reference to his own,[^48] or it may not be by al-Razi at all.

Anyhow, the main points treated here are: (1) nature, (2) foetus, and
(3) eternity of movement. The author refutes the partisans of the idea
of nature as principle of movement, especially Aristotle and his
commentators: John Philoponos, Alexander of Aphrodisias, and Porphyry.

At first he denies that there is no need to prove the existence of
nature, because it is not evident by itself. If nature is one and the
same, why does it produce different effects in stone and in man? If
nature permeates the body, does not that mean that two things can occupy
one and the same place? Why do those partisans say that nature is dead,
insensible, impotent, ignorant, without liberty and choice, and at the
same time attribute to it the same qualities as to God? Against Porphyry
the author says: You admit that nature acts in view of something and not
by hazard or mere chance; why then do you say that nature is dead and
not a living agent?

It seems that the author wants to refute all doctrines which pretend
that nature is the principle of movement and creation, by showing the
contra­dictions to which these doctrines necessarily lead. His
standpoint is that there is no place for admitting the existence of
nature as principle of action and movement. But he does not define his
attitude; his expose is negative and destructive.

As for the question of eternity of movement and time, the author
discusses especially the ideas of Aristotle and Proclus.[^49] He refers
to his refutation of Proclus. We know that al-Razi has written a
treatise entitled “Doubts about Proclus,” and Kraus[^50] thinks that
this is an argument in favour of the authenticity of the attribution of
the treatise to al-Razi, but we think that this is a weak argument,
because Proclus' *de aetermitate mundi* was much discussed by Arab
thinkers after it had been translated by Ishaq ibn Hunain.[^51]

The author's idea is that time is finite and not eternal, that the world
is also finite, that there is only one world, and, lastly, that outside
that one world there is no element and nothing (except God). Here he
reproduces the ideas of Metrodorus and Seleucus taken from
pseudo-Plutarch's *Placita Philo­sophorum*.

The general trend of this treatise is polemical and dialectical. It
cannot be reconciled with al-Razi's ideas on time, space, and Deity.
Therefore, we think that it is spurious and cannot even belong to
another period of al-Razi's spiritual development.

The real doctrine of al-Razi should be searched for in his *Kitab
al-'Ilm al-Ilahi*. Unfortunately, that work is lost and we have only
refutations of some passages from it collected by Kraus.[^52] We do not
even have textual fragments of al-Razi's book. With all the
inconveniences of adversaries' exposes, we have nothing more to do than
to content ourselves with these refutations. What we can conclude from
these is that al-Razi treated in this book: space, vacuum, time,
duration, matter, metempsychosis, prophecy, pleasure, and Manichaeism.

Al-Razi's philosophy is chiefly characterized by his doctrine of the
Five Eternals. Al-Biruni says[^53] that “Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi
has re­ported from the ancient Greeks the eternity of five things: God,
the universal soul, first matter, absolute space, and absolute time, on
which he founded his doctrine. But he distinguished between time and
duration by saying that number applies to the one and not to the other,
because finiteness attains numerality; and, therefore, the philosophers
have defined time as the duration of what has a beginning and an end,
whereas duration (*dahr*) has neither beginning nor end.

He said also that in Being these five are necessary: the sensible in it
is the matter formed by composition; it is spatial, so there must be a
space; alternation of its modes is a characteristic of time, because
some precede and others follow, and it is by time that oldness and
new­ness, and older and newer and simultaneous are known; so time is
necessary. In Being there are living things, so there must be soul; in
it there are intelligibles and their constitution is absolutely perfect;
there must be then a creator, wise, omniscient, doing things as
perfectly as possible, and giving reason for the sake of salvation.”

Out of the Five Eternals, two are living and acting: God and soul; one
is passive and. not living: matter from which all bodies are made; and
two are neither living and acting, nor passive: vacuum and
duration.[^54] Sometimes we find vacuum (*khala'*) instead of space
(*makan*), and duration (*dahr*) instead of time (*zaman*) or duration
in the limited sense (*muddah*).

This doctrine is attributed, in, some sources (al-Fakhr al-Razi,
al-Shahras­tani, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi), to the so-called Harraniyyah.
Who were these Harraniyyah? The word comes from Harran, the famous city
of the Sabians and a centre of learning immediately before Islam and in
the first four centuries of the Islamic era. Massignon[^55] thinks that
these Harraniyyah are fictitious persons, and that what we find about
them in our sources is a mere “literary romance” (*roman litteraire*).

Kraus is also of the same opinion, and he gives his reasons[^56] as
follows: (a) before al-Razi we find no one who attributes the doctrine
of the five eternals to al-Harraniyyah; (b) al-Razi, in his *'Ilm
al-Ilahi* has expounded the doctrines of the Sabian Harraniyyah and also
his doctrine of the five eternals. But then Kraus gives a third reason
which proves exactly the contrary of what the first two prove:
al-Biruni, al-Marzuqi, al-Katibi, and al-Tusi say that al-Razi reported
this doctrine from the ancient Greeks, that is to say, the early Greek
philosophers, especially Pythagoras, Democritus, etc.

How can we then say that al-Razi attributed this doctrine to a
fictitious school, Harraniyyah, when he said expressly in his *'Ilm
al-Ilahi* that it was the doctrine of the early Greek philosophers? He
was not in need of inventing the Harraniyyah, when he already had
declared that it was the doctrine of the early Greek philosophers. For
this reason, we cannot admit Massignon's suggestion, nor Kraus' evidence
which are very weak. It is not right to identify what is attributed in
the different sources to the Harraniyyah with al-Razi’s ideas unless
this is expressly declared in the sources themselves.

We may now describe these Five Eternals.

#### (i) God

God's wisdom is perfect No inadvertence can be attributed to Him. Life
flows from Him as light flows from the sun. He is perfect and pure
Intelligence. From the soul life flows.[^57] God creates everything, He
is incapable of nothing, and nothing can be contrary to His will. God
knows things perfectly well. But the soul knows only what it
experiences. God knew that soul would tend to matter and ask for
material pleasure. After that soul attached itself to matter; God by his
wisdom arranged that this attachment should be brought about in the most
perfect way.

God afterwards poured intelligence and perception upon the soul. That
was the reason for the soul to remember its real world and the reason
for it to know that so long as it is in the world of matter it will
never be free from pain. If soul knows that, and also that in its real
world it will have pleasure without pain, it will desire that world and,
once separated from matter, it will remain there for ever in utmost
happiness.

In that way all doubts can be removed about the eternity of the world
and the existence of evil. Since we have admitted the wisdom of the
Creator, we must admit that the world is created. If one asks why it was
created in this or that moment, we say that it was because soul attached
itself to matter in that moment. God knew that this attachment was a
cause of evil, but after it had been brought about, God directed it to
the best possible way. But some evils remained; being the source of all
evils, this composition of soul and matter could not be completely
purified.[^58]

#### (ii) Soul

God, according to al-Razi, has not created the world through any
necessity, but He decided to create it after having at first no will to
create it. Who determined Him to do so? There must be another eternal
who made Him decide this.

This other eternal is the soul which was living but ignorant. Matter,
too, was eternal. Owing to its ignorance, the soul was fond of matter
and formed figures from it in order to get material pleasures. But
matter was rebellious to forms; so God intervened in order to aid the
soul. This aid was that He made this world and created in it strong
forms wherein the soul could find corporeal pleasures. God then created
man and from the substance of His divinity he created the intelligence
of man to awaken the soul and to show to it that this world is not its
real world.

But man cannot attain the real world except by philosophy. He who
studies philosophy and knows his real world and acquires knowledge is
saved from his bad state. Souls remain in this world till they are
awakened by philosophy to the mystery and directed towards the real
world.[^59]

#### (iii) Matter

The absolute or first matter is composed of atoms. Each atom has volume;
otherwise by their collection nothing could be formed. If the world is
destroyed, it too is dispersed into atoms. Matter has been there from
eternity, because it is impossible to admit that a thing comes from
nothing.

What is more compact becomes the substance of the earth, what is more
rarefied than the substance of the earth becomes the substance of water,
what is still more rarefied becomes the substance of air, and what is
still more and more rarefied becomes the substance of fire.

The body of the sphere is also composed of the particles of matter, but
its composition differs from the compositions of other bodies. The proof
of this is that the movement of the sphere is not directed to the centre
of the world, but to its periphery. Its body is not very compact, as
that of the earth, nor very rarefied as that of fire or air.

Qualities such as heaviness, levity, darkness, and luminosity are to be
explained by the more or less vacuity which is within matter. Quality is
an accident which is attributed to substance, and substance is
matter.[^60]

Al-Razi gives two proofs to establish the eternity of matter. First,
creation is manifest; there must then be its Creator. What is created is
nothing but formed matter. Why then do we prove, from the created, the
anteriority of the Creator, and not the anteriority of the created
being? If it is true that body is created (or more exactly: made
[*masnu*\`]) from something by the force of an agent, then we should say
that as this agent is eternal and immutable before: His act, what
received this act of force must also have been eternal before it
received that act. This receiver is matter. Then matter is eternal.

The second proof is based on the impossibility of *creatio ex nihilo*.
Creating, that is to say, making something out of nothing is easier than
com­posing it. God's creating men fully at one stroke would be easier
than composing them in forty years. This is the first premise. The wise
Creator does not prefer to do what is farther from His purpose to what
is nearer, unless He is incapable of doing what is easier and nearer.
This is the second premise. The conclusion from these premises is that
the existence of all things should be caused by the Creator of the world
through creation and not by composition. But what we see is evidently
the contrary. All things in this world are produced by composition and
not by creation. It necessarily follows that He is incapable of *creatio
ex nihilo* and the world came to be by the composition of things the
origin of which is matter.

Al-Razi adds, universal induction proves this. If nothing in the world
comes to be except from another thing, it is necessary that natures are
made from another thing, and this other thing is matter. Therefore,
matter is eternal; it was originally not composed, but dispersed.[^61]

#### (iv) Space

As it is proved that matter is eternal, and as matter should occupy
space, so there is eternal space. This argument is nearly the same as
that given by al-Iranshahri. But al-Iranshahri says that space is the
manifest might of God. Al-Razi could not follow his master's vague
definition. For him, space is the place where matter is.
Al-Razi distinguishes between two kinds of space: universal or
absolute, and particular or relative. The former is infinite and does
not depend on the world and the spatial things in it.

Vacuum is inside space, and, consequently, inside matter. As aa proof of
the infinity of space, the partisans (al-Iranshahri and al-Razi) say
that a spatialized thing cannot exist without space, though space may
exist without spatialized things.. Space is nothing but the receptacle
for the spatialized things. What con­tains the two is either a body, or
a not-body. If it is a body, it must be in space, and outside this body
there is space or no-space; if no-space, it is a body and finite. If it
is not-body, it is space. Therefore, space is infinite. If someone says
that this absolute space has an end, that means that its limit is a
body. As every body is finite, and every body is in space, so space is
infinite in every sense. What is infinite is eternal, so space is
eternal.[^62]

Vacuum has the power of attracting bodies; therefore, water is conserved
(or retained) in a bottle submerged in water with the opening turned
down­wards.[^63]

#### (v) Time

Time, according to al-Razi, is eternal. It is a substance that flows
(*jauhar yajri*). He is against those (Aristotle and his followers) who
pretend-that time is the number of the movements of the body, because if
it were so, it would not have been possible for two moving things to
move in one time by two different numbers.

Al-Razi distinguishes between two kinds of time: absolute time and
limited (*mahsur*) time. The absolute time is duration (*al-dahr*). It
is eternal and moving. As for the limited time, it is that of the
movements of the spheres and of the sun and stars. If you imagine the
movement of duration, you can imagine absolute time, and this is
eternity. If you imagine the movement of the sphere, you imagine the
limited time.[^64]

Theology
--------

Al-Razi was a theist, but he does not believe in revelation and
prophecy. We content ourselves with giving a summary of his main ideas.

Al-Razi contests prophecy on the following grounds:

1. Reason is sufficient to distinguish. between good and evil, useful
and harmful. By reason alone we can know God, and organize our lives in­
the best way. Why then is there need for prophets?

2. There is no justification for privileging some men for guiding all
men because all men are born equal in intelligence; the differences are
not be­cause of natural dispositions, but because of development and
education.

3. Prophets contradict one another. If they speak in the name of one and
the same God, why this contradiction?

After denying prophecy, al-Razi goes on to criticize religions in
general. He expounds the contradictions of the Jews, the Christians, the
Manichaeans, and the Majusis. He gives the following reasons for the
attachment of men to religion:

(a) Imitation and tradition.
(b) Power of the clergy who are in the service of the State.
(c) External manifestations of religions, ceremonials and rituals,
which impose themselves upon the imagination of the simple and the
naive.

He shows contradictions between religion and religion in detail.

Al-Razi subjects the revealed books, the Bible and the Qur'an, to
systematic criticism. He tries to criticize the one by the aid of the
other; for instance, he criticizes Judaism by means of Manichaeism, and
Christianity by means of Islam; and then criticizes the Qur'an by means
of the Bible.

He denies especially the miraculousness (*i'jaz*) of the Qur'an, either
because of its style or its contents and affirms that it is possible to
write a better book in a better style.

He prefers scientific books to all sacred books, because scientific
books are more useful to men in their lives than all sacred books. Books
on medicine, geometry, astronomy, and logic are more useful than the
Bible and the Qur'an. The authors of these scientific books have found
the facts and truths by their own intelligence, without the help of
prophets. Science is drawn from three sources: reasoning, according to
logic; tradition, from predecessors to succes­sors according to sure and
accurate testimony, as in history; and instinct which guides man without
being in need of much reasoning.

After this negative criticism, he goes on to say that it would not even
be reasonable of God to send prophets, because they do much harm. Every
nation believes only in its own prophets and vehemently denies those of
others, with the result that there have been many religious wars and
much hatred between nations professing different religions.

These ideas of al-Razi were most audacious. No other Muslim thinker was
so daring as he.

Moral Philosophy
----------------

Razi's moral philosophy is to be found in the only extant philosophical
works of his, *al-Tibb al-Ruhani* and *al-Sirat al-Falsafiyyah*. The
latter work is a justification of his conduct of life, from the
philosophical point of view, because he was blamed by some people for
not living on the model of his master, Socrates. It is a curious and
very interesting *apologia pro vita sua*.

He thinks that there should be moderation in a philosopher's life -
neither much asceticism, nor too much indulgence in pleasures. There are
two limits higher and lower. The higher limit beyond which a philosopher
should not go is to abstain from pleasures that cannot be obtained
except by com­mitting injustice and doing things contrary to reason. The
lower is to eat what does not harm him or cause illness, and to wear
what is sufficient to protect his skin, and so on. Between the two
limits, one can live without becoming unworthy of being called a
philosopher.

Al-Razi claims that he in his practical life did not go beyond these two
limits. He did not live in the service of a monarch as a minister or a
man of arms, but as a doctor and counsellor. He was not greedy, nor in
conflict with other people but, on the contrary, he was very tolerant as
regards his own rights. He never exceeded in drinking, eating, or
enjoying life. As for his love of science and study, it is all well
known to everybody. From the theoretical point of view too, his works
entitle him to be called a philosopher.­

In *al-Tibb al-Ruhani* he treats, in twenty chapters, the main points of
ethics. He wants to expound what the vices are and how we are to get rid
of them.

He begins with the exaltation of reason, in the manner we have seen
above. Then he goes in *medius res* by treating the question of
passions. He says that man should control his passions; he brings out
the distinction drawn by Plato between three aspects of the soul:
reasonable, pugnacious, and appetitive; and shows how justice should
reign among them.

It is necessary that a man should know his own defects. For this, he can
appeal to a reasonable friend who will tell him about his defects. He
should get information about what other people, neighbours, and friends,
think of him. Here al-Razi depends on two treatises of Galen: “On
Knowing One's Own Defects,” and “How Good People Benefit from Their
Enemies.”

These are the contents of preliminary chapters. In the fifth, he
expounds his theory of pleasure, a theory which he treats again in a
special epistle. For him, pleasure is nothing but the return of what was
removed by something harmful to the previous state, for example, one who
leaves a shadowy place for a sunny and hot place gets pleasure on coming
back to the shadowy place. For this reason, says al-Razi, natural
philosophers have defined pleasure as a return to nature.

AI-Razi condemns love as an excess and submission to passions. He
con­demns vanity; because it prevents one from learning more and working
better. Envy is an. amalgamation of misery and cupidity. An envious man
is the man who feels sad when another obtains some good things, even
when no harm comes to him at all. If he has been harmed, then the
emotion is not envy but enmity. If a person contents himself with what
is necessary for him, then there would be no place for envy in his soul.

Anger is aroused in animals to make it possible for them to take revenge
on harmful things. If it is in excess, it does much harm to them.

Lying is a bad habit. It is of two sorts: for good, or for evil. If it
is for good, then it merits praise; otherwise, it is blameworthy. So its
value depends on the intention.

Misery cannot be wholly condemned. Its value depends on the reason for
it. If it is due to the fear of poverty and fear of the future, then it
is not bad. If it is for mere pleasure of acquisition, it is bad. There
must be a justification for one's misery; if it is a reasonable one, it
is not a vice; otherwise it is a thing to be combated.

Worry, when it is too much, is not a good thing, for its excess, without
good reason, leads to hallucination, melancholy, and early withering.

Cupidity is a very bad state which brings pain and harm. Drunkenness
leads to calamities and ills of body and mind.

Copulation, when in excess, is bad for the body; it causes early
senility, weakness, and many other ills. One should indulge in it as
little as one can, because excess in it leads to more excess.

Frivolity is also pernicious in some cases.

Acquisition and economy are good for living, but only in moderation. No
more wealth should be acquired than is needed and spent, except a little
saving for sudden calamities and bad future circumstances.

Ambition may lead to adventures and perils. It is well and good if we
can get a better rank without adventure or peril; otherwise it is better
to renounce it.

The last chapter treats a favourite theme in the Hellenistic and early
medieval period, that of the fear of death. Here al-Razi contents
himself by dealing with it from the point of view of those who think
that when the body is destroyed, the soul is also destroyed. After
death, nothing comes to man, because he cannot feel anything. During his
life, man is submerged in pains, whereas after death there would be no
pain whatever. The best thing for a reasonable man to do is to get rid
of the fear of death, because if he believes in another life, he must be
joyful because, by death, he goes to a better world. If he believes
there is nothing after death, there is no cause for worry. In any case,
one should reject every kind of worry about death, because it is not
reasonable to worry.

Conclusion
----------

Al-Razi had no organized system of philosophy, but compared to his time
he must be reckoned as the most vigorous and liberal thinker in Islam
and perhaps in the whole history of human thought.

He was a pure rationalist, extremely confident in the power of reason,
free from every kind of prejudice, and very daring in the expression of-
his ideas without reserve.

He believed in man, in progress, and in God the Wise, but in no religion
whatever.

Bibliography
------------

### A. Ancient Sources

Ibn al-Nadim, *Fihrist*, ed. Flugel, pp. 299 et sqq. ;
Sa'id al-Andalusi, *Tabaqat al-Umam*, p. 33;
Ibn Juljul, *Tabaqat al-Atibba' w-al-Hukama'*, ed. Fu'ad Sayyid, Cairo,
1355/1936, pp. 77-78;
Al-Biruni, *Epitre de Beruni, contenant le repertoire des ouvryesde
Muhammad ibn Zakariya ar-Razi,* publiee par P. Kraus, Paris, 1936;
Al-Baihaqi, *Tatimmah Siwan al-Hikmah*, ed. M. Shafi', Lahore,
1351/1932;
Al-Qifti, *Tarikh al-Hukama'*, ed. Lippert, pp. 27-177;
Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah, *'Uyun al-Anba' fi Tabaqat al-Atibba'*, Vol. I, pp.
309-21;
Abu al-Faraj ibn al-'Ibri (Bar-Hebraeus), *Mukhtasar Tarikh al-Duwal*,
ed. A. Salhani, p. 291;
Ibn Khallikan, *Wafayat al-A'yan*, ed. Muhyi al-Din 'Abd al-Hamid,
Cairo, 1948, No. 678, pp. 244-47;
Al-Safadi, *Nakt al-Himyan*, pp. 249-50;
Ibn al-'Imad, *Shadharat al-Dhahab*, Vol. II, p. 263;
Al-­'Umari, *Masalik al-Absar*, Vol. V, Part 2, ff. 301-03 (photostat
copy in Dar al-­Kutub al-Misriyyah).

### B. Modern Studies

G. S. A. Ranking, “The Life and Works of Rhazes,” in *Proceedings of the
Seven­teenth International Congress of Medicine*, London, 1913, pp.
237-68;
J. Ruska, “Al-Biruni als Quelle fur das Leben and die Schriften
al-Razi's,” *Isis*, Vol. V, 1924, pp. 26-50; “Al-Razi als Bahnbrecher
einer neuer Chemie,” *Deutsche Litera­turzeitung*, 1923, pp. 118-24,
“Die Alchemie al-Razi's,” *Der Islam*, Vol. XXII, pp. 283-319; “Uber den
gegenwartigen Stand der Razi-Forschung,” *Archivio di stori della
sceienza*, 1924, Vol. V, pp. 335-47;
H. H. Shader, *ZDMG*, 79, pp. 228-35 (see translation into Arabic by
Abdurrahman Badawi in “al-Insan al-Kamil,” *Islamica*, Vol. XI, Cairo,
1950, pp. 37-44) ;
E. O. von Lippmann, *Entstehung and Ausbreitung der Alchemie*, Vol. II,
p. 181;
S. Pines, “Die Atomenlehre ar-Razi's” in *Beitrage zur islamischen
Atomenlehre*, Berlin, 1936, pp. 34-93;
Dr. Mahmud al-Najmabadi; *Sharh Hal Muhammad ibn Zakariya*,
1318/1900;
*Encyclopaedie des Islams*, a. v. (by Ruska);
Gamil Bek, *'Uqud al-Jauhar*, Vol., I, pp. 118-27;
Izmirli Haqqi, *Ilahiyat*, Fak. Macm., Vol. I, p. 151; Vol. II, p. 36;
Vol. III, pp. 177 et sqq; Abdurrahman Badawi, “Min Tarikh al-Ilhad fi
al-Islam,” *Islamica*, Vol. 11, Cairo, 1945, pp. 198-228;
Hirschberg, *Geschichte der Augenheilkunde*, p. 101;
E. G. Brown, *Arabian Medicine*, Cambridge, 1921, pp. 44-53;
M. Meyerhof, *Legacy of Islam*, pp. 323 et sqq;
F. Wustenfeld, *Geschichte der Arabischen Arzte und Naturfor­scher*, n.
98;
L. Leclerc, *Histoire de la medicine arabe*, Paris, 1876, Vol. 1, pp.
337-54;
H. P. J. Renaud, “A propos du millenaire de Razes,” in *Bulletin de la
societe francaise d'Histoire de la medicine*, Mars-avril, 1931, pp. 203
*et sqq*.;
A. Eisen, “Kimiya al-Razi,” *RAAD*, *DIB*, 62/4;
Aldo Mieli, *La science arabe*, Leiden, 1938, pp. 8, 16.

### C. Editions of Philosophical Works

For the manuscript of al-Razi's extant books in general, see
Brockelcoann, *GAL*, I, pp. 268-71 (second edition), *Suppl*., Vol. I,
pp. 418-21.

The only edition of al-Razi's philosophical books and fragments, still
extant, is the one by Paul Kraus: “Abi Bakr Mohammadi Filu Zachariae
Raghensis,” *Opera Philosophica*, fragmentaque quae superssunt. Collegit
et edidit Paulus Kraus. Pars Prior. Cahirae MCMXXXIX. Only the first
volume was published; suicide prevented P. Kraus from publishing the
second volume for which he had collected a good deal of material. This
material was transferred, after Kraus' death, to the Institut Francais
d'Archeologie Orientale, in Cairo. It remains to be published.

[^1]: Epitre de Beruni, contenant le repertoire des ouvryes de Muhammad
ibn Zakariya ar-Razi, publiee par Paul Kraus, Paris, 1936, p. 4.

[^2]: See on him: Fihrist, p. 296; al-Baihaqi, p. 22; Usaibi'ah, Vol. I,
p. 309; Meyer­hof, ZDMG, 85, 38 et sqq.; Wustenfeld, p. 55; Leclerc,
Vol. I, p. 292; Brockelmann, GAL, Vol. I, p. 265, Suppl., Vol. I, pp.
414-15; Brockelmann (Suppl., Vol. I, p. 415) refutes the contention that
al-Razi was Ibn Rabban's pupil, on the ground that the latter was in
Rayy in 224/838. But this proof is not sufficient, because Ibn Rabban's
life is not well known as to enable one to assert that he did not, go to
Rayy much later, say between 265/878 and 270/883, especially when we
know nothing about his later life till his death

[^3]: Yaqut, Buldan, Vol.II, p.901.

[^4]: In Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyyah in Cairo, Taimur 129, medicine.

[^5]: Fihrist, pp.299-300.

[^6]: Al-Qifti, p.272.

[^7]: Ibn Abi Usaibi\`ah, Vol. I, p. 310.

[^8]: Ibn Juljul, p.78.

[^9]: P. 299, Flugel; pp. 314-416, Cairo ed.

[^10]: Ibn Abi Usaibi’ah, Vol.1, pg. 312.

[^11]: Fihrist, p.416, Cairo ed.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Ibn Juljul, p.78.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Epitre de Beruni, p. 5

[^17]: This is the date given by al-Biruni (ibid., p. 6). Other dates
given are : (a) around 320/932 (Sa'id, Tabaqat, p. 83, Cairo ed.,
repeated by al-Qifti, p. 178, Cairo ed.; repeated by Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah,
Vol. I, p. 314, but on the authority of Bal­muzaffar ibn Mu'arrif); (b)
295-300/907-912 and a fraction (Abu al-Khair al-Hasan ibn Suwar, in
Usaibi'ah, Vol. I, p. 314); (c) 311/923 (Ibn al.'Imad, Shadharat
al-Dhahab, Vol. II, p. 263); (d) 364/974 (History of Ibn Shiraz, quoted
by Qifti, p. 178, Cairo ed.). Surely the most probable date is that
given by al-Biruni.

[^18]: Fihrist, p.416,Cairo ed.

[^19]: Ibid., pp. 300, 301; Usaibi\`ah, Vol. I, pp. 317, 320; al-Biruni,
No. 117

[^20]: Al-Biruni, No.62.

[^21]: See on him: Qazwini on Chahar Maqalah (Gibb. Mem. Series XI), pp.
127-28; H, Ethe, Rudagi's Vorlaufer and Zeitgenossen, Morgenlandische
Forschungen, Leipzig, 1875. p. 43; Yaqut, Udaba', Vol. I, p. 143.

[^22]: Fihrist, p.416, Cairo ed.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 416; p. 300, Flugel (Ed.); Usaibi'ah, p. 319.

[^24]: Manuscript No. 1408 in Muhammad Murad in Istanbul, p.135.

[^25]: Mentioned in Fihrist, pp. 188, 189; Nizam al-Mulk's
Siyasat.Nameh, p. 186, Schefer (Ed.); 'Abd al-Qahir al-Baghdadi's Farq
bain al-Firaq, p. 267; Ibn Hajar's Lisan al-Mizan, Vol. I, p. 164.

[^26]: Ed. by Kraus, Opera Philosophica, Vol.. I, pp. 295-316
(Orientalia, Vol. V, 1926).

[^27]: Ibid., p. 2, note 3.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 312.

[^29]: Fihrist, p. 301; Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah, Vol. I, p. 316.

[^30]: Al-Biruni, p.79.

[^31]: Fihrist, p.417.

[^32]: Al-Biruni, p.37.

[^33]: Ibid., pp. 129-30.

[^34]: Ibid., p. 147

[^35]: Ibid., p.134.

[^36]: Ibid., p.172.

[^37]: Ibid., p.82.

[^38]: Ibid., p.171.

[^39]: Ibid., pp.119, 120.

[^40]: Fihrist, pp.416-19.

[^41]: Gohins p. 133, II. 33-48.

[^42]: Epitre de Beruni, contenant le repertoire des ouvryeade Muhammad
ibn Zakariya ar-Razi, publiee par Paul Kraus, Paris, 1936­.

[^43]: Isis, Vol. V, 1922, pp. 26-50.

[^44]: Manuscript in Oxford, Bodley Marsh 156, folios 239b-245b

[^45]: Opera Philosophica, Vol. I, 1939, pp. 17, 18.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 296.

[^47]: Pines, Beitrage zur islarnischen Atomenlehre, S. 36, No. 2,
Berlin, 1936.

[^48]: Opera Philosophica, p. 114.

[^49]: Raghib, Manuscript No. 1463 (ff. 90-98b) in Istanbul, pp. 128,
129.

[^50]: Opera Philosphica, p.114.

[^51]: See Neo Platonici apud Arabes, ed. A. Badawi, Cairo, 1955.

[^52]: Opera Philosophica, pp. 170-190.

[^53]: E. Sachau, Alberuni's India, London, 1910, Vol. I, p. 319.

[^54]: Marzuqi, Al-Azminah w-al-Amkinah, Hyderabad, 1332/1913, Vol. I,
p. 144

[^55]: Oriental Studies Presented to E. G. Browne, Cambridge, 1922, p.
333

[^56]: Opera Philosophica, Vol. I, pp. 192-94

[^57]: Marzuqi, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 114.

[^58]: See especially, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Muhassal, Cairo 1323/1905,
pp. 85-86

[^59]: Nasir-i Khusrau, Zad al-Musafirin, ed. Kaviani, Berlin,
1341/1922, pp. 114-16.

[^60]: Ibid., pp.73 et sqq.

[^61]: Ibid.

[^62]: Ibid.

[^63]: Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, al-Mabahith al-Mashriqiyyah, Hyderabad,
1343/1924, Vol. 1, p. 246.

[^64]: Abu Hatim al-Razi, A\`lam al-Nubuwwah in Opera Philosophica, Vol.
I, p. 304.


