Chapter 23: Al-Farabi
=====================

By Ibrahim Madkour

Abu Nasr al-Farabi was born in about 258/870 and he died in 339/950.
Eminent founder of a philosophical system as he was, he devoted himself
entirely to contemplation and speculation and kept himself aloof from
political and social perturbations and turmoils. He left a considerable
amount of literature. Besides his immediate pupils, there were many who
studied his works after his death and became his followers. His
philosophy set the standard for scholarly speculation both in the East
and the West long after his death.

Since the last decades of the thirteenth/nineteenth century, several
attempts have been made to write his biography, to collect his still
unpublished works, and to elucidate some obscurities in his philosophy.
In 1370/1950, on the occasion of the millennium of his death, some
Turkish scholars discovered some of his works still in manuscript and
removed certain difficulties con­cerning his thought. We cannot say if
they have all been resolved. We do not even know if it is easy to
resolve them unless we add further to our knowledge of his life and
works. Public and private libraries still keep a considerable number of
Islamic manuscripts behind closed doors; and we think it is time for
these manuscripts to be brought to the light of the day.

In this chapter an attempt has been made to deal briefly with
al-Farabi's life, his works, and his philosophy, with special reference
to some of the lost links and misconceptions about or objections raised
against his doctrine.[^1]

Life
----

Contrary to the usage among some of the Muslim scholars, al-Farabi did
not write his autobiography, and no one among his disciples managed to
give an account of his life as al-Juzjani did for his master Ibn Sina.
Material for that in the works of the biographers is quite
unsatisfactory and inadequate. The rather lengthy biography in Ibn
Khallikan's *Wafayat al-A'yan*,[^2] is open to criticism as regards its
authenticity. Thus, in the life of al-Farabi, several obscure points and
some unsolved problems are still to be investigated and settled.

His life falls into two distinct periods, the first being the time from
his birth till about the age of fifty. The only information we have
about this period is that he was born at Wasij, a village in the
vicinity of Farab in Transoxiana, in about 258/870. In spite of the
scanty information we have about his family, his childhood, and his
youth, it has been believed that he was Turkish by birth, that his
father was a general, and that he himself worked as a judge for some
time.[^3] What is better known is the cultural and intellectual movement
which flourished and spread with the introduction of Islam in Farab at
the beginning of the third/ninth century, and that the reputed
philologist al-Jauhari, the compiler of *al-Sihah*, was one of his
eminent contemporaries.

Al-Farabi was able to draw largely on this movement. The basis of his
early education was religious and linguistic: he studied jurisprudence,
Hadith, and the exegesis of the Qur'an. He learnt Arabic as well as
Turkish and Persian. It is doubtful whether he knew any other language,
and what has been stated by Ibn Khallikan about al-Farabi's mastery of
“seventy tongues” is more akin to the fabulous than to exact
history.[^4] From his interpretation of the word *safsafah* (sophistry),
it is obvious that al-Farabi had no knowledge of the Greek
languages.[^5]

He did not neglect to benefit himself from the rational studies which
were current in his time, such as mathematics and philosophy, although
it appears that he did not turn to them until much later. Contrary to
what has been held, it does not appear that he paid much attention to
medicine.[^6] And when he became extremely interested in these rational
studies, he did not remain content with what he had acquired in this
respect in his native town. Spurred by intellectual curiosity, he had to
leave his home and wander abroad in pursuit of more knowledge.

That marks the second period of his life, the period of old age and full
maturity. Baghdad, as an outstanding centre of learning throughout the
fourth/tenth century, was naturally his first destination where he
encountered various scholars among whom were philosophers and
translators. It was the study of logic which attracted him to that
circle of distinguished logicians of Baghdad of whom the most renowned
was Abu Bishr Matta ibn Yunus considered to be the foremost logician of
his age. Al-Farabi studied logic under Ibn Yunus for some time. He
surpassed his teacher and, on account of the eminent position he had
gained in this field, he came to be called “The Second Teacher.” Another
famous logician, Yahya ibn 'Adi, was his disciple.

Al-Farabi remained twenty years in Baghdad and then his attention was
engaged by another cultural centre in Aleppo. There, in the brilliant
and scholarly Court of Saif al-Daulah, gathered the most distinguished
poets, philologists, philosophers, and other scholars. In spite of the
strong Arab sympathies of that Court, no racial bias or prejudice could
mar the scholarly and cultural atmosphere in which Persians, Turks, and
Arabs argued and disputed and agreed or differed in the name of
disinterested pursuit of know­ledge.

In that Court al-Farabi lived, first and foremost, as a scholar and
seeker after truth. The glamour and the glory of Court life never
allured him, and, in the garb of a Sufi, he addressed himself to the
hard task of a scholar and a teacher; and he wrote his books and his
treatises among murmuring rivulets and the thick foliage of shady trees.

Except for several short journeys abroad, al-Farabi remained in Syria
till his death in 339/950. Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah maintains that al-Farabi
visited Egypt towards the end of his life.[^7] This is most probable, as
Egypt and Syria have been closely linked for a long time in history, and
cultural life in Egypt at the time of the Tulunids and the Ikhshidids
had its attractions. However, the alleged report of the murder of
al-Farabi by some highwaymen while he was travelling between Damascus
and \`Asqalan quoted by al-Baihaqi is in­credible.[^8] Al-Farabi had
reached such an exalted position in the Court of Saif al-Daulah that the
Amir in person, together with his immediate *entourage*, attended the
funeral service in honour of the dead scholar.

Works
-----

He left a considerable amount of literature; yet, if we accept the
reports of some of the biographers, such as al-Qifti and Ibn Abi
Usaibi'ah, the number of his writings is seventy, small compared with
that of his contemporaries, namely, al-Kindi and al-Razi the physician.
However, we must bear in mind that in the lists of the works of these
scholars, the biographers have often mentioned the same book under two,
maybe more, different titles, and that most of the works they have
listed were mere articles or short treatises.

Al-Farabi's works may be divided into two equal parts, one dealing with
logic and the other with other studies. The logical works are concerned
with the different parts of Aristotle's *Organon*, either in the form of
commentary or paraphrase. Most of these writings, however, are still in
manuscript; and a great many of these manuscripts are not yet
available.[^9]

The second category of his works deals with the other branches of
philosophy, physics, mathematics, metaphysics, ethics, and politics. A
good part of it is available, and it gives a clear idea of the various
aspects of al-Farabi's philosophy. But some of it is doubtful and his
authorship of it is a subject of controversy, as in the case of *Fusus
al-Hikam* (Gems of Sageness) or *al-Mufariqat* (Separateness).[^10] In
this; category, no really scientific study was attempted; al- Farabi did
not even mention medicine, and his discussion of chemistry was rather in
the nature of a defence than in the form of elaboration and analysis.

Ibn Khallikan is probably right when he maintains that al-Farabi wrote
most of his books in Baghdad and Damascus.[^11] There is no evidence of
his having written any of his books before the age of fifty, and even if
he did write any, it is not certain whether it was theological or
philosophical. The biographers have not reported anything contradictory.

Some scholars have attempted to make a chronological list of his
works.[^12] But one wonders what the value of such a list would be since
all his works were written in the last thirty years of his life, when he
began to write as a fully mature philosopher; and there was certainly no
noticeable change or development in his thoughts or doctrine during this
period.

The style of al-Farabi is characteristically concise and precise. He
deliberately selects his words and expressions as he profoundly thinks
of his ideas and thoughts. His aphorisms are pregnant with profound
significance. That is why Max Horten has given a large commentary to
explain the small treatise entitled *Fusus al-Hikam*.[^13] Al-Farabi has
a particular, style; anyone accustomed to it can well recognize it. He
avoids repetition and redundancy and prefers brevity and conciseness.

It seems that al-Farabi was in favour of esoteric teaching and believed
that philosophy should not be made available to the uninitiated among
the masses,[^14] and that philosophers should expound their ideas garbed
in obscurity, mystification, and ambiguity.[^15] Even today, it is not
an easy task to comprehend the meaning implied in some Farabian
aphorisms.
.
His method is almost identical with his style. He collects and
generalizes; he arranges and harmonizes; he analyses in order to
compose; he divides and sub-divides in order to concentrate and
classify. In some of his treatises, division and classification seem to
be his only objective. His treatise entitled “What Should Be Learnt
Before Attempting Philosophy” is in the form of an index of the Greek
schools of philosophy, the meanings of their titles and the names of
their originators. He has been chiefly concerned with the study of the
aims and the style of the works of Aristotle.[^16] His “Classification
of Sciences” is the first attempt of its kind in the history of Islamic
thought.[^17]

Al-Farabi is fond of opposites; in fact, he gives the opposite of almost
every term he uses: thus negation implies affirmation; and Being,
Non-Being. He wrote a treatise in answer to the questions he had been
asked. In this treatise he gives the proposition with which he is
confronted and contrasts it with its opposite, in order to get an
adequate solution. This reminds us of Plato's Parmenides.

His main concern has been to elucidate the basis of a theory and the
foun­dation of a doctrine, to clear up obscurities, and to discuss
controversial ques­tions in order to arrive at the right conclusions.
However, he pays scant attention to ordinary topics; and what he
supposes to be self-evident is passed by without the slightest attempt
at an explanation. A good example of this is his treatise, “The Aims of
the Stagirite in Every Chapter of His Book Named the Alphabet.”[^18]
This study is almost akin to our introduction to or criticism of a new
book. It can be favourably compared to a similar work by a con­temporary
philosopher.[^19] No wonder, Ibn Sina found in this treatise the key to
Aristotle's “Metaphysics”[^20].

The works of al-Farabi became widespread in the East in the fourth and
fifth/tenth and eleventh centuries, and they eventually reached the West
where some Andalusian scholars became the disciples of al-Farabi.[^21]
Some of his writings were also translated into Hebrew and Latin, and had
their in­fluence on Jewish and Christian scholasticism.[^22] These works
were published in the last decades of the thirteenth/nineteenth century,
and some of them were translated into various modem European languages.
Yet there is still great need for their republication with meticulous
editing, especially now that the libraries of Istanbul are much more
available to us than before, and we can fill some gaps through them.

Philosophy
----------

The philosophy of al-Farabi has its distinct features and clear-cut
aims. He has adopted some of the doctrines of previous philosophers,
reconstructed them in a form adaptable to his own cultural environment,
and made them so closely knit that his philosophy has become most
systematic and harmonious. Al-Farabi is logical both in his thinking and
expression, in his argument and discussion, and in his exposition and
reasoning.

His philosophy might have depended on some false presuppositions, and
might have expounded some hypotheses which modern science has refuted,
yet it played a very significant role and influenced several schools of
thought in subsequent times. Beginning with his logical studies, we will
briefly explain the characteristics and the chief elements of his
philosophy

### 1. Logic

It has been already mentioned that a considerable part of the works of
al-Farabi is devoted to the study of logic; but it is almost limited to
the delineation of the *Organon* in the version known to the Arabic
scholars of that time. He holds that “the art of logic gives, in
general, the rules which, if followed, can correct the mind and direct
man to the right way to truth away from the pitfalls of error.[^23] For
him, logic stands in the same relation to intelligibles as grammar to
words, and prosody to verse.[^24] He emphasizes the practical and
applied aspects of logic, indicating that intelligibles are to be tested
by its rules, as dimensions, volumes, and masses are by
measurement.[^25]

Logic also helps us in distinguishing truth from error and attaining the
right way of thinking or in guiding other people along this way; it also
indicates where to start our thoughts and how to conduct them
necessarily to their final conclusions.[^26] Practice in rhetoric and
dialectical discourses, or in geometry and arithmetic, can never be a
substitute for logic, in the same way as learning a considerable number
of poems and speeches is of no avail to a man ignorant of grammar.[^27]
The art of logic - as is generally thought - is not an unnecessary
ornament, because it can never be replaced by natural aptitude.[^28]

However, al-Farabi has always had in mind the difference between grammar
and logic; for the former is concerned with words only, while the latter
deals with meanings and is related to words in so far as they are the
embodiments of meanings. Moreover, grammar is concerned with the laws of
language, and languages are as diverse as peoples and races; but logic
deals with the human mind which is always the same anywhere and
everywhere.[^29]

The subject-matter of logic is its topics in which the laws of
intelligibles are studied. They are classified under eight heads: (1)
Categories, (2) Inter­pretations, (3) First Analytics, (4) Second
Analytics, (5) Topics, (6) Sophistics, (7) Rhetorics, and (8) Poetics,
all of which constitute the real aim of logic. The fourth part is the
most significant and noble of all the others; what is anterior may be
considered to be an introduction and what follows an appli­cation and
comparison leading to the avoidance of error and confusion.[^30]

It is obvious that al-Farabi follows in the footsteps of Aristotle,
although he considers rhetorics and poetics as branches of logic. The
same error was committed by the Peripatetics, especially by those of the
school of Alexan­dria.[^31] Some of them even claimed that Porphyry's
*Isagoge* was a part of the *Organon* of Aristotle; but this claim is
not supported by al-Farabi known as “The Second Teacher,” Aristotle
having been taken to be the First.

Undoubtedly, “Demonstration” was regarded by Aristotle as important, but
he was rather proud of his discovery of syllogism.

The contribution of al-Farabi to logic is two-fold. First, he has
succeeded in properly and lucidly expounding the logic of Aristotle to
the Arabic-speaking world. In the introduction of one of his recently
published treatises, he indicates that he will explain the principle of
syllogism after Aristotle in terms familiar to the Arabs; consequently,
he substitutes examples from the daily life of his own contemporaries
for the otherwise vague and unfamiliar examples originally cited by
Aristotle. His process is in no way detrimental to the study of the
logic of Aristotle, nor does it alter or vitiate the significance of his
philosophy.[^32]

On the other hand, al-Farabi lays the basis for the quinary division of
reason­ing, indicating that it is demonstrative if it leads to
certainty; dialectical if it leads to a semblance of certitude through
good intention; sophistical if it leads to a semblance of certitude
through bad intentions and falsity; rhetorical if it leads to a probable
opinion; and poetical if it leads to imagery giving pleasure or pain to
the soul.[^33] These different kinds are used according to the situation
and the standard of the audience.

Philosophers and scholars make use of demonstrative reasoning,
theologians resort only to dialectic syllogisms, and politicians take
refuge in rhetorical syllogisms. It is obvious that the way of
addressing any group of people should be adapted to the standard of
their understanding; and, thus, to use demonstrative syllogisms when
addressing the populace and the masses is absurd.[^34]

### 2. The Unity of Philosophy

Al-Farabi maintains that philosophy is essentially one unit. Thus, it is
imperative for great philosophers to be in accord, the pursuit of truth
being their one and only aim. Plato and Aristotle, “being the
originators of philosophy and the creators of its elements and
principles and the final authority as regards its conclusions and
branches,”[^35] are closely in accord in spite of some of their apparent
and formal differences.

Thus, al­-Farabi believes in the existence of only one school of
philosophy, the school of truth. Therefore, the terms Peripatetics,
Platonists, Stoics, and Epicureans denote only names of groups of
philosophers; all constitute one single school of philosophy. Parties
and cliques are a nuisance in philosophy as well as in politics.

Al-Farabi, as a philosopher and historian; has been fully aware of the
danger of partisanship in philosophy. This partisanship was caused more
or less by the fanatics among the disciples of the great philosophers.
Instead of attempting to harmonize the doctrines of various
philosophers, these disciples managed to widen the gap between two
masters by stressing shades of difference and sometimes even by altering
and misrepresenting their doctrines.[^36] This attitude of al-Farabi is
identical with the attitude of the twelfth/eighteenth-century
philosophers towards the disputes and dissension of the Renaissance
philosophers.

There is no novelty in this doctrine of al-Farabi; it has been
previously held by the philosophers of the later Greek schools,
especially those of the school of Alexandria. When Porphyry speaks about
his master, he points out that he has found the ideas of the
Peripatetics and the Stoics fused in Plo­tinus' works.[^37] In fact,
Porphyry has devoted several treatises to the attempt of reconciling the
philosophy of Plato with that of Aristotle;[^38] and a number of
scholars of the school of Alexandria followed in his footsteps;[^39] but
none of these scholars ever thought of combining all the philosophers in
a single school. This has been an omission, and al-Farabi has been
profuse in his writings in an attempt to point this out.

Religious truth and philosophical truth are objectively one, although
for­mally different. This idea rendered possible the accord between
philosophy and the tenets of Islam. Al-Farabi undoubtedly has been the
first scholar to raise a new edifice of philosophy on the basis of this
accord; later philo­sophers have followed the lines chalked out by him;
Ibn Sina has been to a certain extent occupied in the exposition and
delineation of its Platonic aspects, while Ibn Rushd has been busy
indicating the accord between Aristo­telian philosophy and religion.

This doctrine of reconciliation has been based on two main points:
first, revising the Peripatetic philosophy and garbing it in a Platonic
form, in order to make it more consonant with Islamic tenets; and,
secondly, giving a rational interpretation of religious truths. In fact,
al-Farabi expounds phi­losophy in a religious way and philosophizes
religion, thus pushing them in two converging directions so that they
may come to an understanding and co-exist.

This revision of the Peripatetic philosophy has been concerned with two
theories, one cosmological and the other psychological, viz., Theory of
the Ten Intelligences and that of the Intellect. His rational
explanation depends on two other theories; the first is concerned with
prophecy and the second with the interpretation of the Qur'an. The whole
philosophy of al-Farabi is summed up in these four theories which are
inter-related and all of which aim at one end.

### 3. Theory of the Ten Intelligences

This theory constitutes a significant part in Islamic philosophy; it
offers an explanation of the two worlds: heaven and earth; it interprets
the phenomena of movement and change. It is the foundation of physics
and astronomy. Its chief concern is the solving of the problem of the
One and the many and the comparing of the mutable and the immutable.

Al-Farabi holds that the One, i. e., God, is the Necessary by Himself;
hence, He is not in need of another for His existence or His
subsistence. He is an intelligence capable of knowing Himself; He is
both intelligent and intelligible. He is quite unique by His essence.
Nothing is like Him. He has no opposite or equivalent.[^40]

If the above premises are admitted, what would be God's influence on the
universe and the relationship between Him and the many? Only through a
kind of emanation has al-Farabi laboured to elucidate these problems. He
holds that from the Necessary One flows or emanates only one other by
virtue of Its self-knowledge and goodness. This emanent is the first
intelligence. Thus, knowledge equals creation, for it is enough for a
thing to be conceived in order to exist. The first intelligence is
possible by itself, necessary by an­other; and it thinks the One as well
as itself. It is one-in-itself, and many by virtue of these
considerations.

From this point al-Farabi starts the first step towards multiplicity.
From thinking by first intelligence of the One flows another
intelligence. By virtue of its thinking of itself as possible in itself
flow the matter and form of the “first heaven,” because every sphere has
its specific form which is its soul. In this way, the chain of
emanations goes on so as to complete the ten intelligences, and nine
spheres and their nine souls. The tenth and last intelligence, or agent
intelligence, is that which governs the sublunary world. From this
intelligence flow the human souls and the four elements. [^41]

These intelligences and souls are hierarchical. The first intelligence
in this hierarchy is the most transcendent, and then follow the souls of
the spheres and then the spheres themselves. The last in order is the
earth and the world of matter, which falls in the fourth rank.[^42]

The ancient Greeks held that any­thing celestial is sacred and anything
terrestrial is impure. The tenets of Islam categorically assert that
heaven is the *qiblah* of prayer, the source of revelation, the
destination of the “ascension.” Everything in heaven is pure and
purifying. Al-Farabi here conforms to both the religious tenets and the
philosophical teachings; but his main difficulty lies in maintaining
that the impure earthly world has evolved from the sacred celestial one.

The number of intelligences is ten consisting of the first intelligence
and the nine intelligences of the planets and spheres, because al-Farabi
adopts the same theories as held by the Greek astronomers, especially by
Ptolemy according to whom the cosmos is constituted of nine encircling
spheres all of which move eternally and circularly around the earth.
Intelligences and souls are the originators of this movement. Every
sphere has its own intelligence and soul.

The tenth intelligence manages the affairs of the terrestrial world. The
soul is the immediate mover of sphere: However it acquires its power
from the intelligence. It moves through its desire for the intelligence;
and pursuit of perfection moves its sphere. Thus, its desire is the
source of its movement. Intelligence in its turn is in a state of
perpetual desire. The lower desires the higher and all desire the One
which is considered the Prime Mover although It is immovable.[^43]

The movement of the spheres is effected by a kind of spiritual
attraction: the inferior sphere is always attracted towards the
superior. This process is a spiritual dynamism similar to that of
Leibniz in spite of its dependence on unequal spiritual powers. It seems
that al-Farabi, the musician, is attempting to introduce into the world
of spheres the system of musical harmony.

However, al-Farabi's conclusions about physics are closely connected
with his theories of astronomy. From the tenth intelligence flows the
prime matter, or *hyle*, which is the origin of the four elements, and
from the same intelligence flow the different forms which unite with the
*hyle* to produce bodies. The terrestrial world is only a series of
different kinds of forms united with matter or separated from it.
Generation is the result of the unity of form and matter, and corruption
is the result of their separation. The movement of the sun produces
hotness and coldness necessary for change. All the separate
intelli­gences provide the movements appropriate to the terrestrial
world. In this way physics is fused with cosmology and the terrestrial
world is subjected to the heavenly world.[^44]

Nevertheless, al-Farabi repudiates astrology which was prevalent at his
time, and which had been cherished by the Stoics and the Alexandrian
schol­ars before him.

Al-Farabi does not deny the law of causality and the connection between
causes and effects. For causes may be either direct or indirect; and if
it is an easy matter to discover the former, the latter are more
difficult to detect. Hence happens chance or coincidence; and there is
no way of controlling coincidence. For how could an astrologer associate
the death of an Amir with an eclipse? Or how could the discovery of a
new planet have any connection with a war? However, belief in fortuitous
happenings is essential in politics and in religion, because it imbues
men with fear and hope, and stimulates obedience and endeavour. [^45]

It is, thus, through the doctrine of the ten intelligences that
al-Farabi solves the problem of movement and change. He has made use of
the same theory in his attempt at solving the problem of the One and the
many, and in his reconciliation of the traditional Aristotelian theory
of matter and the Islamic doctrine of creation. Matter is as old as the
ten intelligences, but it is created because it has emanated from the
agent intelligence. To vindicate the unicity of God, al-Farabi has
resorted to the mediacy of these ten intelligences between God and the
terrestrial world.

Some of the elements of the Theory of the Ten Intelligences can be
traced to the different sources they have been derived from. Its
astronomical aspect is closely identical with Aristotle's interpretation
of the movement of the spheres. The Theory of Emanation has been
borrowed from Plotinus and the school of Alexandria. But, in its
entirety, it is a Farabian theory, dictated and formulated by his desire
for showing the unity of truth and his method of grouping and synthesis.
He reconciles Plato and Aristotle and religion and philosophy.

This theory met with some success among the philosophers of the East and
those of the West in the Middle Ages. Yet reconciliation necessi­tates,
from one side or the other, some concessions; and if it pleases some,
others are sure to resent it. Hence, this theory has been fervently
embraced by Ibn Sina who has given it a concise and elaborate
exposition, while al-Ghazali is loud in denouncing it. Among the Jewish
scholars, Ibn Gabriol does not give it even the slightest notice, while
Maimonides enthusiastically subscribes to it. And in spite of the
objections of Christian scholars to this theory, it has always elicited
their respect and esteem.

### 4. Theory of the Intellect

The psychology of Aristotle has long been reputed for its conciseness
and precision; and as an objective study it has not been less
noteworthy. Aristotle's classification of the faculties of the soul is
the first of its kind. He has emphasized its unity in spite of the
plurality of its faculties and explained its relationship with the body.
He has but inadequately dealt with the Theory of the Intellect, and in
consequence stirred a problem which has puzzled the moderns as well as
the ancients. However, his treatise “On the Soul” is the best of its
kind among ancient works on psychology, and it even surpasses some of
the modern works. In the Middle Ages it was as much in vogue as the
*Organon*.

This book was introduced to the Arabs through translations from Syriac
and Greek, together with ancient commentaries, especially those of
Alexander of Aphrodisias, Themistius, and Simplicius.[^46] It was the
subject of extensive study with Muslim philosophers, who in their turn
commented on it and paraphrased it. Influenced by Aristotle and drawing
on his work, these philo­sophers wrote various theses and treatises on
psychology. They were chiefly concerned with the question of the
intellect which stood out among all the problems studied by the
scholastic philosophers.

Al-Farabi has been fully aware of the significance of this problem, and
has recognized in it an epitome of the whole Theory of Knowledge. He has
closely identified it with his own philosophy; for it is related to the
Theory of the Ten Intelligences, and it is also the foundation of the
Theory of Prophecy. He has dealt with the problem of the intellect in
several places in his works; and he has devoted to its elaboration a
whole treatise, “On the Different Meanings of the Intellect.” This
treatise had a wide circulation among the scholars of the East and the
West in the Middle Ages, and it was translated into Latin at an early
date.

He classifies the, intellect into practical intellect which deduces what
should be done, and theoretical intellect which helps the soul to attain
its perfection. The latter is again classified into material, habitual,
and acquired.[^47]

The material intellect, or the potential intellect as al-Farabi
sometimes calls it, is the soul; or is a part of the soul, or a faculty
having the power of abstracting and apprehending the quiddity of beings.
It can be almost com­pared to a material on which the forms of beings
are imprinted, just like wax which becomes one with the inscriptions
carved on it. These inscriptions are nothing but perceptions and
intelligibles.

Thus, the intelligible exists in potentiality in sensible things; and
when it is abstracted from the senses, it exists in the mind in
actuality.[^48] That explains perception and abstraction, the important
operations of the mind which bring the intelligibles from poten­tiality
to actuality; and when these intelligibles are conveyed to the mind, the
intellect in its turn is transformed from an intellect in potency to an
intel­lect in action.

Therefore, the intellect in act, or the habitual intellect as it is
sometimes called, is one of the levels of the ascension of the mind in
the acquisition of a number of intelligibles. Since the mind is
incapable of comprehending all the intelligibles, it is intellect in
action with regard to what it perceives, and intellect in potency with
regard to what it has not yet perceived. The intelligibles themselves
exist in potency in the sensibles. Once they are stripped of them, they
become intelligibles in action. And once man has attained to this level
of the intellect in action, he can comprehend himself. This kind of
com­prehension has no relation with the external world; it is a mental,
abstract comprehension. [^49]

Once the intellect becomes capable of comprehending abstractions, it is
raised again to a higher level, that of the acquired intellect, or the
level where human intellect becomes disposed to conceive abstract forms
which have no connection with matter.

The difference between this rational conception and sense-perception is
that the former is a kind of intuition and inspiration; or, in other
words, it is a kind of immediate apprehension. This is the noblest level
of human appre­hension, and it is reached only by the few and the select
who attain to the level of the acquired intellect, where the hidden is
unveiled, and come in direct communion with the world of the separate
intelligences.[^50]

Thus, the intellect is capable of rising gradually from intellect in
potency to intellect in action, and finally to acquired intellect. The
two consecutive levels are different from each other, though the lower
always serves as a prelude to the higher. While the intellect in potency
is just a receiver of sensible forms, intellect in action retains the
intelligibles and comprehends the eoncepts. The acquired intellect rises
to the level of communion, ecstasy, and inspiration. Conceptions are of
different levels: originally, they are intelli­gibles in potency
existing in matter; once abstracted from matter they become
intelligibles in action. Still higher are the abstract forms which can
never exist in matter.[^51]

However, this gradual elevation is not spontaneous; for its initial
stage is the intelligibles and the intellect in potency, and its
transition from poten­tiality to actuality can never be effected except
through the influence of a prior actuality whose action is appropriate
to it. This actuality is the agent intelligence, the last of the ten
intelligences.

Human knowledge depends on a radiation from the separate intelligences;
and agent intelligence stands in the same relation to human intellect as
the sun to our eyes: our eyes depend on daylight for sight, and in the
same way our intellect is capable of comprehension only, when it is
unveiled by the agent intelligence which illuminates its way.[^52] Thus,
mysticism is fused with philosophy, and rational knowledge coincides
with ecstasy and inspiration.

The above-mentioned theory of al-Farabi concerning the intellect is
obviously based on Aristotle. Al-Farabi himself declares that his theory
depends upon the third part of *De Anima* of Aristotle,[^53] but he has
his own contribution to add. His conception of the acquired intellect is
alien to Aristotle; for it is almost identified with the separate
intelligences, and serves as the link between human knowledge and
revelation. Thus, it is different from the acquired intel­lect,as found
in the theory held by Alexander of Aphrodisias and al-Kindi; and it is
the outcome of al-Farabi's mystic tendency and his leaning towards
Plotinus' system.

This fact becomes clearer if we consider the influence of the agent
intelligence in the acquisition of knowledge, since it is the outcome of
vision and inspiration; it offers also to the mind the abstract forms
and enlightens the way for it. This theory helps in fusing psychology
with cos­mology, but it underestimates the activity of the human mind,
since it is made: capable of comprehension only when it is illuminated
by heaven; but would the Sufis care about this deficiency of the human
mind?

The general acceptance of this theory in the Middle Ages is clear from
the fact that Ibn Sina has not only embraced it, but has also added to
it vigour and; clarity; and in spite of Ibn Rushd's strict adherence to
the teachings of Aristotle, he has also come under its influence. Among
the Jews, Maimonides has copied it almost to the letter. With the
Christians, this theory has stood at the top of the problems of
philosophy, because it is concerned with the theory of knowledge and is
closely connected with the doctrine of the immor­tality of the soul.

This theory has also given rise to different schools, some favouring and
the others opposing it. To sum up, al-Farabi's Theory of the Intellect
has been the most significant of all theories developed by Muslim
thinkers, and it has exercised a great influence on Christian
philosophy.

### 5. Theory of Prophecy

The basis of every revealed religion is revelation and inspiration. A
prophet is a man endowed with the gift of communion with God and the
ability of expressing His will. Islam, as well as all the great Semitic
religions, has Heaven as its authority. The Qur'an says: ***“It is
naught but revelation that is revealed - the Lord of mighty power has
taught him.” (liii, 4-5***).

It is most imperative for a Muslim philosopher to give due reverence to
prophethood, to conciliate rationality with traditionalism, and to
identify the language of the earth with the words of Heaven. This has
been the endeavour of al-Farabi. His theory of prophethood may be
considered to be one of the most significant attempts at the
reconciliation of philosophy and religion. It may also be considered to
be the noblest part of his system; it has its foundation both in
psychology and metaphysics; and it is also closely related with politics
and ethics.

Influenced by his political and social environment, al-Farabi has
stressed the theoretical study of society and its needs. He has written
several treatises on politics, the most renowned of which is his “Model
City.” He visualizes his city as a whole of united parts, similar to
bodily organism; if any part of it is ill, all the others react and take
care of it. To each individual is allotted the vocation and the task
most appropriate for his special ability and talents. Social activities
differ according to their aims; the noblest of these activities are
those allotted to the chief, for he stands in the same relation to the
city as the heart to the body and is the source of all activities and
the origin of harmony and order. Hence, certain qualifications are the
prerequisite of his station. The chief must be stout, intelligent, lover
of knowledge, and supporter of justice, and he must also rise to the
level of the agent intelligence through which he gets revelation and
inspiration.[^54]

These attributes remind us of the attributes of the philosopher-king in
Plato's Republic, but al-Farabi adds to them the ability of communion
with the celestial world, as if the city is inhabited by saints and
governed by a prophet. Communion with the agent intelligence is possible
through two ways contemplation and inspiration. As already mentioned,
the soul rises through study and quest to the level of the acquired
intellect when it becomes recipient of the divine light. This level can
be attained only by the sacred spirits of the philosophers and sages,
those who can penetrate through the unseen and perceive the “world of
light.”

The sacred soul, preoccupied with what is above, gives no heed to what
is below; and its external sensation never over­whelms its internal
sensation; and its influence may go beyond its own body affecting other
bodies and everything in this world. It receives knowledge direct from
the High Spirit and angels without any human instruction.[^55] Thus,
through continuous speculative studies, the sage gets into communion
with the agent intelligence.

This communion is also possible through imagination, as happens to the
prophets, for all their inspiration or revelation is caused by
imagination. Imagination occupies an important place in al-Farabi's
psychology. It is closely connected with inclinations and sentiments,
and is involved in rational operations and volitional movements. It
creates the mental images which are not imitations of sensibles and are
the source of dreams and visions.

If we could have a scientific interpretation of dreams, it would help to
give us an interpretation of revelation and inspiration, for prophetic
inspirations take the form either of true dreams in sleep or of
revelation in waking- The difference between these two forms is
relative; they are distinct only as regards their degree. In fact, a
true dream is but one aspect of prophecy.

When imagination gets rid of conscious activities as in sleep, it is
wholly occupied with some of the psychological phenomena. Influenced by
some bodily sensations and feelings, or by some emotions and
conceptions, it creates new images or composes, from retained mental
images, their new forms. Thus, we dream of water or swimming when our
temperament is humid, and dreams often so represent the fulfilment of a
desire or the avoidance of fear that the sleeper may move in his bed
responding to a certain emotion, or leave his bed and beat a person
unknown to him, or run after him.[^56] It is needless to point out that
these views in spite of their simplicity are similar to the ideas of
modern psychologists, such as Freud, Horney, and Murray.

It is within the power of imagination to create mental images after the
pattern of the spiritual world. The sleeper may, thus, behold the Heaven
and its inhabitants, and may feel its enjoyments and pleasures.
Imagination may also rise to the celestial world and commune with the
agent intelligence from which it can receive the heavenly judgments
relating to particular cases and individual happenings. Through this
communion which may occur by day or at night, prophecy can be explained,
since it is the source of true dreams and revelation.

According to al-Farabi: “If the faculty of imagination is so power­ful
and perfected in a certain person, and is not completely overwhelmed by
external sensations ... it gets into communion with the agent
intelligence from which images of the utmost beauty and perfection are
reflected. He who sees those images would testify to the sublime and
wonderful majesty of God.... Once the imaginative faculty in man is
completely perfected, he may receive, when awake, from the agent
intelligence the pre-vision of the present and future events ... and
thus he would, through what he has received, prophesy divine matters.
This is the highest level to which imagination may be raised, and which
man can attain through this faculty.”[^57]

Thus, the chief characteristic of a prophet is to have a vivid
imagination through which he can commune with the agent intelligence
during waking time and in sleep, and can attain to vision and
inspiration. And revelation is but an emanation from God through the
agent intelligence.

Some persons, although in a lower degree than the prophets, have a
powerful imagination through which an inferior kind of vision and
inspiration can be achieved. In this way al-Farabi places the saints in
a degree lower than the prophets. The imagination of the populace and
the masses is so weak that it does not admit of rising to union with the
agent intelligence, neither at night nor by day.[^58]

Al-Farabi's attempt at reconciliation was not the only motive behind
this theory. In the third and fourth/ninth and tenth centuries a wave of
scepticism refuting prophecy and prophets was prevalent. Its spokesmen
copied some of the arguments held by the unbelievers in prophecy. At the
head of these sceptics was Ibn al-Rawandi who was once one of the
Mu'tazilites but later rejected their doctrine, and Muhammad ibn
Zakariya al-Razi the physician, a tough and powerful adversary. The
latter, in particular, refuted any attempt to reconcile philosophy and
religion, assumed that philosophy is the only way to reform both the
individual and society and that religions are the source of conflict and
strife.[^59]

This attack aroused all the various Islamic centres to defend their
dogmas. Al-Farabi had to contribute to that defence. He explained
prophecy on rational grounds and gave it a scientific interpre­tation.

He borrowed his explanation from Aristotle's theory of dreams, which had
already been introduced to the Arab world. Al-Kindi,[^60] the forerunner
of al-Farabi, adhered to that theory. It assumes that dreams are images
produced by the imagination the capacity of which increases during sleep
after getting rid of the activities of wakefulness.[^61]

Aristotle, however, denies that dreams are revealed by God, and never
admits of prophetic predictions through sleep, otherwise the populace
and the masses - who have so many dreams-would claim foretelling the
future.[^62] Here, al-Farabi diverges from his master, and asserts that
man through imagination can commune with the agent intelligence, but
this is available only to the privileged and the chosen.

The agent intelligence is the source of divine laws and inspirations. It
is, in al-Farabi's view, almost similar to the Angel charged with
revelation, as in the tenets of Islam. It is within the capacity of the
prophet or the philosopher to commune with the agent intelligence - the
former through imagination and the latter by way of speculation and
contemplation. This is understandable for the two draw together upon the
same source and get their knowledge from high above. In fact, religious
truth and philosophic truth are both the radiation of divine
illumination through imagination or contemplation.

The Farabian theory of prophecy had an obvious impact not only on the
East and the West, but on medieval and modern history. Ibn Sina adhered
faithfully to it. His elaboration of that theory is closely similar to
that of al-Farabi. Ibn Rushd, admitting its validity, was much
astonished at al-Ghazali's criticism of it; for it corroborates the
religious tenets and affirms that the spiritual perfection can be
attained only through man's communion with God.[^63]

When the theory was introduced into the Jewish philosophic thought,
Maimonides subscribed to it and showed much interest in it.[^64] It is
noticeable that Spinoza in his *Tractatus* *theologico-politicus*
expounds a similar theory which he most probably borrowed from
Maimonides.[^65] It continued to be echoed by some of the modern
philosophers in Islam, such as Jamal al-Din al-Afghani and the Imam
Muhammad \`Abduh.

### 6. Interpretation of the Qur'an

Some of the religious tenets are traditional (*sam\`iyyat*); they are
matters indemonstrable by way of reason, such as miracles; and the Day
of Judgment comprising the Doomsday and Resurrection, the Path and the
Balance, the Judgment and the Punishment. Acceptance of these
*sam’iyyat* is one of the pillars of religion. The believers have but to
accept them and remain content with the veracity of their source.

But some thinkers in their attempt at giving a rational explanation
interpret them in a certain way or reduce them to certain natural laws.
The Mu\`tazilites made a noticeable endeavour in this field, for they
went so far in the way of inter­pretation that they refuted the
Transfigurists who qualified God with certain attributes contradictory
to His transcendence and uniqueness.

Al-Farabi attempts a different interpretation. He admits the validity of
miracles since they are the means of proving prophecy. He holds that
miracles although supernatural do not contradict natural laws. For the
source of these laws is to be found in the world of spheres and its
intelligences which manage the terrestrial world; and once we get in
communion with that world, matters other than those of the habitual
course happen to us.

A prophet, as mentioned above, has a spiritual power by means of which
he is associated with the agent intelligence. It is through this
communion that he causes rain to fall, the moon to split asunder, the
stick to be transformed into a snake, or the blind and leprous to be
healed.[^66] In this way al-Farabi tries - as the Stoics had done
before - to reduce to causality matters beyond the habitual course of
nature and even contradictory to it.

The Qur'an points to various *sam\`iyyat*, such as the Tablet and the
Pen. Al-Farabi holds that these should not be understood literally, for
the Pen is not an instrument to write with, nor the Tablet a page on
which sayings are registered,[^67] but they are mere symbols for
precision and preservation. The Qur'an is also full of extensive stories
about the hereafter, Day of Judgment, and reward and punishment. No
believer could deny these matters without undermining the principle of
divine sanction and individual responsi­bility.

Although al-Farabi fully admits the eternal bliss or the painful
suffering of the hereafter, yet he reduces them to spiritual matters
having no relation­ship with the body and material properties, because
the spirit, not the body, is that which enjoys or suffers, is happy or
unhappy.[^68]

This interpretation conforms to the Farabian tendency towards
spiritualism. Ibn Sina borrowed it and widely applied it. In Ibn Sina's
view the Throne and the Chair are symbols of the world of spheres.
Prayers are not mere bodily movements, but aim at imitating the
celestial world.[^69] It is as if these two philosophers wanted to lay
the foundation of a philosophical religion and a religious philosophy.

However, al-Ghazali was dissatisfied with this attempt and he attacked
it, taking the text of the Scripture literally. Ibn Rushd, although
advocating accord between religion and philosophy, was also
dissatisfied, because he claimed that for the sake of their security
religion and philosophy should be kept separate. If combined, they would
not be understood by the ordinary man and might lead astray even some of
those capable of deep thinking.[^70]

Conclusion
----------

We can now conclude that al-Farabi's doctrine is so fully harmonious and
consistent that its parts are completely inter-related. From the One,
the First Cause, al-Farabi gets on to ten intelligences from which the
two worlds of heaven and earth have flowed. His spheres are moved by the
managing intelli­gences, and nature with its generation and corruption
is subjected to these intelligences. The soul is governed by one of
these intelligences which is the agent intelligence. Politics and ethics
are no exceptions, for happiness pursued by men is but the communion
with the celestial world. His “Model City” only aims at this end.

This doctrine is at the same time spiritualistic and idealistic, for
al-Farabi reduces almost everything to spirit. His God is the Spirit of
the spirits, his astronomical spheres are governed by celestial spirits,
and the prince of his city is a man whose spirit transcends his body.
This spiritualism is rooted in ideas and concepts, and is given wholly
to speculation and contem­plation. The One is the Idea *par excellence*
and is the Intellect that intellects Itself. The other beings are
generated by this Intellect. Through speculation and contemplation man
can commune with the celestial world and attain the utmost happiness. No
spiritualism is so closely related to idealism as that of al-Farabi.

Although al-Farabi's doctrine is a reflection of the Middle Ages, it
comprises some modern and even contemporary notions. He favours science,
advocates experimentation, and denies augury and astrology. He so fully
believes in causality and determinism that he refers to causes even for
those effects which have no apparent causes. He elevates the intellect
to a plane so sacred that he is driven to its conciliation with
tradition so that philosophy and religion may accord.

Bibliography
------------

We are content to mention here only the principal old sources and the
latest writings concerning al-Farabi.

### A. Life

Al-Baihaqi, *Tarikh Hukama' al-Islam*, Damascus, 1946 (pp. 30-35);
Al-Nadim, *al-Fihrist*, Leipzig, 1881 (p. 263);
Al-Qifti, *Tarikh al-Hukama'*, Leipzig, 1903 (pp. 277-80);
Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah, *'Uyun al-Anba' fi Tabaqat al-Atibba'*, Konigsberg,
1884, 2 Vols. (Vol. II, pp. 134-40);
Ibn Khallikan; *Wafayat al-A\`yan*, Cairo. 1275/1858, 2 Vols. (Vol. II,
pp. 112-14);
Mustafa 'Abd al-Raziq, *Failasuf al-'Arab w-al-Mu\`allim al-Thani*,
Cairo, 1945 (pp. 55-76).

### B. Works

Aidin Sayili, *Revue de la Societe d'Histoire Turque*, Ankara, 1951,
Vol. XV, No. 57;
M. Bouyges, *Notes sur les philosophes arabes connus des latins au
moyen age dans Milanges de l' Universite de St. Joseph*, Beyrouth, 1924
(Vol. IX, No. 2, pp. 49-70);
De Menasce, *Arabische Philosophie*, Bern, 1948 (6, pp. 27-28);
K. Georr, “Farabi est-il l'auteur des Focouc,”. *REI*, 1941 (pp.
31-39);
L. Massignon, “Notes sur le texte original du Des Intellectus
d'Al-Farabi,” *Arch. d'Histoire doct.et litt. moyen age*, Paris, 1930
(Vol. IV, pp. 151-58);
Mubahat Turker, *Farabi'nin Bazi Mantik*, Ankara, 1958;
M. Steinschneider, “AI-Farabi, Des Arabi­schen Philosophen, Leben and
Schriften,” Memoires *de l'acadamie imperiale des sciences de St.
Petersburg*, VII serie, Vol. XIII, No. 4, 1869.

### C. Philosophy

Al-Farabi, *al-Thamarat al-Mardiyyah fi ba'd al-Risalat al-Farabiyyah*,
Leiden, 1890; *Risalah fi Ara' Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah*, Leiden, 1895;
*Ihsa' al-\`Ulum*, Cairo, 1949; *Kitab al.Qiyas al-Saghir*, Ankara,
1957;
E. Gilson, “Les sources greco-­arabes de l'augustinisme avicennisant,”
*Arch. hist. doct. litt*., Paris, 1929;
I. Mad­kour, *La place d'Al-Farabi dans l'ecole philosophique
musulmane*, Paris, 1934.

[^1]: A comprehensive treatise entitled La place d'Al-Farabi dans
l'ecole philosophique musulmane was published by Ibrahim Madkour in
1934.

[^2]: Ibn Khallikan, Wafayat al-A’yan, Cairo, 1275/1858, Vol.II,
pp.112-14.

[^3]: Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah, 'Uyun al-Anba' fi Tabaqat al-Atibba',
Konigsberg. 1884, Vol. II, p. 134.

[^4]: Ibn Khaliikan, op. cit., p. 113.

[^5]: Al-Farabi, Ihsa' al-'Ulum, Cairo, 1949, p. 65; Madkour, La
Sophistique (Logique d'Al-Shifa), Cairo, 1958, Preface, p. v.

[^6]: Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 134.

[^7]: Ibid., p.135.

[^8]: Al-Baihaqi, Tarikh Hukama' al-Islam, Damascus, 1946, pp. 33-34

[^9]: Mubahat Turker, Farabi'nin, Ankara, 1958.

[^10]: Georr, “Farabi est-il I'auteur des Focouc,” REI, 1941-1946,
pp.31-39; Aidin Sayili, Belleten, 1951.

[^11]: Ibn Khallikan, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 113.

[^12]: Aidin Sayili, op. cit.

[^13]: M. Horten, Das Buch der Ringsteine Farabi, Munster, 1906.

[^14]: Cicero, De Univ., 2, 6.

[^15]: Al-Farabi, al-Thamarat al-Mardiyyah, Leiden, 1895, pp. 4-6.

[^16]: Ibid., pp.49-55.

[^17]: Said al-Andalusi, Tabaqat al-Umam, Beirut, 1912, p. 53.

[^18]: Al-Farabi, al-Thamarat al-Mardiyyah, pp. 34-38.

[^19]: Brehier, Aristotle's Metaphysics by W. D. Ross, compte rendu
bibliographique daps, Revue des Etudes Grecques, Paris, 1926, Vol.
XXXIV, pp. 293 et sqq.

[^20]: Al-Qifti, Tarikh al-Hukama', Leipzig, 1903, p. 416.

[^21]: A. G. Palencia, Historia de la Literatura Arabigo-Espanola,
Arabic tr. Dr. Husain Mu'nis, Cairo, 1955, p. 223.

[^22]: De Menasce, Arabische Philosophie, Bern, 1948, pp. 27-28.

[^23]: Al-Farabi, Ihsa’ al-‘Ulum, p.53.

[^24]: Ibid., p.54.

[^25]: Ibid.

[^26]: Ibid., pp.54-55.

[^27]: Ibid., pp.58-59.

[^28]: Ibid., p.59.

[^29]: Ibid., pp.60-62.

[^30]: Ibid., pp.54-55.

[^31]: Madkur. L'Organon d'Aristote dans le monde arabe, Paris, 1934,
pp. 12-14.

[^32]: Al-Farabi, Kitab al-Qiyas al-Saghir, ed. Dr. Mubahat Turker,
Farabi'nin Bazi Mantiq, Ankara, 1958, pp. 244-45.

[^33]: Ihsa' al-‘Ulum, pp. 64-69.

[^34]: Al-Thamarat al-Mardiyyah, pp.26-27.

[^35]: Ibid.

[^36]: Ibid., p.32.

[^37]: Porphyry, Vie de Plotin; tr. Brehier (Coll. Bude), Vol. I. p. 15

[^38]: Picavet, E'squisse d'histoire generale et comparee . . ., Paris,
1907. p. 86

[^39]: Ravaisson, Essai sur la Metaphyisique d'Aristote, Paris, 1846,
Vol. II, p. 540

[^40]: Al-Farabi, Risalah fi Ara’ Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah, Leiden,
1895, pp. 5-10.

[^41]: Ibid., pp.58-59.

[^42]: Ibid., pp.20-22.

[^43]: Ibid., pp.25-27.

[^44]: Ibid., p.59.

[^45]: Al-Thamarat al Mardiyyah, pp. 107-110

[^46]: Al-Qifti, op. cit., p. 41

[^47]: Al-Thamarat al-Mardiyyah, p.54.

[^48]: Ibid., pp.42-43.

[^49]: Ibid., p.44.

[^50]: Ibid., pp. 45, 46; al-Madinat al-Fadilah, p. 52

[^51]: Al-Madinat al-Fadilah, p.46.

[^52]: Ibid., pp.44-45.

[^53]: Al-Thamarat al-Mardiyyah, p.42.

[^54]: Al-Madinat al-Fadilah, pp. 46, 55-60.

[^55]: Al-Thamarat al-Mardiyyah, p. 75.

[^56]: Al-Madinat al-Fadilah, pp.48-49.

[^57]: Ibid., pp.51-52

[^58]: Ibid., p.52.

[^59]: Kraus et Piness, Encyc. de l'Islam, Vol. IV, p. 1136.

[^60]: Muhammad \`Abd al-Hadi abu Ridah, Rasa'il al-Kindi, Cairo, 1950,
pp. 293-311.

[^61]: Aristote, Traite des Reves, Vol. 1, pp. 9-10.

[^62]: Idem, La Divination, Vol. I, pp. 2-3.

[^63]: Ibn Rushd, Tahafut al-Tahafut, Cairo, 1321/1903, p. 126.

[^64]: Maimonides, le Guide des Egares, Paris, 1856-66, Vol. I, pp.
259-333.

[^65]: Spinoza, Traite theologico-politique, Paris, 1872, pp. 14-24.

[^66]: Al-Thamarat al-Mardiyyah, p. 72.

[^67]: Ibid., p.77.

[^68]: Al-Madinat al-Fadilah, p.67.

[^69]: Ibn Sina, Tis' Rasa'il fi al Hikmah w-al Tabi\`ah, Cairo, 1908,
pp. 128-29.

[^70]: Ibn Rushd, Fasl al-Maqal fi ma bain al-Hikmah w-al Shari’ah min
al-Ittisal, Cairo, p. 26; Manahij al-Adillah, Cairo, pp. 120-21.


