Chapter 25: Ibn Sina
====================

By Fazlur Rahman

In the history of philosophical thought in the Medieval Ages, the figure
of Ibn Sina (370/980-428/1037)[^1] is, in many respects, unique, while
among the Muslim philosophers, it is not only unique but has been
paramount right up to modern times. He is the only one among the great
philosophers of Islam to build an elaborate and complete system of
philosophy - a system which has been dominant in the philosophical
tradition of Islam for centuries, in spite of the attacks of al-Ghazali,
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, and others.

This ascendancy has been possible, however, not merely because he had a
system but because that system had features of remarkable originality
displaying a type of genius-like spirit in discovering methods and
arguments whereby he sought to reformulate the purely rational and
intellectual tradition of Hellen­ism, to which he was an eminent heir,
for and, to an extent, within the religious system of Islam.

The exact terms of this reformulation and their relation to Islam we
shall discuss presently in this chapter; it is only to be noted at the
outset that it was this kind of originality which rendered him unique
not only in Islam but also in the medieval West where the reformulations
of the Roman Catholic theology at the hands of Albert the Great, and,
especially, of Thomas Aquinas, were fundamentally influenced by him.

Since in this chapter we are mainly concerned with Ibn Sina's
interpretation of Greek philosophical doctrines, we need not give an
account of his sources in the Greek and Muslim philosophers. To be sure,
the elements of his doctrines are Greek, and certain reformulations of
Greek doctrines in his writings are also to be found in al-Farabi (to
whom Ibn Sina's debt is immense) in varying degrees of development; but
our task here is to state, analyse, and appreciate Ibn Sina's teaching.
And, indeed, Ibn Sina's system, taken as a whole, is such that it is
his, bearing the unmistakable impress of his personality. This is proved
by the fact that he states his cardinal doctrines over and over again in
his different works and often gives cross references, which are
unmistakable signs of systematic thinking and not of random borrowing
from heterogeneous sources.

The most fundamental characteristic of Ibn Sina's thought is that of
arriving at definitions by a severely rigorous method of division and
distinction of concepts. This lends an extraordinary subtlety to his
arguments. It can often give his philosophical reasoning a strongly
scholastic complexity and intricacy of structure which can annoy the
modern temperament, but it is doubtlessly true that it is also this
method which has resulted in almost all the original doctrines of our
philosopher.

It has enabled him to formulate his most general and basic principle,
viz., to every clear and distinct concept there must correspond *a
distinctio in re*, a principle on which later Descartes also based his
thesis of the mind-body dualism. The fecundity and importance of this
principle of analysis in Ibn Sina's system are indeed striking: he
announces it recurrently and at all levels, in his proof of the
mind-body dualism, his doctrine of universals, his theory of essence and
existence, etc. Examples of this principle are: “that which is affirmed
and admitted is different from that which is not affirmed and admitted,”
[^2] and “a single conceptual (lit. specific) entity cannot be both
known and unknown at the same time except with regard to different
aspects.”[^3]

This chapter will deal mostly with those concepts and doctrines of Ibn
Sina which are not only capital and bring out the nature of his system,
but have also both been influential and originally elaborated by him to
a greater or lesser extent.

The Doctrine Of Being
---------------------

Ibn Sina's doctrine of Being, like those of earlier Muslim philosophers,
e. g., al-Farabi, is emanationistic. From God, the Necessary Existent,
flows the first intelligence alone, since from a single, absolutely
simple entity, only one thing can emanate. But the nature of the first
intelligence is no longer absolutely simple since, not being
necessary-by-itself, it is only possible, and its possibility has been
actualized by God. Thanks to this dual nature which henceforth pervades
the entire creaturely world, the first intelligence gives rise to two
entities: (i) the second intelligence by virtue of the higher aspect of
its being, actuality, and (ii) the first and highest sphere by virtue of
the lower aspect of its being, its natural possibility.

This dual emanatory process continues until we reach the lower and tenth
intelligence which governs the sublunary world and is called by the
majority of the Muslim philosophers the Angel Gabriel. This name is
applied to it because it bestows forms upon or “informs” the matter of
this world, i.e., both physical matter and the human intellect. Hence it
is also called the “Giver of Forms” (the *dator formarum* of the
subsequent medieval Western scholastics). We shall return later to these
intelligences and these spheres to examine more closely their nature and
operations; meanwhile we must turn to the nature of Being.

The procession of the immaterial intelligence from the Supreme Being by
way of emanation was intended to supplement, under the inspiration of
the Neo-Platonic Theory of Emanation, the meagre and untenable view of
God formulated by Aristotle according to whom there was no passage from
God, the One, to the world, the many. According to Muslim philosophers,
although God remained in Himself and high above the created world, there
were, nevertheless, intermediary links between the absolute eternity and
necessity of God and the world of downright contingency. And this
theory, besides, came very close to satisfying the Muslim belief in
angels.

This is the first occasion to remark how Muslim philosophers, by a
re-elaboration of the Greek tradition of philosophy, not only sought to
build a rational system, but a rational system which sought to integrate
the tradition of Islam. But what about the Theory of Emanation itself?
Would it not destroy the necessary and all-important gulf between the
Creator and the creation and lead to a downright pantheistic
world-view - *tat tvam Asi* - against which Islam, like all higher
religions, had warned so sternly?

No doubt, this type of pantheism, being dynamic, is different from the
absolutist and static forms of pantheism; yet it could lead to
anthropomorphism, or, by a reverse process of ascent, to the
re-absorption of the creature's being into the being of God. Now, the
guarantee against any such danger shall be Ibn Sina's doctrine of
essence and existence. This celebrated theory again is designed to
fulfil equally both religious and rational needs and, once again, to
supplement Aristotle.

Early in this section we said that God and God alone is absolutely
simple in His being; all other things have a dual nature. Being simple,
*what* God is and the fact that He *exists* are not two elements in a
single being but a single atomic element in a single being. What God is,
i.e., His essence, is identical with His existence. This is not the case
with any other being, for in no other case is the existence identical
with the essence, otherwise whenever, for example, an Eskimo who has
never seen an elephant, conceives of one, he would *ipso facto* know
that elephants exist.

It follows that God's existence is necessary, the existence of other
things is only possible and derived from God's, and that the supposition
of God's non-existence involves a contradiction, whereas it is not so
with any other existent.[^4] It will be seen that the germs of the
ontological argument exist in a fairly developed form in this argument.
A cosmological argument, based on Aristotle's doctrine of the First
Cause, would be superfluous in establishing God's existence.

Ibn Sina, however, has not chosen to construct a full-fledged
ontological argument. His argument, which, as we shall see later, became
the cardinal doctrine of the Roman Catholic dogmatic theology after
Aquinas, is more like the Leibnizian proof of God as the ground of the
world, i. e., given God, we can understand the existence of the world.
Here cause and effect behave like premises and conclusion. Instead of
working back from a supposed effect to its cause, we work forward from
an indubitable premise to a con­clusion.

Indeed for Ibn Sina, God creates through a rational necessity. On the
basis of this rational necessity, Ibn Sina also explains the divine
pre-knowledge of all events, as we shall see in his account of God. The
world, as a whole, is then contingent, but, given God, it becomes
necessary, this necessity being derived from God. This is Ibn Sina's
principle of existence stated in brief; we shall now analyse it
according to the complex materials which Ibn Sina has left us. It
involves more than one point of view.

From the metaphysical point of view, the theory seeks to supplement the
traditional Aristotelian analysis of an existent into two constituent
elements, as it were, viz., form and matter. According to Aristotle, the
form of a thing is the sum total of its essential and universalizable
qualities constituting its definition; the matter in each thing is that
which has the potentiality of receiving these qualities - the form - and
by which the form becomes an individual existent.

But there are two major difficulties in this conception from the point
of view of the actual existence of a thing. The first is that the form
is universal and, therefore, does not exist. Matter too, being pure
poten­tiality, does not exist, since it is actualized only by the form.
How then shall a thing come into existence by a non-existent form and an
equally non­existent matter?

The second difficulty arises from the fact that, although Aristotle
generally holds that the definition or essence of a thing is its form,
he nevertheless says in certain important passages (e.g., *De Anima*,
Vol. I, Chap. I, 403 a, 27 ff.) that matter is also to be included in
the essence of a thing, otherwise we shall have only a partial
definition of it. If, then, we regard both form and matter as
constitutive of definition, we can never arrive at the actual existence
of a thing. This is the rock against which the whole scheme of Aristotle
to explain Being threatens to break.

This is why Ibn Sina[^5] holds that from form and matter alone you would
never get a concrete existent, but only the essential and accidental
qualities. He has analysed at some length the relation of form and
matter in K. al­-Shifa', (“Met.” II, 4 and “Met.” VI, 1), where he
concludes that both form and matter depend on God (or the active
intellect) and, further, that the composite existent also cannot be
caused by form and matter alone but there must be “something else.”

Finally, in “Met.” VIII, 5, he tells us, “Every­thing except the One who
is by His essence One and Existent acquires existence from something
else. . . . In itself it deserves absolute non­-existence. Now, it is
not its matter alone without its form or its form alone without its
matter which deserves non-existence but the totality (of matter and
form).”

This is why Ibn Sina substitutes a three-term analysis of the existent
material objects instead of the traditional Greek dyadic formula. It
must be noted that it is Aristotle's doctrine which is being developed
here. Many scholars have held that Ibn Sina is here following a
Neo-Platonic line instead of the Aristotelian one, but, from this point
of view, the Neo-Platonic doctrine is the same as that of Aristotle,
viz., the dyadic scheme of form and matter, except that, according to
Plotinus, under the influence of Plato, the forms have a higher
ontological status and exist in God's mind who then proceeds to make
them existent in matter.

It should also be borne in mind that existence is not really a
constituent element of things besides matter and form; it is rather a
relation to God: if you view a thing in relation to the divine
existentializing agency, it exists, and it exists ne­cessarily and,
further, its existence is intelligible, but when out of relation with
God, its existence loses its intelligibility and meaning. It is this
relational aspect which Ibn Sina designates by the term “accident” and
says that existence is an accident.

Ever since the criticism of Ibn Sina's doctrine by Ibn Rushd who, among
other things, accused Ibn Sina of having violated the definition of
substance as that which exists by itself, and of Aquinas who, although
he adopts the distinction between essence and existence under the direct
influence of Ibn Sina, nevertheless follows Ibn Rushd in his criticism,
the unanimous voice of the Western historians of medieval philosophy has
been to the effect that existence, according to Ibn Sina, is just an
accident among other accidents, e. g., round, black, etc.

We have said that when Ibn Sina talks of existence as an accident *with
relation to objects (as distinguished from essence)* he just means by it
a relation to God; it is, therefore, not an ordinary accident. Further,
if existence were an accident, one could think it away and still go on
talking of the object just as one can do in the case of other accidents
and, indeed, in that case Ibn Sina would have been forced to hold
something like the Meinongian view held by many Muslim Mutakallims that
non-existents must also “exist” in some peculiar sense of that word. But
this is the very doctrine which Ibn Sina ridicules. The whole discussion
on this point can be found in the article referred to in note No. 5 of
this chapter.

Here we give only one passage where our philosopher criticizes the view
of those who hold that a non-existent “thing” must, nevertheless,
“exist” in some sense so that we can talk about it. He says (*K.
al-Shifa'*, “Met.” I, 5), “Those people who entertain this opinion hold
that among those things which we can know (i. e., be acquainted with)
and talk about, are things to which, in the realm of non-being,
non-existence belongs as an attribute. He who wants to know more about
this should further consult the nonsense which they have talked and
which does not merit con­sideration.”

Indeed, according to Ibn Sina, the ideas of existence and unity are the
primary ideas with which we must start. These underived concepts are the
bases of our application of other categories and attributes to things
and, therefore, they defy definition since definition must involve other
terms and concepts which are themselves derived (*ibid*., I, 5).

It will be seen that this problem now is not a metaphysical one but has
to do with logic. Ibn Sina has attempted to give his own answer to the
question: How is it possible that we can talk of non-existents and what
do these latter mean? His answer is that we can do so because we give to
these objects “some sort of existence in the mind.” But, surely, our
individual images cannot constitute the meanings of these entities for
the obvious reason that when we talk, e. g., of a space-ship, it must
have an objective meaning.

It is, neverthe­less, true that Ibn Sina has seen the basic difficulty
of the logic of existence. And our modern logic itself, despite its
superior techniques and some valuable distinctions, seems nowhere nearer
the solution. It has tried hard to contend that whenever I talk of a
space-ship, although none exists, I am not talking of a “thing,” of an
individual object, but only of a generic object or a conglome­ration of
properties. But is this really so ? Is it absurd to say that the
“individual space-ship I am talking of now has this and this property”?
Besides, the crux is the phrase “conglomeration or set of properties” -
what is it to which they belong and of which I profess to be talking?

Besides this meaning of “accident” as a peculiar and unique relation of
an existent to God, the term “accident” in Ibn Sina has another
unorthodox philosophic meaning. This concerns the relationship of a
concrete existent to its essence or specific form, which Ibn Sina also
calls accidental. This use of the term “accident” is quite pervasive in
Ibn Sina's philosophy and, without knowing its correct significance, one
would be necessarily led to misinterpret some of his basic doctrines.

Now, *whenever two concepts are clearly distinguishable from each other,
they must refer to two different ontological entities*, as we said
above, and, further, *whenever two such concepts come together in a
thing, Ibn Sina describes their mutual relationship as being
accidental*, i. e., they *happen* to come together, although each must
be found to exist separately. This is the case, for example, between
essence and existence, between universality and essence.

According to Ibn Sina, essences exist in God's mind (and in the mind of
the active intelligences) prior to the individual existents exemplifying
them in the external world and they also exist in our minds posterior to
these individual existents. But these two levels of the existence of an
essence are very different. And they differ not only in the sense that
the one is creative, and the other imitative.

In its true being, the essence is neither universal nor particular, but
it is just an essence. Hence he holds (*K. al-Shifa'*, “Isagoge to
Logic,” Cairo, 1952, pp. 65-69; also *ibid*. “Met.” V, 1) that both
particularity and univer­sality are “accidents” which happen or occur to
the essence. Universality occurs to it in our minds only, and Ibn Sina
takes a strictly functional view of the universals: our mind abstracts
universals or general concepts whereby it is enabled to treat the world
of infinite diversity in a summary and scientific manner by relating an
identical mental construction to a number of objects.

In the external world the essence does not exist except in a kind of
metaphorical sense, i, e., in the sense in which a number of objects
allow themselves to be treated as being identical. Existents in the
external world are the individual concrete objects, no two of which are
exactly the same.

He says, “It is impos­sible that a single essence should exist
identically in many” (“Met.” V, 2), and again, “It (i. e. absolute
manness) is not the manness of 'Amr; it is different from it, thanks to
the particular circumstances. These particular circum­stances have a
role in the individual person of Zaid ... *and also a role in the 'man'
or 'manness' inasmuch as it is related to him*” (“Met.” V, 1). It is
clear especially from this last statement that the “essence” virtually
undergoes a change in each individual. That is why we must say that *if
we regard essence as a universal,* that concrete determinate existence
is something over and above the essence; it is something added to the
essence, or it is an “accident” of the essence.

Two things must be specially noted here. First, that existence is
some­thing added not to the existent objects - this would be absurd -
but to the essence. This is because everything whether it exists or
not - indeed whether it is existable or not - in fact every concept is
“something” of which assertions can be made, whether positive or
negative. Indeed, even non-existence is “something,” since one can talk
about it. But a positive individual existent is more than just
“something.” (This distinction between “something” and an existent,
treated by Ibn Sina [“Met.” 1, 5] which has confusedly returned in
present-day logic, was originally made by the Stoics [see, e.g.,
*Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta*, Vo. II, p. 117].)

Hence Ibn Sina says that when existence is attributed to essences, this
existence is equivalent to “is something” and, therefore, such
statements are not “profitable.” But statements about existents are
informative and profitable, since they add to the essence something that
is new.

Secondly, we must note that although Ibn Sina speaks in several places
of matter as the principle of multiplicity of forms or essences, he
never says that matter is the principle of individual existence. The
sole principle of individual existence is God - the Giver of existence;
matter is the occasional cause of existence, supplying external
attributes of multiplicity.

We have given a considerable number of quotations from Ibn Sina in the
treatment of this problem not only because it is of capital importance
for Ibn Sina's philosophy, but also because there has been such a great
deal of fundamental confusion in the traditional treatment of the
subject that a clarification of the terms “existence,” “accident” in
this relation, and “essence” is absolutely necessary.

The Body-Mind Relationship
--------------------------

With Aristotle, Ibn Sina stresses the intimate connection of mind and
body; but whereas Aristotle's whole trend of thought rejects a
two-substance view, Ibn Sina holds a form of radical dualism. How far
these two aspects of his doctrine are mutually compatible is a different
question: Ibn Sina certainly did not carry his dualism through to
develop a parallelistic, occasionalistic account of mind-body
relationship. His remarks, nevertheless, on either side are both
interesting and profound. We shall first state his arguments for the
two-substance view and then discuss their close inter-connection.

To prove that the human soul is a substance capable of existing
independently of the body, our philosopher employs two different
arguments. One appeals to direct self-consciousness, the other seeks to
prove the immateriality of the intellect. We can postpone his teaching
on the intellect till we discuss his theory of knowledge; here we shall
state and discuss his first argument. Indeed, according to him, this is
the more direct way of proving the incorporeal substantiality of the
soul acting not as an argument but as an eye-opener (*K. al-Shifa'*,
“Psychology,” V 7).

The argument is stated by Ibn Sina in the first chapter of the
psychological book of the *K. al-Shifa'* and then re-stated and
discussed in the last but one chapter of the same book. Let us suppose,
as he says, that a person is created in an adult state, but in such a
condition that he is born in a void where his body cannot touch anything
and where he cannot perceive anything of the external world. Let us also
suppose that he cannot see his own body and that the organs of his body
are prevented from touching one another, so that he has no
sense-perception whatsoever.

Such a person will not affirm anything of the external world or even the
existence of his own body but will, neverthe­less, affirm the existence
of his self as a purely spiritual entity. Now, that which is affirmed is
certainly not the same as that which is not affirmed. The mind is,
therefore, a substance independent of the body. Our philosopher is here
describing an imaginary case impossible of realization, but his real
point, as of Descartes, is that we can think away our bodies and so
doubt their existence, but we cannot think away our minds.

The affinity of Ibn Sina's argument with that of Descartes' *cogito ergo
sum* has been justly pointed out by historians of philosophy. Actually,
this whole trend of thought is inspired by the argument of Plotinus for
the separateness of the mind from the body.[^6] But there is an
important difference between Ibn Sina's and Descartes' formulations.
With regard to Descartes, the question can be and has been raised: Is
the existence of the self a matter of inference or an immediate datum of
consciousness? Whatever the answer to this question may be, there is no
doubt that consciousness or “I think” is constitutively and necessarily
involved in Descartes' “I am.” This is so much so that “I think” and “I
am” have the same meaning in Descartes .[^7]

This being the position, it is obvious that in this case the
consciousness of the self and its existence cannot be logically
disengaged from each other. In Ibn Sina, however, although the element
of consciousness is present since one can “affirm one's own existence,”
it is nevertheless present only as a way of locating the self: it is a
contingent fact and not a logical necessity. In fact, Ibn Sina presents
a medial position between Descartes and Plotinus, for, according to the
latter, consciousness, being a relation, signifies not utter
self-identity but a kind of otherness; in complete self-identity,
consciousness must cease altogether.

This argument, which seeks to establish dualism by doubting or denying
the existence of the body, may be called the argument from abstraction
in that it abstracts psychical functions from the total functions of the
organism. Its fundamental weakness obviously is to insist that by
thinking away the body, the body ceases to play a role in one's total
consciousness. If the problem could be solved by a simple inspection of
the self in this manner, nothing would be easier.

Ibn Sina seems to be aware that the position is liable to objections. He
says (“Psychology,” V, 7): (If my self were identical with any bodily
members) “say, the heart or the brain or a collection of such members
and if it were their separate or total being of which I were conscious
as being my self, then it would be necessary that my consciousness of my
self should be my very consciousness of these members, for it is not
possible that the same thing should be both cognized and uncognized in
the same sense.”

He then goes on to say that “in fact I do not know by self-consciousness
that I have a heart and a brain but I do so either by sense-perception
(experience) or on authority.” “I mean by what I know to be my self that
which I mean when I say: \`I perceived, I intellected, I acted,' and all
these attributes belong to me.” But, Ibn Sina pauses to consider the
possible objection: if you are not aware of your self being a bodily
member, you are neither directly aware that it is your soul or mind.

Ibn Sina's aswer to this objection is: “Whenever I present bodily
attributes to this something which is the source of my mental functions,
I find that it cannot accept these attributes,” and thus this
incorporeal entity must be the soul.

Here we clearly see that the argument has taken a new turn and the
phenomenon of direct consciousness is being supplemented by a further
consideration to the effect that the disparateness between the mental
and physical qualities is such that both cannot belong to one substance.
And this is the perennial argument for the two-substance theory, viz.
that the mental and the physical attributes are of qualitatively
disparate *genre*.

From the acceptance of the view, that the mind is a substance, the
con­clusion that the mind is a unity follows tautologically and Ibn Sina
lays great stress on it. Indeed, once again, both doctrines, viz., the
reality of faculties and the unitary nature of the soul, are stated with
equal emphasis by him. The reality of mental faculties was established
by Aristotle but was further pursued by his commentators, notably
Alexander of Aphrodisias.

Ibn Sina has devoted a special chapter to the question (“Psychology,” I,
4) where he bases the multiplicity of faculties on the qualitative
differences among mental operations. Nevertheless, he repeatedly
stresses the necessity of an integrative bond (*ribat*) for the diverse
operations.[^8] Indeed, he declares that even the vegetative and
perceptual functions in man, for example, are specifically different
from those in plants and animals, thanks to the rationality present in
man which pervades and changes the character of all his functions. This
integrative principle is the mind itself.

The soul in its real being is then an independent substance and is our
transcendental self. We shall return to its transcendence when we
discuss Ibn Sina's theory of knowledge in the next section. Here we
shall note only that Ibn Sina's arguments for the immortality of the
soul are based on the view that it is a substance and that it is not a
form of the body to which it is attached intimately by some kind of
mystical relation between the two.

There is in the soul which emerges from the separate substance of the
active intelligence simultaneously with the emergence of a body with a
definite temperament, a definite inclination to attach itself to this
body, to care for it, and direct it to the mutual benefit. Further, the
soul, as being incorporeal, is a simple substance and this ensures for
it indestructibility and survival, after its origination, even when its
body is destroyed.

But if at the transcendental level the soul is a pure spiritual entity
and body does not enter into its definition even as a relational
concept, at the phenomenal level the body must be included in its
definition as a building enters into the definition of a (definite)
builder. That is why Ibn Sina says that the study of the phenomenal
aspect of the soul is in the field of natural science, while its
transcendental being belongs to the study of metaphysics.

Now, since at the phenomenal level there exists between each soul and
body a mystique which renders them exclusively appropriate for each
other­ - whether we understand this mystique or not - it follows that
the transmigration of souls is impossible. (Transmigration is rejected
by Aristotle who does not hold the two-substance view.) Indeed, this
mystique is both the cause and the effect of the individuality of the
self. Ibn Sina, therefore, totally rejects the idea of the possible
identity of two souls or of the ego becoming fused with the Divine Ego,
and he emphasizes that the survival must be individual.

It is a primary fact of experience that each individual is conscious of
his self-­identity which cannot be shaken by any kind of argument.
Indeed, our philo­sopher is so keen to affirm the individuality of
personality that he says (“Psy­chology,” V, 3) that even the qualitative
nature of the intellectual operations in different individuals may be
different - a statement which would have shocked not only the Platonists
and Neo-Platonists, but even perhaps Aristotle, since, according to the
universal Greek doctrine, the intellect represents, at least, the
qualitative identity of mankind, a doctrine which was later pushed to
its logical extremes by Ibn Rushd.

The relationship, then, between soul and body is so close that it may
affect even the intellect. It goes without saying that all the other
psycho-physical acts and states have both aspects - mental and physical.
This was emphasized by Aristotle himself. But Aristotle's doctrine, even
if it is not outright material­istic, is quasi-materialistic and,
whereas it either emphasizes the double aspect of each state or
operation, or tends strongly to point out the influence of the body on
the mental phenomena, exactly the reverse is the case with Ibn Sina.
Indeed, his insistent stress on the influence of the mind on the body
constitutes an outstanding and one of the most original features of his
philosophy.

Whereas in Aristotle, life and mind give a new dimension to the material
organism, in Ibn Sina, under the inspiration of the Neo-Platonic thought
and the influence of his own metaphysically spiritual predilections,
this no longer remains a mere dimension. The material side of nature is
both pervaded and over­shadowed by its mental and spiritual side, even
though, as a medical man, he is keen to preserve the importance of the
physical constitution, especially in the case of the character of the
emotions and impulses. Indeed, as we shall see, his medical art helped
him to gauge the extent of mental influence on apparently bodily states.

At the most common level, the influence of the mind on the body is
visible in voluntary movement: whenever the mind wills to move the body,
the body obeys. In his detailed account of animal motion, Ibn Sina has
enumerated four stages instead of Aristotle's three. The three stages
according to Aristotle are: (1) imagination or reason, (2) desire, and
(3) movement of the muscles. Ibn Sina has split up the second into (1)
desire and (2) impulsion (*ijma'*) for, he says, not every desire can
move to action but only when it is impulsive, whether consciously or
unconsciously.

The second, and more important difference between Ibn Sina and the
traditional view is that according to the latter the initiation of
bodily movement must always lie in a cognitive state, whether it is
imagination or reason. Ibn Sina holds that, while in most cases the
cognitive act precedes the affective and the conative ones, this is not
true of all cases.

We read (“Psychology,” IV, 4): “All (the appetitive and conative)
faculties also follow imaginative faculties.... But sometimes it
happens, e.g., in cases of physical pain, that our natural impulse tries
to remove the cause of pain and thus initiates the process of stirring
up imagina­tion. In this case, it is these (appetitive) faculties which
drive the imagination to their own purpose, just as, in most cases, it
is the imaginative faculty which drives the (appetitive and conative)
faculties towards the object of imagination.”

Thus, according to Ibn Sina, the initiation of the animal motion can lie
in the affections as well as in the cognitive states. Psychologically,
this is of great significance and marks an advance over the purely and
one-­sidedly intellectual accounts of traditional philosophy.

Here we reach the second level of the influence of the mind on the body,
viz., that of emotions and of the will. Ibn Sina tells us from his
medical experience that actually physically sick men, through sheer
will-power, can become well and, equally, healthy men can become really
ill under the in­fluence of sickness-obsession. Similarly, he says, if a
plank of wood is put across a well-trodden path, one can walk on it
quite well, but if it is put as a bridge and down below is a chasm, one
can hardly creep over it without an actual fall. “This is because he
pictures to himself a (possible) fall so vividly that the natural power
of his limbs accords with it” (“Psychology,” IV, 4).

Indeed, strong emotions like fear can actually destroy the temperament
of the organism and result in death, through influencing the vegetative
func­tions: “This happens when a judgment takes place in the soul; the
judgment, being pure belief, does not influence the body, but rather
when this belief is followed by joy or grief” (“Psychology,” I, 3). Joy
and grief too are mental states, Ibn Sina goes on, but they affect the
vegetative functions.

Again, “We do not regard it as impossible that something should occur to
the soul, in so far as it is embodied, and be then followed by
affections peculiar to the body itself. Imagination, inasmuch as it is
knowledge, is not in itself a physical affection, but it may happen
that, as a result, certain bodily organs, sexual for example, should
expand.... Indeed, when an idea becomes firmly estab­lished in the
imagination, it necessitates a change in the temperament....” (*ibid*.,
IV, 4). Just as, we are told, the ideas of health present in the
doctor's mind produce actual health in a patient, so the soul acts on
the body; only the doctor produces cure through media and instruments,
but the soul does it without any instruments.

If, indeed, the soul were strong enough, it could produce cure and
illness even in another body without instruments. And here Ibn Sina
produces evidence from the phenomena of hypnosis and suggestion
(*al-wahm al-'amil*). He uses these considerations in order to show the
possibility of miracles which are a part of the discussion of the
question of prophethood.

Here we will recall what we said before that, according to Ibn Sina, a
soul becomes exclusively attached to one body. Our newer consideration
shows that it can transcend its own body to affect others. This would
become possible only when the soul becomes akin to the universal soul,
as it were.

It is on these grounds that Ibn Sina accepts the reality of such
phenomena as the “evil eye” and magic in general. We may note that the
influence of the emotions on the body was known and discussed in later
Hellenism. Especially since the Stoic conception of the principle of
“Sympathy” in nature and Plotinus' elaboration of that principle, the
mind-body interaction was explained on these lines. What is
scientifically new in Ibn Sina is that he also explains phenomena like
magic, suggestion, and hypnosis, and, in general, the influence of one
mind on other bodies and minds on these lines, i, e., by referring them
to the properties of the influencing mind.

In Hellenism, these phenomena were accepted, but were regarded as
exceptionally occult. And in the mystery-mongering superstition of later
Hellenism, “Sympathy” was given an occult twist. Magical properties were
assigned to special objects: metals, animals, etc., through which the
magician or the hypnotizer worked or pretended to work on the gods or
spirits to intervene in the realm of nature and to produce occult
effects.

But the only principle which Ibn Sina will accept - and here he strikes
a very modern note - is to refer efficacy to the special constitution of
the mind itself. This rests on the premise that it is of the nature of
mind to influence matter and it belongs to matter to obey the mind, and
Ibn Sina will have no theurgic magic:
“This is because the soul is (derived from) certain (higher) principles
which clothe matter with forms contained in them, such that these forms
actually constitute matter.... If these principles can bestow upon
matter forms constitutive of natural species... it is not improbable
that they can also bestow qualities, without there being any need of
physical contact, action, or affection.... The form existing in the soul
is the cause of what occurs in matter” (“Psychology,” IV, 4).

The reason for this great change is that in later Hellenism the human
soul had lost its dignity and people relied more and more for the
explanation of the “para-natural” phenomena on the intervention of the
gods.

Theory Of Knowledge
-------------------

In accordance with the universal Greek tradition, Ibn Sina describes all
knowledge as some sort of abstraction on the part of the cognizant of
the form of the thing known. His chief emphasis, elaborated most
probably by himself, is on the degrees of this abstracting power in
different cognitive faculties. Thus, sense-perception needs the very
presence of matter for its cognitive act; imagination is free from the
presence of actual matter but cannot cognize without material
attachments and accidents which give to the image its particularity,
whereas in intellect alone the pure form is cognized in its
universality.

It is very probable too that Ibn Sina elaborated this theory “of the
grades of abstraction” to avoid the objection to which Aristotle's
doctrine of cognition (according to which all cognition is the
abstraction of form “without its matter”) was liable, viz., if
perception is the knowledge of form alone, how do we know that this form
exists in matter? Or, indeed, how do we know that matter exists at all?

Ibn Sina's position on perception is generally that of naive realism,
like that of Aristotle and his commentators, holding a representational
view of perception. But under criticism from scepticism and relativism
which point out the relativity of perceived qualities, this
representational view becomes seriously modified and Ibn Sina finally
accepts a quasi-causal or, rather, relational view of perceptual
qualities, i.e., objects, which have certain real qualities in
themselves, appear as such-and-such under such-and-such circum­stances
and from such-and-such a position.

This is responsible for several subjectivist statements in Ibn Sina, who
comes to distinguish between “pri­mary” and “secondary” perceptions: the
“primary” perception being subjective or of the state of the
percipient's own mind, the “secondary” perception being that of the
external world. He did not clearly see, as we moderns do, the basic
difficulties in this position. But his conception reappears in Western
medieval philosophy as the distinction between the psychological or
“inten­tional” object and the real object, a distinction which was much
later developed by Locke into that of primary and secondary perceptual
qualities.

But the great key-stone of Ibn Sina's doctrine of perception is his
distinction between internal and external perception. The external
perception is the operation of the external five senses. Ibn Sina also
divides the internal per­ception formally into five faculties, although
he shows a great deal of hesitation on the subject (see “Psychology,”
IV, I). His chief aim is to separate the different functions or
operations on a qualitative basis, and, of course, we once again
remember his principle that to every clear idea there must cor­respond a
distinction in reality. Indeed, his doctrine of the internal senses has
no precedent in the history of philosophy.

The first internal sense is *sensus communis* which is the seat of all
the senses. It integrates sense-data into percepts. This general sense
must be internal because none of the external five senses is capable of
this function. The second internal sense is the imaginative faculty in
so far as it conserves the perceptual images. The third faculty is again
imagination in so far as it acts upon these images, by combination and
separation. In man this faculty is pervaded by reason so that human
imagination can deliberate and is, therefore, the seat of the practical
intellect.

The fourth and the most important internal faculty is called *wahm*
which passed into the West as *vis estimativa*: it perceives immaterial
motions like usefulness and harmfulness, love and hate in material
objects, and is, in fact, the basis of our character, whether influenced
or uninfluenced by reason. The fifth internal sense conserves in memory
those notions which are called by him “intentions” (*ma'ani*).

The doctrine of *wahm* is the most original element in Ibn Sina's
psycho­logical teaching and comes very close to what some modern
psychologists have described as the “nervous response” of the subject to
a given object. In Aristotle, this function is performed by imagination
or perception itself, but Ibn Sina contends that perception and
imagination tell us only about the perceptual qualities of a thing, its
size, colour, shape, etc.; they tell us nothing about its character or
“meaning” for us, which must be read or discerned by an internal faculty
of the organism.

In the Stoics, again, we have the per­ceptual-moral theory of the
*oikeiosis* or “appropriation,” according to which whatever is perceived
by the external senses is interpreted internally by the soul as the
bearer of certain values. But the Stoics, in this doctrine, were
primarily concerned with the development of a moral personality in man.
Ibn Sina's doctrine of *wahm*, on the other hand, despite its moral
significance, is primarily a purely psychological doctrine, explaining
our instinctive and emotional response to the environment.

This “nervous response” operates at different levels. At one level it is
purely instinctive as when a sheep perceives a wolf for the first time
and flees from it, or as the mother instinctively feels love for her
baby. This occurs without previous experience and hence through some
kind of “natural inspiration” ingrained in the constitution of the
organism.

Secondly, it also operates at a “quasi-empirical” level (“Psychology,”
IV, 3). This occurs through associa­tion of ideas or images of memory. A
dog which has suffered pain in the past from being beaten by a stick or
a stone, associates the image of the object and the “intention” of pain
and, when it sees the object again, at once runs away. This phenomenon
of direct association can also become indirect and irrational. This
happens in the case of animals and also in the case of less reasonable
human beings. Some people who have irrationally associated the yellow
colour of honey with both the colour and the bitter taste of gall, do
not eat honey and in fact at its sight exhibit symptoms of gall-like
taste.

This principle of association appeared later in Leibniz (*Monadology*,
translated by R. Latta, p. 232); and the principle of irrational or
automatic association has appeared more thoroughly worked out in recent
experimental psychology under the name of the “conditioned reflex.”
Since *wahm* makes perceptual predictions on the basis of association of
ideas, for which, says Ibn Sina, there are innumerable causes
(contiguity, similarity, etc.), its perceptual judg­ments may sometimes
be false. Aristotle had noticed this failure of perception but could not
explain it since he did not discern the influence of past experience on
present perceptual judgments.

We come next to the doctrine of the intellect which Ibn Sina has
elaborated in great detail. He has taken over in his doctrine the theory
of the development of human intellect announced by Aristotle very
briefly and rather obscurely and then elaborated by Alexander of
Aphrodisias and later by Farabi. But he has added quite new and original
interpretations of his own.

The doctrine, in brief, distinguishes between a potential intellect in
man and an active intellect outside man, through the influence and
guidance of which the former develops and matures. Basically, the
problem is that of the origin of human cognition and it is explained on
the assumption of a supra-hunan transcendent intellect which, when the
human intellect is ready, bestows knowledge upon it.

As against Alexander, al-Farabi, and probably Aristotle, Ibn Sina holds
that the potential intellect in man is an indivisible, immaterial, and
indestructible substance although it is generated at a definite time and
as something personal to each individual. This has important religious
consequences, for, where, according to al-Farabi only men of developed
intellect survive and others perish for ever at death, Ibn Sina holds
the immortality of all human souls (According to Alexander of
Aphrodisias, even the actualized intellect is perishable so that no soul
is immortal.) The immateriality of the intellect is proved by Ibn Sina
in an unprecedented, elaborate, and scholastic manner, the basic idea
being that ideas or “forms,” being indivisible, cannot be said to be
localized in any material organ.

But it is in his account of the intellectual operation and the manner of
the acquisition of knowledge that the most original aspect of his
doctrine of the intellect lies. Whereas, according to the Peripatetic
doctrine, accepted by Farabi, the universal, which is the object of the
intellective act, is abstracted from the particulars of
sense-experience, for Ibn Sina it issues directly from the active
intellect.

The Peripatetic tradition has given the following account of the rise of
the universal from perceptual experience: First, we perceive several
similar individuals; these are stored up in memory and after this
constant operation the light of the active intellect “shines” upon them
so that the essential nature common to all the particulars emerges from
them. This theory is neither nominalistic nor realistic: it does say
that the universal is more than what the instances of experience have
given to the mind, but it holds that the universal *lies* somehow in
these instances.

For Ibn Sina, the universal cannot emerge from the images of sense
because it does not lie there. Further, as we have seen already, the
essence, according to Ibn Sina, is not really a universal: it only
*behaves* as such when it is in *our* minds. Besides, no amount of
particular instances would actually suffice to produce the universal
essence which is applicable to infinite instances. He, therefore,
declares that the task of our minds is to “consider” and reflect upon
the particulars of sense-experience. This activity prepares the mind for
the reception of the (universal) essence from the active intellect by an
act of direct intuition. The perception of the universal form, then, is
a unique movement of the intellective so not reducible to our perceiving
the particulars either singly or totally and finding the common essence
among them, for if so, it would be only a spurious kind of universal.

There is, besides, another vital consideration which leads to this view.
If the perception of the individual instances and the noting of their
resemblance (which latter, indeed, itself presupposes the possession of
the universal by the mind) were sufficient to cause the universal, then
acquisition of knowledge would become mechanical and this mechanism
would operate necessarily.

It is, however, in fact not true that cognition can be so mechanically
and deterministically produced. The origin of knowledge is mysterious
and involves intuition at every stage. Of all intellectual knowledge,
more or less, it is not so much true to say “I know it” as to admit “It
occurs to me.”

All seeking for knowledge, according to Ibn Sina (even the emergence of
the conclusion from the premises), has this prayer-like quality: the
effort is necessary on the part of man; the response is the act of God
or the active intellect. We are, indeed, often not aware as to what it
is we want to know, let alone go ahead and “know it.” A theory of
knowledge which fails to notice this fundamental truth is not only wrong
but blasphemous.

All ideas or forms then come from outside. The precise sense of the
“outside” we shall try to work out in the next section. But in the
meantime we should notice certain other important characteristics of our
knowledge. The first is that it is piecemeal and discursive, not total;
it is also mostly “receptive” in the sense noted just above. In our
normal consciousness we are not fully aware of the whence and whither of
our cognition.

True, there are people who are receptive in the ordinary sense of the
word in that they do not discover either anything, or much that is new
and original; they only learn for the most part; while there are others
who discover new things. But even these latter are only “receptive” in
the sense that, not being fully conscious of the whence and whither of
their knowledge - not aware of the total context of reality - ­they do
not know the full meaning of their discoveries. This is because, in the
common run of thinkers ideas come and go in succession and, therefore,
their grasp of reality is not total.

Hence Ibn Sina rejects the general and especially later Greek doctrine
of the absolute identity of subject and object in intellectual
operation, for, he argues, in the case of normal consciousness, there
being a succession of ideas, if the mind became identical with one
object, how could it then become identical with another? In this
connection he rebukes Porphyry for his “mystical and poetical
statements.” Why he should single out the pupil of Plotinus, is not
quite clear, for the doctrine is both Peripatetic and Neo-Platonic,
although there are, it must be admitted, moderate representatives like
Alexander of Aphrodisias just as there are extremist champions of the
doctrine like most Neo-Platonists.

Ideas in this detailed, discrete, and discursive form of knowledge, as
we have said, come into the mind and go out of it. Ibn Sina is insistent
that when an idea is not actually being used in intellection, it does
not remain in the mind, or, in other words, there is, properly speaking,
no intellectual memory as there is a memory of sensible images. There is
nothing in the mind which can conserve intelligibles just as there is a
conservatory in the soul for sensibles for the existence of an
intelligible in the mind means nothing else than the fact that it is
actually being intellected.

Absolutely speaking, it should be remarked that the word memory, when
applied to sensible objects and individual events of the past, is
radically different from the memory of universals and universal
propositions, for in the former case there is a reference to the past.
Aristotle himself had indicated this doctrine in his *De Memoria et
Reminiscentia* where he says that universals are remembered only *per
accidens*.

The ordinary human thinking mind, says Ibn Sina, is like a mirror upon
which there is a succession of ideas reflected from the active
intellect. This does not mean that a truth once acquired, because it
“goes out of the mind,” has to be *learnt* all over again when it is
remembered. By our initial acquisition we acquire a skill to contact the
active intellect and in remembering we simply use that skill or power.
Resuming the analogy of the mirror, Ibn Sina says that, before
acquisition of knowledge, the mirror was rusty; when we re-think the
mirror is polished, and it only remains to direct it to the sun (i.e.,
the active intellect) so that it should readily reflect light.

Even so is the ordinary philosophic (or mystic) consciousness: it is
mostly partial (in varying degrees) even when it is original and
creative (again in varying degrees) and it is, therefore, obviously not
in total contact with reality, or, as Ibn Sina puts it, “is not one with
the active intellect.” But even in our ordinary cognitive processes,
there are serious pointers to existence of a type of consciousness in
which this partiality and discursiveness may be overcome and which may
be wholly creative, with the pulse of the total reality in its grasp.

These pointers are illustrated by Ibn Sina by the example of a man who
is confronted suddenly with a questioner who asks him a question which
he has never asked himself before and, therefore, to which he cannot
give a detailed answer on the spot. He is sure, however, that he *can*
answer it because the answer has just “occurred” to him and lies within
him. He then proceeds to the details and formulates the answer.

“The strange thing”, says Ibn Sina, “that when this man begins to teach
the questioner the answer to his question, he is simultaneously teaching
himself as well” the detail and elaborated form of knowledge even though
he previously possessed knowledge in a simple manner. This simple, total
insight is the creator of the detailed, discursive knowledge which
ensues. Now, this simple, total insight (the *scientia simplex* of the
medieval Latin scholastics comes from Ibn Sina) is the creative reason
(or the active intellect); the formulated and elaborate form is the
“psychic” knowledge, not the absolutely intellectual cognition.

A person possessed of this simple creative agency, if such a one exists,
may well be said to be one with the active intellect; and since he
possesses a total grasp of reality, he is sure, absolutely sure, of the
whence and whither of knowledge (Ibn Sina puts a great emphasis on this
self-confidence, certainty, conviction, or faith); he alone is aware of
the total context of truth and therefore, in him alone there is the full
awareness of the meaning of each term in the process of reality; and,
therefore, finally, only such a person can enter (and must enter) most
significantly into temporal history, moulding it and giving it a new
meaning. This is the prophet; but how to ascertain his existence?

Doctrine Of Prophecy945
-----------------------

The necessity of the phenomenon of prophethood and of divine revelation
is something which Ibn Sina has sought to establish at four levels: the
intel­lectual, the “imaginative,” the miraculous, and the
socio-political. The totality of the four levels gives us a clear
indication of the religious motivation, character, and direction of his
thinking. Indeed, from our description and partial inter­pretation of
his central philosophical theses so far, his deeply religious spirit has
emerged very clearly.

His theory of “Being” has led to the dependence of every finite being,
on God; and his doctrines of mind-body relationship and of the genesis
and nature of knowledge have both culminated in the religious conception
of miracles in the one case, and of a creative revelatory knowledge in
the other. And there is not the slightest suggestion that religiosity is
some­thing artificially grafted upon his purely rational thinking; on
the contrary, it has organically grown out of a rigorous process of
ratiocination, and goes down to the very kernel of his thought.

It may be said that Ibn Sina is a citizen of two intellectual-spiritual
worlds; the Hellenic and the Islamic. In his own mind he has so
intrinsically unified the two worlds that they are identical; the
question of disloyalty to either, therefore, does not arise for him at
all. Under this circumstance, both traditional Islam and the heritage of
Hellenism were inevitably interpreted and modified to a greater or
lesser extent. This is apparent in the whole of his philosophy which
enters into the technically religious field, but is most palpably so in
his doctrine of prophecy.

In this doctrine, Ibn Sina drastically modifies the Muslim dogmatic
theology by declaring that the Qur'i.nic revelation is, by and large, if
not all, symbolic of truth, not the literal truth, but that it must
remain the literal truth for the masses (this does not mean that the
Qur'an is not the Word of God; indeed, as we shall see, it is in a sense
*literally* the Word of God); further, that the Law, although it must be
observed by everyone, is also partly symbolic and partly pedagogical
and, therefore, an essentially lower discipline than philosophic
pursuits. (This again does not mean that we can dispense with the Law at
any stage of our individual or collective development, for to be social
belongs to the essence of man.)

The interpretation and modification of Hellenism in this doctrine is
obvious: although most elements of the Muslim philosophic doctrine of
prophethood exist in Hellenism, they nevertheless exist in a nebulous
and sometimes in a crude form; further, they are scattered. Indeed, the
Greeks had no conception of prophethood and prophetic revelation as the
Muslims knew it. In fact, the Muslim conception of prophethood is new
and unique in the history of religion. For the Muslim philosophers
(especially Ibn Sina, for although al-Farabi had pioneered the way, we
do not find all the elements in him, notably, the intel­lectual and the
miraculous), to have evolved out of these nebulous, crude, and
disjointed elements an elaborate, comprehensive, and refined theory of
pro­phecy to interpret the personality of Mutiammad, is nothing short of
the performance of a genius. [^9]

At the intellectual level, the necessity of the prophetic revelation is
proved by an argument elaborated on the basis of a remark of Aristotle
(*Anal. Post*, I, Chap. 34) that some people can hit upon the middle
term without forming a syllogism in their minds. Ibn Sina constructs a
whole theory of total intuitive experience on the basis of this scanty
remark. Since, he tells us, people differ vastly with regard to their
intuitive powers both in quality and quantity, and while some men are
almost devoid of it, others possess it in a high degree, there must be a
rarely and exceptionally endowed man who has a total contact with
reality. This man, without much instruction from outside, can, by his
very nature, become the depository of the truth, in contrast with the
common run of thinkers who may have an intuitive experience with regard
to a definite question or questions but whose cognitive touch with
reality is always partial, never total.

This comprehensive insight then translates itself into propositions
about the nature of reality and about future history; it is
simultaneously intellectual and moral-spiritual, hence the prophetic
experience must satisfy both the philosophic and the moral criteria. It
is on the basis of this creative insight that the true prophet creates
new moral values and influences future history. A psychologico-moral
concomitant of this insight is also the deep and unalterable
self-assurance and faith of the prophet in his own capacity for true
knowledge and accurate moral judgment: he must believe in himself so
that he can make others believe in him and thus succeed in his mission
to the world.

This insight, creative of knowledge and values, is termed by Ibn Sina
the active intellect and identified with the angel of revelation. Now,
the prophet *qua* prophet is identical with the active intellect; and in
so far as this identity is concerned, the active intellect is called
*\`aql mustafad* (the acquired intellect). But the prophet *qua* human
being is not identical with the active intellect. The giver of
revelation is thus in one sense internal to the prophet, in another
sense, i.e., in so far as the latter is a human being, external to him.

Hence Ibn Sina says that the prophet, in so far as he is human, is
“accidentally,” not essentially, the active intellect (for the meaning
of the term “accidental,” see the first section of this chapter). God
can and, indeed, must come to man so that the latter may develop and
evolve, but the meaning of God can at no stage be entirely exhausted in
man.

But although the intellectual-spiritual insight is the highest gift the
prophet possesses, he cannot creatively act in history merely on the
strength of that insight. His office requires inherently that he should
go forth to humanity with a message, influence them, and should actually
succeed in his mission. This criterion leads the Muslim philosophers,
although they admit the divine­ness of the leading Greek thinkers and
reformers, to fix their minds upon Moses, Jesus, and, above all,
Muhammad who, undoubtedly, possesses the requisite qualities of a
prophet to the highest degree. These requisite qualities are that the
prophet must possess a very strong and vivid imagination, that his
psychic power be so great that he should influence not only other minds
but also matter in general, and that he be capable of launching a
socio-political system.

By the quality of an exceptionally strong imagination, the prophet's
mind, by an impelling Psychological necessity, transforms the purely
intellectual truths and concepts into lifelike images and symbols so
potent that one who hears or reads them not only comes to believe in
them but is impelled to action. This symbolizing and vivifying function
of the prophetic imagination is stressed both by al-Farabi and Ibn Sina,
by the latter in greater detail.

It is of the nature of imagination to symbolize and give flesh and blood
to our thoughts, our desires, and even our physiological inclinations.
When we are hungry or thirsty, our imagination puts bej'ore us lively
images of food and drink. Even when we have no actual sexual appetite
but our physical condition is ready for this, imagination may come into
play and by stirring up suitable vivid images may actually evoke this
appetite by mere suggestion.

This symbolization and suggestiveness, when it works upon the spirit and
the intellect of the prophet, results in so strong and vivid images that
what the prophet's spirit thinks and conceives, he actually comes to
hear and see. That is why he “sees” the Angel and “hears” his voice.
That is why also he necessarily comes to talk of a paradise and a hell
which represent the purely spiritual states of bliss and torment. The
revelations contained in the religious Scriptures are, for the most
part, of the figurative order and must, therefore, be interpreted in
order to elicit the higher, underlying, spiritual truth.

It is the technical revelation, then, which impels people to action and
to be good, and not the purely intellectual insight and inspiration. No
religion, therefore, can be based on pure intellect. However, the
technical revelation, in order to obtain the necessary quality of
potency, also inevitably suffers from the fact that it does not present
the naked truth but truth in the garb of symbols. But to what action
does it impel? Unless the prophet can express his moral insight into
definite enough moral purposes, principles, and indeed into a
socio-political structure, neither his insight nor the potency of his
imagi­native revelation will be of much use.

The prophet, therefore, needs to be a Lawgiver and a statesman *par
excellence* - indeed the real Lawgiver and statesman is only a prophet.
This practical criterion throws into still bolder relief the personality
of Muhammad in the philosopher's mind. The Law (*Shari'ah*) must be such
that it should be effective in making people socially good, should
remind them of God at every step, and should also serve for them as a
pedagogic measure in order to open their eyes beyond its own exterior,
so that they may attain to a vision of the true spiritual purpose of the
Lawgiver.

The Law is not abrogated at any stage for anybody, but only the
philosophic vision of the truth gives to the Law its real meaning; and
when that vision is attained, the Law seems like a ladder which one has
climbed but which it would still be unwise to discard. For those
relatively unfortunate souls which cannot see through the Law its
philosophic truth, the technical revelation and the letter of the Law
must remain the literal truth.

God And The World
-----------------

We have learnt in the first section that God is unique in that He is the
Necessary Being; everything else is contingent in itself and depends for
its existence upon God. The Necessary Being must be numerically one.
Even within this Being there can be no multiplicity of attributes - in
fact, God has no other essence, no other attributes than the fact that
He exists, and exists necessarily. This is expressed by Ibn Sina by
saying that God's essence is identical with His necessary existence.

Since God has no essence, He is abso­lutely simple and cannot be
defined. But if He is without essence and attributes, how can He be
related to the world in any way? For Aristotle, who held this conception
of the Deity, the world presented itself as a veritable other - it was
neither the object of God's creation, nor of care, not even of
knowledge. His God led a blissful life of eternal self-contemplation and
the world organized itself into a cosmos out of love and admiration for
Him, to become like Him.

The Muslim philosophical tradition finds the solution under the
influence of the Neo-Platonic example which combines God's absolute
simplicity with the idea that, in knowing Himself, God also knows in an
implicit, simple manner the essences of things.

The system is worked out and systematized by Ibn Sina, who strives to
derive God's attributes of knowledge, creation, power, will, etc., from
His simple unchanging being, or, rather, to show that these attributes
are nothing but the fact of His existence. This is done by an attempt to
show that all the attributes are either relational or negative; they
are, thus, identical with God's being and with one another.

The Deity is, therefore, absolutely simple. That God is knowing, is
shown by the fact that being pure from matter and pure spirit, He is
pure intellect in which the subject and object are identical.

But God's self-knowledge is *ipso facto* knowledge of other things as
well, since, knowing Himself, He also inevitably knows the rest of the
existents which proceed from Him. Here Ibn Sina strikes an original
note. According to the philosophical tradition of Hellenism, God, at
best, can know only the essences (or universals) and not the particular
existents, since these latter can be known only through sense-perception
and, therefore, in time; but God, being supra-temporal and changeless
and, further, incorporeal, cannot have perceptual knowledge.

This doctrine of the philosophers was especially re­pugnant to Islam,
for it not only made God's knowledge imperfect, but it made God Himself
useless for those whose God He is to be. Ibn Sina devises an argument to
show that although God cannot have perceptual knowledge, He nevertheless
knows all particulars “in a universal way,” so that perceptual knowledge
is superfluous for Him.

Since God is the emanative cause of all existents, He knows both these
existents and the relations subsisting between them. God knows, for
example, that after such a series of events a solar eclipse would occur,
and knowing all the antecedents and consequences of this eclipse, He
knows in a determinate manner its qualities and properties; He knows,
therefore, what this particular eclipse will be, and can differentiate
it completely from all other events even of the same species, viz.,
eclipse in general.

But when the particular eclipse actually occurs in time, God, not being
subject to temporal change, cannot know it. But He also need not know it
in this way, for He knows it already (see *K. al-Najat*, Cairo, 1938,
pp. 247-49). Very ingenious though this theory is and, we think,
successful in showing that sense-perception is not the only way to know
the particulars, it is obvious that it cannot avoid the introduction of
time factor, and, there­fore, change in divine knowledge.

Al-Ghazali's criticism of the theory in the thirteenth discussion of his
*Tahafut al-Falasifah* certainly finds the target at this point,
although his view that according to Ibn Sina, God cannot know individual
men but only man in general, is obviously mistaken, for if God can know
a particular sun-eclipse, why can He not know, in this manner, an
individual person? Indeed Ibn Sina declares in the Qur'anic language
(*op. cit*., p. 247) that “not a particle remains hidden from God in the
heavens or on the earth.”

As regards God's attributes of volition and creation, ibn Sina's
emanationist account renders them really pointless as al-Ghazali has
shown. In a thoroughly intellectualist-emanationist account of the
Deity, will has no meaning. For Ibn Sina, God's will means nothing but
the necessary procession of the world from Him and His self-satisfaction
through this. Indeed, he defines it in purely negative terms, viz., that
God is not unwilling that the world proceed from Him; this is very
different from the positive attributes of choice and the execution of
that choice.

Similarly, the creative activity of God, for Ibn Sina, means the eternal
emanation or procession of the world, and since this emanation is
grounded finally in the intellectual nature of God, it has the character
of unalterable rational necessity.

Even though a1-Ghazali's criticism which assimilates the divine activity
of Ibn Sina to the automatic procession of light from the sun and, thus,
rejects the appellation of “act” to God's behaviour, is not quite
correct (since according to Ibn Sina, God is not only conscious of the
pro­cession of the world from Him, but is also satisfied with and
“willing” to it), the term “creation” is nevertheless used only in a
Pickwickian sense, and the term “act” (in the sense of voluntary action)
is also seriously modified, since as we have said, there is no question
of real choice.

Rationally determined activity is, of course, compatible with will and
choice and can also be said to be done with choice, but this choice has
to be brought in as an additional element both initially and finally.
For, suppose, a man chooses to think about a certain problem. Now, the
initial choice is his own to think about this rather than that problem
and then at any moment he can also choose or will to terminate this
process of thinking.

What goes on between the beginning and the end will be a rationally
determined process of thought, and not a series of choices, though the
process as a whole is also chosen and voluntary. But in the
philosophical account of God there is just no room for this additional
factor either at the end or at the beginning.

The world, then, exists eternally with God, for both matter and form
flow eternally from Him. But although this concept was abhorrent to
Islamic orthodoxy, Ibn Sina's purpose in introducing it was to try to do
justice both to the demands of religion and of reason and to avoid
atheistic materialism.

For the materialists, the world has existed eternally without God. For
Ibn Sina, too, the world is an eternal existent, but since it is in
itself contingent in its entirety it needs God and is dependent upon Him
eternally. We see here the double purpose of the doctrine of essence and
existence. Unlike atheism it requires God who should bestow being upon
existents; and in order to avoid pantheism, it further requires that the
being of God should be radically differentiated from the being of the
world.

The chief crux of the eternity of the world, which has been stressed by
the opponents of the doctrine throughout the history of thought, is that
it involves an actual infinite series in the past. In answer, it has
been said, ever since Kant, that it is not impossible at all to imagine
an infinite in the past, just as it is not impossible to imagine it in
the future, i.e., there is no absurdity involved in starting from any
given moment backwards and traversing the past and at no point coming to
the beginning of the past.

The fallacy of this answer consists in assimilating the past to the
future, for the past is something actual in the sense that it has
happened and is, therefore, determinate one and for all. But the same
fallacy, we think, is implied in the objection itself and it seems that
the application of the term “infinite” is inappropriately used for the
past: the term “infinite” is used either for a series which is endless
or which is both beginningless and endless.

According to the thesis, the series is beginningless *in the past*, and
endless in the future, whereas the objection seeks to put an end to the
series at a given moment of time and then argue for an infinity in the
past. Also, whereas beginning is a temporal concept, beginninglessness
is a negation and need not be a temporal concept, but the objection
obviously implies “infinity in the past” as a temporal concept.

Influence On The East And The West
----------------------------------

The influence of Ibn Sina's thought has been enormous. In the East,
indeed, his system has dominated the Muslim philosophical tradition
right down to the modern era when his place is being given to some
modern Western thinkers by those who have been educated in modern
universities. In the madrasahs run on traditional lines, Ibn Sina is
still studied as the greatest philosopher of Islam. This is because no
subsequent philosopher of equal originality and acuteness produced a
system after him.

Ibn Rushd, the last great philosophical name in the medieval tradition
of Muslim philosophy, did not formulate his thought systematically, but
chose to write commentaries on Aristotle's works. These commentaries,
because of their superb scholarliness and acuteness, had a tremendous
impact on the medieval West (which received Aristotle first through him)
but were not only not influential in the Muslim East, but most of them
are even lost in the original Arabic. His comparative lack of influence,
of course, is chiefly due to the destruction of his works.

For the rest, the sub­sequent philosophical activity was confined to the
writing of commentaries on Ibn Sina or polemics against him. Rare
exceptions, like Sadr al-Din al-­Shirazi, who wrote works on systematic
philosophy, became less philosophical and more mystical in their
intellectual, if not spiritual, temper. Nevertheless, these commentaries
and polemics against and for Ibn Sina and later systems have never yet
been studied to any appreciable extent by modern students.

Now, let us determine more exactly the influence of Ibn Sina, within the
Islamic tradition. To say that he has dominated the philosophical
tradition in Islam is certainly not to say that he has dominated the
Islamic tradition itself. On the contrary, the influence of Ibn Sina -
which is equivalent to the influence of philosophy - within Islam
suddenly and sharply dwindled after the polemics of al-Ghazali and later
on of al-Razi and then declined and be­came moribund.

He continued to be read in the madrasahs merely as an intellectual
training ground for theological students, not to philosophize anew but
to refute or reject philosophy. The chief contributory factors to this
situa­tion were the formal rigidity of dogmatic theology and the fact
that human reason itself became suspect due to the incompatibility of
certain tenets of Ibn Sina with this theology (besides, of course,
social, political, educational, and economic causes).

Not only did the philosopher's concept of the eternity of the world give
affront to orthodoxy but also to those doctrines of his own which were
developed with an especial regard for Islam, like the doctrine of
prophet­hood. But perhaps the greatest theological objection was to his
rejection of the bodily resurrection. On this point, although he
maintains in the *K. al-­Najat* (and the *Shifa'*) that the resurrection
of the flesh, while not demonstrable by reason, ought to be believed on
faith; in his expressly esoteric work called *Risalat al-Adwiyyah* he
rejects it in totality and with vehemence.

Ibn Sina's works were translated into Latin in Spain in the middle of
the sixth/twelfth century. The influence of his thought in the West has
been pro­found and far-reaching. We have, while discussing Ibn Sina's
individual theories, alluded time and again to certain definite
influences of his. But as it is impossible to do justice to this aspect
fully within the space at our disposal, we shall be content with certain
general remarks.

Ibn Sina's influence in the West started penetrating palpably since the
time of Albert the Great, the famous saint and teacher of St. Thomas
Aquinas. Aquinas' own metaphysics (and theology) will be unintelligible
without an understanding of the debt he owes to Ibn Sina. No one can
fail to observe Ibn Sina's influence even in Aquinas' later and bigger
works like the *Summa Theologica* and the *Summa contra Gentiles*.

But the influence of the Muslim philosopher in the earlier formative
period of the Christian Saint is overwhelming; he is mentioned by the
latter, e.g., on almost each page of his *De Ente et Essentia* which is,
indeed, the foundation of Aquinas' metaphysics. No doubt, Ibn Sina is
also frequently criticized by Aquinas and others, but even the amount of
criticism itself shows in what esteem he was held in the West.

But the influence of Ibn Sina is not restricted to Aquinas,[^10] or,
indeed, to the Dominican Order or even to the official theologians of
the West. The translator of his *De Anima*, Gundisalvus, himself wrote a
*De Anima* which is largely a wholesale transporation of Ibn Sina's
doctrines. Similar is the case with the medieval philosophers and
scientists, Robert Grosseteste and Roger Bacon. Duns Scotus and Count
Zabarella, the finest of the late medieval commentators of Aristotle,
also bear testimony to Ibn Sina's enduring influence. Dr. S. van den
Bergh in his Averroes' *Tahafut al- Tahafut*, London, 1954 (Vol. II,
*passim*) has traced the influence of certain of the ideas of the
*Shaikh al-Ra'is* down to modern times.

But it would be futile to go on giving a mere catalogue of individual
authors. In fact, the historic influence of this rich personality is a
phenomenon which is being realized only now in the West and Professor
Etienne Gilson has started it off notably by his articles: (1) “Avicenne
et le point de depart de Duns Scot” and (2) “Les sources greco-arabes de
l'augustinisme avicennisant” (in *Arch. Hilt. Doctr. Litt*., 1927 and
1929, respectively).

Since then partial and not very determined efforts have been made on the
subject, but there is still no comprehensive treatment. Still less
satisfactory is the treatment of the historic influence of Ibn Sina's
scientific thought, although again beginnings have been made, notably by
Professor Sarton and Dr. Crombie's work (see also *Avicenna, Scientist &
Philosopher*, edited by G. M. Wickens, London, 1952, Chaps. 4, 5, 6).

But the question of his influence on the West and East apart, a very
small portion of his original works has ever been edited. In 1951, the
Egyptian Government and the Arab League set up a Committee in Cairo to
edit the encyclopaedia, Kitab al- Shifa'. Some parts of it have already
been published.

Bibliography
------------

Besides the works meptioned in the body of this chapter, and the
bibliography given by Father Anawati, an account of the works on Ibn
Sins between 1945 and 1952 will be found in the *Philosophical
Quarterly*, 1953, *Philosophical Surveys*, Vol. VIII, Part 1, “Medieval
Islamic Philosophy” by R. Walzer, and in P. J. de O. P. Menasce's
“Bibliographische Einfuhrungen in das Studium der Philosophie,” 6,
*Arabische Philosophie*, Bern, 1948.

[^1]: Little can be added to the biography of Ibn Sina - a
quasi-autobiography - ­which is available in Arabic works, e.g.,
al-Qifti's and modern works based upon them. Here it is omitted because
it is scarcely important for an appreciation of his philosophical
thought.

[^2]: K. al-Shifa’ (Psychological part, henceforth cited as
“Psychology”).

[^3]: “Psychology”, V, 7.

[^4]: K. al-Najat, Cairo, 1938, p. 224, II, .21ff.

[^5]: This section has been drawn on F. Rahman's article “Essence and
Existence in Avicenna,” in Mediaeval and Renaissance Studies, Oxford,
1958, although certain new considerations added here have changed the
presentation to a certain extent.

[^6]: A similar development took place in the West, beginning with
Augustine, and, again, under Neo-Platonic influences.

[^7]: Meditations II: “What of thinking? I find here that thought is an
attribute that belongs to me; it alone cannot be separated from me. I
am, I exist, that is certain. But how often? Just when I think; for it
might possibly be the case, that if I ceased entirely to think, I should
likewise cease entirely to exist ... to speak accurately I am not more
than a thing which thinks.”

[^8]: An interesting question may be raised here about the unity of the
mind. We have seen that the qualitative disparateness between the mental
and physical phenomena has necessitated their attribution to different
substances. This argument has been re-stated with great vigour in recent
times by G. F. Stout who in his Mind and Matter lays down the “Principle
of Generic Resemblance” for acts and operations if they are to fall in a
single substance. C. D. Broad has rejected this dualism in his Mind and
Its Place in Nature on the ground that no criterion can be laid down as
to how great a qualitative difference there should be to warrant us to
assign phenomena to different substances. However, Broad himself favours
a “Compound Theory” of mind and body, thus implicitly giving force to
the same principle of qualitative resemblance and difference which he
seeks to refute. For, why else should there be the necessity for a
“Compound” ? Yet, if we accept the full consequences of the principle,
what, we may ask, constitutes the resemblance between mental acts so as
to attribute them to one substance? For, hoping, desiring, thinking are
so mutually divergent phenomena. According to the modern traditional
philosophy, consciousness may be a common quality satisfying the
principle and, indeed, it has been regarded as the stuff of which mental
phenomena are made. If we hold this, it will follow that unconscious
desires, fears, and hopes are non-mental.

[^9]: See F. Rahman's Prophecy in Islam, G. Allen & Unwin, London, 1958

[^10]: Miss A. M. Goichon's La Philosophie d'Avicenne et son Influence
en Europe medievale, Paris, 1944, may be consulted; in general, however,
the author's know­ledge of Arabic and philosophy should be taken
cautiously.


