Chapter 10: Mu’tazalism
=======================

Mu’tazilism by Mir Valiuddin, M.A Ph.D., Professor of Philosophy,
Osmania University, Hyderabad Deccan (India)

The General Mu’tazilite Position
--------------------------------

Subsequent to the times of the Companions of the Prophet of Islam, the
Mu'tazilah creed made its appearance. It had its inception nearly two
centuries after the migration (Hijrah) of the Holy Prophet to Madinah.
The Mu'tazilites were thoroughgoing rationalists. They believed that the
arbiter of whatever is revealed has to be theoretical reason.

Let us for a moment consider why the Mu'tazilites were so named. The
story goes that one day Imam al‑Hasan al‑Basri was imparting instruction
to his pupils in a mosque. Before the lessons were finished someone
turned up and addressed him thus:

“Now, in our own times a sect[^1] of people has made its appearance, the
mem­bers of which regard the perpetrator of a grave sin as an unbeliever
and consider him outside the fold of Islam. Yet another group of people
have appeared[^2] who give hope of salvation to the perpetrator of a
grave sin. They lay down that such a sin can do no harm to a true
believer. They do not in the least regard action as a part of faith and
hold that as worship is of no use to one who is an unbeliever, so also
sin can do no harm to one who is a believer in God. What, in your
opinion, is the truth and what creed should we adopt?”

Imam al‑Hasan al‑Basri was on the point of giving a reply to this query
when a long‑necked pupil of his got up and said: “The perpetrator of
grave sins is neither a complete unbeliever nor a perfect believer; he
is placed mid­way between unbelief and faith‑an intermediate state
(*manzilah bain al‑manzilatain*).”

Having spoken he strode to another corner of the mosque and began to
explain this belief of his to others.[^3] This man was Wasil ibn \`Ata.
The Imam shot a swift glance at him and said, *“I’tazala \`anna,”* i.
e.,”He has withdrawn from us.” From that very day Wasil and his
followers were called al‑Mu'tazilah, the Withdrawers or Secessionists.

Ibn Munabbih says that the title of al‑Mu'tazilah came into vogue after
the death of al‑Hasan al‑Basri. According to his statement, when
al-Hasan passed away, Qatadah succeeded him and continued his work.
\`Amr ibn \`Ubaid and his followers avoided the company of Qatadah;
therefore, they were given the name of al‑Mu'tazilah.

In brief, the word *i'tizal* means to withdraw or secede, and the
Mu'tazilites are the people who in some of their beliefs were
diametri­cally opposed to the unanimous consent of the early theologians
or the People of the Approved Way (*ahl al‑sunnah*). The leader of all
of them was Wasil b. \`Ata who was born in 80/699 at Madinah and died in
131/748.

Muslims generally speak of Wasil's party as the Mu'tazilites, but the
latter call themselves People of Unity and Justice (*ahl al‑tawhid wal
\`adl*). By justice they imply that it is incumbent on God to requite
the obedient for their good deeds and punish the sinners for their
misdeeds. By unity they imply the denial of the divine attributes.

Undoubtedly, they admit that God is knowing, powerful, and seeing, but
their intellect does not allow them to admit that these divine
attributes are separate and different from the divine essence. The
reason for this view of theirs is that if the attributes of God are not
considered to be identical with the essence of God, “plurality of
eternals” would necessarily result and the belief in unity would have to
be given up. This, in their opinion, is clear unbelief (*kufr*). Unity
and justice are the basic principles of the beliefs of the Mu'tazilites
and this is the reason why they call themselves “People of Unity and
Justice.”

Now, from the basic beliefs of unity and justice a few more beliefs
necessarily follow as corollaries:

1. God Almighty's justice necessitates that man should be the author of
his own acts; then alone can he be said to be free and responsible for
his deeds. The same was claimed by the Qadarites. The Mu'tazilites
accepted totally the theory of indeterminism and became true successors
of the Qadarites.

If man is not the author of his own acts and if these acts are the
creation of God, how can he be held responsible for his acts and deserve
punishment for his sins? Would it not be injustice on the part of God
that, after creating a man helpless, He should call him to account for
his sins and send him to hell?

Thus, all the Mu'tazilites agree in the matter of man's being the
creator of his volitional acts. He creates some acts by way of
*mubasharah* and some by way of *tawlid*. By the term *tawlid* is
implied the necessary occurrence of an­other act from an act of the
doer, e.g., the movement of Zaid's finger necessitates the movement of
his ring. Although he does not intend to move the ring, yet he alone
will be regarded as the mover.

Of course, to perform this act the medium of another act is necessary.
Man creates guidance or misguidance for himself by way of *mubasharah*
and his success or failure resulting from this is created by way of
*tawlid*. God is not in the least concerned in creating it, nor has
God's will anything to do with it.

In other words, if a man is regarded as the author of his own acts, it
would mean that it is in his power either to accept Islam and be
obedient to God, or become an unbeliever and commit sins, and that God's
will has nothing to do with these acts of his. God, on the other hand,
wills that all created beings of His should embrace Islam and be
obedient to Him. He orders the same to take place and prohibits people
from committing sins.

Since man is the author of his own acts, it is necessary for God to
reward him for his good deeds and this can be justly claimed by him. As
al‑Shahras­tani puts it: “The Mu'tazilites unanimously maintain that man
decides upon and creates his acts, both good and evil; that he deserves
reward or punishment in the next world for what he does. In this way the
Lord is safe­guarded from association with any evil or wrong or any act
of unbelief or transgression. For if He created the wrong, He would be
wrong, and if He created justice, He would be just.”[^4]

It is the creed of most of the Mu'tazilites that one possesses “ability”
before the accomplishment of the act, but some Mu'tazilites (e. g.,
Muhammad b. \`Isa and Abu \`Isa Warraq) like the Sunnites are of the
view that one has ability to act besides the act.

2. The justice of God makes it incumbent upon Him not to do anything
contrary to justice and equity. It is the unanimous verdict of the
Mu'tazilites that the wise can only do what is salutary (*al‑salah*) and
good, and that God's wisdom always keeps in view what is salutary for
His servants; therefore, He cannot be cruel to them. He cannot bring
into effect evil deeds. He cannot renounce that which is salutary. He
cannot ask His servants to do that which is impossible. Further, reason
also suggests that God does not place a burden on any creature greater
than it can bear.

According to the Mu'tazilites, things are not good or evil because God
de­clares them to be so. No, God makes the distinction between good and
evil on account of their being good and evil. Goodness or evil are
innate in the essence of things themselves. This very goodness or evil
of things is the cause of the commands and prohibitions of the Law.

The human intellect is capable of perceiving the goodness and evil of a
few things and no laws are required to express their goodness and evil,
e. g., it is commendable to speak the truth and despicable to commit
oneself to untruth. This shows that the evil and goodness of things are
obvious and require no proof from the Shari\`ah. Shameful and unjust
deeds are evil in themselves; therefore, God has banned indul­gence in
them. It does not imply that His putting a ban on them made them
shameful and unjust deeds.

The thoroughgoing rationalism of the Mu'tazilites is thus expressed by
al‑Shahrastani in these words: “The adherents of justice say: All
objects of knowledge fall under the supervision of reason and receive
their obligatory power from rational insight. Consequently, obligatory
gratitude for divine bounty precedes the orders given by (divine) Law;
and beauty and ugliness are qualities belonging intrinsically to what is
beautiful and ugly.”[^5]

From the second principle of the Mu'tazilites, the unity of God, the
following beliefs necessarily result as corollaries:

1. Denial of the beatific vision. The Mu'tazilites hold that vision is
not possible without place and direction. As God is exempt from place
and direction, therefore, a vision of Him is possible neither in this
world nor in the hereafter.

2. Belief that the Qur'an is a created speech of Allah. It was held by
them that the Qur'an is an originated work of God and it came into
existence to­gether with the prophethood of the Prophet of Islam.

3. God's pleasure and anger, not attributes, but states. According to
the Mu'tazilites, God's pleasure and anger should not be regarded as His
attributes, because anger and pleasure are states and states are
mutable, the essence of God is immutable. They should be taken as heaven
and hell.

The following is the summary of some more beliefs of the Mu'tazilites:

1. Denial of punishment and reward meted out to the dead in the grave
and the questioning by the angels *Munkar* and *Nakir*.

2. Denial of the indications of the Day of Judgment, of Gog and Magog
(*Yajuj* and *Majuj*), and of the appearance of the Antichrist
(*al‑Dajjal*).

3. Some Mu'tazilites believe in the concrete reality of the Balance
(*al‑Mizan*) for weighing actions on the Day of Judgment. Some say that
it is impossible for it to be a reality and think that the mention made
in the Qur'an of weight and balance means only this much that full
justice will be done on the Day of Judgment.

It is clearly impossible to elicit the meanings of the words weight and
balance literally, for deeds, which have been said to be weighed, are
accidents and it is not possible to weigh accidents. Theoretical reason
is in­capable of comprehending this. Substances alone can possess
weight. Further, when nothing is hidden from God, what is the use of
weighing the deeds? It has been mentioned in the Qur'an that the books
of bad or good deeds will be handed over to us. This too is merely a
metaphor. It means only our being gifted with knowledge.

4. The Mu'tazilites also deny the existence of the Recording Angels
(*Kiraman Katibin*). The reason they give for this is that God is well
aware of all the deeds done by His servants. The presence of the
Recording Angels would have been indispensable if God were not
acquainted directly with the doings of His servants.

5. The Mu'tazilites also deny the physical existence of the “Tank”
(*al‑Hawd*), and the “Bridge” *(al‑sirat*). Further, they do not admit
that heaven and hell exist now, but believe that they will come into
existence on the Day of Judgment.

6. They deny the Covenant (*al‑Mithaq*). It is their firm belief that
God neither spoke to any prophet, angel, or supporter of the Divine
Throne, nor will He cast a glance towards them.

7. For the Mu'tazilites, deeds together with verification (*tasdiq*) are
included in faith. They hold that a great sinner will always stay in
hell.

8. They deny the miracles (*al‑karamat*) of saints (*awliya’*), for, if
admitted, they would be mixed up with the evidentiary miracles of the
prophets and cause confusion. The same was the belief of the Jahmites
too.

9. The Mu'tazilites also deny the Ascension (*al‑Mi'raj*) of the Prophet
of Islam, because its proof is based on the testimony of individual
traditions, which necessitates neither act nor belief; but they do not
deny the Holy Pro­phet's journey as far as Jerusalem.

10. According to them, the one who prays is alone entitled to reap the
reward of a prayer; whatever its form, its benefit goes to no one else.

11. As the divine decree cannot be altered, prayers serve no purpose at
all. One gains nothing by them, because if the object, for which prayers
are offered, is in conformity with destiny, it is needless to ask for
it, and if the object conflicts with destiny, it is impossible to secure
it.

12. They generally lay down that the angels who are message‑bearers of
God to prophets are superior in rank to the human messengers of God to
mankind, i. e., the prophets themselves.

13. According to them, reason demands that an Imam should necessarily be
appointed over the *ummah* (Muslim community).

14. For them, the *mujtahid* (the authorized interpreter of the
religious Law) can never be wrong in his view, as against the opinion of
the Ash\`arite scholas­tics that “the *mujtahid* sometimes errs and
sometimes hits the mark.”

The Mu'tazilites and the Sunnites differ mostly from one another in five
important matters:

(1) The problem of attributes.

(2) The problem of the beatific vision.

(3) The problem of promise and threat.

(4) The problem of creation of the actions of man.

(5) The problem of the will of God.

Ibn Hazm says in his *Milal wa’l‑Nihal* that whosoever believes (1) that
the Qur'an is uncreated, (2) that all the actions of man are due to
divine decree, and (3) that man will be blessed with the vision of God
on the Day of Judg­ment, and (4) admits the divine attributes mentioned
in the Qur'an and the Tradition, and (5) does not regard the perpetrator
of a grave sin as an unbeliever, will not be styled as one of the
Mu'tazilites, though in all other matters he may agree with them.

This statement of Ibn Hazm shows that the Mu'tazilites were a group of
rationalists who judged all Islamic beliefs by theoretical reason and
renounced those that relate to all that lies beyond the reach of reason.
They hardly realized the fact that reason, like any other faculty with
which man is gifted, has its limitations and cannot be expected to
comprehend reality in all its details. The point does not need
elaboration. As Shakespeare puts it, “There are more things in heaven
and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philo­sophy.”

Some modern thinkers have recognized that there is a place for intuition
in the field of comprehension and, as a corollary to this, have admitted
the claim of revelation or *wahi* as a source of knowledge. That is why
Iqbal exclaimed

“At the dawn of Life the Angel said to me

\`Do not make thy heart a mere slave to reason.”'

And probably on a similar ground Iqbal's guide, Rumi, offered the
following meaningful advice

“Surrender thy intellect to the Prophet!

God sufficeth. Say, He sufficeth.

Beware of wilful reasoning,

And boldly welcome madness!

He alone is mad who madness scoffs,

And heeds not the agent of Law!”

Some leading Mu’tazilites
-------------------------

In presenting a bird's‑eye view of the beliefs of the Mu'tazilites in
the above paragraphs, it has not been suggested that these views were in
their totality shared by all the leading Mu'tazilites. There were
differences of opinion within themselves. For instance, Abu al‑Hudhail
al‑\`Allaf differed from his companions in respect of ten problems;
Ibrahim ibn Sayyar al‑Nazzam in thirteen; Bishr ibn al‑Mu'tamir in six;
Mu'ammar ibn Khayyat \`Abbad al‑Sulami in four; and \`Amr ibn Bahr
al‑Jahiz, in five. Abu al‑Husain and his followers are called the
“Mu'tazilites of Baghdad” and Abu al‑Jubba'i, his son Abu Hashim, and
their followers were known as the “Mu'tazilites of Basrah.” Below is
given a brief account of the lives and ideas of some of the leading
Mu'tazilites.

### 1. Wasil ibn \` Ata

Wasil was born at Madinah in 80/699 and was brought up in Basrah. “Suq‑i
Ghazzal,” a bazaar in Basrah, used to be his familiar haunt and on that
account people associated its name with him. He died in 131/748. Wasil
had a very long neck. Amr ibn \`Ubaid, who was a celebrated Mu'tazilite,
on looking at him once remarked: “There will be no good in a man who has
such a neck.”[^6] Wasil was *althagh*,[^7] i.e., he could not pronounce
the letter *r* correctly, but he was a very fluent and accomplished
speaker and in his talk totally avoided this letter.

He never allowed it to escape his lips, despite the great difficulty in
avoiding it in conversation. He compiled a voluminous treatise in which
not a single *r* is to be found. He would often maintain silence which
led people to believe that he was mute.

Wasil was a pupil of Abu Hashim \`Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn
al‑Hanafiy­yah, but in the matter of Imamate, as in some other matters,
he opposed his master. Before becoming a Mu'tazilite he used to live in
the company of Imam Hasan al‑Basri.

His works are: *Kitab al‑Manzilah bain al‑Manzilatain,* *Kitab
al‑Futya*, and *Kitab al‑Tawhid*. The first books on the science of
al‑Kalam were written by him. Ibn Khallikan has recounted a number of
his works.

In his illustrious work *al‑Milal wa’l‑Nihal* [^8], al‑Shahrastani says
that the essential teachings of Wasil consisted of the following: (1)
Denial of the attributes of God. (2) Man's possession of free‑will to
choose good deeds. (3) The belief that one who commits a grave sin is
neither a believer nor an unbeliever but occupies an intermediate
position, and that one who commits a grave sin goes to hell. (4) The
belief that out of the opposing parties that fought in the battle of the
Camel and from among the assassinators of \`Uthman and his allies one
party was in error, though it cannot be established which.

(1) *Denial of Attributes* ‑ Wasil denies that knowledge, power, will,
and life belong to the essence of God. According to him, if any
attribute is admitted as eternal, it would necessitate “plurality of
eternals” and the belief in the unity of God will thus become false. But
this idea of Wasil was not readily accepted. Generally, the Mu'tazilites
first reduced all the divine attributes to two ‑ knowledge and power ‑
and called them the “essential attributes.” Afterwards they reduced both
of these to one attribute ‑ unity.

(2) *Belief in Free‑will* ‑ In this problem Wasil adopted the creed of
Ma'bad al‑Juhani and Ghailan al‑Dimashqi and said that since God is wise
and just, evil and injustice cannot be attributed to him. How is it
justifiable for Him that He should will contrary to what He commands His
servants to do?

Consequently, good and evil, belief and unbelief, obedience and sin are
the acts of His servant himself, i.e, the servant alone is their author
or creator and is to be rewarded or punished for his deeds. It is
impossible that the servant may be ordered to “do” a thing which he is
not able to do. Man is ordered to do an act because he has the power to
do that act. Whosoever denies this power and authority rejects a
self‑evident datum of consciousness.

As ibn Hazm frankly said, the excellent work of the Mu'tazilites can be
seen in the doctrine of free‑will and that of promise and threat. If man
were to be regarded as absolutely determined in his actions, the whole
edifice of Shari'ah and ethics would tumble down.

(3) *Intermediary Position of the Grave Sinners* ‑ On account of his
belief that one who commits a grave sin is neither a believer nor an
unbeliever but occupies an intermediate position, Wasil withdrew himself
from the company of Imam Hasan al‑Basri and earned the title
Mu'tazilite. Wasil thought that the expression “true believer” is one
which means praise.

The person who commits grave sins can never deserve praise; therefore,
he cannot be called a true believer. Such a person has, nevertheless,
belief in the Islamic faith and admits that God alone is worthy of being
worshipped; therefore, he cannot be regarded as an unbeliever either. If
such a person dies without penitence, he will ever stay in hell, but as
he is right in his belief, the punishment meted out to him will be
moderate.

As Imam al‑Ghazali has pointed out in his *Ihya' \`Ulum al‑Din*
misinter­pretation of the following verses of the Qur'an was the cause
of the Mu'tazilites' misunderstanding:

***“By (the token of) Time (through the ages), verily mankind is in
loss, except such as have faith and do righteous deeds and (join
together) in the mutual teaching of truth, patience, and
constancy.”***[^9]

***“For any that disobey God and His Apostle ‑ for them is hell; they
shall dwell therein forever:“***[^10]

In the light of these and similar other verses, the Mu'tazilites argue
that all the perpetrators of grave sins will always stay in hell, but
they do not think over the fact that God also says:

***“But, without doubt, I am (also) He that forgiveth again and again
those who repent, believe, and do right, who, in fine, are ready to
receive true guidance:”***[^11]

***“God forgiveth not that equals should be set up with Him; but He
forgiveth anything else, to whom He pleaseth.”***[^12]

The last quoted verse shows that in the case of all sins, except
polytheism, God will act according to His pleasure. In support of this,
the clear saying of the Holy Prophet of Islam can be cited, viz., “that
person too will finally come out of hell who has even an iota of faith
in his heart.”

Further, some words of God, e.g., ***“Verily We shall not suffer to
perish the reward of anyone who does a (single) righteous deed,”***[^13]
and ***“Verily God will not suffer the reward of the righteous to
perish,”***[^14] clearly show that for the commission of one sin, He
will not ignore a man's basic faith and deprive him of all the reward
for his good deeds. Therefore, the general belief is that as the
perpetrator of grave sins is by all means a true believer, even if he
dies without repentance, after being punished for his sins in hell and
thereby purified of them, he will eventually enter heaven.

(4) *Unestablished Errors* ‑ Wasil had firm conviction that out of those
who fought in “the battle of the Camel” and “the battle of Siffin” and
the killers of \`Uthman, the third Caliph, and his allies, one party was
definitely in error, though it cannot be established which.[^15]

### 2. Abu al‑Hudhail \`Allaf

\`Allaf was born in 131/748 and died in c. 226/840. He received
instruction from \`Uthman bin Khalid Tawil, a pupil of Wasil. He was a
fluent speaker and vigorous in his arguments. He often made use of
dialectical arguments in his discussions. He had a keen insight in
philosophy. He wrote about sixty books on the science of Kalam but all
of them have long been extinct.

\`Allaf was an accomplished dialectician. The story goes that by his
dialectics three thousand persons embraced Islam at his hand. We shall
here speak of two of his debates. In those days there lived a Magian
Salih by name who believed that the ultimate principles of the universe
are two realities, Light and Darkness, that both of these are opposed to
each other, and that the universe is created by the mixture of these
two.

This belief led to a discussion between Salih, the Magian, and Allaf.
Allaf inquired of him whether the mix­ture was distinct and different
from Light and Darkness or identical with them. Salih replied that it
was one and the same thing. \`Allaf then said, “How could two things mix
together which are opposed to each other? There ought to be someone who
got them mixed, and the mixer alone is the Necessary Existent or God.”

On another occasion, while Salih was engaged in a discussion with
\`Allaf, the latter said, “What do you now desire?” Salih replied, “I
asked a blessing of God and still stick to the belief that there are two
Gods.” \`Allaf then asked, “Of which God did you ask a blessing ? The
God of whom you asked for it would not have suggested the name of the
other God (who is His rival).”

Wasil was not able to clarify the problem of divine attributes. In this
respect his ideas were still crude. \`Allaf is opposed to the view that
the essence of God has no quality and is absolutely one and by no means
plural. The divine qualities are none other than the divine essence and
cannot be separated from it. \`Allaf accepts such attribute as are one
with the essence of God, or one may say, accepts such an essence as is
identical with the attributes. He does not differentiate between the
two, but regards both as one.

When one says that God is the knower, one cannot mean that knowledge is
found in the essence of God, but that *knowledge is His essence*. In
brief, God is knowing, powerful, and living with such knowledge, power,
and life as are His very essence (essential nature).

Al‑Shahrastani has interpreted the identity of divine essence and
attributes thus: God knows with His knowledge and knowledge is His very
essence. In the same way, He is powerful with His power and power is His
very essence; and lives with His life and life is His very essence.
Another interpretation of divine knowledge is that God knows with His
essence and not with His know­ledge, i.e., He knows through His essence
only and not through knowledge.

The difference in these two positions is that, in the latter, the
attributes are denied altogether, while in the former, which \`Allaf
accepts, they are admitted but are identified with God's essence. This
conforms to the state­ments of the philosophers who hold that the
essence of God, without quality and quantity, is absolutely one, and by
no means admits of plurality, and that the divine attributes are none
other than the essence of God.

Whatever qualities of Him may be established, they are either “negation”
or “essentials.” Those things are termed “negation” which, without the
relation of negation, cannot be attributed to God, as, for instance,
body, substance, and accidents. When the relation of negation is turned
towards them and its sign, i.e., the word of negation, is applied, these
can become the attributes of God, e. g., it would be said that God is
neither a body, nor a substance, nor an accident. What is meant by
“essential” is that the existence of the Necessary Existent is Its very
essence and thus Its unity is real.

\`Allaf did not admit the attributes of God as separate from His essence
in any sense. For he sensed the danger that, by doing so, attributes,
too, like essence, would have to be taken as eternal, and by their
plurality the “plurality of eternals” or “the plurality of the necessary
existents” would become inevi­table, and thus the doctrine of unity
would be completely nullified. It was for this reason that the
Christians who developed the theory of the Trinity of Godhead had to
forsake the doctrine of unity.

Among the “heresies” of \`Allaf was his view that after the
discontinuation of the movement of the inmates of heaven and hell, a
state of lethargy would supervene. During this period calm pleasure for
the inmates of heaven and pain and misery for the inmates of hell will
begin, and this is what is really meant by eternal pleasure and
perpetual pain. Since the same was the religious belief of Jahm,
according to whom heaven and hell would be annihilated, the Mu'tazilites
used to call \`Allaf a Jahmite in his belief in the hereafter.

Allaf has termed justice, unity, promise, threat, and the middle
position as the “Five Principles” of the Mu'tazilites.

### 3. Al‑Nazzam

Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Sayyar, called al‑Nazzam, was younger than \`Allaf
and it is generally known that he was \`Allaf's pupil. He lived during
the reign of Caliphs al‑Mamun and al‑Mu'tasim and died in 231/845. He
was a peerless litterateur and poet. He studied Greek philosophy well
and made full use of it in his works. His main ideas are as follows.

(1) *Denial of God's Power over Evil* ‑ God has no power at all over sin
and evil. Other Mu'tazilites do not deny the *power of* God over evil,
but deny the *act of His* creating evil. In their opinion, God has power
over evil, but He does not use it for the creation of evil. Al‑Nazzam,
in opposition to them, says that when evil or sin is the attribute or
essence of a thing, then the possibility of the occurrence of evil or
the power to create it will itself be evil.

Therefore, it cannot be attributed to God who is the doer of justice and
good. Similarly, al‑Nazzam holds that in the life hereafter too, God can
neither mitigate nor add to the punishment and reward of the inmates of
heaven and hell; nor indeed can He expel them from heaven or hell. As to
the accusation that the denial of God's power over evil necessitates the
affirmation that He is impotent against evil, al‑Nazzam replies that
this equally follows from the denial of divine action to create evil. He
says: “You, too, deny Him the wrong act, so there is no fundamental
difference between the two positions.”[^16]

God, who is Absolute Good and Absolute Justice, cannot be the author of
evil. Besides, if God has power over evil, it will necessarily follow
that He is ignorant and indigent. But this is impossible; therefore, its
necessary conse­quence is also impossible. The sequence of the argument
may be explained thus:

If God has power over evil, then the occurrence of evil is possible, and
as the supposition of the occurrence of a possible thing entails no
impossibility, let us suppose that evil did occur. Now, God might or
might not have had knowledge of the evil which occurred. If we say that
He did not have the knowledge of it, it would necessarily follow that He
was ignorant; and if we say that He did have it, it would necessarily
follow that He was in need of this evil; for had He not been in need of
it, He would not have created it.

When a person is not in need of a thing and knows its inherent evils, he
will have nothing to do with it, if he is wise. It is definitely true
that God is all‑wise; so when any evil is caused by Him, it necessarily
follows that He needed it, otherwise He would have never produced it.

But since it is impossible to think that God needs evil, it is
impossible to think that He creates it.

(2) *Denial of the Will of God* ‑ Apart from the power of action and
action, al‑Nazzam does not admit that God has will, which has priority
over both power and action. He holds that when we attribute will to God
we only mean that God creates things according to His knowledge. His
willing is identical with His acting, and when it is said that God wills
the actions of men, what is meant is that He enjoins them to act in a
certain way.

Why does al‑Nazzam deny the will of God? He does so, because, according
to him, will implies want. He who wills lacks or needs the thing which
he wills, and since God is altogether independent of His creatures, He
does not lack or need anything. Consequently, will cannot be ascribed to
Him. There­fore, the will of God really connotes His acts or His
commands that are con­veyed to man.[^17]

(3) *Divisibility of Every Particle ad infinitum* ‑ Al‑Nazzam believes
in the divisibility of every particle ad infinitum. By this he means
that each body is composed of such particles as are divisible to an
unlimited extent, i. e., every half of a half goes on becoming half of
the other half. During the pro­cess of divisions, we never reach a limit
after which we may be able to say that it cannot be further divided into
halves.

Now, to traverse a distance, which is composed of infinite points, an
infinite period of time would necessarily be required. Is, then, the
traversing of a distance impossible? Does it not necessitate the denial
of the existence of the movement itself? Among the Greek philosophers,
Parmenides and Zeno had denied movement itself. They could not declare
untrue the movement which is observable and is a fact, so they claimed
that perception cannot reveal reality. They maintained that senses are
not the instruments of real knowledge and are deceptive; and the
phenomenal world is illusory; a mirage. The real world is the rational
world, the knowledge of which is gained by reason alone in which there
is neither plurality nor multiplicity, neither movement nor change. It
is an immutable and immovable reality. But they could not explain how
this illusory and deceptive world was born out of the real world. Thus
their system of philosophy, in spite of their claiming it to be monism,
ended in dualism.

Al‑Nazzam did not accept the solution of these Greek philosophers, but
to tide over this difficulty he offered the theory of *tafrah*. The word
*tafrah* means to leap; it means that the moving thing traverses from
one point of distance to another in such a manner that between these two
points a number of points are traversed. Obviously, it happens when the
moving thing does not cross all the points of a distance, but leaps over
them. This indeed is an anticipation of the present‑day doctrine of the
“quantum jump.”

(4) *Latency and Manifestation (Kumun wa Buruz)* ‑ According to
al‑Naz­zam, creation is to be regarded as a single act of God by which
all things were brought into being simultaneously and kept in a state of
latency (*kumun*). It was from their original state of latency that all
existing things: minerals, plants, animals, and men, have evolved in the
process of time. This also implies that the whole of mankind was
potentially in Adam.

Whatever priority or posteriority there may be, it is not in birth but
in appearance. All things came into existence at the same time, but were
kept hidden till the time of their becoming operative arrived, and when
it did arrive, they were brought from the state of latency to the state
of manifestation. This doctrine stands in direct opposition to the
Ash'arite view that God is creating things at all moments of time.[^18]

(5) *Materialism of al‑Nazzam* ‑ For al‑Nazzam, as for many before and
after him, the real being of man is the soul, and body is merely its
instrument. But the soul is, according to him, a rarefied body
permeating the physical body, the same way as fragrance permeates
flowers, butter milk, or oil sesame.[^19] Abu Mansur \`Abd al‑Qahir ibn
Tahir, in his work *al‑Farq bain al‑Firaq*, has discussed this theory
critically and has attempted to refute it.

Besides these philosophical ideas, there are what the orthodox called
the “heresies” of al‑Nazzam. For example, he did not believe in
miracles, was not convinced of the inimitability of the Qur'an,
considered a statute necessary for the determination of an Imam, and
thought that the statute establishing the Imamate of \`Ali was concealed
by \`Umar, that the *salat al‑tarawih* was un­authorized, that the
actual vision of the *jinn* was a physical impossibility, and that
belated performance of missed prayers was unnecessary.

Among al‑Nazzam's followers, the following are well known: Muhammad ibn
Shabib, Abu Shumar, Yunus ibn 'Imran, Ahmad ibn Hayat, Bishr ibn
Mu\`tamir, and Thamamah ibn Ashras. Ahmad ibn Hayat who lived in the
company of al‑Nazzam held that there are two deities: one, the creator
and eternal deity, and the other, the created one which is Jesus Christ
son of Mary. He regarded Christ as the Son of God. On account of this
belief he was considered to have renounced Islam. According to his
faith, Christ in the hereafter will ask the created beings to account
for their deeds in this world, and in support of his claim Ahmad ibn
Hayat quoted the verse: ***“Will they wait until God comes to them in
canopies of clouds?”***[^20] There is a tradition that, looking towards
the moon on the fourteenth day of the lunar month, the Holy Prophet of
Islam said, “Ye will behold your Lord just as ye behold this moon.”[^21]
Ahmad ibn Hayat twisted the meaning of this tradition and said that the
word Lord referred to Jesus Christ. He also believed in incarnation for,
according to him, the spirit of God is incarnated into the bodies of the
Imams.

Fadl al‑Hadathi, who was another pupil of al‑Nazzam, had faith similar
to that of Ibn Hayat. He and his followers believed in transmigration.
Accord­ing to them, in another world God created animals mature and
wise, bestowed on them innumerable blessings, and conferred on them many
sciences too. God then desired to put them to a test and so commanded
them to offer thanks to Him for His gifts. Some obeyed His command and
some did not.

He rewarded His thankful creatures by giving them heaven and condemned
the ungrateful ones to hell. There were some among them who had partly
obeyed the divine command and partly not obeyed it. They were sent to
the world, were given filthy bodies, and, according to the magnitude of
their sins, sorrow and pain, joy and pleasure.

Those who had not sinned much and had obeyed most of God's commands were
given lovely faces and mild punishment. But those who did only a few
good deeds and committed a large number of sins were given ugly faces,
and were subjected to severe tribulations. So long as an animal is not
purified of all its sins, it will be always changing its forms.

### 4. Bishr ibn al‑Mu'tamir

One of the celebrated personalities of al‑Nazzam's circle is Bishr ibn
al­ Mu'tamir. The exact date of his birth is not known, but his date of
death is 210/825.

Bishr made the “Theory of Generated Acts” (*tawlid*) current among the
Mu'tazilites. The Mu\`tazilites believe in‑free‑will. They admit that
man is the author of his voluntary actions. Some actions arise by way of
*mubasharah*, i. e., they are created directly by man, but some actions
arise by way of *tawlid*, i.e., they necessarily result from the acts
done by way of *mubasharah*.

Throwing of a stone in water, for example, necessitates the appearance
of ripples. Even if the movement of the ripples is not intended by the
stone­-thrower, yet he is rightly regarded as its agent. Similarly, man
is the creator of his deeds and misdeeds by way of *mubasharah*, and all
the consequential actions necessarily result by way of *tawlid*. Neither
type of actions is due to divine activity.

Bishr regards the will of God as His grace and divides it into two
attributes: the attribute of essence and the attribute of action.
Through the attribute of essence He wills all His actions as well as
men's good deeds. He is absolutely wise, and in consequence His will is
necessarily concerned with that which is suitable and salutary. The
attribute of action also is of two kinds. If actions are concerned with
God, they would imply creation, and if concerned with men, they would
mean command.

According to Bishr, God could have made a different world, better than
the present one, in which all might have attained salvation. But in
opposition to the common Mu'tazilite belief, Bishr held that God was not
bound to create such a world. All that was necessary for God to do was
that He should have bestowed upon man free‑will and choice, and after
that it was sufficient to bestow reason for his guidance to discover
divine revelation and the laws of nature, and combining reason with
choice, attain salvation.

Mu'tamir's pupil Abu Musa Isa bin Sabih, nicknamed Mizdar, was a very
pious man and was given the title of the hermit of the Mu'tazilites. He
held some very peculiar views. God, he thought, could act tyrannically
and lie, and this would not make His lordship imperfect. The style of
the Qur'an is not inimitable; a work like it or even better than it can
be produced. A person who admits that God can be seen by the eye, though
without form, is an unbeliever, and he who is doubtful about the
unbelief of such a person is also an unbeliever.

### 5. Mu'ammar

Mu'ammar's full name was Mu'ammar ibn \`Abbad al‑Sulami. Neither the
date of his birth nor that of his death can be determined precisely.
According to some, he died in 228/842.

To a great extent Mu\`ammar's ideas tally with those of the other
Mu'tazilites, but he resorts to great exaggeration in the denial of the
divine attributes and in the Theory of Predestination.

The following is the gist of his ideas.

(1) *Denial of Divine Knowledge* ‑ Mu'ammar maintains that the essence
of God is free from every aspect of plurality. He is of the view that if
we believe in the attributes of God, then God's essence becomes plural;
therefore, he denies all the attributes, and in this denial he is so
vehement that he says that God knows neither Himself nor anyone else,
for knowing (or knowledge) is something either within or without God.

In the first case, it necessarily follows that the knower and the known
are one and the same, which is impossible, for it is necessary that the
known should be other than and distinct from the knower. If knowledge is
not something within God, and the known is separate from the knower, it
means that God's essence is dual. Further, it follows also that God's
knowledge is dependent on and is in need of an “other.” Consequently,
His absoluteness is entirely denied.

By Mu'ammar's times, more and more people were taking interest in
philo­sophy and Neo‑Platonism was gaining ground. In denying the
attributes Mu'ammar was following in the footsteps of Plotinus.
According to the basic assumptigns of Plotinus, the essence of God is
one and absolute. God is so transcendent that whatever we say of Him
merely limits Him. Hence we cannot attribute to Him beauty, goodness,
thought, or will, for all such attri­butes are limitations and
imperfections. We cannot say what He is, but only what He is not. As a
poet has said, He is

“The One whom the reason does not know,

The Eternal, the Absolute whom neither senses know nor fancy.

He is such a One, who cannot be counted He is such a Pure Being!”

It is universally believed in Islam that human reason, understanding,
senses, or fancy cannot fathom the essence of God or the reality of His
attributes or His origin. Says \`Attar:

“Why exert to probe the essence of God?

Why strain thyself by stretching thy limitations?

When thou canst not catch even the essence of an atom,

How canst thou claim to know the essence of God Himself?”

To reflect on the essence of God has been regarded as “illegitimate
thinking.” The Prophet of Islam is reported to have said: “We are all
fools in the matter of the gnosis of the essence of God.”[^22]
Therefore, he has warned the thinkers thus: “Don't indulge in
speculating on the nature of God lest ye may be destroyed.”[^23] He has
said about himself: “I have not known Thee to the extent that Thy
knowledge demands !”[^24]

Hafiz has expressed the same idea in his own words thus

“Take off thy net; thou canst not catch ‘*anqa*[^25]

For that is like attempting to catch the air!”

(2) *Denial of Divine Will* ‑ Mu'ammar says that, like knowledge, will
too cannot be attributed to the essence of God. Nor can His will be
regarded as eternal, because eternity expresses temporal priority and
sequence and God transcends time. When we say that the will of God is
eternal, we mean only that the aspects of the essence of God, like His
essence, transcend time.

(3) *God as the Creator of Substances and not of Accidents* ‑ According
to Mu'ammar, God is the creator of the world, but He did not create
anything except bodies. Accidents are the innovations of bodies created
either (i) by nature, e. g., burning from fire, heat from the sun, or
(ii) by free choice, such as the actions of men and animals. In brief,
God creates matter and then keeps Himself aloof from it. Afterwards He
is not concerned at all with the changes that are produced through
matter, whether they may be natural or voluntary. God is the creator of
bodies, not of accidents which flow out of the bodies as their
effects.[^26]

(4) Mu'ammar regards man as something other than the sensible body. Man
is living, knowing, able to act, and possesses free‑will. It is not man
him­self who moves or keeps quiet, or is coloured, or sees, or touches,
or changes from place to place; nor does one place contain him to the
exclusion of another, because he has neither length nor breadth, neither
weight nor depth; in short, he is something other than the body.

### 6. Thamamah

Thamamah ibn Ashras al‑Numayri lived during the reign of Caliphs Harun
al‑Rashid and al‑Mamun. He was in those days the leader of the
Qadarites. Harun al‑Rashid imprisoned him on the charge of heresy, but
he was in the good books of al‑Mamun and was released by him. He died in
213/828. The following is the substance of his ideas.

(1) As good and evil are necessarily known through the intellect and God
is good, the gnosis of God is an intellectual necessity. Had there been
no Shari'ah, that is, had we not acquired the gnosis of God through the
prophets, even then it would have been necessitated by the intellect.

(2) The world being necessitated by the nature of God, it has, like God,
existed from eternity and will last till eternity. Following in the
footsteps of Aristotle, he thinks that the world is eternal (*qadim*)
and not originated (*hadith*) and regards God as creating things by the
necessity of His nature and not by will and choice.

(3) Bishr ibn al‑Mu'tamir, who had put into usage the theory of
generated acts among the Mu'tazilites, was wrong in thinking that men
are not directly but only indirectly the authors of such acts. Neither
God nor man is the author of generated acts; they just happen without
any author. Man is not their author, for otherwise when a deed has been
generated after a man's death, he, as a dead man, will have to be taken
as its author. God cannot be regarded as the author of these acts, for
some generated acts are evil and evil cannot be attributed to God.

(4) Christians, Jews, and Magians, after they are dead, will all become
dust. They will neither go to heaven nor to hell. Lower animals and
children also will be treated in the same manner. The unbeliever, who
does not possess and is not keen to possess the gnosis of his Creator,
is not under the obligation to know Him. He is quite helpless and
resembles the lower animals.

### 7. Al‑Jahiz

\`Amr ibn Bahr al‑Jahiz, a contemporary of Mu'ammar, was a pupil of
al-­Nazzam and was himself one of the Imams of the Mu'tazilites. Both
the master and the disciple, it was held, were almost of one mind.
Al‑Jahiz had drunk deep of Greek philosophy. He had a keen sense of
humour and was a good anecdotist. He usually lived in the company of the
Caliphs of Baghdad. His permanent residence was the palace of Ibn
Zayyat, the Prime Minister of the Caliph Mutawakkil.

When Ibn Zayyat was put to death by the orders of the Caliph, Jahiz too
was imprisoned. He was released after some time. He was the ugliest of
men; his eyes protruded out, and children were frightened at his very
sight. In his last years he had a stroke of paralysis. He died in his
nine­tieth year at Basrah in 255/869. During his illness he would often
recite the following couplets

“Dost thou hope in old age to look like what you were in youth?

Thy heart belieth thee: an old garment never turns into a new one.”

He was the author of a number of books out of which the following are
noteworthy: *Kitab al‑Bayan,* *Kitab al‑Hayawan*, and *Kitab
al‑Ghilman*. He also wrote a book dealing with Muslim sects.

It was the belief of al‑Jahiz that all knowledge comes by nature, and it
is an activity of man in which he has no choice. He was a
scientist‑philosopher. In the introduction to his *Kitab al‑Hayawan*, he
writes that he is inspired by the philosophical spirit which consists in
deriving knowledge from sense‑experience and reason. It employs
observation, comparison, and experi­ment as methods of investigation. He
experimented on different species of animals, sometimes by cutting their
organs, sometimes even by poisoning them, in order to see what effects
were thus produced on animal organism.

In this respect he was the precursor of Bacon whom he anticipated seven
and a half centuries earlier. Al‑Jahiz did not, however, base knowledge
on sense­-experience alone. Since sense‑experience is sometimes likely
to give false re­ports, it needs the help of reason. In fact, in
knowledge reason has to play the decisive role. He Says, “You should not
accept whatever your eyes tell you; follow the lead of reason. Every
fact is determined by two factors: one apparent, and that is sensory;
the other hidden, and that is reason; and in reality reason is the final
determinant.”

According to al‑Jahiz, the will is not an attribute of man, for
attributes are continually subject to change, but the will is
non‑changing and non‑temporal.

He holds that the sinners will not be condemned to hell permanently but
will naturally turn into fire. God will not send anybody to hell, but
the fire of hell by its very nature will draw the sinners towards
itself. Al‑Jahiz denies that God can commit a mistake or that an error
can be imputed to Him. Al‑Jahiz, also denies the vision of God.

### 8. Al‑Jubba'i

Abu 'Ali al‑Jubba'i was born in 235/849 at Jubba, a town in Khuzistan.
His patronymic name is Abu \`Ali and his descent is traced to Hamran, a
slave of \`Uthman. Al‑Jubba'i belonged to the later Mu\`tazilites. He
was the teacher of Abu al‑Hasan al‑Ash\`ari and a pupil of Abu Ya'qub
bin \`Abd Allah al ­Shahham who was the leader of the Mu'tazilites in
Basrah.

Once there was a discussion between him and Imam al‑Ash’ari in respect
of the Theory of the Salutary to which reference has already been made
in the foregoing pages. The story goes that one day he asked Imam
al‑Ash'ari: “What do you mean by obedience?” The Imam replied, “Assent
to a command,” and then asked for al‑Jubba’i’s own opinion in this
matter.

Al‑Jubba'i said, “The essence of obedience, according to me, is
agreement to the will, and whoever fulfils the will of another obeys
him.” The Imam answered, “According to this, one must conclude that God
is obedient to His servant if He fulfils his will.” Al‑Jubba'i granted
this. The Imam said, “You differ from the com­munity of Muslims and you
blaspheme the Lord of the worlds. For if God is obedient to His servant,
then He must be subject to him, but God is above this.”

Al‑Jubba'i further claimed that the names of God are subject to the
regular rules of grammar. He, therefore, considered it possible to
derive a name for Him from every deed which He performs. On this Imam
al‑Ash\`ari said that, according to this view, God should be named “the
producer of pregnancy among women,” because he creates pregnancy in
them. Al‑Jubba'i could not escape this conclusion. The Imam added: “This
heresy of yours is worse than that of the Christians in calling God the
father of Jesus, although even they do not hold that He produced
pregnancy in Mary.”[^27] The following are other notable views of
al‑Jubba'i.

(1) Like other Mu'tazilites, he denies the divine attributes. He holds
that the very essence of God is knowing; no attribute of knowledge can
be attributed to Him so as to subsist besides His essence. Nor is there
any “state” which enables Him to acquire the “state of knowing.” Unlike
al‑Jubba'i, his son abu Hashim did believe in “states.” To say that God
is all‑hearing and all‑seeing really means that God is alive and there
is no defect of any kind in Him. The attributes of hearing and seeing in
God originate at the time of the origination of what is seen and what is
heard.

(2) Al‑Jubba'i and the other Mu'tazilites regard the world as originated
and the will of God as the cause of its being originated; they also
think that the will of God too is something originated, for if the
temporal will is regarded as subsisting in God, He will have to be
regarded as the “locus of temporal events.” This view he held against
the Karramites who claimed that the will subsists in God Himself, is
eternal and instrumental in creating the world which is originated, and,
therefore, not eternal.

Against al‑Jubba'i it has been held that independent subsistence of the
will is entirely incomprehensible, for it tantamounts to saying that an
attribute exists without its subject or an accident exists without some
substance. Be­sides, it means that God who has the will is devoid of it,
i.e., does not have it ‑ a clear contradiction.

(3) For a1‑Jubba'i the speech of God is compounded of letters and sound:
and God creates it in somebody. The speaker is He Himself and not the
body in which it subsists. Such speech will necessarily be a thing
originated. There­fore, the speech of God is a thing originated and not
eternal.

(4) Like other Mu'tazilities, al‑Jubba'i denies the physical vision of
God in the hereafter, for that, according to him, is impossible. It is
impossible because whatever is not physical cannot fulfil the conditions
of vision.

(5) He equally agrees with other Mu'tazilites regarding the gnosis of
God, the knowledge of good and evil, and the destiny of those who commit
grave sins. With them he holds that man is the author of his own actions
and that it lies in his power to produce good or evil or commit sins and
wrongs, and that it is compulsory for God to punish the sinner and
reward the obedient.

(6) In the matter of Imamate, al‑Jubba'i supports the belief of the
Sunnites, viz., the appointment of an Imam is to be founded on catholic
consent.

### 9. Abu Hashim

Al‑Jubba’is son, Abu Hashim \`Abd al‑Salam, was born in Basrah in
247/861 and died in 321/933. In literature he eclipsed al‑Jubba'i. Both
of them under­took new researches in the problems of Kalam. In general,
Abu Hashim agreed with his father, but in the matter of divine
attributes he widely differed from him.

Many Muslim thinkers of the time believed that the attributes of God are
eternal and inherent in His essence. Contrary to this belief, the
Shi'ites and the followers of the Greek philosophers held that it is by
virtue of His essence that God has knowledge. He does not know by virtue
of His knowledge. The divine essence, which is without quality and
quantity, is one and in no way does it admit of plurality.

According to the Mu'tazilites, attributes con­stitute the essence of
God, i.e., God possesses knowledge due to the attribute of knowledge,
but this attribute is identical with His essence. God knows by virtue of
His knowledge and knowledge is His essence; similarly, He is omni­potent
by virtue of His power, etc. Al‑Jubba’is theory is that though God knows
according to His essence, yet knowing is neither an attribute nor a
state, owing to which God may be called a knower.

As a solution to this problem, Abu Hashim presents the conception of
“state.” He says that we know essence and know it in different states.
The states go on changing, but the essence remains the same. These
states are in themselves inconceivable; they are known through their
relation to essence. They are different from the essence, but are not
found apart from the essence. To quote his own words, “A state‑in‑itself
is neither existent nor non‑existent, neither unknown nor known, neither
eternal nor contingent; it cannot be known separately, but only together
with the essence.”

Abu Hashim supports his conception of states by this argument: Reason
evidently distinguishes between knowing a thing absolutely and knowing
it together with some attribute. When we know an essence, we do not
know, that it is knowing also. Similarly, when we know a substance, we
do not know whether it is bounded or whether the accidents subsist in
it. Certainly, man perceives the common qualities of things in one thing
and the differentiating qualities in another, and necessarily gains
knowledge of the fact that the quality which is common is different from
the quauty which is not common.

These are rational propositions that no sane man would deny. Their locus
is essence and not an accident, for otherwise it would necessarily
follow that an accident subsists in another accident. In this way,
states are necessarily determined. Therefore, to be a knower of the
world refers to a state, which is an attribute besides the essence and
has not the same sense as the essence. In like manner Abu Hashim proves
the states for God; these states are not found apart but with the
essence.

Al‑Jubba'i and the other deniers of states refute this theory of Abu
Hashim. Al‑Jubba'i says that these states are really mental aspects that
are not con­tained in the divine essence but are found in the
percipient, i. e., in the perceiver of the essence. In other words, they
are such generalizations or relations as do not‑exist externally but are
found only in the percipient's mind. Ibn Taimiyyah also denies states.
In this respect one of his couplets has gained much fame

“Abu Hashim believes in State, al‑Ash'ari in Acquisition and al‑Nazzam
in Leap. These three things have verbal and no real existence.”[^28]

After a little hesitation, Imam Baqilani supported Abu Hashim's views.
Imam al‑Ash'ari and the majority of his followers disputed them and Imam
al‑Haramain first supported but later opposed them.

The End
-------

Besides the Mu'tazilites an account of whose views has been given above
in some detail, there were some others the details of whose beliefs are
given in the *Milal wal‑Nahal* of Shahrastani and *al‑Farq bain
al‑Firaq* of al‑Baghdadi.

They were \`Amr ibn \`Ubaid; abu 'Ali \`Amr bin Qa'id Aswari who had
almost the same position as al‑Nazzam, but differed from him in the view
that God has no power over what He knows He does not do, or what He says
He would not do, and man has the power to do that; Abu Ja'far Muhammad
ibn \`Abd Allah who shared al‑Nazzam's views but believed that to God
can be attributed the power to oppress children and madmen, but not
those who are in their full senses; Jafar ibn Bishr and Jafar ibn Harb
who held that among the corrupt of the Muslim community there were some
who were worse than the Jews, Christians, and Magians, and that those
who committed trivial sins would also be condemned to eternal hell;
Hisham ibn \`Amr al ­Fuwati who had very exaggerated views on the
problem of predestination and did not ascribe any act to God; and Abu
Qasim \`Abd Allah ibn Ahmad ibn Mahmud al‑Balkhi, a Mu'tazilite of
Baghdad known as al‑Ka'bi, who used to say that the deed of God is
accomplished without His will.

When it is said that God wills deeds, it is implied that He is their
creator and there is wisdom in His doing so; and when it is said that He
of Himself wills the deeds of others, all that is meant is that He
commands these deeds. Al‑Ka'bi believed that God neither sees Himself
nor others. His seeing and hearing mean nothing other than His
knowledge. Al‑Ka'bi wrote a commentary on the Qur'an which consisted of
twelve volumes. No one till then had written such a voluminous
commentary. He died in 309/921.

Bibliography
------------

Abd al‑Karim al‑Shahrastani, *al‑Milal wa’l‑Nihal*, Bombay, 1314/1896.;
Theodor Haarbrucker, *Religionsparthein and Philosophen‑Schulen*, 2
Vols., Halle, 1850‑51; the Arabic text edited by Cureton, London, 1846;
al‑Baghdadi, *al‑Farq bain al­ Firaq*, tr. Kate Chambers Seelye, Part I,
Columbia University Press, New York, 1920 ; Ibn Hazm, *al‑Milal
wa’l‑Nihal*, partly translated by Prof. Friedlender in the JAOS, Vols.
XXVIII and XXIX; Krehl, *Beitrage zur Characteristik der Lehre vom
Glauben in Islam*, Leipzig, 1865; H. Ritter, *Uber UnesreKenntniss der
Arabischen Philosophie*, Gottengen, 1844; I3. B. Macdonald, *Development
of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and Constitutional Theory*, London &
New York 1903; A. J. Wensinck, *The Muslim Creed*, Cambridge, 1932; T.
J. de Boer, *The History of Philosophy in Islam*, tr. E. R. Jones,
London, 1903; *The Encyclopaedia of Islam*, prepared under the
supervision of M, Th. Houtsma and others, 4 Vols. and Supplement Leiden,
1913‑38; Muhammad Najm al‑Ghani Khan, *Madhahib al‑ Islam*, Luknow,
1924; al‑ Ghazali, *Ihya' \`Ulum al‑Din*, tr. into Urdu: *Madhaq
al‑\`Arifin* by Muhammad Ahsan, Lucknow, 1313/1895; Muhammad Rida
Husain, *al‑Kalam \`ala Falasifat al‑Islam*, Lucknow, 1905; Mubammad
Imam 'Ali Khan, *Falsafah‑i Islam* Lucknow, 1890; Abu Muzaffar
al‑Isfra'ini, *al‑Tabsir fi al‑Din*, Egypt, 1359/1941; Mahmud bin \`Umar
al‑Zamakhshari, *al‑Kashshaf.*

[^1]: The name of this sect is ahl al-wa’id.

[^2]: This group is called the Murji’ites. The same was the belief of
Jahm bin Safwa also.

[^3]: His companion, \`Amr ibn \`Ubaid, from the beginning, shared this
view of his. The Khawarij too come under the same category.

[^4]: Al‑Shahrastani, Kitab al‑Milal wa’l‑Nihal, quoted by A. J.
Wensinck in The Muslim Creed, Cambridge, 1932, p. 62.

[^5]: Ibid., pp. 62, 63.

[^6]: Siddiq Hasan, Kashf al‑ Ghummah \`an Iftiraq al‑ Ummah, Matb'ah
Lahjahani, Bhopal, India, 1304/1886, p. 19.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Cf. Urdu translation: Madhaq al‑\`Arifin, Newal Kishore Press,
Luclmow, p. 135.

[^9]: Qur'an, ciii, 1‑3.

[^10]: Ibid., lxxii, 23.

[^11]: Ibid., xx, 82.

[^12]: Ibid., iv, 48.

[^13]: Ibid.; xviii, 30

[^14]: Ibid., xi, 115.

[^15]: Al‑Shahrastani. op. cit., p. 21

[^16]: Ibid., p. 24.

[^17]: Ibid.

[^18]: T. J. de Boer, “Muslim Philosophy,” Encyclopaedia of Religion and
Ethics.

[^19]: Al‑Shahrastani, op. cit., Chap Khaneh‑i \`Ilmi, Teheran,
1321/1903, p. 77.

[^20]: Qur’an, ii, 120

[^21]: The tradition: Innakum satarauna rabbakum kama tarauna hadh
al‑qamar.

[^22]: The tradition: Kullu al‑nas fi dhati Allahi humaqa'.

[^23]: The tradition: La tufakkiru fi Allahi fatahlaku.

[^24]: Ma 'arafnaka haqqa ma'rifatika.

[^25]: 'Anqa' is a fabulous bird said to be known as to name but unknown
as to body.

[^26]: Al‑Shahrastani has criticized this statement of Mu'ammar, op.
cit., p. 29.

[^27]: Al‑Baghdadi, op. cit., pp. 188‑89.

[^28]: Muhammad Najm al‑Ghani Khan, Madhahib al‑Islam, Lucknow, 1924, p.
132.


