Chapter 26: Ibn Bajjah
======================

By Muhammad Saghir Hasan al-Ma’sumi

Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Yahya al-Sa'igh, known as Ibn Bajjah or Avem­pace
(d. 533/1138), hailed from the family *al-Tujib* and is, therefore, also
known as *al-Tujibi*. Ibn Bajjah was born at Saragossa towards the end
of the fifth/eleventh century, and prospered there. We have no knowledge
of his early life, nor have we any idea of the teachers under whom he
completed his studies. However, this much is clear that he finished his
academic career at Saragossa, for when he travelled to Granada he was
already an accomplished scholar of Arabic language and literature and
claimed to be well versed in twelve sciences.

This is evident from the incident that occurred in the mosque of Granada
as recorded by al-Suyuti: “One day Ibn Bajjah entered the mosque
(*jami'ah*) of Granada. He saw a grammarian giving lessons on grammar to
the students sitting around him. Seeing a stranger so close to them, the
young students addressed Ibn Bajjah, rather by way of mockery: 'What
does the jurist carry? What science has he excelled in, and what views
does he hold?' 'Look here,' replied Ibn Bajjah, 'I am carrying twelve
thousand dinar under my armpit.'

He thereupon showed them twelve valuable pearls of exquisite beauty each
of the value of one thousand dinar. 'I have,' added Ibn Bajjah,
'gathered experience in twelve sciences, and mostly in the science of
'Arabiyyah which you are discussing. In my opinion you belong to such
and such a group.' He then mentioned their lineage. The young students
in their utter surprise begged his forgiveness.”[^1]

Historians are unanimous in regarding him as a man of vast knowledge and
eminence in various sciences. Fath ibn Khaqan, who has charged Ibn
Bajjah of heresy and has bitterly criticized his character in his
*Qala'id al-'Iqyan*,[^2] also admits his vast knowledge and finds no
fault with his intellectual excellence. On account of his wealth of
information in literature, grammar, and ancient philosophy, he has been
compared by his contemporaries with *al-Shaikh al-Ra'is* Ibn Sina.[^3]

Due to his growing fame, Abu Bakr Sahrawi, Governor of Saragossa,
appoint­ed him as his vizier. But when Saragossa fell into the hands of
Alphonso I, King of Aragon, in 512/1118, Ibn Bajjah had already left the
city and reached Seville via Valencia, settled there, and adopted the
profession of a medical practitioner. Later on, he left for Granada,
where occurred the incident referred to above. He then journeyed to
north-west Africa.

On his arrival at Shatibah, Ibn Bajjah was imprisoned by Amir Abu Ishaq
Ibrahim ibn Yiisuf ibn Tashifin most probably on the charge of heresy,
as Fath ibn Khaqan has it. But as Renan opines,[^4] he was set free,
probably on the recommendation of his own disciple, father of the famous
Spanish philosopher Ibn Rushd.

Later on, when Ibn Bajjah reached Fez, he entered the Court of the
Governor, Abu Bakr Yahya ibn Yusuf ibn Tashifin, and rose to the rank of
a vizier by dint of his ability and rare scholarship. He held this post
for twenty years.

This was the time of great troubles and turmoils in the history of Spain
and north-west Africa. The governors of towns and cities proclaimed
their independence. Lawlessness and chaos prevailed all over the
country. The rival groups and personalities accused one another of
heresy to gain supremacy and to win the favour of the people. The
enemies of Ibn Bajjah had already declared him a heretic and tried
several times to kill him. But all their efforts proved a failure. Ibn
Zuhr, the famous physician of the time, however, suc­ceeded in killing
him by poison during Ramadan 533/1138 at Fez, where he was buried by the
side of Ibn al'Arabi the younger.

His Predecessors
----------------

There is no doubt that philosophy entered Spain after the third/ninth
century. Some of the ancient manuscript copies of *Rasa'il Ikhwan
al-Safa* available in Europe are ascribed to Maslamah ibn Abmad
al-Majriti.[^5] Maslamah was a great mathematician in Spain. He
flourished during the reign of Hakam II and died in 598/1003. [^6] Among
his disciples, Ibn al-Safa, Zahrawi, Karmani, and Abu Muslim 'Umar ibn
Abmad ibn Khaldun al-Hadrami were famous for mathematical sciences.

Karmani and Ibn Khaldun were also known as philosophers. Ibn Khaldun
al-Hadrami hailed from Seville and died in 449/1054. [^7] Karmani, whose
full name is Abu al-Hakam 'Amr ibn 'Abd al-Rabman ibn Ahmad ibn 'Ali,
hailed from Cordova, journeyed to the Eastern countries and studied
medicine and arithmetic at Harran. On his return to Spain he settled at
Saragossa. According to the statement of Qadi Sa\`id[^8] and
Maqqari,[^9] he was the first man who took the *Rasa'il Ikhwan al-Safa*
to Spain. Karmani died at Saragossa in 450/1063.

But philosophy had entered Spain long before the *Rasa'il Ikhwan
al-Safa* were introduced in that region. Muhammad ibn \`Abdun
al-Jabali[^10] travelled to the East in 347/952, studied logic with Abu
Sulaim Muhammad ibn Tahir ibn Bahrain al-Sijistani, and returned to
Spain in 360/965. Similarly, Ahmad and 'Umar, . the two sons of Yunus
al-Barrani, entered Baghdad in 330/935, studied sciences with Thabit ibn
Sinan ibn Thabit ibn Qurrah, and after a considerable period returned to
Spain in 351/95611. [^11]

This is evident that philo­sophy was imported into the West from the
East and that in the fourth/ tenth century Spanish students studied
mathematics, *Hadith*, *Tafsir*, and *Fiqh* as well as logic and other
philosophical sciences at Baghdad, Basrah, Damas­cus, and Egypt. But
from the end of the fourth/tenth century, when philo­sophy and logic
were condemned in Spain and the advocates of these sciences were
persecuted, the common people stopped favouring these sciences as far
down as the fifth and sixth/eleventh and twelfth centuries. This was the
reason why Ibn Bajjah, Ibn Tufail, and Ibn Ruahd had to face
persecution, imprisonment, and condemnation. Very few people in those
days dared deal with rational sciences.

Among the predecessors of Ibn Bajjah, Ibn Hazm deserves special
attention. Ibn Hazm occupies a very high place in theology and other
religious sciences. His *Kitab al-Fasl fi al-Milal w-al-Nihal* is unique
in that he has recorded the creeds and doctrines of the Christians,
Jews, and others without displaying any prejudice. But in the domain of
philosophy he has never been mentioned by any Spanish scholar side by
side with the philosophers. Maqqari records:[^12] “Ibn Habban and others
say, Ibn Hazm was a man of *Hadlth*, jurisprudence, and polemics. He
wrote many books on logic and philosophy in which he did not escape
errors.”

His Contemporaries
------------------

For throwing light on the contemporary thinkers of Ibn Bajjah we have no
earlier authority than his own disciple ibn al-Imam, through whom we
have received information about his writings. Al-Wazir Abu al- Hasan
'Ali ibn 'Abd al-\`Aziz ibn al-Imam, a devoted disciple of Ibn Bajjah,
preserved the latter's writings in an anthology to which he added an
introduction of his own. That Ibn Bajjah was very fond of this disciple,
a vizier, is apparent from the pre­amble of his letters addressed to him
which are available in the said anthology as preserved in the Bodleian
Library, Oxford.[^13]

In his introduction to the anthology, Ibn al-Imam says: “... the
philosophical books were current in Spanish cities in the time of
al-Hakam II (350/961-366/976), who had imported the rare works composed
in the East and had got them made clear. He (Ibn Bajjah) transcribed the
books of the ancients and. others and carried on his investigation into
these works. The way had not been opened to any investi­gator before him
(Ibn Bajjah). Nor had anything except errors and alterations been
recorded concerning these sciences of the ancients.

A number of errors for example, were committed by Ibn Hazm, who was one
of the most exalted investigators of his time, while most of them had
not ventured even to record their thoughts. Ibn Bajjah was superior to
Ibn Hazm in investigation, and more penetrating in making distinctions.
The ways of investigation in these sciences were opened only to this
scholar (Ibn Bajjah) and to Malik ibn Wuhaib of Seville, both of whom
were contemporaries. But except for a short account of the principles of
logic nothing was recorded by Malik.

Then he gave up investigating these sciences and speaking about them
openly, because of the attempts made on his life due to his discussing
philosophical sciences, and due to the fact that he aimed at victory in
all his conferences on scientific subjects. He turned to the religious
sciences and became one of the leaders in them; but the light of
philosophical knowledge did not shine upon his mind, nor did he record
in philosophy anything of a private nature which could be found after
his death.

As for Abu Bakr (may Allah show him mercy) his superior nature stirred
him not to give up investigating into, inferring from, and reading all
that had left its real impression on his mind on various occasions in
the changing conditions of his time.”

The words of Ibn al-Imam are quite clearly appreciative of the merits of
the contemporary Malik, and of predecessors like Ibn Hazm. Ibn al-Imam's
praise of his teacher has been shared by a number of historians. Ibn
Tufail, the famous author of the well-known philosophical romance, *Hayy
Ibn Yaqzan*, and a younger contemporary of Ibn Bajjah, singles out Ibn
Bajjah in the introduction to his immortal romance, and describes him as
follows: “But none of them possessed a more penetrative mind, a more
accurate view or a more truthful insight than Abu Bakr ibn al-Sa'igh.”

Al-Shaqandi (d. 629/1231), in his famous letter in which he enumerates
the achievements of the Spanish Muslims as against the Africans,
challenges the latter by saying: “Have you anybody among yourselves like
Ibn Bajjah in music and philosophy?”[^14] Maqqari records the following
statement: “As for the works on music, the book of Ibn Bajjah of.
Granada is sufficient by itself. He occupies in the West the place of
Abu Nasr al-Farabi in the East “[^15]

Another contemporary of Ibn Bajjah was al-Amir al-Muqtadir ibn Hud, who
reigned over Saragossa (438/1046-474/1081). He has been mentioned by
al-Shaqandi, who addresses the Africans in these words: “Have you any
king expert in mathematics and philosophy like al-Muqtadir ibn Hud, the
ruler of Saragossa?”[^16] His son al-Mu'tamin (d. 474/1085) was a patron
of rational sciences.''[^17]

Works
-----

We give below a list of Ibn Bajjah's works:

1. The Bodleian MS., Arabic Pococke, No. 206, contains 222 folios.[^18]
It was written in Rabi' II 547/1152 at Qus. This MS. lacks the treatise
on medicine, and *Risalat al-Wada'*.

2. The Berlin MS. No. 5060 (vide Ahlwardt : Catalogue), lost during
World War II.

3. The Escurial MS. No. 612. It contains only those treatises which Ibn
Bajjah wrote as commentaries on the treatises of al-Farabi on logic. It
was written at Seville in 667/1307.

4. The Khediviah MS. *Akhlaq* No. 290. It has been published by Dr. Omar
Farrukh in his Ibn *Bajjah w-al-Falsafah al-Maghribiyyah*. On
com­parison it has been established that this is an abridgment of
*Tadbir al-Mutawahhid*-abridgment in the sense that it omits the greater
part of the text but retains the very words of the original writer.

5. Brockelmann states that the Berlin Library possesses a unique ode of
Ibn Bajjah entitled *Tardiyyah*.

6 Works edited by Asin Palacios with their Spanish translation and
neces­sary notes. (i) *Kitab al-Nabat*, *al-Andalus*, Vol. V, 1940; (ii)
*Risalah Ittisal al-'Aql.bi al-Insan, al-Andalus*, Vol. VII, 1942; (iii)
*Risalah al-Wada', al-Andalus*, Vol. VIII, 1943; (iv) *Tadbir
al-Mutawahhid* entitled *El Regimen Del Solitario*, 1946.

7 Works edited by Dr. M. Saghir Hasan al-Ma'sumi: (i) *Kitab al-Nafs*
with notes and introduction in Arabic, *Majallah al-Majma' al-'Ilm
al.'Arabi*, Damascus; 1958; (ii) *Risalah al-Ghayah al-Insaniyyah*
entitled *Ibn Bajjah on Human End*, with English translation, *Journal
of Asiatic Society of Pakistan*, Vol. II, 1957.

Philosophy
----------

Ibn Bajjah was skilled both in the theory and practice of the
mathematical sciences, particularly astronomy and music, adept in
medicine, and devoted to speculative studies like logic, natural
philosophy, and metaphysics. In de Boer's opinion, he conforms entirely
to al-Farabi in his logical writings and generally agrees with him even
in his physical and metaphysical doctrines.[^19] Let us examine how far
this statement is correct in the light of the writings of Ibn Bajjah
that have come down to us.

Ibn Bajjah has undoubtedly relied in philosophy and logic on the works
of al-Farabi, but it is obvious that he has made considerable additions
to them. Again, he has adopted an entirely different method of
philosophical investiga­tion. Unlike al-Farabi, he deals with the
problems on the basis of reason alone.

He admires the philosophy of Aristotle on which he has founded his own
system. But, he says, for understanding the speculative method of
Aristotle it is of utmost importance to understand, first of all, his
philosophy .correctly. That is why Ibn Bajjah wrote his commentaries on
the works of Aristotle. These commentaries bear clear evidence that he
studied the texts of Aristotle very carefully. As in Aristotle's
philosophy, Ibn Bajjah has based his metaphysics and psychology on
physics, and that is why his writings abound in discourses on physics.

Matter And Form
---------------

De Boer writes: “Ibn Bajjah starts with the assumption that matter
cannot exist without some form, while form may exist by itself, without
matter.” But this is erroneous. According to Ibn Bajjah, matter can
exist without form. He argues that if matter is not formless then it
will be divided. into “matter” and “form,” and this will go on *ad
infinitum*.[^20] Ibn Bajjah claims that the “First Form” is an abstract
form which exists in matter that is said to have no form.

Aristotle defines matter as what receives form and is in a way
universal. His matter in this sense differs from the matter of Plato
who, though agreeing with the above definition, maintains that form in
itself is real and needs nothing to bring it into existence. The aim of
Aristotle is not only to state that matter and form are dependent upon
each other but also to distinguish the particular form of a species from
that of another species. The form of a plant is different, for example,
from the form of an animal, and the form of an inanimate object differs
from the form of a plant, and so on.

In the writings of Ibn Bajjah the word *form* has been used to convey
several different meanings: soul, figure, power, meaning, concept. In
his opinion the form of a body has three stages: (1) the general spirit
or the intellectual form, (2) the particular spiritual form, and (3) the
physical form.

He has divided the spiritual form into the following types: -

I. The forms of circular bodies have only this much connection with
matter that they make the material intelligibles perfect.
2. The material inteligibles which exist in matter.
3. Those forms which exist in the faculties of the soul - common sense,
imaginative faculty, memory, etc., and are the *via media* between
spi­ritual forms and material intelligibles.

Those forms which are related to the active intellect are called by Ibn
Bajjah general spiritual forms, and those which are related to the
com­mon sense are called particular spiritual forms. This distinction
has been maintained because the general spiritual forms have only one
relation and that with the recipient, whereas the particular spiritual
forms have two relations - one particular with the sensible, and the
other general with the percipient.

A man, for example, recalls the form of the Taj Mahal; this form is not
different from the form of the actual Taj Mahal when it is before the
eyes - this form has, besides the aforementioned particular relation, a
relation with the general body of percipients, since there are many
individuals who enjoy the sight of the Taj Mahal.

Psychology
----------

Ibn Bajjah, like Aristotle, bases his psychology on physics. He begins
his discussion of the soul with its definition by stating that bodies,
natural or artificial, are composed of matter and form, their form being
the permanent acquisition or the entelechy of the body. Entelechy is of
various kinds: it belongs either to those existents that perform their
function without being essentially moved, or to those that move or act
while they are being acted upon.

A body of this latter type is composed of both mover and moved, whereas
the artificial body has its mover outside. Now, the form that supplies
the entelechy of a natural body is called the soul. The soul is,
therefore, defined as the first entelechy in a natural, organized body
which is either nutritive, sensitive, or imaginative.

The ancient philosophers who preceded Aristotle had confined their study
to the human soul alone and regarded the study of the animal soul as a
part of natural soience. *Soul* is an equivocal term, because it is not
homogeneous in nature. If it were so, its functions would have likewise
been homogeneous. It actually functions heterogeneously: nutritively,
sensitively, imaginatively, or rationally.

Since every transitory being has to perform a particular function in
virtue of which it stands as a part of the universe, the nutritive
faculty has two ends, namely, growth and reproduction. This faculty does
not only provide substances which are needed for the upkeep of the body,
but also a surplus which is employed for the growth and development of
the body. But when the growth is completed, the surplus is used for
reproduction in those bodies that are reproductive.

The faculty of reproduction is to be distinguished from the nutritive
faculty which acts on food and makes it a part of the body. This faculty
is the “Actual Intellect” which changes a potential species into the
body of an actual species. Those bodies that are not reproductive depend
for the preservation of their species upon spontaneous generation. The
reproductive faculty is the end of the faculty of growth and perishes
only in old age when the nutritive faculty is left alone.

Sense-perception is either actual or potential. What is potential can
become actual only when it is changed by something else. It, therefore,
requires a mover to change it. This mover is the sensible, the moved
being the sense-­organ.

The sensibles or the natural accidents are of two kinds: either they are
particular to the natural bodies or common to the natural and the
artificial bodies; and they are, again, either mover or moved. They are
always moved towards the species, since a mover causes motion in them
only in so far as they are particular species, and not because they
possess matter.

Every sen­tient body is composite and is the result of a mixture of
different elements. This mixture is produced by innate heat and gives
rise, for example, to con­densation and rarefaction, as of odours,
flavours, and colours. But besides these material states, there arise
certain other states such as reproduction and spontaneous generation
which are caused by the intellect or some other mover.

As soon as the process of mixture begins, the form begins to be
received. Motion and reception of form take place simultaneously; and
when the soul attains perfection, the reception of form is completed,
matter and form, thus, becoming a single whole. When form is separated
from matter, it exists actually as abstracted from matter, but is not
the same as it is when it is in matter - ­and this is possible only if
it now exists as an idea in the mind.

Sensation is, therefore, transitory. But how can a separate form be
transitory, since tran­sitoriness is only due to matter? The answer is
this. The term “matter” is used for “psychical faculty” and “corporeal
faculty” equivocally, and it means only the receptivity of form through
which a body that has the faculty of sensitivity becomes sentient. The
faculty of sense-perception is, therefore, a capacity in the sense-organ
that becomes a form of the thing perceived.

But a further question arises: If perception is a form in matter, how
can matter actually exist when it is not so informed? The answer is
given as fol­lows: “That \`apprehensions' are in a substratum and are
identical with it, is clear, or else \`an apprehension' would not be a
particular. But it does not follow from this that form cannot exist
apart from-matter since the matter of \`apprehension' is the receptivity
of the forms of the apprehensibles only, and is called matter *per
prius*, while the matter of the \`apprehensible' is called *per
posterius.*”

Psychical perception is of two kinds: sensation and imagination. As said
before, sensation is by nature prior to imagination, for which it
supplies the matter. In short, sensation is a capacity of the body which
is acted upon by ­the sensible. Since movements are many, sensations are
also many; and because the sensibles are either general or particular,
sensations are also general or particular.

The five senses -- sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch are five
faculties of a single sense, viz., the common sense. Common sense plays
the role of matter through which the forms of things become perceptible.
It is through common sense that a man judges and distinguishes different
states of the perceptible and realizes that every particle of an apple,
for example, possesses taste, smell, colour, warmth, or cold. For this
faculty preserves the impres­sions of the sensibles which enable the
senses to apprehend the sensibles. The common sense is the entelechy of
the whole body and is, therefore, called the soul. This faculty also
supplies matter for the faculty of imagination.

Defined as the first entelechy of the organized imaginative body, the
imagina­tive faculty is preceded by sensation which supplies material to
it.. Sensation and imagination have, therefore, been described as two
kinds of the perceception of the soul. But the difference between the
two is obvious inasmuch as sen­sation is particular and imagination
general. The imaginative faculty culminates .in the reasoning faculty
through which one man expresses himself to another, and achieves as well
as imparts knowledge.

The appetitive soul consists of three faculties: (1) The imaginative
appetenee through which progeny are reared, individuals are moved to
their dwellings, and have affection, love, and the like. (2) The
intermediate appetence through which there is desire for food, housing,
arts and crafts. (3) The appetence that makes speech and, through that,
teaching possible and, unlike the other two, is peculiar to man.

The appetitive soul is applied to these three faculties *per prius et
per poste­rius*. Every animal possesses the intermediate appetence by
which it inclines to nutrition. Some animals do not possess the
imaginative yearning. The yearning of intermediate appetence precedes by
nature the imaginative appe­tences. The one thing that is clear is that
every man has two faculties – the appetitive and the rational - and
these precede others by nature.

The appetitive soul desires a perpetual object or an object in so far as
it is perpetual. This desire is called pleasure, and the absence of
desire is dullness, pain, and the like. Action is caused by desire, and
perpetuity is caused by the faculties. Desire is not distinctive of man.
Anyone who does an action induced by desire is regarded to have done an
action based on animality. It is obvious that when a man acts in this
manner, he does it not because he is possessed of ideas. He attains
perpetuity only to the extent to which he is possessed of them.

Though devoid of eternity, the appetitive soul has a strong desire for
eternity. It loves only the intermediate imaginary form and the
imaginary form. These are the only two forms which are perpetually loved
by the appeti­tive soul. But since forms are many, the appetitive soul
hesitates to make an attempt to realize them.

Again, the appetitive soul seeks the service of nature, and suffers from
pain and laziness when nature does not co-operate with it. As nature is
not simple, it is not always in one and the same state. It is due to
nature that an animal needs rest, and it is due to the appetitive soul
that it feels dissatisfied with it when prolonged.

But these two forms (i. e., the intermediate imaginary form and the
imaginary form) are transitory, not eternal. Hence the appetitive soul
does not achieve eternity but that which represents it, and what
represents it is not difficult to estimate, for individuals as
individuals think that they achieve eternity through perfection and
perfection through the attainment of power and free­dom.

Hence arises the power and freedom of those despots who hold sway over
large areas of the world. Their unlimited power, abundant wealth, and
unbridled activities, however, bring them no benefit, for most of them
die of hunger and in utter regret for losing what they possessed. They
are overtaken by fatigue and distress in dealing with the appetitive
soul. In their hearts there survives the memory of their past and they
feel regret and remorse.

When this occurs to the class of despots, what will be the fate of those
who are lower in rank? This is as it should be, because the anxiety of
their appetitive soul is to collect what is not to be collected and
achieve what is not to be achieved. The animals which have no reason do
not suffer from this kind of remorse, for their appetitive soul has no
ambition and they have no memory of their past whims. They suffer only
from natural calamities such as old age, which is the lot of every
natural organism.

The imaginative faculty in man is the faculty through which he receives
impressions of the sensibles and presents them before himself in
imagination after their disappearance. This function of the imaginative
faculty takes place both in our waking life and in sleep. This faculty
also composes forms of the objects of imagination never sensed before.
Sometimes it imagines and com­poses something which is not an individual
but something applicable to a whole class.

At the final stage of imagination appears the intellect, and the
rational faculty starts functioning; and we find in ourselves something
which distin­guishes us from other animals that obtain nutrition and
possess sense-organs. Man finds in himself, for example, some objects of
knowledge (concepts) containing the distinction between good and evil,
useful and harmful. He also finds in himself things which he considers
to be definitely true, things which are merely conjectural, and things
which are false. These known objects in the soul are called *logos*.

Logos is in the first instance related to the potential rational
faculty, the function of which is to receive the objects of knowledge.
This is so because in the earlier stages man is devoid of them and
receives them only at a later stage. The term “logos” is applicable to
the objects of knowledge after they become potentially receptible, and
also when they actually exist and are expressed through words.

These objects of knowledge (concepts) which exist in potentiality and
become actual in rationality, when considered in relation to the objects
which they signify, constitute their know­ledge since they are known
through and recognized by them. When they are considered in so far as
they are perceived by the imaginative faculty and are applied to the
contents derived from them, they are called intelligibles;-but when they
are considered in so far as they are perceived by the rational faculty
which completes them and brings them from potentiality into actuality,
they are called mind or the intellect.

There are various grades of knowledge, the first of which is the
knowledge of a particularly specified object. This primarily comes into
being by achieving the apprehension of the particular in the imaginative
faculty in a general way only, i.e., it cannot be imagined specifically.
Nor can any quality of the same be described. But it is distin­guished
in a general way without attending to any one of its qualities. This is
the weakest knowledge of an object and resembles the imagination of an
animal.

Again, when the state of the particular is possible in the imaginative
faculty, man advances to this particular with its detailed
characteristics, which help him to recognize it to be the same at
different times. He distinguishes Zaid, for example, as tall, fair,
delicate, and considers all these descriptions in his imagination as
though they were related numerically to one individual.

Some people, however, think that sometimes words lead to absurdity for
they intro­duce multiplicity where there is only unity: for example, the
particular which is described by the words “tall,” “fair,” and so on, is
not more than one. How­ever, this is the way in which man achieves the
knowledge of individuals in so far as they are definite and particular.
Since.the qualities through which the particular individuals are known
as described above are accidents attached to different individuals,
there is no resemblance between any two individuals. Tallness in Zaid,
for example, is not exactly the same as tallness in Bakr.

When the objects of imagination are obtained in the imaginative faculty,
the rational faculty looks at them through its insight, and realizes the
universal meanings. Through these universal meanings the rational
faculty imagines and distinguishes the nature of every imagined object.
And when the words indicating the universal meanings are mentioned, the
rational faculty distinguishes them, presents them before the mind, and
apprehends them. All this occurs in more ways than one.

1. The rational faculty presents universal meanings before the mind, and
apprehends them as true of the imagined individuals signified by them.
Through insight the rational faculty sees the universal meanings in the
indivi­duals. In this sense this faculty distinguishes universal
meanings from one another in the manner described above.

2. According to another method, the rational faculty distinguishes these
universal meanings perfectly, but when it sees them through its insight
and presents them to the soul well arranged, it sees them through its
insight in the imaginative faculty which also acts upon them, and makes
them resemble the universal meaning and imparts to them forms which are
common to more than one, but not to all individuals to which the meaning
is applicable.

The sculptor represents the form of a horse in stone, or a painter draws
the form of a horse on the surface of a board, but this representation
is imperfect, for it represents and reproduces the form of a horse that
*obtains nutrition*, and *neighs*. But all that is represented thus is
not common to all horses. The imaginative faculty represents things
which are limited in respect of age, size, etc. The image of a horse is
not common to the full-grown horse, the young horse, and the colt. Its
image is common only to the horses of that particular size or age which
the imaginative faculty represents.

As soon as the rational faculty makes distinctions of universal
meanings, and presents them to the mind to look more closely into them
through its insight, the latter looks into them through the image which
the imaginative faculty represents. The rational faculty distinguishes
whether the image is perfect or not perfect, common or not common.
Without any difficulty it thinks of the intelligible meanings.

In this way the universal meanings are apprehended by artists and most
scientists. When the artisan, for example, thinks how to make an
article, he presents the image of the particular article to his
imaginative faculty, and prepares his plan to make it. Similarly, when a
scientist looks into the objects of knowledge to know their nature and
give their description, he presents their images to his imaginative
faculty.

These are two methods by which the imaginative faculty serves the
rational faculty by presenting to the latter the phantoms of an object,
either the phan­toms of the individual object itself or those of its
image, which represents the universal meaning, as mentioned above. The
rational faculty imparts universal descriptions to the objects of
imagination. Whoever exerts the rational faculty to act on the objects
obtained in the imaginative faculty sees the confirmation of what has
been mentioned and sees through his rational faculty the divine gift
flowing over the faculty. This is just like a person who sees by the
faculty of seeing the light of the sun through the light of the sun.

The immediate cause of the apprehension of intelligibles and the
activity of the rational faculty in actuality is a gift which is like
the light of the sun through which one realizes and sees the creation of
God so clearly that one becomes a believer in Him, His angels, books,
messengers, and the next world, enjoys certain belief, and remembers God
while standing, sitting, and lying. Every thought is obtained through
this gift which is no other than man's connection with the active
intellect.

Thus, it may be concluded that Ibn Bajjah starts describing
“Aristotelian Psychology” and in the end arrives at the position of Ibn
Sina and also of al-Ghazali, whose name he mentions with respect and
reverence.

Intellect And Knowledge
-----------------------

According to Ibn Bajjah, the intellect is the most important part of
man. In his opinion correct knowledge is obtained through the intellect
which alone enables us to attain prosperity and to build character.
Something has already been said about the source of the intellect and
its working. The following extracts will, however, throw some further
light on the matter:

“It is necessary for man to see through his own insight the contents of
the imaginative faculty, just as he sees the individual objects with his
eyes and distinguishes them fully. He is sure to find that those
individual objects are repeatedly impressed upon the imaginative
faculty. Many imaginable objects have one or more than one individual in
the imaginative faculty. They also possess the accidents attached to
these individuals, viz., measure, colour, knowledge, health, sickness,
motion, time, space, and other categories.

Having realized all this, a man sees through his insight that the
rational faculty looks into the objects of imagination and apprehends
their common charac­teristic, i. e., the differentia which distinguishes
them from the objects of sense, differentia by virtue of which they are
considered to be individuals and distin­guished as intelligible objects.
One should also realize that these differentiae are discerned by the
rational faculty through the divine gift which flows over them in the
same way as the objects of sight become manifest to the perceiving mind
through the light of the sun that falls on them, without which light
they would remain completely invisible.

Through the same gift the whole is distinguished from its parts and is
judged to be greater than the parts. Again, numbers considered to be
numerals are declared by this gift as different and many when
investigation into God's creation - the creatures of heaven and earth,
night and day, messengers, revelation, dreams, and what the soothsayer's
tongue utters - is repeated so much that man comprehends them through
the imaginative faculty, and the rational faculty sees through its
insight in a pure, simple, and peculiar way the existence of objects
which are neither conceived by thought nor perceived by the senses. Its
outlook becomes widened, and it desires to know the causes of those
creatures which become intelligible.

The rational faculty does not know the objects of knowledge adequately
unless it knows them through four causes - form, matter, agent, and
purpose. It is necessary to know all these causes in respect of the
objects which inevitably possess them.

Man is by nature inclined to investigate and know all these causes. His
inquiry covers in the first instance the four causes of the objects of
sense-perception. This is quite evident with respect to the objects of
art as well as those of nature. He is all the more interested in knowing
the causes of the intelligible objects, for this investigation is
considered to be sublime, high, and useful. Finally, it is through
investigation of causes that man reaches the belief in God, His angels,
books, messengers, and the life hereafter.”

“Look,” says Ibn Bajjah, “into the wonders that lie between the
intellect and the faculty of imagination through your penetrative soul.
You can see with certainty that the intellect derives from the
imaginative faculty the objects of knowledge called the intelligibles,
and offers to the imaginative faculty a number of other objects of
knowledge.

Take, for example, the moral and artistic ideals, or those objects of
knowledge which are either the events that might take place and are
available in the imaginative faculty before their occurrence, or the
events that have not occurred but have found their way into the
imaginative faculty not through the sense-organs but rather through the
intellect as in the case of true dreams.

The most astonishing thing concerning the imaginative faculty is that
which relates to revelation and soothsaying. It is clear in these cases
that what the intellect offers to the human imagination does not proceed
from the intellect itself, nor is acted upon by the intellect, but
arises in imagination through an agent who has known it beforehand, and
is able to create it.

It is God who causes by His will the mover of the active spheres to act
upon the passive spheres as He likes. When, for example, He intends to
make manifest what will occur in the uni­verse, He first of all sends
the knowledge to angels and through them to the human intellect. This
knowledge comes to man in accordance with his capacity for receiving it.
This is evident in most cases of God's virtuous servants whom He has
shown the right path and who are sincere to Him, particularly the
apostles to whom He makes manifest through His angels in waking life or
dream the wonderful events that are going to happen in the universe.

“God, the Almighty, makes manifest to His existing beings and creatures
both knowledge and deed. Every being receives these from Him according
to its rank in the perfection of existence: the intellects receive from
Him know­ledge according to their positions, and spheres receive from
Him figures and physical forms according to their ranks and positions.
Every celestial body possesses intellect and a soul through which it
performs particular actions which are perceived by way of imagination
such as the imagination of trans­ference from an imaginary place which
continues to exist.

Due to this indi­vidually perceptible particular transference there
arise particular actions which are perceived by the bodies that come
into being and pass away. This is most manifest in the sun and the moon
from among the celestial bodies. It is through this intellect that a man
knows sciences which are revealed to him from God, things that are
intelligible, the particular events which are to take place in the
present and the future, as well as the events that happened in the past.
This is the knowledge of the unseen of which God informs His chosen
servants through His angels.”

Ibn Bajjah further elucidates the nature of human knowledge and the
stages thereof when he says:
“Knowledge in man means his seeing the existents to­gether with their
perfect existence iu his intellect through the insight of his soul which
is a gift of God. This gift of God is of different grades in different
men, the greatest insight being that of prophets who perfectly know Him
and His creatures, and enjoy that sublime knowledge in their own souls
through their excellent insights without learning and without making any
effort to learn.

The highest knowledge is that of God Himself and His angels down to the
knowledge of what particular events have taken place and will take place
in this universe - knowledge gained through the insight of their hearts,
without the use of the eyes.

In a lower rank than that of the prophets are the friends of God who
possess excellent nature through which they derive from the prophets
that which enables them to attain to the knowledge of God and the
knowledge of His angels, books, apostles, the Last Day, and the highest
blessing, which they continue to attest by the insight they enjoy in
accordance with the different degrees of the divine gift they receive.
These sincere men also receive a little bit of the knowledge of the
unseen in their dreams. The friends of God include the Companions of the
Prophet.

After them come a number of men whom God has favoured with insight
through which they realize with cer­tainty the reality of everything
till stage by stage they attain to sure know­ledge of God, His angels,
books, apostles, and the Last Day. They realize through their insight
that they have become pure and have achieved perfec­tion or the highest
blessing, which is continuity without destruction, honour without
disgrace, and richness without fear of poverty. These people who include
Aristotle are very few in number.”

Ibn Bajjah believes in the plurality of intellects and refers to the
first intellect and the secondary intellects. In his opinion, the human
intellect is the intellect remotest from the first intellect. He further
explains the grades of the intellect by saying that some intellects have
been directly derived from the first intellect, and some others are
derived from other intellects, the relation of what has been derived to
that from which derivation has been made being the same as the relation
of the light of the sun which is inside the house to that of the sun
which is in the courtyard of the house.

Knowledge of the nature of existents which the intellect possesses is of
two kinds: (1) that which is intelligible but cannot be invented, and
(2) that which is intelligible and can be invented. The intellect itself
is also of two kinds: (i) theoretical intellect through which man
understands things which he cannot bring into being, and (ii) practical
intellect through which he con­ceives artificial beings which he can
invent.

Perfection of the practical intellect lies in man's understanding
artificial objects and bringing them into being in accordance with his
own intention. These are invented only through the organs of the human
body, either by the movement of the organs without any implement from
outside, or by moving the organs which in their turn move some external
instruments. This happens when the artificial objects are accomplished
by the human volition.

Human organs are moved *per se,* but when an artificial object is made,
they are moved by the human volition at first in the mind, and then the
object is produced outside the mind in accordance with the image formed
in the mind before the organs bring it into being. This image is a
phantom in the imaginative faculty of the soul and is general. This
image disappears from the soul which obtains another image, and the
process continues.

Whenever man intends to make a certain object, he forms an image in the
imaginative faculty. Then he can see by his insight that another faculty
of the soul abstracts this image in the imaginative faculty and
transfers it from one state to an­other until its existence is
accomplished in the soul, and then he sets the organs into motion to
bring the object into being. This faculty which understands and
abstracts in imagination is called the practical intellect. When in the
imaginative faculty the practical intellect primarily abstracts the
image of the artificial object according to a particular form and size,
the moving faculty moves the organs to invent the object.

The intellect is, therefore, the first maker of the object, and not the
organs which are moved by the soul, nor indeed the faculty which moves
the organs. It is clear that the power of organs is not primarily found
in nature but is caused to come into being by the faculty of the
intellect which causes it to appear in imagination, and only then the
organs cause the objects to be made through volition.

The imaginative faculty seeks the help of sense-perception at the time
of inventing the object to present it to the faculty which has moved the
organs, and to enable the intellect to compare and see whether the
imagined object belongs to sense-perception in the same way as it
belongs to the imaginative faculty.

The intellect has two functions to perform; (1) to present to the
faculty of imagination the image of the object to be created, and (2) to
have the object made outside the soul by moving the organs of the
individual's body.

According to Ibn Bajjah, the human intellect by degrees achieves
nearness to the first intellect in two ways:. (1) by achieving knowledge
based on proof, in which case the highest intellect is realized as form;
and (2) by achieving knowledge without learning or making an effort to
acquire it. This second method is that of the Sufis, notably of
al-Ghazali; it enables one to gain the knowledge of God.

From this it is clear that though Ibn Bajjah has emphasized the
speculative method, he does not condemn the mystic method, as some
Europeans would have us believe.[^21]

God, The Fountain-Head Of Knowledge
-----------------------------------

With regard to the divine gift through which the rational faculty
discerns the differentiae, one man excels another, and that in
accordance with the capacity that God has given him. But these two gifts
are innate, not acquired. The capacities and gifts which are acquired
are next to the innate ones and they are acquired by doing, under the
guidance of the prophets, what pleases God. Man, therefore, should
respond to the Holy Prophet's call and do what he urges him to do.

He can, thus, see through the insight of his heart the nature of every
creature, its origin, and its final destination. He can know in the same
way that God is a necessary being *per se*, is alone, has no associates,
and is the creator of everything; that everything besides Him is
contingent and has emanated from His perfect essence: that His
self-knowledge implies His knowledge of all objects; and that His
knowledge of objects is the cause of their coming into being.

To reduce the number of stages to achieve nearness to God, Ibn Bajjah
advises us to do three things : (1) charge our tongues to rememebr God
and glorify Him, (2) charge our organs to act in accordance with the
insight of the heart, and (3) avoid what makes us indifferent to the
remembrance of God or turns our hearts away from Him. These have to be
followed con­tinuously for the whole of one's life.

Political Philosophy
--------------------

Ibn Bajjah wrote a number of small treatises on the administration of
the House-State and the administration of the City-State, but the only
available book on the subject is *Tadbir al-Mutawahhid* (Regime of the
Solitary). As is clear from this book, Ibn Bajjah agrees to a great
extent with the political theory of al-Farabi. He has, for example,
accepted al-Farabi's division of the State into perfect and imperfect.
He also agrees with al-Farabi in holding that different individuals of a
nation possess different dispositions-some of them like to rule, and
some others like to be ruled.[^22]

But Ibn Bajjah adds to the system of al-Farabi when he exhorts that the
solitary man (*mutawahhid* or the penetrative philosopher) should keep
aloof from the people in certain circum­stances. Even though avoidance
of people is in itself undesirable, it is necessary in the endeavour to
achieve perfection. He also advises him that he should meet the
community only on a few inevitable occasions for a short time, and that
he should migrate to those countries where he finds knowledge, migration
being perfectly permissible under the laws of the science of
politics.[^23]

In his *Risalat al-Wada*\` Ibn Bajjah has given two alternative
functions of the State: (1) to estimate the deeds of the subjects in
order to guide them to reach their intended goals and not any other
ends. This function can be best per­formed in the ideal State by a
sovereign ruler. (2) The alternative function is to devise means for the
achievement of particular ends just as a rider as a preliminary exercise
acquires control over the bridle in order to become an expert in riding.
This is the function of the administrators of those States which are not
ideal. In this case the ruler is called the chief (*ra'is*). The chief
enforces in the State a traditional system for the subjects' execution
of all actions.

In the system of al-Farabi, as well as in that of Ibn Bajjah, the
constitution is to be framed by the Head of the State, who has been
equated by al-Farabi with a prophet or Imam. Ibn Bajjah does not mention
this identity in so many words but he indirectly agrees with al-Farabi
when he declares that “human perfection cannot be attained but through
that which the apostles bring from God the Exalted (i, e., the divine
Law or *Shari\`ah*). Those who follow God's guidance cannot be led
astray.”[^24] It is, therefore, too sweeping a state­ment to say, “He
(Ibn Bajjah) ignores the political relevance of the divine Law
(*Shari\`ah*) and its educative value for man as a citizen.”[^25]

Ethics
------

Ibn Bajjah divides actions into animal and human. The former are due to
natural needs and are human as well as animal. Eating, for example, is
animal in so far as it is done to fulfil need and desire, and human in
so far as it is done to preserve strength and life in order to achieve
spiritual blessings.

Ibn Bajjah draws our attention to the active human faculties, as man is
too dignified to be qualified with the passive faculties which are
either material or animal. The human faculty of learning is a passive
faculty, but it is so in a different sense. The active faculty intends
to attain perfection only, and then it stops, as in the art through
which a trade is accomplished. But the repetition of the art is
exercised only through the appetitive soul and opinion.

What is done due to the appetitive soul is the action which is done by
the agent for its own sake. And, what is done by opinion is the action
which is done to gain some other end. The appetitive soul desires a
perpetual object, the desire being called pleasure, and its absence
dullness and pain. Anybody who per­forms an action in this way is
regarded as having done an animal action.

Those who act through opinion act only in so far as they are men.
Opinion either moves one to that which is essentially perpetual, or to
that which is perpetual because it is abundant. If the action is
perpetual due to abundance, then the end will take the place of the
preliminary action. This end-seeking is either due to propensity only,
in which case it is an animal action, or due to opinion which has an
intended goal in the achievement of which lies its completion.

The end varies in accordance with the nature of the individuals; some
people, for example, are born for shoe-making and others for other
vocations. Ends serve one another mutually, and all of them lead to one
and the same ultimate goal-the chief end. The chief man is naturally he
who prepares himself to aim at the chief end, and those who are not
prepared for it are subservient by nature. Some people are, therefore,
naturally sub­missive and are ruled by others, and some possess
authority by nature and rule others.

Opinion is sometimes right essentially. It is so when it desires the
eternal. Sometimes it is right accidentally and not in its essence. The
opinions of the shrewd and crafty, for example, are right in respect of
the objects they have set up before them; but they are not
right-in-themselves. These opinions are relatively right but not
universally so.

Colocynth is useful for a man of phlegmatic disposition, but not for
all. On the other hand, bread and meat are useful both naturally and
universally. The opinion which is right relatively as much as generally
is right absolutely. But sometimes what is relatively right is not so in
general, and is, therefore, right in one respect and wrong in another.

To declare an action animal or human it is necessary to have speculation
in addition to volition. Keeping in view the nature of volition as well
as speculation Ibn Bajjah divides the virtues into two types, the formal
virtues and the speculative virtues. A formal virtue is innate without
any trace of volition and speculation, such as the honesty of a dog,
since it is impossible for a dog to be dishonest. This virtue has no
value in man. The speculative virtue is based on free volition and
speculation.

The action which is done for the sake of righteousness and not for
fulfilling any natural desire is called divine and not human, since this
is rare in man. Good, according to Ibn Bajjah, is existence, and evil is
absence of existence. In other words, evil for him is really no evil.

Mysticism
---------

Renan is right in his view that Ibn Bajjah has a leaning towards
mysticism, but is certainly wrong in thinking that he attacks al-Ghazali
for his insistence on intuition and Sufism. As a matter of fact, Ibn
Bajjah admires al-Ghazali and declares that the latter's method enables
one to achieve the knowledge of God, and that it is based on the
teachings of the Holy Prophet.

The mystic receives a light in his heart. This light in the heart is a
speculation through which the heart sees the intelligibles in the same
way as a man sees the sunlit objects through eyesight; and through this
apprehension of the intelligibles it sees all that which by implication
precedes them or succeeds them.

Ibn Bajjah holds the friends of God (*auliya' Allah*) in high esteem and
places them next only to the prophets. According to him, some people are
dominated by corporeality only - they are the lowest in rank - and some
are greatly dominated by a fine spirituality - this group is very rare,
and to this group belong Uwais al-Qarani and Ibrahim ibn Adham.[^26]

In his attitude towards God and His decree Ibn Bajjah comes close to
declaring himself a fatalist. In one of the treatises he declares that
if we were to refer to the decree of God and His power we would verily
attain peace and comfort. All existing things are in His knowledge and
He alone bestows good upon them. Since He knows everything essentially,
He issues orders to an intermediary to invent a form like the one which
is in His knowledge and to the recipient of forms to receive that form.
This is the case concerning all existents, even concerning transitory
matter and the human intellect.

In support of his view that God is the Ultimate Creator of all actions
Ibn Bajjah refers to al-Ghazali's view, expressed at the end of his
*Mishkat al-Anwar*, that the First Principle created agents as well as
the objects of action to be acted upon; and he gets further support for
this view from al­-Farabi's observation, in \`*Uyun al-Masa'il*, that
all are related to the First Principle in so far as the First is their
creator.

Ibn Bajjah also states that Aristotle said in his Physics that the First
Agent is the real agent and the near agent does not act but through the
First. The First makes the near act and the object to be acted upon. The
near is known to the majority of people as agent only in affairs that
concern matter. The just king, for example, deserves the ascription of
justice, although he is distant in rank from him who is below him in the
series of agents.

Whoever ascribes an action to a near agent is like the dog that bites
the stone by which it is struck. But such ascription of action to the
near agent is not possible in affairs which do not concern physical
matters. The active intellect which surrounds the heavenly bodies is the
near agent of all transitory particulars. But He who created both the
active intellect and the heavenly bodies is the real eternal agent.

God causes the existence of a thing to continue without end after its
physical non-existence. When an existent reaches its perfection, it
ceases to remain in time (*zaman*) but exists eternally in the
continuous flux of duration (*dahr*). Ibn Bajjah here reminds one of the
Holy Prophet's saying: “Do not abuse *dahr* as *dahr* is Allah.” So
interpreted, the saying implies that the human intellect enjoys eternal
continuity. In support of this interpretation of the word *dahr* Ibn
Bajjah mentions his predecessors like al-Farabi and al-Ghazali.

Bibliography
------------

*Bughhyah*, Egypt, 1326 A.H.; *Rasa'il Iklwan al-Safa li al-'Arif
al-Majriti*, MS. Arabic, Bodleian Hunt No. 296; Risalat al-Wada',
Bodleian MS. Fol. 137a;
Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah *Tabaqat al-Atibba'*;
Al-Maqqari, *Nafh al-Tib*; Ibn Khaqan, *Qala'id al­-'Iqyan*;
Ibn Khallikan, *Wafayat al-A'yan*;
Al-Qifti, *Tarikh al-Hukama'*;
Munk, *Melanges*;
Leclerc, *Histoire de la medecine arabe*;
T. J. de Boer, *The History of Philosophy in Islam*.

[^1]: Bughyah, Egypt, 1326 A.H.

[^2]: Egyptian ed., p.300.

[^3]: Bughyah, p.207.

[^4]: Averroes et l'averroisme, pp. 32, 163.

[^5]: Vide the MS. Arabic Bodleian Hunt No. 296 entitled Rasa'il Ikhwan
al-Safa li al-'Arif al-Majriti.

[^6]: Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah, Vol. II, p. 39.

[^7]: Ibid., p.41.

[^8]: Ibid., p.40.

[^9]: Al-Maqqari, Nafh, Vol.II, p.232.

[^10]: Ibn Abi Usaibi’ah, Vol. II, p.41.

[^11]: Ibid., p.42.

[^12]: Al-Maqqari, op.cit, Vol.I, p.358.

[^13]: E. Pococke, 206, Foll.128a-213a.

[^14]: Al-Maqqari, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 141.

[^15]: Ibid., p.137.

[^16]: Ibid., p.141.

[^17]: Ibid., Vol. I, p.288.

[^18]: For details see Ma’arif, Azamgarh, 1954, Vol. LXXIII 73, No.2.

[^19]: The History of Philosophy in Islam, p. 117

[^20]: Sama', Fol. 7a, Arist. Phys., i. 7. 191a8.

[^21]: De Boer, The History of Philosophy in Islam, p. 177

[^22]: Tadbir, p.52.

[^23]: Ibid., p.78.

[^24]: Risalat al-Wada’, Bodleian MS, Fol.137a.

[^25]: E. I. J. Rosenthal, “The Place of Politics in the Philosophy of
Ibn Bajjah,” Islamic Culture, Jubilee Number, Part 1, Hyderabad, 1951,
p. 193.

[^26]: Tadbir, p.45.


