Chapter 27: Ibn Tufail
======================

By Bakhtyar Husain Siddiqi

Life And Works
--------------

Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn 'Abd al-Malik ibn Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Tufail
(Latin, Abubacer), the first great leader of philosophical thought in
the Muwahbid Spain, was born in the first decade of sixth/twelfth
century, at Guadix, in the province of Granada. He belonged to the
prominent Arab tribe of Qais. Al-Marrakushi traces his education to Ibn
Bajjah, which in view of Ibn Tufail's denial of acquaintance with him,
is incorrect.[^1]

He started his career as a practising physician in Granada and through
his fame in the profession became secretary to the governor of the
province. Later, in 549/1154, he became Private Secretary to the
Governor of Ceuta and Tangier, a son of 'Abd al-Mu'min, the first
Muwahhid ruler of Spain who captured Morocco in 542/1147.

Finally, he rose to the eminent position of the physician and Qadi of
the Court and vizier[^2] to the Muwahhid Caliph Abu Ya'qub Yusuf (r.
558/1163-580/1l84), whose personal interest in philosophy and liberal
pat­ronage turned his Court into a galaxy of leaders of philosophical
thought and scientific method and made Spain, what R. Briffault calls,
“the cradle of the rebirth of Europe.”[^3]

Tbn Tufail enjoyed enormous influence with Caliph Abu Ya'qub Yusuf, and
it was he who introduced Ibn Rushd (d. 595/1198) to him. On the express
desire of the Caliph, he advised Ibn Bajjah to annotate the works of
Aristotle, a task that had been taken up zealously by Ibn Bajjah but had
remained unfinished to the time of his death.[^4]

Ibn Tufail resigned his position as Court physician in 578/1182 due to
old age and recommended Ihn Rushd to his patron as his successor. He,
however, continued to retain Abu Ya'qub's esteem and after his death (in
580/1184) gained the favour of his son Abu Yusuf al-Mansur
(580/1184-595/1199). He died at Morocco in 581/1185-86. Al-Mansur
himself attended his obsequies.

Ibn Tufail was an illustrious physician, philosopher, mathematician, and
poet of the Muwahhid Spain, but unfortunately very little is known about
his works. Ibn Khatib attributes two treatises on medicine to him.
Al-Bitruji (his pupil) and Ibn Rushd credit him with “original
astronomical ideas.” Al-Bitruji offers a refutation of Ptolemy's theory
of epicycles and eccentric circles which in the preface to his *Kitab
al-Hai'ah* he acknowledges to be a contribution of his teacher Ibn
Tufail.[^5]

Quoting Ibn Rushd, Ibn Abi Usaibi'ah attributes *Fi al-Buqa' al-Maskunah
w-al-Ghair al-Maskunah* to Ibn Tufail, but in Ibn Rushd's own account no
such reference is traceable.[^6] Al-Marrakushi, the historian, claims to
have seen the original manuscript of one of his treatises on the science
of divinity.[^7] Miguel Casiri (1122/1710-1205/1790) names two extant
works: *Risalah Hayy lbn Yaqzan* and *Asrar al-Hikmah al-Mashriqiyyah*,
the latter in manuscript form.[^8] The preface to the *Asrar* discloses
that the treatise is only a part of the *Risalah Hayy Ibn Yaqzan*, the
full title of which is *Risalah Hayy Bin Yaqzan fi Asrar al-Hikmat
al-Mashriqiyyah*. [^9]

Creed Of The Muwahhids
----------------------

The foundation of the Muwahhid dynasty is associated with the name of
Ibn Tumart (d. c. 524/1130), a politico-religious leader who claimed to
be the Mahdi. He introduced in the West orthodox scholasticism of
al-Ghazali and exhorted people to observe the Zahirite *Fiqh*. During
his travels he met 'Abd al-Mu'min al-Qumi (d. 558/1163), a potter's son,
and made hirn his disciple and successor in his puritanical movement. He
raised the banner of revolt against the corrupt Murabit rulers of Spain,
but success ultimately fell to the lot of 'Abd al-Mu'min, who took Oran,
Tlemcen, Fez, Sale, Ceuta and in 542/1147 became the first Muwahhid
ruler of Morocco. He was succeeded by Abu Ya'qub Yusuf (d. 580/1184) and
then by Abu Yusuf al-Mansur (d. 595/1199) on whose Courts the two great
luminaries Ibn Tufail and Ibn Rushd, shed imperishable luster.[^10]

The Muwahhids professed to be Ghazalians. They were noted for their
puritanical belief in the unity of God. Anthropomorphic notions were an
anathema to them. Secondly, inspired by Ibn Tumart, they stood for the
strict observance of the exoteric aspect of religion. The Zahirite Fiqh
constituted the Muwahhid State religion. Thirdly, as a legacy of Ibn
Bajjah, they regarded philosophy as a species of esoteric truth reserved
for the enlightened few. The masses, being incapable of pure knowledge,
should not be taught more than the literal sense of the colourful
eschatology of the Qur'an.[^11]

Needless to say, the mental equipment of Ibn Tufail is largely provided
by the official religion of the Muwahhids, and his *Hayy Bin Yaqzan* is
but a defence of the attitude of the Muwahhids both towards people and
philosophers.[^12]

Hayy Bin Yaqzan
---------------

### Summary

The treatise dramatically opens with the spontaneous birth of Hayy in an
uninhabitated island, followed by a popular legend about his being
thrown to this desolate place by the sister of a certain king, in order
to keep her marriage with Yaqzan a secret. Unalloyed by social
conventions. he is nourished there by a roe and taught by natural reason
or common sense, which, though really very uncommon, equips him with
inductive intellect to probe into the secret of things.

Unlike the lower animals, he becomes con­scious of his being naked and
unarmed with physical weapons of defence. He reflects over the situation
and covers the lower parts of his body with leaves. arms himself with a
stick, and thus comes to realize the superiority of his hands over the
feet of animals. The death of the mother-roe leads him to the discovery
of the animal soul which uses the body as an instrument, like the stick
in his hands, shares light and warmth with fire, and thus bears
resemblance to the heavenly bodies.

He then turns to the analysis of the phenomena of nature, compares the
objects around him, and discriminates between them, and classifies them
into minerals, plants, and animals. Observation shows him that body is a
common factor in all the objects, but they belong to different classes
because of the functions peculiar to them. This leads him to assume a
specific form or soul for each class of objects.

But the soul being imperceptible, his dialectical ingenuity at last
brings him to the idea of an ultimate, eternal, incorporeal, and
necessary Being which is the efficient cause of the peculiar behaviour
of bodies. This makes him conscious of his own immaterial essence; and
acting upon a three-point code of ascetic discipline which will be
explained later, he is finally absorbed in the unrestrained
contemplation of the Ultimate Being.

At this stage, Asal, a contemplative and meditative soul, from the
neigh­bouring inhabited island appears on the scene in quest of
attaining perfection in solitude. He informs Hayy, the child of nature,
about the Qur'anic con­ceptions of God, His angels, prophets, the Day of
Judgment, etc., which he by his self-developed intellect immediately
recognizes as truths. He, however, in the first instance, fails to see
the wisdom implicit in the figurative languages of the Qur'an about God
and the hereafter, and in the permission that it gives one to lead a
worldly life - -a permission which is likely to turn one away from the
truth.

Full of ambition and hope, he sets out in the company of Asal to the
said inhabited island ruled by Salaman and begins to reform its
convention-ridden people. He endeavours hard to enlighten the masses
through pure concepts, but, in the end, finds these concepts far above
their heads. He then realizes the wisdom of the Prophet in giving them
sensuous forms instead of full light, returns to his lonely island, and
is absorbed in contemplation.

### Sources

*Hayy Bin Yaqzan* is a unique creation of Ibn Tufail's
mystico­-philosophical thought. Nevertheless, the idea of this romance
is not entirely new. Ibn Sina (d. 428/1037), among his predecessors, had
written a mystic allegory of the same title. But the comparison ends
here. Ibn Sina's dramatized tale narrates how one day he, with a few
companions, went out for a ramble in the vicinity of a town and chanced
to meet an old man, Hayy bin Yaqzan, and requested him to be permitted
to accompany him is his unending journeys. But the old man replied that
that was not possible for Ibn Sina, because of his companions whom he
could not leave.

In this allegory Ibn Sina himself represents the rational soul, the
companions the various senses, and the old man, Hayy bin Yaqzan, the
active intellect.[^13] “With Ibn Sina,” thus, “the character of Hai
[Hayy] represents the Superhuman Spirit, but the hero of Ibn Tofail's
romance seems to be the personification of the natural spirit of Mankind
illuminated from above; and that Spirit must be in accordance with the
Soul of Muhammed when rightly understood, whose utterances are to be
interpreted allegorically.”[^14]

Similarly, the names of Salaman and Asal, the other two characters of
Ibn Tufail's romance, are not new in the philosophical literature.
These, too, have been borrowed from Ibn Sina's tale of *Salaman wa
Absal*, of which we know only through Tusi's paraphrase in his
commentary on *Isharat*.

The story relates how Absal, the younger brother of Salaman, was obliged
to proceed to war in order to avoid the immoral designs of the latter's
wife, but was deserted by the army through her machinations and his
wounded body was carried away by a gazelle to a place of safety. On
returning home, he raised a strong army and regained the lost kingdom
for Salaman, whose wife becoming desperate poisoned him to death.

The sorrow-stricken Salaman lost heart and became a hermit. A mystic
trance, at last, revealed to him that his own wife was the cause of the
catastrophe, and he killed her and all her accomplices.[^15] Salaman, in
this tale, represents the rational soul, Absal the theoretical reason,
and Salaman's wife, the passion-worshipping body.

Notwithstanding the similarity of names and the episode of the gazelle,
the basic theme of both the treatises is intrinsically different. With
Ibn Sina the main object is to show how personal afflictions (he himself
was a prisoner in the dungeon of a fortress while writing the allegory)
invoke divine grace and cause the purification of the soul but the
object of Ibn Tufail is nothing less than to dramatize the development
of theoretical reason from the gross sense-perception to the beatific
vision of God.[^16]

By far the most marked, deep, and saturating influence, which seems to
have coloured the basic structure of Ibn Tufail's romance, is that of
Ibn Bajjah, his arch-rationalist predecessor. His lonely, metaphysically
minded Hayy is only an extreme form of the “solitary man” of Ibn
Bajjah's *Tadbir al-Mutawahhid*. Nevertheless, in spite of his
recognition of the necessity of solitude for the improvement of
theoretical reason, Ibn Tufail feels rather unhappy over Ibn Bajjah's
one-sided emphasis on the role of reason in arriving at the ultimate
truth. Somewhat sympathetically he complains of the “incompleteness” of
Ibn Bajjah's *Tadbir al-Mutawahhid*.[^17]

It is to the desire of removing this incom­pleteness that Ibn Tufail's
*Hayy Bin Yaqzan* owes its origin. And it is the influence of Ghazali
(d. 505/1111) and perhaps also of Suhrawardi Maqtul, his Persian
contemporary that made him supplement reason with ecstasy in its flight
to the celestial world.

Of Hayy's birth in an uninhabited island, Ibn Tufail relates two
versions. The scientific version of his spontaneous birth, he owes
entirely to Ibn Sina.[^18] The legendary version is traced by Gracia
Gomez (“Comparative Study of Ibn Tufail and Baltazar Gracian,” Madrid,
1926) to *Dhu al-Qarnain wa Qissat al-Sanam w-al-Malak we Bintuhu*, a
Greek tale translated into Arabic by Hunain ibn Ishaq.

The tale narrates how, under royal displeasure, the daughter of a king
threw away her natural daughter from the son of her father's vizier, in
the sea, the surging waves of which landed her in an uninhabited island
where she was nourished by a roe. She grew up into a beautiful damsel;
later, Alexander the Great chanced to meet her in the island of
Oreon.[^19] That the life of Hayy resembles that of the damsel in its
initial stages, there can be no doubt, but the resemblance ends there.
Besides, the aforesaid Greek tale does not seem to be the only source of
this legend. Badi' al-Zaman Foruzanfar has lately traced the threads of
the fable to the Persian tale of *Musa-o Dara-o Nimrud*.[^20]

The romantic frame of *Hayy Bin Yaqzan* is by no means original. It is
of Alexandrian origin; it may have even a Persian strain. Nevertheless,
it is Ibn Tufail who changes a simple tale into a romance of a unique
philosophical significance. It is the philosophical acumen rather than
the poetic imagination that marks the treatise with novelty and makes it
to be “one of the most original books of the Middle Ages.”[^21]

### Object of the Treatise

As al-Marrakushi, the historian, has said, *Hayy Bin Yaqzan* is a
treatise which aims at giving a scientific explanation of the be­ginning
of human life on earth.[^22] As a prelude to the story of *Hayy Bin
Yaqzan*, it is related that the moderate climate of the uninhabited
island, coupled with a fair proportion of the elements, led to the
spontaneous birth of the first man, who found the stick a successful
weapon in the struggle for existence, and thereby got the conviction of
his own superiority over other animals. But actually this beginning is
meant merely to provide a background for showing the development of
inductive intellect, independently of any social influence whatsoever.

Contradicting al-Marrakushi's position, but in complete agreement with
de Boer, Dr. Muhammad Ghallab[^23] rightly contends that the treatise
essen­tially aims at showing that the individual man left to himself is
able, with the resources of nature alone and without any help from
society, to advance to and reach the ultimate truth, provided he has the
necessary aptitude for doing so.

The truth of the Qur'an and the Hadith is open to pure intellectual
apprehension, but it has to be guarded against the illiterate masses
whose business it is not to think but to believe and obey. In fact, this
view is an echo of Ibn Bajjah's position, which later came to be
regarded as the proper official attitude under the Muwahhids.

Muhammad Yunus Farangi Mahalli[^24] points to a still higher aim
implicit in the treatise. Religion is as much essential for a
progressive society as are philosophy and mysticism - a thesis which is
brilliantly exemplified by the co-operation of the three dramatic
characters: Hayy, the philosopher; Asal, the mystic; and Salaman, the
theologian. The underlying aim is not only to show that philosophy is at
one with religion properly understood, but that both the exoteric and
the esoteric aspects of religion and philosophy are expressions of the
same eternal truth revealed to individuals according to their
intellectual capabilities.

Philosophically speaking, the treatise is a brilliant exposition of Ibn
Tufail's theory of knowledge, which seeks to harmonize Aristotle with
the Neo-­Platonists on the one hand, and al-Ghazali with Ibn Bajjah on
the other. Al-Ghazali was dogmatically critical of Aristotelian
rationalism, but Ibn Bajjah was Aristotelian through and through. Ibn
Tufail, following the middle course, bridged the gulf between the two.

As a rationalist he sides with Ibn Bajjah against al-Ghazali and
qualifies mysticism with rationalism; as a mystic he sides with
al-Ghazali against Ibn Bajjah and qualifies rationalism with mysticism.
Ecstasy is the highest form of knowledge, but the path leading to such
knowledge is paved with the improvement of reason, followed by the
purification of the soul through ascetic practices.

The methods of al-Ghazali and Ibn Tufail are both partially the same,
but, unlike the former, the latter's ecstasy is marked by a Neo-Platonic
strain. Al-Ghazali, true to his theologico-mystical position, takes
ecstasy as the means to see God, but to Ibn Tufail, the philosopher, the
beatific vision reveals the active intellect and the Neo-Platonic chain
of causes reaching down to the elements and back to itself.

Doctrines
---------

### World

Is the world eternal, or created by God at will out of sheer
nothing­ness? This is one of the most challenging problems of Muslim
philosophy. Ibn Tufail, quite in keeping with his dialectical ingenuity,
faces it squarely in the manner of Kant. Unlike his predecessors, he
does not subscribe to any of the rival doctrines, nor does he make any
attempt to reconcile them. On the other hand, he subjects both the
Aristotelian and the theological positions to scathing criticism.

The eternity of the world involves the concept of infinite existence
which is no less impossible than the notion of infinite extension. Such
an existence cannot be free from created accidents and as such cannot
precede them in point of time; and that which cannot exist before the
created accidents must itself be created in time. Similarly, the concept
of *creatio ex nihilo* does not survive his scrutiny. Like al-Ghazali,
he points out that the notion of existence after non-existence is
unintelligible without supposing the priority of time over the world;
but time itself is an inseparable accident of the world, and so its
being prior to the world is ruled out. Again, the created must needs
have a Creator. Why then did the Creator create the world now and not
before? Was it due to something that happened to Him? Obviously not, for
nothing existed before Him to make anything happen to Him. Should it be
attributed to a change in His nature? But what was there to bring about
this­ change? [^25]

Consequently, Ibn Tufail accepts neither the eternity nor temporal
creation of the world.
This antinomy clearly anticipates the Kantian position that reason has
its own limits and that its arguments lead to a maze of contradictions.

### God

Both eternity of the world and its *creatio ex nihilo* equally and
in­evitably lead to the existence of an eternal, incorporeal Necessary
Being.[^26] The creation of the world in time presupposes a Creator, for
the world cannot exist by itself. Again, the Creator must, of necessity,
be immaterial, for matter being an accident of the world is itself
subject to creation by a Creator. On the other hand, regarding God as
material would lead to an infinite regress which is absurd.

The world, therefore, must necessarily have a Creator that has no bodily
substance. And since He is immaterial, it follows that we cannot
apprehend Him by any of our senses or even by imagination; for
imagination represents nothing except the sensuous forms of things in
their physical absence.

The eternity of the world implies the eternity of its motion as well;
and motion, as held by Aristotle, requires a mover or an efficient
cause. If this efficient cause is a body, its power must be finite and
consequently incapable of producing an infinite effect. The efficient
cause of eternal motion must, therefore, be immaterial. It must neither
be associated with matter nor separated from it, nor within it nor
without it; for union and separation, inclusion and exclusion are the
properties of matter, and the efficient cause, by its very nature, is
absolutely free from it.

However, a question is posed here. God and the world both being eternal,
how could the former be the cause of the latter? Following Ibn Sina, Ibn
Tufail makes a distinction between eternity in essence and that in time,
and holds that God does precede the world in point of essence, and not
in respect of time. Take an example. If you have a body in your fist and
move your hand, the body, no doubt, will move with the movement of the
hand, yet its motion will be subject to the motion of the hand. The
motion of the latter proceeds from its essence, that of the former is
borrowed from the latter,[^27] though in point of time neither precedes
the other.

As to the world becoming co-eternal with God, he maintains in a mystic
strain that the world is not something other than God. Interpreting the
divine essence in terms of light, the essential nature of which is
perpetual illumination and manifestation, as held by al-Ghazali, he
conceives of the world as the manifestation of God's own essence and the
shadow of His own light that has no temporal beginning or end. It is not
subject to annihilation as the belief in the Day of Judgment tends to
suggest. Its corruption consists in its transforma­tion into another
form rather than in its complete annihilation. The world must continue
in one form or another, for its annihilation is inconsistent with the
supreme mystic truth that the nature of divine essence is perpetual
illumination and manifestation.[^28]

### Light Cosmology

In full agreement with Ibn Sina and other predecessors, Ibn Tufail
accepts the principle that from one nothing can proceed except one. The
manifestation of the existing plurality from unity is explained in the
monotonous Neo-Platonic fashion, as successive stages of emanation
proceeding from the divine light. The process, in principle, resembles
the successive reflection of solar light in looking-glasses. The light
of the sun falling on a looking-glass and from there passing into
another, and so on, gives an appearance of plurality.

All these are the reflections of the light of the sun, and yet they are
neither the sun, nor the looking-glasses, nor anything different from
both. The plurality of reflected light is lost into the unity of the sun
when we look to their source, but reappears when we look to the
looking-glasses in which the light is reflected. The same is true of the
primal light and its manifestation in the cosmos.[^29]

### Epistemology

The soul, in its first state, is not a *tabula rasa,* or a blank slate.
The image of God is implicit in it from the very beginning, but, in
order to make it explicit, we need to start with a clean mind, with
neither bias, nor prejudice. Freedom from social prejudices and
prepossessions as a primary condition of all knowledge is precisely the
idea behind Hayy's spon­taneous birth in an uninhabited island.

This being achieved, experience, intellection, and ecstasy play their
respective roles freely in giving a clear vision of the truth inherentt
in the soul. Not mere discipline of spirit, but the education of the
senses and the intellect, too, is essential for such a vision. The
harmony of experience with reason (Kant), on the one hand, and that of
reason with intuition (Bergson and Iqbal), on the other, constitutes the
very essence of Ibn Tufail's epistemology.

Experience is a process of knowing the environment through the senses.
The sense-organs owe their respective functions to the animal soul with
its seat in the heart; from there the confused manifold of sense-data
reaches the brain which spreads it all over the body through the
nerve-paths. It is transmitted through the same paths to the brain,
where it is organized into a perceptive whole.

Observation gives us knowledge about bodies which the inductive
intellect, with its instruments of comparison and discrimination,
classifies into minerals, plants, and animals. Each of these classes of
bodies exhibits certain specific functions, which lead us to postulate
specific forms or souls (like Aristotle) as the cause of the functions
peculiar to the bodies of different classes. Such a hypothesis, however,
is untenable on inductive grounds, for the supposed form or soul is not
open to direct observation. Actions, no doubt, appear to be issuing from
a certain body; in reality, they are caused neither by the body, nor by
the soul in a body, but by some cause external to it and that cause is
God as indicated before.[^30]

Ibn Tufail also knows the limitations of his newly discovered method.
Following al-Ghazali[^31] and anticipating Hume, he sees no power in the
cause which may necessarily produce the effect as it does. Hume's
empiricism ends in scepticism, but the mystic in Ibn Tufail makes him
see that the bond of causality is an act of synthesis which he ascribes
to God, but which Kant attributes to the *a priori* form of
understanding.

Ibn Tufail is at once a fore­runner of Bacon, Hume, and Kant. He
anticipated the inductive method of modern science; perceived the
inability of theoretical reason to solve the puzzle of the eternity and
temporal creation of the world, and that of the inductive intellect to
establish a necessary connection between cause and effect; and finally
cleared the clouds of scepticism by declaring with Ghazali that the bond
of causality is a synthetic act of God.

After educating the senses and the intellect and noticing the
limitations of both, Ibn Tufail finally turns to the discipline of the
spirit, leading to ecstasy, the highest source of knowledge. In this
state, truth is no longer obtained through a process of deduction or
induction, but is perceived directly and intuitively by the light
within. The soul becomes conscious of itself and experiences “what the
eye hath never seen, nor ear ever heard, nor the heart (mind) of any man
ever conceived.”[^32]

The state of ecstasy is ineffable and indescribable, for the scope of
words is restricted to what can be seen, heard, or conceived. Divine
essence, being pure light, is perceived only by the light within, which
comes into its own through the proper education of the senses,
intellect, and spirit. The knowledge of essence, therefore, is itself
essence. Essence and its vision are identical.[^33]

### Ethics

Not earthly felicity, nor even divine vicegerency, but complete union
with God is the *summum bonum* of ethics. Its realization, after the
improvement of inductive and deductive intellect, finally depends upon a
three-point code of spiritual discipline, which, according to de Boer,
has a “Pythagorean appearance.”[^34] Man is a curious mixture of body,
animal soul, and immaterial essence, and, thus, at once resembles
animals, celestial bodies, and God. His spiritual ascent, therefore,
consists in satisfying all the three aspects of his nature, by imitating
the actions of animals, heavenly bodies, and God.

As to the first imitation, it is binding upon him to provide his body
with bare means of sustenance and protect it against inclement weather
and wild animals, with the sole intention of preserving the animal soul.
The second imitation demands of him cleanliness in dress and body,
kindness to animate and inanimate objects, contemplation of the divine
essence and revolving round one's own essence in ecstasy. (Ibn Tufail
seems to believe that the celestial bodies possess animal soul and are
absorbed in the unrestrained contemplation of God.)

Lastly, he must equip himself with the positive and negative attributes
of God, viz., knowledge, power, wisdom, freedom from corporeality, etc.
Discharging one's obligation to oneself, others, and God, is, in brief,
one of the essentials of spiritual discipline.[^35] The last obligation
is an end-in-itself, the first two lead to its realization in the
beatific vision, where vision at once becomes identical with the divine
essence.

### Philosophy and Religion

Philosophy is purely intellectual apprehension of truth in concepts and
images which, by their very nature, are beyond the grasp of conventional
modes of expression. Language is a product of the material needs of
social environment and as such can lay its hand only on the phenomenal
world. The celestial world, being abstract and immaterial, al­together
eludes its grasp. Described in material symbols, it loses its essential
nature, and occasions men to think of it other than what it really is.
[^36]

Why then does the Qur'an describe the divine world in parables and
simili­tudes and thereby waive aside a clearer notion of it, and
occasion men to fall into the grave error of attributing a corporiety to
the essence of God, from which He is absolutely free? And why does not
the Holy Book go further than the precepts and rites of worship, and
give men leave to gather riches and allow them liberty in the matter of
food, by which means they employ themselves in vain pursuits and turn
away from the truth? Is it not the imperative need of the soul to free
itself from earthly passions and chains before starting its journey
towards heaven? Would not men lay aside worldly pursuits and follow the
truth, if they were elevated to pure knowledge in order to understand
things aright? [^37]

Hayy's miserable failure to enlighten the masses by means of pure
concepts clears the way to the answers to these questions. The Prophet
acted wisely in giving the masses sensuous forms instead of full light,
for they had no other way of salvation. Elevated to pure knowledge, they
would waver and fall headlong and make a bad end.

Never­theless, though Ibn Tufail voices the Muwahhid State policy of
withholding the teaching of philosophy from the multitude, he clearly
recognizes a class of gifted people who deserve philosophic instruction
and to whom allegory is the best means of imparting knowledge and
wisdom.

Religion is for the masses: but philosophy is a privilege of the gifted
few. Their provinces should be scrupulously kept apart. Philosophy, no
doubt, is at one with religion properly understood; both of them reach
the same truth, but through different ways. They differ not only in
their method and scope but also in the degree of the blessedness they
confer on their devotees.[^38]

Religion describes the divine world in terms of exoteric symbols. It
abounds in similitudes, metaphors, and anthropomorphic notions, so that
they might better accord with the people's understanding, fill their
souls with desire, and attract them to virtue and morality. Philosophy,
on the other hand, is a species of esoteric truth. It seeks to interpret
the material symbols of religion in terms of pure concepts and images
culminating in a state where the divine essence and its knowledge become
one.

Sense-perception, reason, and intuition are the bases of philosophical
knowledge. Prophets too have intuitions; their main source of knowledge
is revelation from God. The knowledge of the prophet is direct and
personal, but that of the followers is constituted of testimony.

Philosophy is an exclusive affair of the individual; it presupposes a
certain temperament and aptitude for enlightenment. Religion, on the
contrary, is a social discipline. Its point of view is institutional,
not individual. It aims, more or less, at a uniform betterment of the
masses in general, ignoring the individual differences in ability and
inner light.

Philosophy brings us face to face with reality. It demands unrestrained
contemplation of truth, uninterrupted vision of the primal light, the
source of all existence, by renouncing all worldly connections. Religion
is not so exacting in its dictates. It decries asceticism in any and
every sense of the word; for the generality of mankind, for whom it is
primarily meant, are incapable of living up to this ideal. It,
therefore, fixes the absolute minimum and then gives men leave to lead a
worldly life, without, however, trans­gressing the limits thereto.

Thus, the philosopher, left to his inner light, is capable of attaining
to supreme bliss. As to the masses, they should rest content with a
second-rate salvation, beyond which, owing to their own limitations,
they cannot rise. Later on this theory, under the influence of Ibn
Rushd, armed the medieval European scholars in their struggle against
the Church, with the doctrine of “two-fold truth,” John of Brescia and
Siger of Brabant being two of its chief representatives.[^39]

The story does not seem to end here; for the redeeming individualistic
attitude of modern philosophy, an attitude that distinguishes it from
both the medieval and the ancient outlook, also appears to be a
characteristic deposit of the same theory.

Influence
---------

Of Ibn Tufail's works only *Hayy Bin Yaqzan* is extant today. It is a
short philosophical romance, but so great has been its influence on the
succeeding generations in the West that it has come to be recognized as
“one of the most remarkable books of the Middle Ages.”[^40] In spirit,
says Leon Gauthier, it resembles Arabian Nights; in method it is both
philosophical and mystical.[^41]

It combines pleasure with truth by calling imagination and intuition to
the help of reason, and it is this peculiar appeal that has made it an
embodiment of imperishable lustre and eternal freshness, and has caused
its numerous editions and translations into Hebrew, Latin, English,
Dutch, French, Spanish, German, and Russian.[^42] Even today, the
world's interest in it has not ceased. Ahmad Amin's recent critical
Arabic edition (1371/1952), followed by its translations into Persian
and Urdu within the same decade, go far enough to prove that it has no
less a hold over the modem world than it had over the medieval
world.[^43]

The treatise caught the attention of the Quakers,[^44] and George Kieth,
finding in it a support for “enthusiastic notions”[^45] of the Society
of Friends, translated it into English in 1085/1674. So tremendous and
alarming was its influence or what Simon Ockley calls “bad use,” that he
was obliged to devote a thirty-six-page appendix to his English version
of the booklet (1120/1708), in order to refute Ibn Tufail's thesis that
the individual man, left to his a priori inner light, can arrive at the
ultimate truth.[^46]

A Spanish writer, Gracian Baltasar's indebtedness to Ibn Tufail occupied
the world's attention during the first four decades of the present
century. According to L. Gauthier, the early life of Andrenio, the hero
of Gracian Baltasar's *El Criticon* (Saragossa, 1062/1651), is a
“manifest” and “undeniable imitation” of Hayy's legendary version of
birth.[^47] But G. Gomez, the Spanish critic, claims that the *El
Criticon* is nearer to the Greek tale of *Dhu al-Qarnain wa Qissat
al-Sanam w-al-Malak wa Bintuhu*, referred to earlier, than to the *Hayy
Bin Yaqzan*.[^48]

D. K. Petrof, the Russian Orientalist, too holds that Gracian Baltasar
is an exception to Ibn Tufail's influence.[^49] But L. Gauthier, in his
latest version of the treatise (Beirut, 1355/1936), contradicts the
position of Gomez and Petrof, and concludes that Gracian Baltasar is
indebted to the Greek *Qissat al-Sanam* indirectly through the *Hayy Bin
Yaqzan* of Ibn Tufail.[^50]

The influence of the romantic frame of the treatise is also visible in
*Menedez Pelyo*, *Pou*,[^51] *Saif Bin dhi Yazan*, and *Tarzan*.[^52]
Even the Robinson Crusoe (1132/1719) of Daniel Defoe is no exception to
its pervading influence, as proved by A. R. Pastor in his Idea of
Robinson Crusoe.[^53]

Of Ibn Tufail's pupils Abu Ishaq al-Bitruji and Abu al-Walid ibn Rushd
stand far above the rest. He maintained his leadership in the sphere of
astron­omy through al-Bitruji[^54] whose theory of “spiral motion”
(*harkat laulabi*) marks the “culmination of the Muslim anti-Ptolemic
movement.”[^55] In philoso­phy and medicine he dominated the scene in
the person of Ibn Rushd,[^56] whose rationalism “ran like wild fire in
the schools of Europe” and ruled their minds for no less than three
centuries.

Bibliography
------------

Ibn Tufail, *Hayy Bin Yaqzan*, translated into Urdu by Z. A. Siddiqi,
Aligarh, 1955;
B. Z. Frouzanfar, *Zindah-i Bedar*, Teheran, 1956;
Kamil Gilani, *Hayy Bin Yaqzan* (Arabic summarry), Egypt;
Ahmad Amin, *Hayy Bin Yaqzan*, Egypt, 1952;
Z. A. Siddiqi, *Falsafah-i Hayy Bin Yaqzan* (Urdu), Aligarh, 1955;
Simon Ockley, *The Improvement of Human Reason Exhibited in the Life of
Hai Ebn Yakdhan*, London, 1708;
Leon Gauthier, *Ibn Thofail Sa vie ses oeuvres*, Paris, 1909;
D. B. Mac­donald, *Development of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and
Constitutional Theory*, London, 1903;
De Lacy O'Leary, *Arabic Thought and Its Place in History,* London,
1922;
T. J. de Boer, *The History of Philosophy in Islam*, translated into
English by E. R. Jones, London, 1903;
P. K. Hitti, *History of the Arabs*, London, 1937;
*Ency­clopaedia of Islam*, Vol. II. Leiden, 1927, article: “Ibn
Tufail”;
G. Sarton, *Intro­duction to the History of Science*, Vol. II, Part I,
1931;
R. Briffault, *The Making of Humanity*, London, 1930;
A. S. Nadawi, *Hukama'-i Islam*, Vol. II, Azamgarh, 1956;
M. Na\`im al-Rahman, *Khilafat-i Muwahhidin* (Urdu translation of
al­-Marrakushi's *al-Mu\`jab*), Madras, 1922;
M. M. Yunus Farangi Mahalli, *Ibn Rushd*, Azamgarh, 1342/1923;
“Ibn Tufail,” *Ma'arif*, Azamgarh, January, 1922, pp. 18-28;
Dr. M. Ghallab, “Ibn Tufail,” *Majallah Azhar*, Egypt, 1361/1942;
S. M. Afnan, *Avicenna*, London, 1958;
T. Arnold and A. Guillaume (Eds.), *The Legacy of Islam*, London,
1931;
C. Brockelmann; *Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur*, Vol. I, Weimar,
1898, and *Supplementbanden*, I, Leiden, 1937;
S. A. Bilgrami, *Tamaddun-i \`Arab* (Urdu translation of Le Bon
Gustave's French work), Agra, 1898;
F. Thilly, *A History of Philosophy*, New York, 1951;
A. J. Arberry, *Fitzgerald's Salaman and Absal*, Cambridge, 1956.

[^1]: Hayy bin Yaqzan, ed. Ahmad Amin, Egypt, 1952, p. 62. All
references are to this edition unless mentioned otherwise.

[^2]: Leon Gauthier doubts that he really held this office, for only one
text gives him this position and al-Bitruji, his pupil, calls him simply
Qadi. Cf. Encyclopaedia of Islam Vol. II, p. 424.

[^3]: The Making of Humanity, p. 188

[^4]: Na'im al-Rahman, Khilafat-i Muwahhidin (Urdu translation of
al-Marra­kushi's al-Mu'jab), p. 240.

[^5]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol.II, p.424.

[^6]: A. S. Nadawi, Hukama'-i Islam, Vol. II, p. 42.

[^7]: Khilafat.i Muwahhidin, p. 237.

[^8]: MS. No. 669, Escorial; published Bulaq, 1882. Cf. Leon Gauthier.
Ibn Thofail, pp. 32, 34.

[^9]: Gauthier, op. cit., p. 33, footnote.

[^10]: O'Leary, Arabic Thought and Its Place in History, pp. 246-50.

[^11]: D. B. Macdonald, Development of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence
and Con­stitutional Theory, pp. 251-54.

[^12]: Ibid., p.254.

[^13]: S. M. Afnan, Avicenna, p. 198.

[^14]: De Boer, The History of Philosophy in Islam, p. 185

[^15]: A. S. Nadawi, op. cit., p. 50.

[^16]: Later on 'Abd al-Rahman Jami (d. 898/1492) also adopted the names
of Sala­man and Absal as characters in one of his best known mystic
poems (first edition by F. Falconer, London, 1267/1850; translated into
English verse by Fitzgerald, 1267/1850, 1297/1879; literal translation
along with Fitzgerald's versions by A. J. Arberry, Cambridge,
1376/1956). Salaman in this poem symbolically represents the rational
soul, and Absal, his nurse and lover, the passion-worshipping body.
Their close union is frowned on by Salaman's royal father and the two
enter fire to put an end to their lives. But only Absal is consumed
while Salaman remains unharmed, whose sorrow for Absal, in the end,
gives way to celestial love for Venus. The poem, as it is, is nearer in
its aim and method to Ibn Sina's tale of Salaman wa Absal, rather than
to Ibn Tufail's Hayy Bin Yaqzan.

[^17]: We know of this book only through Moses of Narbonne's version in
his Hebrew commentary on Hayy Bin. Yaqzan, 750/1349, the summary of
which appears in M\_ Lntfi Jum\`ah's Tarikh Falsafat al-Islam. Cf. also
A. S. Nadawi. op. cit., Vol. 11, p. 30.

[^18]: Ibn Sina has advocated the same view in his Shifa'. Cf.. also
Jaihl al-Din Dawwani, Akhlaq-i Jalali, Lueknow, 1916, p. 41.

[^19]: Hayy Bin Yaqzan, p.13, footnote.

[^20]: Zindah-i Bedar, p.13.

[^21]: G. Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, Vol. II, p.
354.

[^22]: Khilafat-i Muwahhidin, p. 237.

[^23]: Article “Ibn Tufail,” Majallah Azhar, 1361/1942.

[^24]: Article “Ibn Tufail”,. Ma\`arif, Azamgarh, January 1922, pp.
18-28

[^25]: Hayy Bin Yaqzan, p.95.

[^26]: Ibid., pp. 96-97.

[^27]: Ibid., p.98.

[^28]: Ibid., p.120.

[^29]: Ibid., p.117.

[^30]: Ibid., p.92.

[^31]: Al-Ghazali “... goes to the extreme of intellectual scepticism,
and, seven hundred years before Hume, he cuts the bond of causality with
the edge of his dialectic and proclaims that we can know nothing of
cause or effect, but simply that one thing follows another (D. B.
Macdonald op. cit., p. 229).

[^32]: Hayy Bin Yaqzan, p.114.

[^33]: Ibid., p.115.

[^34]: De Boer, op.cit., p.186.

[^35]: Hayy Bin Yaqzan, pp.107-113.

[^36]: Ibid., p.119.

[^37]: Ibid., p.127.

[^38]: Z.A.Siddiqi, Falsafa-i Hayy Bin Yaqzan, p.103.

[^39]: F. Thilly, A History of Philosophy, p. 239.

[^40]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II, p. 425.

[^41]: Kamil Gilani, Hayy Bin Yaqzan, p. 106.

[^42]: The little masterpiece has a history of translations into
European languages, spread over six centuries: Hebrew translation with a
commentary and comparison with the Tadbir al-Mutawahhid of Ibn Bajjah by
the Jew Moses Ibn Joshua of Narbonne, 750/1349; Latin, E. Pococke Jr.,
Oxford, 1082/1671; reprinted, Oxford, 1112/1700; oriental editions, at
least four from Cairo and two from Constantinople, 1299/1881; English,
G. Kieth, London, 1085/1674; G. Ashwell, London, 1098/1686; S. Ockley,
London, 1120/1708, reprinted 1123/1711, 1144/1731, revised by E. A.
Dyek, Cairo, 1323/1905; P. Bronnle, London, 1322/1904; revised with an
Intro­duction by A. S. Fulton, London, 1325/1907, reprinted, London,
1328/1910, 1348/1929; Dutch, Bouwmeester, Amsterdam, 1083/1672,
reprinted 1113/1701; German, .J. G. Pritius, Francfort, 1139/1726; J. G.
Eichhorn, Berlin 1197/1782; Spanish, F. P. Biogues, Saragossa,
1318/1900, reprinted 1353/1934; Russian, J. Kuzmin, Leningrad,
1339/1920; French, L. Gauthier, Alger, 1318/1900, Paris, 1327/1909, and
Beirut, 1355/1936, the only authentic and exhaustive critical estimate.
(Brockelmann, Vol. I, p. 460, Supp. I, p. 831; George Sarton, op. cit.,
Vol. II, Part I, p. 355; Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. II, p. 425).

[^43]: Arabic edition, Egypt, 1327/1909, Damascus, 1359/1940, with a
commentary by Dr. J. Saliba and K. 'Awad, Ahmad Amin's critical Arabic
edition along with Ibn Sina and Suhrawardi's treatises of the same
title, has renewed world's interest in it. Arabic summary, K. Gilani,
Egypt; Persian (on Ahmad Amin's lines), B. Z. Frouzanfar, Teheran,
1376/1956; Urdu, Z. A. Siddiqi, Aligarh, 1376/1955, with a separate
exhaustive critical estimate, Aligarh, 1376/1956.

[^44]: A religious “Society of Friends,” started by George Fox
(1034/1624-1103/1691), with no formulated creed, liturgy, priesthood,
and outward sacrament. (Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. IX, p. 849.)

[^45]: S. Ockley, The Improvement of Human Reason, p. 194.

[^46]: Ibid., p.168.

[^47]: Gauthier, op. cit., p. 52.

[^48]: Hayy Bin Yaqzan, p. 13.

[^49]: G. Sarton, op.cit., p.355.

[^50]: Hayy Bin Yaqzan, p. 14, footnote.

[^51]: Ibid., pp.12, 14.

[^52]: Kamil Gilani, op.cit., p.105.

[^53]: A. R. Pastor, Idea of Robinson Crusoe, Part I, Wartford, 1930.

[^54]: He refuted Ptolemy's theory of epicycles and eccentric circles
and in the preface to his Kitab al-Hai'ah confesses that he is following
the ideas of Ibn Tufail (L. Gauthier, op. cit., p. 26).

[^55]: G. Sarton, op. cit., p. 399.

[^56]: He was advised by Ibn Tufail with regard to his commentaries on
Aristotle's works as well as his medical work Kulliyat. Cf. G. Sarton,
op. cit., p. 355


