Chapter 29: Nasir Al-Din Tusi
=============================

By Bakhtyar Husain Siddiqi

Life
----

Khwajah Nasir al-Din Abu Ja'far Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Hasan, an
accomplished scholar, mathematician, astronomer, and Shiite politician
of the period of the Mongol invasion on the Assassins and the Caliphate,
was born at Tus in 597/1201. After receiving early education from his
father and Muhammad b. Hasan, he studied *Fiqh*, *Usul*, *Hikmah* and
*Kalam* especially the *Isharat* of Ibn Sina, from Mahdar Farid al-Din
Damad, and mathematics from Muhammad Hasib, at Nishapur. He then went to
Baghdad, where he studied medicine and philosophy from Qutb al-Din,
mathematics from Kamal al-Din b. Yunus, and Fiqh and Usul from Salim b.
Badran.[^1]

Tusi began his career as an astrologer to Nasir al-Din 'Abd al-Rahim,
the Governor of the Isma\`ilite mountain fortress of Quhistan during the
reign of 'Ala al-Din Muhammad (618-652/1221-1255), the seventh Grand
Master (*Khudawand*) of Alamut. His “correspondence”[^2] with the
*wazir* of the last 'Abbasid Caliph, al-Musta\`sim (640-656/1242-1258)
of Baghdad, was, however, intercepted by his employers, and he was
removed to Alamut under close supervision, although he enjoyed there
every facility to continue his .studies. In 654/1256, he “played”[^3]
the last Assassin ruler Rukn al-Din Khurshah into the hands of Hulagu
and then accompanied the latter as his trusted adviser to the conquest
of Baghdad in 657/1258.[^4]

The Maraghah Observatory
------------------------

Tusi's chief claim to fame rests on his persuading Hulagu to found the
celebrated observatory (*rasad khanah*) at Maraghah, Adharbaijan, in
657/1259, which was equipped with the best instruments, “some of them
constructed for the first time.”[^5] Here he compiled the astronomical
tables, called *Zij al­-Ilkhani*, which “became popular throughout Asia,
even in China.” [^6]

Besides being dedicated to the advancement of astronomy and mathematics
in the late seventh/thirteenth century, this observatory was important
in three other ways. It was the first observatory the recurring and
non-recurring expenditure of which was met out of endowments, thus
opening the door for the financing of future observatories.[^7]

Secondly, just as Ibn Tufail (d. 581/1185) turned the Court of Caliph
'Abd al-Mu'min into an enviable intellectual galaxy that promoted the
cause of knowledge and wisdom in the West, Tusi made the Maraghah
observatory a “splendid assembly”[^8] of the men of knowledge and
learning by making “special arrangements”[^9] a for the teaching of
philo­sophical sciences, besides mathematics and astronomy, and by
dedicating the income of endowments to stipends. Thirdly, annexed to the
observatory, there was a huge library in which were stored the
incorruptible treasures of knowledge looted by the Mongols and Tartars
during their invasions on Iraq, Baghdad, Syria, and other territories.
According to Ibn Shakir, the library contained more than four hundred
thousand volumes.[^10]

Tusi retained his influential position under Abaqa, Hulagu's successor,
uninterrupted until his death in 672/1274.

Works
-----

In an age of widespread political devastation followed by intellectual
decline, Hulagu's patronage to Tusi is of singular importance in the
history of Muslim thought. The revival and promotion of philosophical
sciences in the late seventh/thirteenth century centred round Tusi's
personality. To the Persians, he was known as “the teacher of man”[^11]
(*ustad al-bashar*). Bar­-Hebraeus regarded him as “a man of vast
learning in all the branches of philosophy.”[^12] To Ivanow, he appears
an “encyclopedist,”[^13] and Afnan thinks him to be “the most competent
... commentator of Avicenna in Persia.”[^14]

One also cannot help being impressed by the “remarkable industry”
displayed by him in “editing and improving”[^15] the translations made
by Thabit bin Qurrah, Qusta bin Luqa, and Ishaq bin Hunain of Greek
mathematicians and astronomers. Brockelmann has enumerated fifty-nine of
his extant works,[^16] but Ivanow attributes “something like one hundred
and fifty works”[^17] to him. The list given by Mudarris Ridwi runs to
one hundred and thirteen titles, excluding twenty-one the attribution of
which to Tusi is doubtful.[^18]

Himself an accomplished scholar rather than a creative mind, Tusi's
position is mainly that of a revivalist and his works are largely
eclectical in character. But even as a revivalist and eclectic, he is
not lacking in originality, at least in the presentation of his
material. His versatility is indeed astonishing. His manifold and varied
interests extend to philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, physics,
medicine, mineralogy, music, history, literature, and dogmatics. His
important philosophical works are listed below.

I . *Asas al-Iqtibas* (logic), 1947.
2. *Mantiq al-Tajrid*, (logic).
3. *Ta'dil al-Mi'yar* (logic).

4. *Tajrid al.'Aqa'id* (dogmatics), Teheran, 1926.
5. *Qawa'id al-'Aqa'id* (dogmatics), Teheran, 1926.
6. *Risaleh-i I'tiqadat* (dogmatics).

7. *Akhlaq-i Nasiri* (ethics).

8. *Ausaf al-Ashraf* (Sufi ethics)

9. *Risaleh dar Ithbat-i Wajib* (metaphysics).
10. *Ithbat-i Jauhar al-Mufariq* (metaphysics).
11. *Risaleh dar Wujud-i Jauhar-i Mujarrad* (metaphysics).
12. *Risaleh dar Ithbat-i 'Aql-i Fa”al* (metaphysics).
13. *Risaleh Darurat-i Marg* (metaphysics).
14. *Risaleh Sudur Kathrat az Wahdat* (metaphysics).
15. *Risaleh 'Ilal wa Ma'lulat* (metaphysics).
16. *Fusul* (metaphysics), Teheran, 1956.
17. *Tasawwurat* (metaphysics), Bombay, 1950.

18. *Talkhis al-Muhassal*, Cairo, 1323/1905.
19. *Hall-i Mushkilat al-Isharat*, Lucknow, 1293/1876.

Akhlaq-I Nasiri
---------------

Nothing can be farther from truth than the assertion that Akhlaq-i
Nasiri of Tusi is a mere “translation”[^19] of *Tahdhib al-Akhlaq* of
Ibn Miskawaih. The author was undoubtedly commissioned by Nasir al-Din
'Abd al-Rahim, the Isma'ilite Governor of Quhistan, to translate the
*Kitab al-Taharat* (*Tahdhib al-Akhlaq*) from Arabic into Persian, but
he did not accept the suggestion for fear of “distorting and disfiguring
the original.”[^20]

Besides, Ibn Miskawaih's effort is confined to the description of moral
discipline; the domestic and political disciplines are altogether
missing in his work. These, according to Tusi, are equally important
aspects of “practical philosophy” and, therefore, are not to be ignored.
With this in mind, Tusi compiled *Akhlaq-i Nasiri* on the following
pattern.

With regard to content, the part on moral philosophy is a “summary”[^21]
and not a translation of *Kitab al-Taharat*, but the form, the
arrangement of topics, and the classification of subjects is Tusi's own,
which apparently give an air of originality to it.

For the parts on domestic and political philosophy, Tusi is greatly
indebted to Ibn Sina [^22] and Farabi,[^23] and yet the mere addition of
these two parts which completed practical philosophy (*hikmat-i
\`amali*) in all its details, if not any­thing else, justifies Tusi's
claim that *Akhlaq-i Nasiri* was written “not on the style of imitation
nor in the spirit of translation, but as an original venture.”[^24]

Ethics
------

Following Ibn Miskawaih,.Tusi regards ultimate happiness (*sa\`adat-i
quswa*) as the chief moral end, which is determined by the place and
position of man in the cosmic evolution, and realized through his
amenability to discipline and obedience. The concept of ultimate
happiness is intrinsically different from the Aristotelian idea of
happiness which is devoid of the “celestial element”[^25] and also has
no reference to the cosmic position of man.

The Platonic virtues of wisdom, courage, temperance, and justice
(derived from the trinity of the soul - reason, ire, and desire) and
their differentiation into seven, eleven, twelve, and nineteen species
respectively, given by Ibu Miskawaih, figure prominently in Tusi's
ethics, the only difference being that he reduced the last nineteen to
twelve.

But following Aristotle's distinction in the soul of theoretical reason,
practical reason, ire, and desire, and, unlike Ibn Miskawaih, he deduces
justice from the culture of practical reason[^26] without disclaiming
the Platonic view of the proper and harmonious functioning of the triple
powers of the soul. Unlike Aristotle and like Ibn Miskawaih, he ranks
benevo­lence[^27] (*tafaddul*) higher than justice, and love
(*mahabbah*) as a natural source of unity, higher than benevolence.

Aristotle conceived of vice as an extreme of virtue either on the side
of excess or defect. To Galen, vice was a malady of the soul. The
Qur'an, after enunciating the general ethical principles of
moderation,[^28] defines vice as a disease of the heart.[^29]

Ibn Miskawaih, after enumerating the eight generic vices of astuteness
and stupidity (*safah* and *balahat*), rashness and cowardice
(*tahawwur* and *jubun*), indulgence and abstention (*sharrahat* and
*khumud*), tyranny and sufferance (*jaur* and *mahanat*), on the
Aristotelian pattern, describes at length the causes and cures of fear
and sorrow. Ibn Miskawaih does not make it clear whether fear and sorrow
constitute the excess or defi­ciency of ire and desire.

This problem is taken up by Tusi, and he finds out a solution for it,
befitting his ingenuity. Disease is the deviation of the soul from
equipoise (*i\`tidal*). Aristotle and following him Ibn Miskawaih had
thought of this deviation in terms of quantity (*kammiyyat*) and,
therefore, the excess (*ifrat*) and defect (*tafrit*) of a state were
for them the only two causes of moral diseases.

Tusi for the first time propounded the view that the deviation is not
only quantitative but also qualitative, and to this new type of
deviation he gave the name of perversion[^30] (*rada'at*). Consequently,
a moral disease may have one of the three causes: (1) excess, (2)
defect, or (3) perversion of reason, ire, or desire. This explains
adequately that fear constitutes the perversion of ire, and sorrow, the
perversion of desire.

Equipped with the theory of triple causation of the maladies of the
soul, Tusi classifies the fatal diseases of the theoretical reason into
perplexity (*hairat*), simple ignorance (*jahl-i basit*), and compound
ignorance (*jahl-i murakkab*), constituting its excess,-deficiency, and
perversion - a classification which cannot be traced to Ibn Miskawaih.

Perplexity is caused by the inability of the soul to distinguish truth
from falsehood due to the conflicting evidence and confusing arguments
for and against a controversial issue. As a cure of perplexity, Tusi
suggests that a perplexed man should, in the first instance, be made to
realize that composition and division, affirmation and denial, i, e.,
the contraries, being mutually exclusive, cannot exist in one and the
same thing at the same time, so that he may be convinced that if a
proposition is true, it cannot be false, and if it is false, it cannot
be true. After his assimilating this self-evident principle, he may be
taught the rules of syllogism to facilitate the detection of fallacies
in the arguments.

Simple ignorance consists in a man's lack of knowledge on a subject
without his presuming that he knows it. Such ignorance is a precedent
condition for acquiring knowledge, but it is fatal to be contented with
it. The disease may be cured by bringing home to the patient the fact
that intellection and not physical appearance entitles a man to the
designation of man, and that an ignorant man is no better than a brute;
rather he is worse than that, for the latter can be excused for its
absence of reason, he cannot.

Compound ignorance is a man's lack of knowledge on a subject coupled
with his presumption that he knows it. In spite of ignorance he does not
know that he is ignorant. According to Tusi, it is almost an .incurable
disease, but devotion to mathematics may perhaps reduce it to simple
ignorance.

Tnsi regards anger (*ghadab*), cowardice (*jubun*), and fear (*khauf*)
as the three prominent diseases of ire (*quwwat-i difa'*) on the side of
excess, deficiency, and perversion, respectively. In his analysis of
fear, especially the fear of death, and in his elaboration of the seven
concomitants and ten causes of anger, he follows Ibn Miskawaih.

Similarly, excess of appetite (*ifrat-i shahwat*) is caused by the
excess of desire while levity (*batalat*) results from its deficiency,
and sorrow (*huzn*) and jealousy (*hasad*) constitute the perversion of
this power. He defines jealousy as one wishing a reverse in the fortune
of another, without longing to possess a similar fortune for oneself.
Following Ghazali, he also distinguishes between envy[^31] (*ghibtat*)
and jealousy, by defining the former as a longing to have the fortune
similar to the one possessed by another without wishing any reverse to
him. Jealousy consumes virtue as fire consumes fuel, but envy is
commendable, if directed to the acquisition of virtues, and condemnable
if directed to lust for worldly pleasures.

Tusi regards society as the normal background of moral life, for man is
by nature a social being, and his perfection consists in evincing this
characteristic of sociability towards his fellow-beings. Love and
friendship, therefore, con­stitute the vital principles of his moral
theory - a theory in which apparently there is no place for the retired
and secluded life of an ascetic.

In a later work, *Ausaf al-Ashraf*, however, he approvingly writes of
asceticism as a stage in mystical life. He claims no mystic experience
and makes it clear in the preface that his effort is a purely
intellectual appreciation and rational formulation of the mystic
tradition.[^32] Though not a mystic, he is an advocate of a rational
treatment of mysticism. He classifies it into six progressive stages,
each stage, excepting the last, having six moral states of its own.

The first stage is that of the preparation for the mystic journey
(*suluk*), the necessary requirements of which are faith in God
(*iman*), constancy in the faith (*thabat*), firmness of intention
(*niyyat*), truthfulness (*sidq*), contempla­tion of God (*anabat*), and
sincerity (*khulus*).

The second stage consists of the renunciation of the worldly connections
which obstruct the mystic path. There are six essentials of this stage
and these are repentance over sins (*taubah*), asceticism of the will
(*zuhd*), indiffer­ence to wealth (*faqr*), rigorous practices to subdue
irrational desires (*riyadat*), calculation of virtues and vices
(*muharabat*), harmony between actions and intentions (*muraqabat*), and
piety (*taqwa*).

The third stage of the mystic journey is marked by aloofness
(*khalwat*), contemplation (*tafakkur*), fear and sorrow (*khauf* and
*huzn*), hope (*rija'*), endurance (*sabr*), and gratitude to God
(*shukr*).

The, fourth stage covers the experiences of the traveller (*salik*)
before reaching the final goal. They are devotion to God (*iradat*),
eagerness in de­votion (*shauq*), love of God (*mahabbah*), knowledge of
God (*ma'ri fat*), un­shakeable faith in God (*yaqin*), and tranquillity
of the soul (*sukun*).

The fifth stage consists of resignation to God (*tawakkul*), obedience
(*rida'*), submission to the divine will (*taslim*), certitude about the
oneness of God (*tauhid*), effort for union with God (*wahdat*), and
absorption in God (*ittihad*).

In the sixth stage the process of the absorption in God reaches its
culmination and the traveller is ultimately lost (*fana'*) into the
oneness of God.

Domestic Science
----------------

Acknowledging his debt to Ibn Sina,[^33] Tusi defines home (*manzil*) as
a particular relationship existing between husband and wife, parents and
children, master and servant, and wealth and its possessor. The aim of
do­mestic science (*tadbir-i manzil*) is to evolve an efficient system
of discipline, conducive to the physical, social, and mental welfare of
this primary group, with father as its controlling head. The father's
function is to maintain and restore the equipoise of the family, having
in view the particular dispositions of the constituents and the dictates
of expediency in general.

Wealth is necessary for achieving the basic ends of self-preservation
and race-preservation. For its acquisition, Tusi recommends the adoption
of noble professions and the achievement of perfection in them, without
ever giving way to inequity, infamy, and meanness. Hair-dressing and
filth-clearing are, no doubt, mean and repulsive professions, but they
are warranted on the ground of social expediency.

Tusi regards the saving of wealth as an act of prudence, provided it is
not prompted by greed or miserliness, and does not cause hardship to the
consti­tuents of the home or involve the risk of one's integrity and
prestige in society. In matters of expenditure, he stands for moderation
in general. Nothing should be spent which may smack of extravagance,
display, miscalculation or stinginess.

Not gratification of lust, but procreation and protection of property
are the basic aims of marriage. Intelligence, integrity, chastity,
modesty, shrewdness, tenderness of the heart, and, above all, obedience
to husband are the qualities which ought to be sought in a wife. It is
good if she is further graced with the qualities of noble birth, wealth,
and beauty, but these are absolutely undesirable if not accompanied with
intelligence, modesty and chastity.

Ad­ministrative expediency requires that the husband should be
awe-inspiring. He may be benevolent and magnanimous to his wife, but in
the wider interests of the home, he should avoid excessive affection,
keep her in seclusion, and should not confide secrets or discuss
important matters with her. Polygamy is undesirable because it
invariably upsets the whole domestic organization. Women are
feeble-minded by nature and psychologically jealous of another partner
in the husband's love and fortune.

The concession of polygamy is reluctantly given by Tusi to kings because
they are in a position to command unconditional obedience, but even for
them it is desirable to avoid it as an act of prudence. Man is to the
home as heart is to the body, and as one heart cannot give sustenance to
two bodies, so one man cannot manage two homes So great is the sanctity
of home in Tusi's eyes that he even advises people to remain unmarried
if they are unfit to enforce family equilibrium.

On the discipline of children, Tusi, following Ibn Miskawaih,[^34]
begins with the inculcation of good morals through praise, reward, and
benevolent censure. He is not in favour of frequent reproof and open
censure; the former increases the temptation, and the latter leads to
audacity. After bringing home to them the rules regarding dining,
dressing, conversation, behaviour, and the manner of moving in society,
the children should be trained for a particular profession of their own
liking. The daughters should be specifically trained to become good
wives and mothers in the domestic set-up.

Tusi closes the discussion with the greatest emphasis on the observance
of parental rights, as enjoined by Islam. Psychologically speaking,
children realize the rights of the father only after attaining the age
of discrimination, but those of the mother are evident from the very
start of life. From this Tusi concludes that paternal rights are largely
mental, while maternal ones are largely physical in character. Thus, to
the father one owes unselfish devo­tion, veneration, obedience, praise,
etc., and to the mother, the provision of food, clothes, and other
physical comforts.

Lastly, servants are to home as hands and legs are to man. Tusi
recommends that they should be treated benevolently, so that they may be
inspired to identify their interests with those of their master. The
underlying idea is that they should serve out of love, regard, and hope,
and not out of necessity compulsion, and fear, which affect adversely
the interests of the home.

To sum up: Home for Tusi is the centre of domestic life. Income, saving,
expenditure, and the discipline of wife, children, and servants, all
revolve round the general welfare of the family group as a whole.

Politics
--------

Farabi's *Siyasat al-Madinah* and *Ara' Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah* form
the first attempt towards the philosophical formulation of a political
theory in the Muslim world. He used *\`ilm al-madani* both in the sense
of the civic science and the science of government. Following him, Tusi
has also used *siyasat-i mudun* in both of these senses. In fact, his
treatment of the need for civic society (*tamad­dun*) and the types of
social groups and cities is largely derived from Farabi's views on the
subject.[^35]

Man is by nature a social being. To substantiate his position, Tusi
refers to *insan*, the Arabic word for man, which literally means to be
gregarious or associating. Since this natural sociability[^36] (*uns-i
taba'i*) is characteristically human, it follows that the perfection of
man consists in evincing this character­istic fully towards his
fellow-beings. Civilization is another name for this perfection. It is
for this reason that Islam has emphasized the superiority of
congregational prayers over those offered in isolation.

The word *tamaddun* is derived from *madinah* (city) which means living
together of men belonging to different professions for the purpose of
helping one another in their needs. Since no man is self-sufficient,
everyone is in need of help and co-operation from others. Wants differ
from man to man and the same is true of the motives which induce one to
co-operation. Some seek co-operation for the sake of pleasure; others
are prompted by the consideration of profit; and still others aim at
goodness or virtue. This diversity in the causes of co-operation leads
to conflict of interests resulting in aggression and in­justice. Thus
arises the need for government to keep everyone content with his
rightful lot without infringing the legitimate rights of others.

Administra­tion of justice, therefore, is the chief function of a
government, which should be headed by a just king, who is the second
arbitrator, the first being the divine Law. He can exercise royal
discretion in minor details according to the exigencies of time and
occasion, but this too should conform to the general principles of the
divine Law. Such a king, Tusi concludes, is the vicegerent of God upon
earth, and the physician of the world temper.

As to the qualities of this monarch, he should be graced with the
nobility of birth, loftiness of purpose, sobriety of judgment, firmness
of determination, endurance of hardship, large-heartedness, and
righteous friends. His first and foremost duty is to consolidate the
State by creating affection among its friends and disaffection among its
enemies, and by promoting unity among the savants, warriors,
agriculturists, and business men - the four constituents of the State.

Tusi then proceeds to lay down the principles of war ethics for the
guidance of rulers. The enemy should never be taken lightly, however
lowly he might be, but at the same time war should be avoided at all
costs, even through diplo­matic tricks, without resorting to
perfidy.[^37] But if the eonfiict becomes inevitable, offensive should
be taken only in the name of God and that too with the unanimous
approval of the army. The army should be led by a man of dashing spirit,
sound judgment, and experience in warfare.

Tnsi particularly emphasizes the maintenance of an efficient secret
service to have vigilance over the movements of the enemy. Again,
diplomacy demands that the enemy should, as far as possible, be taken
prisoner rather than killed, and there should be no killing after the
final victory, for clemency is more befitting a king than vengeance. In
the case of a defensive stand, the enemy should be overtaken by ambush
or surprise attack, provided the position is strong enough; otherwise no
time should be lost in digging trenches building fortresses, and even in
negotiating for peace by offering wealth and using diplomatic devices.

Tusi, being the wazir of Hulagu, was well aware of the degeneration of
monarchy into absolute despotism, and, therefore, advised the attendants
upon kings to avoid seeking close contact with them, for being in their
company is in no way better than associating with fire. No office is
more perilous than that of a minister to a king, and the minister has no
greater safeguard against the jealousies of the Court and the vagaries
of the royal mood than his trust­worthiness.

The minister should guard jealously the secrets confided to him, and
should not be inquisitive about what is withheld from him. Tusi was held
in great esteem by the Mongol chief, yet he agrees with Ibn Muqna\`,
that the closer one may be to the king, the greater should he show his
respect to him, so much so that if the king calls him “brother,” he
should address him as “lord.”

Source Of Practical Philosophy
------------------------------

According to Tusi, the Qur'anic injunctions relate to man as an
individual, as a member of a family, and as an inhabitant of a city or
State.[^38] This three­fold division is evidently suggestive of the
classification of practical philosophy into ethics, domestics, and
politics by Muslim thinkers. The same is true of the content of these
sciences; but it is no less true that later on these disciplines were
considerably broadened under the influence of Plato and Aristotle.
Shushtery's remark that “ethics was the only subject in which the East
did not imitate the West,” and that “the only influence which the West
could bring to bear upon the East in connection with this subject, was
the method of scientific treatment,”[^39] is more true of domestics and
politics, where Greek influence is least traceable, than of ethics
proper.

Psychology
----------

Instead of proving the existence of the soul, Tusi starts with the
assumption that it is a self-evident reality and as such it needs no
proof. Nor is it capable of being proved. In a case like this, reasoning
out of one's own existence is a logical impossibility and absurdity, for
an argument presupposes an argu­mentator and a subject for argument, but
in this case both are the same, viz., the soul.

### Nature of the Soul

The soul is a simple, immaterial substance which perceives by itself. It
controls the body through the muscles and sense-organs, but is itself
beyond the perception of the bodily instruments. After reproducing Ibn
Miskawaih's arguments for the incorporeality of the soul from its
indivisi­bility, its power of assuming fresh forms without losing the
previous ones, its conceiving opposite forms at one and the same time,
and its correcting sense­ illusions,[^40] Tusi adds two of his own
arguments.

Judgments of logic, physics, mathematics, theology, etc., all exist in
one soul without intermingling, and can be recalled with characteristic
clarity, which is not possible in a material substance; therefore, soul
is an immaterial substance. Again, physical accom­modation is limited
and finite, so that a hundred persons cannot be accom­modated at a place
meant for fifty people, but this is not true of the soul. It has, so to
say, sufficient capacity to accommodate all the ideas and concepts of
the objects it knows, with plenty of room for fresh acquisition.[^41]
This too proves that the soul is a simple, immaterial substance.

In the common expression “My head, my ear, my eye,” the word “my”[^42]
indicates the individuality (*huwiyyah*) of the soul, which possesses
these organs, and not its incorporeality. The soul does require a body
as a means to its perfection, but it is not what it is because of its
having a body.

### Faeulties of the Soul

To the vegetative, animal, and human soul of his predecessors, Tusi adds
an imaginative soul which occupies an intermediate position between the
animal and the human soul. The human soul is charac­terized with
intellect (*nutq*) which receives knowledge from the first intellect.
The intellect is of two kinds, theoretical and practical, as conceived
by Aristotle.

Following Kindi, Tusi considers the theoretical intellect to be a
potentiality, the realization of which involves four stages, viz., the
material intellect (\`*aql-i hayulani*), the angelic intellect (*'aql-i
malaki*), the active intellect (*'aql-i bi al-fi\`l*), and the acquired
intellect (*'aql-i mustafad*). It is at the stage of the acquired
intellect that every conceptual form potentially contained in the soul
becomes apparent to it, like the face of a man reflected in a mirror
held before him. The practical intellect, on the other hand, is
concerned with voluntary and purposive action. Its potentialities are,
therefore, realized through moral, domestic, and political action.

The imaginative soul is concerned with sensuous perceptions, on the one
hand, and with rational abstractions, on the other, so that if it is
united with the animal soul, it becomes dependent upon it, and decays
with it. But if it is associated with the human soul, it becomes
independent of the bodily organs, and shares the happiness or misery of
the soul with its immortality. After the separation of the soul from the
body, a trace of imagination remains in its form, and the punishment and
reward of the human soul depend upon this trace (*hai'at*) of what the
imaginative soul knew or did in this world.[^43]

The sensitive and calculative imagination of Aristotle apparently
constitutes the structure of Tusi's imaginative soul, but his bringing
the imaginative soul into relation with an elaborate theory of
punishment and reward in the hereafter is his own.

As a matter of tradition handed down from Ibn Sina and Ghazali,[^44]
Tusi believes in the localization of functions in the brain. He has
located common sense (*hiss-i mushtarak*) in the first ventricle of the
brain, perception (*musaw­wirah*) in the beginning of the first part of
the second ventricle, imagination, in the fore part of the third
ventricle, and memory in the rear part of the brain.

Metaphysics
-----------

According to Tusi, metaphysics proper consists of two parts, the science
of divinity (*'ilm-i Ilahi*) and the first philosophy (*falsefah-i
ula*). The knowledge of God, intellects, and souls constitutes the
science of divinity, and the know­ledge of the universe and the
universals constitutes the first philosophy. The knowledge of the
categories of unity and plurality, necessity and contingency, essence
and existence, eternity and transitoriness also forms part of the
latter.

Among the accessories (*furu*\`) of metaphysics fall the knowledge of
pro­phethood (*nubuwwat*), spiritual leadership (*imamat*), and the Day
of Judgment (*qiyamat*). The range of the subject itself suggests that
metaphysics is “of the essence of Islamic philosophy and the realm of
its chief contribution to the history of ideas.”[^45]

### God

After denying the logical possibility of atheism and of an ultimate
duality, Tusi, unlike Farabi, Ibn Miskawaih, and Ibn Sina, argues that
logic and metaphysics miserably fall short of proving the existence of
God on rational grounds. God being the ultimate cause of all proofs,
and, therefore, the foundation of all logic and metaphysics, is Himself
independent of logical proof. Like the fundamental laws of formal logic,
Ile neither requires nor lends Himself to proof. He is an *a priori*,
fundamental, necessary, and self-­evident principle of cosmic logic, and
His existence is to be assumed and postulated rather than proved. From
the study of moral life as well, he arrives at a similar conclusion and,
like Kant in modem times, regards the existence of God as a fundamental
postulate of ethics.

Tusi further argues that proof implies perfect comprehension of the
thing to be proved, and since it is impossible for the finite man to
comprehend God in His entirety, it is impossible for him to prove His
existence.[^46]

### Creatio ex nihilo

Whether the world is eternal (*qadim*) or was created by God *ex nihilo*
(*hadith*), is one of the most vexing problems of Muslim philosophy.
Aristotle advocated the eternity of the world, attributing its motion to
the creation of God, the Prime Mover. Ibn Miskawaih agreed with
Aristotle in regarding God as the creator of motion but, unlike him,
reasoned out that the world, both in its form and matter, was created by
God *ex nihilo*.

Tusi in his *Tasawwurat* (written during the period of Isma\`ilite
patronage) effects a half-hearted reconciliation between Aristotle and
ibn Miskawaih. He begins by criticizing the doctrine of *creatio ex
nihilo*. The view that there was a time when the world did not exist and
then God created it out of nothing, obviously implies that God was not a
creator before the creation of the world or His creative power was still
a potentiality which was actualized later, and this is a downright
denial of His eternal creativity. Logically, therefore, God was always a
creator which implied the existence of creation or world with Him. The
world, in other words, is co-eternal with God. Here Tusi closes the
discus­sion abruptly with the remark that the world is eternal by the
power of God who perfects it, but in its own right and power, it is
created (*muhdath*).

In a later work, *Fusul* (his famous and much commented metaphysical
treatise), Tusi abandons the above position altogether and supports the
orthodox doctrine of *creatio ex nihilo*, without any reservation.
Classifying Being into the necessary and the possible, he argues that
the possible depends for its existence on the necessary; and since it
exists by other than itself, it cannot be assumed in a state of
existence, for the creation of the existent is impossible and absurd.
And that which is not in existence is non-existent, and so the Necessary
Being creates the possible out of nothing. Such a process is called
creation and the existent, the created (*muhdath*).

Similarly, in *Tasawwurat*, Tusi agrees with Ibn Sina that from one
nothing can proceed except one, and following this principle explains
the emanation (*sudur*) of the world from the Necessary Being after the
Neo-Platonic fashion. In *Risaleh-i \`Aql*, *Risaleh-i ‘Ilal wa
Ma\`lulat*, and *Sharh-i Isharat* too, he supports, both logically and
mathematically, pluralization in the creative process taken as a whole.
But in later works, *Qawa'id at-\`Aqa'id*, *Tajrid al-\`Aqa'id*, and
*Fusul*, he evidently attacks and blows up the very foundation of this
principle, once held so dearly by him.

The reflection of the first intellect is said to have created the
intellect, soul, and body of the first sphere. This position, he now
points out, obviously implies plurality in what is created by the first
intellect, which goes against the principle that from one nothing can
proceed except one. As to the source of plurality, he further argues
that it exists either by the authority of God or without His authority.
If it exists by the authority of God, then there is no doubt that it has
come from God. If, on the other hand, it exists without the authority of
God, that would mean the setting up of another god besides God.[^47]

Again, in *Tasawwurat*, Tusi holds the view that God's reflection is
equivalent to creation and is the outcome of His self-conscious
necessity. But in *Fusul*, he abandons this position as well. He now
regards God as a free creator and blows up the theory of creation out of
necessity. If God creates out of necessity, he argues, His actions
should spring out of His essence. Thus, if a part of the world becomes
non-existent, the essence of God should also pass into nothingness; for
the cause of its non-existence is conditioned by the non-existence of a
part of its cause, the non-existence of which is further deter­mined by
the non-existence of the other parts of its cause and so on. And since
all existents depend for their existence on the necessity of God, their
non­existence ultimately leads to the non-existence of God Himself.[^48]

Prophethood
-----------

After establishing freedom of the will and resurrection of the body,
Tusi proceeds to establish the necessity of prophethood and spiritual
leadership. Conflict of interests coupled with individual liberty
results in the disintegration of social life, and this necessitates a
divine Code from God for the regulation of human affairs. But God
Himself is beyond all sensory apprehension; there­fore, He sends
prophets for the guidance of peoples. This, in turn, makes necessary the
institution of spiritual leadership after the prophets to enforce the
divine Code.

Good And Evil
-------------

Good and evil are found mixed up in this world. The obtrusiveness of
evil is inconsistent with the benevolence of God. To avoid this
difficulty, Zoroastrians attributed light and good to Yazdan and
darkness and evil to Ahriman. But the existence of two equal and
independent principles itself involves a metaphysical inconsistency.
Rejecting the view on this ground, Tusi explains away the reality and
objectivity of evil with the enthusiasm of Ibn Sina, his spiritual
progenitor.

According to Tusi, the good proceeds from God and the evil springs up as
an accident (*'ard*) in its way. The good, for instance, is a grain of
wheat thrown into the soil and watered, so that it grows into a plant
and yields a rich crop. The evil is like the foam which appears on the
surface of the water. The foam evidently comes from the water-courses
and not from the water itself. Thus, there is no evil principle in the
world, but as an accident it is a necessary concomitant or by-product of
matter.

In the human world, evil is occasioned by an error of judgment or
through a misuse of the divine gift of free-will. God by Himself aims at
universal good, but the veils of the senses, imagination, fancy and
thought hang before our sight and cloud the mental vision. Thus,
prudence fails to foresee the conse­quences of actions, resulting in
wrong choice, which in turn begets evil.

Again, our judgment of evil is always relative and metaphorical, that
is, it is always with reference to something. When, for instance, fire
burns a poor man's cottage or flood sweeps away a village, a verdict of
evil is invariably passed on fire and water. But in reality there is
nothing evil in fire or water; rather their absence would constitute an
absolute evil in comparison to the partial evil occasionally caused by
their presence.

Lastly, evil is the outcome of ignorance, or the result of some physical
disability, or the lack of something which provides for the good. The
absence of day is night, the lack of wealth is poverty, and the absence
of good is evil. In essence, therefore, evil is the absence of
something - a negative, not a positive something.[^49]

To the question why a finite sin is dealt with infinite punishment by
God, Tusi replies that it is a mistake to attribute either reward or
punishment to God. Just as the virtuous, by nature and necessity,
deserve eternal bliss and happiness, so the vicious by nature and
necessity deserve eternal punish­ment and despair.

Logic
-----

On logic, his works include *Asas al-Iqtibas*, *Sharh-i Mantiq
al-Isharat*, *Ta'dil al-Mi\`yar*, and *Tajrid fi al-Mantiq*. The first
of these gives a comprehen­sive and lucid account of the subject in
Persian on the lines of Ibn Sina's logic in *al-Shifa'*.

Tusi regards logic both as a science and as an instrument of science. As
a science, it aims at the cognition of meanings and that of the quality
of the meanings cognized; as an instrument, it is the key to the
understanding of different sciences. When knowledge of meanings as well
as of the quality of meanings becomes so ingrained in the mind that it
no longer requires the exercise of thought and reflection, the science
of logic becomes a useful art (*san\`at*), freeing the mind from
misunderstanding, on the one hand, and per­plexity, on the other.[^50]

Having defined logic, Tusi, like Ibn Sina, begins with a brief
discussion of the theory of knowledge. All knowledge is either a concept
(*tasawwur*) or a judgment (*tasdiq*); the former is acquired through
definition and the latter through syllogism. Thus, definition and
syllogism are the two instruments with which knowledge is acquired.

Unlike Aristotle, Ibn Sina had divided all syllogisms into the
copulative (*iqtirani*) and the exceptive (*istithna'i*). Tusi has
followed this division and elaborated it in his own way. His logical
works are Aristotelian in general outline, but he mentions four[^51]
instead of three syllogistic figures; and the source of this fourth
figure is found neither in the *Organon* of Aristotle nor in any of the
logical works of Ibn Sina.[^52]

Review
------

Tusi, as we have already seen, owes his ethics to Ibn Miskawaih and
politics to Farabi; but neither of them reaches the depth and the extent
of Ibn Sina's influence over him. Tusi's logic, metaphysics, psychology,
domestics, and dogmatics - all are substantially borrowed from him.
Besides, his long though casual connection with the Nizari Isma\`ilites
also influenced his ethical, psychological, and metaphysical
speculations.

Historically speaking, his position is mainly that of a revivalist. But
from the standpoint of the history of culture, even the revival of the
philosophical and scientific tradition, especially in an era of
political and intellectual decline, though marked by tiresome erudition
and repetition, is no less important than origination, inasmuch as it
prepares the ground for the intellectual rebirth of a nation.

Bibliography
------------

Miskawaih, *Tahdhib al-Akhlaq wa Ta’thir al-A'raq*, Egypt, 1329/1911;
Al-Ghazali, *Mizan al-\`Amal*, Egypt, 1328/1910;
Nasir al-Din Tusi, *Akhlaq-i Nasiri*, Lucknow, 1942; *Tasawwurat*, ed.
Ivanow, Bombay, 1950; *Ausaf al-Ashraf*, ed. Nasr Allah Taqwi, Teheran,
1941; *Fusul*, ed. M. T. Danish Pazhuh, Teheran, 1956; *Seh Guftar-i
Tusi*, Teheran, 1956; *Asas al-Iqtibas*, ed. Mudarris Ridwi, Teheran,
1947;
*Yad­nameh-i Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi*, Teheran University, Teheran,
1957;
Aqa-i 'Ali Akbar Zand, “Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi,” Quarterly *Hilal*,
Pakistan, Nov. 1956;
Al-Farabi, *Ara Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah*, ed. F. Dieterici, Leiden,
1895; *Kitab al-Siyasat al-Madaniyyah*, Hyderabad Decean, 1336/1917;
'Abd al-Salam Nadawi, *Hukama'-i Islam*, Azamgarh, Vol. I, 1953, Vol.
II, 1956;
M. Yunus Ansari, *Ibn Rushd*, Azamgarh, 1342/1923;
S. M. Afnan, *Avicenna*, London, 1958;
C. Brockel­mann, *Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur*, Leiden, 1943,
*Suppl*., 1937;
A. M. A. Shushtery, *Outlines of Islamic Culture*, Bangalore, 1938;
R. Levy, *The Sociology of Islam*, 2 Vols., London, 1933;
R. Briffault, *The Making of Humanity*, London, 1919;
D. M. Donaldson, *Studies in Muslim Ethics*, London, 1953;
P. K. Hitti, *History of the Arabs*, London, 1958;
T. W. Arnold and A. Gillaume (Eds.), *The Legacy of Islam*, London,
1952;
Aristotle, *Nichomachean Ethics*, tr. D. P. Chase, Oxford, 1847;
E.G. Browne, *Literary History of Persia*, 4 Vols., London, 1906-28;
*Encyclopaedia of Islam*, London, 1908-38;
M. M. Sharif, *Muslim Thought: Its Origin and Achievements*, Lahore,
1951;
T. J. de Boer, *The History of Philosophy in Islam*, tr. E. R. Jones,
London, 1903.

[^1]: Zand's article on Tusi in Hilal, November 1956, Karachi.

[^2]: Ivanow, Tasawwurat,.p. xxv.

[^3]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. IV, p. 980.

[^4]: After passing into the service of Hulagu, Tusi, in the preface to
Zij al-Ilkhani, referred to his connection with the Isma'llites as
“casual” (Ivanow, op cit., p xxv) and also “rescinded” the dedication of
Akhlaq-i Nasiri to Nasir aI-Din 'Abd al­-Rahim, his Isma’ili patron at
Quhistan (Browne, Literary History of Persia, Vol. II, p. 456)

[^5]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. IV, 981.

[^6]: P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, p. 378.

[^7]: Aidin Sayili's article in Yadnameh-i Tusi, Teheran University,
Teheran, 1957, p. 61.

[^8]: Hukuma’-i Islam, Vol.II, p.256.

[^9]: Yadnameh-i Tusi, p.66.

[^10]: Browne, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 485.

[^11]: Asas al-Iqtibas, p.YB.

[^12]: Browne, op. cit, Vol. III, p. 18.

[^13]: Ivanow, op.cit., p. lxv.

[^14]: Afnan, Avicenna, p.244.

[^15]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. IV, p. 981.

[^16]: Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur, Suppl., Vol. 1, pp. 670-76.

[^17]: Ivanow, op. cit., p. xxvi.

[^18]: Asas, pp. YJ-YH

[^19]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. I, p. 933.

[^20]: Akhlaq-i Nasiri, p. 5.

[^21]: Ibid., p.6.

[^22]: Ibid., p.145.

[^23]: Ibid., p.175.

[^24]: Ibid., p.6.

[^25]: Ibid., p.44.

[^26]: Ibid., p.61.

[^27]: Aristotle regards “prodigality” as the extreme of liberality on
the side of excess, and hence a positive vice, although it is for him
“no sign of meanness, but only of folly” (Nichomachean Ethics, p. 105).

[^28]: Qur’an, ii, 190; v,2.

[^29]: Ibid., ii, 10.

[^30]: Akhlaq-i Nasiri, p.114.

[^31]: Ghazali, Ihya’, Vol.III, Chap.III

[^32]: Ausaf al-Ashraf, p.1

[^33]: Akhlaq-i Nasiri, p.145. The treatise referred to by Tusi is Kitab
al-Siyasat, ed. Ma’luf, Beirut, 1911.

[^34]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, pp.46-54.

[^35]: Ara' Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah, pp. 53-85; Siyasat at-Madaniyyah,
pp. 1-76.

[^36]: Compare this theory of natural sociability with Hobbes' view of
man as “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short” (Roger, Students'
History of Philosophy, p. 245).

[^37]: Compare it with Machiavellian ethics of “force and fraud.' “A
ruler will perish if he is always good. He must be as cunning as a fox
and as fierce as a lion” (Bertrand Russell, A History of Western
Philosophy, p. 528).

[^38]: Akhlaq-i Nasiri, p.10.

[^39]: Outlines of Islamic Culture, Vol. II, p. 441

[^40]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, pp.3-7.

[^41]: Tasawwurat, p.25.

[^42]: Every body belongs to a soul, according to this argument. In
modern times, William James too has used the same argument to prove that
every thought belongs to a mind. “It seems as if the elementary psychic
facts were not thought, this thought or that thought, but my thought,
every thought being owned.” W. James, Psychology (Briefer Course), p.
153

[^43]: Tasawwurat, p.23.

[^44]: Ghazali has located retention (hafizah) in the first ventricle
(tajwif) of the fore part of the brain, imagination (wahmiyyah) in the
middle ventricle of the brain, thought (tafakkur) in the middle of the
brain, and recollection (tadhakkur) in the rear verticle of the brain.
(Mizan al-\`Amal, p. 25.).

[^45]: Afnan, op.cit., p.106.

[^46]: Tasawwurat, p.8.

[^47]: Fusul, p.18.

[^48]: Ibid., pp. 16-18.

[^49]: Tasawwurat, p.44.

[^50]: Asas al-Iqtibas, p.5.

[^51]: Ibid., p.379.

[^52]: Afnan, op.cit., p.101.


