Chapter 31: Al-Ghazali Part 2
=============================

A. Mysticism
------------

### 1. Introduction

It will not be quite true to say that al-Ghazālī’s final resort to
Sufi-mysticism was merely the result of his disillusionment with
philosophy and dissatisfaction with scholastic theology. This is only a
part of the truth; his confessional statement to this effect in
*al-Munqidh* seems to be rather an over-statement of the actual facts.
Sufistic influences had all along been working upon his mind right from
early childhood. We need only recall that his father was a pious Dervish
and his guardian a Sufi devout, where he studied during his youth[^1]
and even practiced Sufism, first under Yusuf al-Nassaj in Tus and that
his own brother, Ahmad al-Ghazālī (d. 520/1126) made a name as a great
Sufi.

It is not improbable that he should also learn Sufism from his teacher
Imam al-Haramain, for it is reported that the Imam himself had been the
student of the renowned Sufi Abu Nu‘aim al-Isfahani (d. 430/1038). So
al-Ghazālī eventual adoption of the Sufi way of life was in reality a
continuation of these early influences and not simply the consequence of
failure to find the philosophical solution of theological problems.
Further, it has to be emphasized that, in spite of his explicit official
denunciation of philosophy, al-Ghazālī could never completely part
company with it. His Sufi-mysticism was as much influenced by his
thorough study of philosophy as by theology; in its final development it
was the mysticism of a philosopher and a theologian.

There is a marked note of Hellenic though in his mystical doctrines and
even the tracings of Neo-Platonism, and yet paradoxical though it may
seem they remain circumscribed within the limits of orthodoxy. He is
surely a sober kind of mysticism carefully eschewing all kinds of
pantheistic extravagances and severely criticizing the antinomian
tendencies of the intoxicated Sufis. On the one hand, he tried to make
mysticism orthodox and, on the other, orthodoxy mystical. It is the
mystical element in religion, he insisted, which is most vital and makes
religious life a reality. Both to the philosophers and the scholastic
theologians he brought home the fact that the basis of all religious
certainty is the first-hand living experience of God. He indeed did his
best to vitalize the law and the doctrine of Islam through this emphasis
on the living religious experience, and this is evident from the very
title of his *magnum opus, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din* (Revivification of the
Sciences of Religion).

But the mystical teaching of al-Ghazālī found in *Ihya’*, meant for all
to read, must be studied in conjunction with what is given in his other
works dealing more specially with the Sufi doctrine such as *Mishkat
al-Anwar, al-Ma’arif al-‘Aqliyyah, Mukashafat al-Qulub* and the like.
The theory developed in these works represents what may be labelled as
theosophical mysticism and this cannot be properly understood without
reference to al-Ghazālī’s specific views about the nature of God and the
human soul. From the point of view of our present study his mystical
views with regard to God and soul may be profitably compared with those
philosophers, i.e. al-Farabi, ibn Sina, and their followers.

### 2. God

The philosophers have particularly emphasized the absolute unity of God.
No positive attributes can be ascribed to God for that leads to the
subject-predicate dualism. Even existence can only be referred to Him.
He is above all distinctions and above all the categories of thought.
The over-emphasis on unity shorn of all qualities reduces God to a mere
non-content inanity. He becomes an ineffable, indescribable,
unpredictable something. Such is the result of the dialectic of the
philosophers’ monistic reductionism. As mentioned in the preceding
chapter, some (if them, following Aristotle, have described God as
thought thinking thought. That which He knows comes into being emanating
from the over-effulgence of His Bing, but He does not positively will
anything, for willing implies a need – a deficiency. He recognizes only
Himself or at best His first eminent, the first intelligence, and, thus,
is purely transcendent to this world of change and multiplicity.

Like the philosophers, al-Ghazālī lays stress on the unity of God: God
is the sole-existent and the ultimate cause and ground of all being, the
only self-subsisting reality. Yet He possesses the fullness of being,
all the attributes mentioned in the Qur’an inhere in Him, only the
modality of this inherence is rationally unknowable. We should, however,
understand that all His attributes are spiritual. He is perfect goodness
and perfect beauty, the supreme object of love.[^2] He is the light of
lights, the eternal wisdom, the creative truth, but above all, He is the
eternal will.

To the philosophers God is primarily thought or intelligence, but to
al-Ghazālī He is primarily a will which is the cause of creation. “The
First Principle,” he says, “is an omnipotent and willing agent. He does
what He wills and ordains as He likes, and He creates the similar and
dissimilar things alike, whenever and in whatever manner He wills”[^3]
So Ultimate Reality is essentially will. The entire choir of the heavens
and the furniture of the earth are the direct work of God, produced out
of sheer nothingness simply through His terrific “Be.”[^4] God has
created the universe through His will, sustains it through His will, and
one day will let pass away by His will. According to philosophers, God
wills the world because He thinks of it. According to al-Ghazālī, “God
has cognizance of the world because He wills it and in His willing
it.”[^5]HHHH

Like the philosophers, al-Ghazālī also emphasizes the transcendent
aspect of God. He is exalted beyond the limitations of space and time,
for He is the creator of space and time. He was before time and space,
but He is also immanent in this spatio-temporal order, His eternal
wisdom and supreme beauty manifests themselves through the wonders and
glory of His creation. His eternal will is an action throughout the
universe; it is in the swing of the sun and the moon and in the
alternation of day and night. Everywhere around is the touch and working
of God.[^6] Al-Ghazālī’s God is not the Absolute of the philosophers,
who is bleak and cold, but a personal God, a living God. He desires
inter-course with His creatures and makes it possible for them to enter
into fellowship with Him through prayer and contemplation and, above
all, through the gift of mystical gnosis.

### 3. Soul

The difference between al-Ghazālī and the philosophers with regard to
the nature of the soul is not very well marked. He only insists, like
Kant,[^7] that the philosophers through their rational arguments cannot
give any conclusive proof for the spirituality, substantiality, unity,
immortality, etc., of the human soul. His attack on the philosophers on
this issue is as incisive and analytic as that of Kant but probably more
violent. He actually smashes one by one al the ten arguments which he
himself expounds as forcefully as they could be in favour on their
thesis.[^8] Like Kant again, he does not disagree with their basic
position but only with their method. He even joins the philosophers in
their refutation of the position of some of the scholastic theologians,
who maintained that the soul is a kind of subtle body or an accident and
not a substance.[^9]

What is more and rather strange, while determining the place of the soul
in the realm of beings, al-Ghazālī talks the very language of the
Neo-Platonic philosophers. His cosmological triad of the divine world
*(‘alam al-malakut)*, the celestial world (*‘alam al-jabrut)*, and the
material phenomenal world (*‘alam al-mulk w-al-shahadah)* runs closely
parallel to that of Plotinus consisting of the universal mind, the
universal soul, and matter.[^10] Like Plotinus, he seems to vouch-safe
that the human soul belongs to ‘alam al-Jabarut*,* i.e. mid-way between
the divine world and the material world, and so is neither purely
eternal like the former nor merely temporal like the latter but partakes
of them both.

Al-Ghazālī’s conception of the human soul, however, is essentially based
on the teachings of the Qur’an and the Tradition. The interesting thing
about this conception is that it runs parallel to his conception of God.
Soul, like God, is a unity and like Him, is primarily and essentially a
will. Further, as God is both transcendent to and immanent in the
universe so is soul with reference to body. “Man is made in the image of
God,”[^11] is saying of the Holy Prophet and it is twice stated in the
Qur’an that “Allah breathed into man of His own spirit.”[^12] The soul
is a mirror illumined by the divine spark reflecting the qualities and
even the essence of God. “Not only are man’s attributes,” says
al-Ghazālī, “a reflection of God’s attributes but the mode of existence
of man’s soul affords an insight into God’s mode of existence...”
Knowledge of the self is the key to the knowledge of God, for so is the
oft quoted tradition, “He who knows himself knows his Lord.” “Both God
and soul,” al-Ghazālī adds, “are invisible, indivisible, unconfined by
space and time, and outside the categories of quantity and quality, nor
can the ideas of shape, colour, or size attach to them...”[^13]

The soul of man is different from everything else in the sensuous world.
There are two worlds: the world of command *(amr)* and the created world
*(khalq)*.[^14] Everything devoid of quantity and dimension belongs to
the world of amr. Soul belongs to the world of amr also because it
proceeds from the command of God; “Say, the spirit proceeded at the
command of my Lord”[^15] is God’s instruction of the Prophet. It is the
world of amr that rules the created world, the command is the divine
force which directs and regulates the world. Thus, soul is a spiritual
principle which having life in itself vitalizes the body and controls it
and regulates it. Body is the instrument and vehicle of the soul. God is
primarily a will and man is akin to God especially in respect of will.

*Volo ergo sum* is the dictum on which al-Ghazālī builds his mystical
psychology and epistemology. The essential element of the soul is not
though which in the final analysis is based upon the bodily perceptions
and the categories of thought but will which created them both for its
own purposes. Man in himself has the infinite spiritual possibilities
and it is through his will that he comes to realize them and thus brings
himself close to the mind and will of God until God says, “Oh soul at
rest, return to thy Lord, satisfied with Him, giving satisfaction unto
Him. So enter among My servants and enter My garden.”[^16] This final
encounter of the soul with God through aspirations is attained by
walking on a mystic Path, under the guidance of a *Sheikh*, and
constitutes what is the very essence and acme of religious experience.

### 4. Religious Experience and Moral and Intellectual Values

Whatever the essence or inner content of religious experience may be, it
certainly is not a mere state of pure contemplation or knowledge as the
philosophers proclaim it to be. It is a vital experience which must
translate itself into good action. Religion without good works,
according to al-Ghazālī, is a dead religion. The life of the true
mystics is the best life and their character the purest character. “Were
the intellect of the intellectuals and the learning of the learned and
the scholarship of the scholars...brought together to improve the life
and character of the mystics, they would find no way of doing so.”[^17]
Indeed, the source from which the philosophers derive their ethical
theories is the lives and teachings of these moral geniuses, i.e. the
saints and the mystics.

In the final analysis, the mystics themselves are illuminated by the
light of the lamp of the prophetic revelation. But what if you were to
doubt the prophethood of a prophet? So close is the relation between the
inner religious life and the outer moral expression of it that you can
move from one back to the other. The authenticity of a prophet can be
attested by applying a moral test, that is, by making a close study of
conduct, by assessing the transformations which his creative will has
wrought in human history and by evaluating the new socio-politico-legal
system that he has introduced and established in a society. Of the
truths of religion, we acquire not a theoretical but a moral certainty,
the deed is more important than mere idea, the will is more ultimate
than pure intellect.

Though the philosophers do not deny the importance of transforming truth
values into moral values, ideas into deeds, so far as their theory of
prophecy is concerned, yet in pursuance of the dominant Hellenic
tradition they seem to hold that knowledge without consequent action has
its own intrinsic value. Good deeds are preparatory to correct thinking.
The ultimate perfection of the soul consists in God-like contemplation,
in a state of pure knowledge which though not without joy is certainly
without action. Al-Ghazālī strongly revolted against this extreme
intellectualism of the philosophers, yet he did not remain altogether
unaffected by it. It is indeed futile to look for any lifeless
consistency in his attitudes which make a happy synthesis of
voluntarism, pragmatism, and idealism. He concedes, for example, that a
prophet is a person endowed with extra-ordinary intellect prophetic
revelation.[^18] Like the philosophers, he also affirms that perfection
of the soul consists in knowledge, albeit intuitive knowledge, like
them, he also shows pre-dilections for knowledge for its own sake. “The
ink of the scholar is better than the blood of the martyr.”[^19]

It is certainly true so far as by knowledge we here understand knowledge
of the religious sciences, but it is also in a sense true of all other
sciences. Knowledge of the sciences dealing with things that God has
made is regarded by al-Ghazālī as a necessary part of the mystic
discipline. “If the soul has not been exercised in the sciences dealing
with fact and demonstration, it will acquire mental phantasms which will
be mistaken by it to the truths descending upon it...Many Sufis remain
stuck for years in such figments of imagination, but they certainly
would have been saved from these, had they first followed the path of
scientific study and acquired by laborious learning as much of the
demonstrative sciences as human power could encompass...”[^20]

It has almost become a fashion to label al-Ghazālī as an
anti-intellectualist and to ascribe to him much of the backwardness of
the Muslim community ever since the sixth/12th century, as an its
anti-liberalism.[^21] It is alleged that al-Ghazālī through his emphasis
on fundamentalism and spiritualism initiated a movement in Muslim
thought that killed all zest for philosophic inquiry and scientific
reflection, if it did not outright create an antipathy for them. The
anti-intellectualism or the anti-liberalism of the Muslim community is a
highly complex sociological phenomenon and its causes shall have to be
explored in a great many areas, it would be too much of an
over-simplification of facts to ascribe it to a single name, however
great that name may be.

We have only to remember that al-Ghazālī never left philosophy
altogether and that he himself was very well acquainted with the
scientific knowledge of his day,[^22] most of which he accepted as true.
The charge of the kind mentioned above may be made only with reference
to someone particular work but it cannot at all be justified if the
whole course of his works is taken into consideration.

Considering, however, the number and complexity of the subjects with
which his works deal, the various levels of readers for whom they were
written and the fact of his own spiritual development, it is not always
possible to reconcile his various views and attitudes and to defend him
against all charges of inconsistency.[^23] One such difficulty arises
when, after having considered his views about the nature of the soul and
God, we have come to formulate his position with regards to relations
between the two. Whether his conception of this relation makes an
allowance for pantheism, is a question which has puzzled some students
of al-Ghazālī.[^24]

### 5. Pantheism

Al-Ghazālī’s view of God as being both immanent and transcendent, his
firm belief in God being a personal God who allows His creatures to
enter into communion with Him, his emphasis on God being a creator who
created the universe at a specific time through an act of volition, one
and all, can hardly fit into any scheme of pantheism. The description of
the mystic’s experience of God at the higher reaches of his ecstatic
flights as identification *(ittihad)* or unification *(wasul)* with God
or inherence or in-dwelling *(hulul)* in Him, al-Ghazālī has expressly
mentioned as false and erroneous.[^25] At best, the mystics can claim
only a nearness to or proximity with God and no more. But it has been
pointed out that in his doctrine of the soul he makes it resemble God so
closely both in essence and qualities that there remains hardly any
difference between the two.

Al-Ghazālī is aware of this dangerous deduction and asserts most
emphatically that there is one special quality *(akhassu wasfihi)* which
belongs to God alone and of which none else partakes and that is the
quality of self-subsistence. God is self-subsistent *(qayyum)*[^26]
while everything else exits through Him and not through its own essence.
“Nay, things through their own essence have nothing but non-existence,
and existence comes to them only from something else, by way of a loan.”
But surely there is the lurking danger of pantheism in such a statement
if it is stretched to its logical limits. If the contingency of the
world should be over-emphasized, it becomes nothing more than a show of
shadows having no reality or actuality of its own whatsoever. All
actuality is devoured by the being of God.

This conclusion is confirmed by al-Ghazālī’s own approval of the
pantheistic formula: *la huwa illa huwa* (there is no it but He) to
which may be added his statement, “He is everything, He is that He is,
none but He has piety or deity at all.”[^27] To this may be added that
al-Ghazālī has taken a very lenient view of some of the obviously
pantheistic utterances of the Sufis of extreme type such as “I am the
Creative Truth,”[^28] “Glory be to Me! How great is My Glory,” “Within
this robe is naught but Allah,”[^29] etc. Statements of this kind
clearly indicate a sense of complete self-deification. But al-Ghazālī
has no word of condemnation for them except the comment that “the words
of passionate lovers in the state of ecstasy should be concealed and not
spoken of.” True, statements of this kind should not be taken strictly
philosophically but only as emotive expressions indicative of a deep
inner experience which has many phases and aspects and a language and
logic of its own. But then, al-Ghazālī seems to forget sometimes the
advice he has so strongly given to those who have attained the mystic
state that they should not try to speak the unspeakable and follow the
poet who said, “What I experience I shall try to say; call me happy, but
ask me no more.”[^30]

B. Ethics
---------

Al-Ghazālī is the best known Muslim writer on moral subjects. Be there
are some critics[^31] who have recently made attempts to belittle the
importance of his ethical theory by trying to show that it is entirely,
or at least mainly, derived from the Aristotelian and Neo-Platonic
doctrines and from the writings of the Muslim philosophers whose systems
were Hellenic in spirit. Al-Ghazālī was, undoubtedly, a widely read
scholar and was, therefore, well versed in the ethical thought of the
Greeks, which did influence him. But it would be basically wrong to say
that he was dependent on Greek philosophy for his inspiration. He was,
in fact, against the philosophers and their heretical doctrines.
Throughout his writings, al-Ghazālī takes his stand upon Islamic
teachings and invariably quotes from the Qur’an and the traditions in
support of his views.

Following the Qur’an, for example, he lays emphasis on spiritual values
like gratitude *(shukr)*, repentance *(taubah)*, reliance *(tawakkul)*,
fear *(khauf)* of God, etc. which were completely unknown to the Greeks.
Similarly, al-Ghazālī is thoroughly Islamic in taking the perfect human
representation of the moral ideal in the Prophet of Islam (peace be on
him), whom God Himself testifies to have the highest character.[^32]
Further, we can legitimately say that the notion of love of God as the
*summon bonum*, leading directly to the beatific vision in the next
world, has nothing like it in Greek philosophy. This is undeniably based
upon the Qur’anic teachings. All these assertions will become clearer as
we proceed with the detailed discussion.

Asceticism is the spirit that runs throughout al-Ghazālī ethics. He does
not deal with the heroic virtues like courage, etc. in detail, and lays
greater emphasis on the purification of the heart after one has severed
all ties with this world, at least in spirit. He says, “The experienced
guide and teacher should bring home to the disciple that he should root
out anger and keep up wealth...otherwise, if he gets the slightest hint
that an excuse for avarice and self-assertion, and to whatever limits he
goes he will imagine that he is permitted as far as that. So he ought to
be told to eradicate these tendencies.”[^33] Again, in *Minhaj
al-‘Abidin*, al-Ghazālī differentiates between two kinds of virtues:
positive, i.e. good actions, and negative, i.e. the abandonment of bad
ones. The negative side is better and more excellent. To elucidate this
point further, he discusses the question in *Ihya’* whether marriage of
celibacy is better. After counting the advantages and the disadvantages
of both, he ultimately tends to the conclusion that celibacy is better.
One may marry, he grants, provided one is at the same time like the
unmarried, i.e. lives always in the presence of God. All this has a
colouring of other-worldliness.

Avoidance of the world is, however, not put forward as an end in itself.
It has been over-emphasized by al-Ghazālī simply to counter-act the
tendencies to vice, luxury, and pride, which were so common in his days.
The curbing or controlling of passions has been stressed merely to
achieve moderation; otherwise, he fully knows the psychology of human
nature. He is quite aware of the social spirit of the Qur’an and of the
Prophet’s teaching that there is no asceticism in Islam.[^34]
Accordingly, al-Ghazālī does sometimes lay emphasis on our duties and
obligations to other individuals and to society as a whole. *Jihad* has
been mentioned as a necessary obligatory duty, even prayers have to be
sacrificed, if need be, during a war.

In the chapter of “Renunciation of the World,” in the *Ihya’* he warns
against the evils and holds thast renunciation is a grievous sin if a
man has dependants who need his support. He defends music by saying that
“gaiety and sport refresh and cheer the heart and bring relief to the
tired mind..., rest prepares a man for work, and sport and gaiety for
grave and serious pursuits.”[^35] Further, among virtues, he includes
good appearance *(husn al-hai’ah* with adornment which is sensible and
has no tinge of ostentation in it. Similarly, there are the virtues of
self-respect, dignity, etc. which point to a man’s relation with other
individuals and pre-suppose a social set-up.

Before discussing al-Ghazālī’s theory of ethics we may consider the
problem which forms the basis of all ethical systems, viz. the problem
of the freedom of the will. The fact that man can change from the state
of the insinuating self at peace *(al-nafs at-mutma’innah)* through a
good deal of conscious struggle and deliberate effort necessarily
suggests that he is free in his will. The Mu‘tazilites had taught that
the freedom of the will is an *a priori* certainty, that man possesses
power *(qudrah)* over his actions and is their real author. The
Ash‘arites, who represented the orthodox reaction, however, held that
“Man cannot create anything. God is the only creator, nor does man’s
power produce any effect on his action at all.

God creates His creature power *(qudrah)* and choice *(ikhtiyar)*. He
then creates in him action corresponding to the power and choice thus
created. So the action of the creature is created by God as to
initiative and as to production, but is *acquired* by the creature. By
acquisition *(kasb)* is meant that it corresponds to the creature’s
power and choice previously created in him, without his having had the
slightest effect on the action.”[^36] This position comes very close the
“pre-established harmony” of Leibniz. It, thus, gives us at the most,
only a consciousness of freedom, and not freedom in the real sense of
the term.

Over this question al-Ghazālī finds himself on the horns of a dilemma.
On the one hand, God is represented as the disposer of everything. He is
the unmoved mover of the material world and the only efficient cause of
all creation. Whatever happens in the heavens or on the earth happens
according to a necessary system and a pre-determined plan. Not even a
leaf can move without His decree, His law is supreme everywhere.
“Whomsoever God wishes to guide, He expands his breast to Islam, but
whomsoever He wishes to lead astray He makes his breast tight and
strait.”[^37] On the other hand, man is shown to be responsible for his
actions and for deserving place either in hell or in heaven. This
implies complete moral freedom.

Al-Ghazālī seeks to reconcile both these tendencies on the basis of an
analysis of the human mind. The heart or of the soul man, according to
him, is furnished with two kinds of impressions. Either there are
sensations through which one gets the sensible qualities of the outside
world, or there is reflection or internal sense which supplies the mind
with its own operations. These impressions, which al-Ghazālī calls
*khwatir* (Locke would call them “simple ideas” and James Ward would
term them “presentations”), are, according to him, the spring and
fountain-head of all activity.

Whatever the heart intends, resolves etc. must come to it as knowledge
in the form of such impressions. These impressions or ideas have an
inherent tendency to express themselves in overt movements. They have a
motive part of their own and are capable of exciting a strong impulse or
inclination *(raghbah)* in the first instance. This inclination must, if
the action is to take place, be followed by decision or conviction
*(i‘tiqad)*. (These three stages correspond pretty closely to what
psychologists call respectively appetite, desire, and wish.) Conviction,
in turn, is followed by resolution or the will to act *(irahda)*. Will
excites power and then the action comes.

The first two stages of this process, viz impression and inclination,
are recognized to be beyond man’s complete control; if an individual
merely thinks intently of falling forward, swaying forward begins. So
“the conclusion would be that, while the occurrences of a strong desire
or inclination may come without man’s responsibility, his reason is free
to make a decision and his will is free to accept the decision of reason
as good and to implement the complete control of his desire would be
beyond his power.”[^38] Thus, al-Ghazālī tries to reconcile the
positions of the determinists and the indeterminists.

In fact, al-Ghazālī recognizes three stages of being. The lowest is the
material world where the absolute necessity of God’s will is all in all.
Second is the stage of the sensuous and the physical world where a
relative sort of freedom is recognized. Lastly, comes God who is
absolutely free. But His freedom is not like that of a man who arrives
at decisions after hesitation and deliberation over different
alternatives. This is impossible in the case of God, “To speak of choice
between alternatives is to suggest that other than the best might be
chosen and this would be inconsistent with the idea of perfection.[^39]

Thus, having established human freedom and responsibility and having
justified his discussion of ethical questions, al-Ghazālī goes on to
present before us his notion of the moral ideal and the means that are
to be adopted for its realization. The path is long and difficult and
needs a great deal of patience and perseverance on the part of the
seeker. Slowly and steadily, by leading a virtuous life, he has to take
his soul towards perfection so that it might be able to attain the
knowledge of God and consequently divine love, which is the *summum
bonum* or the Highest Good in this world. This will lead to the beatific
vision in the world. It should, however, be remembered that man cannot
move a single step forward without the help of God. He is guided
throughout by the gift of God *(taufiq)*. *Taufiq* manifests itself in
various forms:

1. Guidance from God *(hidayah)* is the very condition of all virtues.
It stands for the telling of the moral from the immoral, the good from
the bad and the right from the wrong. Unless these distinctions are
clearly seen, we cannot be supposed to do any good action or avoid evil.

2. Direction *(rushd)*. Mere knowledge of good actions might be
necessary but is not sufficient for their performance. We should also
have the will to do them. This is “direction.”

3. Setting aright *(tasdid)*. It is the power from God which makes the
body obey the will in order to realize the end.

4. Confirmation *(la’ad)*. It makes circumstances congenial for the
actualization of the will.

Helped by God in this way the individual proceeds to exercise virtues
which gradually raise the heart higher and higher up towards the ideal.

Before taking up this enterprise, however, the soul or the heart is to
be subjected to a thorough surgical operation and cleansed of all
impurities. “He will indeed be successful who purifies it and he will
fail to corrupt it.[^40] It is only when the heart has thus been freed
of its fetters and the veils of darkness and ignorance have been rent
asunder that anything positive can be attempted. Al-Ghazālī explains it
by an allegory. Once, the Chinese and the Greeks held a contest on the
art of drawing and painting. One part of a big room was given to the
Chinese and the other to the Greeks. In between was hung a curtain with
many rare colours, but the Chinese proceeded to brighten their side and
polish it.

When the curtain was raised, the beautiful art of the former was
reflected on the latter’s wall and in its original beauty and charm.
Such is the way of the saints who strive for the purification of their
heart to make it worthy of the knowledge of God Most High. But what are
these impurities and what are they due to? What is that which darkens
and casts gloom upon the soul of man? Al-Ghazālī’s answer is, love of
the world, the root from which all the multi-farious sins and vices
spring. The pious people avoid it and seek loneliness. “Be in the world
as if you are a stranger or on a journey upon the road.”[^41] On seeing
a dead goat, the Prophet of Islam (peace be upon him) is reported to
have said, “The world has lesser value in the eyes of God than this goat
has for its owner.”

Let us now discuss briefly al-Ghazālī’s enumeration of the main kinds of
vices that result from the love of the world, the removal of which from
the heart is incumbent up us.

First, there are those vices which are connected with a particular part
of the body. Hunger is one of them. It is no, doubt, a very important
biological function and, thus, indispensable for the preservation of
life. But when it transgresses its limits and becomes gluttony, it is
the cause of immense evil and disturbance. “Eat and drink,” says God,
“but be not prodigal. Verily He loves not the prodigal.”[^42]
Over-eating dulls the intellect and weakens the memory. It also causes
too much sleep which, besides being a waste of time, slackens the mind;
the light of wisdom is dimmed and once becomes unable to differentiate
good from evil.[^43] Further, the glutton forgets what need and hunger
are. Gradually, he becomes oblivious of, and unsympathetic to, the poor
and those who have really nothing to eat. So, one should eat only as
much as is barely sufficient to sustain oneself, out of one has earned
honestly.[^44]

The second group of vices belonging to this category are those arising
out of the sex instinct. This instinct is supposed to be the most
powerful in man,[^45] and so are its distractions from the right path.
The sex appetite must always be directed, controlled, and managed by
reason and should not be allowed to run wild: adultery is a moral and
social as well as religious evil. Further, says al-Ghazālī, the seeker
after the ideal should not marry in earlier stages of his search, for
the wife and children may prove a hindrance. But if, in spite of wilful
determination, he is not able to control himself, he may marry and then
perform all his duties as a husband.

Lastly, we come to the vices of speech, which are many. Talkativeness,
using indecent words, ridiculing, abusing, cursing, etc. belong to this
kind. Similarly, lying is also a heinous sin, “A painful doom is theirs
because they lie.”[^46] Lying, however, loses its immoral sting in
special circumstances when the end in view is good. We can, for
instance, legitimately make use of it as a war tactic. “War is deception
itself,”[^47] goes the tradition. Slandering and tale-bearing are also
very prominent vices of speech. “Don’t back-bite one another,”[^48] says
God. Similarly, we have been prohibited from making false promises
because it is the characteristic of hypocrites *(munafiqun)*.[^49]

Next, there are vices arising out of self-assertion. When working in its
proper limits, this instinct is, no doubt, natural. But the lack or
excess of it makes it an evil. A person, who has no self-assertion, has
no self-respect. He is disgracefully meek and silent and dare not make
his personality felt. Excessive self-assertion, on the other hand,
degenerates into vices like anger *(ghadab)*, malice *(hiqd)*, pride
*(kibr)*, and vanity *(‘ujb)*.

Man is roused to anger when some desire of his is not fulfilled, when
another person possesses the thing which, he thinks, should rightfully
belong to him. When not gratified, anger often turns into malice, which
consists in the desire that the desired thing should be lost to the
feeling of pain but simply a strong desire that one should also possess
a thing like the one the other has. This is known as emulation
*(ghibtah)* and is not undesirable. We can overcome the vices of
excessive self-assertion by forbearance, mildness, forgiveness,
humility, etc.

Anger, malice, and emulation are aroused when man is not in possession
of the objects of his desire. Pride and vanity, on the contrary, occur
when he has secured such objects. Vanity is a sense of self-admiration.
The individual regards his possessions as great, has no fear of losing
them, and forgets that they are merely gifts of God. It he is vain about
his intellect, wisdom, and opinion, all development in knowledge ceases
and all progress is congealed.

A proud man, on the other hand, actively compares himself with others,
is rightly or wrongly aware of some religious or worldly perfection in
him, and feels elated and raised above them. He looks down upon them and
expects respect from them as a superior. Learned men, worshippers, and
devotees are very much prone to this evil. The cure of pride lies in
recognizing God and one’s own self. By this he would come to know that
pride becomes God and greatness belongs to Him alone. Further, he should
remember his humble beginnings and recognize the filthy stuff he is made
of. Let him consider the origin and end of his forefathers and of the
proud persons like Pharaoh and Nimrud tried to equal God Almighty. Let
him consider also that beauty, wealth, and friendship are all transitory
and unreliable.

To the third category of vices belongs the love of wealth *(hub al-mal)*
and of position *(hub al-jah)*, hypocrisy *(riya’)* and willful
self-deception *(ghurur)*. Wealth in itself, however, is not bad. It is
the use of it that makes it so. Wealth can be spent on the poor and the
needy to alleviate their sufferings, but can also lead directly to sins
or can supply means for them. Those who love money often forget God and
He, in turn, prepares and reserves for them a painful doom.[^50] Love of
wealth may lead to avarice: the more one has, the more one desires. It
can also lead to miserliness, which means not spending even where one is
duty-bound to spend. The cure of all these evils is to give away all
that is superfluous and keep only as much as is essential for supporting
life and getting peace of mind. We must further be convinced in our
hearts that wealth, like shadows, is a transitory affair and that God is
sufficient for us and our children. We should hasten to spend when
occasion demands, setting aside the checks and hesitations arising
within.

Love of position means the desire to win and dominate the hearts of
others. It is generally gained by creating in others a conviction that
one possesses the so-called qualities of perfection such as beauty,
strength, ancestry. Real perfection, however, lies in knowledge and
freedom: knowledge of God and spiritual values, and freedom from the
vices and the rebellious nature of passions. Just as wealth is allowed
if used as a means for some good, so may we win the admiration of those
whose help is necessary to realize the ideal. But if position is sought
for its own sake, it is a vice and should be eradicated. One must
impress upon oneself that position is not everlasting and that death is
a leveller. One should also know that a prominent person creates enemies
very easily.

The lover of position generally falls into hypocrisy and tries to
deceive people that he possesses something which actually he does not.
An individual, for example, may pretend to be a pious man by a thin,
lean, neglected body, long prayers, virtuous and humble talk, and so on.
In religious matters, hypocrisy has been condemned very much by both the
Qur’an and the Sunnah. This deadly disease must be cured, otherwise all
the so-called virtuous actions, the inner spiritual basis being absent,
will be entirely useless and unacceptable to God. One must perform all
good actions, including the religious observances and acts of worship,
in secret. We may perform them in the open if our sincere intention is
that others may also be persuaded thereby to do the same.

Love of position also gives rise to self-deception. The individual is
convinced that he has something which he really does not have. Four
classes of people among the believers are, according to al-Ghazālī, very
likely to involve themselves in this evil. They are, for example, such
religious devotees as do not have the real sense of values. They do not
realize what is more important and what is less important and by
performing the latter, they assume themselves to be exempt from the
former. For instance, they take greater care in the correct
pronunciation of the words of the Qur’an than in understanding their
true meanings. Instead of helping a hungry neighbour, they would go on
pilgrimage to Mecca. Some dress themselves poorly and meekly and think
they have become saints. All these persons are deceiving themselves as
the true nature of things.

Similar is the case with the Sufis. Some of them learn only the
terminology of the real Sufis and think they are likewise able to see
God. Some are always wondering about the power and majesty of God and do
nothing more. Some do actually try to cleanse the heart and perform good
actions but wrongly think that they have passed most of the stages and
are the true lovers of God. Again, there are some who make a distinction
between *Shari‘ah* and *tariqah* and regard themselves above *Shari‘ah*.
They give the performance of obligatory duties and religious
observances. The same is the case with the learned and the rich, who are
generally involved in one kind of self-delusion or another.

Thus, we end the brief and synoptic survey of al-Ghazālī’s account of
the main vices of character. Now we turn to virtues, which are the
redeeming qualities *(al-munjiyat)* and represent the positive efforts
of the seeker towards God. Al-Ghazālī has given us a detailed,
interesting, and illuminating discussion on this topic in the fourth
quarter of his “Revivification of Religious Sciences.” The virtues that,
speaking chronologically, come first are repentance, abstinence,
poverty, and patience. Repentance belongs to the purgative period of
life which is an indispensable pre-requisite for the higher stages. It
means abandoning the sins of which man is conscious and resolving never
to return to them. It is a sort of spiritual conversion. “Those who
repent and believe and do righteous work, for such Allah will change
their evil deeds to good deeds.”[^51] The penitent knows that his heart
has been shrouded in the mist and darkness of sins, feels contrition and
shame, and abandons them forever.

Love of the world, which is the root of all vices, has, however, to be
removed first; the passions have to be subjected to a strict control and
the devil within has to be turned out, “...the ascetic who renounces
what is sensual and material knows that what is abandoned is of small
value in relation to what is gained, just as the merchant knows that
what he receives in exchange is better than what is sold, otherwise, he
would not sell.”[^52] Al-Ghazālī compares the ascetic with a person who
is prevented from entering into the palace by a dog at the gate. He
throws a morsel towards it and thus, by distracting its attention,
enters and gets his desires from the king. The dog is like Satan, who
prevents him from going towards God, and the morsel of bread is like the
world by the sacrifice of which we can get something better.

This brings us to the virtue of abstinence *(zuhd)*. Repentance is
simply turning away from something, whereas abstinence includes turning
away from as well as towards something better and more excellent. As a
term in Sufistic literature, it signifies severing the heart’s
attachment from all worldly things, purging it of the rubbish, and then
adorning it with the love of God. Abstinence can, in fact, have three
grades. We might be inspired and motivated by the love of God itself, by
the hope of reward, or by the fear of punishment. The highest grade is
the love of God which makes us sacrifice all considerations of heaven
and hell for the sake of God. This is absolute abstinence *(zuhd
al-mutlaq)*. We are reminded here of the fable of a saint who was
carrying in one hand a flame and in the other a glass of water with the
alleged purpose of burning heaven with the one and quenching the fire of
hell with the other, so that everyone acts sincerely to attain nearness
to God.

The individual who renounces the world is a poor man *(faqir)* in the
terminology of al-Ghazālī and, in fact, of all the mystics. So poverty
is to be wilfully cultivated. The *faqirs* are of various kinds: the
abstinent *(zahid)*, who is pained when wealth comes to him, the
satisfied *(radi)*, who is neither pleased at the possession of wealth
nor pained at its loss, and when it comes to him he does not positively
hate it, the contented *(qani’)*, who wants to get wealth but does not
actively pursue this desire, the greedy *(hares)*, who has a very strong
desire to get property but is somehow or other unable to do so, the
constrained *(mudtar)*, who, being in a state of want such as starvation
or nakedness, is ill at ease and in consternation,. The first of these,
i.e. one in the state of being a *zahid*, is the best. The *zahid* is
the one who, being busy in enjoying the love of God is indifferent to
all worldly losses and gains.

All the virtues considered above – repentance, abstinence, poverty –
demand an immense amount of courage and steadfastness. They are not
possible to attain without unswerving passion, which is doubly more
difficult to cultivate, impatience being in the very nature of man.[^53]
It, however, does not mean toleration of things that are illegal and
against religion. If a man wrongs us, we may pay him back in the same
coin, if he strikes us, we can strike him, too (though forgiveness is
also commendable). Patience in the real sense of the term has three
grades: patience in performing a religious duty, patience in avoiding
actions prohibited by God and patience over sufferings and difficulties
in the arduous path towards Him. The last grade is the noblest.

Gratitude *(shukr)*, too, is a necessary virtue and also so difficult
that only few can exercise it.[^54] It is, according to al-Ghazālī,
complementary to patience, “He who eats until he is satisfied and is
thankful is in the same station as he who fasts and is patient.”
Further, gratitude is based upon man’s knowledge that all that comes to
him comes from God and upon the feeling of joy over it. If one is
pleased with the gift only, without any reference to the Giver, is no
gratitude, “Gratitude is the vision of the Giver, not the gift.”
Secondly, we may be pleased with the Giver over a gift because it is a
sign of His pleasure. This is gratitude, no doubt, but of a low variety.
The highest stage is reached when we are pleased with the Giver and
determine to use His gift in order to attain greater and greater
nearness to Him. “If you give thanks,” says God, “I shall give you more,
but if you are thankless, My punishment is dire.”[^55]

After repentance from sin and successful renunciation of the world, the
individual directs his attention towards his own self with a view to
making it submissive and obedient to the will of God. The process has
various steps and stages: assigning the task to the self
*(musharatbah)*, watching over the self *(muraqabah)*, taking critical
account of the self *(muhasabah)*, punishing the self *(mu‘aqabah)*,
exerting the self *(mujahadah)*, and upbraiding the self *(mu‘atabah)*.
The whole affair, which results in self-mastery, is so difficult that it
has been called the bigger *jihad* *(al-jihad at-akbar)*. We have to
constantly keep a vigilant eye on our thoughts and actions and check
ourselves at every step. We have to convince our hearts of the
omnipresence of God and His omniscience, that God knows even what lies
hidden in the innermost depths of our being. Such a conviction creates
in the soul an all-pervading reverence for God. Single-mindedness
*(ikhlas)* is the fruit of the self thoroughly mastered and trained. A
fashioned soul has only one motive force, and that is the desire for the
nearness to God, the lesser purposes are weeded out.

Single-mindedness leads to the virtue of truthfulness *(sidq)*.
Truthfulness is there in words, intentions, and actions. Truthfulness in
words consists in making a statement which is unequivocal and clear and
is not aimed at deceiving others. We can, however, in some cases, make
ambiguous and false statements if thereby we are aiming at the
betterment of society. Such special cases may be war tactics,
restoration of happy relations between husband and wife, amity among
Muslims, and so on. Further, our intention must be rightful and true.
The right direction of intention is very important because actions are
judged only by intentions,[^56] if our intention is good and the result
incidentally turns out to be bad, we are not to blame. Conversely, if
our intention is evil, we are culpable, whatever its outcome.

Lastly, truthfulness in actions lies in the fact that the inward state
of a person is literally translated into outward behaviour without any
tinge of hypocrisy. The highest truthfulness which is at the same time
most difficult to attain is the complete realization of the various
attitudes of the soul towards God, e.g. trust, hope, love, etc.[^57]

Fear *(khauf)* and hope *(raja’)* also mark stages in moral progress.
Fear may be of the wrath and the awe-inspiring attributes of God, or it
may be produced in man by the consciousness of his guilt and the
apprehension of divine displeasure. A nobler kind of fear is aroused by
the feeling of separation from God who is the ultimate goal of all our
aspirations. Hope, on the other hand, is a pleasant tendency. It
consists of the expectation, after the individual has tried his best, of
the divine love in the world and of the beatific vision in the
hereafter. Fear is the result of knowledge – the knowledge of our
infirmity as compared with the supremacy of our ideal, hope is the
result of assured faith in the loving kindness of our Lord in acceding
to our requests and prayers. It lies at a higher plane because it
strengthens love and enables man to realize the goal.

The highest virtue, according to al-Ghazālī, is reliance *(tawakkul)*,
which is based on the knowledge of God’s oneness or unification
*(tawhid)*. Those who profess belief in unification may be classified
into three groups: those, including hypocrites, who confess the unity
with the tongue only, those who believe on the basis of some so-called
reliable authority, and those who, on the evidence of their direct,
intuitive perception, believe that God is the unmoved mover of the
material world and the ultimate cause of all creation and that He alone
has real or absolute existence of their direct, intuitive cause of all
creation and that He alone can abandon himself to God in complete trust
and merge his will in the divine will. The servant no longer finds his
own powers and personality to be self-sufficient and has allowed God to
dominate his life...he considers himself as a dead body moved by the
divine decree and is content that the divine strength should replace his
own human weakness.”[^58] Reliance, therefore, is the casting of the
soul into self surrender and the withdrawal of it from self assertion.

The moral soldier who is sincerely set upon his task must also form the
habit of meditation and reflection. He has to reflect on the works of
God, on the alternation of day and night, on the waxing and waning of
the moon, on the rise and fall of nations, and on the general management
of his cosmological scheme. For that purpose seclusion away from the
active hustle and bustle of society is absolutely necessary. A heart
pre-occupied with worldly things has no place for the knowledge of God.
The true significance of meditation is a firm conviction in the
omnipresence of God, which results from the realization that He is aware
of what we do under cover of darkness and of what lies buried in the
inner-most depths of our hearts. Further, from meditation and reflection
the soul is led on to contemplation, which is of three kinds:

i. contemplation *bi al-haqq*, i.e. the seeing of things pointing
towards divine unity,

ii. contemplation li al-haqq, i.e. seeing signs of the Creator in
created things, and finally,

iii. the contemplation of God Himself. This form of contemplation surely
and undeniably leads to His love, the final aim of all moral endeavours.

The last stage of contemplation and the love of God are not, however,
the results of, but are simply occasioned by our concentration and
thinking. There is nothing like a casual necessity here. The sacred
knowledge is direct and immediate – and is due to God only. The Sufi has
the impression that something has dropped upon him “as gentle rain from
heaven,” a gift of God due to His grace and mercy.

The highest contemplation is the valence of love, absorption of all
human attributes in the vision of God, and then annihilations of the
everlastingness of God. But why, in the first instance, should mere
contemplation lead to His love? In answer, al-Ghazālī explains at length
how God is the ultimate and absolute source of all the causes because of
which objects are loved. The sentiment of love is, broadly speaking of
four kinds.

i. Self love. An egoistic tendency is ingrained in the very nature of
man. Instincts and the so-called organic need points towards that fact.
Our soul, life, or the pure ego is, certainly, the dearest to us, but
beyond that we also love what William James would call our material and
social selves.

ii. Love of a benefactor for the benefits received from him. This is
also a sort of self love, though an indirect one. We love others because
they promote our own cause in one way or another. We love the physician
because he looks after our health and the engineer because he beautifies
our material environments and, thus, make our lives comfortable and
happy.

iii. Love of beauty. Beauty has almost universally been recognized as a
thing of intrinsic value. It means the orderly and systematic
arrangement of parts, and this is not the quality of material things
only, it lies in the activities and the behaviour of man and in his
ideas and concepts. Whatever is beautiful is loved by us for its own
sake.

iv. Love due to the harmonious inter-action and secret affinity between
two souls. A thief loves a thief and a noble person loves a noble
friend.

Now, if love exists for all these separate causes, will not the
individual be loved who holds all these in their supreme and perfect
form? Such an individual is God Himself, the possessor of the most
lovable qualities. It is to Him that we owe our very existence. He is
the only real benefactor and from Him all benefits are received. If we
get something from a human being, it really comes from God. Had he
willed otherwise, we would not have been able to get it. Thirdly, God
also possesses the attributes of beauty. There is beauty in His design
and in His creative behaviour. “God is beautiful and loves beauty,”[^59]
said the Holy Prophet. Lastly, the human soul has affinity with its
divine source: God has created man after His own image. So, once we know
God with all these attributes and also know where we stand in relation
to Him, our love for Him becomes a necessity. And then He loves us too.
“Verily Allah loves the repentant and those who purify themselves.”[^60]

But the lover who claims to love the Most Lovable must show some signs.
The first sign, according to al-Ghazālī, is that the lover has no fear
of death, for it means meeting the Beloved face to face and having a
direct vision of Him. This world is a hindrance and a barrier which
obstructs the lover’s path. The sooner it is done away with, the better.
Another mark of the true love is that the remembrance of God ever
remains fresh in his heart. Once the fire of love is kindled, it cannot
be extinguished. It remains ever ablaze and the flames go on rising
higher and higher. The lover, in fact, feels happy in this condition.
This is why he often seeks undisturbed loneliness to brighten these
flames by contemplation and one-sided thought. Further, the lover
sacrifices his will for that of the Beloved. His likes and dislikes, his
behaviour and his ways of life are entirely directed and controlled by
God. Lastly, the intensity of love for God demands that we should love
all His activities. So, also, we should love our fellow-men for they are
all His servants and creatures.

Love includes longing *(shauq)*, for every lover pines to see the
beloved when absent. The lover of God craves for the vision of God which
would be the noblest grace and the highest delight held out to him.
Again, love results in affability *(uns)*, which, according to
al-Ghazālī, is one of the most glorious fruits of love and signifies the
feeling of pleasure and delight consequent upon God’s nearness and the
perception of His beauty and perfection. Thirdly, successful love means
satisfaction *(rida’)*. This includes the satisfaction of God with men
and the satisfaction of men with Him. “God is satisfied with them and
them with him.”[^61] This is the stage of the tranquil soul *(al-nafs
al-mutma’innah)*. “Oh tranquil soul!” God will say, “Return to thy Lord
well-pleased (with Him) and well-pleasing (Him), so enter among My
servants and enter into my Garden.”[^62]

Now, because love is consequent upon the knowledge and contemplation of
God, the lover is the gnostic *(‘arif)*. Gnosis *(ma‘rifah)*, however,
is a gem, a precious thing which is not to be wasted, “The sun which
enlightens the heart of the gnostic,” says al-Ghazālī, “is more radiant
than our physical sun, for that sun sets and may be eclipsed, but the
sun of gnosis knows no eclipse nor does it set. It is an invaluable gift
to be given only to those who deserve it and to be given more or less
according to the degree of self-mortification to which they attain. The
limited human mind is not capable of grasping the entire expanse of
divine majesty. The more one knows of God, the more one loves Him. The
height of contemplation is reached when plurality passes away entirely,
when there is complete cessation of conscious perception of things other
than the Beloved, and the individual sees God everywhere. It was in this
state that one said, “I am the Truth,” and another, “Glory be to Me! How
is My majesty,” and another, “Under this robe is naught but God.” This
is the state of absolute unity and identity.

The gnostic and the lover of God in this world will see God in the next
world. The Mu’tazilites had denied the beatific vision because it
involved a directing of the eyes on the part of the seer and the
position on the part of the seen. They said that because God is beyond
space, the question of limiting Him to a particular place and direction
does not arise. But al-Ghazālī meets their objection by saying that this
vision, like meditation, will not have any references to the eye or any
other sense-organ. It will be without their mediation. Similarly, just
as the conception of God is free from the implication of spatial and
temporal characteristics, so will the vision of Him be beyond all such
limitations and boundaries.

C. Influence
------------

Al-Ghazālī’s influence within Islam has been both profound and the most
wide-spread; his works have been and still are being read and studied
from West Africa to Oceania more than those of any other Muslim writer,
and his teaching has been accepted and made a rule of life more than
that of any other theologian. It has been claimed and rightly so that
“al-Ghazālī’s influence taken singly, on the Muslim community has been
perhaps greater than that of all the scholastic theologians.”

But we hasten to add that, like any other original thinker in the world,
al-Ghazālī did not go without his share of criticism. The unprecedented
attempt on his part to make orthodoxy mystical and mysticism orthodox,
and both philosophical, naturally incurred suspicion and criticism from
all schools of thought and all stages of opinion both before and after
his death. Liberals have criticized him for his conservatism, and
conservatives for his liberalism; philosophers for his orthodoxy, and
the orthodox for his philosophy.

Al-Ghazālī’s constant use of philosophical language and his mode of
argument and pre-occupation with Sufism led Tartushi (d. 520/1126),
al-Mazari (d. 536/1141), ibn Jauzi (d. 597/1200), ibn al-Salah (d.
643/1245), ibn Taimiyyah (d. 728/1328), ibn Qayyim (d. 751/1350) and
other famous theologians of the orthodox school to denounce him publicly
as “one of the misguided.” Ibn Jauzi is reported to have once exclaimed,
“How cheaply has al-Ghazālī traded theology for Sufism!”[^63] Ibn
Taimiyyah on the other hand has accused him of having traded “theology”
for philosophy.

Qadi Abu ‘Abd Allah Mohammad ibn Hamdin of Cordova went so far as to
issue a decree *(fatwa)* against al-Ghazālī’s works, with the result
that all his books including the *Ihya’*[^64] were burned and destroyed
throughout Spain and the possession of them was forbidden on the threat
of confiscation of property or even on that of death. The destruction of
his philosophical and even theological writings was also ordered in
North Africa during the reign of the Marrakush Sultan ‘Ali ibn Yusuf ibn
Tashifin (477/1084 – 537/1142), who was fanatically orthodox in his
religious views. Both of these incidents, however, bear ample testimony
to the fact that al-Ghazālī’s writings had gained a very wide
circulation in the Muslim West even as early as that.

Amongst the philosophers, al-Ghazālī’s most renowned and bitterest
critic was ibn Rushd (520/1126 – 595/1198). He took a point-by-point
refutation of al-Ghazālī’s arguments against the philosophers as given
in the *Tahafut* and named his own work *Tahafut al-Tahafut* (576/1180).
Ibn Rushd’s defence of the philosophers is as subtle and vigorous as is
al-Ghazālī’s attack against them. Ibn Rushd indeed handles his arguments
with accomplished understanding and ingenious skill, yet, in the
considered opinion of those who are competent to judge, al-Ghazālī’s
arguments are in the final analysis more telling than those of his
adversary.[^65]

Ibn Rushd in the course of his discussion accuses al-Ghazālī of
hypocrisy and insincerity by saying that his polemics against the
philosophers was merely to win the favour of the orthodox;[^66] there is
nothing to substantiate this charge. He also accused al-Ghazālī of
inconsistencies in his thought. He alleges, for example, that in the
*Mishkat al-Anwar* al-Ghazālī lends whole-hearted support to the theory
of emanation which he had so vehemently criticized in the
*Tahafut*.[^67] Al-Ghazālī’s teaching, according to him, is sometimes
detrimental to religion and sometimes to philosophy and sometimes to
both. It is said, on the report of ibn Taimiyyah, which ibn Rushd was so
struck by the duplicity of al-Ghazālī’s thought that he would often
quote the following verse with reference to him, “One day you are
Yemenite when you meet a man from Yemen. But when you see someone from
Ma’add you assert you are from ‘Àdnan!”[^68]

The charge of inconsistency against al-Ghazālī has also been made by
another Muslim philosopher, namely ibn Tufail (d. 501/1185), who says
that in his works meant for general readers al-Ghazālī is “bound in one
place and loose in another and has denied certain things and then
declared them to be true.” In spite of pointing out certain
contradictions in Ghazālī’s works, ibn Tufail had on the whole great
admiration[^69] for his teaching, and the influence of it can be seen in
his own greatly admired philosophical romance *Hayy Bin Yaqzan*.

Indeed, the amount of criticism levelled against al-Ghazālī[^70] is
itself proof of his wide-spread influence. The number of al-Ghazālī’s
followers and admirers who accepted his teaching and spread it is
immensely greater than that of his critics; it is neither possible nor
useful here to give a long catalogue of names. One fact, however,
becomes conspicuous that it includes mostly people of two types, namely,
the orthodox theologians and the Sufis, or those who were equally
qualified as both. This makes it clear that the influence of al-Ghazālī
within Islam expressed itself simultaneously in two different
traditions, i.e. those of mysticism and orthodoxy, and thus, along with
the other forces of history went a long way in determining the permanent
attitudes in the religious consciousness of the Islamic community,
namely, the attitudes of spiritualization and fundamentalism.

*Ihya’* indeed is still the most widely read of all the works of
al-Ghazālī in all sections of the community, if not in its entirety at
least in the form of fragments and summaries which are available in
large numbers.[^71] It has been so eulogized by some that they have not
hesitated to call it the second Qur’an, and the theologians and
traditionalists have not tired in writing voluminous commentaries on it.

But it is not within Islam only that Al-Ghazālī’s influence exerted
itself so strongly, it also had its impact on Western, particularly
Jewish and Christian, thought, and indeed has flowed right into the most
modern of our philosophical fascinating subject. It will be dealt with
in the next volume in the chapter on “The Influence of Muslim Philosophy
on the West.”

Bibliography
------------

So far, the best sources for a bibliography on al-Ghazālī are Sayyid
Murtada, *Ittihaf al-Sadah*, Cairo, 1311/1893, Vol. 1, pp. 41 – 44; Carl
Brockelman, *Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur*, Weimar, 1898, Vol.
1, pp. 419 – 26, *Supplementbande*, Leiden, 1937, Vol. 1, pp. 744 *et
sqq.*; and *Zweite den Supplementhanden angepasste Auflage*, Vol. 1,
Leiden, 1943, pp. 535, *et sqq*. A list of articles on al-Ghazālī in
English and some of the European languages published in the various
periodicals, etc. from 1906 – 1955 is to be found in *Index Islamicus*,
Cambridge, 1958, pp. 150 – 52. A fairly comprehensive subject-wise
classification of al-Ghazālī’s works and a topic-wise, though brief,
bibliography can be found in the article “Al-Ghazālī” in the
*Encyclopaedia of Islam*. In the tree sections below an attempt has been
made to list: 1) those of al-Ghazālī’s works which can be arranged in a
chronological order with some measure of certainty, 2) works the
authenticity of which has been doubted by the professional students of
al-Ghazālī (for both these sections, cf. note No. 24 in the preceding
chapter), and 3) books (or sections thereof) and articles most of which
have been referred to in the notes but which are not included in any of
the sources mentioned above.

1. *Maqasid al-Falasifah*, Second edition, Egypt, 1355/1936 (statement
of the teachings of the Muslim Peripatetics); *Mi‘yar al-‘Ilm*, Cairo,
1329/1911 (an elaborate treatise on logic); *Tahafut al-Falasifah*, ed.
M. Bouyges, S. J. Beyrouth, 1927 (against the philosophers); *Mihakk
al-Nazar*, Cairo (a smaller work on logic); *al-Mustazhiri*, Leiden,
1916 (against the Batinites); *al-Iqtistad fi al-I‘tiqad*, Cairo,
1327/1909 (on speculative theology); *Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din*, 15 vols,
Cairo, 1356/1937 – 1357/1938 (*magnum opus*, a compendium of
al-Ghazālī’s whole system); *Bidayat al Hidayah*, Cairo, 1353/1934, 47
pp. (on religious conduct, the authenticity of the closing section, pp.
40 – 47, doubtful); *al-Hikma fi Makhluqat Allah*, Cairo, 1321/1903 (on
evidence of God’s wisdom in His creation); *al-Maqsad al-Asna fi Asma’
Allah al-Husna*, Cairo, 1322/1904 (an exhortation to imitation of the
divine qualities); *al-Imla’ ‘an Ishkalat al-Ihya’* (reply to attacks on
*Ihya’*, can be found on the margin of Sayyid Murtada’s *Ittihal
al-Sadah*, Vol. 1, pp. 41 – 252, (the definitions of the Sufi terms in
the introduction are perhaps not authentic); *al-Madnun bihi ‘ala-Ghairi
Ahlihi*, Cairo, 1309/1891 (an esoteric work to be kept from those unfit
for it); *Jawahir al-Qur’an*, Egypt (an exposition of the faith of the
orthodox on the basis of the Qur’an); *Kitab al-Arba‘in*, Cairo,
1328/1910 (a second part of the preceding work); *Kimiya-i Sa‘dat* (in
Persian), lithograph edition, Bombay (a summary of *Ihya’*, to be
distinguished from a spurious work of the same title in Arabic);
*al-Qustas al-Mustaqim*, Cairo, 1318/1900 (a smaller work against the
Batinites); *Iljam al-‘Awamm ‘an ‘Ilm al-Kalam*, Egypt, 1309/1891 (a
work on the science of dogmatics); *Ayyuha al-Walad*, Egypt, 1343/1924
(advice in the sphere of theology); *al-Munqidh min al-Dalal*, Damascus,
1358/1939 (auto-biographical); *Mishkat al-Anwar*, Egypt, 1343/1924 (on
mysticism: an exposition of the light verse in the Qur’an, the
authenticity of the veil section at the end is questionable; cf. note
No. 24. above).

2. *Al-Durrat al-Fakhirah Koshf ‘Ulum al-Akhirah*, ed. Gauthier,
Leipzig, 1877; *Risalah Ladunniyah*, Cairo, 1343/1924 (English
translation by Margaret Smith): *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*,
1938, pp. 177 – 200, 353 – 74; *Rawlat al-Taliban wa ‘Umdat al-Salikin*
in *Fara’id al-La’ali*, Cairo, 1343/1924, pp. 121 – 261; *Sirr
al-‘Alamain wa Kashi ma fi al-Darain*, Cairo, 1328/1910; *Kimiya’
al-Sa‘adah* (Arabic) in *al-Jawahir al-Ghazali*, Cairo 1343, 1924;
*al-Najkh al-Taswiyyah* (referred to by Sayyid Murtada in *Ittahal*);
*al-Madnun al-Saghir*, also known as *al-Ajwibah al-Ghazaliyyah fi
al-Masa’il al-Ukhrawiyyah*, Cairo, 1309/1891; *Mankhul* (refutation of
the *Fikh* of Abu Hanifah; referred to in *Kashf al-Zunan*); *Me’raj
al-Salikin* in *Fara’ad al-La’ali*, Cairo, 1343/1924, pp. 1 – 99;
*Mukashafat al-Qulub*, Cairo, 1328/1910.

3. (A) Books – S. A. Kamali, *al-Ghazālī’s Tahafut al-Falasifah*
(English translation), The Pakistan philosophical Congress, Lahore,
1958; W. M. Watt, *The Faith and Practice of al-Ghazālī* (English
translation of *al-Munqidh min al-Dalal* and *Bidayat al-Hadiyah*),
George Allen and Unwin, London, 1953; Mohammad Hanif Nadawi, *Qadim
Yunani Falsafah* (Urdu translation of *Maqasid al-Falasifah*), Majlis-i
Taraqqi-i Adab, Lahore, 1959; *Sargudhasht-i Ghazālī* (Urdu translation
of *al-Munqidh min al-Dalal* with an Introduction), Institute of Islamic
Culture, Lahore, 1959; *Afkir-i Ghazālī* (al-Ghazālī’s teachings with
regard to knowledge and faith based on *Ihya’* with an Introduction),
Institute of Islamic Culture, Lahore, 1956 (Urdu); M. Ahsan, *Madhaq
al-Arifin* (Urdu translation of *Ihya’*), four vols., Matba‘ah Tejkumar,
Lucknow, 1955 (seventh edition); M. ‘Inayat Allah, *Kimiya’i Sa‘adat*
(Urdu translation), Din Mohammadi Press, Lahore. n.d. (revised edition);
Sayyid ‘Abd al-Quddus Hashimi Nadawi, *al-Murshid al-Amin* (summary of
*Ihya’* in Urdu), Urdu Manzil, Karachi, 1955; Syed Nawab Ali, *Some
Moral and Religious Teachings of al-Ghazālī* (English translation of
extracts from Parts Three and Four of *Ihya’* with Introduction by Alban
G. Widgery), Sheikh Mohammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1946; Claud Field, *The
Alchemy of Happiness* (English translation of some parts of
*Kimiya-Sa‘adat*), Sh. Mohammad Ashraf, Lahore, n.d. (reprint from the
Wisdom of the East Series); W. H. T. Gairdner, *Mishkat al-Anwar*, Sh.
Mohammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1952 (new edition); Sulaiman Dunya, *Tahafut
al-Falsifah li al-Ghazālī*, Cairo, 1947; *al-Haqiqah fi Nazar
al-Ghazālī*, Dar Ihya’ al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah, Cairo, 1947; *al-Hiqah fi
Nazar al-Ghazālī*, Dar Ihya’ al Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah, Cairo, n.d.; A.W.
Zuhuri, *Makatib-i Imam Ghazālī* (Letters of al-Ghazālī in Urdu),
Karachi, 1949; M. Umaruddin, *The Ethical Philosophy of al-Ghazālī*,
four parts, published by the author, Muslim University, Aligarh, 1949 –
1951; *Some Fundamental Aspects of Imam Ghazzali’s Thought*, Irshad Book
Depot, Aligarh, 1946; Nur al-Hassan Khan, *Ghazālī ka Tasawar-i Akhlaq*
(Urdu translation of Dr. Zaki Mubarak’s *al-Akhlaq ‘ind al-Ghazzali)*,
al- Maktabat al-‘Ilmiyyah, Lahore, 1956; Shibli Nu‘mani, *al-Ghazālī* M.
Thana Allah Khan, Lahore 1956 (Urdu); Simon van den Bergh, *Averrose’
Tahafut al-Tahafut* (English translation with extensive notes), two
vols., Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1954. An Urdu translation of ibn
Rushd’s *Tahafut al-Tahafut* is under preparation, to be published by
the Board for Advancement of Literature, Lahore.

(B) Sections of Books – ‘Abd al-Salam Nadawi, *Hukama’-i Islam*,
Azamgarh, 1953, Vol. 1 pp. 386 – 408 (Urdu); Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali,
*Tarikh-i Da‘wat-u ‘Azimat*, Azamgarh, 1375/1955, Part One, pp. 111 – 81
(Urdu); Majid Fakhry, *Islamic Occasionalism*, George Allen & Unwin,
London, 1958, chapter two and by index; M. M. Sharif, *Muslim Thought:
Its Origin and Achievements*, Sh. Mohammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1951, pp. 75
– 80; F. Rahman, *Prophecy in Islam*, George Allen & Unwin, London,
1958, pp. 94 – 99; M. Saeed Sheikh, *Studies in Muslim Philosophy* (in
press), Pakistan Philosophical Congress, Lahore, chapter on al-Ghazālī;
D. M. Donaldson, *Studies in Sufism*, George Allen & Unwin, London, 1956
(second impression), pp. 74 – 75, 79 – 83 and by index; S. M. Afnan,
*Avicenna: His Life and Works*, George Allen & Unwin, London, 1958, pp.
235 – 41; E. I. J. Rosenthal, *Political Thought in Medieval Islam*,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1958, pp. 38 – 43 and by index;
J. W. Sweetman, *Islam and Christian Theology*, Lutterworth Press,
London, 1955, Part 2 , vol. 1, pp. 90 – 93, 262 – 309 and by index of
authors; C. Hartshorne and W. L. Reese, *Philosophers Speak of God*,
Chicago, 1953, pp. 106 – 11.

(C) Articles – G. F. Hourani, “Al-Ghazālī and the Philosophers on the
Origin of the World,” *The Muslim World*, 1958, Vol. 48, Nos. three and
four, pp. 183 – 91, 308 – 14; Michael E. Marmura, “Al-Ghazālī and the
Argument of Time,” *The Muslim world*, 1959, Vol. 49, no. four; M. M.
Sharif, “Muslim Philosophy and Western Thought,” *Iqbal*, July 1959,
Vol. eight no. 1, pp. 7 – 14; M. Hanif Nadawi, “Ghazālī ka Nazriyyah’i
Ta‘lil,” *Thaqafat* (Urdu), Institute of Islamic Culture, Lahore, July
1959, vol. eight, no. seven, pp. 11 – 19.

[^1]: In the Munqidh al-Ghazālī expressly mentions that he had studied
the Qut al-Qutub of Abu Talib al-Makki (d. 386/996), the works of Harith
al-Muhasibi (d. 243/857), and the fragments of al-Junaid (d. 298/910),
al Shibli (d. 334/945) and Abu Yazid al-Bistami (d. 261/875). At the end
he adds that he had read the discourses of all the leading Sufis. In
al-Ghazālī’s works, indeed, there are references to be found to all the
great mystics of Islam. For al-Ghazālī’s Sufistic sources, cf. Margaret
Smith, Al-Ghazālī: The Mystic, London, 1944, pp. 123 – 32. For a
comparison of Qut al-Qulub and Ihya’ cf. Shibli Nu’mani, Al-Ghazālī,
Lahore, 1956, p. 107; for the comparison of Muhasibi’s Kitab al-Wasaya
and Munqidh, cf. A. J. Arberry, Sufism, London, 1950, pp. 47 – 50.

[^2]: Cf. Ihya’, Cairo, 1340/1921, Vol. 4, p 259 et.sqq.

[^3]: Tahafut, p. 88, see note 38 in the preceding chapter.

[^4]: Qur’an 2:117, 26:40.

[^5]: T. J. de Boer, The History of Philosophy in Islam, English trans.
by E. R. Jones, London, 1933, p. 163.

[^6]: Cf. Qur’an 3:189, 190, 6:100, 10:5, 6, 13:3, 4, etc., cf. also
al-Ghazālī’s al Hikmah fi Makhtuqat Allah, Cairo, 1321/1903.

[^7]: Cf. M. Saeed Sheikh, “Kant’s Critique of Rational Psychology and
Its Paralogisms,” Proceedings of the Sixth Pakistan Philosophical
Congress, Lahore, 1959, pp. 185 – 93.

[^8]: Cf. Tahafut, pp. 200—20. For a comparison of al-Ghazālī’s and ibn
Sina’s views with regard to soul, cf. Sulaiman Dunya, al-Haqiqah fi Nazr
al-Ghazālī, Egypt, 1367/1947, pp. 356 – 455.

[^9]: Cf. article “Nafs,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, esp. sections 9 and10;
also Maqasid al-Falasifah (Urdu translation) by M. Hanif Nadawi, Lahore,
1959, pp. 323 – 32.

[^10]: See Ihya’, Cairo 1340/1921, p. 54. Cf. also D. B. Macdonald,
Development of Muslim Theology..., London, 1903, pp. 234, 235, and A. J.
Wonsinek, The Relation between al-Ghazālī’s Cosmology and His Mysticism,
Amsterdam, 1933.

[^11]: See Kimiya-Sa’dat, Urdu Trans. by M. ‘Inayat Ullah, Lahore, n.d.,
pp. 8, 36. Also cf. Qur’an, 30:30.

[^12]: Qur’an, 15:29, 38:72.

[^13]: Kimiya-i Sa‘adat, English trans. by Claud Field, The Alchemy of
Happiness, Lahore, n.d. pp. 19, 35.

[^14]: See Kimiya-i Sa‘dat, Urdu trans. p. 10.

[^15]: Qur’an 37:85

[^16]: Ibid, 49:27 – 30.

[^17]: Munqidh, p. 60; see note no. 1 in the preceding chapter.

[^18]: Cf. F. Rahman, Prophecy in Islam London, 1958, p. 96.

[^19]: Ihya’ Urdu trans. by M. Ahsan Siddiqi, Lucknow, 1955, Vol. 1, pp.
11 et sqq.

[^20]: Cf. Mizan al-‘Amal, Cairo, 1342/1923, pp. 35, 36; also Ihya’,
Part 1 Book 1, Section 7 on ‘Aql (Intellect).

[^21]: Cf. P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, London, 1949, p. 432; Max
Meyerhof, The Legacy of Islam, ed. T. Arnold and A. Guillaume, Oxford,
1931; and Will Durant, The Age of Faith, New York, 1950, pp. 256, 257,
332.

[^22]: He himself wrote a treatise on astronomy. Cf. Sarton,
Introduction to the History of Science, Baltimore, 1927, Vol 1, p. 753.

[^23]: The charge of esotericism, in the narrow sense of the theory of
two-fold truth against al-Ghazali, is however, unfounded. Cf. W.
Montgomery swat, “A Forgery in al-Ghazālī’s Mishkat,” Journal of royal
Asiatic Society, 1949, pp. 5 – 22; also article “al-Ghazālī,” (section
3), Encyclopedia of Islam. This question is connected with the problem
of the authenticity of al-Ghazālī’s works.

[^24]: Cf. M. Iqbal, “...to this day it is difficult to define with
accuracy, his view of the nature of God. In him, like Borger and Solger
in Germany, Sufi Pantheism and the Ash’arite dogma of personality appear
to harmonize together, a reconciliation which makes it difficult to say
whether he as a Pantheist or a Personal Pantheist of the type” (The
Development of Metaphysics in Persia, p. 75). Also C. R. Upper,
“Al-Ghazālī’s Thought Concerning the Nature of man and Union with God,”
The Muslim World, 1952, Vol 42, pp. 23 – 32. C. R. Upper ends this
article by a significant remark, “Al-Ghazālī’s occasional pantheism is
indubitable, yet is orthodoxy is impeccable. How this can be ist he
secret between the various positions. cf. S. R. Shafiq, “Some Abiding
Teachings of al-Ghazālī,” The Muslim World, Vol 54, No. 1, 1954, pp. 43
– 48.

[^25]: Cf. Munqidh, p. 61.

[^26]: Cf. Qur’an, 2:255.

[^27]: Cf. Miskhat al-Anwar, English translation by W. H. T. Gairdner,
Lahore, p. 62.

[^28]: Saying of al-Hallaj (executed 309/922). Cf. R. A. Nicholson, The
Idea of Personality in Sufism, Cambridge, 1923.

[^29]: Sayings ascribed to Abu Yazid al-Bistani, who is probably the
first of the intoxicated Sufis.

[^30]: Munqidh, p. 61.

[^31]: Margaret Smith, Dr. Zaki Mubarak, and others.

[^32]: Qur’an 58:4.

[^33]: Al-Ghazālī Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din part 3, p.50.

[^34]: Hadith, Ahmad b. Hanbal, Vo. 4, p. 226

[^35]: Al-Ghazālī, Ihya’, Pate 2, Chap. on Music.

[^36]: D.B. Macdonald, Development of Muslim Theology, p. 192.

[^37]: The Qur’an, 6:125.

[^38]: Donaldson, Studies in Muslim Ethics, p. 156.

[^39]: W. R. Sorley, Moral Values and the Idea of God, p. 446.

[^40]: The Qur’an, 90:9 – 10.

[^41]: Ibn Hajr, Bulugh al-Maram, “Bab al-Zuhd w-al-War‘.”

[^42]: The Qur’an, 7:31.

[^43]: Al-Ghazālī, Ihya’, Part 3, p.72.

[^44]: Ibid., p. 66

[^45]: Ibid., p. 85.

[^46]: The Qur’an, 2:10.

[^47]: Jama‘ Tirmidhi, Matba’ah Mujtaha’i, p. 201.

[^48]: The Qur’an, 49:12.

[^49]: Al-Mishkat al-Masabih, “Bab al-Kaba’ir wa ‘Alamat al-Nifaq.”

[^50]: Qur’an, 9:34.

[^51]: Ibid. 25:70

[^52]: Margaret Smith, Al-Ghazālī: The Mystic, pp. 167 – 68.

[^53]: The Qur’an 70:19.

[^54]: Ibid. 34:13.

[^55]: Ibid. 14:7.

[^56]: The opening hadith in al-Sahih al-Bhkhari.

[^57]: Al-Ghazālī, Ihya’, Part 4, pp. 334 – 35.

[^58]: Margaret Smith, op. cit. pp. 167 – 68.

[^59]: Al-Mishkat al-Masabih “Bab al-Ghadab w-al-Kibr.”

[^60]: Qur’an 2:222.

[^61]: Ibid. 98:8.

[^62]: Ibid. 89:27 – 30.

[^63]: Cf. Jamal al-Din ibn al-Jauzi, al-Namus fi Talbis Iblis, Cairo,
1340/1921, p. 377.

[^64]: For the theologians’ various objections to Ihya’ and an answer to
them, see M. Hanif Nadawi, Afkar-i Ghazālī, Lahore, 1956, pp. 61 – 73.

[^65]: Cf. e.g. Majid Fakhry, Islamic Occasionalism, London, 1958, pp.
103 et sqq.

[^66]: Cf. also ibn Rushd, al-Kashf ‘an Manahij al-Adillah, Cairo,
1319/1901, pp. 57, et sq.

[^67]: Cf. Mishkat al-Anwar, English translation by W. H. T. Gardner,
Lahore, pp. 17 – 21.

[^68]: Quoted by F. Rahman, op. cit. London, 1958, p. 112. It is
significant to note that S. van den Bergh concludes in his introduction
to Averroes’ Tahafut al-Tahafut that resemblances between Ghazālī and
Averroes seem sometimes greater than their differences, pp. 35, 36.

[^69]: Cf. ibn Tufail, Hayy Bin Yaqzan (Urdu trans. by Zafar Ahmad
Siddiqi), Aligarh, 1955, pp. 26 – 30.

[^70]: For a modern criticism of al-Ghazālī cf. M. Zaki ‘Abd al-Salim
Mubarak, al-Akhlaq ‘ind al-Ghazzali, Cairo, 1924 (Urdu trans. by Nur
al-Hassan Khan, Lahore, 1956). Very recently F. Rahman in his short
treatment of al-Ghazālī’s vies on prophecy in the above cited work has
made a very strong charge of inconsistency against him.

[^71]: With the exception of al-Ghazālī’s own Kimiya-i Sa‘dat (in
Persian), the first of such summaries was written by al-Ghazālī’s own
brother, Ahmad al-Ghazālī (d. 520/1126), under the title Lubab al-Ihya’.
A list of these may be found in Sayyid Murtada’s Ittihaj al-Sadah,
Cairo, 1311/1893, p. 41.


