Chapter 32: Fakhr Al-Razi
=========================

A. Life, Signficance Of Thought And Works
-----------------------------------------

The intellectual life of Islam after the attacks of Ash‘ari and Ghazālī
upon rationalistic philosophy can be largely described as the gradual
transition from rationalism of Aristotelian philosophy toward the
intuitive and illuminative wisdom of Ishraqis[^1] and Sufis. Although
Islam began to weaken politically and culturally during the latter part
of the ‘Abbasid Caliphate, Muslim thought, especially in the Shi‘ah
world continued the process of divorcing itself from the categories of
Peripatetic philosophy. One of the most influential and colourful
figures in this movement, who played a major role in the attack against
the rationalists, was Fakhr al-Din Razi, who is considered to be the
reviver of Islam in the sixth/12th century as Ghazālī was in the
fifth/11th century.[^2] Razi is, in many ways, a second Ghazālī; in
fact, he may, without exaggeration, be considered to be one of the
greatest Muslim theologians.

Abu al-Fadl Mohammad ibn ‘Umar, known as Fakhr al-Din Razi and also as
Imam Fakhr ibn al-Katib, and *Imam al-Mushakkikin* (the Imam of
Doubters),[^3] was born in Rayy in northern Persia in 543/1149 to a
family of scholars who came originally from Talbaristan. His father,
Dia’ al-Din, was a well known scholar in Rayy and was Imam Fakhr’s first
teacher. Later, Fakhr al-Din al-Jilli (the latter being also the teacher
of Sheikh al-Baghawi and Majd al-Din Suhrawardi) and theology with Kamal
al-Din Simnani in Rayy and Maraghah, and soon became a master of all the
sciences of his time, including mathematics, medical and natural
sciences.[^4]

Having completed his formal studies, Imam Fakhr set out for Khwarizm to
combat the Mu‘tazilites, and from there journeyed to Transoxiana and was
warmly accepted at the Courts of Ghur rulers, Ghiyath al-Din and his
brother Shihab al-Din. This stay terminated soon due to opposition and
jealousy of certain scholars and courtiers. Consequently, Imam Fakhr
left Qhur Court for Chaznah, where he taught for a while, and finally,
settled in Herat where, under the patronage of Khwarizm Shah ‘Ala
al-Din, a special school was built for him. There he spent the rest of
his life as a teacher and preacher in comfort and honour among a large
number of disciples and students who came from all over the Muslim world
to study under him. He passed away at the height of fame and glory in
606/1209.[^5]

The career of Imam Fakhr is, in many ways, a repetition of that of
Ghazālī’s. Like his great predecessor, he was of the Shafi‘i school,
well versed in all the sciences and philosophy and yet opposed to many
aspects of the Greek heritage, a critic of the Muslim philosophers, and
drawn towards Sufism.[^6] In theology, in which he followed the Ash‘rite
school, he was certainly influenced by Ghazālī and Imam al-Haramain. In
philosophy he came under the influence of his compatriot, Mohammad
Zakariyya Razi, as well as ibn Sina and in physics his master was,
without doubt, Abu al-Barakat al-Baghdadi. Like a series of
anti-Aristotelian philosophers before him, Imam Fakhr tried to reconcile
religion and rational philosophy by reliance upon ideas derived more
from the *Timaeus* of Plato than the Physics of Aristotle.[^7]

Imam Fakhr’s main role in the intellectual life of Islam was to support
the orthodox policy of the Caliphate of his time, to suppress
rationalistic philosophy in favour of theology. In the unified view of
Islam, politics, religion and intellectual life have never been
divorced, so much so, that the political struggle of minorities in the
Caliphate, whether they were opposed to Arab domination or, like the
Shi‘ahs, to the ‘Abbasid Caliphate as such, was reflected clearly in the
intellectual and religious activities of the period. As the Caliphate
supported the Orthodox Sunni theologians against the rationalists, the
philosophers sought refuge in the courts of those minor dynasties that
were opposed to the central authority of the Caliphs. So we see such
figures as ibn Sina and Khuwaja Nassir al-Din Tusi seeking favour of
rulers opposed to the authority of Baghdad, and especially of Shi‘ah
princes.[^8]

On the other hand, there appeared a series of great scholars and sages,
mostly theologians and Sufis, of whom the most important were Ghazālī,
Imam Fakhr, and the Sufi masters, like Shihab al-Din ‘Umar Suhrawardi,
who lifted their pen in support of the Caliphate and used both theology
and Sufism in order to combat rationalistic philosophy.[^9] The works of
Imam Fakhr were, above all else, dedicated to his cause. Sunni theology
reached its height in his works and weakened considerably with the fall
of the ‘Abbasid Caliphate, which came to an end about 50 years after his
death.

The writings of Fakhr al-Din Razi, of which nearly a hundred are known
deal almost with every aspect of Muslim intellectual life and include
all the sciences of his time.[^10] Some of these, like the commentary
upon the *al-Isharat w-al-Tanbihat* of ibn Sina and upon his *‘Uyun
al-Hikmah* and the *Mabahith al-Mashriqiyyah*, are written as criticisms
of Muslim philosophers, especially ibn Sina, and on general problems of
philosophy.[^11] Others deal with the many branches of the intellectual
sciences including logic, mathematics, metaphysics and the natural and
esoteric sciences.

Still another set of books deals with theology, of which the most famous
are the *Kitab al-Arba~in fi Usul al-Din, Laudami’ al-Bayyinat*, and the
*Mubassal*, a classic among writings of the *Kalam*. Fakhr al-Din also
wrote a large number of works on particular sciences, like the
commentary upon the syntax of Zamkhshari, *Kitab al-Sirr al-Maktum* on
astrology and astronomy, *Manaqib al-shifi‘i* on history, the commentary
upon the *Qanun* or *Canon* of ibn Sina, and many other treatises
dealing with medicine, geometry, physiognomy, agriculture, theurgy, etc.
Besides these writings, Imam Fakhr composed a large number of works on
the purely Islamic sciences of exegesis and jurisprudence, of which the
most famous are the *Mafatih al-Ghaib*, the voluminous commentary upon
the Qur’an and *al-Ma‘alim fi Usul al-Figh* on the principles of
jurisprudence.

Throughout these writings, the character of Imam Fakhr as a critic and
“doubter” is evident. He criticizes not only the philosophers, but also
theologians like Ash‘ari and historians like Shahrastani, when he
accuses of plagiarizing Baghdadi’s *al-Farq bain al Firaq* in his
*al-Milal wa-al-Nibal*.[^12] Imam Fakhr’s particular genius for analysis
and criticism is evident in whatever field he turns his attention to, so
that in the annals of Muslim thought he has quite justly become famous
as one who is a master in posing a problem but not in solving it, in
entering into a debate but not in concluding it.

B. Theology (Kalam)
-------------------

Muslim theology, known as *Kalam*, began as a reaction against the
rationalistic school of the Mu‘tazilites, and only gradually developed
into a complete science. In the earlier centuries the theologians,
following the lead of Abu al-Hassan al-Ash‘ari, tried to use logic, the
instrument of their enemies, in order to defend the truths of
revelation. From the fourth/tenth century onward, this defence itself
became more subtle and systematic, reaching its height in the works of
Imam al-Haramain Abu al-Ma‘ali ‘Abd al-Malik al-Juwaini, such as the
*Irshad* and the *Shamil*.[^13] With Ghazālī *Kalam* took a new turn, as
opposed to what it was at the beginning to the school of philosophers,
it now began to employ the syllogistic method, intellectual (‘aqli)
evidence and certain theses of the philosophers, thus laying the
foundation of the school of philosophical *Kalam* of the later
theologians.

Imam Fakhr is the greatest master of this later school of theology,
surpassing in many ways even the more illustrious Ghazālī. With Imam
Fakhr philosophical *Kalam* reaches its zenith of power and perfection;
his works became consequently a continuous source of influence over
their later theologians, whether they were Sunnis like al-Iji and
al-Taftazani or Shi‘ahs like Khuwaja Nasr.[^14] Properly speaking, Razi
must be credited with the foundation of a new school of *Kalam*, and
certain writers have even considered him to be the Third Teacher after
Aristotle and Farabi.[^15] Actually, he composed works characteristic of
both the first period of Muslim theology – marked by a revolt against
the philosophers and yet by a dependence upon their methods and even
some of their ideas – and the second period, after Ghazālī, in which
theology became a more independent science and lost much of its
defensive and apologetic quality. Among the first type of writings one
may name *Muhassal* and *al-Arabi fi Usul al-Din* and among the second
*Asas al-Taqdis* and *Lawamial-Bayyindt*.

The theology of Imam Razi is marked by the integration of theological
themes with other sciences. For example, in his Persian treatise, *Asrar
al-Tanzil*, he combines theology with ethics, and in the *Lawami‘
al-Bayyindt*, theology with Sufism, giving theology a fragrance of
spirituality and a beauty detailed and profound discussion concerning
*dhikr*, the invocation of one of the interior forms of *dhikr* he
writes, “The third kind of *dhikr* is that man of creation should
contemplate the creatures of God until each particle of the essence of
creation becomes a polished mirror before the unmanifested world so that
when he looks into this mirror with the eye of wisdom the ray of the eye
of his should will fall upon the world of Majesty. This is a station
without end and a sea with limit.”[^16] In this way, Imam Razi raises
theology to a height approached only by Ghazālī, far surpassing the
usual level of this study.[^17]

To understand Razi’s approach to theology, it is enough to analyze the
structure of one of his treatises. We take as an example perhaps the
most famous of his theological works, the *Muhassal*, which became a
classical source book on the *Kalam* almost from the moment of its
composition.[^18] Here, Imam Razi divides theology into four parts
*(arkun)*: preliminaries, being and its divisions, rational theology
*(ilahiyyat)*, and traditional questions *(sam‘iyyat)*. The
preliminaries include the principles of logic, the sufficiency of
demonstration *(dalil)* to prove the existence of God, and the
obligation upon each believer to prove God’s existence.[^19] The section
on Being and its divisions considers the questions of Being and
Non-being, the relation of the One to the many, cause and effect, etc.
Rational theology, which is interlaced with passages from the Qur’an,
concerns the Necessary Being, His attributes, acts and the divine names.
Finally, the traditional questions, which are exclusively scriptural,
concern prophethood, eschatology, the Imamate, the faith and other
related subjects. As a whole, therefore, Imam Razi’s theology combines
the transmitted or traditional elements of revelation *(naqli)* and the
intellectual and rational evidence concerning religious and metaphysical
questions *(‘aqli)* into a science which takes into account the problem
of religion while participating in many of the discussions of
philosophy.

In the method and problems of theology, Imam Razi followed the
Ash‘rites. As he writes in his *Kitab al-Arb’in*, “We (the Ash‘rites)
believe that God is neither body nor substance, and that He is not in
space, yet, we believe that we can see God.” But to show his
independence of judgment he goes on to assert, “Our companions (the
Ash‘rites) have given an intellectual reason for the possibility of
seeing God, but we have brought 12 objections against it which cannot be
answered. Therefore, we only say that we can see God by appealing to
transmitted reasoning, i.e. the Qur’anic text.”[^20]

Imam Razi also criticized Ash‘ari on the question of atomism which is
such an essential aspect of the Ash‘rite theology. Razi rejected atomism
in his earlier works like the *Mabahith al-Mashriqiyyah* and wrote his
*Kitab al-Jauhar al-Fard* to refute it, but later works like the great
Qur’anic commentary, the *Majafih al-Ghaib*, he accepted it once again.
(Atomism does not play a major role in his theology as it does in the
system under other Ash‘arites like Baqillani.) This change of position
occurs also in the rejection of infinity the void, and the plurality of
worlds in the earlier writings and their acceptance in later works like
the *Mafahh.*

There are several points in Imam Razi’s theology which are of special
interest in so far as his particular point of view is concerned. One
relates to the question of faith in which he joins most theologians in
regarding faith as the necessary and sufficient requirement for being
saved. Hell is not for those who have committed evil acts accidently,
but for the infidels who have no faith. Man is, of course, responsible
for his work but ultimately all is determined by the divine will. Imam
Razi is very emphatic in his determinism and over-throws even the theory
of acquisition *(kasb)* of the Ash‘arites. His Qur’anic commentary is
full of arguments for determinism, which he defends more openly and ably
than any other theologian. God is the creator of both good and evil,
faith and impiety, benefit and injury, all these qualities are decreed
by the determination of the divine will (*qada wa qada*). Yet, none of
the divine acts can be considered to be inappropriate or blameable since
God is the creator and ruler of the world, and whatever He does in His
kingdom is His own affair and is as such, appropriate.

According to Imam Razi, “God’s attributes and names must be interpreted
symbolically *(ta’wil)* in order to be understood.” He follows the
method of Imam al-Haramain in applying *ta’wil* to the Qur’an,
especially to those verses in which God is attributed with such
anthropomorphic qualities as sight, hearing, etc. This does not mean
that Razi tries to overcome the rational difficulties of certain
principles of faith by *ta’wil*, as did many of the philosophers. For
example, on the question of resurrection, unlike the philosophers who
believed only in the resurrection of the soul, Imam Razi asserts that at
resurrection God will create for each soul in the same body, made of the
same elements as those it possessed in this life.

On the question of knowledge and the process of reasoning, Imam Razi is
of the view that reason is neither the cause of which knowledge is the
effect nor the source which produces knowledge. There is an intelligible
succession between the two; God creates a reasoning which knowledge
follows necessarily.[^21] He accords a definite value to the rational
faculty; his aim in theology is, in fact, to create a science which
combines and harmonizes reason and revelation, *‘aql* and *naql*. In his
Qur’anic commentary, he calls those who have succeeded in integrating
these two elements the Muslim sages *(hukma’ islamiyya)*, and praises
them greatly. His own importance in Muslim theology lies in his success
in establishing the school of philosophical *Kalam*, already begun by
Ghazālī, in which both intellectual and revelational evidence played
important roles.

C. Philosophy
-------------

The importance of Imam Razi in philosophy lies more in his criticism of
the philosophers than in the establishment of a new school. Influenced
by the writings of Ghazālī, he studied philosophy to such an extent that
he became a definite master of it. Unlike the theologians who rejected
Greek philosophy totally or the Peripatetics who followed it strictly,
Imam Razi criticized many points of Greek philosophy while accepting
certain others.

In the introduction to the *Mugahith al-Mashriqiyyah*, the most
important of his philosophical works, he writes, “Our associates belong
to two groups: one consisting of those who imitate the Greek
philosophers, permit no one to discuss their thought and take pride in
being able to understand their sayings, and the other comprising those
who reject all their ideas with exception. Both of these groups are
wrong. We have delved deep into the writings of the previous
philosophers and have affirmed the true and rejected the false. We have
added certain principles to this philosophy and have put forth some new
ideas.”[^22]

The new ideas of which Imam Razi speaks are mostly those pertaining to
the rejection of certain basic elements of Aristotelianism and in some
cases of Platonis. In the *Mabahith* he rejects the Platonic ideas,
since in the Ash‘arite perspective all infinite modes of Being are
absorbed in the Absolute. He also criticizes the Platonic notion of
knowledge as reminiscence and the most important and penetrating
discussions involves criticism of the principle that from Unity only
unity can issue forth, *ex uno non fitnisi unum*, a principle held by
nearly all medieval philosophers. Imam Razi puts this view to the test
of his severe judgment and criticizes it with his usual genius for
analysis. He asserts, on the contrary, that from Unity multiplicity can
issue forth, but does not pursue the proof of this assertion very far.

The *Mabahith* deals with many other subjects treated in the well-known
texts of Muslim philosophy like those of ibn Sina. In each case it is
the acute criticism of commonly held Peripatetic notions that is of
interest. In his commentary upon the *al-Isharut w-al-Tunbihat* of ibn
Sina, which after the *Mabihith* is his most important philosophical
work, this type of criticism and doubts about Peripatetic philosophy
continue – doubts with his student Nassir al-Din Tusi, tried to answer
in his own commentary upon the *Isharut*. Ever since these works were
written, nearly every student of Peripatetic philosophy in the Muslim
world, especially in Persia, has reached this philosophy through the
criticism of Imam Razi, so that the thought of Imam Razi has become a
permanent heritage of Muslim philosophers.

His other philosophical works, like the commentary upon the *‘Uyun
al-Hikmah, Lugab al-Iskarut* and many treatises on logic and
metaphysics, are also significant, but his greatest philosophical
importance lies in the criticisms and doubts cast upon that school but
opened the horizon for the other modes of knowledge like *ishraqi*
philosophy and gnosis, which are more intimately bound with the spirit
of Islam.

D. The Sciences
---------------

There have been very few Muslim theologians who have had a lot of
knowledge of the mathematical and natural sciences as Imam Razi. His
pre-occupation with the sciences is itself of great interest, because,
usually the Sunni theologians and doctors of law shunned any discipline
outside the sphere of the strictly religious sciences. Imam Razi, on the
contrary, studied all the *awa’il* sciences, that is, the sciences
inherited from the Greeks, and was considered by many of his
contemporaries to be the greatest authority of his time on them. There
is hardly a science in which he did not compose a treatise, although he
never occupied himself with the study of nature in the manner of ibn
al-Haitham or Biruni. His main importance in the sciences was in
considering their principles and their relation to theology and to the
spirit of Islamic revelation.

A field in which Imam Razi excelled is medicine, a discipline the
mastery of which one hardly expects from a theologian. He wrote several
treatises on health, pulse, and anatomy, and a medical encyclopedia
entitled *al-Jami‘ al-Kabir* or *al-Tibb al-Kabir*, which he never
completed. His most important medical work was his commentary upon the
*Qanun* of ibn Sina, which he often criticized, basing himself on the
opinions of Galen and the Muslim physicians, especially Mohammad
Zakariyya Razi. The commentary is sufficient evidence that Imam Razi did
not learn medicine by reading one or two manuals but studied it
thoroughly and was well versed in it. He was, in fact, famous in Herat
for his ability and exactitude in diagnosis.

Imam Razi also wrote several treatises on geometry, astronomy,
agriculture, politics, history, and comparative religion.[^23] Also of
interest are his works on the esoteric sciences *(‘ulum gharibah),* to
which he devoted much attention. There remains among his writings
treatise on theurgy *(talismat)*, geomancy *(raml)*, physiognomy
*(firusah)*,[^24] astrology, and other similar subjects. It is curious
that Imam Razi wrote all these treatises, although he was opposed to
certain of these subjects like astrology which he attacked throughout
his writings.[^25] He was, however, more sympathetic to the study of
esoteric sciences than either the theologians or the philosophers, as is
illustrated by his defence of alchemy against the charges of ibn
Sina.[^26]

Of particular interest to the history of Muslim sciences is the
scientific encyclopedia of Imam Razi, the *Jami‘ al-‘Ulum*.[^27] This
work offers a good source for the names, definitions, scope, and major
principles of the various Muslim sciences. Imam Fakhr begins with a
discussion of traditional religious sciences such as theology,
jurisprudence, dialectics, comparative religion, inheritance, will and
testament, Qur’anic commentary, and reading of the Qur’an and Hadith,
and then passes on to the linguistic sciences dealing with grammar,
syntax etymology of words, prosody and poetic metre, and, after that to
history.

Having considered the transmitted *(naqli)* sciences, he devotes the
rest of the book to the intellectual *(‘aqli)* sciences which include
natural pharmacology, the science of the occult properties of things,
alchemy, theurgy, agriculture, geometry, science of weights, arithmetic,
algebra, optics, music, astronomy, astrology, metaphysics, ethics and
its various branches, and even chess and other games.

Imam Razi describes the principles, scope and major problems of each
science. Despite the fact that his discussion is always general and
characteristic of an encyclopaedists and never penetrates too deeply
into any single science, the work is perfect evidence of his vast
erudition and encyclopedic knowledge. In this respect Imam Razi is
similar to the Isma‘ili of whom, like Sheikh Baha al-Din Amili, took
great interest not only in philosophy but also in all the cosmological
and mathematical sciences. Imam Fakhr’s importance in the Muslim
sciences is, therefore, mostly in bringing closer together the
theological and cosmological traditions which, until his time, had been
far apart, and in studying nature with a view of discovering God’s
wisdom in creation, as was done by many other Muslim scientists.[^28] In
this case, as in so many others, he advanced upon a path already trodden
by Ghazālī.

E. Commentaries Upon The Qur’an
-------------------------------

Imam Razi’s fame in the Muslim world lies as much in his commentaries on
the Holy Qur’an as in his theological works. He was greatly devoted to
the Qur’an as in his theological works. He was greatly devoted to the
Qur’an from childhood and studied Qur’anic commentary with his father.
His study of all the other sciences by no means reduced his love for the
Qur’an. As he wrote in old age, “I have experienced all the methods of
theology and all the ways of philosophy, but I did not find in them the
benefit which could equal the benefit I derived from reading the exalted
Qur’an.[^29]

Imam Razi’s Qur’anic commentaries include the *Tafsir al-Fatihah, Tafsir
Surat al-Baqarah, Asma’ Allah al-Husna* and *Risalah fi al-Tanbih ‘ala
ba‘d al-Asrur al-Mau‘izah fi al-Qur’an*, which last is a theological
commentary combined with Sufi ideas in which metaphysics *(ilahiyyat)*
is based on the chapter *(surah)* *al-Ikhlas*, prophecy on the chapter
*al-A‘la*, resurrection on the chapter *al-Tin* and the recording of
human actions on the chapter *al-‘Asr*. The most important of Imam
Razi’s commentaries is the voluminous *Majatih al-Ghaib*, known as the
“Great Commentary” *(Tafsir al-Kabir)*, which was collected and
organized by ibn al-Khu’i and Suyuti after his death. This work is the
most important theological commentary ever written on the Qur’an.

Imam Razi makes this also an occasion to expose his encyclopedic
knowledge in that he inter-mingles history, geography, and other
branches of knowledge in the commentary of the Qur’anic text wherever
possible. He mentions and praises often in this work the Muslim sages
who combine intellectual principles with the principles of Islamic
revelation.

He also analyzes the stories of the Qur’an and interprets their
theological and metaphysical meanings. Despite its volume and the number
of topics which do not seem very relevant to the immediate
subject-matter, the *Mafatih* is an impressive theological Qur’anic
commentary. It its intellectual interpretation and the combining of
*‘aql* and *naql*, or reason and authority, and in the understanding of
the sacred Scripture it remains one of the major commentaries upon the
Qur’an.

F. Jurisprudence (Fiqh)
-----------------------

Although primarily occupied with theology, Imam Razi occasionally
devoted himself to jurisprudence as well. The few works like *al-Mahsul
fi al-Usul al-Figh, al-Ma‘alim*, and *Ihkam al-Ahkum* bear evidence to
his mastery of jurisprudence which he interpreted according to the
school of exegetes. As already mentioned, he belonged to the Shafi‘i
school of which he was considered to be one of the *‘ulama’* and
authentic interpreters. Imam Razi was particularly well versed in the
principles of jurisprudence *(Usul)*, which he treated in a manner
similar to theology. This subject has in fact never been able to divorce
itself from *Kalam*, and is still studied almost as if it were one of
its branches. The importance of Imam Razi in Shafi‘i jurisprudence lies
more in his contribution to the theoretical principles of *Fiqh* than in
their actual application embodied in the *fatwas* of the various Shafi‘i
*‘ulama’*.

G. Dialectic, Rhetoric, And Poetry
----------------------------------

Following the example of Ghazālī, Imam Razi became a dialectical
theologian and, as his works testify, excelled in dialectics. He was
famous for his eloquence in persuasion and argumentation, for the
quickness of his intelligence and keenness of wit. These gifts were
combined with a rhetorical power which made him the most famous preacher
in Herat. Hardly would a scholar dare enter into debate with him; those
who took sides against him would soon feel the thrust of is dialectical
and rhetorical weapons.

The *Munazarat* bears ample evidence of these traits. In its pages one
sees Imam Razi as a tiger that pounces mercilessly upon his helpless
adversary and has little regard for softness in discourse. Much of his
energy throughout life was spent in attacking bitterly the small sects
which arose against the main orthodoxy, such as the Karramlyyah, who
probably finally poisoned him.[^30] As the *Sheikh al-Islam* of Herat,
his main duty was to preach and defend Islam, and he took the
opportunity of using his remarkable gifts of rhetoric and dialectic in a
manner which made him one of the most famous of Muslim preachers.

Imam Razi also had the gift of poetry, and many verses both in Arabic
and Persian are attributed to him. As in the case of many other sages
like Khayyam, poetry became for Imam Razi the vehicle for the expression
of gnosis and the form of “ignorance” which lies above all formal
knowledge. In a quatrain in Persian he writes:

*“My heart was never deprived of science,*

*There are little of the mysteries that I did not understand.*

*For 72 years I thought night and day,*

*Yet I came to know that nothing is to be known.”*

H. Sufism
---------

There is little doubt that Imam Razi was sympathetic to Sufism,
especially in later life, when he wrote most of his poems like the one
mentioned above. Moreover, many of his works are, like his Qur’anic
commentary, full of Sufistic ideas, and in *Laudmi‘ al Bayyinat* he
outlines the degree of knowledge in a manner very similar to the Sufi
treatise of Suhrawardi, *Safir-i Simurgh*.[^31] He is altogether a
theologian with sympathies towards Sufism.

What is difficult for us to discover is whether Imam Razi was a
practicing Sufi or not. Certainly Sufism is not as evident in his
writings as in Ghazālī’s and his life, rich in worldly fame and wealth,
had none of the ascetic elements of the life of his great predecessor.
There is even an extant letter from the master of gnosis, the
Anadalusian Sufi, Sheikh al-Akbar Muhyi al-Din ibn ‘Arabi, advising Imam
Razi to leave dialectic and discursive thought and try to reach the
stage of gnosis and contemplation, telling him that in heaven medicine
and geometry will do him little good.[^32]

Moreover, in his writings as in his life, Imam Razi displayed
aggressiveness and fighting quality hardly characteristic of the lives
and writings of the Sufis.

Yet, despite all this negative evidence, some of his later writings do
show the clear influence of Sufism upon him, and it may be that, because
of his social position, even after joining the circle of the Sufis, he,
to a large extent, his has sympathies and affiliations in order to avoid
any external opposition. His own poems and his great love for the blind
Arab poet Abu ‘Ala’ al-Ma‘arri, the gnostic who often appears like a
sceptic to the uncritical eye, on whose *Diwan* he is said to have
commented, point to the fact that Imam Razi was not an ordinary
theologian, but knew that there is another form of knowledge, gnosis,
which lies above all rational sciences like theology. Whether he
actually participated in this knowledge in an effective way, is a
question too difficult to answer from either historical evidence or
internal evidence from his own writings.[^33]

There is a poem of Imam Razi which is in itself almost sufficient
evidence for his Sufism. In the original Arabic it is so beautiful and
effective that hardly any of his biographers has failed to mention it.
Written in old age by a man who was the leading scholar and theologian
of his day and who enjoyed all the comfort and glory of the life of this
world, it is a vivid reminder that beyond the sphere of all human life
and knowledge there is another reality which man must seek in order to
remain faithful in his own intimate nature. The poem begins with these
verses:

*“Our souls fear our bodies as if they want to separate from them.*

*The result of our life in this world has been nothing but pain to
others and sin.”*

I. The Significance And Influence Of Imam Razi
----------------------------------------------

The many sided genius of Imam Razi, to which the previous pages bear
partial witness, makes him one of the most colourful figures in Islam.
Following the example of Ghazālī, by whom he was profoundly influenced
and whose retreat in Tus he visited, Razi spent a life time in combating
the rationalistic aspect of Greek philosophy. Although not of equal
stature to Ghazālī in Sufism and ethics, he, nevertheless, exercised as
much influence, especially in theology, as did his more famous
predecessor. Possessed of a special gift for posing problems and for
analyzing philosophical questions, he left an indelible mark upon all
later Muslim philosophers, especially upon Khuwaja Najr al-Din Tusi, his
student, who was the reviver of Muslim philosophy after Imam Razi, and
was also the most famous of Shi‘ah theologians.

Imam Razi’s role in Muslim intellectual life, besides establishing the
school of philosophical *Kalam* begun by Ghazālī, was to intensify the
attack against Peripatetic philosophy, thereby preparing the way for the
propagation of the metaphysical doctrines of the Ishraqis and Sufis who,
like Imam Razi, opposed the rationalism inherent in Aristotelianism.
With the method of doubt in which was the greatest master in Islam, he
analyzed and criticized Peripatetic philosophy in a way hardly ever
equalled by anyone except Ghazālī. Yet, he was a theologian also
interested in the cosmological, natural and esoteric sciences.[^34]

Imam Razi played an important role in bringing theology closer to the
sciences and even to Sufism, with which he flavoured this theological
works. In the centuries when the Muslim world was turning away from
Peripatetic rationalism toward modes of thought more akin to its own
spirit, Imam Razi played a major role in this transformation. He remains
as one of the most arresting figures among Muslim theologians, a figure
the power of whose thought spread over the whole Muslim world at the
very moment when the Mongol onslaught was putting an end to the
caliphate, to the survival of which his work was to a large extent
dedicated.

Bibliography
------------

G. Gabrieli, “Fakhr al-Din al-Razi,” *Isis,* 7, 1925, pp 9 – 13, L.
Gardet and M. M. Anawati, *Introduction a la theolgie musulmane*,
Librarie Philosophique J. Vrin, Paris, 1948, I. Goldziher, “Aus der
Theologie des Fakhr al-Din al-Razi,” *Der Islam*, 3, 1912, pp 213 – 47,
M. Horten, *Die Philosophischen Ansichten von Razi and Tusi,* Bonn,
1910, *Die spekulative und positive Theologie des Islam nach Razi und
ihre Kritik durch Tusi,* Leipzig, 1912, P. Kraus, “Les ‘controverse’ de
Fakhr al-Din Razi,” *Bulletin de l’Institut d’Egypt*, t. 29, 1936 – 37,
pp. 187 – 214, Y. Mourad, *La physiognomonis arabe et la Kitab
al-Firasah de Fakhr al-Din al-Razi*, Librarie Orientaliste, Paul
Geuthner, Parris, 1939, S. Pines, *Beitrahge zur islamischen
Atomenlehre*, A. Heine GmbH. Grafenhainichen, Berlin, 1936.

Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, *Aarur al-Tanzil,* lithographed edition, Teheran,
1301/1883, *Fowa’id-i Ghiyalhiyyah*, Matba-‘i Qasimi, Hyderabad,
1323/1905, *I‘tiqadat Farq al-Muslimin w-al-Mushrikin*, Maktabat
al-Nahdat al-Misriyyah, Cairo, 1356/1937, *Jami‘* *al-‘Ulum*, Mirza
Mohammad Khan, Bombay, 1323-1905, *Kitab al-Arba‘in fi Usul al-Din*,
Dairatul-Maarif-il-Osmania, Hyderabad, 1353/1934, *Lubab al-Isharat*,
Cairo, 1343/1924, *Majatih al-Ghaib*, eight vols., Cairo, Matba‘at
al-Amirat al-Shara-fiyyah, 1308/1890, *Muhassal*, Matba‘at
al-Hussainiyya, Cairo, 1323/1905; *Musnzarat*,
Dairatul-Maarif-il-Osmania, Hyderabad, 1355-1936, *al-Rislat
al-Kamaliyyah fi al-Ilahiyyah*, Teheran University Press,1335 Solar.

[^1]: For the definition and description of this term refer to the
chapter on “Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi Maqtul.”

[^2]: According to a hadith, in each century God sends a great sage and
scholar into the world to strengthen Islam. Muslim historians, following
the hadith, have searched during each century for the fittest person to
receive this honour.

[^3]: He was given this title because he doubted so many of the views of
previous philosophers and even of theologians.

[^4]: In the Wafayat al-A‘yan, ibn Khallikan writes that Imam Razi was
the greatest authority on the Greek sciences (‘ulum al-awd’il) in his
time. The best sources for the biography of Razi are ibn Abi Usaibi‘ah,
‘Uyan al Anba’, ibn al-Qifti, Tarikh al-Hukama’, ibn Khallikin, Kitab
Wajaydi al-A‘yan, Shams al-Din Shahrazuri, Nuzhat al-Arwah wa Raudat
al-Afrah, and ibn Taqi al-Din al-Subki, Tabaqat al-Shafi’iyyat al-Kubra

[^5]: Al-Subki, Tabaqat al-Shafi‘iyyat al-Kubra, Matba‘at
al-Husainiyyah, Cairo, 1324/1906, vol. 5 pp 33 – 40.

[^6]: Although not a great Sufi figure like Ghazali, Imam Razi was,
nevertheless, sympathetic towards Sufism, especially in the latter
period of his life. Subki, op. cit., p. 35, writes that Razi was himself
a Sufi and some of his poems and frequent quotations from the Sufi
masters like Hallaj and Abu Sa‘id certainly pointed in this direction.

[^7]: For an outline of the ideas of the group of Muslim thinkers who
were influenced by Platonic physics, see S. Pines, Beitrage zur
islamischen Atomenlehre, Berlin, A. Heine Gtubh, Grufenheinichen, 1936.

[^8]: It is far from accidental that the philosophy and the sciences
which were connected with the Greek heritage flourished, especially in
the fourth/tenth century, when most of the Muslim world was governed by
the Shi‘ah Buwaibids and Fatimids.

[^9]: The opposition of this group to Greek philosophy was primarily
against its rationalistic and syllogistic aspects. The cosmological and
certain metaphysical doctrines of the Greeks were not only criticized
but were also openly accepted by them. So we see a Ghazali using
Hermetic symbolism or a Fakhr Razi writing numerous treatises on the
cosmological sciences.

[^10]: For a bibliography of his works, see Subki, op,.cit., pp. 33 – 40
and Imam Razi’s I‘tiqadat Farq al-Muslimin w-al-Mushrikin, Maktabat al
Nahdat al-Misrtyyah, Cairo, 1356/1937, Introduction by Sheikh ‘Abd
al-Razzaq, pp. 27ff.

[^11]: Imam Razi’s student, Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi, wrote many works
answering his teacher’s criticism of ibn Sina and other philosophers.

[^12]: See Fakhr al-Din Razi, Munazarut, Dairatul-Maarif-il-Osmania,
Hyderabad, 1355/1936, where he also criticizes certain parts of
Ghazali’s Tahafut al-Falasifah on the motion of planets. See also P.
Kraus, “Les ‘controverse’ de Fakhr al-Din, Razi,” Bulletin de l’Instiut
d’Egypt, t. 29, 1936-37, pp. 187 – 214.

[^13]: For a history of Muslim theology, especially of the Sunni school,
see Shibli Nu‘mani, Tarikh ‘Ilm-i Kalam, tr. M. Fakhr Da‘i Gilani,
Rangin Press, Teheran, 1328/1910, and L. Gardet and M. M. Anawati,
Introduction a la theologie musulmane, Librarie Philosophique J.Vrin,
Paris, 1948.

[^14]: The theological masterpiece, the Tujrid of Khwajah Nasir al-Din
Tusi, who is the greatest of the Shi‘ah theologians, is to a large
extent, influenced by Imam Razi’s Masa’il al-Khamzun.

[^15]: This title, however, is more commonly given to Mir Damad, the
master of theology and philosophy during the Sufawid period.

[^16]: Fakhr al-Din Razi, Lawami‘ al-Bayyandi, Library of Imam Rida,
Meshed, MS. Cat. No. 233

[^17]: Imam Razi, like the Christian theologians, considered Kalam to be
the queen of the sciences and sub-ordinated all the other rational
sciences like philosophy and the mathematical and natural sciences to
it.

[^18]: For a more detailed discussion of this work, see L. Gardet and
M.M. Anawati, op. cit., pp 162 – 64.

[^19]: In all Muslim theology it is considered obligatory upon each
Muslim to prove the existence of Good according to his intellectual
ability. See F. Schuon, “Nature et arguments de la foi,” Etudes
Traditionelles, vol. 54, Dec. 1953, pp 344 – 63.

[^20]: Fakhr al-Din Razi, Kitab al-Arba‘in fi Usul al-Din,
Dairatul-Maarif-il-Osmania, Hayderabad, 1333/1934, p. 190

[^21]: Many theologians before Razi considered this relation between
reason and knowledge to be custom (‘ddah), but he explicitly rejects
this notion.

[^22]: Fakhr al-Din Razi, al-Mabahith al-Mashriqiyya,
Dairatul-Masarif-il-Osmania, Hyderabad, 1343/1924, vol. 1, p.4

[^23]: His historical works include Kitab Fada’il al-Sahabah and Kitab
Monaqib al-Imam Shafi‘i and his work on comparative religion, the
I‘tiquadat Farq al-Muslimin w-al-Mughrikin.

[^24]: See Y. Mourad, La physiognomonie arabe el le Kitab al-Firasah de
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Librarie Orientaliste, Paul Geuthner, Paris, 1939.

[^25]: See Munzarat, pp. 20 – 24.

[^26]: See Mabahith..., p. 214.

[^27]: This work Imam Fakhr wrote for Khwarizm Shah Abu al-Muzaffar ibn
Malik al-Mu‘azzam. It has always been a popular scientific encyclopedia
and was printed in a lithographed edition in Bombay in 1323/1905.

[^28]: Imam Fakhr’s wrigitngs are full of passages in which he appeals
to various natural phenomena as “signs” of the different divine
qualities and names. She his Asrar al-Tanzil, Teheran, lithographed
edition, 1301/1883, pp. 68ff.

[^29]: Ibn Abi Usaibi‘ah, Usaibi‘ah, ‘Uyun al-Anba’ fi Tabaqat
al-Atibba’, Matba‘at al Wahabiyyah, Cairo, vol. 2, p. 27.

[^30]: There is a story told of Imam Razi’s opposition to the Isma‘ilis.
He used to attack them bitterly in public, accusing them of having no
proofs for their doctrines. One day, one of their agents, posing as a
student, found Imam Razi alone in his library, pulled out a knife and
pointed it to his chest saying, “This is our proof.” Henceforth, Imam
Fakhr never attacked the Isma‘ilis inn public. One day, the disciples
asked him why he no longer spoke against this group – the group which he
had opposed so bitterly before. he replied, “Because I have seen their
proof.” This story appears in nearly all the biographies of Imam Fakhr
which we have already mentioned and is characteristic of his wisdom in
public life.

[^31]: See the chapter on “Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi Maqtul.”

[^32]: See Fakhr al-Din Razi,k al-Risalat al-Kamaliyah fi al-Haqa’iq
al-Ilahiyyah, Tehran University Press, 1335 Solar, Introduction by
Sayyid Mohammad Baqir Sabziwari, p. (kt)

[^33]: There is a story told that Imam Razi met the Sufi Najm al-Din
Kubra in a gathering and boasted of his religious knowledge and said
that he knew a hundred proofs for the existence of God. Najm al-Din
answered, “Is not each proof due to some doubt? God has placed in the
heart of the Sufi a light of certainty which dispels all doubt so that
he no longer has need of proofs.” Imam Razi, upon hearing this answer,
surrendered himself to the Sheikh and was initiated into Sufism.

[^34]: It is of great interest that not only in the Muslim world but
also in medieval Christianity and in China, many of those who
pre-occupied themselves with the science of nature, like the Taoists,
Ikhwan al-Safa, and the Franciscans, were opposed to philosophical
rationalism and accepted some form of esoteric and metaphysical doctrine
based on intellectual intuition and revelation.


