Chapter 33: Political Thought In Early Islam
============================================

In this chapter we try to elucidate the political thought which laid the
foundations of society and State in the early days of Islam, and the
changes that crept into it during the first century and a quarter of the
Hijrah.

A. Principles of Islamic Polity
-------------------------------

Muslim society that came into existence with advent of Islam and the
State that it formed on assumption of political power were founded on
certain clear cut principles. Prominent among them and relevant to our
present discussion were the following:

1. Sovereignty belongs to God and the Islamic State is in fact a
vicegerency, with no right to exercise authority except in
sub-ordination to and in accordance with the Law revealed by God to His
Prophet.[^1]

2. All Muslims have equal rights in the State regardless of race, colour
or speech. No individual, group, class, clan or people are entitled to
any special privileges, nor can any such distinction determine anyone’s
position as inferior.[^2]

3. The *Shari‘ah* (i.e. the law of God enunciated in the Qur’an and the
Sunnah, the authentic practice of the Prophet) is the supreme Law and
everyone from the lowest situated person to the Head of the state is to
be governed by it.[^3]

4. The government, its authority, and possessions are a trust of God and
the Muslims, and ought to be entrusted to the God fearing, the honest,
and the just, and no one has a right to exploit them in ways not
sanctioned by or abhorrent to the *Shari‘ah*.[^4]

5. The Head of State (call him Caliph, Imam or Amir) should be appointed
with the mutual consultation of the Muslims and their concurrence. He
should run the administration and undertake legislative work within the
limits prescribed by the *Shari‘ah* in consultation with them.[^5]

6. The Caliph or the Amir is to be obey ungrudgingly in whatever is
right and just *(ma‘ruf)*, but no one has the right to command obedience
in the service of sin *(ma‘siah)*.[^6]

7. The least fitted for responsible positions in general and for the
Caliph’s position in particular are those that covet and seek them.[^7]

8. The foremost duty of the Caliph and his government is to institute
the Islamic order of life, to encourage all that is good, and to
suppress all that is evil.[^8]

9. It is the right, and also the duty, of every member of the Muslim
community to check the occurrence of things that are wrong and abhorrent
to the Islamic State.[^9]

B. Early Caliphate and its Characteristic Features
--------------------------------------------------

The rule of the early Caliphs that followed the Prophet was founded on
the foregoing principles. Each member of the community, brought up under
the guidance and care of the Prophet of God, knew what kind of
government answered the demands and reflected the true spirit of Islam.
Although the Prophet had bequeathed no decision regarding the question
of his successor, the members of the community were in no doubt that
Islam demanded a democratic solution of the issue. Hence, no one laid
the foundations of a hereditary government, used force to assume power,
or tried to have himself installed as Caliph. On the contrary, the
people, of their own free will, elected four persons one after another
to this august office.

### Elective Caliphate

Abu Bakr was proposed Caliph by ‘Umar, and accepted by the inhabitants
of Medina (who for all practical purposes represented the country) of
their free will and accord, and they swore him allegiance. Abu Bakr,
nearing his end, wrote a will in favour of ‘Umar, then, collecting the
people in the mosque of Medina, he addressed them thus, “Do you agree on
him whom I am making my successor among you? God knows I have racked my
brain as much as I could, and I have not proposed a relation of mine to
succeed me, but ‘Umar, the son of Khattab. Hence, listen to him and
obey.” Upon this the people responded, “Yes, we shall listen to him and
obey.”[^10]

In the last year of ‘Umar’s reign a man declared during the pilgrimage
that when ‘Umar died he would swear allegiance to so and so. Abu Bakr’s
installation, he said, had also been so sudden, and succeeded well
enough.[^11] When ‘Umar came to learn of it, he resolved to address the
people about it and “warn them against those who designed to impose
themselves upon them.”

Alluding to it in the first speech he made on reaching Medina, he gave a
lengthy account of what had transpired at Banu Sa‘idah’s Meeting House
and explained how in the exceptional circumstances which then prevailed
he had suddenly risen to propose Abu Bakr’s name and offered allegiance
to him. “If I had not done so,” he said, “and we had dispersed that
night without settling the issue, there was a great danger that people
might take a wrong decision overnight, then it would be difficult for us
to accept it, and equally difficult to reject it.”

“If that was successful,” he continued, “let it not be made a precedent.
Who among you is there to match with Abu Bakr in stature and popularity?
Now, therefore, whoever will swear allegiance to another without
consultation with other Muslims, he and the one whose allegiance is
sworn, shall both stand to die.”[^12]

When ‘Umar approached his end, he appointed an Elective council to
decide the issue of succession. Elucidating his principle enunciated
above, he asserted that whoever attempted to impose himself as Amir
(ruler) without the consultation of the Muslims deserved to die. He also
barred his son from election[^13] lest the Caliph’s office should become
a hereditary right, and constituted the Elective Council to comprise
those six persons who in his opinion were the most influential and
enjoyed the widest popularity. This council in the end delegated its
power of proposing a person for the Caliph’s office to one of its
members, ‘Abd al-Rahman bin ‘Auf. ‘Abd al-Rahman moved among the people
to find out as to who commanded their confidence most and left no stone
unturned to ascertain the people’s verdict. Even the pilgrim parties
returning home after the pilgrimage were consulted. It was after this
“plebiscite” that he concluded that the majority favoured ‘Uthman.[^14]

When ‘Uthman was killed, a few people tried to install ‘Ali as Caliph.
But he said, ‘You have no authority to do so. This is a matter for the
Consultative Council *(ahl al-shura)* and those that fought at Badr
*(ahl al-Badr)*. Whomsoever the Consultative Council and the people of
Badr will choose, the Caliph will be Caliph. Therefore we shall gather
and deliberate.”[^15] In al-Tabari’s version, ‘Ali’s words were, “I
cannot be elected secretly, and it must be with the consultation of the
Muslims.”[^16]

When ‘Ali lay dying it was asked of him, “Shall we offer allegiance to
al-Hassan (your son)?” His replied, “I do not ask or forbid you to do
so. You can see for yourself.”[^17] When he was addressing his last
words to his sons, a person interposed saying, “Oh Commander of the
Faithful, why do you not nominate your successor?” His reply was, “I
will leave the faithful in the condition in which the Prophet of God
left them.”[^18]

It is evident from these facts the early Caliphs and the Companions of
the Prophet regarded the Caliph’s office as an elective one, to be
filled with mutual consultation and consent of the Muslim community.
They did not regard hereditary succession or one acquired by force of
arms as anything valid.

### Government by Consultation

The first four Caliphs did not perform their administrative or
legislative functions without consulting “the wise” *(ahl al-ra’y*,
lit., those that are able to give advice) of the community. They also
realized that those consulted had the right to give their candid opinion
without any fear. ‘Umar expressed the official policy in this regard in
his inaugural speech before a Consultative Council in this way, “I have
called you for nothing but that you may share with me the burden of the
trust that has reposed in me of managing your affairs. I am but one of
you, and today you are the people that bear witness to truth. Whoever of
you wishes to differ with me is free to do so, and whoever wishes to
agree is free to do that. I will not compel you to follow my
desires.”[^19]

### The Exchequer, a Trust

The treasury *(Bait al-Mal)* was to them a trust from God and the
public. They did not consider it permissible to receive into it or
expend from it a sum which the Law did not authorize. To use it for the
personal ends of the rulers was, according to them, simply unlawful.
‘Umar in a speech remarked, “Nothing is lawful for me in this trust of
God save a pair of clothes for the summer and a pair of clothes for the
winter, and subsistence enough for an average man of the Quraish for my
family. And after that I am just one of the Muslims.”[^20]

In another speech he said, “I do not regard anything correct in respect
of this trust of yours but three things: that it should be taken by
right, that it should be expended by right, and that it should be
withheld from wrong. My position regarding this property of yours is the
same as that of an orphan’s guardian with the orphan’s property. So long
as I am not needy I will take nothing from it. When I am needy I shall
take as it befits one to take from an orphan’s property under his
care.”[^21]

When ‘Ali was at war with the Mu‘awiyah he was exhorted by some to use
the treasury to win adherents against him who was drawing large numbers
to his side by giving sumptuous rewards and gifts. But ‘Ali declined to
take that counsel saying, “Do you want me to win success by unfair
means?”[^22] His brother, ‘Aqil, wished to have some help from *Bait
al-Mal*, but he refused him, saying, “Do you wish your brother to give
you the money of the people and take his to hell?”[^23]

### Ideal Government

What their idea of government was what they thought of themselves, of
their status and duties as rulers, and what policy they followed –
questions like these and others were answered in the various speeches
addressed by them from the Caliph’s pulpit. Abu Bakr, in the first
speech he made following the oath of allegiance to him in the Mosque of
Medina said, “I have been made a ruler over you though I am not the best
of you. Help me if I go right; correct me if I go wrong. Truth is
faithfulness and falsehood is treachery. The weak one among you will be
strong with me until I have got him his due, if God so wills, and the
strong one among you will be weak with me until I have made him pay what
he owes, if God so wills. Beware when a nation gives up its endeavours
in the way of God. He makes no exception but brings it low and when it
allows evil to prevail in it, undoubtedly He makes it miserable. Obey me
as long as I obey God and the Prophet, if I do not obey them, you owe me
no obedience.”[^24]

And ‘Umar said in his speech, “No ruler holds so high a position as to
have the right to command obedience in defiance of God. Oh people, you
have rights on me whom I shall relate before you, and you may take me to
task over them. I owe you this that I do not receive anything from your
revenue or the *fai’* (lands or possessions that accrue to Muslims in
consequence of their collective dominance, not as booty in war) given to
us by God except in accordance with the law, and nothing that accrues to
us in these ways should go from the treasury but rightfully.”[^25]

Al-Tabari quotes ‘Umar giving instructions to all persons whom he sent
out as governors in the wise, “I have appointed you governor over the
followers of Mohammad (on whom be peace) not to make you masters of
their persons and properties but to enable you to lead them to establish
prayer, dispose of their affairs with justice, and dispense their rights
among them with equity.”[^26]

‘Umar once declared in public, “I have not sent my governors that they
may whip you and snatch your property, but that they may instruct you in
your faith and the way of your Prophet. If there be any who has been
treated otherwise, let him bring me his complaint. By God, I will see
that this wrong is avenged.”

Upon this ‘Amr bin ‘As, Governor of Egypt, stood up and asked, “What,
when a man is appointed ruler and he chastises someone, will you take
revenge on him?”

‘Umar replied, “Yes, by God, I will take revenge on him. I have seen the
Prophet of God himself allowing people to take revenge on him.”[^27]

On another occasion ‘Umar collected all his governors at the annual
pilgrimage and announced in a general congregation of people that if
there was a person who had a charge of injustice against anyone of them,
he should come forward to make his complaint. One person rose from the
multitude and complained that he had been undeservedly given a hundred
stripes by ‘Amr bin ‘As. ‘Umar asked him to come forward and square the
account with. ‘Amr bin ‘As protested, beseeching ‘Umar not to expose his
governors to this humiliation, but ‘Umar reiterated that he had seen the
Prophet of God himself allowing men to avenge themselves upon him, and
asked the aggrieved man to step forward and take his revenge. ‘Amr bin
‘As saved his skin only by appeasing the man with a pair of crowns for
each stripe that was to fall on his back.[^28]

### Rule of Law

The “Right-going” Caliphs did not regard themselves above the law. On
the other hand, they declared that they stood at par with any other
citizen (Muslim or non-Muslim) in this respect. They appointed judges,
but once a person was appointed a judge he was free to pronounce
judgment against them as against anybody else. Once ‘Umar and Ubayy bin
Ka‘ab differed in a matter, and the dispute was referred to Zaid bin
Thabit for a decision. The parties appeared before Zaid and he rose and
offered ‘Umar his own seat, but ‘Umar sat by Ubayy. Then Ubayy preferred
his claim which ‘Umar denied. According to the procedure, Zaid should
have asked ‘Umar to swear an oath but Zaid hesitated in asking for it.
‘Umar himself swore an oath and at the conclusion of the session
remarked that Zaid was unfit to be a judge so long as ‘Umar and an
ordinary man did not stand equal in his eyes.[^29]

The same happened between ‘Ali and a Christian whom he saw selling his
(‘Ali’s) lost coat of mail in the market of Kufah. He did not seize it
from the fellow with a ruler’s might, but brought the case before the
magistrate concerned, and as he could not produce adequate evidence to
support his claim, the decision of the court went against him.[^30] Ibn
Khallikan reports that once ‘Ali and a non-Muslim citizen *(dhimmi)*
appeared as parties in a case before Judge Shuraih. The judge rose to
greet ‘Ali, who was Head of State at that time. Seeing this ‘Ali said to
Shuraih, “This is your first injustice.”[^31]

### Absence of Bias

Another distinctive feature of the early days of Islam was that
everybody received an equal and fair treatment exactly in accordance
with the principles and the spirit of Islam, the society of those days,
being free from all kinds of tribal, racial, or parochial prejudices. As
the Prophet of God passed away, the tribal jealousies of Arabs rose
again like a held-up storm. Tribal prejudice formed the main impulse
behind the claims to prophethood and large-scale apostasy that
immediately followed the Prophet’s demise. One of Musailimah’s followers
said, “I know Musailimah is a false prophet, but a false one of the
(tribe of) Rabi‘ah is better than the true one of the (tribe of)
Mudar.”[^32] An elder of the Banu Ghatafan, similarly taking sides with
another false prophet, Tulahah said, “By God, it is easier for me to
follow a prophet of one of our allied tribes than one from the tribe of
Quraish.”[^33]

But when the people saw that Abu Bakr (r. 11 – 13/632 – 634), and in his
wake ‘Umar (r. 13 – 23/634 – 644), dispensed exemplary, even handed
justice not only among the various Arab tribes but even among the
non-Arabs and non-Muslims were once more inspired with that cosmopolitan
outlook which Islam sought to inculcate in them. Abu Bakr and ‘Umar’s
attitude in this respect was most exemplary.

Towards the end of his reign ‘Umar became apprehensive lest these tribal
currents which, despite the revolutionizing influence of Islam, had not
succumbed altogether should shoot up again and cause disruption after
him. So, on one occasion talking to ‘Abd Allah bin ‘Abbas regarding his
possible successors, he said about ‘Uthman, “If I propose him as my
successor I fear he would suffer from the sons of Abu Mu‘ait (the
Umayyads) to ride the necks of the people, and they will practice sin
among them. God knows, if I do so, ‘Uthman will do this, and if ‘Uthman
does this, they will surely commit sins, and people will rise against
‘Uthman and make short work of him.[^34]

This apprehension clung to him even in the hour of his death. Summoning
‘Ali, ‘Uthman, and Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas to his bedside, he said to each
one, “If you succeed me as Caliph do not allow members of your clans to
ride the necks of other people.”[^35] Besides that, among the
instructions which he left for the Elective Council of Six, on which
devolved the task of electing the new Caliph, was that the new incumbent
was to be asked to give a pledge that he would not show discrimination
in favour of his own clan.[^36] Unluckily, however, the third caliph,
‘Uthman (r. 23 – 35/644 – 656) failed to keep up the standard by his
predecessors and inclined towards favouring the Umayyads. This was
regarded by him as “good office to the kindred.” Thus, he used to say,
“‘Umar deprived his kin for the sake of God, but I provide for my kin
for His sake.”[^37] The result was the ‘Umar had apprehended. There was
a rising against him, which led to his murder and rekindled the sleeping
embers of tribal bias into a fire that consumed the whole edifice of the
“Right-going” Caliphate.

After the death of ‘Uthman, ‘Ali (r. 35 – 41/656 – 661) tried to
recapture the standard set by Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. He had no bias in him
and showed himself remarkably free from it. Mu’awiya’s father, Abu
Sufyan, had taken note of it when he tried to excite this passion in him
on Abu Bakr’s accession. He had asked him, “How could a man of the
humblest family in Quraish become Caliph? If you prepare to rise, I will
undertake to fill this valley with horsemen and soldiers.” But ‘Ali had
coldly retorted that this spoke for his enmity for Islam and the Muslims
and so far as he was concerned, he regarded Abu Bakr truly fit for that
office.[^38] Therefore, when he became Caliph he treated the Arabs and
non-Arabs, gentlemen and poor born, Hashimites and others, all alike. No
distinction was made between them, and not received preference over
others undeservedly.[^39]

C. Theological Differences and Schisms
--------------------------------------

The period of the “Right-going” Caliphate, described above, was a
luminous tower towards which the learned and the pious of all succeeding
ages have been looking back as symbolic of the religious, moral,
political, and social orders of Islam *par excellence*. Abu Hanifah,
employed at elucidating the Islamic ideals in the fields of politics and
law, as we shall presently see, also reverted to it as the ideal epoch
to take instance from. We have, therefore, devoted a good deal of space
to it, that the reader may be able to comprehend his work in the true
background.

But before attending to his work we have also to take a brief view of
the reactionary movement that had set in towards the end of the
“Right-going” caliphate and reached its height by the time Abu Hanifah
appeared on the scene. As his efforts were mainly devoted to countering
this reaction, it is necessary to take stock of it and the problems that
sprang from it, to be able to grasp the true significance of his work.

Differences among Muslims had sprung up during the last years of
‘Uthman’s reign leading to his murder, but they had not yet assumed
theological or philosophical shape. When, after his death in the reign
of ‘Ali these differences raged more furiously than ever and led to a
civil war resulting in bloodshed, as in the Battle of the Camel
(36/656), the Battle of Siffin (37/657), the “arbitration” (38/659), and
the battle of Nahrawan (38/659), questions like “Who is in the right in
these battles and how?” “Who is in the wrong and why?” “If some regard
both sides wrong, what is their ground for holding this?” naturally
cropped up and demanded to be answered. These questions led to the
framing of certain opinions and justifications that were essentially
political in the beginning, but as each group sought to strengthen its
position by calling theological support in aid of its particular stand,
these political factions gradually changed into religious groups.

Then, the bloodshed which accompanied these factional feuds in the
beginning and continued during the rules of the Umayyads and the
‘Abbasids, did not allow these differences to remain only theological;
they went on growing ever more acute and menacing until they threatened
the national unity of the Muslims. Every house was a place of
controversy, every controversy suggesting ever new political,
theological, and philosophical offshoots. Every new question that
cropped up gave birth to a number of new sects which sub-divided
themselves into further sects over minute internal differences.

These sects were not content to fill themselves with bias against one
another, their polemics often ended up in quarrels ad riots. Kufah, the
capital of Iraq, where Abu Hanifah was born, was the chief centre of
these quarrels. The battles of the Camel, Siffin and Nahrawin had all
been fought in Iraq. The heart-rending murder of Hussain (61/680), the
Prophet’s grandson, had also taken place here. It was the birth place of
most of these sects and the field where both the Umayyads and the
‘Abbasids used the maximum of coercion to repress their opponents. The
time of Abu Hanifah’s birth (80/699) and growth coincided with these
factional hostilities at their height.

The large number of sub-sects that grew out of these factions had their
roots in four main sects: the Shi‘ah, the Khawarij, the Murji’ah, and
the Mu‘tazilah. We shall give here a brief account of the doctrines of
each of them before proceeding further.

### The Shi‘ah

They were the supporters of ‘Ali and called themselves the Shi‘ahs
(party) of ‘Ali. Later (the word of ‘Ali was dropped and) they began to
be called the Shi‘ahs.

Although a section of the people of Banu Hashim and a few others
regarded him superior to the other Companions particularly to ‘Uthman,
and others considered him to be more entitled for the Caliphate because
of his relationship with the Prophet, yet up to the time of ‘Uthman
these opinions had not assumed the form of a creed or religious belief.
Nor were the people who held these opinions hostile to the first three
Caliphs.

On the other hand, they acknowledged and supported their succession. As
a separate party with clear cut views on these matters, they emerged in
‘Ali’s reign during the battles of the Camel, Siffin, and Nahrawan.
Later, the cold-blooded slaughter of Hussain rallied them, fired them
with a new wrath, and shaped their views into a separate creed. The
indignation provoked among the general Muslim populace by the vile deeds
of the Umayyads and the sympathy excited in their breasts for the
descendants of ‘Ali on account of their constant persecution in both the
Umayyad and the ‘Abbasid regimes, lent extra-ordinary support to Shi‘ite
propaganda. They had their stronghold at Kufah. Their beliefs were as
follows:

1. The Imam’s office (particular Shi‘ite term for the Caliph’s office)
is not a public office the institution of which may have been left to
the choice of the public *(ummah)*. The Imam is a pillar of the faith
and the foundation stone of Islam. Therefore, it is one of the main
duties of the Prophet to institute somebody as Imam instead of leaving
the matter to the discretion of the community.[^40]

2. The Imam is impeccable, i.e. free from all sins, great and small. He
is immune from error. Everything that he says or does is inviolate.[^41]

3. The Prophet had conferred the Imamate on ‘Ali and nominated him as
his successor. Thus ‘Ali was the first imam by ordinance.[^42]

4. As the appointment of the imam is not left to be made by public
choice, every new imam will be appointed by an ordinance from his
predecessor.[^43]

5. All the Shi‘ah sects are also agreed that the Imam’s office is the
exclusive right of the descendants of ‘Ali.[^44]

Beyond this general agreement, however, the various Shi‘ahs sects
differed among themselves. The moderate among them held that ‘Ali was
the best created man. He who fought or bore malice against him was an
enemy of God to be raised among infidels and hypocrites and destined to
live in hell. “If ‘Ali had refused to recognize their Caliphate as
legitimate and expressed displeasure with them, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and
‘Uthman who preceded him as Caliphs would also have deserved that doom,
but as ‘Ali recognized them and swore allegiance and offered prayers
behind them, we cannot take exception to what he took as right. We do
not differentiate between ‘Ali and the Prophet except that the latter
was endowed with prophethood, for the rest ‘Ali was worthy of the same
esteem as the Prophet.[^45]

The fanatical among them held that the Caliphs before ‘Ali were usurpers
and those who elected them were ill-guided and unjust, as they belied
the Prophet’s will and deprived the rightful caliph of his due. Some
went further and pronounced anathema against the first three Caliphs and
declared them and their electors ex-communicated.

The softest of them were the Zaidiyyah, followers of Zaid (d. 122/740)
son of ‘Ali, son of Hussain. They regarded ‘Ali as superior to others,
but allowed the choice of those who were inferior to him. Moreover, they
held that the Prophet’s decision in favour of ‘Ali was not unequivocal;
hence, they accepted the Caliphate of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. All the same,
they preferred the choice of an able person from the descendants of
Fatima (the Prophet’s daughter) as imam, provided he claimed that
position and challenged the title of “the kings” to it.[^46] Abu Hanifah
was closely connected with Zaid, as we shall see in the course of this
chapter, although he did not contribute to the Zaidite doctrine.

### The Khawarij

In direct opposition to the Shi‘ahs the Khawarij stood at the other
extreme. They suddenly grouped together during the battle of Siffin.
Until then they were among the staunch supporters of ‘Ali, but when,
during that engagement, he consented to submit his quarrel with Mu‘awiya
to the decision of two arbiters, they abandoned him asserting that he
had turned infidel by accepting to submit to the verdict of human
arbiters instead of God. After that they drifted farther and farther
away and being fanatical hot heads, who believed in waging war against
those who differed from them and against “unjust government” wherever
one was found, they indulged in war and bloodshed for a long time until
their power was finally crushed under the ‘Abbasid rule. They, too, were
most influential in Iraq, their camps being mainly centred in al-Bata’ia
between Kufa and Basra. Their beliefs briefly were as follows.

1. They acknowledged Abu Bakr and ‘Umar as Rightful Caliphs but ‘Uthman,
in their opinion, had, towards the end of his reign, erred from the path
of justice and right conduct and hence deserved to be deposed or killed.
‘Ali also committed, according to them, a major sin when he accepted the
“arbitration” of “one besides God.” The two arbiters (‘Amr bin ‘As and
Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari), their choosers (‘Ali and Mu‘awiya), and all those
who agreed to arbitration were sinners. All those who participated in
the battle of the Camel, including Talhah, Zubair, and A’ishah, the
Prophet’s wife, had been guilty of grievous sin.

2. Sin, with the Khawarij, was synonymous with infidelity. Anyone who
committed a major sin (and did not repent and revert) was placed outside
the pale of Islam. All the personages mentioned above were declared
infidels. Anathema was pronounced against them, and they were considered
fit to be censured. The Muslims in general were pronounced infidels,
first, because they were not free from sins, and, secondly, because they
not only regarded these persons as Muslims but also acknowledged them as
reliable guides, and deduced and verified the law from traditions
reported by them.

3. The Caliph, according to them, should be elected by the free vote of
the Muslims.

4. The Caliph need not be a member of the tribe of Quraish. Whomsoever
they elected from amongst the honest Muslims would be a rightful caliph.

5. A caliph was to be obeyed faithfully as long as he acted rightly and
justly, but if forsook the path of right and justice; if he was to be
fought against and deposed or assassinated.

6. The Qur’an was recognized as the authoritative source of law but
their views on Hadith (the Prophet’s Tradition) and *ijma‘* (the
agreement of Muslims in respect of a rule of Law) were different from
those of the majority.

A large group of them, which called itself al-Najdiyyah, did not believe
in the very need of a State. The Muslims, they said, should of
themselves abide by the right. However, if they needed a Caliph to
direct their affairs, there was no harm in choosing one.

Their major section, the Azariqah, dubbed all Muslims, expecting
themselves polytheists. The Khawarij, according to them, could not go
for prayer in response to any but a Kharijite’s call. They could neither
take the meat of an animal slaughtered by non-Kharijites, nor marry
among them, nor could a Kharijite and a non-Kharijites inherit each
other’s possessions. They considered war on all other Muslims to be a
religious duty and sanctioned the killing of their women and children
and the looting of their property. They declared those of their own sect
as infidels if they shirked this duty. The allowed treachery with their
opponents and were so malicious that a non-Muslim would find himself
safer in their midst than an average Muslim.

The most tolerant of them were the Ibadiyyah who refrained from
declaring the other Muslims as polytheists although they put them
outside the pale of Islam and described them as non-believers. Their
evidence, the Ibadiyyah said, was to be accepted, marriages with them
and inheritance to and from them allowed. Their territory, too, was not
to be called *dar al-kufr* (the land of the infidels) or *dar al-harb*
(the land of the people at war) but *dar al-tawhid* (the land of the
people of one God) although they excepted the centres of their
government from it. They disallowed secret assaults on other Muslims,
although open warfare with them was not repugnant.[^47]

### The Murji’ah

The conflicting principles f the Shi‘ahs and the Khawarij were
responsible for the birth of another sect, called the Murji’ah.

Apart from the people who had flung themselves violently in support of
‘Ali or against him during his wars, there was a section which had
remained neutral either wisely avoiding to indulge in war, which they
had deemed a curse to being unable to decide which side fought for the
truth. These people quite realized that it was a veritable curse for
Muslims to indulge in bloodshed and mutual slaughter, but they were not
prepared to blaspheme any of the belligerents, and left it to God to
decide the affair between them. He alone would tell, on Judgment Day,
which of them struggled for the right cause and in general, but when the
Shi‘ahs and the Khawarij raised questions as to what was faith and what
constituted infidelity ushering in an era of doctrinal wrangling and
polemical contests, this neutral group evolved some theological
doctrines in support of its position. Briefly stated, they were as
follows:

1. Faith comprises belief in God and the Prophet. One’s action does not
form an integral part of one’s faith. Hence, a believer will remain a
believer though he should eschew his duties or commit grave sins.

2. Salvation depends on faith alone. No sin will hurt one who has faith.
It is enough for a man’s redemption that he should abstain from
polytheism and die as a monotheist.[^48]

Some of the Murji’ah, taking it a step further, affirmed that short of
polytheism, all sins, even the worst, would be forgiven.[^49] A few,
taking a further leap in that direction, asserted that if a man
cherished faith in his heart but worshipped idols or adopted Jewish or
Christian doctrine and spoke heresy in the Islamic State where he lived
under no fear, he would yet be quite fast grounded in faith, remain a
friend of God, and deserve to go to Paradise.[^50]

Another view closely comparable with the one mentioned above was that if
one’s duty to uphold the right and stem the wrong *(amr bi alp-ma‘ruf*
and *nahi ‘an al-munkar)* required one to bear arms, it was a “trial” to
be avoided. It was quite right to check others on wrong conduct, but to
speak loud against the tyranny of government was not allowed.[^51]
Al-Jassas was very bitter on these things and asserted that they
strengthen the hands of tyrants and greatly demoralized the Muslims’
power of resistance against the forces of evil and wickedness.

### The Mu‘tazilah

This tumultuous period was responsible for the birth of yet another sect
known to Islamic history as “the Seceders.” Although it did not owe its
origin, like the former three, to purely political factors, like them it
contributed its share of opinions to the political issues of the day and
entered the arena of theological disputes that raged in the Islamic
world at that time, particularly in Iraq. The leaders of this group,
Wasil bin ‘Ata (80 – 131/699 – 748) and ‘Amr bin ‘Ubaid (d. 145/763)
were both contemporaries of Abu Hanifah, and Basra was the centre of
their religious contests in the beginning.

Their political views were briefly these:

1. The appointment of an Imam (or, in other words, the institution of
the State) was a religious urgency. Some Mu‘tazilites, however, opined
that the Imam’s was a superfluous office. No Imam was needed if the
community followed the right path.[^52]

2. The choice of the Imam, according to them, rested with the community,
and only the community’s choice validated his appointment.[^53] Some of
them held that the choice should be unanimous, and in the event of
differences and dissensions the appointment should be suspended and held
in abeyance.[^54]

3. The community could choose any morally qualified and efficient person
as Imam. The condition of his being a Quraishite, an Arab, or a non-Arab
was irrelevant.[^55] Some of them actually preferred the appointment of
a non-Arab, it was better still if he could be a freed slave, for he
would have fewer devotees, and it would be easy to depose him if he
turned out to be a tyrant.[^56] They would rather have a government
which was weak and easy to depose than one that was bad but strong and
firmly established.

4. According to them, the Friday or other congregational prayers could
not be held behind an unrighteous Imam.[^57]

5. *Amr bi al-ma‘ruj w-al-nahi ‘an al-munkar* (enjoining what is right
and forbidding what is wrong) was among their fundamental principles.,
It was a duty with them to rise in arms against an unjust government
provided they had the power to do so and hoped to raise a successful
*coup*.[^58] Thus it was that they rose in arms against the Umayyad
Caliph Walid bin Yazid (r. 125 – 126/743 – 744) and tried to replace him
by Yazid bin Walid who espoused their doctrine of succession.[^59]

6. On the question of the inter-relation of sin and infidelity, over
which the Khawarij and Murji’ah were at logger-heads, their verdict was
compromising. A sinful Muslim was neither a believer nor a disbeliever,
but one in the middle state.[^60]

In addition to these principles, the Mu‘tazilah pronounced bold verdicts
upon the differences among the Prophet’s Companions and upon the issue
of caliphate. Wasil bin ‘Ata declared that one of the two opponents in
the battles of Camel and Siffin was surely a “transgressor” although it
was hard to say who. It was for this reason that he said that if ‘Ali
Talhah and Zubair came before him to give evidence on a vegetable knot,
he would not accept it of them since there was a possibility that they
had been guilty of transgression. ‘Amr bin ‘Ubaid pronounced both sides
as “transgressors.”[^61]

They also attacked ‘Uthman vigorously and some of them did not spare
even ‘Umar.[^62] Besides this, many of them practically rejected the
Hadith (the Prophet’s Tradition) and *ijma‘* (the consensus of opinion)
as authoritative sources of Islamic Law.[^63]

### The Major Section

In the midst of these violent, wrangling groups the large majority of
Muslims went along subscribing to the orthodox principles and doctrines,
accredited as authoritative since the days of the “Right-guided”
Caliphs, principles and precepts which the Prophet’s Companions and
their successors and Muslims in general had commonly regarded as
Islamic. However, nobody, from the time of the inception of the schism
down to the days of Abu Hanifah, had vindicated the stand of the
majority in these matters of violent divergences, and presented it
methodically in a compact, doctrinal form, although learned men,
traditionists and scholars of repute and integrity had from time to time
been bringing one or another aspect of it to light by word of mouth or
action, or embodying it in their behaviour or sacred pronouncements as
opportunity afforded itself.

Bibliography
------------

1. Qur’an and Commentaries: Qur’an; ibn Kathir, *Tafsir al-Qur’an
al-‘Azim*, Matba‘ah Mustafa Mohammad, Egypt, 1937; Atusi, *Ruh
al-Ma‘ani*, Idarat al-Taba‘at al-Muniriyyah, Egypt, 1345 H.; al-Jassas
al-Hanafi, *Ahkam al-Qur’an*, al-Matba‘at al-Bahiyyah, Egypt, 1347 H.

2. Hadith and Commentaries: Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud, Abu Dawud
al-Tayalisi, *al-Musmad*, Dairatul-Maarif, Hyderabad, 1321 H.; Muslim;
al-Nasa’i; ibn Majah; al-Tirmidhi; Ahmad bin Hanbal, *Al-Musnad*, Dar
al-Ma‘arif, Egypt, 3rd ed., 1947; *ibid*, Matba‘at al-Maimaniyyah,
Egypt, Cairo, 1306 H; ibn Hajar, *Fath al-*Bari, al- Matba‘at
al-Khairiyyah, Cairo, 1325 H.; al-Baihaqi, *al-Sunan al-Kubra,*
Dairatul-Maarif, Hyderabad, 1st ed., 1355 H.

3. *Al-Fiqh*: Abu Yusuf, *Kitab al-Kharaj*, al-Matba‘at al-Salafiyyah,
Egypt, 2nd ed., 1352 H.

4. *Al-Kalam:* Al-Shahrastani, *Kitab al-Milal w-al-Nihal*, London;
al-Ash‘ari, *Maqalat al-Islamiyyin*, Maktabat al-Nahdat al-Misriyyah,
Cairo, 1st ed.; ‘Abd al-Qahir al-Baghdadi, *al-Farq bain al-Firaq*,
Matba‘at al-Ma‘arif, Egypt; ibn Hazm, *al-Fasl fi al-Milal w-al-Nihal*,
al Matba‘at al-Adabiyyah, Egypt, 1317 H.

5. Biographies: Ibn al-Qayyim, *Zad al-Ma‘ad*, Matba‘ah Mohammad ‘Ali
Sabih, Egypt, 1935; ibn Hisham, *al-Sirat al-Nabawiyyah*, Matba‘ah
Mustafa al-Babi, Egypt, 1936; ibn Khallikan, *Wafayat al-A‘yan*,
Maktabat al-Nahdat al-Misriyyah, Cairo, 1948; ibn ‘Abd al-Barr,
*al-Isti‘ab*, Dairatul-Maarif, Hyderabad, 2nd ed.

6. History: Al-Tabari, *Tarikh al-Umam w-al-Muluk*, al-Matba‘at
al-Istiqamah, Cairo, 1939; ibn al-Athir, *al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh*, Idarat
al-Taba‘at al-Muniriyyah, Egypt, 1356 H.; ibn Qutaibah, *al-Imamah
w-al-Siyasah*, Matba‘at al-Futuh, Egypt, 1331 H.; *‘Uyun al-Akhbar*,
Matba‘ah Dar al-Kutub, Egypt, 1928, 1st ed.; al-Mas‘udi, *Muruj
al-Dhahab wa Ma‘adin al-Jawahir*, al-Matba‘at al-Bahiyyah, Egypt, 1346
H.; ibn Kathir, *al-Bidayah w-al-Nihayah*, Matba‘at al-Sa‘adah, Egypt;
ibn Khaldun, *al-Maqwaddimah*, Matba’ah Mustafa Muhammad, Egypt;
al-Suyuti, *Tarikh al-Khulafa’*, Government Press, Lahore, 1870; *Husn
al-Muhadarah fi Akhbar Misr w-al-Qahirah*, al-Matba‘at al-Sharifiyyah,
Egypt; Ahmad Amin, *Duha al-Islam*, Matba‘ah Lajnah al-Talif
w-al-Tarjamah, Egypt, 4th ed., 1946; al-Khatib, *Tarikh Baghdad*,
Matba‘at al-Sa‘adah, Egypt, 1931.

7. Literature: Al-Qalqashandi, *Subh al-A‘sha fi Sana‘at al-Insha’*, Dar
al-Kutub al-Misriyyah, Cairo, 1910; ibn Abi al-Hadid, *Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah*, Dar al-Kutub al-‘Atabiyyah, Egypt, 1329 H.; ibn ‘Abd
Rabbihi, *al-‘Iqd al-Farid*, Lajnah al-Talif w-al-Tarjamah, Cairo, 1940;
Abu al-Faraj al-Asbahani, *Kitab al-Aghani*, al-Matba‘at al-Misriyyah,
Bulaq, Egypt, 1902; al-Murtada, *al-Amali*, Matba‘at al-Sa‘adah, Egypt,
1st ed., 1907.

8. Miscellaneous: Tash Kubrazadah, *Miftah al-Sa‘adah* Dairatul-Maarif,
Hyderabad 1st ed., 1329 H.

[^1]: Qur’an, 4: 59, 105, 5:44, 45, 47, 7:3, 12: 40, 14: 55, 23: 36.

[^2]: Tradition: “Muslims are brothers to one another. None of them has
any preference over another, except on grounds of piety.” (ibn Kathir,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim, Matba‘ah Mustafa Mohammad, Egypt, 1937, 4, p.
217). “Oh men, beware, your God is one. An Arab has no preference over a
non-Arab, nor a non-Arab over an Arab, nor a white over a black nor a
black over a white, save on grounds of piety” (Alusi, Ruh al-Ma‘ani,
Idarat al-Taba‘at al-Muniriyyah, Egypt, 1345-1926, 26, p. 148; ibn
al-Qayyim, Zad al Ma‘ad, Matba‘ah Mohammad ‘Ali Sabih, Egypt, 1935, 4,
p. 31). \`Whosoever declares that there is no god but God, and faces our
qiblah (direction of prayer), and offers prayer as we offer, and eats of
the animal we slaughter, is a Muslim. He has the rights of a Muslim, and
the duties of a Muslim.” (Bukhari, Kitab al-Salah, Ch. 38). “A Muslim’s
blood is like another Muslim’s blood. They are one as distinguished from
others, and an ordinary man of them can offer dhimmah (i.e. stand
surety) on their behalf.” (Abu Dawud, Kitab al-Diyat, Ch. 11; Nasa’i,
Kitab al-Qasamah, Chs. 10 – 14). “A Muslim is exempt from poll-tax.”
(Abu Dawud, Kitab al-Imarah, Ch. 34).

[^3]: Tradition: “Nations before you were destroyed because they
punished those among them of low status according to law, and spared the
high ranking. By God, who holds my life in His hand, if Fatima, daughter
of Mohammad, had committed this theft, I would have chopped off her
hand.” (Bukhari, Kitab al-Hudud, Chs 11, 12). Says ‘Umar, “I myself have
seen the Prophet of God allowing the people to avenge themselves on
him.” (Abu Yusuf, Kitab al-Kharaj, al Matba‘at al-Salafiyyah, Egypt, 2nd
ed. 1352/1933, p. 116; Musnad, Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi, Tr. No. 55,
Dairatul-Maarif, Hyderabad, 1321/1903)

[^4]: Qur’an, 4:58 Tradition: “Mind, each one of you is a shepherd and
each one is answerable in respect of his flock. And the chief leader
(i.e. the Caliph) is answerable in respect of his subjects.” (Bukhari,
Kitab al-Ahkam, Ch 1; Kitab al-Imarah, Ch. 5).

[^5]: Qur’an (13:38) Tradition: “‘Ali reports that he asked the prophet
of God (on him be peace), ‘What shall we do if we are faced with a
problem after you die about which there is no mention in the Qur’an nor
have we heard anything concerning it from your lips?’ He answered,
‘Collect those of my people (Ummah) that serve God truthfully and place
the matter before them for mutual consultation. Let it not be decided by
an individual’s opinion.’” (Alusi, op, cit, 25, p.42)

[^6]: Tradition: “It is incumbent on a Muslim to listen to his Amir and
obey, whether he likes it or not, unless he is asked to do wrong. When
he is asked to do wrong, he should neither listen nor obey.” (Bukhari,
Kitab al-Ahkum, Ch. 4; Muslim, Kitab al-Imrah, Ch, 8; Abu Dawud, Kitab
al-Jihad, Ch. 105; Nasa’i, Kitab al-Bas’ah, Ch. 33; ibn Majah, Abwab
al-Jihad, Ch. 40). “There is no obedience in sin against God. Obedience
is only in the right.” (Muslim, Kitab al-Imarah, Ch. 8; Abu Dawud, Kitab
al-Jihad, Ch. 95; Nasa’i, Kitab al-Bai‘ah, Ch. 33). “Do not obey those
of your rulers that command you to disregard the order of God.” (Ibn
Majah, Abwab al-Jihad, Ch. 50).

[^7]: Tradition: “Verily, we do not entrust a post in this government of
ours to anyone who seeks or covets it.” (Bukhari, Kitab al-Ahkam, Ch.
7). “The most trustworthy of you with us is he who comes forward to seek
position in the government.” (Abu Dawud, Kitab al-Imrah, Ch. 2). The
Prophet of God said to Abu Bakr, “Oh Abu Bakr, the best fitted person
for the government is he who does not covet it, not he who jumps at it.
He who knows its responsibility and tries to shun it deserves it most,
not he who proudly advances to collect for himself. It is for him to
whom you could say, “You most deserve it,” not for him who says of
himself, “I am most deserving.” (al-Qalqashandi, Subh al-A‘sha, dar
al-Kutub al-Misriyyah, Cairo, 1910, 1, p. 240).

[^8]: Qur’an 22:41

[^9]: Tradition: “Whoever of you sees an evil thing let him undo it with
his hand. If he cannot, let him check it with his tongue. If he cannot
do even this, let him despise it with his heart and wish it otherwise,
and this is the lowest degree of faith.” (Muslim, Kitab al-Iman, Ch. 20;
Tirmidhi, Abwab al-Fitan, Ch. 20). “Then the undeserving will take their
place who will say what they will not do, and will do what they are not
asked to do. Therefore, he who strives against them with his hand is a
believer, and he who strives against them with his tongue is a believer,
and he strives with his heart is a believer, and there is no degree of
faith below this.” (Muslim, Kitab al-Iman, Ch 20.) “The best of jihad
(endeavour towards God) is to say the right thing in the face of a
tyrant.” (Abu Dawud, Kitab al-Malahim, Ch. 27; Tirmidhi, Abwab al-Fitan,
Ch. 12; Nasa’i, Kitab al-Bai‘ah, Ch. 36i; ibn Majab, Abwab al-Fitan, Ch.
20). “When the people see a tyrant and do not seize his hand, it is not
far that God should afflict them with a general ruin.” (Abu Dawud, Kitab
al-Malahim, Ch. 17; Tirmidhi, Abwab al-Fitan, Ch. 12). “Some people are
going to be rulers and not after me. He who supports them in their wrong
and assists in their tyranny has nothing to do with me, nor Have I
anything to do with him.” (Nasa’i, Kitab al-Bai‘ah, Chs. 34, 35).

[^10]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam w-al-Muluk, al-Matba’at al-Istiqamah,
Cairo, 1939, Vol 2, p. 618

[^11]: The reference was to the abrupt rising of ‘Umar from his place
during the meeting at Banu Sa‘idah’s Meeting House when he proposed Abu
Bakr’s name as the Prophet’s successor and extending his hand to him
offered him allegiance. There has been long deliberation before electing
Abu Bakr to be Caliph.

[^12]: Bukhari, Kitab al-Muharibin, Ch. 16; Ahmad, Musnad, Third
edition, Dar al-Ma‘arif, Egypt, 1949, 1. Tr. 391. According to this
version, the words are as follows, “Whoever swears allegiance to an Amir
without the consultation of Muslims offers no allegiance, and he who
receives allegiance from him receives no allegiance.” In another version
the following words are reported, “He who is offered allegiance with
consultation, it is not lawful for him to accept it.” (Ibn Hajar, Fath
al-Bari, al-Matba‘at al-Khairiyyah, Cairo, 1325/1907, Vol, 2, p. 125)

[^13]: Al-Tabari, op. cit., Vol 3, p. 292; ibn al-Athir, Idarat
al-Taba‘at al-Muniriyyah, Egypt, 1356/1937, Vo. 3, pp 34, 35.

[^14]: Al-Tabari, op, cit., Vol 3, p. 295 – 96; ibn al-Athir, Idarat
al-Taba‘at al-Athir, Vol. 3 pp. 36 – 37. Also ibn Qutaibah, al-Imamah
w-al-Siyasah, Matba’at al-Futuh, Egypt, 1331/1912, Vol. 1, p. 23.

[^15]: Ibn Qutaibah, op. cit., p. 41

[^16]: Al-Tabari, op cit., Vol. 3, p. 450

[^17]: Ibid., Vol. 4, p. 112; al-Mas‘udi, Muruj al-Dhahab, al-Matba‘at
al-Bahiyyah, Egypt, 1346/1927, Vol. 2 p. 42.

[^18]: Al-Mas‘udi, op. cit. p. 42.

[^19]: Abu Yusuf, op. cit.. p.25

[^20]: Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah w-al-Nihayah, Matba‘at al-Sa‘adah, Egypt,
Vol. 7, p. 134

[^21]: Abu Yusuf, op. cit., p. 117

[^22]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Dar al-Kutub
al-‘Arabiyyah, Egypt, 1329/1911, Vol. 1, p. 182.

[^23]: Ibn Qutaibah, op. cit., p. 71

[^24]: Al-Tabari, op. cit., Vol, 2 p. 450; ibn Hisham, al-Sirat
al-Nabawiyyah, Matba‘at Mustafa al-Babi, Egypt, 1936, Vol. 4, p. 311.

[^25]: Abu Yusuf, op. cit., p. 117.

[^26]: Al-Tabari, op. cit., p. 273

[^27]: Abu Yusuf, op. cit., p. 115; Musnad, Abu Dawud al-Tayalisi, Tr.
No. 55; ibn al-Athir, Vol. 3, p. 30; al-Tabari, op. cit., Vol 3, p. 273

[^28]: Abu Yusuf, op. cit., p. 116

[^29]: Balhaqi, al-Sunan al-Kubra, Dairatul-Maarif, Hyderabad, First
ed., 1355/1936, vol. 1 p. 136

[^30]: Ibid

[^31]: Wafayat al-A‘yan, Maktabat al-Nahdat al-Misriyyah, Cairo, 1948,
vol. 2, p. 168.

[^32]: Al-Tabari, op. cit., Vol 2, p. 508

[^33]: Ibid., p. 487

[^34]: Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Isti‘ab, Dairatul-Maarif, Hyderabad, 2nd ,
Vo. 2 p. 467

[^35]: Al-Tabari, op. cit., Vol. 3, p. 264

[^36]: Ibn Qutaibah, op. cit., Vol 1, p. 25

[^37]: Al-Tabari, op. cit., Vol. 3, p. 291

[^38]: Ibid., Vol. 2, p. 449, ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, op. cit., p. 689

[^39]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, op, cit., pp. 180, 182

[^40]: Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddimah, Matba‘ah Mustafa Mohammad, Egypt, p.
196; al-Shahrastani, Kitab al-Milal w-al-Nihal, London, Vol. 1, pp. 108,
109.

[^41]: Ibn Khaldun, op. cit., p. 196; al-Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 109

[^42]: Al-Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 108; ibn Khaldon, op, cit., pp. 196
– 97.

[^43]: Ibn Khaldun, op. cit., p. 197, al-Ash‘ari, Maqalat al-Islamiyyin,
Maktabat al-Nadat al-Misriyyah, Cairo, 1st ed., p. 87; al-Shahrastani,
op, cit., p. 109.

[^44]: Al-Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 108

[^45]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, op. cit., Vol 4, p. 520

[^46]: Al-Ash‘ari, op. cit., Vol, 1 p. 129; ibn Khaldun, op, cit., pp.
197 – 98; al-Shahrastani, op. cit., pp. 115 – 17.

[^47]: ‘Abd al-Qahir Baghdadi, al-Farq bain al-Firaq, Matba‘at
al-Ma‘arif, Egypt, pp. 55, 61, 63, 64, 67, 68, 82 ,83, 99, 313, 315; al
Shahrastani, op. cit., pp. 87, 90 – 92, 100; al-Ash‘ari, op cit., pp 156
– 57, 159, 189, 190; al-Mas‘udi, op. cit., p. 191.

[^48]: Al-Shahrastani, op.cit., pp. 103, 104; al-Ash‘ari, op. cit., pp.
198, 201.

[^49]: Al-Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 104

[^50]: Ibn Hazm, al-Fasl fi al-Milal w-al-Nihal, al-Matba‘at
al-Adabiyyah, Egypt, 1317/1899, Vol 4, p. 204

[^51]: Al-Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur’an, al-Matba‘at al-Bahiyyah, Egypt
1347/1928, Vol 2, p.40

[^52]: Al-Mas‘udi, op. cit., p. 191

[^53]: Ibid

[^54]: Al-Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 51

[^55]: Al-Mas‘udi, op. cit., p. 191.

[^56]: Al-Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 63.

[^57]: Al-Ash‘ari, op. cit., p,. 124

[^58]: Ibid., p. 125.

[^59]: Al-Mas‘udi, op. cit., pp. 190, 193; al-Suyuti, Tarikh
al-Khulafa’, Government Press, Lahore, 1870, p. 255

[^60]: Al-Baghdadi, op, cit., pp. 94 – 95.

[^61]: Ibid., pp., 100, 101; al-Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 34.

[^62]: Al-Baghdadi, op. cit., pp. 133 – 34; al-Shahrastani, op. cit., p.
40

[^63]: Al-Baghdadi, op. cit., 138 – 39.


