Chapter 11: Ash’arism
=====================

Ash’arism by M. Abdul Hye, M.A, Ph.D, Professor of Philosophy,
Government College, Rajshahi (Pakistan)

Al-Ashari’s Life and Work
-------------------------

Asharism is the name of a philosophico‑religious school of thought in
Islam that developed during the fourth and fifth/tenth and eleventh
centuries. This movement was “an attempt not only to purge Islam of all
non‑Islamic elements which had quietly crept into it but also to
harmonize the religious consciousness with the religious thought of
Islam.”

It laid the foundation of an orthodox Islamic theology or orthodox
*Kalam*, as opposed to the rationalist *Kalam* of the Mu'tazilites; and
in opposition to the extreme orthodox class, it made use of the
dialectical method for the defence of the authority of divine
revela­tion as applied to theological subjects.

The position at the end of the third/ninth century was such that the
deve­lopment of such a movement as orthodox Kalamwas inevitable. The
rational­ization of faith, which developed, at the beginning of the
second century of the Hijrah as a systematic movement of thought, in the
name of rationalism in Islam or Mu'tazilite movement, was, in its
original stage, simply an attempt to put Islam and its basic principles
on a rational foundation, by giving a consistent rational interpretation
to the different dogmas and doctrines of Islam.

But when the Mu'tazilite rationalists began to study the Arabic
translations of the works of Greek physicists and philosophers made
available to them by the early 'Abbasid Caliphs, particularly by
al‑Mansur and al‑Mamun, they began to apply the Greek philosophical
methods and ideas to the inter­pretation of the basic principles of
Islam as well.

Some of the early 'Abbasid Caliphs, particularly al‑Mamun, began to
patronize the rationalism of the Mu'tazilites in public. The Mu'tazilite
specula­tion, in the hands of the later Mu'tazilites, those of the
second and third generations, under the influence of Greek philosophy
and with the active sup­port and patronage of the Caliphs, tended to be
purely speculative and “ab­solutely unfettered, and in some cases led to
a merely negative attitude of thought.”[^1]

They made reason the sole basis of truth and reality and thus
identi­fied the sphere of philosophy with that of religion. They tried
to interpret faith in terms of pure thought. They ignored the fact that
the basic principles of religion are, by their very nature, incapable of
logical demonstration or rational proof. The basic principles of Islam
deal with supersensible realities and, as such, they must first be
accepted on the authority of revelation.

The Mu'tazilites, in their zeal to judge everything by reason alone,
destroyed the personality of God and reduced Him to a bare indefinable
universality or to an abstract unity. This idea of an abstract,
impersonal, absolute God could not appeal to the ordinary Muslims. The
orthodox section of the people reacted strongly against the Mu'tazilite
rationalism and began to consider the Mu'tazilites to be heretics.

The extreme rationalistic attitude of the later Mu'tazilites was
followed by powerful reaction from the orthodox section of the people.
This reaction was greatly aggravated by the unfortunate attempt of the
Caliph al‑Mamun to force Mu'tazilism (rationalist *Kalam*) on his
subjects by introducing *mihnah* (a compulsory test of faith) in the
Mu'tazilite doctrines, particularly in their doctrine of the createdness
of the Qur'an. The whole of the third/ninth century was a time of
reaction.

The orthodox Muslims (and among them were the Traditionists [the
Muhaddithin]), the Zahirites (the followers of Dawud ibn \`Ali), and the
Muslim jurists (*fuqaha'*) adhered strictly to Tradition and literal
interpretation of the Qur'an and the Sunnah,[^2] and refused to admit
any “innovation” (*bid'ah*) in the Shari'ah (the Islamic Code). Any
theological discussion was considered an “innovation” and was as such a
cause of dis­pleasure to them.[^3] The reactionary influence of Imam
Ahmad bin Hanbal and his Zahirite followers was very strong at that
period and the orthodox Muslims kept themselves safely aloof from the
Mu'tazilites and the philosophers.

The reaction against the rationalist *Kalam* went to such an extreme
that even the anthropomorphic verses of the Qur'an were interpreted by
them in a purely literal sense. Malik bin Anas said: “God's settling
Himself firmly upon His Throne is known, the how of it is unknown;
belief in it is obligatory; and questioning about it is an
innovation.”[^4] Any speculation about sacred things was considered an
innovation. Every dogma was to be believed in with­out raising the
question how or why (*bila kaifa*).

But such an attitude of blind faith could not be maintained for any
length of time. Islam, as a universal religion and as a living force,
had to adapt it­self to new thoughts and to new surroundings. So, as
time went on, there arose gradually a party, from amongst the orthodox
section of the Muslims, who real­ized the necessity of putting Islam on
a solid ground by advancing “reasons” for the traditional beliefs, of
defending these beliefs against all sorts of attacks internal and
external, and thus purging their faith of all the non‑Islamic elements
that had crept into it.

They founded the orthodox theology of Islam by using *Kalam* or the
philosophical method in order to meet the dialectical reasoning of the
Mu'tazilites. These theologians who employed *Kalam* for the defence of
their faith were, therefore, known as the Mutakallimun (orthodox
theologians).[^5]

But, although these thinkers used philosophical method in their
discussions, they obtained the primary materials from revelation. They
deve­loped a rival science of reasoning to meet the Mu'tazilites on
their own ground. In the beginning this new orthodox theological
movement developed privately and secretly. It was at first a gradual
unconscious drift. It could not come to the open for fear of public
criticism.

Al‑Junaid, for instance, had to discuss the unity of God behind closed
doors. Al‑Shafi'i held that some trained people might defend and purify
the faith but that should not be done in public. Al‑Muhasibi and other
contemporaries of Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal incurred his displeasure for
defending the faith with arguments or reason. But gradually the movement
gathered strength and began to be openly preached almost at the same
time in different places of the Muslim world‑in Mesopotamia by Abu
al‑Hasan \`Ali bin Isma\`il al‑Ashari (d. 330 or 334/941 or 945), in
Egypt by al‑Tahawi (d. 331/942), and in Samarqand by Abu Mansnr
al‑Maturidi (d. 333/ 944).

But of these three, al‑Ash'ari became the most popular hero, before whom
the Mu'tazilite system (the rationalist *Kalam*) went down, and he came
to be known as the founder of the orthodox philosophical theology, and
the school founded by him was named after him as Ash\`arism.

Al‑Ash'ari was born at Basrah. Regarding his date of birth there is
difference of opinion. Ibn Khallikan, in his discussion of the life of
al‑Ash'ari, mentions that he was born in 260 or 270/873 or 883 and died
at Baghdad in 330/941 or some time after that.[^6]

According to Shibli Nu'mani and Ibn \`Asakir (the author of *Tabyin
Kidhb al‑Muftari*, on the life and teachings of al‑Ash'ari), he was born
in 270/873 and died in 330/941.[^7] He was buried between Karkh and Bab
al‑Basrah (the gate of Basrah). He was a descendant of Abu Musa
al‑Ash'ari, one, of the famous Companions of the Prophet.

Al‑Ash'ari, in his early youth, came under the care of the great
Mu'tazilite scholar of the Basrite school, Abu 'Ali Muhammad bin \`Abd
al‑Wahhab al‑Jubba'i, and, as a disciple of his, became an adherent of
the Mu'tazilite school and continued to support its doctrines up to the
age of forty. After that there happened a sudden change in his mind and
one day he went to the Mosque of Basrah and declared: “He who knows me,
knows who I am, and he who does not know me, let him know that I am Abu
al‑Hasan 'Ali al‑Ash'ari, that I used to maintain that the Qur'an is
created, that eyes of men shall not see God, and that the creatures
create their actions. Lo! I repent that I have been a Mu'tazilite. I
renounce these opinions and I take the engagement to refute the
Mu'tazilites and expose their infamy and turpitude.”

What brought about this sudden change in al‑Aah'ari is not definitely
known to us. Shibli in his \`*Ilm al‑Kalam* says that “the change came
to him due to some directions which he had obtained in a dream...”.[^8]
Ibn Khallikan mentions in this connection the story of a public
discussion in which al‑Ashari met his old Mu'tazilite teacher,
al‑Jubba'i, on the problem of *salah wa’l aslah*, i. e., the problem
whether God's actions are to be based on rational consideration and
whether He is bound to do what is best for His creatures.

Al‑Ash'ari came to al‑Jubba'i and presented the case of three brothers,
one being God‑fearing, another godless, and a third having died as a
child, and asked him as to what would be their positions in the next
world. Al‑Jubba'i could not give a satisfactory and consistent reply to
that question and, on his having failed to justify rationally the
Mu'tazilite doctrine of *salah wa’l aslah*, al‑Ash'ari abandoned the
Mu'tazilite camp.[^9]

But whatever might have been the cause of this change, when he changed
he was terribly in earnest. After the change he wrote a number of books
and Ibn Furak says that the number amounted to three hundred. Ibn
\`Asakir Dimashqi has given the titles of ninety‑three of them, but only
a few have been preserved and are enumerated by Brockelmann.

His work *al‑Ibanah \`an Usul al‑Diyanah* was printed at Hyderabad,
Deccan (India), in 1321/1903 and a small treatise *Risalah fi Istihsan
al‑Khaud fi al‑Kalam* was printed in 1323/1905 and reprinted at
Hyderabad in 1344/1925. Al‑Ash'ari's other famous works are *al‑Maqalat
al IsIamiyyin* (published in Istanbul in 1348/1929), *Kitab al‑Sharh
wal‑Tafsil*, *al-Luma\`*, *Mu'jaz*, *I’adah al‑Burhan*, and *Tab'in*.

Of these books the *Maqalat al­ Islamiyyin wa Ikhtilaf al Musalliyyin*
is the most authentic book on the views of different schools about
religious dogmas and doctrines. *Al‑Maqalat* was written much earlier
than the other books on the same subject, such as Shahrastani's *Kitab
al‑Milal wal‑Nihal,* or Ibn Hazm's *al‑Fasl fi al‑Milal wal‑Ahwa' wal­
Nihal*.

Ibn Taimiyyah said in his *Minhaj al-Sunnah* that the most
compre­hensive of the books he went through on the views of different
people on the basic principles of Islam was al‑Ash'ari's *al‑Maqalat
al‑Islamiyyin* and that he (al‑Ash'ari) discussed many of such views in
details as were not even mentioned by others. Ibn al‑Qayyim also spoke
very highly of this work. In his *Hadi al‑Arwah* and *Ijtima\` al‑Juyush
al‑Islamiyyah*, he said, “Shahrastani, \`Abd al‑Qahir Baghdadi, and
other later writers on the subject simply copied from al‑Ash'ari's book
and did not discuss the views in details.”

Al‑Ash'ari's other famous book *al‑ Ibanah \`an Usul al‑Diyanah* seems
to have been written by him just after his abandoning the Mu'tazilite
views. In this book we find he is almost a Zahirite. The reaction
against the Mu'tazilite speculation might have been very strong in his
mind at that period. *Al‑Maqalat* seems to be a later work. The *Risalah
fi Istihsan al‑Khaud* deals with the objections raised by the extremely
orthodox against the use of *Kalam*, and the replies given by
al‑Ash'ari, justifying its use in matters of faith.

Al‑Ash'ari's theology has been discussed mainly in these books. He had a
good number of pupils who passed as famous theologians and who spread
and developed his doctrines and dogmas. Some of those older Ash'arites
were abu Sahl Saluqi, Abu Quffal, Abu Zaid Maruzi, Zahir bin Ahmad,
Hafiz Abu Bakr Jurjani, Shaikh Abu Muhammad Tabari, and Abu al‑Hasan
Bahili. Some of the pupils of these older Ash'arites became still more
famous and the best known among them are Qadi Abu Bakr Baqillani, Abu
Bakr bin Furak, Abu al‑Qasim al‑Qushairi and abu Ishaq Isfra'ini and his
pupil Abu al‑Ma'ali al‑Juwaini, known as Imam al‑Haramain.[^10]

Ash’arite Theology
------------------

Al‑Ash'ari maintains an intermediary position between the two
diametrically opposed schools of thought prevailing at the time. He had
to fight against both the opposing parties. At the one extreme were the
Mu'tazilites who made reason in preference to revelation the sole
criterion of truth and reality and, thus, passed slowly into
comparatively innocuous heretics. At the other extreme were the orthodox
groups, particularly the Zahirites, the Mujassimites
(anthropomorphists), the Muhaddithin (Traditionists), and the Jurists,
all of which were wholly opposed to the use of reason or *Kalam* in
defending or explaining religious dogmas and condemned any discussion
about them as innovation. Al‑Ash'ari wrote his *Istihsan al‑Khaud*
mainly to meet the objec­tions raised by the orthodox school against the
use of reason in matters of faith.

In that treatise he says: “A section of the people (i.e., the Zahirites
and other orthodox people) made capital out of their own ignorance;
discussions and rational thinking about matters of faith became a heavy
burden for them, and, therefore, they became inclined to blind faith and
blind following (*taqlid*). They condemned those who tried to
rationalize the principles of religion as \`innovators.'

They considered discussion about motion, rest, body, accident, colour,
space, atom, the leaping of atoms, and attributes of God, to be an
innovation and a sin. They said that had such discussions been the right
thing, the Prophet and his Companions would have definitely done so;
they further pointed out that the Prophet, before his death, discussed
and fully explained all those matters which were necessary from the
religious point of view, leaving none of them to be discussed by his
followers; and since he did not discuss the problems mentioned above, it
was evident that to discuss them must be regarded as an innovation.”

They further contended that these so‑called theological problems were
either known to the Prophet and his Companions and yet they kept silent
and did not discuss them or they were not known to them. If they knew
them and yet did not discuss them, we are also to follow them in keeping
silent, and if they could remain unaware of them we can also do so. In
both cases dis­cussion about them would be an “innovation.” These were,
in brief, their objections against the use of *Kalam* in matters of
faith.

Al‑Ash'ari, then, proceeds to justify theological discussions about
matters of faith. He tries to meet these objections in three ways.
First, by turning the objections of the orthodox against themselves by
pointing out to them that the Prophet had not said that those who would
discuss these problems were to be condemned and charged as innovators.
Hence, their charging or con­demning others as innovators was itself an
innovation, for it amounted to discussion about matters which the
Prophet did not discuss, and condemn the action of those whom the
Prophet did not condemn.

Secondly, “the Prophet was not unaware of all these problems of body,
accident, motion, rest, atoms, etc., though he did not discuss each of
them separately. The general principles (*usul*) underlying these
problems are present in general, not in details, in the Qur'an and the
Sunnah.” Al‑Ash'ari then proceeds to prove his contention by citing
verses from the Qur'an and the sayings of the Prophet, and thereby
showing that the principles underlying the problems of *harakah*,
*sukun*, *tawhid*, etc., are, as a matter of fact, present in the Qur'an
and the Sunnah.[^11]

Thirdly, “the Prophet was not unaware of these matters and knew them in
detail, but as problems about them did not arise during his life‑time,
there was no question of his discussing or not discussing them.” The
Companions of the Prophet discussed and argued about many religious
matters which appeared during their life‑time, although there was no
direct and explicit “saying” of the Prophet about them, and because of
the absence of any explicit injunction from the Prophet they differed in
their judgments about them.

Had the ques­tion, for instance, of the creation of the Qur'an, or of
atoms or substance, been raised in so many words in the life of the
Prophet, he would have definitely discussed and explained it as he did
in the case of all those problems which were then raised. “There is no
direct verdict (*nass*) from the Prophet, for instance, as to whether
the Qur'an is created or uncreated. If to call the Qur'an created is an
\`innovation,' then, on the same ground, to call it un­created must also
be an \`innovation.”' Al‑Ash'ari then concludes that Islam is not
opposed to the use of reason; on the other hand, rationalization of
faith is a necessity in Islam.

Al‑Ash'ari discussed the main theological problems in his *Maqalat
al‑Islamiy­yin* and *al‑Ibanah \`an Usul al‑Diyanah*.In these books
al‑Ash’ari selects a few principles which distinguish the Ash'arites
from the Mu'tazilite school of thought. Later on al‑Ghazali put them in
a consolidated form in his *Ihya* [^12] as the “Principles of Faith” or
*Qawa'id al‑\`Aqa'id*, and Imam Fakhr al‑Din al‑Razi explained them more
elaborately. The main problems about which the Ash'arites differed from
the Mu'tazilites are:

(1) The con­ception of God and the nature of His attributes.

(2) Freedom of the human will.

(3) The criterion of truth and the standard of good and evil.

(4) The vision (*ru’yah*) of God.

(5) Createdness of the Qur'an.

(6) Possibility of burdening the creatures with impossible tasks.

(7) Promise of reward and threat of punishment.

(8) The rational or non‑rational basis of God's actions.

(9) Whether God is bound to do what is best for His creatures.[^13]

The problems discussed by the Ash'arites in their system may be broadly
classified into two categories: (i) theological, and (ii) metaphysical.

Fundamental Principles Of The Ash'arite Theology
------------------------------------------------

### 1. Conception of God and the Nature of His Attributes

According to the Ash'arites, God is one, unique, eternal, existent
Being; He is not a substance, not a body, not an accident, not limited
to any direction, and not in any space. He possesses attributes such as
knowledge, power, life, will; He is hearing and seeing and has speech.

About the nature of divine attributes two extreme views were held before
the Ash'arites. On the one hand, there were the extreme Attributists
(*Sifatis*), the Anthropomorphists (*Mujassimin*), and the Comparers
(*Mushabbihin*), who maintained that God possesses all the attributes
mentioned in the Qur'an and that all such attributes as God's having
hands, legs, ears, eyes, and His sitting firmly (*istiwa*) on His Throne
must be taken in their literal sense.

Such a view of the attributes of God is pure anthropomorphism, implying
God's bodily existence. On the other hand, there were the Mu'tazilites
who held that God is one, eternal, unique, absolute Being, having no
touch of dualism in Him. His essence is self‑contained. He does not
possess any attributes apart from His essence. His essence is, for
instance, knowing, powerful, seeing, willing, etc. They denied the
attributes of God as anything other than and addition to His essence.

The Ash'arites maintained a view which was, so to say, a reconciliation
be­tween the two extreme views. In agreement with the Sifatis and in
opposition to the Mu'tazilites and the “philosophers” (those who were
under Greek in­fluence), the Ash'arites held that God possesses
attributes in general. They classified the attributes of God into two
main groups: (i) *sifat‑i salbiyyah*, or negative attributes, and (ii)
*sifat‑i wujudiyyah* or existential or positive attributes. According to
them, the *sifat‑i wujudiyyah*, which they also called *sifat‑i
\`aqliyyah* or rational attributes, were seven: knowledge, power, will,
life, hearing, seeing, and speech.

The extreme Sifatis asserted that even those attributes of God which
imply His bodily existence are also to be taken in their true literal
sense. As against them, the Ash'arites maintained that God possesses the
apparently anthropo­morphic attributes no doubt, but these should be
understood not in their literal sense. They are to be believed in *bila
kaifa*, without asking “how,” and *bila tashbih*, without drawing any
comparison.[^14]

The Ash'arites here introduced a principle that the attributes of God
are unique and fundamentally different from those of the created beings
and as such should not be compared to them. This is known as the
doctrine of *mukha­lafah*, or absolute difference. This doctrine
signifies that if any quality or term is applied to God, it must be
understood in a unique sense and never taken in the sense in which it is
normally used when applied to created beings. Because of the doctrine of
*mukhalafah*, the Ash'arites held that we are not allowed to ascribe any
attribute to God unless it is expressly so applied in the Qur'an. God's
attributes differ from those of the creatures, not in degree but in
kind, i. e., in their whole nature.

The Ash'arites, as against the Mu'tazilites, held that “God has
attributes which inhere eternally in Him and are in addition to His
essence.”[^15] These attributes are eternal, but they are neither
identical with His essence, nor are they quite different from or other
than His essence. God is knowing, for instance, means that God possesses
knowledge as an attribute, which is inherent in God, and although it is
not exactly the same as His essence, yet it is not something quite
different from and other than His essence. The Ash'arites, here,
maintained a very difficult position. They were between the two horns of
a dilemma. They could neither assert the eternal attributes of God to be
identical with nor wholly different from the essence of God.

They could not agree to the Mu'tazilite view and assert the identity of
the attributes with the essence of God, because that would be a virtual
denial of the attributes. They could not also assert that these eternal
attributes are something absolutely different, or other than and
separate, from God, as that would lead to multiplicity of eternals, and
go against divine unity.

They, therefore, maintained that these attributes are, in one sense,
included in and, in another sense, excluded from, the essence of
God.[^16] It is common knowledge that the Asharites contended that
essence (*mahiyyah*), and attri­butes (*sifat*) are two different things
and they cannot be otherwise in the case of God, the Supreme Being.

The Ash'arites made a distinction between the meaning or connotation
(*mafhum*) of a thing and its reality (*haqiqah*). So far as their
meaning is concerned, the attributes and the essence of God are not the
same and as such the attributes are in addition to the essence of God,
i.e., they have different meanings. The meaning of *dhat* (essence) is
different from the meanings of different attributes.

God's essence, for instance, is not knowing or powerful or wise, but so
far as their ultimate *haqiqah* (reality or application) is concerned,
the attributes are inherent in the divine essence, and hence are not
something quite different from or other than the essence of God.[^17]

In support of the above view of theirs, the Ash'arites advanced the
following arguments:

The analogical argument of the Ash'arites of the older generation: God's
actions prove that He is knowing, powerful, and willing; so they also
prove that He possesses knowledge, power, will, etc., because the ground
of inference cannot differ in different things. What is true in the case
of a created being must also be true in the case of the Divine
Being.[^18] In the case of a human being, by “knowing” we mean one who
possesses knowledge and even common sense and draws a line of
demarcation between an essence and its attributes.

On the same analogy, distinction must be drawn between the essence of
God and His attributes. The essence and the attributes should not be
supposed to be blended in the Divine Being. Hence the attributes of God
cannot be identical with His essence, as the Mu'tazilites held. But this
analogical reasoning is very weak, for what is true of a finite being
need not necessarily be true of an infinite being. But, according to the
doctrine of *mukhalafah*, God's knowledge or power or will and, as a
matter of fact, all His rational attributes signify quite different
meanings when applied to created beings.

Secondly, they argued that if all the attributes of God are identical
with His essence, the divine essence must be a homogeneous combination
of contra­dictory qualities. For instance, God is merciful (*rahim*) and
also revengeful (*qahhar*); both the contradictory attributes would
constitute the essence of God, which is one, unique, and indivisible
(*ahad*), and that is absurd.

Further, if the attributes are identical with God's essence, and if, for
instance, His being knowing, powerful, and living is His essence itself,
no useful purpose will be served by ascribing them to Him, for that
would ultimately be the virtual application of His essence to itself,
which is useless. Hence the divine attributes cannot be identical with
the divine essence.

Thirdly, if the attributes of God are not distinct from His essence, the
meanings of the different attributes will be exactly the same, for God's
essence is a simple and indivisible unity. The meanings of knowing,
willing, and living, for instance, will be exactly the same, and thus
knowledge will mean power, or power will mean life, and so on.[^19]

This also is an absurdity. These different attributes imply different
meanings and hence they cannot be identical with God's essence. His
essence is one and He possesses many attributes which eternally inhere
in Him and, though not identical with His essence, yet they are not
absolutely different from His essence.

### 2. Free will

On the question of free‑will or on the ability of man to choose and
produce actions, the Ash'arites took up again an intermediary position
between the libertarian and fatalistic views, held by the Mu'tazilites
and the Jabrites respectively. The orthodox people and the Jabrites
maintained a pure fatalistic view. They held that human actions are
predetermined and predestined by God.

Man has no power to produce any action. “Everything,” they contended,
“is from God.” God has absolute power over everything including human
will and human actions. The Mu'tazilites and the Qadarites, on the other
hand, held that man has full power to produce an action and has complete
freedom in his choice, though the power was created in him by God.

The Ash'arites struck a middle path. They made a distinction between
creation (*khalq*) and acquisition (*kasb*) of an action. God, according
to the Ash'arites, is the creator (*khaliq*) of human actions and man is
the acquisitor (*muktasib*). “Actions of human beings are created
(*makhluq*) by God, the creatures are not capable of creating any
action.”[^20] “There is no creator except God and the actions of man
are, therefore, His creation.”[^21] Power (*qudrah*), according to them,
is either (i) original (*qadamah*) or (ii) derived (*hadithah*). The
original power alone is effective. Derived power can create nothing. The
power possessed by man is given by God and as such it is derived.[^22]

Al­ Ash’ari said, “The true meaning of acquisition is the occurrence of
a thing or event due to derived power, and it is an acquisition for the
person by whose derived power it takes place.”[^23] God is, thus, the
creator of human actions and man is the acquisitor. Man cannot create
anything; he cannot initiate work. God alone can create, because
absolute creation is His pre­rogative. God creates in man the power and
the ability to perform an act. He also creates in him the power to make
a free choice (*ikhtiyar*) between two alternatives ‑ between right and
wrong.

This free choice of man is not effective in producing the action. It is
the habit or nature of God to create the action corresponding to the
choice and power created by Himself in man. Thus, the action of man is
created by God, both as to initiative and as to production or
completion. Man is free only in making the choice between alternatives
and also in intending to do the particular action freely chosen: Man, in
making this choice and intending to do the act, acquires (*iktisab*)
either the merit of appreciation and reward from God if he makes the
right choice, or the demerit of condemnation and punishment if he makes
the wrong choice.

The Ash\`arites, thus, in order to avoid the fatalistic position,
introduced the doc­trine of acquisition by which, they thought, they
could account for man's free‑will and lay responsibility upon him. Man
has no free‑will in the Mu'tazilite sense; he has no real and effective
power, but has some derived power by which he acquires a share in the
production of the act: In the case of voluntary actions of human beings,
there are, so to say, two causes.

The action is the combined effect of the real cause, God, and the choice
and intention of man, the acquisitor, the possessor of ineffective power
because of its being derived power. God creates in two ways: either with
a locus (*mahall*) or without a locus. Human actions are His creation
with a locus.[^24]

“God creates, in man, the power, ability, choice, and will to perform an
act, and man, endowed with this derived power, chooses freely one of the
alternatives and intends or wills to do the action and, corresponding to
this intention, God creates and com­pletes the action.”[^25]

It is this intention on the part of man which makes him responsible for
his deeds. Man cannot take the initiative in any matter, nor can he
originate any action. But the completion of the act is partially due to
his intention: He, thus, acquires the merit or demerit of the action
because of his intending to do a good or bad action. Man's free choice
is, so to say, an occasion for God's causing the action corresponding to
that choice.

In this the Ash\`arites come very close to the occasionalism of
Malebranche which was expounded in Europe eight centuries and a half
later. This correspondence and harmony between the choice of man and
God's creation, according to the Ash'arites, is not due to a harmony
established by God previously, but because of His habit or nature to
create the harmony whenever human action is done.

This, in short, is the solution of the problem of free‑will offered by
the Ash'arites. The Ashh'arite view on this problem is not free from
logical and ethical difficulties. It was really very difficult for them
to reconcile the absolute determination of all events by God with man's
accountability and responsi­bility for his deeds. Some, of the later
Ash'arites, particularly Imam Fakhr al‑Din al‑Razi, discarded the veil
of acquisition in order to escape the charge of fatalism, and advocated
naked determinism.[^26]

### 3. The Problem of Reason and Revelation and the Criterion of Good and Evil

­The Ash\`arites differ from the Mu'tazilites on the question whether
reason or revelation should be the basis or source of truth and reality:
Both the schools admit the necessity of reason for the rational
understanding of faith, but they differ with regard to the question
whether revelation or reason is more fun­damental and, in case of a
conflict, whether reason or revelation is to get preference.

The Mu'tazilites held that reason is more fundamental than revela­tion
and is to be preferred to revelation. Revelation merely confirms what is
accepted by reason and, if there be a conflict between the two, reason
is to be preferred and revelation must be so interpreted as to be in
conformity with the dictates of reason.

The Ash\`arites, on the other hand, held that revelation is more
funda­mental as the source of ultimate truth and reality, and reason
should merely confirm what is given by revelation. The Ash\`arites
prefer revelation to reason in case of a conflict between the two. As a
matter of fact, this is one of the fundamental principles in which the
rational *Kalam* of the Mu'tazilites differs from the orthodox *Kalam*
of the Ash'arites.

If pure reason is made the sole basis or source of truth and reality,
including the truth and reality of the most fun­damental principles or
concepts on which Islam is based, it would be a pure speculative
philosophy or at best a rational theology in general and not a doctrinal
theology of a particular historic religion, i. e., that of Islam in
par­ticular. Islam is based on certain fundamental principles or
concepts which, being suprasensible in nature, are incapable of rational
proof. These principles, first, must be believed in on the basis of
revelation.

Revelation, thus, is the real basis of the truth and reality of these
basic doctrines of Islam. This faith, based on revelation, must be
rationalized. Islam as a religion, no doubt, admits the necessity of
rationalizing its faith. But to admit the necessity of rationalizing
faith is not to admit pure reason or analytic thought to be the sole
source or basis of Islam as a religion. Reason, no doubt, has the right
to judge Islam and its basic principles, but what is to be judged is of
such a nature that it cannot submit to the judgment of reason except on
its own terms.

Reason must, therefore, be subordinated to revelation. Its function is
to rationalize faith in the basic principles of Islam and not to
question the validity or truth of the principles established on the
basis of revelation as embodied in the Qur'an and the Sunnah. The
problem of the criterion of good and evil follows as a corollary to the
problem of reason and revelation. The problem of good and evil is one of
the most controversial problems of Islamic theology.

The Mu'tazilites held that reason, and not revelation, is the criterion
or standard of moral judgment, i.e., of the goodness and badness of an
action. The truth and moral value of things and human actions must be
determined by reason. They contended that moral qualities of good and
evil are objective; they are inherent in the very nature of things or
actions and as such can be known by reason and decided to be good or
bad.

The Ash'arites, as against the Mu'tazilites, held that revelation and
not reason is the real authority or criterion to determine what is good
and what is bad. Goodness and badness of actions (*husn wa qubh*) are
not qualities inhering in them; these are mere accidents (*a'rad*).
Actions‑in‑themselves are neither good nor bad. Divine Law makes them
good or bad.

In order to make the ground of controversy between the Mu'tazilites and
the Ash'arites clearer, we may explain here the three different senses
in which these two terms, good and evil, are used.[^27]

(i) Good and evil are sometimes used in the sense of perfection and
defect respectively. When we say that a certain thing or action is good
or bad (for instance, knowledge is good and ignorance is bad), we mean
that it is a quality which makes its possessor perfect or implies a
defect in him.

(ii) These terms are also used in a utilitarian sense meaning gain and
loss in worldly affairs. Whatever is useful or has utility in our
experience is good, and the opposite of it is bad. So whatever is
neither useful nor harmful is neither good nor bad.

Both the Ash'arites and the Mu'tazilites agree that in the two senses,
men­tioned above, reason is the criterion or standard of good and evil.
There is no difference of opinion in the above two senses. But good and
bad in the second sense may vary from time to time, from individual to
individual, and from place to place.

In this sense there will be nothing permanently or universally good or
bad; what is good to one may be bad to others and vice versa. This
implies that good and evil are subjective and not objective and real.
Hence actions are neither good nor bad, but experience or workability
would make them so and, therefore, they can be known by reason without
the help of revelation.

(iii) Good and evil are also used in a third sense of commendable and
praise­worthy or condemnable in this world and rewardable or punishable,
as the case may be, in the other world.

The Ash'arites maintained that good and evil in their third sense must
be known through revelation, not by reason as the Mu'tazilites had held.
According to the Ash'arites, revelation alone decides whether an action
is good or bad. What is commanded by *Shar'* is good, and what is
prohibited is bad. *Shar*\` can convert previously declared good into
bad and vice versa.

As actions by themselves are neither good nor bad, there is nothing in
them which would make them rewardable (good) or punishable (bad). They
are made rewardable or punishable by revelation or *Shar'*. As there is
no quality of good or evil seated in the very nature of an act, there
can be no question of knowing it by reason.

### 4. The Problem of the Eternity of the Qur'an

There was a great controversy over the question whether the Qur'an is
created or uncreated and eternal. This question is bound up with another
question whether speech is one of God's attributes or not. The orthodox
section of the Muslims, including the Ash'arites, held that God has it
as one of His seven rational attributes, and as His attributes are
eternal, divine speech, i.e., the Qur'an, is also eternal.

As regards the eternity of the Qur'an, the Ash'arites adopted again an
inter­mediary position between the extreme views of the Zahirites and
the Mu'tazi­lites. The Hanbalites and other Zahirites (extreme orthodox
schools) held that the speech of God, i. e., the Qur'an, is composed of
letters, words, and sounds which inhere in the essence of God and is,
therefore, eternal. Some of the Hanbalites went to the extreme and
asserted that even the cover and the binding of the Qur'an are
eternal.[^28]

The Mu'tazilites and a section of the Rafidites went to the other
extreme and maintained that the Qur'an was created. They denied all
attributes of God, including the attribute of speech, on the ground that
if it be an eternal attribute of God, there would be multi­plicity of
eternals, to believe which is polytheism and contrary to the basic
principles of Islam. They further argued that “the Qur'an is composed of
parts, successively arranged parts, and whatever is composed of such
parts must be temporal.”[^29]

Hence the Qur'an must be created. The Ash'arites maintained that the
Qur'an is composed of words and sounds, but these do not inhere in the
essence of God. They made a distinction between the outward and
con­crete expression of the Qur'an in language, and the real,
self‑subsistent mean­ing of it, and held that the Qur'an, as expressed
in words and sounds, is, no doubt, temporal (*hadath*); but against the
Mu'tazilites they asserted that the Qur'an in its meanings is uncreated
and eternal.

The “self‑subsisting meaning” eternally inheres in the essence of God.
These meanings are expressed; their expression in language is temporal
and created. It is so because the same mean­ing, while remaining the
same, might be expressed differently at different times, in different
places by different persons or nations. They further maintained that
this meaning is an attribute other than knowledge and will and, as such,
inheres eternally in the essence of God and is, therefore, eternal.[^30]

In support of this contention the Ash\`arites advanced the following
argu­ments:[^31]

(i) The Qur'an is “knowledge from God”; it is, therefore, inseparable
from God's attribute of knowledge which is eternal and uncreated. Hence
it is also eternal and uncreated.

(ii) God created everything by His word *kun* (be) and this word, which
is in the Qur'an, could not have been a created one, otherwise a created
word would be a creator, which is absurd. Hence God's word is uncreated,
i. e.. eternal.

(iii) The Qur'an makes a distinction between creation (*khalq*) and
command (*amr*) when it says, ***“Are not the creation and command His
alone?”*** Hence God's Command, His word or *Kalam*, which is definitely
something other than created things (*makhluq*), must be unereated and
eternal.

(iv) Further, God says to Moses, ***“I have chosen thee over mankind
with My apostolate and My word.”*** This verse signifies that God has
speech. Again, Moses is addressed by God with the words: ***“Lo, I am
thy Lord.”*** Now, if the word which addresses Moses is a created thing,
it would mean that a created thing asserts that it is Moses Lord (God),
which is absurd. God's word, there­fore, must be eternal.

The Ash'arites further pointed out that all the different arguments
advanced by the Mu'tazilites (and in ***Sharh‑i Mawaqif*** as many as
eight such arguments have been mentioned), in support of their view that
the Qur'an is created, would apply only to the expressed Qur'an and not
to the real Qur'an, the latter being the “meanings of the Qur'an.”[^32]

### 5. The Problem of the Beatific Vision

On the question of the beatific vision, the Ash\`arites, true to their
attitude of reconciliation, again tried to adopt a course lying midway
between the extreme anthropomorphic view of the Zahi­rites and other
orthodox Muslims on the one hand and the view of the Mu'tazi­lites and
the “philosophers” on the other.

The extreme orthodox Muslims and the Zahirites, in particular, held that
it is possible to see God and the righteous persons would actually have
His vision as the chief reward for their good actions. They further held
that God is settled firmly on His Throne, He exists in different
directions, and is capable of being pointed out. The Mu'tazilites and
the “philosophers” denied the possibility of seeing God with eyes, as
that would imply His bodily existence, which is absurd.

The Ash'arites, as against the Mu'tazilites and the “philosophers,” and
in agreement with the orthodox class, held that it is possible to see
God;[^33] but they could not agree to their view that God is extended
and can be shown by pointing out. They accepted the philosophical
principle that whatever is extended or spatial must be contingent and
temporal, and God is not an extended and temporal being.

This admission landed them into a difficulty, for if God is not extended
and only extended things can be seen, God cannot be seen;[^34] but this
conclusion conflicts with their position that beatific vision is
possible. So, in order to get out of this difficulty, they asserted the
possibility of seeing an object even if it is not present before the
perceiver.[^35] This was a very peculiar and untenable position, for it
repudiated all the principles of optics.

It is possible to see God even though our sense of vision does not
receive the corresponding “impression” of the object on it. Besides, it
is possible for God to create in human beings the capacity to see Him
without the necessary conditions of vision, such as the presence, in
concrete form, of the object itself in space and time, normal condition
of the appropriate sense‑organ, absence of hindrance or obstruction to
perception, and so on; and though God is un­extended and does not exist
in space and time, “yet He may make Himself visible to His creature like
the full moon.”

They further contended that the vision of God is possible without any
impression on our sense‑organ for another reason. There is practically
no difference between a “sensation” and an “after ­image” except that
the sensation possesses an additional quality over and above the common
qualities present in both, and this additional quality, i.e, impression
on the sense‑organ produced by the external object, does not make any
difference in the perception of an object.

Hence, though this impression is missing in the case of seeing God, it
may still be called “seeing.” The weak­ness of this argument is apparent
to any student of psychology, because an after‑image is possible only
when it is preceded by an actual impression of the object on the
sense‑organ. The actual impression of the object is, there­fore, a
precondition of an after‑image in the case of beatific vision too.

The Ash'arites were faced with another difficulty. The Mu'tazilites had
pointed out that if seeing of God is possible, it must be possible under
all circumstances and at all times, for this possibility is due either
to His essence or to an inseparable attribute in Him. In either case, it
should be possible at all times. And if it is possible at all times, it
must be possible now; and if it is possible to see Him now, we must see
Him now, for when all the conditions of “vision” are present, the actual
seeing must take place. The Ash\`arites met this objection in a very
naive manner by saying, “We do not admit the necessity of actual seeing
taking place, even when all its eight conditions are present.”

The Ash'arites supported their views on the basis of revelation.
According to the Qur'an, Moses asked of God, ***“O, my Lord, show
Thyself to me so that I can see Thee.”*** Had seeing been impossible,
Moses would not have said so, for, otherwise, it must be assumed that
either he knew its impossibility or did not, and both the alternatives
are absurd, because an intelligent person like him could not have been
ignorant of this impossibility and could not have asked for what he knew
was impossible.

Again, according to the Qur'an, God said to Moses, ***“If the mountain
remains fixed in its place, you can see Me,”*** and if the antecedent is
possible the consequent must be possible. Here, evidently, the
antecedent, fixity of the moun­tain, is in itself a possible thing.
Therefore, the consequent, the vision of God, must also be possible.
Some other verses also support the conclusion.[^36]

There are a few more controversial problems of secondary importance, in
which the Ash\`arites differed from the Mu'tazilites. These are, for
example, promise of reward and threat of punishment by God; whether God
can make His creatures responsible for the actions for which they have
no ability; whether God's actions are bound to be based on rational
considerations and on purpose; whether He is bound to do what is best
for His creatures; and whether the knowledge of God or recognition of
His existence is based on reason or revelation.

These theological problems of secondary importance are more or less the
corol­laries of the main principles in which the Ash'arites and
Mu'tazilites differed.

The Ash'arites held that God is the only real cause of everything; He
alone possesses real and effective power and this power is unlimited;
His will is absolutely free ‑ not determined by anything. Whatever power
human beings apparently possess is given by God. Man does not possess
any real and effective power. God, being absolutely free in His action,
is not bound to act on rational purpose. He does not act teleologically
for, otherwise, His actions would be determined by something external to
and other than Himself and He would not remain absolutely free. External
purpose would put a limit to God's omnipotence.

Like Spinoza, al‑Ash'ari held that there is no purpose in the mind of
God which would determine His activity. From thus anti‑teleological view
it follows that as God's action is not teleological, He is not bound to
do what is best for His creatures. He does whatever He wills. But as He
is an absolutely intelligent and just being, His actions, as a matter of
fact, are all full of wisdom.[^37]

As against the Mu'tazilites, the Ash'arites held that God can make us
responsible for the actions which we have no power to do. The
Mu'tazilites held that God cannot do so, because that would be an
irrational and unjust act on His part. It is admitted by all schools of
thought in Islam that power or ability of men to do a thing is given by
God. But opinions differ on the question whether this power or ability
is really effective in producing any action. The Mu\`tazilites and the
Qadarites held that man's power is fully effective and can produce an
action. But the Ash'arites maintained that, being derivative, it can
have no effective force. Similar are their respective positions with
regard to the ability to act.

This ability is no doubt given by God as an accident, but the
Mu'tazilites, particularly Abu al‑Hudhail \`Allaf, held that this
ability is given to man simultaneously with the performance of the act.
But the Ash'arites maintained that it is given before the actual
performance of the act;[^38] but being a mere accident in man, it has
only a momentary existence and is of no practical use to man in
performing the act.

As a matter of fact, it ceases to exist when the actual action takes
place. Man, therefore, does the act, practically without having the
power and the ability to do so. He is held responsible for his actions
because of his choosing freely one of the two alternative actions and
intending to do the action so chosen. But neither his choice nor his
intention can produce the action. It is God who creates the action and
is thus its effective and real cause.[^39]

There is an almost similar controversy over the question of God's
promise of reward to the virtuous and His threat of punishment to the
wrong‑doer. This was one of the five main problems with which the
Mu'tazilite movement started.[^40]

The Mu'tazilites held that God is bound to fulfil His promises of reward
and punishment. Every action, good or bad, must take its own course and
be followed by its logical and normal consequence. A right action,
there­fore, must be followed by its reward and a wrong one by
punishment. God has made promises in the Qur'an and He, being a just
being, cannot do otherwise, i.e., He cannot punish the virtuous and
forgive the wrong‑doer.

On the other hand, the Ash'arites maintained that, being all‑powerful
and absolutely free in His will, God can punish His creatures even if
they have not committed any sins or reward His creatures even though
they have done no virtuous deeds. There is nothing binding on God; His
will is not subject to teleological considerations.

It is by the inner necessity of His own nature that He fulfils His
promises of reward to the virtuous and does not do otherwise. And it is
in His infinite mercy that He may forgive any wrong­doer or vicious
person, in spite of the threats of punishment for his vicious acts. This
act of forgiveness will also be in accordance with His nature as the
most generous and gracious being.

Ash’arite Metaphysics
---------------------

Al‑Ash'ari's interest was purely theological and his discussions did not
con­tain much metaphysics.[^41] But the subsequent Ash'arites found it
impossible to achieve their main object of defending the faith and
harmonizing reason with revelation without making reference to the
ultimate nature of reality.

Al‑Ash'ari's theological system was, thus, considered to be incomplete
without a support from metaphysics. The system was fully developed by
the later Ash'arites, particularly by Qadi Abu Bakr Muhammad bin Tayyyib
al‑Baqillani who was one of the greatest among them. He was a Basrite,
but he made Baghdad his permanent residence and died there in 403/1013.
He was a great original thinker and wrote many valuable books on
theology and various other subjects.

He made use of some purely metaphysical propositions in his theological
investigations, such as substance is an individual unity, accident has
only a momentary existence and cannot exist in quality, and perfect
vacuum is possible, and thus gave the school a metaphysical foundation.

About him a Western scholar has remarked: “It is his glory to have
contributed most important elements to, and put into fixed form what is,
perhaps, the most daring metaphysical scheme, and almost certainly the
most thorough theo­logical scheme, ever thought out. On the one hand,
the Lucretian atoms raining down through the empty void, the
self‑developing monads and pre­-established harmony of Leibniz; and all
the Kantian “things‑in‑themselves” are lame and impotent in their
consistency beside the parallel Ash'arite doctrines; and, on the other,
not even the rigours of Calvin; as developed in Dutch confessions, can
compete with the unflinching exactitude of the Muslim conclusions”.[^42]

The Ash'arites, being primarily interested in theological problems, kept
their philosophical discussions mainly confined only to those questions
which they thought had a direct or indirect bearing on these
problems.[^43] Willingly or unwillingly, they had to philosophize “in
order to meet the contemporary philosophers on their own ground.” But
when they began philosophizing, they were very earnest and became great
metaphysicians.

In dealing with the most important basic principles of Islam: (i) the
existence of God, as the creator of the universe, and His unity and
oneness, and (ii) the belief in the prophethood of Muhammad, they had to
use certain proofs which necessitated some metaphysical and
epistemological discussions. Hence they had to develop a theory of
knowledge and a theory of reality, which were peculiarly their own. God,
the ultimate principle, is, according to the Ash'arites, a necessary
existent; His existence is identical with His essence.

In proving God's existence the Ash'arites used three arguments. Their
argument from the contingent nature of motion is not of much importance
to our discussion. The other two are:

(i) All bodies, they argued, are ultimately one in so far as their
essence is concerned. But, in spite of this basic unity, their
characteristics are different. Hence there must be an ultimate cause for
these divergent characteristic, and that ultimate cause is God.

(ii) The world is contingent. Every contingent thing must have a cause;
therefore, the world must have a cause, and as no contingent thing can
be the cause, that cause must be God. The major premise (i.e., every
event must have a cause) does not require a proof. The minor premise ‑
the world is con­tingent ‑ they proved in the following manner:
Everything that exists in the world is either a substance or a quality.
The contingent character of a quality is evident, and the contingence of
substance follows from the fact that no substance could exist apart from
qualities. The contingence of quality neces­sitates the contingence of
substance; otherwise, the eternity of substance would necessitate the
eternity of quality.[^44]

The Ash'arites believed in miracles which were considered to be the
basis of the proof of prophethood and, in order to defend this view,
they had to deny the laws of nature. They also denied causality in
nature and made God the only cause of everything.

Now, in order to explain the full implication of the above arguments, it
was necessary for them to develop a theory of knowledge and a
metaphysics.

The world consists of things. Now, the question arises: What is meant by
a thing, what is its nature, and how far do we know it?

Al‑Baqillani defined knowledge as the cognition of a thing as it is in
itself.[^45] A thing is defined by the Ash'arites as “that which is
existent.” Everything is an existent and every existent is a thing.[^46]
So, according to the Ash'arites, existence, whether necessary or
contingent, is the thing or the essence of the thing‑in‑itself and not a
quality in addition to it, as the Mu'tazilites held.

Al‑Jahiz, al‑Jubba'i, and some other Mu'tazilites of the Basrite school
defined a “thing” as that which is known,[^47] and held that existence
is a quality of it, added to its essence. The Ash'arites, as against
these Mu'tazilites, contended that if existence is an additional
quality, the essence‑in‑itself would be a non­existent and hence a
non‑entity and the subsequent‑addition of the quality of “existence” to
it would involve a clear contradiction in so far as it would make the
non‑existent existent.[^48]

This is an absurdity. The thing‑in‑itself which is the object of
knowledge according to the Ash'arites, is, therefore, an existent thing
or a body. Everything that exists in the world has a contingent
existence and is either substance or quality. In this sense God is not a
thing.

The Aristotelian categories of thought were subjected by the Ash'arites
to a searching criticism. Only two of those categories, substance and
quality, were retained by them. The other categories, quality, place,
time, etc., are nothing but relative characteristics (*i'tibarat*) that
exist subjectively in the mind of the knower, having no corresponding
objective reality.

Like Berkeley, the Irish philosopher, they also did not make any
distinction between the primary and secondary qualities of objects. The
world, therefore, consists of substance, on which the mind reflects, and
qualities, which are not in the thing‑in‑itself but only in the mind of
the knower. The qualities are mere accidents which are fleeting,
transitory, and subjective relations, having only a momentary existence.
A quality or accident cannot exist in another accident but only in a
substance. No substance could ever exist apart from a quality. The
substance, being inseparable from its accidents, must also be
transitory, having only a moment's duration, just as the accidents are.
Everything that exists, therefore, consists of mere transitory units
(subjective), having only a moment's duration.

The Ash'arites, thus, rejected the Aristotelian view of matter as “a
permanent potentiality (*hayula*) of suffering the impress of form
(*surah*),” because a possibility is neither an entity nor a non‑entity
but purely a subjectivity. With inert matter, the active form and all
causes must also go. They, too, are mere subjectivities. This led them
straight to the atomists and, as a matter of fact, they did become
atomists after their own fashion.

In this connection we may observe that the object of the Ash'arites was,
like that of Kant, to fix the relation of knowledge to the
thing‑in‑itself; and they showed here a great originality in their
thought. On this question they not only anticipated Kant but, in
reaching the thing‑in‑itself, they were much more thorough than Kant.
“In his examination of human knowledge regarded as a product and not
merely a process, Kant stopped at the idea of ‘Ding an sich’
[thing‑in‑itself], but the Ash'arite endeavoured to penetrate further,
and maintained, against the contemporary Agnostic‑Realism, that the
so‑called underlying essence existed only so far as it was brought in
relation to the knowing subject.”[^49]

Ash'arite Atomism
-----------------

The substances perceived by us are atoms which come into existence from
vacuity and drop out of existence again. The world is made up of such
atoms. The Ash'arite atoms are fundamentally different from those of
Democritus and Lucretius. The Ash\`arite atoms are not material; they
are not permanent; they have only a momentary existence; they are not
eternal but every moment brought into being, and then allowed to go out
of existence by the Supreme Being, God, the only cause of everything in
the universe. These atoms are not only of space but of time also. They
are non­-material or ideal in character. They resemble the monads of
Leibniz.

But the Ash'arite monads differ from those of Leibniz in having no
possibility of self‑development along certain lines. Each monad has
certain qualities but has extension neither in space nor in time. They
have simply position, not bulk, and are isolated from and independent of
one another. There is absolute void between any two monads. Space and
time are subjective. All changes in the world are produced by their
entering into existence and dropping out again, but not by any change in
themselves.

The Ash'arite ontology necessitated the existence of God. Their monads
must have a cause, without which they could not have come into being,
nor could there be any harmony or connection between them. This cause
must be a *cause sui*; otherwise there would be an infinite regress of
the causal nexus. The Ash'arites found this cause in the free‑will of
God. It creates and annihilates the atoms and their qualities and, thus,
brings to pass all motion and change in the world.

The Ash'arites were, thus, thoroughgoing metaphysicians. Being was all
­important in their ontology. The will of that Being or God must,
therefore, be the ground of all things. Hence they did not find any
difficulty, as Leibniz did, in explaining the harmony and coherence
among the isolated, windowless, and independent monads, constituting the
one orderly world.

Leibniz had to bring in, in his monadology, a Monad of monads or God,
and fall back upon the Theory of Pre‑established Harmony to bring his
monads into harmonious and orderly relations with one another, and this
he could do only at the cost of his monadology, and by abandoning his
pluralistic and individualistic meta­physics.

But the Ash'arites, consistently with their ontology, fell straight back
upon God, and found in His will the ground of orderliness and harmony in
the universe. They were, thus, more thorough and consistent than Leibniz
in their theory of monads. The Ash'arite atomism approaches that of
Lotze's, who in spite of his desire to save external reality, ended in
its Complete reduction to ideality. But, like Lotze, they could not
believe their atoms to be the inner working of the infinite Primal
Being.

The necessary consequence of their analysis is a thorough going idealism
like that of Berkeley. Their theory of knowledge reduced the universe to
a mere show of ordered subjectivities which, as they maintained like
Berkeley, found their ultimate explanation in the will of God. Their
interest, as we have already pointed out, was mainly theological.
Interest in pure monotheism was very strong with them. Their
metaphysical and epistemological discussions were actuated by a pious
desire to defend the idea of divine creations, to drive men back to God
and His revelation and compel them to see in Him the one grand fact of
the universe.

The Ash'arites are here more consistent than Berkeley. God, according to
them, is the only cause in the true sense of the term. No created thing,
having created power, could be the cause of anything.

The attitude of the Ash'arites towards the law of causation was
sceptical. They denied objective validity of causality in nature. No
created thing or being can be the cause of anything. Things or beings in
nature do not possess any power or quality which could produce any
effect. The so‑called power which men and objects of nature seem to
possess is not an effective power, for it is a derived power, not an
original power which alone can produce effect.[^50] Whatever power the
creatures might possess must have been given by God, who alone possesses
all real power. Being (God) is the only Ultimate Reality.

The things of the world are composed of indivisible units monads which,
every moment, are created and annihilated; and it is God who creates and
annihilates them and their qualities, thereby bringing about all the
motion and change in the world. There is, thus, no such thing as a law
of nature and the world is sustained by a constant, ever repeated
activity of God.

There is no such thing as a secondary cause; when there is the
appearance of such a cause, it is only illusionary. God produces the
appearance of the effect as well as the effect. Things of the world do
not possess any permanent nature. Fire, for instance, does not possess
the nature or quality of burning; it does not burn. God creates in a
substance “a being burned” when fire touches it.

The Ash'arites thus denied power in the cause as well as the necessary
connection between the so‑called cause and effect. Shibli mentions that
the Ash'arites rejected the idea of causation with a view to defending
the possibility of miracles on the manifestation of which, according to
them, pro­phethood depended. The orthodox school believed in miracles as
well as in the universal law of causation; but they also maintained
that, at the time of manifesting a miracle, God suspends the operation
of this law and thus brings about an exception.

Asha\`ari, however, maintained that a cause must have always the same
effect (i.e., the effect of one and the cause cause could not be
different at different times). Having accepted this principle as
formulated by their leader, the Ash'arites could not agree to the
orthodox view and, therefore, to prove the possibility of miracles they
rejected the law of causation altogether, According to them, there is no
power in the antecedent to produce the consequent. “We know nothing but
floating impressions, the phenomenal order of which is determined by
God.”[^51]

Objection might be raised against the Ash'arite metaphysics that it
es­tablishes in effect a relationship between God and the atoms, but
relation­ships, according to the Ash'arites, are subjective illusions.
In reply to this objection it may be pointed out that all relationship
applies only to contingent beings or things perceived by the senses. It
would not hold in the case of the Necessary Being, God, who is
suprasensible. And according to their principle of *mukhalafah*, nothing
which is applied to created things or beings can be applied to God in
the same sense. God is not a natural cause but a free cause.

This is the Ash'arite system as completed by Qadi Abu Bakr al‑Baqillani.
It faced a strong opposition from the orthodox, particularly from the
followers of Abmad bin Hanbal. Al‑Ashari's opinions did not get much
recognition outside the Shafi'ite group to which he belonged. The
Hanafites preferred the doctrines of his con­temporary al‑Maturidi who
differed from al‑Ash'ari in certain minor contro­versial points. Shibli
has mentioned nine such points.[^52]

In Spain, Ibn Hazm (d. 456/1063) opposed the Ash'arite doctrines. The
Saljuq Sultan Tughril Beg, who was an adherent of the Hanbalite school,
treated the Ash'arites very badly, but his successor Sultan Alp Arsalan
and especially his famous vizier, Nizam al‑Mulk supported the
Ash\`arites and put an end to the persecution to which they had been
exposed. Nizam al‑Mulk founded the Nizamite Academy at Baghdad in
459/1066 for the defence of Ash'arite doctrines. It is under his
patronage that Abu al‑Ma'ali \`Abd al‑Malik al‑Juwaini got the chance of
preaching the Ash'arite doctrine freely.[^53]

The Ash'arite system could not obtain widespread acceptance until it was
popularized by a1‑Juwaini and al‑Ghazali in the East and by Ibn Tumart
in the West. It was al‑Juwaini who could legitimately claim the credit
of making the Ash'arites' doctrines popular. His vast learning and
erudite scholarship brought him the title of Dia' al‑Din (the light of
religion).

Al‑Juwaini received his early education from his father, Shaikh Abu
Muhammad \`Abd Allah, and after the death of his father, he got further
education from his teacher, abu Ishaq al‑Isfara'ini, a great Ash'arite
scholar. Al‑Juwaini, in course of time, was recognized by the scholars
of the time to be Shaikh al‑Islam (the chief leader of Islam) and Imam
al Haramain (the religious leader of Makkah and Madinah). For thirty
years, he continued teaching and preaching the Ash'arite doctrines.

Al‑Juwaini was the teacher of al‑Ghazali. He wrote many books on various
subjects. Some of these are: *al‑Shamil*, on the principles of religion;
*al‑Burhan*, on the principles of jurisprudence; *al‑\`Aqidat
al‑Nizamiyyah*; and *Irshad*, on theology. He was born in 419/1028 and
died at Nishapur in 478/1085.53 Being the Shaikh al‑Islam and the Imam
of Makkah and Madinah, al‑Juwaini's *Fatawa* (judgments on religious
matters) used to be respected by people in general throughout the Muslim
world; and for this reason, his writings got the widest circulation and,
through these writings, Ash'arite doctrines became known everywhere.

One great theological result of the Ash'arite system was that it checked
the growth of free thought which tended to dissolve the solidarity of
the Islamic Shari'ah. The Ash\`arite mode of thought had its
intellectual results also.

It led to an independent criticism of Greek philosophy and prepared the
ground for philosophies propounded by men like al‑Ghazali and Fakhr
al‑Din al‑Razi. Al‑Ghazali is generally included among the Ash'arites
and it is he who maybe said to have completed the Ash'arite metaphysics.
It was he who, by giving a systematic refutation of Greek philosophy in
his famous work, *Tahafut al‑Falasifah*, completely annihilated the
dread of intellectualism which had characterized the minds of the
orthodox. It was chiefly through his influence that people began to
study dogma and metaphysics together.[^54]

Strictly speak­ing, al‑Ghazali was not an Ash'arite, though he admitted
that the Ash'arite mode of thought was excellent for the masses. “He
held that the secret of faith could not be revealed to the masses; for
this reason he encouraged exposi­tion of the Ash\`arite theology, and
took care in persuading his disciples not to publish the results of his
private reflection.”[^55]

Al-Ghazali made the Ash'arite theology so popular that it became
practically the theology of the Muslim community in general and has
continued to remain so up to the present time.

Bibliography
------------

Abu al‑Hasan bin Isma'il al‑Ashari, *Kitab al‑Ibanah \`an Usul
al‑Diyanah*, Hyderabad, Deccan, 1321/1903; *Risalah fi Istihsan
al‑Khaud*, Hyderabad, Deccan, 1323/1905, 1344/1926; *Maqalat
a1‑Islamiyyin wa Ikhtilaf al‑Musalliyyi*n, 2 Vols., Istanbul, 1929;
\`Abd al‑Karim al‑Shahrastani, *Kitab al‑Milal wal‑Nihal*, ed. Cureton;
Shibli, *\`Ilm al‑Kalam*, 4th edition, Ma'arif Press, Azamgarh,
1341/1923; Qadi \`Add and Sayyid Sharif, *Sharh al Mawaqif*; abu
al‑\`Ala, *Sharh‑i Mawaqif*, Newal Kishore, Lucknow; al‑ Ghazali, *Ihya'
\` Ulum al‑Din,* Newal Kishore, Lucknow;

Ibn Khallikan, *Wafayat al‑A'yan*, 2 Vols; Shaikh Muhammad Iqbal, *The
Development of Metaphysics in Persia*, Bazm‑i Iqbal, Lahore; al‑Mas'udi,
*Muruj ad‑Dhahab*; Dhahabi, *Mizan al‑I\`tidal*; Baihaqi, *Kitab
al‑Asma' w‑al‑Sifat;* D. B. Macdonald, *Development of Muslim Theology,
Jurisprudence and Constitutional Theory*, Charles Scribner's Sons, New
York, 1926; Ahmad Amin, *Duha al‑Islam*, 4th edition, Cairo, 1946;
Taftazani, *Sharh \`Aqa'id‑i Nasafi*; Khayali, *Sharh‑i \`Aqa'id‑i
Nasafi*.

[^1]: Iqbal, The Development of Metaphysics in Persia, p. 53.

[^2]: Ahmad Amin, Duha al‑Islam, p. 36.

[^3]: Al‑Ash'ari, Istihsan al‑Khaud, p. 4.

[^4]: Al‑Shahrastani, al‑Milal wal‑Nihal, p. 50.

[^5]: The subject originally was not called \`Ilm al‑Kalam. This name
was given afterwards, during al‑Mamun's time. See Shibli, \`Ilm
al‑Kalam, p. 31.

[^6]: Ibn Khallikan, Wafayat al‑A'yan, p. 454.

[^7]: Shibli, op. cit., p. 56.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Ibn Khallikan, op. cit., p. 55.

[^10]: Shibli, op. cit., pp. 56. 57.

[^11]: Al‑Ash'ari, op. cit., pp. 4‑9

[^12]: Al‑Ghazali, Ihya Ulum al‑Din, p. 53.

[^13]: Shibli, op. cit., p. 59.

[^14]: Al‑Ash'ari, al‑Ibanah, p. 47.

[^15]: Idem., al‑Maqalat, p. 291.

[^16]: Abu al‑\`Ala, Sharh‑i Mawaqif, p. 571.

[^17]: Ibid., .pp. 581‑82.

[^18]: Al‑Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 51.

[^19]: Al‑Ash’ari, al‑Maqalat, p. 484.

[^20]: Ibid., .p. 291.

[^21]: Al‑Ash’ari, al‑Ibanah, p. 9.

[^22]: Idem, al‑Maqalat,, pp. 539‑54:

[^23]: Ibid., p. 542.

[^24]: Abu al‑\`Ala, op. cit., p. 625.

[^25]: Al‑Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 53.

[^26]: Shibli, op. cit., p. 72.

[^27]: Qadi ‘Add and Sayyid Sharif, Mawaqif, vol. IV, p. 182; Musallam
al-Thubut, p. 114.

[^28]: Baihaqi, Kitab al‑Asma' wal‑Sifat, p. 198.

[^29]: Qadi \`Add and Sayyid Sharif, op. cit., p. 601.

[^30]: Sharh‑i Mawaqif, p. 602; al‑Ibanah, pp.23‑42.

[^31]: Al‑Maqalat, p. 292.

[^32]: Dhahabi, Mizan al‑I\`tidal (Allahabad edition), pp. 179‑93;
al‑Ash'ari, al -Maqalat, pp. 582‑602.

[^33]: Al‑Ibanah, p. 9.

[^34]: Shibli, op. cit., p. 63.

[^35]: Sharh‑i Mawaqif, pp. 610‑24.

[^36]: Al‑Ibanah, pp. 13‑20.

[^37]: Al‑Maqalat, p. 252; Shibli, \`Ilm al‑Kalam, p. 59.

[^38]: Al Maqalat, p. 43.

[^39]: Al‑Shahrastani, op. cit., p. 53.

[^40]: Mas'udi, Muruj al‑Dhahab.

[^41]: Shibli, op,.cit., p. 57; Iqbal, op. cit., p. 55.

[^42]: Macdonald, Development of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and
Constitutional Theory, pp. 200‑201.

[^43]: Sharh‑i Mawaqif, p. 15.

[^44]: Shibli, op. cit., pp. 87, 88.

[^45]: Sharh‑i Mawaqif, p. 15.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 128.

[^47]: Al‑Maqamat, p. 520.

[^48]: Sharh‑i Mawaqif, p. 109.

[^49]: Iqbal; op. cit., p. 57.

[^50]: Sharh‑i Mawaqif, p. 262; al‑Maqalat, p. 539

[^51]: Shibli, op. cit., p. 64.

[^52]: Ibid.. p. 92.

[^53]: Ibn Khallikan, vol. I, p. 312.

[^54]: Iqbal, op. cit., p. 59.

[^55]: Shibli, op. cit.,p 66.


