Chapter 35: Al-Farabi
=====================

A. Society And Its Goal
-----------------------

An account of the life and philosophical thought of Abu Nasr Mohammad
ibn Tarkhan al-Farabi (d. 339/950) has already been given in a previous
chapter. The reader must have noted that, while recasting the
philosophical views of Plato, Aristotle, and other Greek thinkers,
al-Farabi always keeps in view the Islamic tenets which have formed the
inner links of his writings. In his political philosophy, he has
followed the same line. Under the influence of Plato and Aristotle he
evolves his own system which markedly differs from the system of the
Greeks, the Iranians, as well as the Indians.

This will be shown in these pages which have been prepared in the light
of 1) *Kitab Ara’ Ahal al-Madinat al-Fadilah* (Book on the Views of the
People of the Excellent State), 2) *Kitab al-Siyasat al-Madaniyyah*
(Book on Caution on the Path of Administration), 3) *Kitab Tahsil
al-Sa‘adah* (Book on the Achievement of Happiness, 4) *Kitab al-Tanbih
‘ala Sabil al-Sa‘addah* (Book on Caution on the path of Happiness), and
5) the Bodleian manuscript of his *Fusul al-Madini* (Chapters on the
Civilian).

### The City State

According to al-Farabi, the City State *(Madinah)* and the Family State
are places that contain inhabitants, no matter whether their dwellings
are constructed of wood, mud, wool or hair.[^1]

The house or family is limited to only four relationships: husband and
wife, master and slave, father and son, and property and proprietor. He
who makes them unite in co-operation and aims at providing for them an
abode with the best facilities and maintenance, is called the master of
the family. He is in the house what the administrator of the city is in
the city.[^2]

### Necessity of Society

Men are naturally so constituted that they need many things for their
best achievements. Hence, they need mutual help and co-operation –
everyone doing his best for obtaining a particular kind of object. Thus,
by uniting their individual efforts for different objects they organize
different societies.[^3]

The greater the society, the better are the facilities it achieves for
its individuals. The grouping of men is not confined to a house. It
extends to lanes, localities, villages, towns, and cities. Men work for
the welfare of society and in the long run serve the State. The people
living in a state are called a nation *(Ummah)*. One nation can be
distinguished from another by natural character, temperament, habits,
and language.[^4]

Human societies are either perfect or imperfect. The perfect society may
be great, middling, or small. The great human society is the one
consisting of several nations uniting themselves in one unity and
helping one another. The middling one is the society of one nation in a
part of the world, and the small is the society of the people of a
city.[^5]

The imperfect society is that of the people of a village, a locality, a
lane, or a house, the last being the smallest.

Now, the highest good and perfection are primarily achieved through
volition and will. Similarly, evil finds its scope by volition and will.
The City-State can, therefore, develop by mutual help and efforts to
attain some evil purpose or to attain happiness. The city in which the
members of the society co-operate to attain happiness is in reality the
ideal City-State *(al-madinat al-fadilah)*, the society, the ideal
society, and the nation.[^6] In this State the citizens help one another
to achieve qualities of the greatest life perpetually.[^7] But if they
help one another to obtain the bare necessities of life and its
preservation, this City-State is evidently the necessary State.[^8]

### How to Achieve Happiness

Al-Farabi speaks of happiness both of this world and hereafter. He
explains that when human factors or the four excellences – speculative
virtues *(al-jada’il al-nazariyyah)*, theoretical virtues *(jada’il
al-fikriyyah)*, the moral virtues *(fada’il al-khuluqiyyah)*, and the
practical arts *(al-sana‘at al-‘amaliyyah)* – form the qualities of a
nation or of the people of a city, their worldly happiness in this life
and the lasting happiness in the next are insured.

Speculative virtues *(al-fuda’il al-nazariyyah)* represent those
sciences which aim at the highest object, knowledge of existing things
including all their requirements. These sciences are either innate in
man, or they are achieved by effort and learning.[^9]

Now, the principal factors of existing bodies and accidents, as
explained by al-Farabi, are of six kinds with six grades: The first
cause in the first grade, the secondary causes in the second grade,
active intellect in the third grade, soul in the fourth grade, form in
the fifth grade, and matter in the sixth grade. The first grade is
confined to one individual only; it cannot have more than one. But other
grades can have more than one occupant. Out of this six, three, viz. the
first cause, the secondary cause, and the active intellect, are neither
bodies nor are they contained in bodies. The other three: soul, form and
matter are not bodies, but exist in bodies.

As for bodies, they are of six types: the heavenly bodies, rational
animals, irrational animals, plants, minerals and the four elements. All
these six bodies as a whole form the universe. The first to be believed
in is God, the Almighty, who is the immediate cause of the existence of
the secondary causes and the active intellect. The secondary causes are
the causes of the existence of heavenly bodies and their substance. The
secondary causes should be called the spirits, the angels, and so on.

The function of the active intellect is to attend the rational animal,
man, and to enable him to attain the highest perfection he can reach.
The highest perfect of man consists in his highest happiness which he
achieves when he raises himself to the stage of the active intellect by
abstracting himself from bodies, matter, and accidents, and continues to
enjoy this perfection perpetually. In essence, the active intellect is
one but in gradation it includes all that is purified from the rational
animal and attains to happiness. The active intellect should be called
the Holy Spirit *(al-ruh al-Amin* or *al-Ruh al-Qudus)* or the like and
its grades be called the spiritual realm *(al-malakut)* or the like.

Souls have three grades: souls of celestial bodies, souls of the
rational animal, and souls of the irrational animals. The souls of the
rational animal are the rational faculty, the appetitive faculty, the
imaginative faculty, and the perceiving faculty. The rational faculty
equips man with sciences and arts, and enables him to distinguish good
from evil manners and actions. Through this faculty man inclines to do
good and avoid evil and realizes the useful, the harmful, the pleasant
and the unpleasant.[^10]

1) The rational faculty is either speculative or practical; the first is
that through which man obtains the knowledge of all that he is not at
all supposed to know by his own effort, and the second is that through
which he knows all that he can know if he wills it so. The second is
again divided into that through which arts and crafts are obtained
*(mahaniyyah)*, and that through which imagination and insight
concerning doing or not doing a thing are achieved *(marwiyyah)*.

2) The appetitive faculty manifests the human inclination of wanting
something or running away from something, of desiring or not desiring
something, of giving preference to something or avoiding something. All
psychological feelings – hatred, affection, love, friendship, enmity,
fear, anger, passion, mercy, etc. – are expressed by this faculty.

3) The faculty of imagination retains the impression of the sensible
objects after they have disappeared from sense-perception, unites some
of them with some others, or separates some of them from some others
both in wakefulness and sleep producing true or false propositions. This
faculty also perceives the useful, harmful, pleasant, and unpleasant
manners and action.

4) The faculty of sense-perception obviously perceives the sensible
through the five sense-organs – the pleasant and the unpleasant, without
discriminating between the harmful and the useful, and without
distinguishing good from evil.
The three faculties other than the rational faculty are available to
animals, imaginative faculty serving them as the rational faculty serves
man. Some animals, however, possess only the sensible and the appetitive
faculties.

The celestial souls are different from the animal souls in so far as the
former are actual souls that understand the intelligible, whereas the
latter are at first potential and then become actual.[^11]

Having explained the gradation of cosmos and the relation that the
different grades have with the First, al-Farabi emphasizes the point
that the whole cosmos depends for its existence on God, the First
Necessary Being.

Man, however, understands and realizes happiness only through the
speculative rational faculty. The imaginative and the sensitive
faculties help the rational faculty in moving man towards those actions
which lead to happiness. The good is characterized as “voluntary.” But
if the rational faculty feels happiness only by making an effort to
perceive it, while other faculties do not perceive it, then sometimes
man considers the pleasant and the useful to the ultimate ends of life.

Again, when one becomes indifferent or slow in accomplishing the
sensitive rational part and does not feel happiness in doing so, one
hastens to attain to it by exercising one’s appetitive faculty in aiming
at and making all effort to achieve things other than happiness, and in
this effort one is assisted also by the faculties of imagination and
sense-perception, and produces what may be rightly called voluntary
evil.

Similarly, he produces only evil who attains to happiness which he does
not recognize as his aim, does not desire it, or desires it with the
faint desire, and adopts something other than happiness at his end, and
exerts all his faculties to achieve that end.[^12]

Since man has been created to achieve happiness which is the highest
perfection that remains perpetually, it is possible to obtain it through
the active intellect which gives primarily the first intelligible or the
first objects of knowledge. But men differ in their capacity to receive
the primary intelligible.

B. Human Nature
---------------

Human nature is not the same in all individuals; it varies in accordance
with the physical qualities of individuals. Some can easily grasp the
first intelligible or the first known things, some do not receive them
directly. Again, some of them do not receive anything from the first
intelligible in a natural way at all, and some others receive them in a
way different from theirs. There are still others who receive them in
respect of their own selves.

Human beings in this third group are free from defect, their nature
being homogeneous, prepared to receive intelligible which are common to
them and through which they advance to the affairs and actions that are
common to them. After this stage, they differ from one another, as some
receive those intelligible which are peculiar to them, and are not
common to others. Those belonging to this group endeavour towards a
particular genus without allowing anything else to share it.

Similarly, human beings excel one another in the faculties through which
they derive the objects of one genus, some having the ability of
deriving all the individuals of a genus and others perceiving only a few
individuals thereof. Again, sometimes it so happens that two individuals
do not prove to be equal in their capacity of deriving the external
objects, one being swift and the other slow, or one being swift in
deriving the genus of the greatest excellence and the other in deriving
the basest of the genus. It is also possible that both are equal in
power, but one is able enough to teach what one has derived, and can
offer guidance to others, but the other has no such power of teaching
and guiding others. They also differ in performing corporeal deeds.

Natural dispositions do not oppose one another, nor do they insist on
action, but they facilitate performance, and are not moved by anything
external towards opposite actions. Even if they are moved in opposite
directions they resist and offer hindrance.

All these natural dispositions require a suitable teacher. Hence, they
are trained in matters that prepare them to be in their highest or
nearly highest perfection. Some are trained in mean things which produce
excellent actions from a mean genus.[^13]

People have different calibres by nature, and they vary in ranks in
accordance with the ranks in genus, arts, and sciences for which they
have naturally been prepared. They also differ in the capacity of
training and giving guidance. Some are stronger than others, and, hence,
they differ in receiving and training. For some can be trained for a
part of the genus only. Now, he who is an expert in imparting training
and guidance is called the *chief*.[^14]

C. Education
------------

Man has been created to attain to the highest happiness *(sa‘ddah)*. He
should, therefore, know what happiness is and should make it the aim of
his life. He, then, needs to know those factors and arts through which
he can achieve happiness. He will have to exercise all those arts which
will enable him to attain to it. But since it has been explained that
human individuals differ in nature, it is not in the nature of every man
to know happiness or those factors which enable him to reach it by
himself. He, therefore, needs a teacher, a guide.

Some people require less guidance and teaching, and some need more. It
is also not necessary that one should learn all that one is taught, or
receive all the guidance one is given. Hence, some people require
constant teaching and guidance to urge them to do what they have been
taught to do.[^15]

Teaching *(ta‘lim)* means creating speculative excellences in nations
and cities, while upbringing *(tadib)* is the method of creating and
developing moral virtues and scientific arts in nations. Teaching is
possible only be expressing; *tadib* or discipline is to make nations
and citizens habituated to the deeds done through scientific habits.
That is, their resolutions will move them to perform those actions, so
much so that these resolutions will dominate their souls, and they will
become devoted to those actions.

To exert one’s resolution to do something is possible either by
expression or by performance. While al-Farabi agrees with Plato in the
system of education and in learning from childhood, he emphasizes that
speculative sciences are learned either by kings and leaders *(imams)*
or by those who preserve these sciences and teach kings and leaders in
several ways. First of all, they should know the primary axioms, and the
first known object in every genus of speculative sciences, and then they
should know the various forms of premises and their arrangement through
which they can lead to conclusions. After they have completed their
education, and have accustomed themselves to logical methods, they will
be made kings in each of the partial States, and will be promoted little
by little until the stage of the great State is achieved.

Speculative sciences must be taught through convincing methods. Men very
often understand these sciences by a process of thinking, because they
understand them after realizing many known principles which are not
corporeal. The common people can understand their images by the method
of convincing only.

The teacher should also distinguish what should be imparted to a
particular nation and how to make it common to all nations or to all the
people of every city. He should also know what should be taught to the
entire nation, or city, and what only to a particular group in the city.
All these distinctions can be made by the imaginative virtue which
enables one to achieve the speculative virtues.

As for practical virtues and practical arts, people must habituate
themselves to practising them by two methods. First, the teacher should
train them by convincing and effective expressions to engender the
values of these actions and habits perfectly in their hearts so that
their convictions may move them to perform them submissively. Secondly,
he should use the method of force which is employed for the disobedient
and revolutionary citizens, and those who do not move to righteousness
meekly on their own accord or by persuasion.[^16]

The virtuous teachers and artists can be divided into two groups in
respect of the above-mentioned two methods – one group teaching and
training those who are obedient, the other group teaching the
disobedient. In both respects, the king is the teacher of nations whom
he trains to achieve virtues, and the master of the house is the teacher
of the people of the house. Similar is the case with one who is in
charge of children or the youth.[^17]

### The Imaginative Virtue

The imaginative virtue enables a man to think of an exceedingly useful
purpose which is common to the comity of nations, to a nation, or to a
city. This virtue is called the civil imaginative virtue. But if this
virtue is common to a group of citizens or the members of a house only,
then it is ascribed to that particular group and is called family
imaginative virtue, or State imaginative virtue. Sometimes this virtue
is further divided. Since it is derived from what is most useful and
beautiful in respect of a particular art or profession for a limited
time, it is divided into the various kinds of arts and professions. The
most accomplished one in this virtue is the strongest one who succeeds
in creating a great State.

The imaginative virtue confined to different aspects of the State –
defence, finance, and so on – is followed by moral virtue which is
related to the imaginative virtue as the imaginative virtue is related
to different arts, professions, or families. This virtue is, first of
all, needed for organizing and maintaining the army. The moral virtue
alone impels the warriors to display their bravery, and the best kind of
valour. It also urges citizens to earn the wealth of the State with
honesty and legal means. In fact, it plays a major role in all
departments of the State.[^18]

D. The Chief
------------

It is evident that every man cannot be the chief. People differ in their
intellectual capacity, in physical strength, in the exercise of virtuous
deeds, and in the acquisition of excellent habits of thinking, feeling,
willing, and doing. In every department of life and arts the strongest
person, of excellent manners, who also knows, acts, and directs, is the
chief of that department, the rest being the subjects. The chief is
either one of the first rank who is not sub-servient to anyone, or he is
of the second rank, dominating some, and being dominated by some others.
Such ranks develop in relation to the forms of art, e.g. cultivation,
trade, medical profession, or in respect of all kinds of human
beings.[^19]

The first chief in general is he who needs no help from anyone. Sciences
and arts are his property in actuality, and he needs no guidance from
any person in any respect.[^20]

The first chief of the excellent (ideal) city is one who is chief in all
respects. His profession must excel all the rest in attaining to
perfection, and in intending by all actions of the ideal state to
achieve the highest happiness. This man is not sub-servient to any
other. He is a man accomplished in all virtues, and, therefore, he is
intellect and intelligible in actuality, having his imaginative faculty
naturally so perfected as to be able to receive particulars from the
active intellect either in themselves, or as images in sleep, or in
wakeful state. His passive intellect receives the intelligible in
complete perfection, so that nothing which has become an intellect in
actuality is denied to him.

Whosoever invests his passive intellect with intelligibles becomes
intellect and intelligible in actuality. His understanding of himself is
more perfect, more separable from matter, nearer to the active
intellect, and is called the derived intellect. This derived intellect
has a rank between the passive and the active intellect. The passive
intellect is, therefore, like matter and sub-stratum for the derived
intellect which is like matter and sub-stratum for the active
intellect.[^21]

The rational faculty[^22] which is the natural form, supplies material
sub-stratum for the passive intellect and makes it the actual intellect.
The actual intellect is the first stage at which man is called man and
being human becomes common to all human beings. When the passive
intellect and the natural form become one in the same way as the
composite of matter and form becomes one and the same thing, and man
receives human form, the actual intellect is achieved; and when the
natural form becomes the matter of the passive intellect which has thus
becomes the actual intellect, it becomes the matter of the derived
intellect, which in its turn becomes the matter of the active intellect,
and all of these become like one thing, then man enjoys the presence of
the active intellect in himself.

If the active intellect is present in both parts of the rational faculty
– the speculative and the practical – then man receives revelation in
his imaginative faculty. Allah, the Exalted and Sublime, sends
revelation to him through the active intellect. If the active intellect
extends what it receives from Allah to his passive intellect through his
derived intellect and then to his imaginative faculty, then man, through
what descends upon his passive intellect, becomes a wise philosopher and
possessor of perfect understanding, and through what descends upon his
imaginative faculty, a prophet, a warner against what is going to take
place, and an informer of what particulars exist, as he understands them
for God. This man is in the most perfect stage of humanity and in the
highest place of blessing, his soul being perfect, united with the
active intellect in the manner described. This the man who is aware of
every action that would enable one to achieve grace and is the chief,
the leader, who cannot be led by anybody else.

E. Characteristics Of The Chief Of The Ideal State
--------------------------------------------------

The Imam or the chief of the ideal State is the chief of the ideal
nation, and for the matter of that, of the whole inhabited part of the
earth. This position is only attained by a man who naturally possesses
the following 12 characteristics as his second nature:

1. Sound health, and perfect organs, performing their functions with
ease and facility and in harmony will faculties.

2. Intelligence and sagacity, so as to be able to grasp the intention of
a speaker in his particular situations and circumstances.

3. Good memory, so as to retain in his mind all that he understands,
sees, hears, and perceives.

4. Prudence and talent, to understand a problem from the perspective in
which it has been presented to him.

5. Eloquence, so that his tongue may assist him in expressing in a
perfect manner all that is in his mind.

6. Devotion to education and learning, and submission to receive
knowledge with ease without feeling any annoyance.

7. No greed for food, drink and sex, avoidance of play, and dislike of
pleasures caused by these.

8. Friendliness towards truth and truthful persons and condemnation of
falsehood and those who are inclined to falsehood.

9. Bigness of heart, loving nobility, and natural magnanimity without
any trace of meanness.

10. Indifference to *dirham* and *dinar* and other forms of wealth.

11. Devotion by nature to justice and just people, abhorrence of
injustice and oppression and unjust and oppressive people, offering half
of one’s possessions and those of one’s family to help the oppressed,
and urging others to do the same, helping everything good and beautiful,
and being easy to bend to justice but difficult to oppression and evil.

12. Strong resolution, courage, and promptitude without any sign of fear
or psychological weakness.

If a person possessed of these qualities happens to live in an ideal
State he is the chief.

It is, however, impossible to have all these qualities in one man.
People are scarcely equipped with all of them. If no one having these
qualities is found in the State, the laws promulgated by the former
chief or his successors should be kept in force.

The second chief who succeeds the first should fulfil at least the
following six requirements:

1. He should be wise and philosophical.

2. Learned and abreast with the laws, customs, rites and rituals adopted
by his predecessor to discharge the function of the ideal State with all
perfection.

3. He should be an expert in deriving principles in case he does not
find any law.

4. He should be far-sighted, possessing an insight to frame rules and
regulations in accordance with the conditions and circumstances he finds
himself in, and capable of keeping up the reforms he introduces.

5. He should also be well experienced and eloquent in giving directions
to urge the people to follow him in accordance with the *Shari‘ah*.

6. In addition, he should be skilful in physical display of exercises
needed in warfare, and in the use of arms, ammunition, and other
equipments.

In other words, this ruler must have insight to derive inferences from
the possessed records of the customs, rites, and rituals, and accurate
opinion in understanding the events that take place and may increase the
prosperity of the State. He must have the power to convince others and
struggle hard. This sovereign is called the king of the tradition, and
the State is called *al-mulk al-sunnah* the country of traditions and
customs.

If all the conditions described for the chief are not found in one man,
and are available in two persons – one wise and the other possessing
other qualities – then both will be the chiefs of the State. If,
however, these conditions are scattered in a group of people agreeable
to work together, then these members will be the ideal chiefs. But if
wisdom does not form a part of the State while other conditions are
fulfilled entirely, the city will be best without a sovereign, but it
will be exposed to destruction. The State without a philosopher to whom
it may be entrusted will perish in no time.[^23]

F. The Ideal State
------------------

The sovereigns of an ideal State who succeed one another are all like
one soul, as if there were one king who continued all the time. Similar
is the case with a group of people who administer the State together at
a time in one or more than one city. The whole group is just like one
sovereign, their souls being like one soul. Uniformity is found in every
stage and in every part of the State, and people flourishing at
different times look as they were one soul working at all times in the
same way. If there is continuity and harmony at a particular stage, even
different groups of people, whether of one or more than one State, would
appear as one soul.[^24]

The people of the ideal State have something common to all of them in
their learning and acting, but different groups of people belonging to
different ranks and stages have some sciences and deeds peculiar to
them. Through both of these, people achieve happiness, and by displaying
these they obtain an ideal physical form. This form grows stronger and
stronger and better and better by constant performance of those deeds.
For example, the art of writing has some pre-requisite performances. The
more they are executed by the expert, the greater is the excellence of
his art. Not only that, the scribe enjoys his art by repeating his
exercises, and grows in love for it.

The same is the case with happiness, which increases with the constant
practice of deeds that lead to it. The soul grows in happiness to such a
degree that it becomes free from matter. It does not perish with matter,
for it is no longer required for its existence. At this stage, being
separated from matter, the soul frees itself from all corporeal
qualities so much so that even movement and rest cannot be ascribed to
it. As this state is very unusual, it is very difficult to form an idea
of it.

G. Arts And Blessings
---------------------

As art has three grades, happiness or bliss is also divided into three
grades in respect of species, quality, and quantity. There are such
species of art as weaving, cloth-trading, perfumery, and sweeping, or as
dancing, jurisprudence, philosophy, and rhetoric. Thus, arts excel one
another in different species.

The artists of the same art excel one another in skill and efficiency.
Two scribes, for example, differ in their skill, because, besides a good
hand, their art requires some knowledge of lexicon, rhetoric, and
arithmetic. Now, one may be an expert in good hand and rhetoric, another
in good hand, lexicon, and rhetoric, and yet another in all the four
arts. Again, two scribes may differ in the quality of their art, for one
of them maybe better than the other. Similarly, happiness excels in
species, quantity, and quality.

The people of an imperfect State have but little virtue. They have evil
psychical forms and their actions are not good. The greater their
activity, the more does their profession display defect and
imperfection. In consequence, they become ill inasmuch as they do not
enjoy edibles, and become annoyed with beautiful and excellent things.
Some of them even regard themselves as healthy and perfect, though they
are actually not so, and do not pay any heed to the advice of the
physician or the well-wisher.

H. Inhabitants Of The Ideal State
---------------------------------

The excellent or the ideal State consists of five kinds of people: the
excellent, the linguists, the secluded, the struggling, and the steady.
The excellent people are the philosophers, the intellectuals, and “the
People of Opinion” in great affairs. As for linguists, they are the
orators, speakers, poets, musicians, writers, and the like. The secluded
people are the mathematicians, statisticians, physicians, astronomers,
and the like. The struggling people are the fighters, the defenders, and
all those who take their place. The steady are those who earn money in
the city, for example cultivators, traders, and those engaged in other
pursuits.[^25]

I. Imperfect States
-------------------

The excellent State as explained above is the State administered by the
best and most talented who aim at prosperity and happiness for all and
sundry. If its constitution fails to provide the people with prosperity,
and the rulers do not possess the qualities of ideal rulers, then the
State ceases to be excellent and is called the evil-doing State
*(al-madinat al-fasiqah)*, the ignorant state *(al-madinat al-jahilah)*
or the astray going State *(al-madinat al-dallah)*. People in the evil
doing State are like weeds in a field. They are no better than savages
and can have no organization worthy of a State.[^26]

As for the people of the ignorant State, they possess their own
constitution and culture. But their civic organization varies. They look
after the necessities of life in a necessary State; organize the society
of the contemptible in the contemptible State, the society of the vile
in the vile State, the society of the extravagant in the extravagant
State, the society of the dominant in the dominant State, or the society
of the free in the social State.

The necessary organization is the State which endeavours to earn what is
evidently necessary for the constitution and the upkeep of the
body.[^27] The State of the contemptible is the one which tries to
achieve wealth in abundance, and the money which they hoard due to the
love of wealth and niggardliness is spent only for the needs of the
body. The vile state broods over sensuous pleasures and achieves the
best means for the sake of pleasure only. This State is the most coveted
one.

The extravagant State is the organization of the profusely generous in
which the individuals help one another to reach nobility in expression
and action. The people of this State are called generous either by
themselves or by the people of other States.[^28] This is the best State
among all the States of the ignorant.

The state of the dominant people tries to over-power others in power and
wealth; they shed blood, subjugate others, and indulge in all sorts of
pleasures. The State of the dominant excels the State of the generous in
showing power.[^29] As for the social State, everybody is free in it to
do whatever he likes, and believes that no man has any superiority over
others by any means. But independence often leads to extremes, and,
therefore, there arise in this State different rites and rituals,
customs and manners, and people are misled by evil propensities. Thus,
this State splits into different groups and parties.

In all these States there is always unrest prevailing among the people,
as everybody tries to become the chief and, by virtue of his wits, to
lead the State of prosperity and happiness.

The evil doing States differ from the States mentioned above in so far
as the people of these States believe in the principles held and the
forms of happiness conceived by the people of the excellent State, and
also invite others to do the same, but they themselves do nothing to
achieve their object, nor do they try by action to attain the happiness
they believe in. On the contrary, they incline to their own whims and
propensities, that is to say, they like to enjoy power, nobility, and
domination, and direct their actions towards their achievement. In
activities, these States are like the States of the ignorant. In
manners, their peoples resemble the peoples of the said States. The
peoples of these two States differ only in belief. None of these states
ever achieve happiness and prosperity.

The astray going States are those whose people suffer from some
delusion. They adopt such principles, actions, and deeds as appear to
them to be those of the excellent State, but in fact are not. The same
is true of their goal of happiness and prosperity which they conceive to
be so but which actually is not so.

The offspring of societies which develop in these States are of various
types and all of them aim at personal gain and victory and not at real
happiness and true prosperity.[^30]

J. Conclusion
-------------

According to al-Farabi, the chief of the state should be physically free
from all defects, and should have a sharp intellect, memory, and wit. He
should be devoted to sciences, truth-loving, and not easily upset by
difficulties, contented, without greed for things to eat, and
disinclined towards sensuous pleasures. He should abhor falsehood and
liars, be ambitious with lofty ideals, a lover of justice, without
thought of wealth or worldly position, and should have strong
resolution, boldness, and courage. Plato’s philosopher king has also
been described as truth loving, fond of the knowledge of existents, one
who keeps away from vice, is free-thinking, intelligent, sagacious,
witty, and ambitious. But the state of al-Farabi is international in
character.

While the State of Plato is only a City-State, that of al-Farabi can be
as vast as a World-State. Plato wants to entrust the affairs of the
State to a group of philosophers and names the organization
“aristocracy.” Al-Farabi not only calls the Head of State Imam but
identifies him with prophet. It is in the absence of the Imam or the
second chief who has the necessary qualities to follow the tradition of
the Imam that he entrusts the affairs of the State of the chief. It is,
therefore, not true to say that al-Farabi has based his theory entirely
on the *Republic* of Plato, or that he is simply Aristotelian in his
thought.

Bibliography
------------

Al-Farabi, *Fusul al-Madini*, Bodleain MS.; *Kitab Ara’ Ahl al-Madinat
al-Fadilah; Kitab al-Siyasat al-Madaniyyah Kitab Tahsil al-Sa‘adah;* M.
Horten, “Das Buch der Ringsteine Farabis mit dem Kommento des Emir
Isma‘il al-Hoseini al-Farani ubersetzt und erlautere,” *Beitruge zur
Geach. des Philosophie des Mittelalters*, Vol. 5, Munster, 1906, with a
bibliography; M. Steinschneider, “Al-Farabi des arabischen Philosophen
Leben and Schriften” in the *Memoires d’Acad, imperial des Sciences de
St. Perersbourg*, Vol. 13, No. 4, St. Petersbourg, 1869;

Dieterici, *Alfarabis Philosophische Abhandlungen*, Leiden, 1890,
(Abrabic text); Bronnle, *Alfarabi, Die Staateleitung*, Leiden, 1904; T.
J. de Boer, *The History of Philosophy in Islam*, English tr., London,
1903; Carra de Vaux, *Avicenne*, Paris, 1900; M. Worms, Die Lehre von
der Anfangslosigkeit der Welt,” *Beitrage zur Geasch. der Philosophic
des Mittelalters*, Vol. 3, Munster, 1900; Brockelman, *Geach. der arab.
Litt.*; R. P. Janssen, Youssef Karam, J. Chlala, *Al-Farabi: Idees des
habitants de la cite vertneuse*, Cairo, 1949.

[^1]: Al-Farabi, Fusul alp-Madini, Bodleian MS., Fol. 97a.

[^2]: Ibid., Fol. 97b

[^3]: Kitab Ara’ Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah, p. 60.

[^4]: Kitab al-Siyasat al-Madaniyyah, p. 39.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 39.

[^6]: Kitab Ar’ Ahl-Madinat al-Fidilah, p. 61.

[^7]: Fusul al-Madini, Bodleian MS., Fol. 98b.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Kitab Tahsil alp-Sa‘adah, p. 2

[^10]: Kitab al-Siyasah, pp. 3, 4.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 5.

[^12]: Ibid., pp. 43 – 44.

[^13]: Ibid., p. 46.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 47.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 48

[^16]: Kitab tasil al-Sa‘adah, pp. 29 – 31.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 31.

[^18]: Ibid., pp. 24 – 36.

[^19]: Kitab alpSiyasat, p. 48.

[^20]: Ibid.,p. 49

[^21]: Kitab Ara’ Ahl al-Madinat al-Fadilah, pp. 64 -65.

[^22]: Ibid., pp. 65, 66.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 67.

[^24]: Ibid., p. 70.

[^25]: Fusul al-Madini, Bodleian MS., pp. 40 – 41; (Proceedings of the
Fourth) Pakistan Philosophical Congress, p. 336.

[^26]: Kitab al-Siyasat, p. 57.

[^27]: Ibid., p. 58.

[^28]: Ibid., pp. 59 – 60.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 64.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 74.


