Chapter 36: Al-Mawardi
======================

A. Life And Works
-----------------

Abu al-Hassan al-Mawardi was born in Basrah (c. 364/974) which was then
one of the principal seats of learning and education in the Muslim
world. He, therefore, got all his education here and rose in literary
renown at an early age. He especially prepared himself for the judicial
profession and obtained an appointment in the State service. As a judge
he served at various places and was finally posted in Baghdad. In the
year 429/1037, the Caliph, al-Qadir, summoned four jurists representing
the four schools of Islamic Law to write a legal epitome. Al-Mawardi was
chosen to represent the Shafi‘ite school and he wrote *Kitab al-Iqna‘*;
al-Quduri produced his famous *al-Mukhtasar* for the Hanafites. The
other two books were of no importance.

The Caliph, however, recognized al-Mawardi’s work as the best and in
appreciation of his merit appointed him as the *Aqda al-Qudat*. This
designation was objected to by many leading jurists like Abu al-Tayyib,
al-Tabari, and al-Simyari, who said that it did not become anyone except
God. But al-Mawardi took no notice of these objections and retained the
designation until his death in 450/1058, because the same jurists had
previously approved the title of *Malik al-Muluk al-A‘zam* for Jalal
al-Daulah, the Buwaihid chief.

Although al-Mawardi was a staunch Sunnite and Shaf‘ite jurist, he had
the good fortune of being equally favoured by both the Buwaihids and
‘Abbasids. But the Shi‘ite Buwaihids favoured him out of diplomacy,
because he was often helpful in settling their everyday quarrels with
the palace, for, writes Yaqut, “He was held in great esteem by the
Buwaihid Sultans who deputed him to negotiate between them and their
opponents, and were pleased with his mediation, and affirmed his
settlements.”

Al-Mawardi was acclaimed as one of the ablest men of his age. He was not
only a distinguished judge but also a distinguished author. He wrote
mostly on law and politics. His well-known extant works are: *Kitab
al-Hawi, al-Iqna‘, Siyasut al-Mulk, Qawanin al-Wizarah, Adab al-Dunya
w-al-Din*, and *al-Ahkum al-Sultaniyyah*. But it is this last work on
which his fame chiefly rests. In Muslim history it is one the first
scientific treatises on political science and State administration. A
detailed discussion of this will be taken up in the following pages.

Here, a note of explanation seems to be necessary. Ibn Khallikan quotes
a report that none of al-Mawardi’s writings were published in his
life-time because the author had grave doubts as to whether he was
really honest and correct in his speculations. This report cannot be
accepted as true, particularly with reference to *al-Ahkam
al-Sultaniyyah*, because there exists another book with the same title
by Abu Ya‘la al-Farra’, who was a contemporary of al-Mawardi and who
died in 458/1066.

Abu Ya‘la’s book is almost an exact replica of al-Mawardi’s work so far
as its pattern and subjects of discussion are concerned. Even the
language and arguments are almost the same as in al-Mawardi in most
places. It is, therefore, certain that Abu Ya‘la had seen the published
work of al-Mawardi while the latter was still alive, because the dates
of their deaths are so approximate to each other and because it is not
proven that Abu Ya‘la had personal relations with al-Mawardi. This
conclusion is further strengthened by the fact that Yaqut, who died in
626/1229, does not mention this story, and the authority of ibn
Khallikan, who died in 681/1282, cannot be accepted in this matter.

B. Political Theory
-------------------

Al- Mawardi’s main political thought is embodied in his *al-Ahkam
al-Sultaniyyah*. Only a small portion of the work is, however, devoted
to political theory, the rest of it discusses the details of public
administration and rules of government. But his small portion is
extremely important because it is the first attempt in Muslim history to
evolve a comprehensive theory of the State and because it has left an
enduring influence on the course of Muslim political thought up to our
own day.

Further, although we know that al-Mawardi profited a good deal from
previous sources in the elaboration of his theory, for he says that it
is the epitome of the views of various schools of jurisprudence, we do
not posses in our hands today any sources in the elaboration of his
theory, for he says that it is the epitome of the views of various
schools of jurisprudence, we do not possess in our hands today any
source discussing comprehensively the problem of the Caliphate dating
back beyond the fifth/11th century. The *Usul al-Din* of ‘Abd al-Qahir
al-Baghdadi gives theologically a more copious discussion of the Imamate
than al-Mawardi’s book, but al-Baghdadi (d. 429/1037) was a contemporary
of al-Mawardi. Hence, the conclusion is that most of al-Mawardi’s ideas
are partly a heritage of the past and partly a clever manipulation of
the opinions current in his time.

A closer examination of his work, however, discloses that he is not a
mere recorder of facts handed down to him but a shrewd statesman and
diplomat. There is enough historical data to sanction the view that on
many fundamental questions al-Mawardi’s opinions were dictated by the
exigencies of his time and the special circumstances of his life. In the
preface of his *al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah* he writes,

“Since these principles of royalty are mainly concerned with the conduct
of rulers, and since the direct application of these principles to the
entire business of government prevents the rulers from an inquiry into
their true nature, and because these rulers are too engrossed in State
affairs and diplomacy, I have brought out a separate book discussing all
of them, in obedience to the behest of one whose allegiance is essential
in order that he may be informed of the different schools of law and may
know what the people owe to him so that he may demand its fulfillment,
and what he owes to them so he may fulfill it. [And he has asked to be
informed about these things] out of love for justice in his enactments
and decisions and for the sake of equity in his imposts and
rewards.”[^1]

The mention of authority in this passage refers to the Caliph,
especially because al-Mawardi had been raised to the high office of
*Aqda al-Qudat*,[^2] and represented the Caliph in his negotiations with
the Buwaihids.

Further, it is necessary to point out that the declining power of the
Buwaihids in the beginning of the fifth/11th century because of internal
conflicts and insurrections in the army and because of Mahmud of
Ghaznah’s solicitations for the ‘Abbasids, made the Caliph al-Qadir and
his son al-Qa’im aspire to regain the lost glory of their fore-fathers.
The first step in this direction was the legal definition and exposition
of the powers and prerogatives of the Caliph which had well-nigh been
forgotten and had fallen to oblivion.

The historical situation explains al-Mawardi’s efforts to propound a
theory of the caliphate in which everything depends on the authority of
the Caliph, in an age in which the prestige of the Caliphate had fallen
to its lowest ebb. Al-Mawardi’s endeavours have been supposed to be
directed to the theoretical discussion of an ideal State. This view is
however, untenable on account of the fact that al-Mawardi is, truly
speaking, not a philosopher, and is least interested in abstract
thinking. He is a jurist and builds on the opinions of his forbears,
gives a wider scope to these opinions, and uses his own wisdom to apply
them intelligently to the special conditions of his own times.

His greatest merit, therefore, lies in the fact that he abstains from
abstract speculation and correlates the opinions of the jurists to the
historical perspective of his age. Similarly, as already remarked, he is
not a mere compiler or interpreter and expresses views opposed to the
views of earlier authorities, or gives out opinions altogether original.

Now, it will be useful to pick up the main points in al-Mawardi’s theory
and compare them with the contentions of the ancient jurists, on the one
hand, and with the contemporary political conditions, on the other. This
will give us a true estimate of al-Mawardi’s achievements.

1. The institution of the Imamate is a necessary requirement of the
*Shari‘ah* and not of reason. The appointment of an imam by the
consensus of the Muslim community is obligatory.[^3] There is a similar
passage in al-Baghdadi,[^4] who remarks that this is al-Ash‘ari’s
opinion is opposed to the Mu‘tazilite view.

2. The Imamate is instituted by means of election. The Electoral College
shall consist of persons with special qualifications.[^5] Also, the
candidates for the Imamate must fulfil certain conditions.[^6] This
elective principle of the Imamate is obviously opposed to the Shi‘ite
claim of bequeathal or divine nomination. Al-Mawardi, however, does not
discuss the election of a licentious person as Imam. Al-Baghdadi says
that his election will be void, even if it has taken place through a
properly constituted Electoral College. Al-Mawardi’s omission is
deliberate, being a concession to the Buwaihids, who appointed the
Caliphs to suit their selfish ends.

3. The right of franchise is enjoyed not only by the people living in
the capital. The Caliph is, however, traditionally elected in the
capital because the death of the previous Caliph is first known there,
and political considerations require the immediate appointment of a new
Caliph, and also because most people possessing the necessary
qualifications for the Imamate generally reside there.[^7] This
principle was hotly contended by the Khawarij who believed in complete
democracy and universal franchise.

4. Among the seven conditions which according to al-Mawardi must be
fulfilled by a candidate, the seventh one, that is, the Quraishite
descent is very important. Al-Mawardi lays great stress on it and says
that if anyone objects to it on the ground that it excludes
non-Quraishites from the Caliphate, such an objection would not be
considered, because it was this Quraishite descent that was presented by
Abu Bakr as an argument for preference in the election of Saqifah Bani
Sa‘idah.[^8]

5. The Imam is appointed in one of two ways:[^9] (a) He may be elected
by the Electoral College, or (b) he may be nominated by the ruling Imam.

In the first case some scholars say the Imam must be elected by all the
members of the Electoral College in all the cities. Others oppose this
view and say that Abu Bakr was elected only by the citizens of Madinah.
Still others assert that only five persons are sufficient to elect the
Imam, as happened in the case of Abu Bakr and ‘Uthman. In al-Mawardi’s
opinion, even one person is enough to elect the Caliph.[^10] He cites
the tradition of ‘Abbas as evidence. ‘Abbas said to ‘Ali, “Stretch your
hand, I will sear my allegiance to you, and when people come to know
that the Prophet’s uncle has sworn his allegiance to his nephew, nobody
would object to your Imamate.” This opinion has also been corroborated
by al-Ash‘ari.[^11]

6. The above extreme opinion has been advocated by al-Mawardi to advance
another important opinion given in the next section, where he discusses
the case of two candidates equally qualified for the Imamate. He says
that the Electoral College may nominate anyone of the two as Imam
without assigning any reason.[^12]

7. The election of a less qualified person in the presence of a more
qualified person is perfectly legal, provided the former fulfils all the
conditions of the Imamate.[^13] It was this principle under which most
of the worthless caliphs took refuge. It was also directed against the
Shi‘ahs, who believe that an inferior person cannot have precedence over
a superior one. They coined this theory to assert that since ‘Ali and
his descendants in the Fatimid line were superior to the rest of
mankind, anyone who assumed the Caliphate power was a mere usurper. The
refutation of this dogma was essential to establish the above doctrine.
But al-Mawardi is not alone in this respect, for this is the agreed
opinion of Sunnite jurists and theologians.

8. If there is only one suitable candidate for the Imamate, he
automatically becomes the Imam, and election is required.[^14]
Al-Mawardi seems to be inclined to this view; the jurists and scholars,
however, assert that election must be held even if there is only one
candidate for it; otherwise the Imam cannot acquire legal status. This
insistence on election is obviously directed against the Shi‘ite theory
of divine appointment.

9. The existence of two Imams contemporaneously is illegal.[^15]
Al-Ash‘ari opposes this view and says that two Imams at a time are
possible if their territories are far-flung and widely separated by an
ocean, which hinders easy communication between the two. But al-Mawardi
insists in his view to rule out the Fatimids and the Umayyads of Spain.

C. Succession
-------------

1. The ruling Imam can nominate his successor. There is complete
consensus on this point in the Muslim community.[^16] The Muslims
accepted ‘Umar as caliph not on the *suggestion* of Abu Bakr but in
*obedience* to his order as Caliph.[^17] Similarly, when ‘Umar appointed
a limited council to elect his successor it was an order from the Imam
and there was no choice for the Muslims to do otherwise.[^18]

2. The Imam can nominate any suitable person as his successor, provided
he does not happen to be his father or son. The concurrence of the *ahl
al-hall w-al-‘aqd* is not necessary;[^19] but if he nominates his son,
the concurrence must be obtained.[^20] Also, he can nominate any other
relation without requiring the concurrence.[^21]

It was this theory of nomination that cut at the very root of democratic
ideals in Islamic polity. It has been persistently resorted to be every
Muslim ruler after the days of the pious Caliphate, to perpetuate
dynastic and despotic rule among the Muslim peoples. Thus, apparently
the structure of the Caliphate was maintained by the Umayyads, the
‘Abbisids, the Fatimids, and the Turks, but the spirit of Islamic
democracy was cast away with the shedding of the blood of ‘Uthman, the
third successor of the Prophet.

Al-Mawardi’s contention that Abu Bakr’s nomination of ‘Umar could not be
challenged by the Companions, for it was the valid enactment of a valid
Imam, is nothing but historical fiction having no basis in historical
fact. One of the earliest and most reliable authorities on that period,
ibn Qutaibah, reports in his *al-Imamah w-al-Siyasah* that when symptoms
of death approached Abu Bakr, he became very anxious as to who should
succeed him to the Caliphal authority.

After much deliberation he decided to nominate ‘Umar to succeed him. He
called ‘Uthman to his bedside and dictated to him the deed of
succession. When the news spread, people flocked to him from every
quarter and began to question his choice. Thereupon he said, “If God
asked me about this matter, I would tell Him that I appointed over them
one whom I considered to be the best of them.”

After this he ordered a general assembly of the people, and when they
gathered together, he addressed them and said, “If you so desire, you
may sit together and elect a person whom you like, but if you wish that
I should use my discretion in the matter on your behalf, then I assure
you by One other than whom there is no God, I will spare no pains in
doing you the best service.” He then stopped and wept and the people
wept with him and said, “You are the best and most informed amongst us,
so you choose for us.” And when the crowd dispersed he called for ‘Umar
and gave him the deed of succession and said, “Go to the people and
inform them that his is my suggestion, and ask them if they hear it and
obey it.” ‘Umar took that document and went to the people and addressed
them. They all said, “We are all ears and obedience to it.”[^22]

This testimony of ibn Qutaibah is most unequivocal and decisive. It
completely abrogates al-Mawardi’s theory of nomination. It is quite
obvious that Abu Bakr did not deprive the people of their democratic
right to elect the head of the State freely. He simply gave his personal
opinion. The people could accept his opinion as well as reject it. There
was no political bar in their way, no Caliphal decree to prevent the
exercise of their right of franchise.[^23]

Al-Mawardi’s second argument in support of his thesis that the limited
college of electors prescribed by ‘Umar had the sole right of nominating
the new Caliph,[^24] is nothing but a deliberate effort to interpret
ancient practice to justify later historical phenomena. In fact, ‘Umar
did nominate the limited council at the suggestion of ‘A’ishah to
prevent civil strife after his death.[^25] He knew full well that the
probable candidates for the Caliphate were the very people whom he had
nominated for it. Not only that, he was perfectly sure that either
‘Uthman or ‘Ali would be elected.[^26]

Therefore, to facilitate the new election he fixed a procedure that was
least pregnant with evil and the best guarantee against civil discord.
The stern warnings which he gave to the dissentient members of the
Electoral College and the strict directions which he issued about the
conduct of the election were but the last symbols of his great
over-riding authority over the hearts and minds of people, by means of
which he so wonderfully ruled half the world for 12 years. But he did
not lay down a permanent principle of Islamic polity, for this he could
not do, since there was no warrant for it in the Qur’an or the Sunnah.

Even Abu Bakr could not devise the theoretical foundations of the
Caliphate, for during the last moments of his life he said that the one
great regret he had was that he could not ask the Prophet to enlighten
him on three problems. Regarding two of these, he said, “I should have
asked who would succeed him in political power after him? If he
nominated anyone, nobody could challenge his nominee on this issue. And
I should have asked him whether the Ansars were entitled to any share in
political power.”[^27]

Umar’s arrangement was, therefore, dictated by purely prudential
considerations. A proof of this assertion is that he categorically
declared that the Ansars were not entitled to any share in the sovereign
power,[^28] although Abu Bakr was doubtful on this issue, and although
many of the later jurists did not accept ‘Umar’s ruling on this point.
The truth is that ‘Umar took this extra-ordinary step for the defence of
the State and not for the defence of a principle, for there was no clear
principle before him. Hence, the construction of a political theory out
of his ruling can be neither justified nor appreciated as an achievement
in political thought.

But al-Mawardi was not very concerned about theory. He was a leading
Sunnite legal doctor of the Shafi‘ite school, and was intimately
associated with the ‘Abbasids; hence, his chief interest lay in
emancipating the Sunnite Caliphate from the Shi‘ite tyranny of the
Buwaihids. This explains why he gave the stamp of validity to the
monarchical system of the ‘Abbasids. He had already before him the
precedent of the Umayyads. Moreover, the jurists had, by the force of
circumstances, reconciled themselves to the imperialistic order of the
day, and given it to the form and sanction of religious authority.

Al-Mawardi, therefore, found no difficulty in taking his cue from the
prevailing ideas of his time. His main contribution to Muslim political
thought lies in the transformation of these ideas into a system,
directly related to historical practice. He was not a visionary and
idealist like the jurists or the scholastics, and like them did not sit
to speculate a vacuum. He was a man of the world; he tried to solve its
problems as best as he could.

3. The nomination of a person as heir apparent becomes effective only
when he declares his consent to it. The Imam cannot withdraw the
nomination until there occurs in this heir apparent some important
change which invalidates him legally. So, also, an Imam cannot be
deposed until a similar change occurs in him.[^29] Now, these are only
logical deductions from the fundamentals of the *Shari‘ah* for there are
no historical precedents to vouch-safe them.

4. The Imam can appoint the Electoral College as well as the persons who
may contest for the Imamate.[^30] This opinion is based on the election
of ‘Uthman by means of a limited *shura* appointed by ‘Umar, the
derivation of a general principle out of it is certainly most dangerous
to sound polity and to the stability of the State. The piety, honesty,
intelligence, and statesmanship of ‘Umar could well be relied upon. The
same cannot be said of another personality after him in the Muslim
history.

Notwithstanding this, historians have held that ‘Umar was mistaken in
taking this step.[^31] It is a well-known fact that most of the members
of the *shura*, who came out unsuccessful in the contest, at once
started plotting against ‘Uthman and began to aspire for the
Caliphate.[^32] Apart from this historical fact, if the right of
nominating the electorate as well as the candidates is conceded to the
Imam, it is bound to make him absolute and despotic. In truth, it was
this theory that developed into divine right with ‘Alids and the
‘Abbasids. And it was this theory that throttled the growth of democracy
in Islamic polity.

5. The Imam can nominate two or more heirs apparent to succeed him one
after the other. The argument has been derived from the battle of Mutah,
in which the prophet appointed Zaid bin Harithah as the Commander of the
Muslim forces and said that if he fell in fighting he was to be
succeeded in command by Ja‘far bin Abi Talib who was to be succeeded by
‘Abd Allah bin Rawabah. If ibn Rawabah also fell, then the Muslims could
choose anyone from among themselves as their commander. Apparently, the
citation of this incident in support of a fundamental issue, like that
of the Caliphate, is but fake reasoning.[^33]

This practice of appointing two or more heirs apparent proved to be the
greatest political evil in Muslim polity. It often engendered palace
intrigues and gave rise to internecine wars and dynastic feuds.

D. Designation And Privileges
-----------------------------

1. When a person is duly elected as Imam, the people should entrust all
their affairs to him and must give him their unquestioning obedience.
The Imam may not consult them in the affairs of the State, yet they must
obey him.[^34]

2. The Imam may be addressed as the *Khalifat Allah*, but the majority
of jurists say that this title is forbidden, for no human being can
represent God on Earth, since man is mortal and imperfect. Hence the
Imam may either be a mere *Khalifah* or *Khalifat al-Rasul Allah*.[^35]
Once when Abu Bakr was addressed as *Khalifat Allah* he exclaimed, “Do
not address me as *Khalifat Allah* but as the *Khalifat al-Rasul
Allah*.”

E. Duties And Functions Of The Imam
-----------------------------------

The Imam has the following ten principle duties to perform:

1. The safeguard and defence of the established principles of religion
as understood and propounded by the consensus of ancient authorities. If
anyone innovates an opinion or becomes a sceptic, the Imam should
convince him of the real truth, correct him with proper arguments, and
make him obey the injunctions an prohibitions of the *Shari‘ah*, so that
the people at large may be saved from the evil effects of heresies.

This is undoubtedly the foremost duty of the Imam under the *Shari‘ah*.
But unfortunately it is under the cover of this pre-text that throughout
the last 13 centuries, adventurers and self-seekers have striven to
carve out political fortunes for themselves. The second civil war of
Muslims was fought by the Umayyads, the Hashimites, and the Zubairites
under the same pre-text.

When the ‘Abbasids, the Fatimids, and the Safawids came to power they
called themselves the Defenders of Faith, and crushed every political
dissentient in the name of religion. Even today there can be evinced a
great effervescence for religious revival in all the Muslim lands, but
everywhere the undertone is political, not religious.

Al-Mawardi’s enumeration of these duties, however, was very effective
and timely, since it came out as a stern warning to the Buwaihids, who
had over-powered the Caliph in Baghdad, and who professed a heretical
faith.

2. The dispensation of justice and disposal of all litigations in
accordance with the *Shari-ah*. The Imam should curb the strong from
riding over the weak and encourage the weak to take their due in face of
the strong.

3. The maintenance of law and order in the country to make it possible
for the people to lead a peaceful life, proceed in their economic
activities freely, and travel in the land without fear.

4. The enforcement of the criminal code of the Qur’an to ensure that the
people do not outrage the prohibitions of God, and that the fundamental
rights of men are not violated.

5. The defence of the frontiers against foreign invasions to guarantee
the security of life and property of Muslims and non-Muslims alike in
the Islamic State.

6. The organization and prosecution of religious war against those who
oppose Islam or refuse to enter the protection of the Islamic State as
non-Muslim subjects. The Imam is bound to be the covenant of God to
establish the supremacy of Islam over all other religions and faith.

7. The collection of *kharaj* and *zakat* taxes in accordance with the
laws of the *Shari‘ah* and the interpretation of the jurists, without
resorting to extortion by pressure.

8. The apportionment of allowances and stipends from the State treasury
*(Bait al-Mal)* to those who are entitled to them. This money should not
be expended with extravagance or stinginess, and must not be either
pre-paid or delayed.

9. The appointment of honest and sincere men to the principal offices of
State and to the treasure to secure sound and effective administration
and to safe-guard the finances of the State.

10. The Imam should personally look into and apprise himself of the
affairs of his dominions so that he may himself direct the national
policy and protect the interests of the people. He should not entrust
his responsibility to others and engross himself in luxury or religious
devotion.

And when the Imam has carried all these duties efficiently, the people
must offer him two things, obedience and help.

This enumeration of the ten-fold functions of the Imam is arbitrary.
Number ten has been chosen particularly because it is an auspicious and
mystical number. The notable fact here is that, while his predecessors
and successors lay great emphasis on the first two points, viz, the
safe-guard of religious principles and the dispensation of justice, as
the principal duties of the Imam, al-Mawardi lays the main stress on the
administrative responsibility for the carrying out of justice but also
the greatest social organization to help promote the corporate life of
men.

In other words, the management of the State machinery is of basic
importance to him. This explains why he devotes only one-tenth of his
book to the exposition of the theory of the Caliphate and uses the rest
of his work to elaborate the detailed apparatus of government which
hinges on the central authority of the Caliph.

The nebulous nature of the dispersion of State power had led to the
dreadful tussle between the Buwaihids and the ‘Abbasids. The Buwaihids,
who had no legal claim to sovereignty, and who had not clarified their
position, had long been intriguing to over-throw the Caliphate outright.
Al-Mawardi’s attempt, therefore, at defining in detail the
responsibility and scope of Caliphal powers in relation to normal
administration, was most plausible and a direct hit at the Buwaihids.

Further, he made his treatise an inviolable document by reinforcing it
with the argument of earlier historical practice, dating back to the
time of the Prophet, and by basing it on the opinions of the leading
jurists of Islam. It is significant to note that al-Mawardi hardly
quotes anywhere any of these jurists, but since he was the greatest
judge of Baghdad, his declaration in the preface was taken as sufficient
guarantee of his veracity. There is no ground to question his *bona
fides*, yet it would have been more commendable if he had given the
actual authorities.

F. Deposition Of The Imam
-------------------------

Al-Mawardi has given detailed consideration to the subject of an Imam’s
deposition. In the first place, arguing on the basis of legal deduction
from the fundamentals of the *Shari‘ah* he says that once a person is
elected as Imam, he cannot be removed from that office until there has
occurred some definite change in him.[^36] Then after discussing the
duties of the imam, he reverts to the subject and dilates on it at
length. He says that the Imam loses his title and authority on account
of one of the following reasons:

1. If there occurs a change in his moral status, technically known as
*‘adalah* (sense of justice). The moral change is of two kinds:

(a) The one connected with the body, that is, if he becomes a slave to
his inordinate desires and flouts openly the prohibitions of the
*Shari‘ah*. In such an event, a person can neither be elected as Imam
nor continue as such.[^37] Abu Ya‘la rejects this opinion and holds the
opposite view.[^38]
(b) The one connected with his faith, that is, if a person holds
opinions contrary to the established principles of religion, or holds
such twisted opinion as amount to an abrogation of the accepted
principles, he can neither be initiated as Imam nor continue to hold
that office.[^39] In this there is a clear denunciation of the stand of
Buwaihids and of the Shi‘ite and Fatimid claims to the Caliphate.

2. If there occurs a change in the person of the Imam. It is of three
kinds: loss of physical senses, loss of bodily organs, and loss of
ability to supervise and direct the affairs of the State.

(a) Among the defects which occur in the physical senses, the two most
important ones which preclude a person from election to the Imamate or
make unfit to continue in office are the loss of mental faculty and the
loss of eyesight. The first case is obvious and needs no comment. But
the second has had a profound bearing on the course of Muslim history.
The practice of putting out the eyes with hot iron to prevent a person
from wearing the imperial purple was undoubtedly borrowed from the
Byzantine Empire; the opinion of the Muslim jurists on the issue,
however, gave it an added importance as an instrument of tyranny in
Oriental lands.

The dreadful effect of this foul practice can be gauged from the fact
that about two dozen ‘Abbasid Caliphs were thus blinded to be dethroned
from the Caliphal seat. The juridical opinion referred to above is that
a blind person is unqualified to give witness or sit as a judge in a
court of law; he is, therefore, much more unqualified to serve as the
Head of the State.[^40]

(b) Loss of bodily organs. It is of various kinds. If it does not hinder
the performance of normal duties, and does not disfigure the features or
the external beauty of the body, it will be of no account.[^41]

In certain cases when the loss of organs renders a person helpless and
makes him incapable of doing anything, he can neither be elected as Imam
nor can he continue in that office. Such is the loss of the two hands or
of the two feet.

Al-Mawardi discusses the details of other losses too, but they are not
pertinent to our purpose here.

(c) The loss of personal ability to supervise and direct is of two
kinds:

(i) If the Imam is over-powered by one of his counsellors and
assistants, who appropriates all authority to himself, but does not
openly defy the Imam, the Imam will continue in his office, provided the
usurper rules in accordance with the injunctions of the *Shari‘ah*, and
in deference to the accepted norms of justice. This is to ensure that
the functions of the Imamate should continue to be performed, and that
the people do not fall prey to the ways of evil on account of the
non-enforcement of the laws of the *Shari‘ah*.[^42] But if his conduct
is opposed to the principles of religion and justice, he will not be
tolerated in that status, and the Imam shall have to seek the help of a
person who can oust the usurper and restore supreme authority to the
Caliph.[^43]

This principle has been elaborated by al-Mawardi with great care and
legal acumen. In the next chapter he takes it up again and discusses it
in full detail.[^44] This principle which had no sanction in ancient
authority or in the opinions of the jurists, was dictated by the force
of circumstances in which the ‘Abbasid Caliphate had been placed during
the two centuries preceding the death of al-Mawardi.

The Buwaihid usurpation in Baghdad and falling of the Caliphal power
into insignificance necessitated the evolution of a formula which suited
the exigencies of the times and covered the *de facto* relation that
existed between the Buwaihids and the ‘Abbasids. This was a clear
departure from the principle of the Caliphate enunciated by al-Mawardi
in the earlier part of his book. But he devised a *via media* to remove
this glaring contradiction.

If the absolute governor or the usurper *(Amir bi al-Istila’)* declares
his allegiance to the Caliph and promises to maintain the unity of the
Caliphate, enforces the laws of the *Shari‘ah* which cannot be let go by
default, and because of the unavoidable condition created by the act of
usurpation.[^45]

In this theory there is, on the one hand, an overt recognition of the
situation prevailing in Baghdad and, on the other an unconcealed warning
to the Buwaihids that if they transgressed their limits they could be
brought to book with the help of the Ghaznawid power which was an open
ally of the ‘Abbasid caliphate. In a passage, al-Mawardi says that in
case the usurper shows an uncompromising and rebellious attitude, the
Caliph can call in the help of one who can relieve him of the straits.
The person referred to is none but Mahmud of Ghaznah.

There is little doubt that al-Mawardi was influenced by the
circumstances of his environment in the enunciation of this theory, but
the deviation from the original principle completely nullified the true
conception of the Imamate as demonstrated in the days of the Caliph
‘Umar. Nay, it contributed directly to a political theory which
encouraged adventurous and ambitious men to impose them on the will of
the people with brute force and sheer might. Further, if it served as
one of the main incentives for the dismemberment of the ‘Abbasid Empire,
it also greatly influenced the suppression of democratic thought and
practice in the Muslim world. Al-Mawardi may have been well-intentioned
but the legacy he left completely changed the concept of Muslim polity
in the centuries that followed. And the charge that occurred was simply
un-Islamic, undemocratic and vicious.

(ii) If the Imam falls a prisoner to the hands of an enemy it will be
the duty of the entire Muslim people to endeavour to emancipate
him,[^46] and as long as there is any hope of his deliverance he will
continue as Imam and another person may be elected to officiate in his
absence. But if all hope is lost, he will be deemed to have relinquished
his office, and a new election shall take place.

If the Imam is captured by a Muslim rebel army, and the rebels have not
appointed an Imam of their own, the captured Imam shall continue to
command the loyalty of the people, and an acting Imam shall be appointed
by him, if possible, or by the Electoral College. But if the rebels have
appointed an Imam of their own, the existing Imam shall forfeit his
claim to the Imamate, and the responsible men *(ahl al-hall w-al-‘aqd)*
shall elect a new Imam according to their discretion.[^47] Al-Mawardi’s
wording in this passage is full of meaning. He means to say that a
victorious rebel leader does not automatically become the Imam.

G. Conclusion
-------------

Al-Mawardi’s great contribution to political thought was that he gave a
detailed account of the administrative machinery of the Government of
his time and in formulating his political theory he took full cognizance
of historical facts and, unlike the jurists and the scholastics, did not
indulge in empty speculation, but with all the good things that can be
said about al-Mawardi, he had one short-coming – he could not evolve a
philosophic conception of the State. He did not discuss the meaning,
scope, jurisdiction, and obligations of the State, gave no conception of
sovereignty, and were completely ignorant of the idea of a
constitutional democracy. Lack of constitutional theory not only reduced
the value of his work, but also adversely affected the later development
of Muslim Political thought.

Bibliography
------------

Al-Mawardi, *al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah*; al-Baghdadi, *Usul al-Dine*; ibn
Qutaibah, *al-Imamah w-al-Siyasah; Kitab al-Ma‘arif*; ibn Hisham,
*al-Sirat al-Nabawiyyah*; ibn Khallikan, *Wafayat al-A‘yan*, Cairo,
1299; Yaqut, *Irshad al-Arab*; al-Subki, *Tabaqat al-Shafi‘iyyah*; Rafiq
Bek, *Ashhar Mashahir al-Islam*; Wustenfeld, *Schafiiten*, No. 395; R.
Enger, *De vita et scriptis Mawerdii*, Bonn, 1851; Brockelmann, *GAL;
Kitab Mohammad b. Tumari Mahdi al-Muwahhidin*, ed. Luciani, Alger, 1903;
E. Tyan, *Le Califat Institutions du Droit Public Musulman*, Vol. 1,
Paris, 1954; E. I. J. Rosenthal, *Political Thought in Medieval Islam*,
Cambridge, 1958.

[^1]: Al-Mawardi, al-Akham al-Sultaniyyah, p.1.

[^2]: Literally “the greatest Judge,” but paradoxically enough the
office was sub-ordinate to that of the Qadi al-Qudat, the Chief Justice
(Yaqut, Vol. 5, p. 407).

[^3]: Al-Mawardi, op. cit., p. 3.

[^4]: Al-Baghdadi, Usul al-Din, p. 272.

[^5]: These qualifications are three: justice with all the conditions
pertaining to it, knowledge of religion and the interests and policy of
the nation, and wisdom (al-Mawardi, op. cit., p. 4).

[^6]: These conditions are: justice, learning, integrity of physical
senses, wisdom, bravery, and Quraishite descent (ibid., p. 5).

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 7.

[^11]: Al-Baghdadi, op. cit., pp. 275 – 77.

[^12]: Al-Mawardi, op, cit., p. 9.

[^13]: Ibid., p. 10.

[^14]: Ibid, pp. 10 - 11

[^15]: Ibid.. 11.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 13.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 14.

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 15.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Al-Imamah w-al-Siyasah, pp. 19 – 23.

[^23]: In one of his pilgrimage to Mecca ‘Umar heard a report that a
person was saying, “By God, if ‘Umar died I would declare my allegiance
to so and so, and by God, Abu Bakr’s election was certainly defective,
but it was made effective later on.” ‘Umar became enraged at this
report, and wanted to take immediate action, but at the advice of ‘Abd
al-Rahman bin ‘Auf, returned to Medina and ordered all the judges,
governors, and chiefs of the army to proceed to the capital. When all hd
come, a public assembly was held where the Caliph delivered one of the
most important addresses of his life. After saying many important things
on this occasion, he said, “Let not anyone be deceived to say that the
election of Abu Bakr was defective and that it became effective later.
And among you there is none like Abu Bakr towards whom the people may
look with love and reverence, therefore, if anyone of you swears
allegiance to a person without consulting the general body of Muslims,
such a person shall not be deemed as elected, and the likelihood is that
both these persons may be beheaded.” (Ibn Hisham, al-Sirat
al-Nabawiyyah, Vol. 4, pp. 308 – 09).

[^24]: Al-Mawardi, op. cit., pp. 13 – 14.

[^25]: Ibn Qutabibah, Kitab al-Ma‘arif, p. 23.

[^26]: Ibid., p. 25.

[^27]: Ibid., p. 19.

[^28]: Ibid., p.24.

[^29]: Al-Mawardi, op. cit., p. 16.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 21.

[^31]: Rafiq Bek, Ashhar Mashahir al-Islam, Vol. 1.

[^32]: Ibn Qutaibah, op, cit., p. 48.

[^33]: Al-Mawardi, op. cit., p. 22.

[^34]: Ibid., p-. 27.

[^35]: Ibid., pp. 27 – 28.

[^36]: Ibid., p. 16.

[^37]: Ibid., p. 31.

[^38]: Abu Ya‘la, p. 4.

[^39]: Al-Mawardi, op. cit., p. 32.

[^40]: Ibid., p. 33.

[^41]: Ibid., p. 35.

[^42]: Ibid., p. 37.

[^43]: Ibid., p. 38.

[^44]: Ibid., pp. 67 – 70.

[^45]: Ibid., p. 68.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 38.

[^47]: Ibid., p. 40.


