Chapter 38: Zizam Al-Mulk Tusi
==============================

Nizam al-Mulk Tusi was born in 408/1018[^1] and died in 485/1092. He
was not only a minister of the Saljuqs for the last 30 years of his
life, a scholar,[^2] and a patron of arts and sciences, but also the
founder[^3] of the famous university styled after his name the
*Nizamiyyah*.

He lived in an age which witnessed the lowest degradation of the
caliphate, following its transformation during a period of three
centuries,[^4] from a democracy into an autocracy and from autocracy
into a mere puppetry in the hands of powerful masters. That period also
saw the fall of the Ghaznawid Empire and the Buwaihid Kingdom, and the
rise of the Saljuqs after their victory over the Ghaznawids in 431/1040,
when their nomadic life changed into the life of a gigantic empire,
extending from the Oxus and Jaxartos to the Bosphorus. It was an age of
change and fusion of social and political ideas and institutions,
especially in that part of the Muslim world in which Nizam al-Mulk lived
and worked.

The rise of the Persian element in political power in the early period
of the ‘Abbasids was followed by a gradual revival of the Persian
political institutions under the patronage of the Samanids, the
Ghaznawids, and then of the Saljuqs. These institutions in their turn,
together with their theoretical foundations, came to be assimilated by
Muslim thought. For this assimilation, no battle of ideas was ever
fought, it came as a process of cultural development in which Nizam
al-Mulk stood as one of the representatives of Persian culture, with a
bias towards Islamic thought.

Nizam al-Mulk was not really his name. It was a title of honour
conferred upon him by his Saljuq master, Alp Arslan, after his
appointment as a minister. His name was Abu ‘Ali Hassan, and his
father’s name was Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali, who belonged to a family of
landowners *(dihqans)*[^5]of Radhkan,[^6] a small town in the suburb of
Tus where Nizam al-Mulk was born. In the days of the Ghaznawids his
father was appointed a tax-collector of Tus by Abu al-Fadl Suri, who was
the Governor of Khurasan.[^7]

His early education started with the study of Tradition *(Hadith)* and
jurisprudence *(Fiqh)*, and as his father wanted him to take up the
legal profession for his future career; he was put under the care of
‘Abd al-Samad Funduraji,[^8] who was a profound scholar of Law.[^9]

In the famous “Tale of the Three School Fellows,” it is related of him
that in his school days in Nishapur, where he was sent to attend the
lectures of Imam Muwaffaq, he made friends with two boys, who later
became eminent personalities. One was ‘Umar Khayyam, the great poet and
astronomer, and the other Hassan b. Sabbab, the founder of the
Batiniyyah sect of the Assassins. Research by the late Sayyid Sulaiman
Nadawi makes it unnecessary to discuss this controversial point[^10] of
Nizam al-Mulk’s life. This tale, he proves, is a fabrication.

From what the author of *Tarikh-i Baihaqi* relates about Nizam’s family
on the reliable authority of his grandfather Shaikh al-Islam Amirak, who
had seen Nizam al-Mulk in his boyhood, it may be concluded that it was
after he had reached the age of maturity and not in his early years, and
after his father had been relieved of financial worries[^11] that he was
able to attend Imam Muwaffaq’s lectures in order to complete his higher
studies.

His studies over, he travelled to Bukhara and Merv, and to a number of
towns[^12] in Transoxiana, most probably in search of a post, and after
441/1049[^13] he went to Ghaznah, where he sought service with the
Gaznawids, thus getting an opportunity to acquaint himself with their
administration. When Sultan ‘Abd al-Rashid was murdered in 444/1052 and
the political affairs were upset, he escaped to Balkh and entered the
service of ‘Ali b. Shadhan,[^14] who was then the governor of that
province on behalf of the Saljuq ruler Chaghari Beg Dawud. Annoyed with
the habits of this man, who extorted heavy sums from him every
year,[^15] he fled to Merv.

Once there, Chaghari Beg appointed him the *mushir* (counsellor) and the
*katib* (secretary)[^16] of his son, Alp Arslan. It was on the advice of
‘Ali b. Shadhan[^17] that Alp Aralan, after his accession to the throne
in 455/1062, raised him to the position of a Joint Minister with ‘Amid
al-Mulk Kunduri. But Kunduri was soon deposed and then put to death, it
is said,[^18]on the advice of Nizam al-Mulk, who had then become the
full-fledged Prime Minister of the Saljuq Empire.

He became the real master of the whole realm with the succession of
Malik-shah to his father’s throne in 465/1072, which he owed entirely to
Nizam al-Mulk’s efforts.[^19] From the capital of the Saljuqs, his
influence spread to the capital of the ‘Abbasid Caliph, who is said to
have dignified him with the title of *Radi-u Amir al-Mu’minin*, never
before conferred on a vizier.[^20] He had done much to stabilize the
power of the Saljuqs, and to improve their administration, and,
therefore, when Malik shah once threatened him with dismissal he dare to
reply that the kingship was linked with his vizierate.[^21]

In his last days, he came into collision with the Isma‘iliyyah movement
of Hassan b. Sabbah, in whose activities he saw danger to the Saljuq
Empire. He had actually once deputed Abu Muslim Radi to arrest
Hassan,[^22] but Abu Muslim was himself assassinated by one of the
*fida’is* (the Assassins) in 485/1092.

It will be in place here to refer to the two Persian works of Nizam
al-Mulk, which are the chief sources for the study of his political
ideas: the *Sayasat Nameh* (The Book on State-craft) and the *Dastur
al-Wuzara’* (The Conduct of Ministers) or, as it is more generally
known, the *Wasaya-i Khuwaja Nizam al-Mulk* (The Precepts of Khuwaja
Nizam al-Mulk). He is said to have written yet another work entitled as
*Safar Nameh* (The Book of Travels) which is now extinct.[^23]

Certain changes and additions may have been made to the original text in
a later period, but the *Siyasat Nameh* has generally been recognized as
the genuine composition of Nizam al-Mulk himself. There has been some
controversy among scholars about the authenticity of the *Wasaya* on
account of the doubtful “Tale of the Three School Fellows,” which has
been set out in detail in the preface of the treatise. There is no need
to revive this half a century old controversy[^24] as it has nothing to
do with the study of his political thought.

The *Wasaya* is not claimed to be the composition of Nizam al-Mulk
himself in the sense in which the *Siyasat Nameh* is considered to be
his work. It was compiled in the ninth/15th[^25] century by an anonymous
person whose family, as he claims in the preface, descended from Nizam
al-Mulk. He compiled it partly from the books and partly from the oral
traditions handed down in his own family.[^26] Therefore, the anecdotes
cited in it begin invariably with the phrase, “So says Khuwaja Nizam
al-Mulk.”

The preface, which is one of the reliable sources of Nizam al-Mulk’s
life, is evidently from the pen of the compiler. But the other two
chapters, which form the main part of the work and contain much valuable
material on the political ideas of this famous vizier, are composed from
his own authentic writings and utterances. It has been justly
remarked[^27] that there is no internal evidence in the main part of the
work to show that it does not owe its contents to his pen. A large part
of the *Wasaya* may be regarded as the actual utterances of Nizam
al-Mulk.[^28]

We are fortunate in having these two important works of Nizam al-Mulk
representing his thoughts about kingship and vizierate, which were the
two political institutions of primary importance in his days. The
*Siyasat Nameh*, which is the exposition of his theory of kingship, was
originally written to serve as a “monarch’s primer.”[^29] It is said
that in 484/1091[^30] Sultan Malik-shah (r. 465 – 1072/485/1092)
instructed some of his dignitaries to think over the state of affairs in
his realm and write down the principles of conduct that were followed by
monarchs in the past, and were required to be observed by himself.[^31]

The treatise of Nizam al-Mulk among the works presented to the Sultan
was the only one which he approved of and adopted as a guide
*(imam)*.[^32] But it must not be treated as a mere handbook of
day-to-day administration, nor must it be regarded as containing simply
practical suggestions for the improvement of an administrative system.
It is more than that. It is, in fact, the expression of a realistic
political theory which emerges out of an actual political situation,
and, therefore, helps us to understand the stage in the development of
Muslim polity reached in the fifth/11th century.

The *Wasaya* is the exposition of his theory of vizierate. It consists
of the counsels which he is said to have addressed in the “last days of
his life,”[^33] to his eldest son, Fakhr al-Mulk, who also held the
office of vizier under the Saljuq Sultans Barkiyaruq and Sanjuar, and
was assassinated, like his father, by a Batini[^34] in 500/1106.

It is fairly easy to present Nizam al-Mulk as one who largely differs
from the past writers of political treatises and from his
contemporaries, both in his selection of the political institutions
which form the subject matter of his writings, and in his approach to
those institutions. The method adopted by him in explaining the
principles of State administration throws light on his outlook and about
the political situation in his days. His approach and outlook regarding
the political problems are, indeed, inter-related.

A modern scholar, author of a pioneer work on Muslim political thought,
regards his method as “historical.” “If it is possible,” he writes, “to
label the Khuwaja’s method with any particular epithet, it is that his
method is, to a large extent, historical.”[^35] He considers it
historical because “in nearly every case he proves the truth of a
principle which he chooses to propound, on the touchstone of tradition
or historical facts, though some of the facts he relates are not
chronologically correct.”[^36]

But it is in a limited sense that his approach can be regarded as
historical. It is true that he makes reiterated references to history.
But this is not all that makes the historical method what it really is.
This method does not consist exclusively in citing historical instances.
That is only a preliminary. The historical method consists basically in
drawing conclusions objectively from the study of historical facts. The
political maxims which Nizam al-Mulk lays down as the guiding principles
for the successful administration of the State, are, in fact, the
inductive generalizations from the study of history.

They are, indeed, empirical conclusions drawn from his personal
experience of practical politics and from his observation of existing
conditions. “No event,” he believes, “ever happens to take place in the
world which might not have occurred already several times. As one might
have read, or known, or heard about the circumstances a particular event
had brought in, one can surmise the consequences that would follow it in
case it happens to occur again.”[^37]

In effect he is arguing that history repeats itself, but instead of
proceeding from the past to the present he follows a reverse course when
he first draws conclusions from the observation of the conditions around
him and then turns them back upon the past. History, for him, is not the
solution of problems, but the endorser of pre-conceived solutions. The
essence of his approach to the political issue lies in the blood of the
historical method and the method of observation. Though not very
successful in following the historical method, he may be regarded as the
most historically-minded writer on political topics both among his
predecessors and his contemporaries.

This treatment of history squares well with the object with which he
proceeds to formulate a particular political theory. He is concerned
with theorizing those institutions and their principles and problems
which had developed into an actual political constitution, resting
mainly on the Sultanate (kingship) and the vizierate, and to bring them
to their possible perfection by suggesting practical reforms. He makes
ample use of the past and contemporary history to give his personal
ideas the appearance of historical facts.

The political institutions of which he speaks had real roots in the
political life of the peoples who inhabited a large part of the eastern
lands of the ‘Abbasid Caliphate, mostly non-Arab races. Most of those
institutions had existed there long before the Great Saljuqs came to
adopt them, and still much earlier than they could find their
theoretical exposition in the writings of Nizam al-Mulk. The absolute
monarchy, for instance, the office of vizierate, the monarchical form of
administration of justice, the feudal system, the order of courtiers,
the system of espionage, etc., were the institutions handed down by
ancient Persia to the successive generations.

Though modified in some respects under the influence of the new Muslim
political theory, those political institutions had, nevertheless,
succeeded in preserving much of their original Persian character, and
exerting, in their turn, a good deal of influence both on the political
thought of the indigenous people even after their conversion to Islam as
well as on the political system, largely of Persian origin, that Nizam
al-Mulk seeks to set out. This makes us look upon his writings as the
earliest exposition of what may be called the Persian political theory.

Side by side with this political theory, but with different notions and
with a different approach to political problems, there existed the
constitutional theory of the Arab jurists of whom Mawardi[^38] (c.
364/974 – 450/1058), the author of the *Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah*, was the
most eminent. Among this small group of jurists mention must be made of
Abu Ya‘la (380/990 – 450/1066), a contemporary of Mawardi, and author of
another *Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah*,[^39] and of Imam al-Haramain al-Juwaini
(419/1028 – 478/1085), an intimate friend[^40] of Nizam al-Mulk, whose
treatise *Ghiyath al-Umam*[^41] has not yet seen the light of day. (As
political thinkers, the two have not yet been properly studied by
students of the history of Muslim constitutional theory.[^42])

While the Persian political theory attempts to throw light on the
sovereign powers of the king, by analysing the institutions
characteristic of this royal office, the constitutional theory puts
forward the doctrine of Caliphate. It will be in place here to look into
the general nature of the juristic approach to the political problems,
and more especially to the institution of kingship, which Nizam al-Mulk
also treats, with even greater interest. This will help us to appreciate
the realistic element in his thought and approach.

In the first instance, these two sets of contemporary theories, one of
the jurists and the other of an administrator, differ in their subject
matter. A comparison of the contents of the two treatises of Nizam
al-Mulk with those, for example, of the *Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah* of
Mawardi, would hardly make one regard the two writers as dealing with
the problem and institutions of the same political community living in
the same age.

Of the office of the *Khalifah*, his powers and qualifications, the
method of his election, the division of vizierate between the unlimited
vizierate *(wizarat tanfidh)*, the legal difference between their
powers, the economic institutions of *jizyah* (poll tax), *zakat* (tax
on the accumulated property), *fai’* (goods taken from non-believers),
*kharaj* (land tax), and of so many other institutions of
religio-political character, which from the chapter heads of the *Ahkam
al-Sultaniyyah*, the author of the *Siyasat Nameh* and the *Wasaya*
makes no mention at all, and, likewise, most of the topics discussed by
Nizam al Mulk have been avoided by Mawardi and other jurists, except the
offices of the Sultan and vizier, which they treat on a different plane
of thought. In their constitutional theory, the Sultan occupies a
position which is quite different from what he actually enjoyed in the
political set-up of those days.

To treat the Sultan as a governor by usurpation *(amir bi al-istila)* is
to bring him down to the position of the other provincial governors
appointed by the Caliph. This amounts to arguing, as they seem to do,
that the Sultan did actually derive his powers from the “Imperial”
authority of the Caliph. They leave actual facts out of account by
putting the main emphasis on the formal legitimization of the Sultan’s
authority by the *Khalifah*, which was but an insignificant aspect of
their mutual relations. In doing so, they are apt to lose sight of his
sovereign powers, which he enjoyed independently of the Caliph’s assent.

This limitation of the juristic approach to contemporary politics was
bound to arise from the fact that its exponents were building their
argument on the foundations of the political order of the Caliphate,
which had ceased to exist as a real force for about 200 years. Deprived
of any real power to shape the political life of Muslims, the Caliphate,
as a political system, continued to exist in theory, which found its
elaborate exposition in the writings of the juristic school of the
fifth/11th century.

But by interpreting the political fiction of the Caliphate in terms of
political realities of their times, these jurists, regardless of the
actual facts, were indoctrinating the people with the belief that the
caliph was still the real source of all authority.

They were, thus, unable to appreciate the fact that it was the
autocratic rule of the independent prince, and not that of the ‘Abbasid
Caliph, under which the people had actually been living, and they failed
to see that by legitimizing the authority of the Sultan, the Caliph only
recognized his *de facto* sovereignty, and that this in practice did not
render him sub-ordinate to the Caliph. Their juristic theory could not
take into full account the growth of absolute monarchy in the Muslim
polity upon which a formidable political structure had come to rest.

It is this monarchical system of government developing under the
aristocratic rule of the prince, as against the constitutional structure
of the Caliphate, which Nizam al-Mulk attempts to study. His political
theory represents a particular phase of the development of the Muslim
polity which was characterized by kingship. As such, it is an essential
part of his contribution to Muslim political thought.

The first thing remarkable about his exposition of the institution of
kingship is that he is careful to make no reference to the *Khalifah* as
the head of the Muslim community, and to say nothing about the
constitutional relations of the Saljuq ruler with the ‘Abbasid Caliph.
He rarely uses the title of Sultan for the Saljuq King,[^43] and as for
the term *amir muslauli* (governor by usurpation), it does not occur at
all through his writings, both being the terms of the constitutional law
employed by the jurists to denote the legal superiority of the caliph
over the prince. Instead, he generally calls his ruler *padshah* – a
Persian term for the king. All this may reasonably be taken as a
conscious effort on the part of Nizam al-Mulk to avoid any discussion or
even a phrase which might involve any reference to the legal relations
of the Caliph and the prince, for his object in studying the monarchical
constitution of the Saljuq Empire is to represent his royal master in
his full independent position.

To this political objective his *Siyasat Nameh* was expressly dedicated,
for it was composed at the instance of the great Saljuq ruler,
Malik-shah, as the *Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah*, the earliest treatise on the
constitutional theory of the Caliphate had been written by Mawardi only
40 years before at the instance of an ‘Abbasid Caliph[^44] to vindicate
his claim to sovereign authority. This indicates the existence of a
theoretical conflict between the powers of the Caliph and the king,
which of course has been prompted by the historical events which
preceded it.

Conscious of the growing weakness of the Buwaihid dynasty in the
beginning of the fifth/11th century, the ‘Abbasid Caliph Qadir (381/991
– 422/1031) and his successor Qa’im (422/1031 – 407/1075), during whose
rules the juristic theory of the Caliphate was formulated, attempted to
achieve independence from the tutelage of the Buwaihids.[^45] On the
other hand, the Saljuqs, too, who had succeeded both the Buwaihids and
the Ghaznawids after over-throwing their power, were no less keen to
assert the authority they had established at the point of the sword.

In spite of acknowledging the nominal authority of the *Khalifah*,[^46]
who, in turn, had legitimized their rule and conferred upon them titles
of honour,[^47] the Saljuqs did not hesitate to inflict humiliation upon
him whenever it was demanded by the political situation. Kunduri, the
vizier of Tughril Beg (d. 455/1062), is said to have with-held the
pension of the Caliph on his refusal to marry his daughter to the Suljuq
prince.[^48] On another occasion, Malik shah is said to have intended to
banish the Caliph al-Muqtadi from Baghdad.[^49]

Under this situation it was not possible for Nizam al-Mulk to make any
mention of the *Khalifah* without recognizing him as the supreme
authority over his Saljuq prince. This would have been inconsistent with
the objective he had in mind in writing his treatise.

His effort to avoid any discussion of the legal or political relations
of the Caliph and the king is significant. He is seeking to defend his
prince against the theoretical encroachment on his independent position
by the advocates of the Caliph’s authority.

From the outset Nizam al- Mulk seems to have taken if for granted that
the real source from which the king derives his authority, in theory or
in practice, is not the institution of the Caliphate. That point has
been removed from the plan of discussion. The reason is not far to seek.
As it was inconsistent with his political ends to recognize the Caliph
as the supreme authority, so an explicit refutation of his claims in
this respect would have made Nizam al-Mulk unnecessarily provoke a
controversy about the powers of the two offices. To this dilemma he
finds a solution in what may be called in modern language the theory of
divine right – the theory that the king enjoys the right to rule over
his subjects by virtue of divine appointment.

This becomes obvious from the study of the first chapters in the
*Siyasat Nameh*, which mainly explain the divine nature of this
institution, and its functions ordained by God. He puts it in very clear
words when he says, “In every age God selects one from amongst mankind
and adorns him with princely skills, and entrusts him with the affairs
of the world and the comfort of the subjects.”[^50] This is the
remarkably simplified hypothesis of his theory of kingship; he does not
argue to prove it, but simply states it as a self-evident truth.

This proposition, as advanced by Nizam al-Mulk, suffers theological
weakness common to all the expositions of the divine right theory which
set out this hypothesis as a *fait accompli*, to be simply accepted
rather than to be argued. It is indeed a dogmatic belief rather than a
rational proposition. It is, however, important for our purpose, because
it serves to explain how Nizam al-Mulk comes to expound a political
theory which is out and out a vindication of autocracy, and how he is
led from the outset to reject the democratic principles and enunciated
by the advocates of the Caliphate.

After explaining the nature of the king’s appointment, Nizam al-Mulk
discusses the purposes of kingship in a political community. He argues
the *raison d’ètes* of this institution, and throws more light on its
divine nature. The essential function which the king has to fulfil in
human society is to bring order of chaos, and to maintain peace and
justice. This is what he means when he says, “If the people show any
sign of disobedience or contempt towards the *Shari‘ah* (the Canon-Law),
or if they fail to obey God and to comply with His commands, then he
intends to inflict punishment on them for their conduct...Due to their
sin they bring this wrath upon themselves.

Benevolent kinds disappear from amongst them. Swords are drawn and
blood-shed follows, and whosoever is powerful does as he pleases, until
the sinners to one of the people whom God by His grace blesses with
success according to his worth, and endows with wisdom and
knowledge.[^51]

Then Nizam al-Mulk goes on to say that the ultimate object to which the
king should direct his efforts is to create and maintain wholesome
conditions so “that the people may live with comfort under the shadow of
his justice.”[^52]

It amounts to a sort of “mystical” interpretation of historical changes,
bringing about the rise and fall of rulers. The king has been
represented here as an instrument of God’s will, fulfilling a divine
function in political upheavals. It is the punishment for their
disobedience that people are first deprived by the Almighty of the
benevolent king. Then His wrath takes the shape of calamities and
upheavals. And it is again by His mercy that a man rises to the position
of a sovereign and brings about peace and order. Thus, in this divine
order of political society all things proceed from God’s will, and it is
from His supreme authority that the king derives his powers.

While speaking of the monarch who succeeds in establishing his rule by
subduing the warring elements and in executing God’s will by bringing
peace and tranquility to the people, Nizam al-Mulk is not unmindful of
the victorious career of the Saljuq dynasty, which had risen to
sovereign position by its own strength and successfully established an
orderly government. This becomes clear when he says that it is by divine
providence that his Saljuq master has been destined to rule his
subjects.[^53]

This implies that the king’s authority rests, in the first place, on
direct authorization from God and, in the second place, on his own
ability to gain political power in which he is helped by God the
Almighty. He is equally emphatic on the principle of hereditary
kingship, which is always an essential part of the divine right
doctrine. According to him, the kingly office is essentially of divine
origin as well as hereditary, and should pass, like the kingship in
ancient Persia, from father to son.[^54] And it is according to this
principle that his Saljuq prince, he claims, has inherited this
dignified office from his great ancestors.[^55]

Nizam al-Mulk’s vindication of the claims of the king to sovereign
powers is based on a three-fold justification, namely, the divine
sanction, the conquest of power, and the hereditary succession. He later
states this more clearly in an anecdote in which Nushirwan, the Persian
King, has been shown as asserting his eligibility to the throne in a
royal speech addressed to his feudatories, “First, this kingship has
been bestowed upon me by God the Almighty, secondly, I have inherited it
from my father, thirdly,...I have recaptured the kingdom by the
sword.”[^56]

It is obvious now that in explaining the nature of the supreme authority
in the political community, he takes the position of a legitimist” who
believes not in human choice, but in divine appointment and hereditary
succession.

This exposition of kingship is significant from yet another point of
view. There is more in it than the mere explanation of the divine origin
of the king’s powers. It may be regarded as an effort of Nizam al-Mulk
to seek moral justification for the passive obedience which the monarch
has the right to demand from his subjects, and also for his unlimited
authority to control the administration and political life of the
people. The two are correlative to each other and follow as corollaries
from this legitimist doctrine. This helps us to understand the relation
between ruler and subjects as envisaged in his political theory.

He lays great emphasis on obedience as the most essential duty of the
people towards the ruler, since he brings to them peace and prosperity
after they have been deprived of it as a punishment for their
disobedience to God. This has been stated more explicitly in another
work, the *Wasaya*, in which he discusses the question of obedience to
royal authority. “No doubt,” he says, “it is but obligatory to worship
the Almighty, and to obey the king. The common people generally, and the
royal favourites and courtiers particularly are under the obligation of
such obedience, and more especially one who has been entrusted with
authority in the matters of administration and finance.”[^57]

The king is entitled to receive obedience from his subjects as a
divinely appointed authority. Nizam al-Mulk asserts that the very fact
that the king succeeds in establishing his rule in sufficient to make us
regard his authority as resting on the divine sanction. Without the aid
of God Almighty,” he argues, “an individual can never become a ruler,
nor can he bring the world into the bondage of subjugation. Though there
might be several causes of his rise to political power, they all refer
undoubtedly to the same divine help.”[^58]

The gist of this remarkably simplified contention is that it is the duty
of the people to obey the prince without questioning the validity of his
authority: it is valid as *de facto*. A *de facto* ruler may be unjust
and may put the country into disorder, but Nizam al-Mulk, like a true
legitimist, is careful to avoid this question as it ultimately involves
the right of the people to resist a ruler who is doing wrong to them. If
confusion and disorder ever take place in a political society, he
attempts to interpret it as resulting not from the misrule of the
monarch but from the sinful acts of the people themselves.

It is, therefore, by remaining obedient to the king that they can enjoy
peace and prosperity which is restored to them under his rule. The king
can rightly inflict punishment upon those who, “not realizing the value
of security and comfort,” might revolt against his authority.[^59] There
is no doubt that Nizam al-Mulk believes in the principle of passive and
unconditional obedience on the part of the people, and leaves them
without any moral right to resist the royal authority.

A political theory like this, with the belief in the divine appointment
of the king, coupled with the principle of passive obedience by the
people, can result only in the advocacy of absolute monarchy. The prince
of whom Nizam al-Mulk is speaking here is surely an absolute monarch in
that his powers are unrestricted by any human power. The only authority
which could claim, at least in theory, a certain amount of legal right
to impose any obligations on a Muslim prince as the ‘Abbasid Caliph, to
whom, we have seen Nizam al-Mulk avoids making any reference in this
respect.

It is obvious from his attempt to explain the administrative system with
constant reference to the royal office that the monarch is the sovereign
authority in his realm, and, as such, is the source of all political
power, all are sub-ordinate to him, and are endowed by him with powers
and privileges according to their capability. In spite of representing
the king as directly responsible for the welfare of the whole country,
Nizam al-Mulk does not regard him as accountable to the people for his
political conduct. On the question of the kings’ responsibility in
public affairs he seems to take again the position of the people, but
before God. That, however, has not been laid down expressly, and has to
be concluded only indirectly from the statements in which, for example,
he says that on the Day of Judgment the king will be summoned before God
to answer for his conduct towards his subjects,[^60] and that the
government officials are accountable to the king, and the king in his
turn is responsible to the Almighty.[^61]

What Nizam al-Mulk is attempting to set out here is indeed the concept
of absolute monarchy. At this point he comes much nearer to the Persian
idea of kingship and the Shi‘ite doctrine of *imamah* (the leadership of
political community), both founded on the divine right of the Head of
the State, than to the constitutional theory of the Sunni Arab jurists,
which was based on democratic principles. An absolute monarch claiming
direct authorization from God to manage the affairs of a political
society was an idea quite foreign to Arab thinkers. The *Khalifah* had
always been regarded by them, at least in theory, as an elected
functionary[^62] to whom powers were delegated, not directly by God, but
by the electors. They, therefore, held that the *Khalifah* was subject
to certain legal restrictions. This democratic idea of Caliphate is in
striking contrast with the Persian notion of absolute monarchy revived
in Nizam al-Mulk’s political theory.

It would not be wrong to suppose that this concept of a divinely
appointed ruler came to him mainly from the political system of ancient
Persia, and not from the contemporary Shi‘ite doctrine,[^63] which, as
systematically evolved under the Fatimid rule in Egypt, was definitely a
much later development in comparison with the Persian concept. This is
obvious from his repeated references to the political principle on which
the monarchical constitution in ancient Persia was based, but he makes
no such references to the political ideas of the Shi‘ites, of whose
political activities in the form of Batini movement he is, on the
contrary, vehemently critical.[^64] But it must be admitted at the same
time that his exposition of divine right is lacking both in
philosophical depth and systematic treatment with which this doctrine
was set out in the Fatimid dogmatics.

The reason for imitating the Persian model of kingship is to be sought
in his contemporary historical conditions. On the one hand, he is
expressing, as pointed out before, the popular idea of kingship
prevailing in the territories conquered by the Saljuqs, and, on the
other hand, he is seeking to replace the Turkish concept of tribal
leadership by the Persian ideal of absolute monarchy.

The peculiar conditions under which he had to work out his political
theory, made the adoption of autocratic rule inevitable. The institution
of *Khanat*, that is, the tribal leadership among the Saljuqs, had
largely become inconsistent with the stage of political power under
tribal customs, their Khan was far from having any territorial basis for
his authority, with the result that their tribal system of government
was found inadequate to cope with the problems of the large territorial
empire which they had come to rule. The Empire they had inherited from
the Ghaznawids and the Buwaihids was far vaster than the territory
hitherto known to them, and more advanced in political principles as
compared with their own tribal customs. Despite the large powers that
were conferred upon the Khan by the tribal system, he was regarded much
more the leader of a large tribe, than as a sovereign in the proper
sense.

There were other “minor leaders” of small groups of families who, at
least in the early stage of their political career, could lay claim to
political power derived not from the “major” tribal leader but from the
tribal customary law. It was not until the reign of Malik shah, the
third ruler of the great Saljuq dynasty, that the Saljuq prince could
become a real autocratic mind[^65] in all State affairs throughout the
reign of Alp Arslan and Malik shah, who was mainly responsible for
altering their nomadic tribal political organization to harmonize with
the requirements of a territorial empire. He converted their power into
a centralized autocratic authority essential for successful government
in his time.

What he is attempting now in his writings by theorizing about kingship
and its institutional organization is to provide the Saljuq monarchy
with a theoretical basis. He is seeking, moreover, to shape it on the
model of Persian kingship about which he had read in the “works of the
ancients” *(kutub-i pishinagan)*,[^66] and had seen revived in the
monarchical constitution of the Ghaznawids. To him this Persian
monarchy, with its autocratic principles, was more adaptable to the new
circumstances than any other type of institution which was founded on
democratic principles.

Only an absolute monarchy, he thinks, can vigorously deal with the nomad
Turkumans and the *petit* leaders of the Ghuzz tribes in subduing their
power to a centralized authority. Therefore, he advises his prince that
“God Almighty has created the king most powerful of all people, and all
are sub-ordinate to him. It is from that they take their subsistence
money and their position. He should treat them in such a way that they
always realize their position, and may not throw off the bondage of
allegiance, and, moreover, they should not be allowed to do whatever
they like; they should do only what they have been ordered to do.”[^67]
His aim in stressing the absolute superiority of the king is to
introduce a central authority with autocratic powers in the political
system of the Saljuqs, the majority of whom were not yet fully
accustomed to this principle of government and administration.

To imitate the Persian absolute monarchy was also useful in tackling the
problems of the growing “feudal system” in the Saljuq Empire. The
Persian institution of kingship had a record of feudal traditions, and
could furnish the Saljuqs with the laws applicable in many respects to
their relation with the feudatories and the subjects.

The system of land assignment – what Nizam al-Mulk calls the *iqta‘
dari*[^68] - may be regarded undoubtedly as the Eastern form of
feudalism as against the feudalism of medieval Europe. To a great
extent, Nizam al-Mulk may be considered responsible for developing, if
not for introducing, it on systematic lines within the political
structure of the Saljuq Empire. It was due to the military organization
of the Saljuqs, on which their political structure ultimately came to
rest, together with the problems of revenue administration, that the
practice of assigning fiefs *(iqta‘s)* to the military chiefs, soldiers,
and to other private persons was adopted. There were also the *dihqans*,
the old Persian land-owners, who continued to exercise proprietary
rights as before. This system, in brief, was designed as a means of
paying the soldiers and of collecting revenues.

The principles on which Nizam al-Mulk suggests that the *iqta‘ dari*
should be based develop it into a feudal system very different from the
Western feudalism, both in character and in social and political
consequences. It is basically different in the tenure of the
feudatories, in their legal rights over the land and the *ra‘iyyah*
(vassals) as well as in the relation of the king as the over-lord with
the *muqta‘s* (feudatories), on the one hand, and with the subjects, on
the other, and with the subjects, strictly hereditary as a general rule.
There is nothing in his writing to suggest that he is in favour of
assigning lands to an individual with a specified legal right to
transmit it by inheritance.

On the other hand, in his system the feudatories come to occupy a
position more akin to that of the tax-collectors with large
administrative powers than that of the “feudal lords,” in the medieval
sense. In their relations with the vassals they are like the *shihnahs*
(guards, and in case a feudatory fails to treat them well, “the fief, it
is suggested, must be withdrawn from him.”[^69] Besides, “the officials
and the feudatories must be changed every two to three years so that
they may not get strong enough in their fortifications.”[^70]

It appears that side by side with developing the *iqta‘* system, Nizam
al-Mulk attempts to enlarge the powers of the king as a means of
checking the centrifugal tendencies which tend to appear in feudalism.
This leads him to put forward a theory of land ownership which goes well
with his idea of absolute monarchy. He holds that “the feudatories who
hold the fiefs must know that civility and courtesy the lawful amount
which has been assigned to them, i.e., to the feudatories, and when that
has been taken, the subjects shall be secure in their persons, property,
wives, and children, and in their goods and estates....They must know
that the land and the subjects all belong to the king, and the
feudatories and the governors *(walis)*, set over their head, are like
the guards to the subjects, as the king is to others.”[^71]

In entertaining such a view regarding land ownership, Nizam al-Mulk
departs from what may be regarded as the Islamic theory, which
attributes the absolute ownership of land, not be the Head of the State,
but to the State itself, as entrusted to by God. It is also a clear
departure from the traditional concept of the Ghuzz tribes, who looked
upon the land that they would come to occupy as the common property of
their families. It was this tribal concept of land ownership of Nizam
al-Mulk was seeking to modify basically, as it was out of tune with the
administrative principle of a centralized empire which had now passed
into their hands. To him it was essential to bring both the land and the
subjects under the central authority of the king.

A good deal of his theory, it appears, has come to him from the old
feudal Persia. This is evident from his attempt to explain this
principle by an anecdote from Persian history in which the famous vizier
Buzurjmihr has been represented as advising Nushirwan that “the kingdom
(wilayah) belongs to the king (malik), and the king has entrusted the
dominion, and not the subjects, to the military When the military is not
well wishing unto the kingdom, and kind to the people...and takes the
power to arrest and imprison...and to appoint and dismiss, what
difference then remains between the king and the military, for that
power really belongs to the king, and not to the military.”[^72] On
another occasion Nushirwan exhorts his feudatories to treat the people
well, and only to take from them what is due and just, and he stresses
the fact that the dominion belongs to him, and it is by him that the
estates have been assigned to them.[^73]

Nizam al-Mulk’s feudal theory takes away much of the powers from the
hands of feudal lords which they enjoyed, for instance, in Western
feudalism. It leaves them with limited power to collect the revenues,
and to have only “a fixed amount in their hands.”[^74] Moreover, it
removes them from the position of being the sole intermediaries between
the king and the subjects, preventing the latter from getting into
direct contact with him.[^75] In his system, the direct responsibility
for the well-being of the subjects rests not with the feudatories, but
with the king, and, therefore, he suggests that the king should send
spies *(jasusan)* and special confidants *(khwas)*[^76] to inquire
secretly about administration in the fiefs in order to get reliable
information about the condition of the subjects, and urges him to
dismiss a feudatory who forbids subjects to represent their cases to the
king in order to seek redress for grievances.[^77]

All this results in the concentration of all the political
administrative powers, as sought my Nizam al-Mulk, in the central
authority of the king which was once enjoyed by the Persian autocrat.

Though his idea of kingship is in essence of Persian origin, it differs
in certain respects from the Old Persian prototype, and has been
refashioned in other respects under the influence of Muslim political
theory and practice. It is, on the whole, an attempt to readjust the
Persian model with the contemporary social and political structure.

The most important point of difference is that Nizam al-Mulk is not an
incarnationist. Unlike the ancients who could look upon their Persian
monarch as the incarnation of Divinity,[^78] he treats his ruler as a
simple human being. In spite of once calling the prince the “shadow of
God on earth” *(zill Allah fi al-ard)* in the *Wasaya*[^79] - a phrase
which does not occur at all in the *Siyasat Nameh* – he does not go the
extent of clothing him with divine attributes so as to make him appear
an embodiment of Divinity. The phrase is devoid here of any mystical
meanings, and has been used in the ordinary sense of a metaphor, to mean
that the exalted office of the king is like a shadow provided by God on
earth under which mankind may find peace and security. No doubt, he
speaks of this monarch as “adorned with the virtues and excellences
which were lacking by kings all over the world,”[^80] yet there is in
him no tendency to regard the king as a super-human being in any
metaphysical sense. Among those excellent virtues with which his prince
is adorned, he counts, for example, good appearance, justice, courage,
generosity, etc.[^81] but they are all divinely gifted qualities, not
divine attributes. Therefore, his prince is by no means an incarnation
of God.

Far from attaching any “mystical” or metaphysical sense to the concept
of kingship, he believes that “the king is endowed by God with wisdom
and knowledge so that he can treat each of his subjects according to his
worth and can give each a position according to his value,”[^82] and,
again, “His (i.e. the king’s) wisdom is just like a lamp that gives off
abundant light. People can find their way in its light and can come out
of darkness,[^83] and he does not need himself to be guided by others.”
We can see his prince bearing a small resemblance both to the
philosopher-king[^84] and to the Shi‘ite teacher-Imam,[^85]but suffering
from an innate inability to become the true image of either. This seems
mainly due to the fact that Nizam al-Mulk is by temperament much more a
matter-of-fact exponent of popular ideas than a real philosopher, unable
to develop his thoughts into philosophical concepts. He may be taken as
possibly expressing a general belief about kingship prevailing in his
days, in which the old Persian idea of the divinely-appointed monarch in
its moderate form – and not the concept of divine monarch – was
superficially inter-mingled with the Neo-Platonic interpretation of the
philosopher-king as an embodiment of perfect wisdom. His concept of the
king is that of a statesman who is primarily concerned with general
beliefs rather than with philosophical generalizations.

His Persian ideal is modified also in another respect, obviously under
the direct influence of Muslim thought. Though he treats his prince as a
divinely-appointed ruler, invested with unlimited powers, he does not
regard him by any means as a law-giver. A human authority with absolute
legislative powers has never existed in Muslim polity, because
*legislation* in the proper sense of the term has never been recognized
as a human function in the Muslim legal theory. According to this
theory, there does already exist a divine Law *(Shari‘ah)* supreme,
eternal, and perfect, which is theoretically as binding on the ruler
himself, however autocratic he may be in practice, as on his subjects.
This is what seems to have prevented Nizam al-Mulk from attributing any
legislative power to his prince. His king, on the other hand, is subject
to the supreme Law of God, and, is, moreover, an instrument for
enforcing that law, and for making people abide by it. He emphasizes
that it is obligatory for the king to seek knowledge of religion matters
and to comply with, and make arrangements to carry out the commands of
God and the traditions of the Prophet, and to pay respect to religious
scholars.”[^86] Therefore, it is the duty of the ruler to appoint judges
*(qadis)* to execute the *Shari‘ah* as his deputies *(na’ibin)*.

This discussion of the ruler’s responsibility in enforcing the
*Shari‘ah*, apart from explaining a principle of Muslim policy, is also
interesting for its historical significance in respect of the Saljuqs.
This shows Nizam al-Mulk’s attempt to teach the Saljuqs the principles
of the Muslim legal system and to familiarize them with the law of the
more civilized people of whom they had become the rulers. But his royal
masters were altogether strangers to all culture,[^87] and there is no
reliable information to prove that they could even read and write.
Therefore, books, as the direct source of knowledge of religious Law,
were out of their reach. This seems to be the reason why Nizam al-Mulk
advises his prince to get himself acquainted with the teachings of
religion through the debates of the scholars *(‘ulama’)* which he should
caused to be held occasionally in his presence, once or twice a week.
“Thus, one day he will become conversant with most of the laws of the
*Shari‘ah*, the commentary of the Qur’an and the traditions of the
Prophet and, thus, the methods of dealing with temporal and religious
affairs would become easy for him.”[^88]

This discussion leads us at this point to another important question,
namely, the place that religion must have, according to Nizam al-Mulk,
both in the conduct of a ruler and in the political life of a people,
where we can see again that his concept of kingship is modified by the
influence of Muslim thought. In spite of his love for the political
principles for pre-Islamic Persia, he is essentially a religious-minded
man who can believe only in the religious values of social life and
enunciated by Islam, and can look upon a political community as
dedicated out and out to religious ends. His political theory is made up
of reconciliation between the Old Persian ideals and the Muslim
political ideology.

To him, in the first place, religion and politics are inseparably joined
together and, as such are complementary to each other. “The State (and
kingship) and religion,” he believes, “are like two brothers.”[^89] And
throughout his writings, the two have been treated in the same spirit.
In dealing with them, he closely follows the spirit of Muslim polity
which is largely based on the concept of the indivisible unity of
religion and politics.

The principles of conduct which he lays down for his king under the
influence of this religious trend are in striking contrast with those
prescribed by Machiavelli for his prince. Unlike the Machiavellian
prince who is advised to handle religion merely as a useful instrument
for achieving political ends, and who is taught to appear rather than
become religious,[^90] Nizam al-Mulk’s prince is taught to believe
sincerely in religious truths, and to exercise political power as an
essential means of attaining them. According to him, both the State and
religion are dependent upon each other for their existence; therefore,
the king must treat them both alike. “Whenever there is any disorder in
the state,” says Nizam al-Mulk, “there is confusion in the religion of
its people also, and the heretics and mischief-makers make their
appearance. And whenever religious affairs are disturbed, the State is
thrown into disorder, the mischief makers grow strong, and heresy makes
itself manifest.”[^91] He believes that “the most virtuous thing for the
king is to uphold the right faith.”[^92] To him a wise and just ruler is
one who follows the tenets of religion faithfully, and eradicates heresy
from his realm.[^93]

It is obvious that the concern of his prince with religion is not mere
politics; it is rather a matter of genuine faith in the religious values
of social life. It is an instrument to preserve the State as well as a
means of salvation in the life to come.[^94] “The ruler who strives to
uphold the faith successfully is entrusted by God with temporal and
religious affairs, and his wishes are granted in both worlds.”[^95]

This shows how Nizam al-Mulk is at pains to make his prince a religious
as well as mundane authority. It is, however, no artificiality with him
to blend the religious and temporal powers in one and the same office.
With a religious man like him, looking to faith for guidance in the
spiritual as well as in the worldly affairs, it is more natural to
combine them than to treat them as separate. Besides his own outlook
about the relation of religion and politics, which led him to attribute
religious function to kingship, there arose a historical situation in
which the king came to be regarded not only as a temporal authority but
also as a religious functionary. The age of the Caliph, when he was the
undisputed leader of the Muslim community, had practically come to a
close by this time, giving rise to the power of the independent
autocratic monarch to whom the people now looked for leadership, there
arose a historical situation in which the king came to be regarded not
only as a temporal authority but also as a religious functionary.

The age of the Caliph, when he was the undisputed leader of the Muslim
community, had practically come to a close by this time, giving rise to
the power of the independent autocratic monarch to whom the people now
looked for leadership in all temporal and religious affairs. It will not
help much towards appreciating the role this autocrat came to play in
the social life of the Muslim people, to suppose about this historical
change that, “politically, the *Khalifah* gave place to the Sultan, that
is, a religious executive was replaced by and explicitly independent
mundane power.”[^96] It must be admitted that the Muslim world, far from
thinking in terms of the separation of State and religion, was
definitely at a stage of political development in which, as we have
seen, it could still easily believe in their ultimate oneness. The
Caliph, therefore, was not held to be simply a religious executive; he
was a temporal authority as well, and both functions were intricately
inter-woven in his office.

The autocratic prince, who came to fill the void left by the Caliph in
the Muslim life with the latter’s downfall, was his heir in both
capacities. He was a replica of the Caliph, in almost every respect,
save that, like the Caliph, he was not an elected functionary, and
therefore, unlike him, he was in practice an absolute sovereign with no
constitutional limitations on his authority, and under no constitutional
obligation even in fulfilling his religious functions. Had he been
regarded as simply a mundane power, the Muslims living under his rule
would have been left without a leader to organize their religious life,
especially after the Caliph had practically been removed as a real force
from the scene of their spiritual and political life.

It is this practical necessity that has led Nizam al-Mulk to insist on
the essentially religious character of the king’s authority. This
special emphasis on the religious character is also important on account
of the fact that it tones down the autocratic temper of his monarch. The
moral obligations he sets on the absolute authority of the king prevent
it from growing into an oppressive despotism. His is basically the idea
of a *paternalistic* State in which the king is held responsible for the
security and well-being of all subjects. The first and foremost moral
obligation of the king towards his subjects is to do justice. He
believes it to be a religious duty, for it has been ordained by God.

Justice, as a principle of good government, occupies a pre-dominant
place in his concept of kingship, and time and again he lays emphasis on
its importance for State and society. But, in spite of all its
significance, he does not attempt to formulate any systematic theory of
justice, nor does he make any effort to define it exactly. This much,
however, can be concluded from his statement that, like almost all his
ideas, justice, too, is a practical maxim or a social rule rather than a
social philosophy. Everyone should be given what is due to him, or what
has been legally recognized as his right in a given social order. To him
justice is a moral principle which is also usable as an effective means
to preserve a political society and to promote peace and prosperity
among the people. “The kings should strive,” he says, “to seek the
favour of God, which can be attained through the kindness with which
they treat the people and through justice which they administer to them.
When the people pray to the welfare of the king, his State grows stable
and prospers ever day.”[^97]

To stress its significance for the prosperity of the State he quotes the
saying that “a State can continue to exist notwithstanding impiety, but
it cannot exist with tyranny.”[^98] Therefore, he believes that an
auspicious age is one in which a prince comes to rule.[^99] He quotes
several anecdotes from history to demonstrate the material advantages of
justice, and to show that justice is the outstanding moral virtue of a
king. He lays equal emphasis on its moral and material aspects as
inseparably joined together, and stresses the point that as justice
brings prosperity and good reputation in this world, it helps a ruler
“to attain salvation in the next world.[^100]

In his notion of justice he is influenced again both by Islam and by
Persia. It is under the Islamic influence that he comes to realize the
religious and moral significance of justice, and goes to the extent of
linking its worldly aspect with the deliverance of the soul and
eternity. To illustrate this point he quotes from the Holy Qur’an,[^101]
the Tradition[^102] of the Prophet, and statements about the practice of
the pious Muslim rulers, and says that the worthiest prince is one
“whose heart is the seat of justice.”[^103]

From ancient Persia he learns the methods of the administration of
justice and principle of direct responsibility of the king in matters
relating to it. He is so impressed by the Persian standard of justice
that he believes that “the Sassanian kings, especially Nushirwan the
Just, have surpassed all other monarchs in justice, generosity, and
courage.”[^104] He says that the Persian kings used to strive so
honestly to live up to the principle of impartiality in justice that
they could even allow themselves to appear as respondents before the
Chief Justice who heard complaints against their royal person.[^105]
They held it as their personal duty to see that the others also treated
the people with the same impartiality and justice, and, in order to hear
the complaints personally, they used to hold public audience twice a
year, to which everyone was allowed free access, and whoever prevented
anyone from going to the king to obtain redress for grievances was
sentenced to death.”[^106]

Besides justice, which is essential for good government, there are some
other moral duties, which, as Nizam al-Mulk says a ruler has to perform
for the well-being of his subjects. His idea of benevolent despotism
involves the notion that a good monarch must rule, not for his own good,
but for the good of the whole country. He is responsible for the welfare
of his subjects and is personally accountable to God, not only for his
own conduct, but also for the conduct of his officials towards the
people.[^107] It is therefore, an essential part of his duty that he
should appoint as government officers only those who are God-fearing,
learned, pious, and righteous,[^108] and should instruct them to treat
the people well,[^109] because as justice brings prosperity, oppression
leads to the devastation of a country.

This autocratic but benevolent sovereign, depicted for the first time in
the writings of Nizam al-Mulk, is a typical Muslim prince who came into
existence with the downfall of the Caliphate and continued to live for
centuries in the Muslim polity. Equally typical is his vizier, who
stands next to him in rank and power in the political hierarch of the
kingdom.[^110] Like the king, he is also of Persian origin; he is, in
fact, the Muslim heir of the pre-Islamic Persian grand vizier, called
the *wazurg-farmdhar*, who made his way into the constitutional system
of the Caliphate[^111] “when the ‘Abbasids came to copy the
administration of Sassanian Empire.”[^112] This grand vizier was next to
the king, and what he was in his relation to the Persian king, the
Muslim vizier was to the Caliph.[^113]

For Nizam al-Mulk, himself a Persian and Grand Vizier, it is quite
natural to aspire to model this institution as closely as possible on
the traditional line of the Persian vizierate, which had once worked so
successfully under the Sassanian rule. But he is not the first writer to
speak of this institution, for Mawardi and others had already discussed
it in some detail. There is, however, a sharp distinction between the
theory, for example, of Mawardi and that of Nizam al-Mulk. What Mawardi
speaks of is, in fact, the constitutional position of the vizier in his
relation to the caliph, and, therefore, it is what may be called the
constitutional theory of vizierate.

With this aspect of the vizierate, Nizam al-Mulk is less concerned, and
he seldom refers to it. What really interests him more, or rather
exclusively, is the political and moral aspect of this institution.
There is yet another difference: unlike Mawardi, who is primarily
concerned with discussing the question what the vizier’s functions are
in a constitutional set-up, Nizam al-Mulk attempts to show what he ought
to be in order to attain perfection in ministerial ethics. He deals with
the vizierate on a plane of thought which is nearer to that of the
*Qabas Nameh* of Amir Kaika’us (412/1021 – 475/1082).[^114] Indeed, his
field of study is the art of minister ship, but, compared with Amir
Kaiks’us, he treats it on a wider scale and with a touch of personal
experience which obviously could not be claimed by the Amir.

To Nizam al-Mulk the vizierate is the most important and the most
exalted office, next only to the Sultanate.[^115] Though this
glorification of the ministerial office is not without a tinge of
exaggeration, it serves to give an idea of the importance the vizier
once had in the Eastern monarchical States, including the Saljuq Empire,
in which he played a significant part in politics, and actually shared a
good deal of power with the king. In most of the achievements which were
attributed to the royal person he had a real hand. Therefore, there is a
certain basis of truth in regarding the vizierate as “an institution on
which depends the State and the people, the religion and the
kingdom.”[^116] This indicates Nizam al-Mulk’s belief about the
vizierate as an indispensable part in the machinery of a monarchical
government. He is also conscious of the historical role it played in
bringing so much credit to the kingship in the long course of its
career. “All the kings,” he says, “who have left their good names on the
pages of time, owe it to the felicity of the righteous vizier,”[^117]
and again, “...a good minister brings to the king a good name and leads
him to adopt a good conduct. All the princes who had been great, and
whose name shall be held in honour until the Day of Judgment, where
those who had good ministers.”[^118] Throughout his arguments about the
importance of minister ship, he is insistent on the point that the
welfare of both the king and the kingdom depends upon the sagacity of
the vizier, and that a bad vizier always leads them to
destruction.[^119]

What Nizam al-Mulk is attempting here by stressing the importance of the
vizierate is not to represent the vizier as a mere intermediary between
the king and his subjects, but to show them as the representative of the
king and actually responsible to him for the whole administration. That
is to say, the vizier, as conceived by him, is in a sense a share in the
king’s real powers. This was actually the position which Nizam al-Mulk
had himself enjoyed in his own life-time as the vizier of the Saljuqs.
That in elevating this office to such an exalted position he is mainly
encouraged by the Persian tradition, is evident from statement in which
he asserts that since the origin of the State up to the days of
Yazdigird all administrative affairs had been exclusively in the hands
of the viziers. The vizier was the counter-part and deputy of the
king.[^120] He is influenced again by the Persian forerunners, the
Barmakids, were the first exponents in Islam. To him it seems most
desirable that both the kingship and the vizierate should be hereditary,
as was the regular practice in ancient Persia from the days of Ardashir,
the son of Babekan, to the reign of Yazdigird.[^121] He regrets that
“when the kingship came to an end in Persia the vizierate also departed
from the house of the viziers.”[^122]

Nizam al-Mulk presents a picture of the typical minister serving at the
Court of an Oriental monarch, when he comes to enumerate the dangers
with which this important office was fraught, and the noble qualities
which were supposed to be the pre-requisites of the vizierate. He gives
a detailed account of them, supported by his personal experiences, or by
illustrations taken from contemporary history. It gives an idea of the
state of politics and administration in the medieval Orient in which a
vizier had to discharge his duties with so many powers to conduct the
government, and, at the same time, with so many risks of being suddenly
overthrown from office for any mistake.

The dangers in accepting his office, as he enumerates are:

a) The minister may do injustice to the people as he has to issue
numerous orders every day,[^123]

b) may please one man and displease thousands of others, high and low,
rich and poor,[^124]

c) he may displease the princes of the royal household by his acts and
may consequently incur the displeasure of the king,[^125]

d) he has to always deal with the nobles and grandees of the empire
whose hostility and hate might turn the king against him,[^126] and

e) there is a large number of officials of high and low ranks upon whom
he has to depend in discharging his duties, and their displeasure and
conspiracy may undermine his reputation and career.[^127]

All this renders the office of the vizier a difficult one, requiring a
man of sharp intellect and outstanding abilities. Nizam al-Mulk attempts
to lay down at length the essential conditions of this office which were
regarded in his days as the qualities of an ideal vizier. The duties of
the vizier, he says,[^128] are determined by his four-fold relations:
First, he is under the obligation of obedience to God, secondly, he owes
allegiance to the royal master, thirdly, he has to care for the
favourites of the king, and fourthly, he is concerned with the common
people.

One cannot fail to note that his whole discussion of the institution of
vizierate, like that of the office of kingship, is pervaded again by a
religious and moral outlook, arising out of his sincere regard for
religion. In the office of vizierate, as he treats it, diplomacy and
morality have been blended together, but emphasis is altogether on its
moral ends. To acquire merely worldly pomp and power, he says, should
not be the ultimate end of the vizier, what really befits this exalted
office is to seek real prestige and a good name in religious and worldly
matters.[^129] This can be achieved through upholding the right faith
and following the dictates of God faithfully.[^130] It is the duty of
the minister that he should strive hard to revive and propagate the
faith of Islam and try to attain the excellent moral virtues without
which divine favour is impossible. He comes to preach to the vizier a
sort of Sufi-like attitude towards political life when he says that he
should believe in the divine providence, and should regard his success
not as the fruit of his own efforts but as the result of the divine
will.[^131]

Then comes the king who is, according to Nizam al-Mulk, a
divinely-appointed authority. He is at pains to make him a point of
focus for the loyal sentiments of the whole political society and
especially of the official community among whom the vizier has a greater
obligation to pay homage to the king than anyone else.[^132] In order to
prove himself a truly obedient servant of his master, he says, the
vizier must refrain from seeking any sort of worldly pleasure, because
the greatest pleasure for a minister really consists, not in satisfying
his own desires, but in pleasing his royal master.[^133] Therefore, he
should direct all his efforts towards reforming the affairs of the
kingdom[^134] and increasing the wealth of the State,[^135] which is the
only way to please the king.

Finally, he advises the minister to have special regard for the
companions, courtiers, and other favourites of the king and the nobles
and high officials of the kingdom.[^136] They are always influential
figures in a feudal society headed by an absolute monarchy, and have an
important role in its politics. As their friendliness has great
advantages for the vizier, their antagonism may turn all against
him;[^137] therefore, he advises the vizier to be careful in handling
them. It is, however, remarkable about Nizam al-Mulk that, in spite of
dealing with the problems of an office of a diplomatic nature within the
framework of feudalism, which is always tainted with conspiracies, he
does not induce the vizier to follow cunning methods. Instead, he
believes in the moral standards of political conduct and insists that
the vizier “should steadily follow the path of truth and righteousness
in State affairs,” and this would serve to protect him from the enmity
of his foes and would ultimately convince them of his integrity.[^138]

Nizam al-Mulk’s importance as a political thinker must rest, not on the
practical suggestions he offered to improve the conditions of a
particular State, but on his theories of monarchy and minister ship. He
was the first to discover the moral and political principles of kingship
and vizierate and wherever the two institutions came into existence in
the Muslim world, his ideas served as their theoretical foundations. It
is evident from the references to his works in the writings of the
succeeding generations, that he was generally studied. Even the contents
of *Wasaya’* “were known far and wide,”[^139] long before they came to
be compiled in the form of a treatise in the ninth/15th century. The
vast literature on political ethics produced in later days, especially
the treatises written for the guidance of Muslim princes, contain a good
deal of the political principles which are enunciated for the first time
by Nizam al-Mulk. This may be considered to be his direct influence on
the later development of Muslim political thought.

Bibliogrraphy
-------------

‘Abd al-Razzaq Kanpuri, *Nizam al-Mulk Tusi*, Agra, 1912; Abu Ya‘la,
Mohammad b. Hussain ibn al-Farra’, *al-Aham al-Sultaniyyah*, ed.
Mohammad Hamid al-Faqqi, Cairo, 1357/1938; Qadi Ahmad Mian Akhtar
Junagarhi, “Al Mawardi: ASketch of His lilfe and works,” *Islamic
Culture*, Hyderabad in Deccan, India, July, 1944; Mohammad Kamil
Hussain, “‘Alam al-Islam Thiqat al-Imam, al- Majalis al-Mustansiriyyah,”
in *Makhtutat al-Fatimiyyin*, Cairo, n.d.; T. W. Arnold, *The
Caliphate*, O. U. P., 1924; Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali b. Hassan Bakharzi,
*Dumyat al­-Qasr,* ed. Mohammad raghib Tabbakh, Aleppo, 1349/1930; W.
Barthold, *Turkestan down to the Mongol Invasioni*, tr. H. A. R. Gibb,
Oxford University Press, 2nd ed., 1928; H. Bowen, “The Sargudhash-i
Sayyidna,” *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society*, London, Part 4, Oct.
1931; Article “Nizam al-Mulk,” *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, vol. 3,
London/Leiden, 1936;

E. G. Browne, *A Literary History of Persia*, vol. 2, T. Fisher Unwin
Ltd., London, second impression, 1915; “Yet More Light on ‘Umar-i
Kayyan,” *JRAS: A volume of Oriental Studies Presented to E.G. Browne*,
Cambridge University Press, 1922; ‘Imad al-Din Mohammad al-Asbahani
Bundari, *Zubat al-Nusrah w-al-Nukhbat al-‘Usrah*, ed. M. Th. Houtama,
Leiden 1889; A. Christensen, *L’Iran Sous les Sasanian*, tr. Mohammad
Iqbal, *Iran ba ‘Ahd-i Sasanian*, Anjuman-i Taraqqi-i Urdu, Delhi, 1941;
‘Ata Malik Juwaini, *Tarikh-i Jahan-Gusha*, Vol. 2, Gibb Memorial
Series, Leiden/London, 1937; Qadi Ahmad b. Mohammad Ghaffari, *Tarikh-i
Nigaristan*, Bombay, 1245/1829; H. A. R. Gibb, “Marwadi’s Theory of
Khalifat, *Islamic Culture*, Hyderabad Deccan, India, July 1937; Hamd
Allah Musaufi, *Tarikh-i Guzidah*, vol. 2, G.M.S. Leiden/London, 1910;

Hassan Ibrahim Hassan, *Tarikh al-Islam*, Vol. 2, Maktabat al-Nahdat
al-Misriyyah, Cairo, 1945; M. Ruknuddin Hassan, *‘Abd-i Salajiqah-i Uzma
ke Ba‘d Mumtaz Siyasi Mufakkir*, Thesis, 1946, Political Science Dept.,
Osmania University, Hyderabad Deccan, India, Hindu Shah b. Snajar b.
‘Abd Allah *Tajarib al- Salaf*, ed. ‘Abbas Iqbal, Teheran, 1313/1934;
ibn al-Athir, *al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh*, vols. 9, 10, Bulaq, 1290/1874;
‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. Mohammad ibn al-Jauzi, *al-Muntazain fi
al-Tarikh al-Muluk w-al-Umam*, vol. 9, Dairatul-Maarif, Hyderabad
Deccan, India, 1359/1939; ‘Ali b. Zaid al-Baihaqi ibn Funduq, *Tarikh-i
Baihaqi*, ed. Ahmad Bahman-yar, Chap Khanah-i Qanun, Teheran, 1317/1938;
ibn Khallikan, *Wafayat al-A‘yan*, vol. 1, Bulaq, 1299/1882; Mohammad
Iqbal, “Wasay-i Nizam al-Mulk,” *Oriental College Magazine*, Lahore,
vol. 4, No. 1, Nov. 1927; Imam al-Haramain Abu al-Ma‘ali ‘Abd al-Malik
b. ‘Abd Allah, *Ghiyath al-Umam*, MS. Bankipur Library, and the Law
Department of Osmania University, Hyderabad Deccan, India; Kaika’us b.
Iskandar b. Qabbus b. Washmgir, *Nasihat Nameh*, known as *Qabus nameh*,
ed. Reuben Levy, G.M.S., London, 1951;

Ahmad Hamid al-Din Kirmani, *Rahat al-‘Aql*, ed. Kamil Hussain and
Mustafa Hilmi, *Makhtutat al-Fatimiyyin*, Cairo, 1952; A.K.S. Lambton,
*Landlord and Peasant in Persia*, Royal Institute of International
Affairs, Oxford University Press, London, 1953; Niccolo Machiavelli,
*The Prince*, tr. L. Ricci, 1903, New American Library, New York 5th ed.
1955; Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali b. Mohammad al-Mawardi, *al-Ahkam
al-Sultaniyyah*, ed. R. Enger, Bonn, 1853; Nizam al-Mulk, *Siyasat
Nameh*, ed. C. Schefer, *De l’ecole des langues* *orientales vivantes*,
Paris, 1891; *Dastur al-Wuzara’* known as *Wasaya*, MS. British Museum,
London, Add. 26 – 267; *Nasa’ih-ia Khuwaja Nizam al-Mulk*, Bombay,
1305/1887; De Lacy O’Leary, *A Short History of the Fatimid Calphate*,
Kegan Paul, London, 1923; Plato, *The Republic*, tr. Benjamin Rawandi,
*Rahat al-Sudur*, G.M.S., Leiden, 1921; C. Rieu, *Catalogue of Persian
Manuscripts in the British Museuem*, London, 1879, Vol. 1; E. D. Ross,
*A Biographical Introduction to the Ruba‘iyat of Omar Khayyam*, tr.
Fitzgerald, Methuen, London, 1900;

Sadr al-Din Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali b. Nasir, *Akhbar al-Daulat
al-Salifuqiyyah*, ed. Mohammad Iqbal, Lahore, 1933; Sa‘id Nafiey,
*Tarikh-i Tammaddun-i Iran-i Sasani*, Chap-Khanah-i Danish-Gah, Teheran,
1331/1934; ‘Abd al-Karim b. Mohammad Sam‘ani, *Kitab al-Ansab*, G.M.S.,
Leiden/London, 1912; H. K. Ashraf, Lahore, 2nd ed., 1945; A.H. Siddiqi,
*Caliphate and Kingship in Medieval Persia*, Sh. Mohammad Ashraf,
Lahore, 1942; W. C. Smith, *Islam in Modern History*, Princeton
University Press, Princeton/Oxford University Press, London, 1957 Taj
al-Din Abu Nasr ‘Abd al-Wahhab al-Subki, *Tabqaqt al-Shafi‘iyyah*, Vol.
3, ed. Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Karim, Husainiyyah Press, Cairo, 1324/1906;
Sayyid Sulaiman Nadawi*, Khayyam*, Ma‘arif Press, Azamgarh, India, 1933
Mohammad Taqi Khan, *Ganj-i Danish*, Teheran, 1305/1887; J. Wellhausen,
*Arab Kingdom and Its Fall*, tr. Khuda Bakhsh, Calcutta, 1927; Ahmad b.
Abi Ya‘qub ibn Wadih Ya‘qubi, *Tarikh al-Ya‘gubi*, ed. M. Th. Houtsma,
Brill, Leiden, 1883.

[^1]: According to ibn Funduq ‘Ali b. Zaid al-Baihaqi, he was born in
470/1019 – 20; see Tarikh’i Baihaqi, ed. Ahmad Bahman-Yar, Chap Khanah-i
Qanun, Teheran, 1317/1938, p. 76.

[^2]: Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, Bulaq, 1290/1874, vol. 10, p.
77.

[^3]: Bundari, Zubdat al-Nusrah w-al-Nukhbat al-‘Usrah, ed. M. Th.
Houtsma, Leiden, 1889, p. 33.

[^4]: For a detailed description, see T. W. Arnold, The Caliphate, O. U.
P., Oxford, 1924, Chapters 4, 5; A.H. Siddiqi, Caliphate and Kingship in
Medieval Persia, Sh. Mohammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1942, Chaps 1 and 2.

[^5]: Shams al-Din Abu al-‘Abbas ibn Khallikan, Wafayat al-A‘yan, Bulaq,
1299/1882, vol. one, p. 179.

[^6]: ‘Abd al-Karim b. Mohammad al-Sam‘ani, Kitab al-Ansab, Gibb
Memorial Seires, Leiden/London, 1912, fol. 242a.

[^7]: Ibn Funduq, op. cit., pp. 78 – 79.

[^8]: Not Fandaruhi as in the Nasa’ih-i Khuwaja Nizam al-Mulk (MS.
British Muesum,Or. 256, fol. 7a), or Qanduzi as in the Dastur al-Wuzara’
(Ms. B. M. Add. 26, 267, fol. 5a), but Funduraji as in Sam‘ani, op.
cit., fol. 432a and in Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali b. Hassan al-Bakharzi, Dumyat
al-Qasr, ed. Mohammad Raghib Tabbakh, Aleppo, 1349/1930, p. 213.

[^9]: Wasaya-i Khuwaja Nizam al-Mulk, Bombay, 1305/1887, p. 6.

[^10]: Sayyid Sulaiman Nadawi, Khayyam, Ma‘arif Press, Azamgraph, 1933,
pp. 1 – 50. For further study, see E.D. Ross, A Biographical
Introduction to the Ruba‘iyat of Omar Khayyam, tr. Fitzgerald, Methuen,
London, 1900, Part 2, pp. 38, 76; E. G. Browne, A Literary History of
Persia, London, 1915, second ed. vol. 2, pp. 190 – 93; Arnold and
Nicholson, Eds., A Volume of Oriental Studies Presented to E. G. Browne,
Cambridge University Press, 1922, pp. 409 – 12; H. Bowen, “The
Sargudhasht-i Sayyidna,” JRAS, London, Oct. 1931, Part 5, p. 773 – 76.

[^11]: Ibn Funduq, op. cit., pp. 79 – 82.

[^12]: Ibn al-Athir, op. cit., vol. ten, p. 77.

[^13]: ‘Abd al-Razzaq Kanpuri, Nizam al-Mulk Tusi, Agra, 1912, p. 59.

[^14]: Taj al-Din Abu Nasr ‘Abd al-Wahhab al-Subki, Tabaqat
al-Shafi‘iyyah, ed. Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Karim, Husainiyyah Press, Cairo,
1324/1906, vol. 3, p. 136.

[^15]: Ibn Khallikan, op. cit., vol 1, p. 179.

[^16]: Taqi Khan, Ganj-i Danish, Teheran, 1305/1887, p. 350.

[^17]: Al-Subki, op. cit., p. 136; Sadr al-Din Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali b.
Nasir, Akhbar al-Daulat al-Saljuqiyyah, ed. Mohammad Iqbal, Lahore,
1933.

[^18]: Sadr al-Din, op. cit., p. 25.

[^19]: Hamd Allah Mustaufi, Tarikh-i Guzidah, Gibb Memorial Series,
London, 1910, Vol. 1, p. 443; Hindu Shah b. Sanjar b. ‘Abd Allah,
Tajarib al-salaf,m ed. ‘Abbas Iqbal, Teheran 1313/1934, p. 280.

[^20]: Wasaya, p. 37.

[^21]: Sadr al-Din, op. cit., p. 69; Hindu Shah, op. cit., p. 280.

[^22]: ‘Ala al-Din ‘Ata Malik al-Juwaini, Tarikh-i Jahan-Gusha, Gibb
Memorial Series, London, 1937, vol. 2, p. 193.

[^23]: ‘Abd al-Razzaq, op. cit., pp. 72 – 73.

[^24]: E. G. Browne, op. cit., London, 1915, Vol. 2, p. 212; Mohammad
Iqbal, “Wasaya-i Nizam al-Mulk,” Oriental College Magazine, Lahore, Nov.
1927, vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 1 – 8; Sulaiman Nadawi, op. cit., pp. 12 – 14;
H. Bowen, op. cit., Part 4, pp. 776 – 78.

[^25]: Charles Rieu, Notes on the Wasaya, MSS. British Museum, Or. 256,
& Add. 26 – 267;Catalogue of the Persian Manuscripts in the British
Museum, 1879, Vol. 1, p 446.

[^26]: Nasd’is, MS., British Museum,OR. 256 fol. 5b.

[^27]: Sulaiman Nadawi, op. cit., p. 12.

[^28]: H. Bowen, op. cit., p. 778.

[^29]: Idem, “Nizam al-Mulk,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, London, 1936, Vol.
3, p. 934.

[^30]: Siyasat Nameh, ed. Ch. Schefer, L’Ècole des langues Orientales
Vivantes, Paris, 1891, p. 1.

[^31]: Ibid., pp. 8, 210.

[^32]: Ibid., p. 2.

[^33]: Nayyir-i Rakhshan, Nawwab Dia al-Din Ahmad Khan of Delhi. Notice
pre-fixed to the Nasa’ih or Wasaya, MS. British Museum Or. 256 fol. 2a.

[^34]: ‘Ata Malik Juwaini, op. cit., p. 186.

[^35]: H. K. Sherwani, Studies in Muslim Political Thought and
Administration, Sh. Mohammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1945, second ed., p. 131.

[^36]: Ibid.

[^37]: Wasaya, p. 52.

[^38]: Abu Al-Hassan ‘Ali b. Mohammad al-Mawardi, al-Akham
al-Sultaniyyah, ed. R. Enger, Bonn, 1835.

[^39]: Mohammad b. Hussain Abu Ya‘ala al-Farra’, al-Ahkam
al-Sultaniyyah, ed. Mohammad Hamid al-Faqqi, Cairo, 1357/1938.

[^40]: Wasaya, p. 13.

[^41]: Imam al-Haramain Abu alpMa‘ali ‘Abd al-Malik b. ‘Abd Allah,
Ghiyath al-Umam, MS. Bankipur Library. There is a copy of this
manuscript in the Seminar Library of the law Department,Osmania
University, Hyderabad Deccan, India.

[^42]: For a study of their constitutional theories, see M. Ruknuddin
Hassan’s thesis, “‘Abd’i Salajiqah-i‘Uzma ke Ba‘d Mumtaz Siyasi
Mufakkir,” Seminar Library of Political Science department, Osmania
University, Hyderabad Deccan, India.

[^43]: Siyasat Nameh, pp. 7, 65, 88; Wasaya, pp. 43, 44, 46.

[^44]: Qadi Ahmad Mian Akhtar Junagarhi, “Al-Mawardi: A Sketch of His
Life and Works,” Islamic Culture, Hyderabad Deccan, India, July 1944, p.
298; H. A. R. Gibb, “Mawardi’s theory of Khalifat’” Islamic Culture,
July 1937, p. 292.

[^45]: Gibb, op. cit.

[^46]: Hamid Allah Mustaufi, op. cit., vol. 1, p. 437; Bundari, op.
cit., p. 8.

[^47]: Hamd Allah Mustaufi, op. cit., pp. 439, 449; Mohammad b. ‘Ali b.
Sulaiman Rawandi, Rahat alp-Sudur, Gibb Memorial Series, Leiden, 1921,
p. 105.

[^48]: Rawandi, op. cit, p. 111.

[^49]: ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. Mohammad ibn al-Jauzi, alpMuntazasm fi
al-Tarikh alpMuluk w-al-Umam, Diaratul-Maarif, Hyderabad Deccan, India,
1359/1939, pp. 61 – 62; Qadi Ahmad b. Mohammad al-Ghaffari, Tarikh-i
Nigaristan, Bombay, 1245/1829, vol. 9, p. 122.

[^50]: Siyasat, p. 5.

[^51]: Ibid., pp. 5 – 6.

[^52]: Ibid.

[^53]: Ibid., pp.6 – 7.

[^54]: Ibid., p. 151.

[^55]: Ibid., p. 7.

[^56]: Ibid., p. 29.

[^57]: Wasaya, p. 42.

[^58]: Ibid, p. 43.

[^59]: Siyasat, p. 6.

[^60]: Ibid., p. 9.

[^61]: Ibid., pp. 39, 43.

[^62]: Al-Mawardi, op. cit., p. 5; Abu Ya‘la, op. cit., pp. 3 – 4, 9;
Imam Al Haramain, Ghiyath al-Umam, fols. 29 – 31.

[^63]: For the Fatimid doctrine, see “‘Alam al-Islam Thiqat al-Imam,
al-Majalis al-Mustansiriyyah,” in Makhtutat al-Fatimiyyin, ed. Kamil
Hussein, Cairo, n.d., pp. 113 – 15.

[^64]: Siyasatm Chapters 43, 46, 47.

[^65]: Ibn Kallikan, op. cit., Vol 1, pp. 179 – 80.

[^66]: Siyasat, p. 10.

[^67]: Ibid., p. 163.

[^68]: For the iqta‘ system under the Saljuqs, see W. Barthold,
Turkestan down to the Mongol Invasion, tr. H. A. R. Gibb, Oxford
University Press, second ed., 1928, pp. 305 – 09; A. K. S. Lambton,
Landlord and Peasant in Persia, Royal Institute of International
Affairs, Oxford University Press, London, 1953, Chap. 3.

[^69]: Siyasat, p. 28.

[^70]: Ibid., p. 37.

[^71]: Ibid., p. 28.

[^72]: Ibid., p. 163.

[^73]: Ibid., p. 29.

[^74]: Ibid., p. 91.

[^75]: Ibid., p. 68.

[^76]: Ibid., p. 119.

[^77]: Ibid., p. 28.

[^78]: De Lacy O’Leary, A Short History of the Fatimid Caliphate, Kegan
Paul, London, 1923, pp. 3 – 4; J. Wellhausen, Arab Kingdom and Its Fall,
tr. Khuda Bukhsh, Calcutta, 1927, p. 67.

[^79]: Wasaya, p. 43.

[^80]: Siyasat, p. 7.

[^81]: Ibid.

[^82]: Ibid., p. 6.

[^83]: Ibid., p. 7.

[^84]: Plato, Republic, Bk. 5.

[^85]: For the exposition of teacher-Imam, see Ahmad Hamid alpdin
Kirmani, Rahat al-‘Aql, ed. Kamil Hussain and Mustafa Hilmi, Makhtutat
al-Fatimiyyin, Cairo, 1952, pp. 60 – 90.

[^86]: Siyasat, p. 54.

[^87]: W. Barthold, o. cit., p. 308.

[^88]: Siyasat, pp-. 54 – 55.

[^89]: Ibid., p. 55.

[^90]: “It is not, therefore, necessary for a prince to have all the
above-mentioned qualities (i.e., the conventional virtues), but is very
necessary for him to seem to have them. I would even be bold to say that
to possess them and always to observe them is dangerous, but to appear
to possess them is useful” Niccolo Machiavelli, The Prince, tr. L.
Ricci, 1903, New American Library, New York, 5th ed., 1955, Chap 18, p.
102).

[^91]: Siyasat, p. 55.

[^92]: Ibid.

[^93]: Ibid., p. 126.

[^94]: Ibid., pp. 8, 28, 37.

[^95]: Ibid., p. 210.

[^96]: W. C. Smith, Islam in Modern History, Princeton University Press,
Princeton/Oxford University Press, London, 1957, p. 36.

[^97]: Siyasat, p. 8

[^98]: Ibid.

[^99]: Ibid., p. 44.

[^100]: Ibid., p. 8.

[^101]: Ibid., pp. 44 – 45.

[^102]: Ibid.

[^103]: Ibid., p. 45.

[^104]: Ibid., p. 118.

[^105]: Ibid,. p. 39.

[^106]: Ibid., pp. 38 -39.

[^107]: Ibid., pp. 9, 43.

[^108]: Ibid., pp. 38 – 41.

[^109]: Ibid., p. 18.

[^110]: Ahmad b. Abi Ya‘qub, ibn Wadih al-Ya‘qub, Tarihk alpYa‘qub, ed.
M. Th. Houtema, Brill, Leiden, 1883, p. 202.

[^111]: Hassan Ibrahim Hassan, Tarikh al-Islam, Maktabat al-Hahdat
al-Misriyyah, Cairo, 1945, vol. 2, p. 196.

[^112]: Sa‘id Naficy, Tarikh-i Tamaddun-i Iran-i Sasami, Chap Khanah-i
Danish-Gah, Teheran, 1331/1912, pp. 231 – 32.

[^113]: A. Christensen, L’Iran Sous les Sassanides, Urdu tr., Mohammad
iqbal, Iran ba ‘Ahd-i Sasanian, Anjuman-i Taraqqi-i Urdu, India, Delhi,
1941, p. 148.

[^114]: Kaika’us b. Iskandar b. Qabus b. Washimgir, Nasihat Nameh known
as Qabus Nameh, Reuben Levy, G.M.S. London, 1951, Chap. 2.

[^115]: Wasaya, p. 11.

[^116]: Ibid., p. 11.

[^117]: Ibid, p. 48.

[^118]: Siyasat, p. 150

[^119]: Ibid., pp. 18 – 19.

[^120]: Wasaya, p. 63.

[^121]: Siyasat, p. 151.

[^122]: Ibid.

[^123]: Wasaya, p. 11.

[^124]: Ibid., p. 13.

[^125]: Ibid., p. 16 – 17.

[^126]: Ibid., pp. 22 – 23.

[^127]: Ibid., pp. 27 – 28.

[^128]: Ibid., p. 35.

[^129]: Ibid., p. 36.

[^130]: Ibid.

[^131]: Ibid., p. 39.

[^132]: Ibid., p.42.

[^133]: Ibid., p. 44.

[^134]: Ibid., pp. 45 – 46.

[^135]: Ibid., p. 47.

[^136]: Ibid., pp. 55, 56, 63, 68

[^137]: Ibid., p. 63.

[^138]: Ibid., p. 55.

[^139]: Ibid., p. 5.


