Chapter 39: Al-Ghazali
======================

The structures of political authority in Islam are by no means as simple
as it seems at first glance. In the legalistic theory of the caliphate
expounded by the Sunni jurists the *Shari‘ah* is quite obviously the
source of all authority, including political authority as well. As a
body of more or less concrete law, the *Shari‘ah* itself must be
authorized from some source, which is presumably qualified to judge
right from wrong.

Theoretically, the *Shari‘ah* is changeable from time to time, i.e. from
prophet to prophet, but the *Shari‘ah* of a prophet is the best law for
the time for which it is laid down. It is claimed that the Islamic law
is laid down for all times to come. It is elastic only in the sense that
some parts of one of its sources (the Qur’an) are given in such general
terms as are capable of different interpretations at different times,
and the validity of some parts of another source *(Hadith)* depends upon
historical authenticity. Human beings may not change the laws laid down
by the *Shari‘ah* but they my know them or not know them, interpret them
or not interpret them, obey them or disobey them. The pre-requisite for
the knowledge of the *Shari‘ah* is acknowledgement of the established
sources of the *Shari‘ah*, i.e. *usul al-din*. The pre-requisite for
obedience is belief.

The ultimate source is authority is God. It is only the good that God
commands and only the evil that He forbids. The principal difference
between the Sunni and later Shi‘ite persuasions is the Sunni doctrine
that the last and definitive revelation is the Qur’an, and Mohammad is
the last human being to be endorsed with revealed knowledge of right and
wrong. The successors of Mohammad may only know the *Shari‘ah* by
reference to the Qur’an, to the behaviour of Mohammad, and, wherever
these sources are not explicit, to the consensus of Muslims – or indeed
by reference to analogical judgment. Thus, the proximate sources of
authority are the Qur’an, the Sunnah, *Ijma‘* and *qiyas*.

The immediate source of authority is somewhat more difficult to
ascertain. Learning, or *‘ilm*, is necessary for the discovery of what
the *Shari‘ah* is, and this qualification is the source of the title
‘ulama’. The Sunni *‘ulma’* are distinguished from others by their
acknowledgement of the “canonical” sources of the *Shari‘ah*. However,
since there is no priesthood in Islam, the *‘ulama’* form an undefined
and unwieldy body. The business of discovering the law is at times very
much like legislation, but the non-officialised body of the *‘ulama’*
tend to convert their function to that of a huge, unwieldy board of
judicial review.

Obviously such action as might be undertaken by such a group must come
after the political fact, and because of the nature of the institution
the time-lapse between deed and decision might be generations. It would
be wrong to deny the *‘ulama’* any authority at all, for the ‘Abbasid
dynasty went to great lengths to secure the support of the *‘ulama’* and
to display respect for their judgments. The pattern of political
behaviour thus was carried on by subsequent Islamic rulers.
Nevertheless, it was characteristic of the Caliphs to claim the more
remote authority for their government.

In a sense the Muslim community, because of its intimate connection with
the principle of *ijma‘*, may be reckoned a source of authority.
However, since *ijma‘* is a source of the *Shari‘ah*, and since it is a
process rather than an institution, it cannot satisfy the requirement of
an immediate source of authority. As a source of the *Shari‘ah* it is
theoretically anterior to it, and, thus, a more remote source of
authority. In any case, it is still subject to “discovery” and
interpretation by the *‘ulama’*. As a process, its legislative efficacy
is similar to that of custom in Roman and Canon Law, so the time-lapse
is necessarily great.

The Muslim community is not only the Islamic Church, but it is also the
personal sphere of validity of Islamic government. Membership in the
community is the result of belief, and belief is the basis of obedience
to the *Shari‘ah*. The purpose of Islamic government is to see to it
that the *Shari‘ah* is obeyed. In other words, the part the community
plays in political affairs is primarily passive, although Islamic
government is clearly established for the benefit of the Muslims.

Regardless of the degree and kind of authority attributed to the
*‘ulama’* and the community, neither group ever wielded real political
power to transform their political function to that of an institution
authorizing the day-to-day acts of government. Theoretically, the Muslim
system all but disregards the question of power, practically, it is
another question. Ibn Khaldun is the most outstanding Islamic theorist
of those few who dealt with the problem of power. He asserts that power
and authority were joined in the Orthodox Caliphate.[^1] Ideally, of
course, power should reside with the immediate source of authority in
the community.

The relation of the caliphate to the *Shari‘ah* is more difficult to
define than that of the *‘ulama’* or the community. During the whole of
the Umayyad and the early part of the ‘Abbasid Caliphate, the Caliph is
much more the exponent of power than of authority. In the last centuries
of the ‘Abbasid Caliphate the Caliph could hardly be considered the
exponent of power either. Was he then the most immediate representative
of authority?

With the exception of the Qur’anic Law, the caliphate and the *Shari‘ah*
developed *pari passu*. The Sunnah of the Prophet did not become
constitutive until treated as such by the successors of the Prophet.
*Ijma‘* and *qiyas* are certainly later accretions. This historical fact
has tended to complicate the relationship of the Caliph and the
*Shari‘ah*. In the main, the Caliph is the executive of the *Shari‘ah*,
the commander-in-chief of the Muslim army, and the leader in formal
religious observances prescribed by the *Shari‘ah*.

Above all, the Caliph is the head of the religious institution in Islam,
only of the formalized part of it. Since religion was an all-inclusive
concept, he was also the political institution. The sub-ordination of
the Caliph to the *Shari‘ah* was most clearly expressed as a by-product
of early political controversy in the attacks on the piety and personal
behaviour of the Umayyad Caliphs.[^2] That the political behaviour of
the caliph must be in accordance with the *Shari‘ah*, was implicit in
‘Abbasid religious policy. The theoretical implications of this policy
were limited only to the function of the Caliph once appointed and as a
consequence fail to define the authority for the appointment of a
particular Caliph, or the authority for the institution itself.

The circumstantial authority arising out of the contention that the
Caliphs were properly executing the function of the Caliphate did not
exhaust the ‘Abbasid theory. Their personal claim to the office itself
was based both on agnate descent from the Prophet and the action of
divine Providence. This theory of constitutive authority was never
denied by Sunni theorists, but it was certainly omitted in the heavy
casuistical overlay which attempted to camouflage the fact of dynastic
succession.

In time the Sunni theory of the constitutional process came to be a
composite of the actual circumstances of the historical appointment of
various Caliphs. These various circumstances were codified in detail,
and with some juridical expansion by al-Mawardi,[^3] but the *Shari‘ah*
nature of the constitutional process had already been established.

Thus, the *Shari‘ah* was recognized as authority for the acts of the
caliph and for the manner of appointment of a particular Caliph, but
there remains the problem of the authority for the institution itself.
Al-Baghdadi’s answer that the Caliphate is required because there are
certain explicit *Shar‘i* duties incumbent upon the Caliph merely begs
the question.[^4] We must be satisfied then with the conclusion that the
authority of the Caliph is primarily circumstantial, i.e. he has
authority for what he does rather than for what he is.

What the Caliph is depends rather upon historical events, and this is
not surprising since the institution developed along with the
*Shari‘ah*. History has a legislative character in Sunni Islam, and the
Caliphate is the prime example of the legislative efficacy of history.
On the other hand, the effect of historical legislation is primarily
retrospective. As a result, we are told what the Caliph *was* and what
he *should* not be. Clearly, Sunni theories of the Caliphate are not
slavish descriptions of the obtaining conditions, but in so far as they
deviate from the merely descriptive, they also concentrate on the
function rather than the institution of the Caliphate.

So long as sufficient measure of power was attached to the Caliphate,
this question did not agitate Muslim theorists. We might say the
institution of the Caliphate was almost taken for granted. However, when
the Caliphs lost control of affairs, circumstantial authority had no
longer applied to the Caliphate. Al-Mawardi was very much aware of this
problem, but his treatment of it was entirely inadequate. He insists on
the legitimacy of the Caliph who is constrained by one of his military
sides, even though he expressly states that the “obligatory” character
of the Caliphate is derived from the Caliph’s duties as executor of the
*Shari‘ah*.[^5] Nevertheless, al-Mawardi has not necessarily
contradicted himself – he has simply failed to state explicitly the
source of Caliphal authority.

It was this omission which permitted theorists of the post-‘Abbasid
period to apply the criteria of circumstantial authority to the actual
but “unconstitutional” holders of power. The inevitable corollary was
the establishment of power as the constitutive authority of the Caliph.
Regarding the theory of al-Mawardi, our inference is that he considered
the constrained Caliph legitimate because of the validity of the
constitutional process by which he was appointed. The resulting
situation is pure anomaly, the authority of the Caliph is his
“constitutionality,” while the authority of his constrainer is
circumstantial (derived from his ruling in accordance with the
*Shari‘ah*), and the sum total is legitimate government.

Al-Ghazālī’s attempt to solve this problem is much more serious than
that of the preceding theorists. In many important respects his theory
departs from the well-established pattern of Sunni theory. On the other
hand, these divergences are carefully couched in terms calculated to
maintain the essentials of traditional Sunni theory. While remembering
that the classification of authority as functional, constitutional, and
institutional is only an analytical construction, which finds no place
in Islamic theory, we may find his classification helpful in analyzing
al-Ghazālī’s theory.[^6]

In referring to Islamic government al-Ghazālī uses the same term as his
predecessors. However, it is almost immediately clear that he has
something else in mind, and not the traditional Caliphate of even
al-Mawardi. He follows the prejudice in favour of a one-man government,
but his implication is clearly that of a multi-lateral rather a unitary
government. Most important of all is his association of the Caliph with
the Sultan. We shall return to this problem, but it is necessary to
realize that he assumes the co-operation of the Caliph and the actual
holder of power in his discussion of the obligatory character of the
Caliphate.

In keeping with the then traditional treatment of the question of the
obligatory character of the Caliphate, al-Ghazālī first directs his
argument against those who deny the Caliphate, and then against those
who deny its obligations altogether.[^7] The first argument is a
positive one, and concerns the institutional authority for the
Caliphate. The second is a negative argument, and sheds light on the
nature of the Caliphate and the duties attached thereto. After dealing
with these two arguments we shall discuss his treatment of the
constitutive process with special reference to the qualifications of the
Caliph and the constituent power.

The Mu‘tazilah asserted that the obligatory character of the Caliphate
was based on “reason” and not upon the *Shari‘ah*. The Sunni jurists
insisted upon the *Shari‘ah* as the basis of the Caliphate. Al-Ghazālī
follows the accepted Sunni line, but he develops his argument in a more
logical fashion, adding new elements. First, he states that the
Caliphate does indeed have utility, but he traces the proof of the
*Shar‘i* obligation of appointing an Imam first to *ijma‘* and, second
and more importantly, to the deduced will of the Prophet. He contends
that the will of the Prophet was the source of the consensus of the
community. His argument is that the prophet’s purpose was the formal
establishment of the religion of Islam. To secure this end both life and
livelihood must be protected. The appointment of an imam is, therefore,
obligatory. He also indicates that only through the performance of
formal religious observances may the bliss of the hereafter be achieved.

We have found the usual Sunni insistence upon the *Shar‘i* character of
the Caliphate inadequate for the definition of the institutional
authority of that office. In supporting this view, the Sunni theorists
point to no specific provisions of the *Shari‘ah*. Instead, they reason
from the prescribed duties, deducing the executive institution.[^8] The
weakness of their argument is manifest, for as we have seen, the
Caliphate existed in fact before any of its duties were defined. By the
addition of new elements to this argument, al-Ghazālī goes much further
towards a definition of the institutional authority of the Caliphate.
The most important innovation is his reference to the consensus of the
community, which is no less than the historical practice of the
community. Evidently, this is historically legislation.

Technically, the consensus by which the community has authorized the
institution of the Caliphate has reference to the consent of the
Companions of the Prophet to the establishment of the Orthodox
Caliphate. The phrase “consensus of the community” is sufficiently vague
to include the consensus of other generations as well. However, the
consensus of the community is not actually a legislative process, but
merely evidence of the fact that what has been approved by the community
is actually provided for in the *Shari‘ah*. Despite this legal detail,
we must conclude that the authority for the institution of the Caliphate
is derived from the community of the Muslims.

By the time al-Ghazālī wrote, the consensus of the community had become
a source of the *Shari‘ah* in its own right. The community at large has
been endowed by the grace of God with a special character, summed up in
the words of the Prophet, “My community will never agree in error.” The
important thing to note is the consensus implies unanimity, or very
nearly that. The community as a source of authority is then considered
collectively. *Ijma‘* is, as has been said, primarily a conservative
principle, tending to approve and perpetuate existing phenomena. But it
is correlatively a dynamic principle, expressing in a way the historical
continuity of the Islamic community. The institution of the Caliphate is
intimately bound up with the collective unity of the community, as well
as with its historical continuity.

Al-Ghazālī’s logical bent of mind will not allow to be satisfied with
the mere evidential fact of *ijma‘*. Clearly, *ijma‘* itself contains no
logic, while al-Ghazālī’s intention is to frame the requirements of the
*Shari‘ah* in a manner best calculated to convince the protagonists of
reason. Therefore, he goes back to the source of the *ijma‘* which is,
he says, the intention of the Prophet to organize the establishment of
Islam.[^9] Primarily, he is referring to the establishment of external
observances of the religion such as prayer, fasting, and pilgrimage, the
execution of the *hudud* punishments for such transgressions as drinking
and adultery, the maintenance of the *Shari‘ah* Law in such matters as
marriage and inheritance, and the administration of Islamic justice by
means of the Qadis.

Under these headings come the collection of taxes and the government
administration, for these are included either directly or indirectly in
the *Shar‘i* requirements concerning them. The Prophet may have desired
to accomplish other, less concrete things as well, but here the main
point is his purpose of organizing the administration of the (Sunni)
religion. Although it is here presented in slightly different terms,
this is the same old argument leading to the functional or
circumstantial authority of the Caliphate. Al-Ghazālī’s argument goes on
to show that the requirements of the *Shari‘ah* imply the requirement of
an institution of some sort to execute them. That institution, the form
of which has been authorized by the consensus of the community, is the
Caliphate.

Though al-Ghazālī rejected the argument of the Mu‘tazilah that the
obligatory character of the Caliphate is based upon reason, he agrees
with them that it does have utility. Utility is a concept with a minimum
of religious connotation. We have seen that the *Shari‘ah* contains very
many material provisions, but none of these could be classified by a
Muslim as merely utilitarian. Obviously, al-Ghazālī is referring to
governmental functions common to all centralized coercive orders, such
as the maintenance of order and the security of life and property. This
utility can only exist where power is present.

The subject of utilitarian power comes into al-Ghazālī’s argument again
when he attempts to prove that the Imamate is necessary for the
realization of the Prophet’s goal. It enters when he says that material
security is a pre-requisite for the carrying out of the *Shari‘ah*.[^10]
The concrete character of so many of the *Shari‘ah* provisions
necessitates, in the establishment of the *Shari‘ah* in the setting of a
civic religious institution.

Obviously, this implies the existence of a favourable disposed political
power. This is provided by the Sultanate. His conclusion is that the
Caliphate (execution of the Shari‘ah because of its relationship with
the Sultanate (coercive power) is required as a result of the objective
of the Prophet (the establishment and institutionalization of the
*Shari‘ah*). In the progress of this argument the Sultanate is brought
in without any explanation of the relationship of the bearer of power to
the Caliph; we only know that the function of the Sultanate is an
essential element of the authorized Caliphate.

In a later argument al-Ghazālī opposes those who deny the obligatory
character of the Caliphate altogether. Here we get into some confusion
of terms. The contention of al-Ghazālī’s opponents is that the Caliphate
has lapsed because there is no qualified person to serve in that
capacity.[^11] The implication of their statement is that the Caliphate
is not, therefore, a rigid requirement of the *Shari‘ah*. At least this
is in some measure the way in which al-Ghazālī chooses to understand
their argument. In his own approach al-Ghazālī definitely confuses the
terms obligatory (moral) and necessary (natural).

The argument is simple: there ought to be a Caliph, therefore, there
must be a Caliph, therefore, there is a Caliph. From this we are
probably justified in deducing that the opposing argument runs, there is
no Caliph, therefore, there need not be a Caliph, and therefore there is
no obligation to appoint a Caliph.

Al-Ghazālī’s final argument on this question is his asking what would
become of all those religious, social, economic, and political phenomena
which are regulated by the *Shari‘ah* if there were no Caliph.[^12] He
contends that without the existence of the Caliphate no judgment of a
Qadi, no contract, no testament would be valid. In other words, the
power of all Qadis and government officials is derived from the Caliph.
In theory, Islamic government is perfectly centralized. The authority
which any individual Qadi has is completely derived from the Caliph, and
not from the task he performs, as is the case of the Caliph’s own
authority. It is inconsistent, but there is no circumstantial authority
for sub-ordinate officials, their authority is only constitutive
(derived from the manner in which they were appointed). Thus, the
absence of the Caliphate would turn every normal human relationship into
sin, and lead to disorder and strife. He does not say what effect such
social disintegration might have on the chances of the individual Muslim
for salvation, but from other indications we may conclude that they
would be considerably reduced.

We are not much clearer on the nature of the Caliphate in al-Ghazālī’s
theory: (a) The Caliphate comprehends the necessary power to accomplish
the maintenance of order. (b) It represents or symbolizes the collective
unity of the Muslim community and its historical continuity. (c)
Deriving its functional and institutional authority from the *Shari‘ah*
in the community as well as the symbol of the divine guidance of the
Sunni community by virtue of its obedience to the *Shari‘ah*. It is not
coincidental that these three aspects of the Caliphate correspond to
al-Ghazālī’s three sources for the obligatory character of the
Caliphate: (a) utility, (b) *ijma‘*, and (c) the objective of the
Prophet.

So much for the Caliphate, what about the Caliph himself? Al-Ghazālī
joins the earlier theorists in giving a long list of qualifications
required of for the office. Ideally, al-Ghazālī’s qualifications are the
same as those of al-Mawardi’s. The Caliph must be without physical as
well as mental defects. He must be honourable, courageous, wise, and so
on. It must not be thought that these qualifications are mere words.
They do not represent abstract qualities, but rather their concrete
equivalents. Thus, he must be able to defend the Muslims against their
enemies and maintain internal order. He must be able to make judgments
in accordance with the *Shari‘ah*. He must be able to administer the
affairs of the State. Finally, he must be of Quraishite descent.
Al-Ghazālī adds that he must be an ‘Abbasid.[^13]

These requirements are very great, and it is not surprising that they
were, in reality, never completely fulfilled. The only stipulation which
had been fulfilled was that the Quraishite lineage, and for 300 and more
years before al-Ghazālī, the Quraishite Caliph, had been an ‘Abbasid.
This fact, more than anything else, represented the unity and historical
continuity of the Sunni community.

The inconsistency in al-Mawardi’s theory stems from the fact that he
insisted upon these qualifications in the Caliph, while permitting the
Caliph to be inactive. On the Caliph’s inactivity he clearly contradicts
his own words. At one point, al-Mawardi insists on the personal activity
of the Caliph, while at another he validates his being constrained by
one of his military sides. The reasons which might have justified
al-Mawardi’s equivocation were no longer effective in al-Ghazālī’s time.
We find al-Ghazālī facing the problem of the inactivity of the Caliph,
and the related problem of his qualifications.[^14]

To understand al-Ghazālī’s treatment of this problem we must bear in
mind his insistence upon the obligatory, even necessary, character of
the Imamate. We are not concerned with “an irresistible force” and an
“immovable object.” Al-Ghazālī tells us frankly that the necessity of
having an Imam is so great that it compels the alteration of the
qualifications when there is no other way out.[^15] The licence of
duress had, indeed, been applied previously by al-Mawardi to validate
the rule of “Amirs by Conquest,”[^16] but he does not seem to have been
able to bring himself to do the same for the constrainer of the Caliph.

At any rate, al-Mawardi did not permit, even in a case of duress, the
lowering of the qualifications of the Imamate. Perhaps al-Mustazhir was
obviously unqualified, or it might be that al-Ghazālī was more honest
than al-Mawardi; anyway al-Ghazālī is willing to concede many of the
qualifications in order to maintain the Caliphate. About the only
concrete thing that he insists upon is that the Caliph be of Quraishite
lineage. As a result, the personal qualifications of the Caliph are
hardly applicable to the nature of the Caliphate. On the other hand, the
symbolic character of the Caliph could not be more sharply drawn. In
other words, the Caliph himself represents only one of the three major
aspects of the Caliphate.

The qualifications of the Caliph are probably the well-developed part of
the constitutive process in the hands of Islamic theorists. But they are
very vague in their description of the constituent power. Al-Ghazālī
says there are three ways in which one of those who is qualified for the
Caliphate may be chosen: by designation of the Prophet, by designation
of the ruling Caliph or by designation of the holder of actual power.
Al-Ghazālī tells us that only the last alternative applies to his
time.[^17] Designation alone is not sufficient for appointment, for
there must be the *bai‘ah* as well. The *bai‘ah* must be performed by
the great man and the people of “loosening and binding” *(ahl al-hall
w-al-‘aqd)*.[^18]

It is not easy to ascertain who these people are, but we take the great
men to be those with some measure of power; and the people of loosening
and binding to be the *‘ulama’*; in concrete terms, this means that the
most powerful Saljuq leader appoints the Caliph, then the appointee is
recognized by the less Saljuqs, local princes, and the chiefs of the
bureaucracy, and finally the appointment receives the consent of the
*‘ulama’*. There is probably a fourth stage in which the appointment is
announced in the mosques, and the people accept the decision handed down
from above. In view of al-Ghazālī’s statement to the effect we must look
upon the holder of power, or the Sultan, as the constituent power. The
whole of the constitutive process beyond the bare fact of appointment by
the Sultan is a formality.

Al-Ghazālī’s treatment of the constitutive process by no means
contravenes the accepted requirements of the *Shari‘ah* in this matter.
It is true that al-Mawardi sets up special qualifications for those who
choose the Caliph, as Mawardi sets up special qualifications for those
who choose the Caliph, as well as for the Caliph himself. But, generally
speaking, the Sunni theorists are sufficiently vague about the question
of selectors to allow al-Ghazālī’s theory to meet their standards,
particularly since some of them at least insist that their need not be
more than one selector.

On the other hand, it is quite possible that he belittles the importance
of the *bai‘ah* of the *‘ulama’* too much. His reason for this is
probably that the important question for him was whether or not the
Sultan would choose anyone at all. But, of course, the Sultan’s primary
concern was that his choice should be acceptable to the *‘uluma’* and
the people. Were he not concerned with the attitude of these groups, and
perhaps his own salvation, the Sultan might dispense with choosing a
Caliph altogether. Having chosen a Caliph, he has gone so far towards
preserving law and order and the “establishment of Islam” that
al-Ghazālī cannot conceive the repudiation of his choice by the
*‘uluma’* or the people.

The constitutive process is, then, loosely speaking, a *Shar‘i* process,
but the constituent power is the Sultan. The limitations upon the
Sultan’s choice are real, as is the importance of the general *bai‘ih* ,
but since these have much greater reference to the functional and
institutional authority of the Caliphate, we shall do no more than make
a mental note of them here. Our conclusion is that the constituent
authority for the appointment of the Caliph is the Sultan.

There is no contradiction between this conclusion and our previous
statement that the source of all authority in Islam is the *Shari‘ah*,
for the *Shari‘ah* has a tendency to recognize existing power in the
constitutive process. Besides, as long as the Caliph had no power to do
anything, the most important aspect of *Shari‘ah* authority, i.e.,
functional authority, does not become operative. As a result, the
constituent authority of the Sultan is the critical political factor.
One might argue that the Sultan derives this authority from the
*Shari‘ah*, but that would not be what al-Ghazālī himself has argued.

From the foregoing, we can see that the Caliph is different from the
Caliphate, and that the authority for one differs from the authority for
the other. We must now examine the relationship of the Caliph to the
Caliphate, and of the Sultan to them both.

If the Caliph does not satisfy all the requirements of the Caliphate in
him, it is at least clear that he is its principal personal
representative. We have already established that the Caliph has a
special connection with the authoritative source of *ijma‘*. On the
other hand, we know that he cannot possibly be the personal subject of
functional authority, since he has no power. Contrarily, no governmental
act, unless performed directly or indirectly by the Caliph, has any
validity.

We have already seen the Sultan is, in some measure, the authority for
the Caliphate. However, the actual government in the world of Islam is
carried out by the Sultan. Circumstantial authority is not considered
sufficient to legitimize the government of the Sultan even if it is not
a conformity with the *Shari‘ah*.[^19] The only way in which the
government of the Sultan is valid and authorized is through its
recognition of the Caliph. As we have already stated, no government,
other than that of the Caliph, is valid under the *Shari‘ah*, and
sub-ordinate officials have only delegated authority, not functional.
Thus, the validity of the government of the Sultan is established only
upon the Sultan’s oath of allegiance to the Caliph, and the Caliph’s
appointment of the Sultan. By his exercise of the constitutive
authority, the Sultan recognizes the Islamic Sunni community, and in
theory, the functional authority which rests with the *Shari‘ah* proper.

The fact that al-Ghazālī accepts this compromise sheds some light on the
political objectives of Sunni theorists. The total achievement of this
arrangement is the recognition by the holder of power that the
*Shari‘ah* is the organizing principle of the Sunni community, and, in
more concrete fashion, the establishment of Sunni Islam. The element of
compromise enters when al-Ghazālī argues for the legitimacy of this
arrangement, even though the Sultan actually ignores many provisions of
the *Shari‘ah*. Recognition of the *Shari‘ah* by the Sultan with
obedience to its provisions is form without content. This leads us to
the second objective of the Sunni theorists, that is, the establishment
of order and maintenance of discipline.

The governmental scope of the Sultanate included very few of the
interests which concern modern governments. By the establishment of
order and the maintenance of discipline the Sultanate merely provided a
favourable field for the activity of the established Islamic
institution. Al-Ghazālī, therefore, felt justified in validating the
government of such a Sultan. He was willing to make concessions
regarding a limited number of *Shari‘ah* regulations in order to
preserve the religious life of the community.

Just as the Caliphate comprehends the function of the Sultan, so does it
also comprehend the religious and legal duties imposed by the
*Shari‘ah*. As we have said, the Caliphate is a religious as well as a
political institution of Islam. We have also seen that al-Ghazālī does
not insist upon the qualifications which the Caliph must have in order
to carry out his religious duties. If necessary, the Caliph may enlist
the aid of the most outstanding learned people of the day.[^20] The
principal political function of the *‘ulma’* is the interpretation of
the *Shair‘ah* in terms of the problems facing the community. In short,
by their approval of the Sultan’s choices of the Caliph *(bai‘ah)* and
by their *fatwas*, the *‘ulama’* express the functional authority of the
*Shari‘ah*.

The term caliphate stands for the whole of Islamic government. Although
al-Ghazālī seems to follow the traditional prejudices in favour of
autocracy, it is obvious that his is a multi-lateral conception of the
caliphate. In it there are three main elements: the Caliph, the Sultan
ad the *‘ulama’*, each corresponding in some aspect of the authority
behind Islamic government and each performing a function required by the
authority. The greatest virtue of al-Ghazālī’s theory is its political
realism, and yet he has maintained the essentials of the traditional
theory. Each of the parts of the Caliphate represents not only an aspect
of authority and a function of Islamic government, but also one of the
major elements of political power in the Sunni community.

Was al-Ghazālī’s theory an accurate description of the government of his
time? Such a development of the caliphate was the result of many diverse
and fortuitous events. Nevertheless, the roots of this development may
be traced back to the calculated policy of the early ‘Abbasids. The
early ‘Abbasids based their government upon the power of troops imported
from Khurasan, and not upon local Iraqi levies. They asserted their own
legitimacy upon the circumstantial fact, that they were ruling in
accordance with the *Shari‘ah*. They went out of their way to honour the
*‘ulama’* and give them a place at Court.

Ultimately, the success of the system depended upon the maintenance of
delicate balance of power, and upon the continued co-operation of those
forces. The fact of the matter was that when the relative power of each
element of the government changed it was not supported by the others.
Al-Ghazālī argued for the independence of the *’ulama’* and he urged
them to resist the blandishments of the Sultan. When the Sultan was
powerful he interfered with the succession to the Caliphate in a manner
calculated to lower the influence and prestige of that office. When the
Sultan grew somewhat weaker, the Caliph was eager to exercise local
power himself. Al-Ghazālī’s theory notwithstanding, the existence of the
Caliph alongside the Caliphate was an ever-present temptation to
re-establish the old order.

The multi-lateral conception of the Caliphate was not opposed to
al-Mawardi’s ideal construction. Al-Ghazālī did not reject the
traditional Sunni theory. In fact, al-Ghazālī sought only to explain the
political conditions of his own time in terms acceptable to traditional
Sunni thought. If he ground any axe at all, it was for the Sunni
*‘ulama’*, who were certainly a most conservative body. Nevertheless,
once the Caliphate could be resolved into its component parts, it became
possible for the rest of the parts to hobble along without the Caliph
himself. In this sense al-Ghazālī paved the way for the post-‘Abbasid
development of the Sunni political theory.

The original inspiration for al-Ghazālī’s theory of the Caliphate seems
to have come from his interest in Hellenistic thought. We find an
interesting statement of the same principle in no less an exponent of
the opposing “philosopher-king” theory than Nasir al-Din al-Tusi.
Al-Tusi says that the second possible variation of the supreme
government of the Virtuous City arises when all the qualities required
of a philosopher-king do not exist in one man, but are produced in
several men collectively.[^21]

More significant than the parallel passage in *Akhlaq-i Nasiri* is the
reflection of al-Ghazālī’s theory in the writings of ibn Taimiyyah. If
anything, ibn Taimiyyah was more enamoured of the past than al-Mawardi,
but by the time he wrote the ‘Abbasid Caliphate was no more. Ibn
Taimiyyah argued that legitimate Islamic government in his days was
composed of the Amirs and the *‘uluma’* acting in co-operation with one
another. Ibn Taimiyyah’s principle of “co-operation’ leads him to repeat
al-Ghazālī’s theory of divided authority in accordance with the
qualifications of various persons in opposition to the theory which
accorded complete authority to the ruling war-lord.[^22]

The origin and development of this principle present many difficulties,
but Laoust tells that ibn Taimiyyah was influenced rather by the Arab
Neo-Platonists, such as the Ikhwan al-Safa, than by al-Ghazālī.[^23] It
is unlikely that the idea itself originated with al-Ghazālī who was
himself deeply influenced in his youth by the Hellenistic movement in
Islam. Nevertheless, his application of it is to the Sunni caliphate was
certainly an innovation, and all the more noteworthy for its
reappearance two centuries later in the works of ibn Taimiyyah. It need
hardly be added that the *‘ulama’* did in fact assume a special position
of political authority as well as a part of the “original” Caliphal
functions in the ottoman State, and to a lesser extent, perhaps, in the
Mughul Empire in India.

Bibliography
------------

Al-Ghazālī, *al-Iqtisad fi al-l‘tiqad*, Cairo, n.d.; *Ihya’ ‘Ulam
al-Din*; al-Mawardi, *al-Akhum al-Sultaniyyah*; ‘Abd al-Qahir ibn Tahir
al-Baghdadi, *Usul al-Din*, Istanbul, 1928; al-Baqillani, *al-Tamhid*,
Cairo, 1947; ibn Khaldun, *Muqaddimah*, Beirut, 1900, Nasir al-Din Tusi,
*Akhlaq-i Nasiri*; Goldziher, *Muhammedanische Studien*, vol. 2;
*Streitschrift des Ghazālī gogen die Batinijia-Sekte*, Leiden, 1916;
Henry Laust, *essai sur les doctrines socials et politiques d’Ibn
Taimiya*, Cairo, 1939.

[^1]: Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddimah, Beirut, 1900, pp. 2-3ff.

[^2]: Goldziher has set forth the arguments of the early political
factions in Volume 2 of his Mohammedanicsche Studies.

[^3]: Al-Mawardi, al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah, Cairo, 1909, Chapter 1.

[^4]: ‘Abd al-Qahir ibn Tahir al-Baghdadi, Usul al-Din, Istanbul, 1928,
p. 272.

[^5]: Al-Mawardi, op. cit., p. 16

[^6]: Functional authority is that which authorizes each separate act of
the Caliph, without regard to the manner of his appointment.
Institutional authority is that which provides that there shall be such
an institution as the Caliphate. Logically, institutional authority must
precede functional authority, though the office and its duties are
conceptually joined. Constitutional authority provides for the manner in
which a Caliph should be appointed. It will usually be found that the
question of legitimacy in Islamic political theory relates to the
constitutive process, while functional lapses are regarded as
disqualifying and not illegitimating.

[^7]: Al-Ghazālī al-Iqtizad fi al-I‘tigad, Cairo, n,d., pp. 104 – 09.

[^8]: Al-Baghdadi, loc. cit,; al-Mawardi, op. cit., p. 3; see also
al-Baqillani, al-Tamhid, Cairo, 1947, pp. 185 – 86 “Concerning the
Purpose for which the Imamate is Established.”

[^9]: Al-Ghazālī, op., cit., p. 105.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 107.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Al-Ghazālī, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, Vol. 2; al-Haram w-al-Halal, p.
124.

[^14]: See Goldziher, Streitechrift des Gazali gegen die
Batinijja-Sekte, Leiden, 1916, pp. 80ff., for analysis and pp. 58ff.
text for al-Ghazālī’s early, detailed views, referred to in both Iqtisad
and the much later Ihya’.

[^15]: Iqtisad, p. 107; Ihya’, loc. cit.

[^16]: Al-Mawardi, op. cit., Chapter 3, pp. 27 – 28.

[^17]: Ihya’, loc.cit.

[^18]: Iqtisad, p. 107. The bai‘ah is important, even essential, but not
constitutive. Thus, according to al-Ghazālī, it a qualified Quraishite
is an actual holder of power, he may be appointed himself as Imam. (This
denied by al-Baqillani, al-Tamhid, p.180, and so may not be taken as a
generally accepted Sunni theory). Nevertheless, the bai‘’h remains
necessary, having only a declarative effect.

[^19]: Ihya’, loc. cit.

[^20]: Iqtipad, p. 107.

[^21]: Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, Akhlaq-i Nasiri, treatise 3, Chapter 3, p.
309.

[^22]: Henri Laoust, Esai sur les doctrines socials at politiques d’Ibn
Taimiya, Cairo, 1939, pp., 282, 294, 307, 315, 317.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 100, note 1.


