Chapter 12: Tahawism
====================

Tahawism by A.K.M Ayyub Ali, M.A, Ph.D, Principl Government Rajshahi
Madrasah, Rajshahi (Pakistan)

Tahawi’s Life and Works
-----------------------

Abu Ja'far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Salamah al‑Azdi, al‑Hajri, al‑Tahawi,
was born at Taha, a village in Upper Egypt. His forefathers came from
the Yemen to Egypt and settled there after it had come under the Muslim
rule. There is a considerable difference of opinion as to the year of
his birth. The years 229/843, 230/ 844, 238/852 and 239/853 are
mentioned by different biographers. Al‑Sam'ani asserts that he was born
in 229/843 and this is correct. He died in Egypt in 321/933.[^1]

Al‑Tahawi was mainly interested in Hadith and Fiqh, and was regarded as
one of the greatest *Muhaddithin* and *fuqaha'* of his time. According
to Abu Ishaq al‑Shirazi, he was the last leader of Hanafi Fiqh in
Egypt.[^2]

He began to study Shafi'i Law under his maternal uncle abu Ibrahim
Ismail al‑Muzani (d. 264/878), the most celebrated pupil of Imam
al‑Shafi'i, and then leaving his school he took up the study of Hanafi
Law under al‑Shaikh abu Jafar Ahmad b. abi ,\`Imran (d. 285/898), who
became the Chief Qadi of Egypt in 270/883. Different versions are given
by his biographers of his conversion to Hanafi school, but the most
probable reason seems to be that the system of Imam abu Hanifah appealed
to his critical insight more than that of Imam Shafi\`i.

Al‑Tahawi went to Syria in 268/882 for further studies in Hanafi Law and
became a pupil of Qadi abu Khazim \`Abd al‑Hamid b. Ja'far, the then
Chief Justice of Syria.[^3] He learnt hadith from a large number of
Shaikhs especially from those who visited Egypt at his time, and had
also many pupils of distinc­tion.[^4]

He is a distinguished author of many important works of which the
following may be mentioned here: 1. *Sharh Ma'ani al‑Athar*, 2. *Mushkil
al­ Athar*, 3. *Ahkam al‑Qur'an*, 4. *Ikhtilaf al‑Ulama'*, 5.
*al‑Nawadir al‑Fiqhiyyah*, 6. *Kitab al‑Shurut al‑Kabir*, 7. *al‑Shurut
al‑Ausat*, 8. *Sharh al‑Jami\` al‑Saghir*, 9. *Sharh al‑Jami' al‑Kabir*,
10. *al‑Mukhtasar*, 11. *Manaqib Abi Hanifah*, 12. *Tarikh al‑Kabir*,
13. *al‑Radd \`ala Kitab al‑Mudallisin*, 14. *al‑Radd \`ala Abi
\`Ubaid*, 15. *al‑Radd \`ala \`Isa b. Abban*, 16. *Hukm \`Aradi Makkah*,
etc.

His original contribution to Hadith literature, so far as we can
estimate is that he introduced a new system of collecting legal
traditions, developed a new method of interpreting and harmonizing the
conflicting traditions, and adopted a new criterion for criticizing
them. His predecessors and contem­poraries, the authors of *al‑Sihah
al‑Sittah* (the Six Canonical Compilations) collecting traditions
according to their own standards and principles, left out a large number
of genuine traditions.

Al‑Tahawi made a strenuous effort to collect all the genuine legal
traditions of the Prophet, narrated by different authorities on a
particular subject, together with the opinions of the Companions of the
Prophet, their Successors and the distinguished jurisprudents. He then
scrutinized traditions (*ahadith*) and showed by evidence which of them
were authentic, strong, weak, unknown, or such as might be supposed to
have been repealed.

Thus, his collection provided for the scholars an un­precedented
opportunity to judge for themselves the merits or demerits of a
particular tradition. The criterion for judging the genuineness of a
tradition, according to the Traditionists in general, was the *isnad*
(chain of the nar­rators), and so they paid greater attention to the
scrutiny of the *isnad* than to the scrutiny of the text (*matn*) of a
tradition. But al‑Tahawi, while scrutiniz­ing a tradition, took into
consideration the *matn* as well as the *isnad* of the tradition. He
also aimed at a harmonizing interpretation in case of conflicting
traditions.

Al‑Tahawi, like al‑Maturidi, was a follower of Imam Abu Hanifah (d. 150/
767) in jurisprudence as well as in theology. He wrote a little treatise
on theology named *Bayan al‑Sunnah w‑al‑Jama'ah*, generally known as
*al­\`Aqidat al‑Tahawiyyah*.[^5]

In the introduction to this treatise he says he will give therein an
account of the beliefs of the *Ahl al‑sunnah w’al‑jama'ah* according to
the views of Imam Abu Hanifah, Abu Yusuf, and Muhammad al‑Shaibani ‑ the
well‑known jurisprudents of the community. So the importance of his
creed lies in the fact that it corroborates the views of Imam Abu
Hanifah, the founder of the school, that have come down to us from
different sources. Al‑Tahawi made no attempt to explain the views of the
Imam or to solve the old theological problems by advancing any new
arguments. His sole aim was to give a summary of the views of the Imam
and to show indirectly that they were in conformity with the traditional
views of the orthodox school.

The difference between him and al‑Maturidi the two celebrated
authorities on the views of the Imam is quite evident. Al‑Maturidi was a
thorough dialectician and his main endeavour was to find out a
philosophical basis for the views of the leader and to support these
views by scholastic reasoning, and thereby bring them closer to the
views of the rationalists.

Al‑Tahawi, as a true traditionist, did not favour, as will be seen, any
rational discussion or speculative thinking on the articles of faith,
but preferred to believe and accept them without questioning. There is
no reference in his creed to the critical examination of the method,
sources, and means of knowledge, or the foundation on which his
theological system is built. So his system may be termed as dogmatic,
while that of al‑Maturidi as critical. The critical method followed by
al‑Tahawi in Hadith is quite lacking in theology. Thus, though both of
them belong to the same school and uphold faithfully the doctrines of
their master, they differ from each other in temperament, attitude, and
trends of thought.

In order to indicate the characteristics of the system of al‑Tahawi and
to make an estimate of his contributions to theology, we propose to give
in the following pages an outline of the views of Imam Abu Hanifah along
with the views of both al‑Tahawi and al‑Maturidi on some of the most
important theological problems that arose in Muslim theology.

Imam Abu Hanifah directed his movement against the Kharijites,
Qadarites, Mu'tazilites, Shiites, Jabrites, the extreme Murji'ites, and
the Hashwiyyah, the last being a group of the orthodox people who under
the influence of the converted Jews, Christians, and Magians fell into
gross anthropomorphism, and ascribed to God all the characteristics of a
created being.[^6]

He was the first theologian among the *fuqaha'* who adopted the
principles and method of reasoning and applied them to a critical
examination of the articles of faith and the laws of the Shariah. That
is why he and his followers were called by the Traditionists the People
of Reason and Opinion (*ashab al‑ra'i w‑al‑qiyas*). This rational spirit
and philosophical attitude were more consistently main­tained by
al‑Maturidi than by al‑Tahawi. Their views on the nature of faith,
attributes of God, beatific vision, divine decree, and human freedom may
be mentioned here to indicate the distinctive features of their methods.

Nature of Faith
---------------

Faith, according to the well‑known view of Imam Abu Hanifah, consists of
three elements: knowledge, belief, and confession; knowledge alone or
confession alone is not faith.[^7] Al‑Maturidi holds the same view and
lays emphasis on knowledge (*ma'rifah*) and belief (*tasdiq*). But,
according to his explanation, knowledge is the basis of faith and
confession is not in reality an integral part of faith but only an
indication (\`*alamah*) of faith, a condition for enforcement of Islamic
laws and enjoyment of the rights and privileges of the Muslim
com­munity. So the belief based on the knowledge of God is the basis of
faith.[^8]

Al‑Tahawi excludes knowledge from his definition of faith and holds that
it consists in believing by heart and confessing by tongue.[^9]

As regards the relation between faith and action Imam Abu Hanifah
main­tains that Islam demands from its followers two things: belief and
practice, and both are essential for a perfect Muslim. The two are very
closely related like back and belly, but they are not identical.
Practice is distinct from faith and faith is distinct from practice, but
both are essential elements of Islam. “Allah has ordained practice for
the faithful, faith for the infidel, and sincerity for the hypocrite.”
The term *al‑din* (religion) includes both faith and action.[^10]

Faith, according to him, is a living conviction of the heart ‑ an
absolute and indelible entity having its own existence independent of
action. From this definition of faith he arrived at the following
conclusions: (a) Faith is not liable to increase or decrease.[^11] (b)
Faith is impaired by doubt.[^12] (c) The faith­ful are equal in faith
but different in degree of superiority regarding practice.[^13] (d) No
Muslim should be declared devoid of faith on account of any sin, if he
does not declare it to be lawful. One may be a man of faith with bad
be­haviour, but not an infidel.[^14] (e) A believer who dies
unrepentant, even though guilty of mortal sins, will not remain in hell
for ever. Allah may grant him for­giveness or punish him in accordance
with his sins.[^15]

Pointing out the differences between himself and the Murji'ites, Imam
Abu Hanifah says: “We do not say that sins do not harm the faithful, nor
do we say that he will not enter hell, nor do we say that he will remain
there for ever, although he should be a man of evil practice (*fasiq*),
after having departed from this world as a man of faith. And we do not
say that our good actions are accepted and our sins are forgiven, as the
Murji'ites say.

But we say that no one who performs a good action, fulfilling all its
conditions and keep­ing it free of all defects, without nullifying it by
infidelity, apostasy, or bad conduct during any part of his life, shall
be neglected by God. God may punish in hell or grant complete
forgiveness to a person who commits an evil deed (polytheism and
infidelity excluded) and dies without repenting.[^16]

The Kharijites and Mu'tazilites laid so much emphasis on the doctrine of
threats (*wa\`id*) that they led the believers to despair and take a
depressing view of life; while the Murji'tes emphasized the doctrine of
promise (*wa'd*) so much that they quite endangered the ethical basis of
Islam. Imam Abu Hanifah endeavoured to strike a middle course between
these two extremes.

Sins, according to him, are not without consequences; a sinner is always
liable to blame or punishment, but to drive him out from the fold of
Islam, to declare him an infidel, or to condemn him to eternal
punishment is quite inconsistent with divine justice. His broad outlook
and tolerant attitude were consistently continued by al-Maturidi and
al‑Tahawi. The latter has summarized the views of his master on these
questions in the following words:

“We do not declare anyone of the people of *qiblah* an infidel on
account of a sin, so long as he does not deem it lawful. And we do not
say that sin with faith does no harm to him who commits it. We entertain
hope for the righteous among the faithful, but we have no certainty
about them, and we do not certify that they will be in paradise. We ask
forgiveness for their evil actions and we have fear for them, but we do
not drive them into despair. Sense of security and despair both turn a
man away from religion. The true way for the people of *qiblah* lies
midway between these two. A faithful servant does not go out of the
field of faith except by renouncing what had brought him into it.''[^17]

Al‑Tahawi substituted the phrase *ahl al‑qiblah* for *mu'min* and
Muslim, evidently to avoid the theological controversies regarding their
identification, and to make the circle of the believers wider and at the
same tune to give the question a practical bias. He also avoided the
theoretical definition of a Muslim or *mu'min*, and instead described
how one could be regarded as such. He says: “We give those who follow
our *qiblah* the name Muslim or *mu'min*, so long as they acknowledge
what the Prophet brought with him and believe in what he said and what
he narrated.”[^18]

Knowledge of God and belief in Him may save those who are guilty of
mortal sins from eternal punishment, and they may entertain hope of
deliverance from hell through divine mercy and the intercession of the
righteous. “Those who are guilty of grievous sins will not remain
eternally in hell, if they died as unitarians, even if they were not
repentant. They are left to God's will and judgment; if He wills He will
forgive them out of His kindness, as He has said: ***‘Surely Allah will
not forgive the setting up of other gods with Himself; other sins He may
forgive if He pleases;’*** [^19] and if He wills He will punish them in
hell in proportion to their sins as demanded by His justice. Then He
will bring them out of it through His mercy and the intercession of His
obedient people, and finally He will send them to paradise. This is
because Allah is the Lord of those who know Him well, and He has not
destined them in either world to be like those who denied Him, went
astray from His guidance, and did not obtain His help and favour.”[^20]

It may be noticed here that, although al‑Tahawi did not include
knowledge in his definition of faith, he was fully conscious of the
cognitive aspect of it.

As regards intercession, Imam Abu Hanifah seems to restrict it to the
prophets in general and particularly to Prophet Muhammad,[^21] but
al‑Tahawi extends this privilege to the righteous and the pious among
the faithful.

As regards the independent character of faith and equality of the
faithful, al‑Tahawi says: “Faith is one and the faithful are equal;
their comparative eminence lies in fear[^22] (of Allah), in
righteousness, in disobeying lust, and in pursuing what is best. All the
believers are friends of the Merciful. The most honourable among them
before God are those who are the most obedient and the best followers of
the Holy Qur'an.”[^23]

On the question whether it is obligatory for a man to know God before
the advent of His messenger, and whether to follow precedence
(*taqlid*)[^24] is allowed in matters of faith, al‑Tahawi does not
express his opinion explicitly, though his master was quite outspoken on
these questions. These questions pertain to the Mu'tazilites doctrine of
promise and threat (*al‑wa'd w’al‑wa'id*), which gave rise to the
discussion of the nature and value of reason and revelation.

They held that as God has endowed men with reason and they can easily
perceive by proper use of this faculty that the world has a creator, it
is obligatory on their part to know God even if the call of the Prophet
does not reach them. But they were divided as to whether knowledge of
God is acquired and a posteriori (*kasabi*) or necessary and a priori
(*daruri*).[^25]

Imam Abu Hanifah agreed with the Mu'tazilites on the original question
and main­tained that “no one can have any excuse for ignorance about his
creator, as he sees the creation of the heaven and the earth of his own
as well as of others. So even if Allah should not have sent any
messenger to the people, it was obligatory on them to know Him by means
of their intellect.”

God’s Essence and Attributes
----------------------------

As to the relation between God's essence and attributes Imam Abu Hanifah
is stated to have advised his pupils not to enter into discussion on
this ques­tion, but to be content with ascribing to God the qualities
which He Himself ascribed to Himself.[^26] He even once declined to
discuss this problem with Jahm.[^27] In order to avoid the difficulties
involved in affirming attributes, he simply declared that “they are
neither He, nor other than He” (*la huwa wa la ghairuhu*).[^28]
According to the explanation of al‑Maturidi, this phrase means that the
attributes of God are neither identical with nor separate from His
essence.[^29]

Al‑Tahawi made no reference to the philosophical problem of the relation
between God and His essence, nor did he make a clear distinction between
the attributes of essence and those of actions. But he emphatically
asserts the eternity of the attributes and says: “Allah has eternally
been with His attributes before He created the world and nothing has
been added to His qualities after the creation, and as He has been from
eternity with His qualities, He will remain with these to eternity . . .
.”[^30]

Expressing his vigorous attitude against the Anthropomorphists he
declared “Whosoever attributes to Allah any of the human senses
(*ma'ani*), he becomes an infidel.” The true path lies, he asserts,
between *tashbih* and *ta'til*. “He who does not guard against denial
(of attributes) and assimilation, slips and does not attain *tanzih*.
Verily our Lord the High and Exalted has been attributed with the
attribute of oneness and has been qualified with the quality of
uniqueness. No one of the creation possesses His qualities. Allah is
most high and praise be to Him. He is without limits, ends, elements,
limbs, and instru­ments. The six directions do not encompass Him as they
do the created things.”[^31]

It may be inferred from the above statement and the similar one in the
\`*Aqidah*, that al‑Tahawi is against the literal interpretations of the
anthropo­morphic expressions of the Qur'an, such as the face of Allah,
His eyes and hands, etc. But he does not indicate what these terms
signify. Abu Hanifah clearly states that these terms denote His
qualities. Even then he also is not in favour of giving any rational
interpretation of them, as he fears that this may lead to the denial of
His qualities.

He says: “He has hand, face, and soul as mentioned in the Qur’an, and
whatever Allah mentioned in the Qur'an as face, hand, or soul is
unquestionably His quality. It should not be said with the Qadarites and
the Mu'tazilites that by His hand is meant His power or His bounty,
because this leads to the rejection of certain attributes. Nay, His hand
is His attribute without description.”[^32]

The Imam had also adopted the principle of leaving the judgment to God
(*tafwid*)[^33] regarding the interpretation of the ambiguous verses of
the Qur'an; al‑Tahawi stuck to this principle very consistently.

He says: “The foot of Islam does not stand firm but on the back of
submission and surrender. Who­soever wishes to attain that knowledge
which was forbidden for him and whose intelligence does not remain
content with submission, his desire certainly hinders him from access to
pure concept of unity (*tawhid*), clear knowledge, and correct faith,
and he then wavers between faith and infidelity, belief and disbelief,
confession and denial as a sceptic, distracted, eccentric, and fugitive
person without being a faithful believer or a faithless
disbeliever.”[^34]

The attitude of al‑Maturidi on this question is more rational and
liberal than that of al‑Tahawi. According to the former, leaving
judgment to God and passing an interpretative judgment for oneself are
both allowed; and he is in favour of interpreting them in the light of
explicit verses of the Qur'an.[^35]

### Throne of Allah

Regarding the Throne of Allah (‘*arsh*) as mentioned in the Qur'an,[^36]
Abu Hanifah maintains that the expression should not be taken in the
literal sense to mean a particular place. God being the creator of place
cannot be thought of to be limited by place. He is where He has been
before the creation of place. Abu Muti\` al‑Balkhi, one of the disciples
of the Imam, asked him, “What will you say if anyone asks: \`Where is
Allah the Exalted?”' He replied: “He should be told that Allah has been
existing while there was no place before He created the universe; He has
been existing while there was no \`where (*aina*), no created being, nor
anything else. He is the creator of everything.”[^37]

Refuting the idea of the Anthropomorphists that God is in a particular
place, he declared: “ We confess that Allah has seated Himself on the
Throne without any necessity on His part, and without being fixed on it.
If He had been under any necessity, He would not have been able to
create the world and would have governed it like the created beings; and
if He should feel any necessity to sit down and remain seated, where
then was He before the creation of the Throne? God is exalted and high
far above such ideas.”[^38]

It is evident that, according to Abu Hanifah, God, being eternal and
in­corporeal, cannot be conceived as being encompassed by direction and
place. Al‑Tahawi, as has been quoted above, firmly holds this view. “God
is without limits, ends, elements, limbs, and instruments. The six
directions do not encompass Him as they encompass the created
things.”[^39] Referring to the Throne and the Chair, he states: “The
Throne and the Chair are realities as Allah described them in His
honoured Book. But He is not in need of the Throne nor of what is
besides the Throne. He encompasses everything and is above everything.
[^40]

Al‑Maturidi went a step further to allow rational interpretation of
those verses, the apparent sense of which created an impression of His
being in a place. He refuted the view of those who thought that the
Throne was a par­ticular place and God was on it, in it, or encompassed
by it, as well as the views of those who thought that He was in every
place.

According to him, God being eternal, infinite, and incorporeal is free
of time and space which imply rest, change, motion, and movement.
Explaining the verses[^41] which were interpreted to prove His being in
a particular place or in every place by the champions of these views, he
asserts that these verses refer to His creative function, controlling
power, absolute authority, sovereignty, eternity, and infinitude and
indirectly prove that He is above the limitations of time and
space.[^42]

### Beatific Vision

This question was discussed with much fervour by the Companions of the
Prophet. Besides their intense love of God and an ardent desire to enjoy
the happiness of seeing their Lord in the next world, the accounts of
Ascension (*mi'raj*), and the prayer of Moses to have a vision of his
Lord as referred to in the Qur'an,[^43] aroused in them fervent zeal for
a discussion of this topic. It seems quite certain that as a result of
this discus­sion they arrived at the following conclusions: (a) God is
invisible in this world; no human being saw Him or will ever see Him in
this world[^44] except the Prophet Muhammad who, according to some of
them, saw Him on the night of *mi'raj*; (b) God will be seen by the
faithful in paradise.[^45]

The eager inquiries of the Companions of the Prophet whether he saw his
Lord[^46] or whether believers will see Him in the next world[^47] and
the vehement opposition of a group of leading Companions, including
\`A'ishah, to the common belief that the Prophet saw his Lord,[^48] all
clearly indicate that the Companions were fully conscious of the
difficulties involved in answering these questions.

Their standpoint on this question, like that on the problem of essence
and attributes was just to believe and refrain from a detailed
discussion of such matters as cannot be comprehended by human reason.
The seeing of God in paradise was regarded by them as the highest
blessing and happiness for the believers and the summum bonum of their
life. They believed in it without description (*wasf*) or rational
explanation. (*ta'wil*).

The Anthropomorphists, in the subsequent period, found in this belief a
strong basis for their gross and crude anthropomorphic conception of
God. As God will be seen in paradise He must have body and form and may
be seen in this world, nay, He may even assume the form of a beautiful
man.[^49]

It was Jahm who, in order to oppose *tashbih*, laid great emphasis on
*tanzih* and quite consistently with his idea of abstract God denied for
the first time, according to our present information, the vision of God
in paradise.[^50] The Mu'tazilites adopted this view and interpreted the
beatific vision allegorically. Imam Abu Hanifah upheld the view of the
Companions and discarded both anthropomorphic and allegorical
interpretation of “seeing God.”

God will be seen by the faithful in paradise, he maintains, with their
bodily eyes, but without any idea of place, direction, distance,
comparison, or modality and without any description.[^51] Al‑Tahawi
maintains the same position and em­phasizes that beatific vision is an
article of faith and it must be accepted with­out any doubt, without any
rational interpretation, and without any idea of anthropomorphism. Any
attempt to interpret it by reason will amount, according to him, to the
denial of this tenet.[^52]

Al‑Maturidi also supported this orthodox view and opposed *tashbih* and
*ta'wil* and showed by elaborate discussion that the verses of the
Qur'an and the traditions of the Prophet on this question do not allow
any allegorical interpretation. His main argument, as we have already
seen, is that the conditions of seeing a physical object in this world
should not be applied to seeing God who has no body and no form and is
not limited by time and space, and that too in the next world where
nature of things and state of affairs would be quite different from what
pre­vails here.[^53]

### Speech of God and the Qur'an

Speech (*kalam*), according to Abu Hanifah, is an attribute of God
pertaining to His essence and is eternal like all other divine
attributes, and God speaks by virtue of this eternal speech.[^54] As
regards the relation between *kalam* of Allah and the Qur'an, he says:
“We confess that the Qur'an is the uncreated speech of Allah;
inspiration or revelation from Him is neither He nor other than He, but
His quality in reality, written in the copies, recited by the tongues,
and preserved in the breasts. The ink, the paper, the writing are
created, for they are works of men.

The speech of Allah, on the other hand, is uncreated; the writings, the
letters, the words, and the verses are signs (*dalalat*)[^55] of the
Qur'an for the sake of human needs. The speech of Allah is self‑existing
and its meaning is understood by means of these symbols. Whosoever says
that the speech of Allah is created, he is an infidel: His speech,
though recited, written, and retained in the hearts, is yet never
dissociated from Him.”[^56]

Abu Hanifah thus refutes the ideas of the Mu'tazilah who denied the
attribute of speech being identical with divine essence and declared the
Qur'an to have been created, as well as the ideas of those Mushabbihah
and Hashwiyyah (extreme orthodox) who thought that divine speech, like
human speech, con­sists of words and sounds and that the script in which
the Qur'an was written was as eternal as the Qur'an itself.[^57]

*Kalam* of Allah, according to him, is not identical with His Being, for
this will make His Being complex and lead to the plurality of Godhead;
nor can it be something other than Himself, for this will mean that He
acquired a new quality and became what He was not before. This also
implies imperfection and change in the divine nature; hence absurd.
Divine speech, therefore, must be eternal, and as the Qur'an is
uni­versally accepted to be the speech of Allah, it is necessarily
uncreated.

Al‑Tahawi treated this subject with great caution and condemned
controversies about the Qur'an and practically declined to enter into a
philosophical discussion on the nature of divine speech. He says:
“Verily the Qur'an ‑ the *kalam* of Allah ‑ originated (*bada*\`) from
Him as words without description (*bila kaifiyyah*) and He sent it down
to His Prophet as revelation; and the faithful believed it to be truly
as such, and they knew for certain that it was in reality the *kalam* of
Allah, the Exalted, not created like the speech of the created beings.
So whoever supposes it to be human speech is an infidel.”[^58]

The main point of controversy, it may be mentioned here, between the
Jahmiyyah and Mu'tazilah, on the one hand, and the orthodox, on the
other, was on the nature of the divine word and its relation to the
Qur'an, after they had all agreed that the Qur'an was the revealed book
of Allah. So al‑Tahawi, in fact, bypassed the main point at issue. He
also made no reference to the relation of the speeches of created beings
or that of Allah's word addressed to them such as to the Prophet Moses,
as mentioned in the Qur'an, with the eternal speech‑a problem, which
evidently bewildered the minds of Ja'd, Jahm, and their followers. Abu
Hanifah sought to remove this doubt with reference to the eternal divine
attributes of knowing and creating. “Allah had indeed been speaking
before He spoke to Moses, as Allah had indeed been creating from
eternity before creating any creatures.

So, when He spoke to Moses, He spoke to him with His speech which is one
of His eternal attributes.” Similarly, “whatever Allah mentions in the
Qur'an, quoting from Moses and other prophets and from Pharaoh and
Iblis, is the eternal speech of Allah about them. The speech of Allah is
uncreated, but the speech of Moses and other created beings is created.
The Qur'an is the speech of Allah and not their speech; therefore, it is
eternal.”[^59]

### Divine Will and Human Freedom

The all‑pervading will of God, His eternal decree (*qadar*) and infinite
power, on the one hand, and freedom of the human will and action, on the
other, are equally stressed in the Qur'an.[^60]

According to the Qur'an, divine will, decree, and power are not
inconsistent with human freedom. These problems were discussed by the
Prophet and his Companions. Belief in *qadar* was declared by the
Prophet as an article of faith, but at the same time he asserted that
*qadar* does not deprive a man of his freedom in his limited sphere.

Thus, according to the Qur'an and the Tradition, God is the creator of
all things including their nature, and nothing can go against this
nature. He is the creator of the human soul and its nature and He has
created in it free­will and bestowed upon it the faculty of knowing,
thinking, and distinguishing and the power of judging, choosing, and
selecting. God, being the omniscient creator, knows from eternity what
His creatures will do in future ‑ this is the “writing of the destiny”
and “the eternal divine decree.”[^61]

That the Prophet laid stress both on *qadar* and human freedom and on
the possibility of human action side by side with divine action, is also
evident from his famous saying on natural religion (*din al‑fitrah*):
“Every child at birth is born in the *fitrah*, then it is his parents
who make of him a Jew, a Christian, or a Magian.” This is testified by
the Qur'anic verse, “The *fitrah* of Allah in which He hath created
mankind, there is no change.”[^62]

The sayings of the Prophet that divine decree comprises all human care
and precautions for life, that prayer can change destiny,[^63] and that
God has provided remedy for every disease,[^64] and similar other
traditions also clearly indicate that the divine decree is not despotic
or tyrannical in its nature and that it does not imply any compulsion,
nor is it inconsistent with freedom and responsibility.

The Companions of the Prophet also believed both in *qadar* and human
freedom and emphatically denied the idea of compulsion (*jabr*). Some
promi­nent Companions explained *qadar* as foreknowledge. Abu Musa
al‑Ash\`ari said: “God decreed as He knew.”[^65] \`Abd Allah b. \`Amr
(d. 63/682) used to say: “The Pen has dried up according to the
knowledge of God.”[^66]

\`Ali (d. 40/661) gave a clear exposition of his view on the problem and
said: “Perhaps you think that the judgment (*qada'*) is binding and the
decree (*qadar*) is final. Had it been so, then reward and punishment
would be meaning­less and the promise and threat null and void, and no
reproach then should have come from Allah against a sinner and no
promise for a righteous person. This is the view of the brethren of
Satan .... Verily Allah has enjoined discre­tion, issued prohibitions,
and given warnings. He has not burdened (men) with compulsion, nor has
He sent the prophets in vain . . . .”[^67]

Imam Abu Hanifah made a bold attempt to harmonize the contradictory
views of the self‑determinists and the predeterminists by explaining the
nature of divine power, will, and decree and enunciating the doctrines
of natural religion (*din al‑fitrah*), divine help, and guidance
(*taufiq*), abandoning (*khadh­lan*) and acquisition (*kasb*). God had
knowledge concerning things before they existed from eternity, and His
will, decree, decision, and writing on the Pre­served Tablet are in
accordance with this foreknowledge. So the eternal decree is of a
descriptive nature and not of a decisive nature. God created men with
natural dispositions (*fitrah*), endowed them with intellect, then
addressed them and commanded them through His messenger to believe and
abstain from unbelief.

Thereupon some people deviated from this natural religion, disavowed
truth, and turned to unbelief. This unbelief is their own act, their own
acquisition, preferred by their free‑will, which God created in them,
and is not due to any compulsion from Him, but due to His leaving them
to themselves. Those who clung to their nature received divine help and
guidance. “Allah did not compel any of His creatures to be infidel or
faithful, and He did not create them either as faithful or infidel, but
He created them as individuals, and faith and unbelief are acts of men
.... All the acts of man, his moving as well as his resting, are truly
his own acquisition, but Allah creates them and they are caused by His
will, His knowledge, His decision, and His decree.” But while good
actions are according to His desire, pleasure, judgment, command, and
guidance, evil actions are not in accordance with these.[^68]

Al‑Maturidi, as we have already noticed, explained this view quite
elaborately and laid emphasis on the freedom of acquisition and choice.
Al‑Tahawi dis­courages all speculative thought on the subtle and
mysterious question of predestination (*taqdir*), because this may lead
one to despair and disobedience.[^69] But he asserts that all human
actions are creations in relation, to God and acquisition an relation to
men, and God is never unjust to them so as to burden them beyond their
power and capacity.[^70]

Conclusion
----------

It will be noticed from what has been said in the foregoing pages that
al­-Tahawi did not introduce any new doctrine or system in theology, but
sum­marized faithfully and honestly the views of his master on important
theological questions, in his own language. So “Tahawism,” in fact, does
sot imply a new school of thought in Islamic theology; it is only
another version of Imam Abu Hanifah's theological system. The importance
of al‑Tahawi’s creed, mainly consists in the fact that it makes the
position of his master quite clear. Imam Abu Hanifah occupied so
important a place in theology and law and his system exerted so much
influence on the educated mind that the Mu'tazil­ites, the Murji'iites,
and the orthodox equally claimed him for themselves. The Mu'tazilites
for this reason even denied his authorship of any book in theology.[^71]

Prominent pupils of Imam Abu Hanifah and his followers mainly engaged
themselves in a close study of the problems of practical life, and
generally it was they who occupied the posts of judges and legal
advisers during the reign of the \`Abbasids and even afterwards. By
virtue of their work they could get little time for a detailed study of
speculative theology.[^72]

Their trends of mind also, it appears, were not in favour of pure
speculation. Their time, energy, and genius were devoted to legal
studies, and theological speculation was left for others. Thus, their
contribution to theology is negli­gible in contrast to their
contributions to law and jurisprudence. A few of them, like Hammad and
Isma'il, the son and grandson of Abu Hanifah, Bishr al‑Marisi, Hafs
al‑Fard, Bishr b. Walid, Muhammad b. Shuja', and others who took some
interest in theology, could not quite consistently explain and expand
the views of their leader.

During the reign of al‑Mamun and his immediate successors, the Hanafi
judges openly supported the Mu'tazilites' stand on some of the
controversial questions and co‑operated with the rulers in suppressing
the views of the extreme orthodox. Besides the Mu'tazilites and the
Murji'ites, the followers of Imam Abu Hanifah themselves were divided in
interpreting his views.

Al‑Tahawi, like al‑Maturidi, rendered valuable services in removing the
doubts and confusions and making the position of the Imam quite clear.
The influence of al‑Tahawi on theology can easily be estimated from the
nume­rous commentaries written on his creed. In short, al‑Tahawi's
credit lies in the fact that he very nicely and elegantly presented the
summaries of the views of Imam Abu Hanifah, the first founder of the
theological school of Ahl al-sunnah ‑ summaries for which he must have
relied, besides the latter's works, on other reliable sources which had
already received recognition from a large number of orthodox people.

Bibliography
------------

Al‑Sam'ani, *al‑Ansab*, Leiden, 1912; Ibn Qutlubugha, *Taj al‑Tarajim*,
1862; Ibn al‑Nadim, *al‑Fihrist*, Cairo, 1348/1929; 'Abd al‑Qadir
al‑Qarashi, *al‑Jawahir at‑Mud'iyyah*, Hyderabad, 1332/1913; Jalal
al‑Din Suyuti, *Husn al‑Muhadarah*; Ibn Khallikan, *Wafayat al‑A'yan*;
al‑Dhahabi, *Tadhkirat al‑Huffaz*, Hyderabad, 1334/1915; 'Abd al‑Hayy
Lakhnawi, *al‑Fawa'id al‑Bahiyyah*, Cairo, 1324/1906; Muhammad Zahid
al‑Kauthari, *al‑Hawi*, Cairo, 1368/1948; Sadr al‑Din 'Ali b. Muhammad
al‑Adhra'yi, *Kitab Sharh al‑Tahawiyyah fi al‑'Aqidat al‑Salafiyyah*.
Mecca, 1349/1930;

Abu Hanifah, *al‑'alim w‑al‑Muta'allim*, ed. Muhammad Zahid al‑Kauthari;
*al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar*, Hyderabad; al‑Qari, *Sharh al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar*; *Sharh
al‑Wafiyyah*, Hyderabad; ibn 'Abd al‑Barr, *al‑Intiqa*. Cairo,
1350/1931; al‑Ash'ari, *Maqalat*, Cairo, 1950; Maturidi, *Kitab
al‑Tauhid*, MS. Cambridge; *Sharh al‑Taha­wiyyah*, Mecca, 1349/ 1930;
al‑Taftazani, *Sharh al‑'Aqa'id al‑Nasafiyyah*, Cawnpore. 1347/1928;
al‑Tahawi, *Bayan al‑Sunnah w‑al‑Jama'ah*, Halab, 1344/1925; al ­Biyadi,
*Isharat*; al‑Makki, *al‑Manaqib*; Bukhari and Muslim, “Kitab al‑Qadar”;
Wali al‑Din, *Mishkat al‑Masabih*, Delhi; ibn Hajar, *Lisan al Mizan*;
Yaqut, *Mu'jam*; Yafi'i, *Mir'at*; Haji Khalifah, *Kashf al‑Zunun*;
al‑Murtada al‑Zabidi, *al‑Munyat w‑al‑'Amal*, Hyderabad; Tash
Kubrazadah, *Miftah al‑Sa'adah*, Hyderabad.

[^1]: Al‑Sam'ani, al‑Ansab, Leiden, 1912, fol. 368; Ibn Qutlubugha, Taj
al‑Tarajim, ed. G. Flugel, Leipzig, 1862, p. 6; Ibn al‑Nadim,
al‑Fihrist, Cairo, 1348/1929, p. 292; \`Abd al‑Qadir al‑Qarashi,
al‑Jawahir al‑Mud'iyyah, Hyderabad, 1332/1913, Vol. I, pp. 102‑05; Jalal
al‑Din, al‑Suynti, Husn al‑Muhaddrah,Vol. I, p. 147; Ibn Khallikan,
Wafayat al‑A'yan,Vol. I, p. 19; al‑Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al‑Huffaz,
Hyderabad, 1334/1915, Vol. III, p. 28; \`Abd al‑Hayy Lakhnawi,
al‑Fawa'id al‑Bahiyyah, Cairo, 1324/1906, pp. 31‑34.

[^2]: Al‑Dhahabi, op. cit., Vol. III, p. 28; al‑Suyuti, op. cit., Vol.
I, p. 147.

[^3]: Cf. authorities cited above.

[^4]: Muhammad Zahid al‑Kauthari, al‑Hawi, Cairo, 1368/ 1948, pp. 6‑11;
al‑Qarashi, op. cit.; Lisan al‑Mizan.

[^5]: The \`Aqidah was published in Halab in 1344/1925. Several
commentaries were written on this creed (cf. Kashf al‑Zunun, Istanbul,
II, 1143) one of which named Kitab Sharh al‑Tahawiyyah fi al‑\`Aqidat
al‑Salafiyyah was published at Makkah in 1349/1930, and was ascribed to
Sadr al‑Din 'Ali b. Muhammad al‑Adhra'yi.

[^6]: It was \`Abd Allah ibn Saba, a convert from Judaism, who
introduced and propagated anthropomorphic ideas among the Muslims during
the caliphate of 'Ali. The foreign influence is traceable at the
background of all sorts of ideas of tashbih, tajsim, and hulul (cf., al.
Shahrastani, al‑Baghdadi). The anthropomorphic expressions in the Qur'an
were never understood by the Prophet or his Com­panions in the strict
literal sense.

[^7]: Abu Hanifah, Al‑'alim w‑al‑Muta'allim, ed. Muhammad Zahid
al‑Kauthari, pp. 13, 29, idem, al‑Wasiyyah, MS. Cairo, pp. 1, 2; al‑Fiqh
al‑Akbar, Hyderabad, p. 11; al‑Qari, Sharh Fiqh al‑Akbar, pp. 76 et
sqq.; Sharh Wasiyyah, Hyderabad, p. 75; ibn Abd al‑Barr al‑Intiqa,
Cairo, 1350/1931, p. 168; al‑Ash'ari, Maqalat, Cairo, 1950, Vol. I. p.
202.

[^8]: Maturidi, Kitab al‑Tauhid, MS. Cambridge, pp. 193 et sqq.;
al‑Makki, Manaqib Abi Hanifah, Vol. I, p. 148; Sharh al‑Tahawiyyah,
Makkah, 1349/1930, p. 261; al‑Taftazani, Sharh al‑\`Aqa'id
al‑Nusafiyyah, Cawnpore, 1347/1928, p. 91.

[^9]: Al‑Tahawi, Bayan al‑Sunnah w‑al‑Jama'ah, Halab, 1344/ 1925, p. 7.

[^10]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, pp. 10‑11; al‑Wasiyyah, MS. Cairo, p. 2; Sharh
al‑Wasiyyah. p. 78 ; al‑\`Alim w-al Muta'allim, pp. 12 et sqq.; Risalat
Abi Hanifah, ed. al‑Kauthari, pp. 35 et sqq.

[^11]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, p. 10; al‑Wasiyyah, p. 2; al‑\`Alim w‑al
Muta'allim. pp. 14 et sqq.; Sharh al‑ Wasitiyyah, p. 76; al Qari, Sharh
al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, pp. 78 et sqq.; Abu al‑Muntaha, Sharh al‑Fiqh
al‑Akbar, Hyderabad, pp. 58 et sqq.

[^12]: Al‑Wasiyyah, p. 2; Sharh al‑Wasiyyah, p. 77 ; al‑Fiqh al‑Absat
ed. al‑Kauthari, pp. 45 et sqq.; Musnad al‑Imam al‑A'zam, ed. Muhammad
\`Abid al‑Sindhi, Lucknow, 1316/1898, p. 12.

[^13]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, p. 10; al‑\`Alim w‑al‑Muta'allim, pp. 14, et
sqq.; Sharh al­-Wasiyyah, p. 76.

[^14]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, p. 9; al‑Fiqh al Absat, pp. 41 et sqq.; Risalat
Abi Hanifah, p. 37; al‑\`Alim w‑al‑Muta'allim, pp. 25 et sqq.; al‑Makki,
op. cit.,Vol. I, pp. 78et a'qq.; Musnad al‑Imam al A'zam, p. 10.

[^15]: Musnad al‑Imam al‑A'zam. pp. 11 et sqq.

[^16]: Abu Hanifah, al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar.

[^17]: Al‑Tahawi, al‑'Aqidah, p. 7.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 7 .

[^19]: Qur'an, iv, 48.

[^20]: Al‑Tahawi, al‑'Aqidah, p. 8.

[^21]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, p. 11.

[^22]: In the printed text the word is al‑Haqiqah which most probably is
al ­Khashiyyah, cf.Sharh al‑Tahawiayah, p. 261.

[^23]: Al‑\`Aqidah, pp. 7‑8.

[^24]: To act or believe on the authority of others.

[^25]: Cf. the views of the Mu\`tazilites, especially of \`Allaf and
al‑Nazzam, in al­-Badghadi's al‑Farq and Usul al‑Din, and
al‑Shahrastani's Milal. This question was discussed by the Mu'tazilites,
by Ghailan al‑Dimashqi (prose­cuted by Hisham b. \`Abd al‑Malik [d.
125/743]),who taught that knowledge is of two kinds: natural or
instinctive (fitri)and acquired (muktasab). Faith, according to him, is
the rational knowledge, not the instinctive knowledge. (Milal,Vol. I, p.
274; al‑Farq, p. 125; Maqalat,Vol. I, p. 200.)

[^26]: Al‑Biyadi, Isharat, p. 149.

[^27]: Al‑Makki, al‑Manaqib, Vol. I, p. 145.

[^28]: Al‑Wasiyyah, p. 4; al‑Biyadi, op. cit., p. 118.

[^29]: Al‑Isharat, p. 118; Sharh al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, ascribed to
al‑Maturidi, Hyder­abad, p. 19.

[^30]: al‑\`Aqidah, p. 4.

[^31]: Ibid., p. 5.

[^32]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, p. 6.

[^33]: Leaving the true meaning to the knowledge of Allah.

[^34]: Al‑\`Aqidah, p. 4.

[^35]: See the chapter on al‑Maturidi.

[^36]: Qur’an, vii, 54; xx, 5; xxx, 75; lix, 17, etc.

[^37]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Absat, p. 57.

[^38]: Al‑Wasiyyah, pp. 3‑4; Sharh al‑Wasiyyah, p. 81; Isharat, p. 195.

[^39]: al‑\`Aqidah, p. 5.

[^40]: This translation is according to the text given in the Sharh
al‑Tahaiyyah, p. 213.

[^41]: Such verses of the Qur'an as vii, 54; xx, 5; xliii, 84; lix,17;
1, 16; ivi, 58; lviii, 7.

[^42]: Kitab al‑Tawhid, pp. 32‑37; Ta'wilat, Surah vii, 54; xx, 5.

[^43]: Qur'an, vii, 143.

[^44]: “None among you will ever see his Lord till he dies” is a saying
of the Prophet, Isharat, p. 65.

[^45]: Traditions on this point have been narrated by more or less
thirty Companions: Sharh al‑Tahawiyyah, p. 24; Isharat, p. 205.

[^46]: Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, Vol. III, p. 9; al‑Nawawi, Sharh Muslim,
Cairo, 1929, Vol. III, p. 12.

[^47]: Al‑Nawawi, op. cit., Vol. III, pp. 17 et sqq.

[^48]: Ibid., pp. 8, et sqq.; Isharat, p. 317; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir,Vol.
II, pp. 161 et sqq.; Vol. IV, pp. 247 et sqq.

[^49]: Al‑Ash'ari, Maqalat, Vol. I, p. 263.

[^50]: Shahrastani, Milal, Vol. I, p. 137

[^51]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, p. 10; al‑Wasiyyah, p. 7 ; Sharh al‑Wasiyyah,
p. 97 ; Isharat, p. 201.

[^52]: Al‑'Aqidah, p. 4.

[^53]: Cf. the chapter on Maturidism.

[^54]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, p. 5.

[^55]: In one MS. the word. is alah. (instrument).

[^56]: Al‑W'asiyyah, p. 4; Sharh al‑W'asiyyah, pp. 82‑83.

[^57]: Al‑Ash'ari, Al‑Irshad, pp. 128‑29.

[^58]: Al‑\`Aqidah, p. 3; cf. p. 7.

[^59]: Abu Hanifah, al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, pp. 5‑6.

[^60]: Qur'an, vi, 39, 125, 149; xxii, 14; lxxxv, 16; lxxxvi, 30; liv,
49 and other verses referring to the divine will and decree. And the
verses: iv, 111; x, 44, 108; xi, 101; xiii, 11; xvii, 15‑17; 84; xviii,
29; xli. 46: x1v. 15, and many others refer to freedom.

[^61]: Cf. also verses of the Qur'an, 1, 4, 16.

[^62]: Bukhari and Muslim, “Kitab al‑Qadar”; also Qur'an, xxx, 30.

[^63]: Tirmidhi, “Kitab al‑Qadar.”

[^64]: Mishkat, “Kitab al‑Tibb.”

[^65]: Al‑Biyadi, op. cit., p. 33. This sentence has been chosen by
Bukhari as the heading of a section of “Kitab al‑Qadar” in his Sahih.

[^66]: Wali al‑Din, Mishkat al‑Masabih, Delhi, Ch. “Qadar,” p. 22.

[^67]: Al‑Murtada al‑Zabidi, al‑Munyat al‑\`Amal. Hyderabad, 1920, p. 7.

[^68]: Al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, pp. 7‑8; al‑Wasiyyah, pp. 3, 5‑6; Sharh
al‑Wasiyyah, pp. 79‑80, 84‑85; cf. al‑Makki, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 104;
al Bazzazi, al‑Manaqib, Vol. II, p. 84; ibn \`Abd al‑Barr, al‑Insab, pp.
164‑65.

[^69]: Al‑\`Aqidah, p. 5.

[^70]: Ibid., p. 11.

[^71]: Al‑Bazzazi, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 107; Tash Kubrazadah, Miftah al
Sa’adah, Hyderabad, 1328/1910, Vol. II, p. 29.

[^72]: Some books on theology were written by Muhammad al‑Shaibani,
al‑Hasan b. Ziyad and Zufar b. Hudhail‑all pupils of Abu Hanifah.


