Chapter 13: Maturidism
======================

Maturidism by A.K.M Ayyub Ali, M.A, Ph.D, Principal Government Rajshahi
Madrasah, Rajshahi (Pakistan)

A detailed discussion of the fundamental principles of Islam led Muslim
scholars in the second and third/eighth and ninth centuries of Hijrah to
philo­sophical reasonings on the nature and attributes of God and His
relation to man and the universe. As a result, a new science of Muslim
scholasticism called *'Ilm al‑Kalam* came into being.

As a matter of fact, it was the Mu'tazilites who laid the foundation of
this new science and made lasting contributions for its development.
They started their movement by adopting a rational attitude in respect
of some theological questions, but when they reached the height of their
power, they adopted an aggressive attitude towards their opponents. The
orthodox Muslims opposed the Mu'tazilite movement from the very
beginning and tried to refute their doctrines by the traditional method.
A section of the orthodox people took recourse even to violent methods.

Conflicting ideas and antagonistic attitudes created chaos and confusion
in Muslim thought and shook the foundation of old ideas and traditional
beliefs. The need for reconciliation and solving the crisis by adopting
a middle course and a tolerant attitude was keenly felt. At this
critical period of the history of Muslim theology there appeared, in
three parts of the Muslim world, three eminent scholars: al‑Maturidi in
Central Asia, al‑Ash'ari in Iraq, and al­-Tahawi in Egypt.

They all endeavoured to reconcile conflicting ideas and settle the
theological problems of the time by adopting a system that would satisfy
reason and conform to the general tenets of the Qur'an and the Sunnah.
They exercised profound and lasting influence on the subsequent
development of Muslim philosophy and theology and were considered to be
the fathers of the three schools of thoughts named after them.

Ash'arism and Tahawism have been dealt with in separate chapters; here
we are concerned with Maturidism.

Life and Works of Maturidi
--------------------------

Abu Mansur Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Mahmud, al‑Maturidi, al‑Ansari,
al‑Hanafi, was born at Maturid,[^1] a village or quarter in the
neighbourhood of Samarqand, one of the great cities of Central Asia.
According to some writers, he came of the renowned family of Abu Ayyub
al‑Ansari of Madinah.[^2]

This statement is also corroborated by the fact that some other Arab
families of Madinah also settled in Samarqand[^3] and that al‑Maturidi's
daughter was married to al‑Hasan al‑Ash'ari, the father of Imam Abu
al‑Hasan \`Ali al­ Ash'ari and a descendant of Abu Ayyub al Ansari of
Madinah.[^4]

Almost all the biographers who give only short sketches of al‑Maturidi's
life in their works agree that he died in the year 333/944, but none of
them mentions the date of his birth. One of the teachers of al‑Maturidi,
namely, Muhammad b. Muqatil al‑Razi is stated to have died in 248/862,
which proves that al‑Maturidi was born before that year and possibly
about the year 238/853. According to this assumption, al‑Maturidi was
born during the reign of the 'Abbasid Caliph al‑Mutawakkil (r.
232‑247/847‑861) who combated the Mu'tazilite doctrines and supported
the traditional faith[^5].

Al‑Maturidi flourished under the powerful rule of the Samanids, who
ruled practically the whole of Persia from 261/874 to 389/999 actively
patronized science and literature, and gathered around their Court as
number of renowned scholars.[^6] He was brought up in the peaceful
academic atmosphere and cultural environment of his native land and
received good education in different Islamic sciences under four eminent
scholars of his time: Shaikh Abu Bakr Ahmad b. Ishaq, Abu Nasr Ahmad b.
al‑\`Abbas known as al‑Faqih al‑Samar­qandi, Nusair b. Yahya al‑Balkhi
(d. 268/881), and Muhammad b. Muqatil al‑Razi (d. 248,/862), Qadi of
Rayy. All of them were students of Imam Abu Hanifah (d. 150/767)[^7]

In recognition of his scholarship and profound knowledge in theology
(and his invaluable services to the cause of *Ahl al‑sunnah
w‑al‑jama'ah*) people conferred on him the title of *Imam al‑Huda* and
*Imam al‑Mutakallimin*. Mahmud al‑Kufawi mentioned him as “leader of
guidance, the model of the Sunnite and the guided, the bearer of the
standard of *Ahl al‑sunnah w‑al ­jama'ah*, the uprooter of misguidance
arising from disorder and heresies, leader of the scholastics, and
rectifier of the faith of the Muslims.[^8]

*Works* ‑ Al‑Maturidi wrote a number of important books on *Tafsir*,
*Kalam*, and *Usul*, a list of which is given below:

1. *Kitab Tawilat al‑Qur'an* or *Tawilat Ahl al‑Sunnah.*

2. *Kitab Ma'khadh al‑Shari'ah*.

3. *Kitab al‑Jadal*.

4. *Kitab al‑Usul* (*Usul al‑Din*).

5. *Kitab al‑Maqalat*.

6. *Kitab al‑ Tauhid*.

7. *Kitab Bayan Wahm al‑Mu'tazilah*.

8. *Kitab Radd Awa'il al‑Adillah li al‑Ka'bi*.

9. *Kitab Radd Tahdhib al‑Jadal li al‑Ka'bi*.

10. *Kitab Radd Wa'id al‑Fussaq li al‑Ka'bi.*

11. *Radd al Usul al‑Khamsah li abi Muhammad al‑ Bahili*.

12. *Radd Kitab al‑Imamah li ba'd al‑Rawafid*.

13. *Kitab al‑Radd \`ala al‑Qaramitah*[^9]

Unfortunately, not a single work of al‑Maturidi has so far been
published. His *Tawilat al‑Qur'an, Kitab al‑Tauhid*, and *Kitab
al‑Maqalat* which are by far the most important and valuable of all his
works, exist only in manu­scripts. The *Tawilat al‑Qur'an* is a
commentary on the Qur'an in the scholastic method in which he
endeavoured to establish the liberal orthodox theology, both
traditionally and rationally, and to provide for it a sound basis.[^10]
Com­menting on this momentous work, Sheikh \`Abd al‑Qadir al‑Qarashi
says, “A unique book with which no book of the earlier authors on this
subject can have any comparison.”[^11]

In his *Kitab al‑Tauhid*, al‑Maturidi gave an elaborate exposition of
his system and sought to harmonize the extreme views of both the
traditionists and the rationalists. The book bears testimony to his
broad outlook, deep insight, and intimate acquaintance with the
philosophical systems of his time.

The evidence at our disposal at present shows that al‑Maturidi was the
first *Mutakalim* to introduce the doctrine of the sources of human
knowledge in a book on theology such as *Kitab al‑Tauhid* and thereby
made a thorough attempt to build up his system on a sound philosophical
basis. This method was followed by other theologians and the subject was
later on elaborately treated by the Ash'arite scholars, al‑Baqillani (d.
403/1013), and al‑Baghdadi (d. 429/1037).

Al‑Maturidi is one of the pioneers amongst the Hanafite scholars who
wrote on the principles of jurisprudence and his two works *Ma'khadh
al‑Shari'ah* and *Kitab al‑Jadal* are considered to be authoritative on
the subject.[^12]

It is evident from the list of works written by al‑Maturidi that he took
great care to refute the views and ideas of the Qarmatians, the Shiites,
and especially those of the Mu'tazilites. His contemporary abu al‑Qasim
\`Abd Allah al‑Ka'bi (d. 317/929) was the leader of the Mu'tazilite
school of Baghdad.[^13] Al‑Maturidi combated the doctrines of al‑Ka'bi
in his *Kitab al‑Tauhid* and wrote three books on criticism of
al‑Ka'bi's three books. It may be observed here that while al‑Maturidi
in the East engaged himself in fighting the Mu'tazilites in general and
particularly the Baghdad group, his contemporary al‑Ash'ari in Iraq took
a prominent part in resisting the Mu'tazilites of Basrah. But it appears
to us that al‑Maturidi began his movement long before al‑Ash'ari
appeared on the scene and most probably while the latter was still in
the Mu'tazilite camp.[^14]

Method
------

Al‑Maturidi in his *Kitab al‑Tauhid* gave a short critical account of
the different views regarding the matter and sources of human knowledge
and the best method to be followed in order to acquire knowledge. Means
of acquiring knowledge, according to him, are three: (1) Sense‑organs
(*al‑a'yan*); (2) Reports (*al‑akhbar*); (3) Reason (*al‑nazr*).

He severely criticized the conflicting views of different groups who
thought that knowledge is not attainable at all, or that senses cannot
supply true knowledge, or that reason alone is sufficient to give us all
knowledge. Refuting the views of those who deny or doubt the possibility
of knowledge altogether or the possibility of acquiring knowledge
through sense‑organs, al‑Maturidi says that even animals perceive by
their senses what may preserve or destroy them and what may be useful or
harmful to them.

So theoretical arguments with those who pretend to deny the objective
reality of things is useless. Yet he says, they may be humorously asked:
“Do you know what you deny?” If they say “No,” their denial stands
cancelled, but if they answer affirmatively, they admit the reality of
their denial and thereby become opposers of their opposing. A more
effective way than this is to make them subject to physical torture so
that they may be compelled to admit what they deny of the reality of
sensuous knowledge.

Reports are the means of acquiring knowledge concerning genealogy, past
occurrences, remote countries, useful and harmful things, foodstuffs,
medicine, etc. These are of two kinds, historical reports (*khabr
al‑mutawatir*) and reports of the prophets (*khabr al‑rusul*),
possessing sure signs to prove their honesty. Though both kinds of
reports are proved to be sources of knowledge, we should be very
critical in accepting reports of the prophets, because they are handed
down through chains of narrators who are not infallible and who may
commit mistakes in reporting.

Those who reject report as a source of knowledge are, al‑Maturidi
asserts, like those who reject sensuous knowledge. In order to convince
them, they should be physically tortured and if they complain of pain,
they should be told: Your words of complaint are nothing but reports
which cannot give us any real knowledge.[^15]

Reason, according to al‑Maturidi, is the most important of all other
sources of knowledge, because without its assistance sense and report
can give no real knowledge. Knowledge of metaphysical realities and
moral principles is derived through this source. It is reason which
distinguishes men from animals. Al‑Maturidi has pointed out many cases
where nothing but reason can reveal the truth. This is why the Qur'an
repeatedly enjoins man to think, to ponder, and to judge by reason in
order to find out the truth. Refuting the ideas of those who think that
reason cannot give true knowledge, he says that they cannot prove their
doctrine without employing reason.[^16]

Reason, no doubt, occupies a very eminent place in the system of
al-­Maturidi, but it cannot give, he holds, true knowledge concerning
everything that we require to know. Like senses, it has a limit beyond
which it cannot go. Sometimes the true nature of the human intellect is
obscured and influenced by internal and external factors such as desire,
motive, habit, environment, and association, and, as a result, it even
fails to give us true knowledge of things that are within its own
sphere. Divergent views and conflicting ideas of the learned concerning
many a problem are mentioned by al‑Maturidi as one of the proofs in
support of his statement.

Hence, reason often requires, he asserts, the service of a guide and
helper who will protect it from straying, lead it to the right path,
help it understand delicate and mysterious affairs, and know the truth.
This guide, according to him, is the divine revelation received by a
prophet. If anyone will deny the necessity of this divine guidance
through revelation and claim that reason alone is capable of giving us
all the knowledge we need, then he will certainly overburden his reason
and oppress it quite unreasonably.[^17]

The necessity of the divine revelation is not restricted, according to
al­-Maturidi, to religious affairs only, but its guidance is required in
many worldly affairs too. The discovery of the different kinds of
foodstuffs, medicine, inven­tion of arts and crafts, etc., are the
results of this divine guidance. Human intellect cannot give any
knowledge in respect of many of these matters, and if man had to rely
solely on individual experience for the knowledge of all these things,
then human civilization could not have made such rapid progress.[^18]

Al‑Maturidi refutes the idea of those who think that the individual mind
is the basis of knowledge and criterion of truth. He also does not
regard in­spiration (*ilham*) as a source of knowledge. Inspiration, he
argues, creates chaos and conflicts in the domain of knowledge, makes
true knowledge impossible, and is ultimately liable to lead humanity to
disintegration and destruction for want of a common standard of judgment
and universal basis for agreement.[^19]

It is evident from this brief account that reason and revelation both
occupy a prominent place in the system of al‑Maturidi. The articles of
religious belief are derived, according to him, from revelation, and the
function of reason is to understand them correctly. There can be no
conflict between reason and revelation if the real purport of the latter
be correctly understood. His method of interpreting the Scriptures may
be outlined in the following words: The passages of the Holy Qur'an
which appear to be ambiguous or the meanings of which are obscure or
uncertain (*mubham* and *mushtabah*) must be taken in the light of the
verses that are self‑explaining and precise (*muhkam*).

Where the apparent sense of a verse contradicts what has been
established by the “precise” (*muhkam*) verses, it must then be believed
that the apparent sense was never intended, because there cannot be
contradiction in the verses of the Holy Qur'an, as God has repeatedly
declared. In such cases, it is per­missible to interpret the particular
verse in the light of the established truth (*tawil*) or to leave its
true meaning to the knowledge of God (*tafwid*).[^20]

The difference between the attitude of al‑Maturidi and that of the
Mu'tazilites in this respect is quite fundamental. The latter formulated
certain doctrines on rational grounds and then tried to support their
views by the verses of the Holy Qur'an, interpreting them in the light
of their doctrines. As regards the traditions of the Prophet, their
attitude was to accept those which supported their views and to reject
those which opposed them.[^21]

Criticism of the Mu’taziltes
----------------------------

Al‑Maturidi always tried to adopt a middle course between the extreme
Rationalists and the Traditionists. He would agree with the Mu'tazilites
on many points, but would never accept the Aristotelian philosophy as a
basis of religious doctrines. Similarly, he is in accord with the
Traditionists on fundamentals, but is not ready to take the Qur'an and
the Hadith always in their literal sense and thereby to fall into gross
anthropomorphism.

He agrees with the Mu'tazilites that it is obligatory on the part of
every rational being to acquire knowledge of the existence of God
through his reason even if no messenger were sent by Aim for this
purpose; that things are intrinsically good or bad and the *Shari'*
(God) takes into consideration these values in His *amr* (command) and
*nahi* (prohibition); that God has endowed man with reason through which
he can often distinguish right from wrong.

But, contrary to the Mu'tazilites, he maintains that reason cannot be
the final authority for human obligation and religious law. The basis of
religious obligation, according to him, is revelation, not reason.[^22]
It seems that al‑Maturidi's view on this question and on the authorship
of human action, as will be seen, is mainly guided by the Qur'anic
verses such as ***“To Him belong creation and command.”***[^23]

Al‑Maturidi bitterly criticized the Mu'tazilite doctrine of divine
justice and unity. Their interpretation of divine justice led them to
deny the all‑pervading will and power of God, His authorship of human
action, and made Him quite helpless and subject to external compulsion.
Divine grace and mercy find no place in their system as is evident from
their view on grave sins. Their doctrine of *al‑aslah* (salutary) cannot
explain satisfactorily the existence of evil, natural calamities, and
sufferings of innocent children and animals.

According to their doctrine, man enjoys more power and freedom than the
Creator of the universe. They did not follow, al‑Maturidi tried to
prove, the explicit decisions of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, nor the
dictates of sound reason.[^24] Their interpretation of *tauhid* reduced
God to an unknown and unknowable non‑entity (*ta'til*).[^25]

Their view that Non‑Being is a thing (*al‑ma'dumu shai'un*) only
supports the atheists' doctrine of the eternity of the world, makes an
eternal partner with God, and thereby contradicts the Qur'anic doctrines
of creation and *tauhid*. They made God quite imperfect and subject to
changes by denying His eternally creative function.[^26]

Maturidi’s System
-----------------

Al‑Maturidi built up his own system mainly on two principles: freedom
from similitude (*tanzih*) and divine wisdom (*hikmah*). On the
principle of freedom from similitude he opposes similitude (*tashbih*)
and anthropomorphism (*tajsim*) in all their forms, without denying
divine attributes. The anthropomorphic expressions used in the Qur'an
like the hands, the face, the eyes of God, and His sitting on the Throne
should not be taken in their ap­parent sense, because the literal
interpretation of these expressions contradicts the explicit verses of
the Qur'an.

These passages, therefore, should be inter­preted in the light of the
clear passages of *tanzih* in a manner consistent with, the doctrine of
*tauhid*, and permissible according to the usage and idiom of the Arabic
language, or their true meanings should be left to the knowledge of
God.[^27]

On the principle of divine widom (*hikmah*) al‑Maturidi tried to
reconcile the conflicting views of the Determinists (Jabrites) and the
Mu'tazilites and prove for man certain amount of freedom, without
denying the all‑pervading divine will, power, and decree. Wisdom means
placing a thing in its own place; so divine wisdom comprises both
justice (*'adl*) and grace and kindness (*fadl*). God possesses absolute
power and His absoluteness is not subject to any external laws but His
own wisdom.[^28]

Al‑Maturidi applied this principle also to combat the Mu'tazilites'
doctrine of *al‑aslah* (best) on the one hand, and the orthodox view
that God may overburden his servants (*taklif ma la yutaq*) on the
other. It is inconsistent with divine wisdom, which includes both
justice and kindness, to demand from man performance of an act which is
beyond his power, such as to command a blind man: “See,” or to command
one who has no hands: “Stretch your hands.”[^29]

Similarly, it would be an act of injustice if God would punish the
believers in hell for ever or reward the infidels in paradise for
ever.[^30] He agreed with the Mu'tazilites on these questions in
opposition to the orthodox,[^31] but he strongly opposed the former's
doctrine that God must do what is best for man.

This Mu'tazilite doctrine, he argues, places God under compulsion to do
a particular act at a fixed time for the benefit of an individual and
denies His freedom of action. It only proves the right of a man on Him
and not the intrinsic value and merit of an action which the divine
wisdom keeps in view. Moreover, this doctrine cannot solve the problem
of evil. Al‑Maturidi, there­fore, maintains that divine justice consists
not in doing what is salutary to an individual, but in doing an action
on its own merit and in giving a thing its own place.[^32]

After this brief outline, we give below a somewhat detailed account of
al-Maturidi’s view on the most important theological problems of his
time, viz., the relation between God and human action, divine
attributes, and beatific vision.

### Relation between God and Man

Al‑Maturidi in his *Kitab al‑Tauhid* and *Tawilat al‑Qur'an* has dealt
at length with different aspects of this broad problem, the will, the
power, the eternal decree, and the creative function of God; His wisdom
and existence of evil in this world; freedom of man; and the basis of
religious obligation and responsibility, etc.

Al‑Maturidi combated the views of the Jabrites and the Mu'tazilites on
the above questions and he also disagreed with al‑Ash'ari on certain
points. Refuting the absolute determinism of the Jabrites, he says that
the relation between God and man should not be considered to be the same
as that between God and the physical world. God has endowed man with
reason, with the power of distinguishing between right and wrong, and
with the faculties of thinking, feeling, willing, and judging, and has
sent messengers and revealed books for his guidance.

Man inclines and directs his mind towards something which he thinks may
benefit him, restrains himself from what he thinks will harm him,
chooses one of the alternative courses of action by the exercise of his
own reason, and thinks himself responsible for the merits or demerits of
his actions.

Now, while he thinks, desires, inclines, chooses, and acts, he always
considers himself quite free, and never thinks or feels that any outside
agency compels him to do any of his actions. This consciousness of
freedom, al‑Maturidi asserts, is a reality, the denial of which will
lead to the denial of all human knowledge and sciences. Quoting passages
from the Qur'an[^33] he also shows that the actions enjoined or
prohibited by God are ascribed to men, and that they will be accountable
for their “own” actions.

All this clearly proves that God has granted men freedom of choice and
necessary power to perform an action. The denial of this freedom will
mean that God is wholly responsible for all human actions and is liable
to blame or punishment for sins committed by men, yet on the Day of
Judgment He will punish them for His own actions. This is quite absurd,
as God has described Himself in the Qur'an as the Most wise, just, and
compassionate.[^34]

But how can human freedom be reconciled with the Qur'anic conception of
the all‑embracing divine will, power, eternal decree, and God's
authorship of all human actions? Al‑Maturidi's explanations may be
summed up as follows.

Creation belongs to God alone and all human actions, good or bad, are
willed, decreed, and created by Him. Creation means bringing forth of an
action from non‑existence into existence by one who possesses absolute
power and complete knowledge in respect of that action. As man does not
know all the circumstances, causes, conditions, or the results of his
action, and does not possess within himself the requisite power for
producing an action, he cannot be regarded as the creator (*khaliq*) of
his action.

Now, when it is proved that God is the creator of all human actions, it
will necessarily follow that He also wills these actions, because divine
action must be preceded by divine will. So nothing can happen in the
world against or without the will of God. But, though God wills and
creates human actions, He is not liable to blame or accountable for
their actions, because divine will is determined by divine knowledge and
He creates the action when a man in the free exercise of his reason
chooses and intends to perform an action.

Thus, God wills an action good or evil, which He knows a man will
choose, and when ultimately he chooses and intends to acquire it God
creates that act as a good or evil act for him. From this, it will be
clear that God's willing or creating an evil action is not inconsistent
with His wisdom and goodness.

Because, God wills the happening of the evil because He desires the
individual to exercise free choice, but being wise and just He always
prohibits the choice of evil. So, though sins are in accordance with His
will, they are never in accordance with His command, pleasure, desire,
or guidance. Sin, then, according to al‑Maturidi, consists not in going
against the divine will, but in violating the divine law, command,
guidance, pleasure, or desire.

The basis of man's obligation and responsibility (*taklif*), al‑Maturidi
main­tains, does not consist in his possessing the power to create an
action, but it is the freedom to choose (*ikhtiyar*) and the freedom to
acquire an action (*iktisab*), conferred on man as a rational being,
which make him responsible and accountable.[^35]

As regards eternal divine decree (qada' and *qadar*) al‑Maturidi holds
that it is not inconsistent with human freedom, nor does it imply any
compulsion on the part of man, because it is an eternal record based on
foreknowledge. God decrees the act He knows from eternity that a man
will choose and acquire freely.

Man cannot deny his own responsibilities on the ground of the divine
decree, al‑Maturidi adds; he cannot do so on account of time and space
within which actions must be done. So, though man is not absolutely
free, God has granted him necessary freedom consistent with his
obligation and, therefore, the divine decree relating to human actions
should not be regarded the same as in relation to the physical
world.[^36]

It may not be out of place to note here the points of difference between
al‑Maturidi and al‑Ash'ari on this question. In order to make a man
responsible for his action al‑Maturidi laid great stress, as we have
just noticed, on the freedom of choice (*ikhtiyar*) and freedom of
acquisition (*iktisab*). Divine will, decree, and foreknowledge do not
deprive a man of this freedom.

An action is a man's own action, though created by God, because it is
the result of his own choice and it has been acquired by him without any
compulsion. God provided for him all the means and facilities for
acquiring an action, endowed him with the power of judgment and
self‑control, and granted him freedom to choose whatever means and
course he prefers to adopt.

Al‑Ash'ari also used the term acquisition (*kasb*)[^37] but interpreted
it differently. It seems that he did not favour the idea of the freedom
of choice. According to him, God being omnipotent, all objects of power
fall under His power, as God being omniscient all objects of knowledge
fall under His knowledge. So a man's will has no effect or influence at
all on his action; it is always determined by the divine will. Even the
desire and power of acquisition fall under divine power and are the
creation of God.[^38] Acquisition then; according to al‑Ash'ari, means
only a general coincidence of the divine power anal human actions.

It is God who in reality creates as well as acquires the action through
man. This view, as is evident, does not differ in essence from that of
the Determinists and hence he was regarded by some writers as being one
of them.[^39] Even most of the prominent Ash'arites like Qadi Abu Bakr
al‑Baqillani (d. 403/1013), Shaikh Abu Ishaq al‑Isfara'ini, and Imam
al‑Haramain al‑Juwaini (d. 478/ 1085) could not agree with him on this
question and gave different interpreta­tions of the term *kasb*.[^40]

### Divine Attributes

Human languages do not possess any term, al‑Maturidi says, to explain
the nature and attributes of God in a way that will not imply any idea
of resemblance or comparison. Yet it is a necessity for human
under­standing to ascribe some names and attributes to the Creator of
the world. Giving a critical account of the views of the philosophers,
the pluralists, the dualists, and the atheists, al‑Maturidi asserts that
the belief in one Supreme Power and Ultimate Reality is universal, but
the people differ greatly from one another in giving names and
attributing qualities to this Supreme Being. Among the people of
*tauhid*, it is only the Mu'tazilites, he says, who by denying the
divine attributes and their eternity endangered this universal belief in
the existence of one God.

Refuting the views of the Mu'tazilites on this question, he says that it
is agreed that God has beautiful names and it will be quite futile to
apply these names to Him divested of the meanings and contents which
they imply; for otherwise it will not be unreasonable to ascribe to Him
any name whatsoever. So, when, for example, it is said that God is wise,
it must mean that He possesses the quality of wisdom. The denial of the
divine attributes (*ta'til*) only creates confusions, makes the
knowledge of God im­possible, and ultimately reduces Him to an unknown
and unknowable Non­ Being. The denial of the eternity of the attributes
makes God imperfect in the beginning and subject to changes, and, thus,
it shakes the very basis of *tauhid*.

The idea of pluralism or anthropomorphism that may arise due to
affirmation of the eternal attributes can easily be eradicated by firm
belief in the absolute unity of God together with the idea of *tanzih*
(denial of likeness and similitude) and *mukhlafah* (difference from the
created being). Thus when we say that “God is knowing,” we also add to
this (as a safeguard against any blasphemous idea concerning Him), “but
not like the learned, and His knowledge is not like our knowledge.” The
consequences of the denial of the divine attributes or their eternity
are far more dangerous than those of their affirmation.

As regards the relation between divine essence and attributes,
al‑Maturidi says that the problem is so complicated that no human reason
can hope to solve it satisfactorily. So we should believe that God is
one, has attributes which He ascribes to Himself, without similitude,
comparison, and asking how. We should not go further than asserting that
“the attributes are not identical with nor separated from His essence”
(*la huwa wa la ghairuhu*).[^41]

Al‑Maturidi also maintains that all the attributes of God whether
belonging to His essence or action are eternal. The word *takwin* has
been used to denote all the attributes pertaining to action such as
creating, sustaining, etc. *Takwin*, according to al‑Maturidi, is an
eternal attribute distinct from power (*qudrah*).

So God is the creator before and after the creation. This does not
indicate in any way the eternity of the world, because as knowledge and
power are eternal attributes, though the objects of knowledge and power
are created, *takwin* is an eternal attribute, though the object of
*takwin* (*mukawwan*) is created. The non‑existence of the world at the
beginning does not imply God's inability, as He created it at the
appropriate time in accordance with His eternal know­ledge and
will.[^42]

Al‑Ash'ari on this question is in agreement with the Mu'tazilites and
holds that the attributes of action are originated.[^43] It seems to us
that he agreed with them in order to evade the Aristotelian argument
which aims at proving the eternity of the world by the eternal, creative
power of God. Al‑Maturidi's main argument is that the idea of the
createdness of any of the divine attributes is fundamentally opposed to
the conception of God as a perfect, self‑subsistent, eternal Ultimate
Reality and is, therefore, in conflict with the doctrine of *tauhid*.

As regards the Word of God (*Kalam Allah*), al‑Maturidi maintains that
like all other attributes His attribute of speaking as well as His
speech is eternal without similitude and comparison. The exact nature of
this eternal speech or the attribute of speaking is not known, but it is
certain that the divine speech cannot be composed of sounds and letters
like human speech, because sounds and letters are created.

So, in reality, he asserts, only the “meaning” of which the words are an
expression can be termed as the *kalam* of Allah. This “meaning” which
existed with God from eternity can be heard and understood only through
the medium of created sound.

Accordingly, Moses did not hear the eternal speech, but God made him
hear and understand the eternal speech through created words and sounds.
Now, what is heard by or revealed to the prophets is called the *kalam*
of Allah figuratively (*majazan*) for three reasons: (1) They heard
(understood) the purport (*al‑ma'na*) of the *kalam*, that is, divine
command, prohibition, forbidding, sanctioning, etc., which belong to God
alone. (2) God Himself composed it (*allafa wa nazama*); hence it was
inimitable by any human being. (3) It explains the eternal speech and
proves His attribute of speech.[^44]

It is evident from the above account that al‑Maturidi refutes the idea
of the orthodox section who identified the revealed Qur'an with the
eternal speech, and he agrees in principle with the Mu'tazilites who
held it to be a creation of God. So the subject of contention between
him and the Mu'tazilites is not whether the recited Qur'an is created,
but whether God has eternal speech and the attribute of speaking.

Al‑Ash'ari, like al‑Maturidi, maintains that God has eternal speech and
the attribute of speaking,[^45] but it is not clear from his lengthy
discourses in *Kitab al‑Luma* and *al‑Ibanah* what he exactly meant by
*kalam* of Allah and what, according to him, was eternal in the
Qur'an‑words or meanings? He maintained that the eternal speech could be
heard directly without the medium of created sound.[^46]

This statement, together with general trends of his ideas and his mode
of reasonings as reflected in his printed books, corroborates a
statement according to which both words and meanings were regarded by
him as eterna1.[^47] But al‑Shahrastani asserts that, according to
al‑Ash'ari, the words are created and the “mental” meaning (*al‑ma'na
al‑nafsi*) is eternal;[^48] this last is the view of all the eminent
Ash'arites.[^49] If so, there is not much differ­ence on this question
between the Mu'tazilites and the Ash'arites.

### Beatific Vision

It has been noticed that al‑Maturidi, like the Mu'tazilites, strongly
opposed the anthropomorphic idea of God and interpreted meta­phorically
those passages of the Qur'an which appear to create such an impression.
But on the question of seeing God in paradise by the believers, he is
wholly in agreement with the orthodox, and firmly holds that the
passages of the Qur'an and the traditions of the Prophet on this subject
must be taken in their literal sense.

By scholastic reasonings he shows that the letter and spirit of these
verses and traditions do not allow us to take them allegorically and to
interpret seeing God as “seeing His signs and rewards or knowing Him by
the heart.” This latter type of seeing is common for believers and
non­believers in the next world and may even happen in this world. The
texts must always be taken in their literal and real sense, he argues,
except where that is impossible.

The vision of God in the next world is not impossible and it does not
necessarily prove His corporeality, and hence if the literal sense were
rejected, its consequences would be dangerous and it might ultimately
lead to the denial of the existence of God. As God is knowing and doing;
for example, without His being a body or accident or without His being
limited by time and space, so will He be an object of vision in the next
world. Some people were misled because, as they had no experience of
seeing what is not a body or an accident, they compared the vision of
God in paradise with the vision of a material object in this world.

Thus, the Corporealists (*Mujassimin*) erred in saying that God is a
body, because He will be seen, and the Mu'tazilites erred in saying that
He cannot be seen because He is not a body. Conditions of vision,
al‑Maturidi says, differ from stage to stage, person to person, and
genus to genus. Many things exist, but we do not see them. Angels who
are not corporeal beings see us, though we do not see them. Conditions
of seeing: rays of light, darkness, and shadow, are not the same as
those of seeing solid material objects.

So it is quite unreasonable to apply the conditions of seeing a physical
object in this world to the seeing of the Being which is not a body in
the next world, where conditions will be totally different from those in
this world. Seeing God, therefore, may be impossible in this world, but
not in the next world.

He also argues that vision may not happen sometimes for some reason or
other, although the conditions of vision exist; in the same way, vision
may happen in the absence of those conditions. Another argument of his
is that, according to our sense‑experience, only the knowledge of matter
and accidents can be acquired by a man, yet we assert the possibility of
acquiring knowledge of the realities beyond experience. This principle
is also applicable to beatific vision.

In short, al‑Maturidi asserts that the vision of God in paradise is the
highest spiritual and intellectual delight and the most coveted reward
of the believers; it is an article of faith based on the Qur'an and the
Sunnah and supported by reason. So we must accept this as such, without
going into details.[^50]

Conclusion
----------

The theological systems of al‑Maturidi and al‑Ash'ari have long since
been accepted by the general populace of the Muslim world. Though
ascribed to them, neither al‑Maturidi nor al‑Ash\`ari was, in fact, the
author of his system, nor was either of them a pioneer in this field.
Imam Abu Hanifah (d. 150/767) was the first renowned scholar among the
Ahl al‑sunnah wa’l Jama'ah, who studied theology for long before he had
taken up the study of Fiqh, combated the heretical sects of his time,
and founded the first orthodox school in theology.[^51]

Al‑Maturidi followed his system, explained it in the light of the
philosophy of his time, tried to defend it by argument and reason, and
this provided for it a firm foundation. Hence this school is ascribed to
its founder as well as to its interpreter who fixed its ultimate form
and brought victory to it.

The difference between the attitude of al‑Maturidi and of al‑Ash'ari may
be judged from this: If al‑Ash'ari's attempt during the later period was
to strike a middle path between rationalism and traditionalism,
al‑Maturidi certainly took a position between what may be called
Ash'arism and Mu'tazilism. The important points of difference between
these two leaders of orthodox *Kalam*, more strictly, between the two
schools, have been reckoned by some writers as fifty in number.[^52]
(References have already been made in the fore­going pages to some of
the most important of them and we need not enter here into a discussion
of the rest.)

As a result of these differences, there was once a tendency of bitter
rivalry between the followers of these two schools but happily in course
of time this tendency subsided and both the schools were regarded as
orthodox. But how profoundly the educated Muslims of today are
influenced by the system of al‑Maturidi may easily be realized from the
fact that the \`*Aqa'id* of al‑Nasafi (d. 537/1142), which gives the
sub­stance of the former's *Kitab al‑Tauhid*, has been recognized as an
authority and prescribed as a text‑book on theology in many educational
institutions of the Muslim world.

A comparative study of the arguments employed by al‑Maturidi and by the
great Ash'arite scholars like \`Abd al‑Qahir al‑Baghdadi (d. 429/1031)
and Imam al‑Haramain al‑Juwaini (d. 478/1085) to prove the non‑eternity
of the world, the existence of God, His unity and attributes, the value
of human reason, the necessity of the divine revelation, and the
prophethood of Muham­mad, will show how deep and enormous his influence
was on the orthodox dialecticians who came after him, and what a lasting
contribution he made towards the development of orthodox Kalam.

That Shaikh Muhammad \`Abduh (d. 1323/1905), one of the leaders of the
modern reform movement in Islam, in his endeavour to reconstruct Islamic
theology, closely followed the system of al‑Maturidi, is evident from
his *Risalat al‑Tauhid* and his observations on several controversial
questions in his note on the *Sharh \`Aqa'id al‑\`Adudiyyah*.

Bibliography
------------

Al‑Sam'ani, *al‑Ansab*; Ibn al Athir, *al‑Lubab*; Ahmad Amin, *Zuhr
al‑Islam*, vol. 1; al‑Maturidi, *Kitab al‑Tauhid*, MS., Cambridge, fol.
1; Sayyid Murtada, *Sharh Ihya'*, vol. II; \`Abd al‑Qadir al‑Qarashi,
*al‑Jawahir al‑Mud'iyyah*, MS., Cairo; Mahmud al‑Kafawi, *Kata'ib*
*A\`lam al‑Akhyar*, MS., Cairo; Qasim b. Qutlubugha, *Taj al‑Tarajim*,
Leipzig, 1862; Tash Kubrazadah, *Miftah al‑Sa'adah*, Hyderabad, 1928;
\`Abd al‑Hayy Lakhnawi, *al‑Fawa'id al‑Bahiyyah*, Cairo, 1324/1906;
Kamal al‑Din al‑Biyadi, *Isharat al‑Maram*, Cairo, 1949;Hajji Khalifah,
*Kash al. Zunun*, Istanbul, 1943; 'Ali al‑Qari, *Sharh al‑Fiqh
al‑Akbar,* Cairo, 1323/1905; Zuhdi Hasan, *Al‑Mu'tazilah*, Cairo, 1947;
al‑Ash'ari, *Kitab al‑Luma'*; Maqalat, Cairo; Imam, al‑Haramain,
*al‑\`Aqidat al‑Nizamiyyah*; *Sharh al‑\`Aqa'id al‑\`Adudiyyah*;
al‑Baghhdadi, *al‑Farq*;

Muhammad b. al‑Murtada al‑Yamani, *Ithar al‑Haqq*; Ibn al‑Nadim,
*al‑Fihrist*; al‑ Shahrastani, *Milal*; \`Abd al‑Rahim, *Nazm
al‑Fara'id*, Cairo; al‑Makki and Bazzaz, *al‑Manaqib*; \`Abd Allah b.
\`Uthman, *Risalah fi al‑Khilaf bain al‑Ash'ariyyah' wa’l Maturidiyyah*,
MS., Cairo; Goldziher, *Vorlesungen uber den Islam*, Heidelberg, 1910;
*Islamische Philosophie des Mittelalters in Kultur des Gegenwart*; T. J.
de Boor, *Geschichte der Philosophic im Islam*, Stuttgart, 1901;
Maimonides, *La Guide des Egares*, ed. and tr. S. Munk, Paris, 1856‑66;
S. Harovitz, *Uber den Einfluss der griech.* *Philosophy auf die
Entwicklung des Kalam*, Breslau, 1909; K. Lasswitz, *Geschichte der
Atomistik*, Hamburg/Leipzig, 1890.

[^1]: The word is also pronounced as Maturid and Maturit. Cf,
al‑Sam'ani, al‑Ansab, fol. 498b; Ibn al‑Athir, al‑Lubab, vol. III, p.
76; Ahmad Amin, Zuhr al‑Islam. vol. I, p. 365. It was wrongly
transcribed by some writers as Matarid.

[^2]: Al‑Maturidi, Kitab al‑Tauhid, MS. Cambridge, fol. 1, footnote al
Sayyid Murtada, Sharh Ihya' of al‑Ghazali, Cairo, 1893, V ol. II, p. 5.

[^3]: Imam Abu Nasr al‑'Ayadi, al‑Samarqandi, one of al‑Maturidi's
teachers, was a descendant of Sa'd b. \`Ubadah, vide 'Abd al‑Hay
Lakhnawi, al‑Fawa'id al ­Bahiyyah, Cairo, 1324/1906, p. 23.

[^4]: Al‑Sam'ani, op. cit., fol. 498.

[^5]: Abd al‑Qadir al‑Qarashi, al‑Jawahir al‑Mud'iyyah, MS. Cairo, p.
251 (it has been printed at Hyderabad); Mahmud al‑Kufawi, Kata'ib A'lam
al‑Akhyar, MS. Cairo, pp. 129‑30; Qasim b. Qutlubugha, Taj al‑Tarajim,
Leipzig, 1862, p. 44; Tash Kubrazadah, Miftah al‑Sa’adah, Hyderabad,
1928, vol. II, p. 22; Sayyid Murtada, op. cit., vol. II, pp. 5‑14; \`Abd
al‑Hayy Lakhnami, op. cit., p. 195.

[^6]: For Samanids see al‑Maqdisi, Ahsan al‑Taqasim, p. 294; Ahmad Amin,
op. cit. vol. I, pp. 261 et sqq.

[^7]: Kamal al‑Din al‑Biyadi, Zaharat at‑Maram, Cairo, 1949, p. 23;
Sharh Ihya' vol. II, p. 5, and books on Hanafi ,Tabaqat.

[^8]: Kata’ib A'lam al‑Akhyar, p. 129.

[^9]: Three other works, viz., Sharh Fiqh al‑Akbar of Imam Abu Hanifah,
'Aqidah abi Mansur and Sharh al‑Ibanah of Imam al‑Ash'ari are
erroneously ascribed to him.

[^10]: MSS. of this book are found at the Cairo, Istanbul, and Berlin
Libraries. Sheikh 'Ala al‑Din Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ahmad al‑Samarqandi
wrote a com­mentary on this book in eight volumes, an incomplete copy of
which can be found at the Patna Library.

[^11]: Al‑Jawahir al‑Mud'iyyah, MS. Cairo, p. 251.

[^12]: Kashf al‑Zunan, Istanbul, 1943, vol. I, pp. 110‑11.

[^13]: For al‑Ka'bi, see al‑Shahrastani, Milal, al‑Azhar ed., vol. I,
pp. 116‑17; al‑Baghdadi, Kitab al‑Fariq, Cairo, pp. 108‑09.

[^14]: Al‑Ash'ari was born in 260/873 or 2701883 and remained in the
Mu'tazilites' camp up to the fortieth year of his age, so he must have
begun his movement after the end of the third century of Hijrah.
Al‑Maturidi was born before 248/862, and supposing that he spent about
thirty years in acquiring knowledge, then his move­ment seems to have
begun before the end of the third century A.H.

[^15]: Al‑Maturidi, op. cit., pp. 3, 13.

[^16]: Ibid., pp. 4‑5, 68‑69.

[^17]: Ibid., pp. 92‑95; Tawilat, Surah vii, 54.

[^18]: Ibid., pp‑ 91 et sqq.

[^19]: Ibid., pp‑ 2‑4.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 116; Tawilat, MSS. Istanbul & Hyderabad, Preface; 'Ali
al‑Qari, Sharh al‑Fiqh al‑Akbar, Cairo, 1323/1905, p. 75.

[^21]: Zuhdi Hasan, al‑Mu'tazilah, Cairo, 1947, pp. 247‑48; Ahmad Amin,
Duha al‑Ialam, Cairo, vol. III, p. 32.

[^22]: Kitab al‑Tauhid pp. 48‑49, 91‑92; Sharh al‑\`Aqa'id
al‑\`Adudiyyah with commentaries of Sialkuti and Shaikh Muhammad
\`Abduh, Cairo, 1322/1904, p. 180, Nazm al‑Fara'id Cairo, 1317/1899, pp.
32‑37; al‑Raudat al‑Bahiyyah, Cairo, 1322/1904, pp. 34‑39.

[^23]: Qur'an, vii, 56.

[^24]: Kitab al‑Tauhid, pp. 41‑42, 48, 144‑69, 178; Tawilat, Surah vii,
10.

[^25]: Kitab al‑Tauhid, pp. 13, 21, 46.

[^26]: Ibid., p. 59; Tawilat, Surah xxxix, 62.

[^27]: Tawilat, Surah vii, 54; v, 64; iv, 27; xi, 37; Kitab al‑Tauhid,
pp. 12, 32.

[^28]: Kitab al‑Tauhid, pp. 46‑47, 61‑62.

[^29]: Ibid., pp. 134‑35; Tawilat, Surah ii, 286.

[^30]: Ibid., pp. 186 et sqq.

[^31]: For al‑Ash'ari's views on these questions, see his Kitab
al‑Luma\`, Cairo, 1955, pp. 113 et sqq.; al‑Ibanah, Hyderabad, 1948, p.
59:

[^32]: Kitab al‑Tauhid, pp. 48, 61, 112.

[^33]: Qur'an, ii, 77, 167; xxliii, 17; xli, 40; xcix, 7, etc.

[^34]: Kitab al‑Tauhid, pp. 115 et sqq., 165.

[^35]: Ibid., pp. 117 et sqq.

[^36]: Ibid., p. 161.

[^37]: The evidence at our disposal does not clearly indicate when and
by whom the doctrine of kasb was first formulated. But it is quite
evident that neither al‑Maturidi nor al‑Ash'ari was the originator of
this doctrine. The term kasb or iktisab had been used long before them
by Imam Abu Hanifah and his contem­poraries: Jahm b. Safwan (d.
128/745), Hafs, al‑Fard, and Dirar b. \`Amar. Cf. al‑Ash'ari,
al‑Maqalat, Cairo, vol. I, pp. 110, 313; al‑Baghdadi, op. cit., pp. 129
et sqq.; Muhammad b. al‑Murtada al‑Yamani, Ithar al‑Haqq, pp. 312, 316.

[^38]: al-Ash'ari, Kitab al‑Luma\`, Cairo, 1955, pp. 72 et sqq.

[^39]: Ibn al‑Nadim, al‑Fihrist, chapter on the Jabrites;
al‑Shahrastani, Milal, vol. I, p. 134.

[^40]: Al‑Shahrastani, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 157 et sqq.; Imam
al‑Haramain, al‑\`Aqidat al‑Nizamiyyah, p. 34; Shari’a al‑\`Aqa'id
al‑\`Adudiyyah, p. 88; al‑Biyadi; Isharat al‑Maram, p. 255.

[^41]: Kitab al‑Tauhid, pp. 12, 21, 31, 44, 51; al‑Biyadi, op. cit., p.
118; al‑Subki, Sharh \`Aqidah. MS. Madinah.

[^42]: Kitab al‑Tauhid, pp. 23 et sqq.; Tawilat, Surahs i, 3; ii, 117.

[^43]: The three schools differ from one another in defining the
attribute of an action. Cf. Ali al‑Qari, Sharh Fiqh al‑Akbar, Cairo,
1323/1905, p. 19.

[^44]: Kitab al‑Tauhid, pp.26‑28; Tawilat, Surahs ix, 6; xlii, 51; vii,
143; iv, 164.

[^45]: Kitab al‑Luma\`, pp. 33 et sqq.; al‑Ibanah, pp. 19 et aqq.

[^46]: Kitab al‑Luma\`, p. 63; also Ibn Humam al‑Musayarah, Cairo,
1347/1928, p. 11; \`Abd al‑Rahim, Nazm al‑Fara'id, Cairo, 1317/1899, pp.
15‑18; Abu \`Udhbah, al ­Raudat al‑Bahiyyah, Hyderabad, pp. 44‑45.

[^47]: Sharh al‑\`Aqa'id al‑\`Adudiyyah, p. 188.

[^48]: Nihayat al‑Iqdam, p. 320.

[^49]: Imam al‑Haramain, al‑Irshad, Cairo, 1950, pp. 102 et sqq.;
al‑Ghazali, al ­Iqtisad, Cairo, pp. 71‑72.

[^50]: Kitab al-Tauhid, pp. 37‑41; Tawilat,Surahs vi. 103; vii, 143; x,
26; lxxv, 22‑23.

[^51]: Al‑Baghdadi, op. cit., p. 220; Usul al‑Din, vol. I, p. 308;
al‑Makki and Bazzaz, al‑Manaqib; al‑Biyadi, op. cit., pp. 19‑23. There
are five books on theo­logy ascribed to Imam Abu Hanifah: al‑Fiqh
al‑Akbar, al‑Fiqh al‑Absat, al‑Risalah al‑\`Alim w‑al‑Muta'aalim and al‑
Wasiyyah. These books, we are convinced, represent the correct views of
the Imam.

[^52]: Al‑Biyadi, op. cit., pp. 53‑56; Shaikhzadah, Nazm al‑Fara’id,
Cairo, 1317/1899; Sayyid Murtada, op. cit., vol. I, pp. 8 et sqq.; Abu
'Udhbah, op. cit.; \`Abd Allah b. \`Uthman, Risalah fi al‑Khilaf bain al
Ash'ariyyah wa’l‑Maturidiyyah. MS. Cairo.


