Chapter 15: Ikhwan al-Safa
==========================

Ikhwan al-Safa by Omar A. Farrukh, Ph.D, Member of the Arab Academy,
Damascus (Syria)

Introduction
------------

The name Ikhwan al‑Safa was assumed by a group of *libres penseum* who
cultivated science and philosophy not for the sake of science and
philosophy, but in the hope of forming a kind of an ethico‑spiritual
community in which the elites of the heterogeneous Muslim Empire could
find a refuge from the struggle that was raging among religious
congregations, national societies, and Muslim sects themselves.

External evidence concerning the Ikhwan al‑Safa is so scanty that no
clear historical picture of them is in any way possible. Were it not for
Abu Hayyan al‑Tauhidi (d. after 400/1009), a famous author and a friend
of some members of the group, no facts about them would have come down
to us.

The group of the Ikhwan al‑Safa originated in Basrah. In about 373/983,
the group was already famous and its “Epistles,” which contain its
spiritual doctrines and philosophical system, were in wide
circulation.[^1]

The complete name of the group was *Ikhwan al‑Safa wa Khullan al‑Wafa wa
Ahl al‑Hamd wa Abna' al‑Majd*[^2] a name which was suggested to them by
the chapter of the “Ring‑Necked Dove” in *Kalilah wa Dimnah*, a book
which they very highly esteemed.[^3]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa succeeded in keeping complete secrecy about their
names. But when Abu Hayyan was asked in about 373/983, about them, he
named, perhaps at random, five of them: Abu Sulaiman Muhammad b. Ma'shar
ad‑Busti, known as al‑Muqaddisi, Abu al‑Hasan 'Ali b. Harun al‑Zanjani,
Abu Ahmad Muhammad al‑Mihrajani, a certain al‑'Aufi, and the famous Zaid
b. Rifa'ah.[^4]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa produced numerous works the most famous and
im­portant of which is the encyclopedic compilation entitled *Rasa'il
Ikhwan al‑Safa* (Epistles of the Ikhwan al‑Safa), which will henceforth
be referred to as *Rasa’il* or “Epistles.” These “Epistles” are
definitely the result of a collaboration of various writers many of whom
may not have been members of the group.

The compilation must have dragged over a long period, but by 373/983 the
“Epistles” must have been already complete in the first recension at
least. It is, moreover, practically certain that the Ikhwan al‑Safa
embarked upon the compilation of the “Epistles” with the number fifty in
their mind. The current edition, however, has fifty‑three epistles.

Closely connected with the “Epistles” is *al‑Risalat al‑Jami'ah* (the
Com­prehensive Epistle) which was a summarium and summa of the original
“Epis­tles.” It was also intended for private circulation among the more
advanced members of the group. The *Jami'ah* discards much of the
scientific information originally the backbone of the “Epistles,” and
expounds more fully and frankly the ideas which the Ikhwan al‑Safa
intended to inoculate into their followers.[^5]

The *Jami’ah* was further summarized in *Risalat al‑Jami'at al‑Jami'ah
au al‑Zubdah min Rasa'il Ikhwan al‑Safa* (the Condensation of the
Comprehen­sive Epistle or the Cream of the Epistles of Ikhwan al‑Safa),
called also *al-Risalat al‑Jami'ah*.[^6] The scientific information as
well as chapters of the “Epistles” are eliminated, while the symbolic
and esoteric interpretation of the verses of the Qur'an are brought out
vigorously.

The Ikhwan al‑Safa made arrangements for holding meetings everywhere
they had followers. In these meetings, which were held once every twelve
days and were restricted to the members and followers of the group,
subjects of metaphysical and esoteric nature were discussed.[^7] There
were also occasional meetings for the initiation of young people.[^8]

Apparently, some of the followers were given, during these meetings, to
singing, drinking, and other indulgences for which the Ikhwan al‑Safa
rebuked them indirectly.[^9]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa were a secret group. They were recruited through
per­sonal and confidential contacts. The emissaries were advised to work
among the youth, as old people are usually rigid and unfit for any
movement.[^10]

The group had four grades in which its members were placed generally
according to their age. The first and most inferior grade was that of
those who had attained their fifteenth year; the second of those between
thirty and forty years of age; the third of those between forty
and‑fifty. The fourth, last and highest grade, was that of those who
were already fifty years of age.[^11].

The Ikhwan al‑Safa were Muslims. But they had a special interpretation
of religion in general, and of Islam in particular. The Shi\`ite
colouring, which is very conspicuous in their missionary work, is only
dramatic because it helped them to play cleverly upon the emotions of
the masses.

In the strict historical sense, the Ikhwan al‑Safa did not belong to any
sect. In fact, they sought, with the aid of Islam and Greek philosophy,
to work out a spiritual doctrine which would take the place of the
historical religions and which would, at the same time, suit everyone
and insult nobody.

As far as we can gather from the “Epistles,” the Ikhwan al‑Safa had no
political programme. It seems, however, that some of their followers had
pressed for political action to take the reins of government into their
hands. The Ikhwan al‑Safa themselves, the magnates among them, were not
of this opinion; they reiterated in this connection that their sole aim
was to uphold the faith and attain the bliss in the hereafter. In the
meantime they tried to acquire knowledge and be versed in theoretical
sciences.[^12] They declared, further, that they intended to build up a
spiritual city, a Utopia, which was not of this world, neither on the
continent; nor on the high seas, nor in the air.[^13]

The sections, in the “Epistles,” referring to *daulatu ahl al‑khairi and
daulatu ahl al‑sharri* (literally, the State of the people of good and
the State of the people of evil) contain only a brief and general
discussion on, the terms of governments or dynasties and on their
succession.[^14] The Ikhwan al‑Safa referred once[^15] to the coming of
*daulatu ahl al‑khairi*; but they meant simply “the time when the
adherents to their group would form the bulk of the nation.”

System and Theories
-------------------

### 1. Classification of the Sciences

Sciences may be classified in different ways. The Ikhwan al‑Safa
mentioned a few classifications and adopted that which divided all
branches of knowledge roughly into three major classes:[^16]
mathematics, physics, and metaphysics, a classification which was
current since Aristotle's days. Mathematics included, in the “Epistle,”
the theory of numbers, geometry, astronomy, geography, music,
theoretical and practical arts, ethics, and logic.[^17] Physics included
matter, form, motion, time, space, the sky, generation, corruption,
minerals, the essence of nature, plants, animals, the human body, the
senses, life and death, microcosm, pleasure, pain, and language.[^18]

Metaphysics was subdivided, as should be expected, into
psycho‑rationalism and theology. The first sub­division included
psychics, rationalistics, being, macrocosm, mind, great years, love,
resurrection, and causality.[^19] Theology included the beliefs of the
Ikhwan al‑Safa, friendship, faith, divine Law, prophethood, call unto
God, the in­corporeals, polities, the structure of the world, and
magic.[^20]

### 2. Theory of Knowledge

The Ikhwan al‑Safa were very much interested in epistemology or the
theory of knowledge. General knowledge, they said; may be acquired in
three ways:[^21]

(1) The way of the five senses is the natural and the most common way of
acquiring knowledge. But through our senses we acquire only the material
changes immediately apprehended by us and occurring in space and
time.[^22]

(2) Man acquires knowledge also by means of primary reason, by pure or
mere thinking. But reason, if unaided by sound senses, cannot acquire
know­ledge. Moreover, concepts having no connection with our senses,
like those of God and the First Matter, cannot be acquired thus.[^23]
Akin to the two previous ways is the way of proof,[^24] the way of the
trained dialecticians.

(3) The way of acquiring knowledge which agrees best with the esoteric
doctrine of the Ikhwan al‑Safa is the way of initiation and authority,
i.e., re­ceiving knowledge personally from an authorized elder, a
teacher in the broadest and deepest sense. This teacher receives his
knowledge from the Imam (reli­gious leader) who, in turn, receives it,
through other Imams, from the Prophet whose ultimate source of knowledge
is God.[^25]

Philosophy, wisdom or philosophical wisdom, according to the Ikhwan
al‑Safa, is to behave Godlike as best as a human being can.[^26] A more
detailed definition would be “love for science added to knowledge of the
essence of all beings, gained” as best as one can, together with
profession and public behaviour in harmony with that.”[^27]

In the “Epistles” of the Ikhwan al‑Safa metaphysics proper is quite
meagre.

### 3. Metaphysics

If metaphysics did not include theology, it would have interested them
very little.

#### Form and Matter

The views of the Ikhwan al‑Safa regarding form and matter are
Aristotelian: every body consists of matter and form which are
insepararable, since pure forms are only concepts like the soul and the
intel­lect.[^28] Matter and form are both simple essences. The form is
more important, since bodies are different because of their forms, their
matter being in many cases the same; but matter is theoretically
older.[^29] In keeping with their dis­position towards compilation, they
show some leaning to Plato when they say[^30] that the images, figures,
frames, and characteristics which we see in the world of (sublunary)
bodies and in the essences of the heavenly bodies are examples,
likenesses, and colourings of those forms which are in the world of
spirits.

#### Space and Time

As regards space and time, their view was that both are not realities;
space is more objective, since it is related to bodies which have
dimensions: it is the vessel which holds the contained.[^31]

Time has no independent existence. It cannot be conceived of except in
connection with moving bodies. Note, if space is the outer surface of
the world and time is the reckoning of the rotations of the spheres,
space and time would be unthinkable prior to the spheres
themselves.[^32] These views led some to think that they believed in the
eternity of the world. They were aware of this accusation and tried to
defend themselves against it.[^33]

#### Motion

There are six general kinds of motion grouped in three pairs: generation
and corruption, increase and decrease, change and displacement. The
particular kinds are numerous. The continuous and perfect motion is
spherical; the straight motion is also continuous but not perfect. The
arrow when passing through the air forms, from the bowstring to its
falling place, one continuous course.[^34] Here they disagree, in the
example of the arrow, with Zeno of Elea (d. 430 B.C.) who argued that if
a line was made up of points, there must be always space among these
points. And so, an arrow in any given moment of its flight must be at
rest in some particular point.[^35]

#### Causality

In the field of causality the Ikhwan al‑Safa depended on Aristotle.
*\`Ilal* (pl. of \`*illah*,, fem.) or major causes are four:[^36]. the
*hayulaniyyah* (material, the matter or substance of which a thing is
made), *suriyyah* (formal, the form which is given to a certain
substance to produce that thing), *fa'iliyyah* (active, the agent which
gives that substance its form) and *tamamiy­yah* (fulfilling, the end
which that produced thing serves).

The answer to a question concerning any of the causes, and especially
the fourth cause, is always difficult because it is a question about the
essence of things. These four causes should act together, otherwise the
intended thing would not come into existence, and they should hold on,
so that the produced thing might persist. It is needless to say that God
is the ultimate cause of all beings.[^37]

#### Number

Numbers are the vehicle of the doctrine of the Ikhwan al‑Safa. The
Pythagorean theory of numbers (their properties: proportion,
progression, etc.) and their linking mystically to the life and
after‑life of man captured their imagination.

The Ikhwan al‑Safa divided the numbers into two classes: a factor which
is the “one” and a “series from two ad infinitum.” The one is an
absolute unity, indivisible, undiminishable, and unincreasable. All the
numbers originate from the one: the two by the repetition of the “one”
twice; the other numbers by adding the “one”; whence its character as a
factor to every subsequent number.[^38] This dexterous acrobatism was
necessary to arrive at the following, half‑theological and
half‑metaphysical statement: Just as “the one is of a different nature
from the numbers which originate from it, so the One (God) is unlike all
the beings emanating from Him.”[^39]

#### Being and Emanation

This leads us to Being and Emanation, the coming of the universe into
existence, or its creation.

The universe is not eternal but created by God through emanation.
Ema­nation was a compromise between the strict religious notion of
creation and the Aristotelian view of the eternity of the world.
Theoretically, creation was accomplished in two steps: first, God
willed, in one thought, that the universe should come into existence *ex
nihilo*; then, immediately emanation began and proceeded gradually,
until the universe took its present shape.

The order and character of emanation were as follows:[^40]

(i) *Al‑Bari* (The Maker, Creator, or God). *Al‑Bari* is the First and
only Eternal Being, the One, Unique, and One in every respect. He has no
partner and no peer. No anthropomorphic attribute or action should be
ascribed to Him. Only the will to create pertains to Him.[^41]

(ii) *Al‑\`Aql* (Intellect or Gr. Nous). *Al‑\`aql* was the first being
to ema­nate from *al‑Bari*. God created it directly, necessarily,
without break, and with no need for movement or effort. From God's
eternity it acquires its own eternity; and through His perpetuance it
receives its continuity and perfection. It is one in number as God
Himself is One. But since God does not condescend to deal with material
bodies, He created in the intellect all the forms of subsequent beings
and instituted in it the office of re‑emanation: from it emanated the
world‑soul and the first matter. It is clear, then, that the office
attributed usually to God belongs, in the opinion of the Ikhwan al‑Safa,
to the intellect, a counterpart, duplicate, or image of God.[^42]

(iii) *Al‑Nafs al‑Kulliyyah* (The Absolute Soul, the World‑Soul) ‑ The
world­-soul is the soul of the whole universe, a simple essence which
emanated from the intellect. It receives its energy from the intellect.
It manifests itself in the sun through which it animates the whole
sublunary (material) world. What we call creation, in our world,
pertains actually to the world‑soul.[^43]

(iv) *Al‑Hayula* (Arabicized from Gr. *hyle*: substance, matter, stuff),
First Matter ‑ First matter is a simple and spiritual essence already
substance with­out bulk, and yet without conceivable dimensions. Because
the first matter was passive, having no proper energy; it could not
emanate by itself. It was caused by the intellect to proceed from the
world‑soul which had to exert effort and show great care to facilitate
for it to gush forth and become subsequently susceptible to accepting
different forms.”[^44]

(v) *Al‑Tabi'ah* (Nature) ‑ Nature is one of the powers of the
world‑soul, the energy diffused throughout the sublunary world and
effecting all bodies therein, organic and inorganic. It is the cause of
motion, life, and change. It works wisely and uniformly. In this sense,
it is the philosophical term for the religious concepts of divine will
and Providence.”[^45]

Here, with nature, ceases the influence of the intellect, since all
subsequent emanations will tend to be more and more material, defective,
and, conse­quently, unworthy of its care.[^46]

(vi) *Al‑Jism al‑Mutlaq* (The Absolute Body) ‑ When the world‑soul
began, with the help of the intellect, to move the first matter in three
directions, the first matter acquired the three dimensions (length,
width, and depth) and became the absolute body or second matter. The
second matter is no more a concept, an essence, or a quality denoting
pure existence, as was the first matter, but a quantum, spherical in
shape. This absolute body, or second matter, is the substance of which
our world, as such, is made[^47]

(vii) *The Spheres or the World of the Spheres* ‑ In the seventh stage
of emanation appeared the spheres which are not imaginary but spiritual,
spheri­cal, hollow, transparent, and concentric bodies. These spheres,
which are eleven in number, vary in the thickness of their shells, in
proportion to the magnitude of the planets with which they are inset.
These spheres are: the spheres of the fixed stars, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon. All the heavenly bodies are
made up of a fifth element, ether,[^48] and are not liable to generation
and corruption.[^49]

(viii) *The Four Elements* - With the emanation of the four elements:
fire, air, water, and earth, we come to the beings immediately under the
sphere of the moon (within its orbit), to the sublunary world where the
process of generation and corruption begins to take place.

Fire, air, water, and earth ‑ supposed to be elements by the Ikhwan
al‑Safa like many Greek thinkers ‑ exist, free in nature, in minor
spheres about the centre of the earth. Further, they espoused the view
of the Ionians, and Thales (d. c. 545 B.C.) in particular, as against
the Eleatics, that the four “elements” change into one another, water
becomes air and fire; fire becomes air, water, earth, etc.[^50]

(ix) *The Three Kingdoms* ‑ In the closing stage of emanation appeared
the three kingdoms: mineral, plant, and animal, which originated from
the absolute interchange and proportional intermixture of the four
elements.[^51]

#### Macrocosm and Microcosm

The early Greek thinkers conceived of the universe as one living being
in which the phenomena and powers are correlated and governed
hierarchically by a single general law. Democritus of Abdera (d. c. 370
B.C.) developed from that concept the Theory of Macrocosm and Microcosm
which treated of man as a reduced model of the universe, and of the
universe as the enlarged copy of man.[^52] His theory was accepted by
the Ikhwan al‑Safa.

#### The Individual Soul (al‑Nafs al‑Juz'iyyah) and Its Fall

As soon as the world‑soul was called upon to care for individual beings,
beginning with the spheres, its innumerable powers became distinct and
independent but not detached, since detachability is a property of
matter. In this sense individual souls, representing the infinite powers
of the world‑soul, began to form. During a very long time these souls
filled the world of the spheres and constituted the angels who animated
the heavenly bodies.

At first, they were aware of the grace which is bestowed by the
intellect upon the world‑soul, of which they are the powers. They
contemplated the intellect and performed the wor­ship due to God. By and
by, some of these individual souls began to forget much about their
origin and office.

This sin caused them to get farther and farther (though not in the sense
of space and time) from God. The punishment was the fall of the sinful
souls to our earth, to be tied to individual bodies in order to atone,
by undergoing hardships, pain, and sorrow, for the sin they had
committed in their heavenly abode. This was the metaphysical origin of
life on earth.[^53]

The fall was described and explained symbolically by the Ikhwan al‑Safa.
When God created the universe, He peopled it with spiritual incorporeal
beings whose office was to praise and glorify God. These were cognitive
beings; they could witness fully the corporeal and the absolute and
could conceive of every form and thought anywhere in the universe. The
period during which this condition prevailed, since the creation, was
called *daur al‑kashfi* or the period of exposition, as every being was
exposed to every other being in every respect.[^54]

Towards the end of this period, God willed that *daur al‑sitri*, the
period of concealment, should succeed and that the Absolute be hidden in
a corporeal body which the faculties of the spiritual beings cannot
penetrate. So, He created Adam in His own image and breathed in him the
world‑soul and settled him in His paradise. Then God enjoined that all
the spiritual beings, save a few archangels, should prostrate before
him, worship him, and be at his com­mand in the management of the
world.[^55]

At the same time God warned Adam against eating from a certain tree. On
the other hand, Satan (*Iblis*), one of the lesser leaders of the jinn
who had aspired to be in place of Adam, was vexed by the honour bestowed
on Adam. He refused to prostrate before Adam and be subordinate to
him.[^56] Then he accosted God with the pretension: ***“I am better than
he. Thou*** ***didst create me from fire and him from clay.”***[^57]
Afterwards he turned to Adam to avenge himself on him.

Knowing Adam's reality and frailty, *Iblis* could convince him that
eating from the forbidden tree would disclose to him the names and
grades of the archangels who were exempted from prostrating before him,
would give him knowledge of the hereafter, and would render him
immortal.[^58]

When Adam realized what he had become, he was filled with boastfulness.
At times he overshot himself and disclosed a part of the secret with him
to some of those who were around him but were unworthy of this secret
before the time assigned for such disclosure. This was Adam's crime ‑
curiosity and lust for power.[^59]

Now, it was no more possible for Adam to stay with the angels who
disavowed him because he showed a knowledge inconsistent with his
physical appearance and which was even new and startling to them who, as
spiritual beings, were supposed to know more than he. Even the animals
and the other inhabitants of paradise were scared by his behaviour and
abhorred him. Therefore, he was caused to fall to earth to lead on it
the life of flesh, deprived of all the supernatural faculties accorded
to him in the heavenly abode. With him also fell his wife and *Iblis*,
so that the struggle may continue and be decided openly, and in a fair
manner.[^60]

The fall of Adam represents, in the metaphysical system of the Ikhwan
al‑ Safa, the union of the individual souls with sublunary bodies. When
an individual soul is caused to fall, it may be lucky enough to realize
its mistake and repent readily. In this case its downward journey is
interrupted and it is caused to turn back and regain its former
place.[^61]

The unlucky souls continue their fall towards the centre of the earth to
be tied to an inorganic body, plant, beast, or man. We are concerned
with the soul assigned to a man which is the least unlucky of all the
falling souls.

When a soul falls, it enters the ovum which happens to be impregnated at
the time of its fall. This soul in the ovum comes soon under the regimen
of the planets. All planets, beginning with the farthest one, Saturn,
influence the incubation of the soul turn by turn for a whole lunar
month. After the completion of the third month the foetus comes under
the influence of the sun, the king, of the planets, and life is breathed
into it. The period of pregnancy is accepted by the Ikhwan al‑Safa to be
(at least) seven complete lunar months, the number of the spheres of the
then known planets.[^62]

The soul is prepared in this world through the medium of the body for
the hereafter. Life in this world is only a means to an end: here the
soul is enabled to attain perfection in order to be allowed to regain
its former celestial life. The body is only the workshop of the soul, a
temporary house, a shell, a mount necessary for a journey. Once the body
is forsaken by the soul it becomes again a heap of solid matter akin to
the constituent elements of the earth. But the body is as necessary for
the soul as is the womb for the development of the foetus.[^63]

Death is welcome to the purified soul, since death means to it nothing
more than that it has stopped using the body. With the death of the body
the real life of the soul begins. Moreover, the soul cannot benefit by
the knowledge acquired during its terrestial life except after the death
of the body.[^64]

#### Lesser and Greater Resurrections, Paradise and Hell

With the death of the body occurs the first or lesser resurrection of
the soul. All human souls are immortal: those which have attained
perfection during their earthly life would be able to enjoy again the
absolute being and happiness; those which have remained imperfect would
be barred from entering heaven and remain sus­pended between heaven and
earth with the devils dragging them on every side until they are forced
back to the hollows of gloomy‑bodies and the bounds of physical
nature.[^65]

In leaving the body, the soul leaves simultaneously the lesser hell
which is the transient life on earth subject to generation and
corruption, change and putrefaction. Greater hell is the eternal
condemnation of the wretched soul to roam in the underworld, burdened
with the accumulated ignorance and fettered with depression and pain.
Paradise, on the other hand, is the vast space of heaven, where the
righteous souls float in an infinite spread of light in perpetuance and
immortality, in a state of happiness and grace.[^66]

When all the individual souls have left their bodies and are reunited
with the world‑soul, the world‑soul would lose the reason for its
independent existence: so it would return to God. The universe would
cease, and there would remain one being: God. This is the greater
resurrection: the closing of a manifestation of God.[^67]

### 4. Nature and the Sciences

The Ikhwan al‑Safa happened to compile in their “Epistles” the
scientific materials available to them and, at the same time, support
their esoteric doc­trine. They tried to arrange these materials, the
scientific legacy of Greece since the earliest Ionian thinker, Thales of
Miletus, in independent chapters.

The picture which resulted was that of accumulation rather than of
exposition, and never that of exhaustiveness and systematization. We do
not know, however, what additions they made; but we are sure that they
did give us a general account of the scientific life of the Muslims in
the Middle Ages, with its bright and dark sides. Further, the “Epistles”
supply us with a picture, though imperfect, of the ancient world of
science.

(1) In arithmetic, the Ikhwan al‑Safa depended in the main, as they
say,[^68] on Pythagoras and Nicomachus. “Pythagoras” must mean the
Pythagorean school; Nicomachus was a late neo‑Pythagorean of Gerasa
(present Jarash in Jordan) who flourished about the middle of the second
Christian century.[^69]

He elaborated the Pythagorean mathematics and wrote a book entitled
*Arithmatike eisagoge* or “Introduction to Arithmetic,” in which he
maintained that “numbers had a pre‑existence in the spirit of the
Creator before the forma­tion of the universe. He wrote another book
which the Ikhwan al‑Safa must have known and used: *Arithmatika
theologoumena* or “Theology of Numbers,”[^70] They also knew a book by
Euclid on arithmetic called *al‑Usul*.[^71]

(2) Geometry has for its aim the training of the soul, by which it
realizes promotion in knowledge from perception to conception, from the
physical to the spiritual and from the concrete to the abstract.
Geometry (Ar. *handasah*) is of two kinds: *hissiyyah*, tangible,
sensible, or common plane and solid geometry which helps man to acquire
skill in crafts; and \`*aqliyyah*, intellectual or rational, namely:
analytic and descriptive, which enables man to be versed in theoretical
sciences.[^72] The Ikhwan al‑Safa knew Euclid and other writers on
geometry[^73] from whom they drew their information on the subject.

To geometry belong the mysterious or magical figures, the smallest of
which is composed of nine squares in three rows. In these squares are
inserted the numbers 1 to 9 in a manner that any row, horizontal,
perpendicular, or diagonal, must give the uniform sum of 15.[^74]

(3) The aim of the “Epistle” on music is to stimulate the souls, already
instructed in mathematics, physics, psychics, and theology, to join the
im­mortals in the vast space of heaven. Music itself is a spiritual art
founded by wise men. It has a strong and varied effect on all souls. It
is either soothing or exciting, gratifying or grieving. On this account,
music is played to calm the sick and insane, to tranquillize a weeping
child or to lull him to sleep. Even animals are subject to the effect of
music. Music is also played in temples because of the touch of awe it
possesses.[^75]

Pythagoras was said to have heard the sound of the moving spheres and
planets. Since the motions of these spheres have regularity and ratios
to one another, their sounds must have tunes which are of highest
perfection and harmony. These tunes are intended for the inhabitants of
the heaven. Pytha­goras discovered the scale and essentials of music as
a result of hearing the sounds of the heavenly bodies.[^76]

(4) The universe, say the Ikhwan al‑Safa, is made up of all the bodies
in existence. It is finite and spherical in shape. Being is one solid
body; it stuffs the whole space: it is the universe. Outside the
universe there is neither Being nor Non‑Being, neither emptiness
(vacuum) nor fullness, since the universe has no outside.[^77]

On this they agree with the Eleatic Parmenides and his disciple
Zeno;[^78] but they disagree with them fully on the question of motion.
Parmenides and Zeno presumed that since the universe is completely
replete, the movement of individual bodies is impossible. The view of
the Ikhwan al‑Safa was: since the mass of the universe is not of the
same density, the more dense may move through the less dense, as the
fish swim in water and the birds fly in air.[^79]

The earth stands in the centre of the world; then come seven concentric
spheres in which revolve the planets: the moon, Mercury, Venus, the sun,
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Finally comes the sphere of the fixed stars.
The number of the stars which were determined by astronomical
observation, including the seven planets, was one thousand and
twenty‑nine. All the stars are luminous except the moon which receives
its light from the sun.[^80]

The movement of the planets was explained by the rotation of the outer
sphere clockwise: from east to west above the earth, and from west to
east under the earth, once every day. The outer sphere carries the other
spheres along with it. From this it follows that these spheres with
their planets too should complete a revolution around the earth in one
day.[^81]

But the ancients noted that the planets have complicated movements:
sometimes they appear to overtake the sun and continue their courses
ahead of it; and sometimes the sun appears to overtake them. With the
planets nearer the earth ‑ ‑the moon, Mercury, and Venus ‑ this
phenomenon was more conspicuous and gave rise to the theory of
epicycles. This means that the orbits within the outer sphere are not
homocentric with it, concentric or having one common centre, but
eccentric, i. e., having independent centres.

Aristotle was in favour of homocentrieity; Claudius Ptolemy (d. 168
A.D), the Alexandrian astronomer, upheld the theory of epicycles.
Unfortunately, the Ikhwan al‑Safa sided with Ptolemy and rejected, at
the same time, the view that the heavenly bodies revolve from west to
east,[^82] a view which seems to have had some upholders among the
Pythagoreans.[^83]

Regarding the magnitudes of the stars, they showed some boldness. The
earth, they said, is but a point in a large circle. The smallest planet
has a size eighteen times that of the earth; the largest is one hundred
and seven times.[^84]

They maintained, further, that the celestial bodies are neither heavy
nor light. If any body, they argue, is in its specially assigned place
in the spheres, it does not exert weight. It acquires weight, on the
contrary, when it comes into the neighbourhood of other strange bodies,
not of the same material (water in water or air in air, for example, has
no weight). Weight, they say, is nothing but the mutual attraction and
mutual repulsion in the face of resistance.[^85]

We are reminded in this case of the artificial satellites and of the
fact that they lose all weight as soon as they leave the zone of the
gravity of the earth. In the same spirit, they declared also that the
sun and the stars are neither hot nor cold.[^86]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa accepted the solar year to be of 365 1/4 days. On
this basis they computed the revolutions of the planets around the
earth: Saturn com­pletes a revolution of its orbits in 29 years, 5
months and 6 days; Jupiter in 11 years, 10 months and 26 days; Mars in
about 23 months; Venus in 584 days, and Mercury in 124 days only.[^87]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa supplied us with data which enable us to construct
formulae for the extension of the universe and for its volume which may
be computed roughly at: 1,300,000,000 and
150,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 km., respectively or 13 x 108 and 15
x 1025. This is nothing to be compared with the real measurements, but
it serves to give us an idea of the boldness of the Ikhwan al‑Safa in
their age.

(5) The earth, say the Ikhwan al‑Safa is a sphere. Their proof is that
any line on the surface of the earth or on the face of a river is an
arch, and any portion of the sea is a part of the shell of a spherical
body.[^88] George Sarton, the historian of science, holds that the idea
of the sphericity of the earth is as old as Pythagoras; but he wonders
how Pythagoras could arrive at a proof. He declares that Pythagoras must
have postulated the sphericity of the earth out of wild boldness.[^89]

They believe also that the earth stands in the centre of the universe,
suspend­ed in the midst of the air, because it is in its special place
within a space free from the attraction and repulsion of every other
heavenly body.[^90] Although the Ikhwan al‑Safa were essentially
Pythagorean, they rejected the Pythagorean view that the earth has two
motions: a revolution around a central fire and a rotation on its
axis.[^91] They believed, however, that it had a sway (forwards and
backwards) on its axis, and that when it was created it was in motion;
but afterwards it came to a standstill.[^92] It seems that they
followed, in this view, Democritus who held that the earth had in the
beginning a motion, but afterwards it came gradually to a
standstill.[^93]

The earth is not solid or massive, but it is full of cavities. The solid
parts of its interior are also of different densities.[^94]

Further, it has no bottom, in the common meaning of the word; its bottom
is its centre. So, wherever a man stands on the earth, his head is
always towards the sky (above the earth) and his feet are always towards
the bottom or centre of the earth.[^95] In spite of all this genial
explanation, they believed that we live on one side of the earth
only.[^96]

(6) In the two chapters on geography and meteorology, based principally
on *Meteorologica*[^97] and other Greek works, the Ikhwan al‑Safa speak
of the equator, of the polar zones where the winter is a night of six
continuous months and the summer is a day of six continuous months, of
the four seasons of longitude and time, of the mountains and their
nature as reservoirs of water, and cognate topics.[^98] Their
explanation of the eclipses is noteworthy,[^99] but their interpretation
of the ebb and flow of tides is false: they believed that the rays of
the moon heat the waters of the sea and cause their rise.[^100]

(7) In physics and chemistry the Ikhwan al‑Safa held, with Aristotle,
the Theory of the Four Elements and rejected the atomic theory.[^101]
They main­tained also with the Ionian physicists that the so‑called four
elements: fire, air, water, and earth, change into one another.

Furthermore, when those four elements undergo intense heat and strong
pressure inside the earth, they change into mercury and sulphur. If
aerial moisture mixes with earth, it becomes mercury, a masculine
element; if oily moisture mixes with earth, it changes into sulphur, a
feminine element. From the further intermixture of sulphur and mercury,
in different proportions, are formed all the mineral bodies: clay,
glass, iron, copper, ruby, silver, gold, etc.

(8) The natural world is made up of three kingdoms: the mineral, plant,
and animal kingdoms. Evolution rests on the view that every kingdom
constitute the primary matter and nourishing material for the next
higher kingdom. Accordingly, the mineral kingdom must have come into
existence long before that of plants. The plants came into existence
before the animals; sea animals before the animals on land; the less
developed before the more developed; and all animals were in existence
ages before man.[^102] At the top of the animal kingdom appeared the
*qird* (monkey, or ape) which bears so much resemblance to man in shape
and behaviour.[^103]

There is also a spiritual evolution by which the human soul evolves from
the soul of a child to that of an angel. At the age of fifty, the wise
and cultivated man may attain the degree which enables him to receive
inspiration, to become a messenger between the Intellect and his
fellow‑men, to found doctrines, and to make laws. At this stage, he is a
proxy of God on earth; he attains divinity and so worship is due to
him.[^104]

### 5. Psychology

(1) *The Soul* ‑The soul has three major faculties or powers, every one
of which is called equally a soul.

(i) The vegetative or nutritive soul common to all living beings:
plants, beast, and man alike. It is subdivided into three powers: that
of nutritive proper, that of growth, and that of reproduction.[^105]

(ii) The animal, beastly, or sensitive soul belongs to beasts and men
only. It is subdivided into two powers: locomotion and sensation.
Sensation falls in turn in two categories: perception (sight, touch,
etc.) and emotion. Emotion is either primitive (laughter, anger, etc.)
or evolved (good food, social and political prestige, etc.).[^106]

(iii) The human (rational, thinking, or talkative) soul is restricted to
man.

These three faculties, together with their powers, work together and are
united in man and likened to a tree with three boughs, every bough of
which has several branches, and every branch many‑leaves and fruit.
Comparison may also be made with a person who is a blacksmith,
carpenter, and builder or who can read, write, and teach:[^107] he is
one man with three faculties.

(2) *The Brain, and the Heart* ‑ The prevailing belief in ancient times
was that the heart constituted the most important organ of the body: the
centre of sensation, the seat of intelligence, and the house of life.
Aristotle was also of this opinion. The Ikhwan al‑Safa decided in favour
of the brain and held that it is the brain where the processes of
perception, emotion, and conception develop.[^108]

(3) *The Process of Thinking* ‑ It begins in the five senses and
continues in the brain. Fine nerves extend from the sense‑organs to
different parts of the mass of the brain, where they form a net similar
to a spider's web. Whenever the senses come in touch with sensible
bodies, their temperament undergoes a change which is communicated soon,
together with the abstract forms of those sensible bodies, to the
imaginative zone in the front part of the brain. Next, the imaginative
faculty passes the traces which the abstract forms have left on it to
the reflective faculty, in the middle part of the brain, to ponder upon
them and verify their indications; then, the indications are transmitted
in turn to the retentive faculty (or memory) in the back part of the
brain to be stored there until a recollection of them is needed. At the
right time the rele­vant data are referred to the expressive or
talkative faculty by which they are abstracted, generalized, and given
the form expressible by the tongue to be received intelligibly by the
ear.[^109]

### 6. Politics

(1) The Ikhwan al‑Safa had no interest in the theory of State or in the
forms of government. Nor could they be influenced, in this respect, by
Greek writers. The two worlds were totally different: Plato and
Aristotle lived in City‑States; the Ikhwan al‑Safa lived in the great
cities of an empire. At any rate, the Ikhwan al‑Safa believed that the
State rests on two foundations: religion and kingship. A king is
indispensable, though he may be a tyrant, if the State is to lead a
secure and prosperous life. A group of wise men, however may do without
a king.[^110]

(2) The indifference of the Ikhwan al‑Safa about the State was
counter­balanced by their keen interest in *al‑siyasat al‑madaniyyah*, a
blend of civics and domestic economy, which bears more on the personal
and communal behaviour of man.

As a rule, the Ikhwan al‑Safa preferred that their followers should
practise celibacy. But since that was impracticable, marriage was
enjoined to serve two purposes: first, that the race may continue ‑ a
reason which was given by Aristotle too; and second, because there are
people who cannot remain celibate.[^111]

A man of standing should be a kind of a ruler in his community. He
should first exercise self‑control in the different situations through
which he passes, because he who can control himself may be able to
control others.[^112] Regarding his children and brothers, he should
give them a fair, uniform but firm treatment from which he should allow
no deviation except in circumstances not under his control.

People are governed easier and better if they have been accustomed to a
certain way of government. As for other relatives of his servants, and
dependants, he should be bounteous in their maintenance and meek in
their treatment. But it is of no use to disclose to them any trouble or
want of his. This would impair his authority in their eyes without
helping him in the least. If he was ever short of means, and
consequently obliged to lay a restriction on his favours to them, he
should try, to make them believe that he has done so on purpose and not
because he has yielded to a certain pressure.[^113]

A man should choose his friends carefully and treat them with tact: know
them well and betray none of his secrets to them. Further, he should
appear always, before them, consistent in his opinion and behaviour,
because they are expected to share with him his doctrines and way of
life (the ultimate aim of the Ikhwan al‑Safa in making friends is to
propagate their doctrines among these friends). It is very important
that the relatives of a leading personality should follow his doctrines
and adopt his views, otherwise his friends would lose their enthusiasm
for him. He should disclaim publicly any relative who proves to be at
variance with him in the matter of doctrine.[^114]

### 7. Ethics

Muslims have always been more interested in morals and matters of
con­duct than in ethical theories, because Islam insists on good or
righteous deeds as well as on good intentions. The Ikhwan al‑Safa's
interest in ethics was confined to its bearing on their doctrine:
acquiring theoretical knowledge and doing good in this life so that
their souls may enjoy eternity and happiness in the hereafter.

They start from the assertion that characters are either in­born or
acquired. Inborn characters begin with the formation of the foetus in
the womb, and they develop therein gradually under the influence of the
planets. Innate characters, or virtues, are specialized aptitudes
assigned to different organs. They enable the soul to act through every
organ and produce the sensation, action, or craft particular to that
organ without need for deliberation or choice.

At one place the Ikhwan al‑Safa assume that inborn characters are
uniformly good.[^115] At another, they maintain that they are bad, and,
consequently, all religions were revealed to resist the innate
characters of man and to reform them if possible.[^116]

After birth man begins to acquire virtues. He continues to do so until
his death. There is in man an aptitude to do good, and with the same
aptitude he can do evil. Character and behaviour are teachable.[^117]

Anything which should be done, if done as it should, to the extent to
which it should, in the place where it should, at the time when it
should, and in view of the end for which it should, is called good. And
he who does that thin deliberately and with choice is called a wise man,
a philosopher, and a perfect man. Good, for the masses, is that which
religion has enjoined, and evil, that which religion has
prohibited.[^118]

Acquired characters are determined and modified by the disposition of
the body, climate of the land, and the contact of the children with
their parents, tutors, comrades, and with the people in prominence. The
different circum­stances through which man usually passes are important
factors in making people change from one character into another.[^119]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa urge their followers to be idealistic in their
behaviour. The good they seek should be final and self‑sufficient. One
should do good not because one expects from doing it, or for doing it, a
benefit, nor because one expects to avoid some loss.[^120]

### 8. Education

As soon as a child is born, he comes under the influence of social
factors for four complete years, during which he reaches a certain stage
of intelligence and comprehension. After the fourth year the child
begins to acquire his habits, knowledge, doctrines, crafts, and hobbies
by imitation, as a result of his contact with those who happen to be
around him. The masses copy the external behaviour of the dominant
class.[^121]

Children are apt to use an analogy characteristic of them. They believe
that their parents are perfect and that the conditions prevailing in
their own homes are models for all the conditions elsewhere. On the
practical side, children are more apt to master the arts, sciences, and
crafts of their parents than those of strangers.[^122]

Knowledge is the abstraction of the knowable in the soul of the knower
through the aid of a teacher. The aptitude to learn belongs to the soul
alone. The end of teaching is to purify the souls of the taught and give
them correct behaviour in order to prepare them for immortality and
happiness in the hereafter. A science which does not lead to happiness
in the hereafter is useless.[^123]

Every soul is potentially learned; the parents and tutors polish its
aptitude and help it to become learned in action. A teacher is
absolutely necessary, especially to common people.[^124]

The brain is able to store simultaneously all kinds of information,
however diverse and contradictory they may be, since it stores their
abstractions only. And in spite of the fact that the data stored in the
brain fade gradually, and that some of them are sometimes totally
forgotten, they do not annul one another. [^125]

Essentially, knowledge is never spontaneous; it must be taught and
learnt. A teacher is simply a guide for the soul to knowledge. Knowledge
is handed down traditionally through religious leaders, the Imams, whose
ultimate source of knowledge is the Prophet, who acquires his knowledge
from God by in­spiration.[^126]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa touch at a thorny problem in education. They believe
that neither the pupil may benefit from the tutor, nor the tutor may
benefit from the pupil, unless there is a kind of intimacy between them.
We know for certain that some kind of a reserved friendship is very
useful in this respect. But the Ikhwan al‑Safa overshoot themselves and
speak frankly of “the desire of grown‑up men for boys” as an incentive
for effecting real education. Further­more, they mention explicitly that
such manners belong only to nations which esteem science, art,
literature, and mathematics, like the Persians, the peoples of
Mesopotamia and Syria as well as the Greeks. Nomads, who as a rule have
no interest in science, art, etc., lack this desire.[^127]

The idea of Platonic love contaminated the Ikhwan al‑Safa as a result of
their readings in Greek history in general and in the philosophy of
Plato in particular. Plato advocated it especially in his Symposium.
Sarton blames Plato and says of him: “Platonic love for him was the
sublimation of paederasty; true love is called in the Symposium[^128]
the right method of boy­-loving”.[^129] The Ikhwan al‑Safa condemn this
desire, however, in all fields other than education.[^130] Plato too
seems to have condemned it in a later work of his, *Nomoi* (The Laws),
at least twice.[^131]

### 9. Religion

On the practical side of belief, the Ikhwan al‑Safa speak of religion
and laws. The word for religion in Arabic is *din*, i. e., custom or
obedience to one acknowledged head.[^132] Religion is a necessity as a
social sanction for the government of the masses, for the purification
of the soul, and also because all people are predisposed to
religiousness and piety. In this sense, religion is one for all people
and for all nations.[^133]

By Law (Ar. *Shari'ah* or *namus*, from the Greek word: *nomos*, law)
the Ikhwan al‑Safa meant what we mean today by religion. Laws
(religious) are different to suit different communities, groups, and
even individuals. These laws are dictated by the wise men of every
people for the benefit of their respective nations.[^134]

On this basis the Ikhwan al‑Safa declare that all metaphysical themes in
the sacred books such as creation, Adam, Satan, the tree of knowledge,
resurrection, the Day of Judgment, hell, and paradise should be taken as
symbols and understood allegorically. Only the masses, who cannot think
adequately for themselves, understand these themes in their literal and
physical sense. Themes of a lesser magnitude, as ***“He sendeth down
water from the sky,”***[^135] should also be treated symbolically: water
in this context being the Qur'an![^136]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa were not satisfied with any of the existing
religions; they, nevertheless, urged everybody to select one of them. To
have a defec­tive religion is better than to be a disbeliever, since
there is an element of truth in every religion. Everybody should be left
free to embrace the religion he chooses; he may also change his
religion, perhaps often too, though he is expected to look for the best
religion in his time. He should refrain, however, from contradictory
opinions and false doctrines: a wise man does not embrace two
contradictory religions at the same time.[^137]

There should be no compulsion in religion;[^138] compulsion should be
affected only through the laws. This is so because religion is a
self‑conviction felt in the heart. The laws of religions, on the
contrary, are social orders, to abide by which is necessary for the
maintenance of security and welfare of the community.[^139]

The Ikhwan al‑Safa formulated a definite attitude towards all existing
religions, sects, and schools of theology.[^140] We shall content
ourselves with their attitude towards Islam.

Islam is considered by them to be the religion par excellence: the best
and most perfect of all religions. The Qur'an overruled all earlier
revealed books. It, being the last, confirmed in them that which
resembled its contents and abrogated that which was contrary to its
precepts. Muhammad, peace be upon him, is the head of all the prophets
and the last of them. He is the governor of all governors; in him has
God united the elements of kingship and prophethood, so that his
followers may enjoy the worldly as well as the spiritual glories.[^141]

Final Note
----------

The numbering of the verses of the Qur'an followed in this chapter is
according to *Tafsir al‑Jalalain*, Cairo, 1346/1927. There is sometimes
in the long Surahs a slight difference in the numbering of verses
(resulting from the division of a few long verses). In Rodwell (q.v.)
this difference, when it occurs, varies from three to six; in Muhammad
'Ali and Pickthall (q.v.) the difference is only that of one.

Bibliography
------------

Aristotle, *Introduction to Aristotle (Selections*), ed. Richard McKeon,
The Modern Library, New York, 1947 ;

Adel Awa, *“L'Esprit critique des Mares de la Purete,”* Encyclopedistes
arabea, du IVs/Xe sicele, Beirut, 1948;

T. J. de Boer, *The History of Philosophy in Islam*, tr. Edward R.
Jones, London, 1933;

Omar A. Farrukh, \`*Abqariyyat al‑'Arabi fi at‑\`Ilm as‑al‑Falsafah*,
2nd ed., Beirut, 1371/1952; *The Arab Genius in Science and Philosophy*,
tr. John B. Hardie, Washington, 1954;

Ikhwan al‑Safa, 2nd ed., Beirut, 1372/1953; Abu Hayyan al‑Tauhidi,
*al‑Imta\` wa’l‑Mu'anasah*, Vols. II and III, Cairo, 1942; *al‑Risalat
al‑Jami’ah (li Rasa'il Ikhwan al‑Safa)*, Damascus, Vol. I, 1387/1948,
Vol. II n.d.;

*Jami'at al‑Jami’ah, Risalah Jami'at al‑Jami’ah au al‑Zubdah min Rasa'il
Ikhwan al‑Safa wa Khullan al‑Wafa* (an ordinary transcription from a
copy in the library of al‑Amlr \`Arif Tamir, Salsmiyyah, Southern
Province of U.A.R.);

Muhammad 'Ali, The Holy Qur'an, Arabic Text, English Translation, and
Commentary, revised edition, Lahore, 1951;

Marmaduke Pickthall, The Meaning of the Glorious Koran, an Explanatory
Translation, London, 1952;

*Rasa'il Ikhwan al‑ Safa wa Khullan al‑Wafa*, 4 Vols., Cairo, 1347/1928;

J. M. Rodwell, The Koran, English Translation, Everyman's Library, New
York, 1950;

George Sarton, *A History of Science, Ancient Science through the Golden
Age of Greece*, Cambridge, U.S.A., 1952 ; *Introduction to the History
of Science*, Vol. III, Baltimore, 1948;

Ueberweg, *Grundris der Geschichte der Philosophic*, Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol.
II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I
and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926,
1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II,
Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and
Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.,
Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin,
1926, 1928., Vol. I and Vol. II, Berlin, 1926, 1928.

[^1]: Imta, ii, pp. 4ff

[^2]: The true friends, the faithful comrades, the people deserving
praise, and the sons of glory (cf. Jami’ah, i, p. 141).

[^3]: Cf. Rasa’il, i, p. 310;. ii, pp. 166, 193, 207, etc.; iii, pp.
173‑78; iv, pp. 87, 203; Jami’ah, i, pp. 128 ff.

[^4]: Imta', ii, pp. 4ff.

[^5]: Rasa’il, iv, p. 490; also of. p. 278;

[^6]: Jami’ah, i, pp. 169f.; ii, pp. 36, 47.

[^7]: Jami'at al‑Jami’ah, Sec. vii. Rasa’il, iv, pp. 105, 237.

[^8]: Ibid., iv; pp. 338f,

[^9]: Ibid., iii, pp. 33f; cf. iv, pp. 138 f.

[^10]: Ibid., iv, p. 114.

[^11]: Ibid., pp. 119f.

[^12]: Ibid., ii, p. 19; iv, pp. 235, 241 f.

[^13]: Ibid., ii, p. 19; iv, pp. 215, 220‑24; Jami’ah, i, pp. 160f.,
162, 165, 166, 323f.

[^14]: Rasa’il, i, p. 130f.; iv, pp. 198ff., pp. 234f.

[^15]: Ibid., i, pp. 130f.; iv, pp. 234f,

[^16]: Ibid., i, pp. 23, 49, 202ff.; Jami’ah, i, pp. 219f.

[^17]: Rasa’il. i, pp. 23‑362.

[^18]: Ibid., ii, pp. 3‑388; iii, pp. 3‑181.

[^19]: Ibid., iii, pp. 182‑371.

[^20]: Ibid.; iii, pp. 373‑432; iv, 3‑478.

[^21]: Ibid., iii, p. 228; cf. ii, p. 351.

[^22]: Ibid.. i, pp. 106, 211;,ii, pp. 334, 335‑51; iii, pp. 38, 228,
384; cf. pp. 241, 292ff.

[^23]: Ibid., iii, pp. 41f.

[^24]: Ibid., i, p. 211; cf. .p. 106.; ii, p. 334; cf. p. 228.

[^25]: Ibid., iii, pp. 42, 322.

[^26]: Ibid., iii, pp. 48, 58, 152; Jami’ah, i, pp. 107, 123, 189, 288.

[^27]: Rasa’il, i, p: 23; cf. Jami’ah, i, pp. 99, 107; cf. further pp.
10, 99‑107; ii, pp 275f., 277f.. 280.

[^28]: Rasa’il, i, p. 326; ii, pp. 4, 325; iii, p. 186; cf. Jami’ah, i,
p. 298; ii, p. 74.

[^29]: Rasa’il, p. 322; ii, pp. 4, 5f.; iii, pp. 186, 360.

[^30]: Ibid., ii, p. 232.

[^31]: Ibid., ii, pp. 9, 10, 336; iii, p. 361.

[^32]: Ibid., ii, pp. 10, 13; iii, pp. 334f., 361.

[^33]: Ibid., iii, p. 336.

[^34]: Ibid., ii, pp. 10, 11, 13, 238‑47; iii, p. 306; Jami’ah, ii, p.
237.

[^35]: Ueberweg, Vol. I, p. 87; Sarton, History p. 276.

[^36]: Rasa’il i, p. 201; ii, pp. 78, 132f.; iii, p. 233; Jami’ah, ii,
p. 79; cf. Aristotle, pp. 122ff., 132f., 249ff

[^37]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 201, 354; iii, pp. 185, 233, 325, 327; iv, pp.
8f., 178; Jami’ah, ii, pp. 79, 278.

[^38]: Sarton, History, p. 217.

[^39]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 24f., 28f., 31f.; cf. Jami’ah i, p. 43.

[^40]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 28f.; iii, pp. 184f., 200ff.; Jami’ah, i, pp.
27ff.; ii, pp. 284ff.

[^41]: Rasa’il, i, p. 189; ii, pp. 107, 108ff.; Jami’ah, i, p. 593; ii,
p. 83.

[^42]: Rasa’il, ii, pp. 4, 9, 83, 244, 293, 392; iii, pp. 187, 189, 197,
228f., 328, 332, 260f,; Jami’ah, ii, pp. 33, 36.

[^43]: Rasa’il, p. 28; ii, pp. 55f., 112ff.; iii, pp. 19, 191, 192, 193,
203, 214f., 235, 361; Jami’ah, i, p. 529.

[^44]: Rasa’il, iii, pp. 5, 187ff., 230; iv, pp. 4ff.; Jami’ah, ii, pp.
4ff., 37.

[^45]: Rasa’il, i, p. 331; ii, pp. 55f., 112f.: iii, pp. 124ff.;
Jami’ah, i, pp. 331ff.; ii, p. 36.

[^46]: Rasa’il, ii, p. 36; iii, p. 198.

[^47]: Ibid., ii, pp. 4, 5; iii, pp. 8, 189, 198, 203, 204; iv, p. 4;
Jami’ah., i, p. 276; n, pp. 6, 37

[^48]: Cf. infra viii.

[^49]: Rasa’il, ii, pp. 2, 3, 22, 25ff., 29ff., 39‑42, 123; iii, pp.
190, 219, 221, 361; Jami’ah, i, p. 306.

[^50]: Rasa’il, ii, pp. 5, 22, 45‑50, 7 7, 78, 200, 337, 403; iii, pp.
79, 183, 190; Jami’ah, i, pp. 306, 311; ii; 37, 362; iv, pp. 268ff.,
313.

[^51]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 311, 315, 331, 350f.; ii, pp. 45 50ff.; Jami’ah,
ii, p. 37.

[^52]: Rasa’il, i, p. 17; ii, pp. 20f., 25f., 243ff., 318, 320f.; iii,
pp. 3ff. 9f., 12ff., 211‑14; iv, p. 277; Jami’ah, i, pp. 240, 563‑68,
581‑95, 635; ii, pp. 24‑38, 123; cf. Ueberweg, Vol. 1, pp. 51, 110;
Sarton, History, pp. 177, 216, 421.

[^53]: Rasa’il, i pp. 96, 98; ii, pp. 111 288; iii, pp. 25, 26, 28, 59,
102, 279, 332, 362; iv, pp. 29, 230, 231, 238; Jami’ah, i, pp. 383, 514,
515; ii, 28, 247, 298.

[^54]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 155f. The definitions of the periods of
“Exposition and Conceal­ment” as used in the “Epistles” are different
from those accepted by the Druzes and the Isma\`ilis.

[^55]: Rasa’il, ii, p. 227; Jami’ah, i, pp. lllf., 114, 145ff., 156f.;
ii, p. 143.

[^56]: Rasa’il, i, pp. lllff., 145ff., 157f.

[^57]: Qur'an, vii, 11; xxxviii; 76 cf. Jami’ah, i, p. 126.

[^58]: Jami’ah, i. pp. 113ff., 124‑28. 146; ii, p. 144.

[^59]: Ibid., i; pp. 111, 112, 115f., 155, 158, 163; ii, p. 144.

[^60]: Rasa’il, i, p. 62; ii, p. 17; iii, p. 216; iv, p. 138; Jami’ah,
i, pp. 116f., 129, 164, 295, 437, 439ff.; ii, pp. 145, 247, 298.

[^61]: Rasa’il, iv, p. 232; Jami’ah, i, p. 382; ii, p. 298.

[^62]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 169, 241; ii, pp. 250ff., 357ff.; iv, p. 413;
Jami’ah, i, pp. 513f.,, 554, 559.

[^63]: Rasa’il, i, p. 62; ii, pp. 17, 145, 247, 298, 323ff.; iii, pp.
25ff., 29, 51, 62, 73, 116; iv, p. 138; Jami'ah, i, pp. 116ff., 129,
164, 295, 437, 439ff., 498.

[^64]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 169, 226, 255, 277, 337; ii, pp. 43, 277; iii,
pp. 51, 56£, 59f.; iv, p. 82; Jami’ah, i, pp. 509, 663, 667; ii, pp. 28,
87.

[^65]: Rasa’il, i, p. 260; iii, pp. 26f., 29, 36, 93f., 105f., 279 289.

[^66]: Ibid., ii, p. 52; iii, pp. 64, 189, 279, 282, 284, 240, 243, 344,
346; iv, p. 82.

[^67]: Ibid., iii, pp. 315f., 320.

[^68]: Ibid., i, p. 35.

[^69]: Ueberweg, Vol. I, p. 513. Sarton (History, pp. 205, 214, n.15)
sets his flourishing in the second half of the first Christian century.

[^70]: Ueberweg, Vol. I, pp. 514, 519; Sarton, Introduction to the
History of Science, Vol. III, p. 1511; History, p. 214, n. 32.

[^71]: “Principles” or “Essentials” (Rasa’il, i, pp. 44f.). Certainly,
this is not the book of Euclid on geometry which was later called the
Elements (Ibid., p. 280; cf. also pp. 171, 442).

[^72]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 50ff., 63ff., 68‑71; Jami’ah, i, pp. 175f.

[^73]: Rasa’il, i, p. 68; cf. pp. 103.

[^74]: Ibid., i, pp. 71 f.; cf. p. 69.

[^75]: Ibid., i, pp. 132ff.. 134, 136, 154, 158. 175, 179f.; Jami’ah,
pp. 185‑88, 190ff

[^76]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 152f., 158M, 168.

[^77]: Rasa’il, ii, pp. 10, 24, 25; iii, pp. 374; Jami’ah, ii, p. 24.

[^78]: Cf. Ueberweg, Vol. II, pp. 80 ff., 87, 38.

[^79]: Rasa’il, ii, p.24.

[^80]: Ibid., i, pp. 73ff., 86, 88; ii, pp. 21, 22, 25, 26f., 28, 37;
iii, pp. 189f.; iv, p. 321.

[^81]: Ibid., i, pp. 100, 244; ii, pp. 21, 74f.; iii, p. 314.

[^82]: Ibid., ii, pp. 32ff.

[^83]: Ibid., ii, p. 33, cf. pp. 29‑37, 86ff.; cf. Sarton, History, p.
289, lines 30ff.

[^84]: Rasa’il, i, p. 117; cf. pp. 27f.

[^85]: Ibid, ii, pp. 40ff.

[^86]: Ibid., ii, p. 42.

[^87]: Ibid., i, pp. 84, 86‑88; ii, p. 31; iii, pp. 255‑57.

[^88]: Ibid., i, p. 111; ii, pp. 22, 49, 57, 219; iii, pp. 210, 219,
310; iv, p. 312; Jami’ah, i, p. 149.

[^89]: Sarton, History, p. 212, cf. p. 287.

[^90]: Rasa’il, i, pp‑. 111, 113; ii, pp. 22, 40, 49, 79, 118, 307, 310;
Jami’ah, i, pp. 149f.

[^91]: Ueberweg, Vol. I, p. 68 unten.

[^92]: Rasa’il. iii, pp. 309f.

[^93]: Ueberweg, Vol. I, p. 108.

[^94]: Rasa’il, iii, pp. 309, 310.

[^95]: Ibid., i, p. 112.

[^96]: Ibid., iv, p. 436.

[^97]: Ascribed to Aristotle; cf. Sarton, History, p. 517.

[^98]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 110‑31, cf. pp. 84ff.; pp. 54‑75.

[^99]: Ibid., i, pp. 79f., 88f.;‑ii, p. 21.

[^100]: Ibid., ii, p. 83.

[^101]: Ibid., ii, p. 10; iv, p. 7.

[^102]: Ibid., ii, pp. 123, 141ff., 152, 154f., 221f., 223, 318; iii,
pp. 64, 138.

[^103]: Rasa’il, iv, p. 317.

[^104]: Ibid., I, pp. 224ff.; ii, p. 287 ; iii, p. 44; iv, pp. 101, 118,
143, 176, 178; Jami’ah, 344, 701.

[^105]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 241f.; ii, pp. 325ff.; Jami’ah, ii, p. 164.

[^106]: Rasa’il, i, pp. 241f.; ii, pp. 325ff.; Jami’ah, ii, pp. 164f.;
cf. pp. 168‑86.

[^107]: Rasa’il, ii, pp. 325f., 347.

[^108]: Ibid., ii, p. 162; iii, p. 23 bottom.

[^109]: Ibid., ii, pp. 324, 328, 341, 347; ii:, pp. 17f., 29, 376ff.,
386, 388, 392; Jami’ah, i, pp. 507, 602f., 60,5.

[^110]: Rasa’il, ii, p. 308; iv, pp. 32f., 189.

[^111]: Ibid., iii, p. 424.

[^112]: Ibid., iv, p. 68.

[^113]: Ibid., iv, pp. 297ff.

[^114]: Ibid., iv, pp. 299ff.

[^115]: Ibid., iv, p. 3 7 2.

[^116]: Ibid., i, pp. 259, 260; of. iv, p. 144.

[^117]: Ibid., iii, pp. 421 f.

[^118]: Ibid., i, p. 247, of iv, p. 18 , Jami’ah, i, p. 94‑96, 98.

[^119]: Rasa’il, i, pp, 229‑38, 246; ii, p. 372; iii, pp. 268L, 395; iv,
pp. 109, 111, 141, 342; Jami’ah, i, p. 237.

[^120]: Rasa’il, iv, pp. 118, 141 f., 297 f.

[^121]: Ibid., i, pp. 153, 360f.; ii, pp. 129, 379ff.; iii, pp. 147f.

[^122]: Ibid., i, pp. 153, 213, 225, 229, 360; iii, pp. 106, 107f.

[^123]: Ibid., i, pp. 195, 198, 211, 225, 271, 273, 317; iii; p. 33.

[^124]: Ibid., i, pp. 198, 211, 225, 317; ii, p. 352; iii, pp. 90, 426;
iv, pp. 18, 127.

[^125]: Ibid., iii, pp. 236ff.; iv, p. 114.

[^126]: Ibid., i, pp. 211, 225, 317; iv, p. 18; Jami’ah, i, p. 413.

[^127]: Rasa’il, iii, pp. 267ff.

[^128]: 211B, quoted by Sarton, History, p. 425.

[^129]: Ibid., p. 425; cf. pp. 423ff.

[^130]: Rasa’il, iv, pp. 170ff.

[^131]: 636c, 836c, cited in Sarton, History, p. 425.

[^132]: Rasa’il, iii, p. 424; iv, p. 24.

[^133]: Ibid., iv, pp. 24, 25f.

[^134]: Ibid., i, pp. 135, 247; iii, pp. 48, 49, 241, 374; iv, pp. 24,
25f.,100,138,168, 186ff.

[^135]: Qur'an, xiii,19 (cf. Muhammad 'Ali, p.487; Pickthall, p.250;
Rodwell, p. 235).

[^136]: Rasa’il, iv, p. 137.

[^137]: Ibid., iii, pp. 86‑90; iv, pp. 22, 3 7, 54‑\`65; Farrukh, Ikhwan
al Safa, pp.108‑13.

[^138]: Rasa’il, iv, p. 476, in ref. to Qur'an, ii, 256 (Muhammad 'Ali,
p. 111, Pickthall, p. 59, Rodwell, p. 367).

[^139]: Rasa’il, iv, p. 476.

[^140]: Farrukh, op. cit., pp. 108‑13.

[^141]: Rasa’il, ii, p. 201; iii, pp. 92, 353; iv, pp. 33, 59, 172, 242;
Jami’ah, ii, p. 365.


