Chapter 16: Early Sufis Doctrine
================================

**Chapter 16: Early Sufis**[^1] **Doctrine**

(by M. Hamiduddin)

A
-

Sufism like many other institutions became, early in its history, a
fertile ground for imitators, impostors, and charlatans. The corrupting
influence of these charlatans was regarded as a source of great
confusion to all those who either wanted to follow the Path of Sufism;
or wanted honestly to understand it, one reason why this was so was that
Sufism by its very nature was a discipline meant not for the average but
for those who always felt ambitious for something above the average.

Besides these charlatans and impostors who put on the garb of Sufism and
exploited the credulous and the unwary, there was another group of men
who unwillingly became the source of corruption and confusion. Since a
Sufi more often than not was a man significantly different from the
average, it was but natural that some among the Sufis went so far away
from the norms of their societies and communities that they created
doubts in the minds of their followers regarding the legitimacy of the
commonly accepted norms.

Such doubts, if not properly tackled, could lead to the corruption of
vast segments of the communities concerned, an inevitable result of
which would have been either a widespread scepticism regarding the
erstwhile universally accepted norms, or a universal condemnation of
that which such exceptions among the Sufis stood for. Neither of these
two courses was considered to be healthy, for, whereas the first would
have resulted in the complete demorali­zation of all Muslim communities,
the latter could have resulted in the con­demnation not only of the
exceptional Sufis, but of all Sufis without exception, as deviants from
the accepted norms.

Most of the early treatises on Sufism, like the one that will be
referred to in this chapter, were written with two main aims in view:
(1) to point out to all those who cared to read these works what Sufism
really meant; and (2) to raise as strong a note of protest as possible
against the current malpractices of the charlatans and impostors so that
even those who may not have the time and the will to follow the path of
true Sufism may at least escape the clutches of these charlatans.

The extent to which this two-fold desire of the early writers shaped
their works is worth noting, because it is a measure of the
dependability of these works. This is how the author of *Kitab
al-Luma'*, one of the earliest, if not the earliest, Sufi texts now
available, Sarraj (d. 456/1063), felt: “It is necessary for the
intelligent among us that they understand something of the principles,
aims, and ways of those who are the people of rectitude and eminence
among this group (Sufis) so that we can distinguish them (genuine Sufis)
from those who just imitate them, put on their garb, and advertise
themselves as Sufis.“[^2]

“There are to be found (in our days),” he adds, “many of those who just
parade as Sufis, point to themselves as genuine Sufis, and set
themselves to the job of answering all sorts of questions and queries
regarding Sufism. Everyone of these impostors claims to have written a
book or two on Sufism which in reality he has filled with nothing but
utter trash and absurdly non­sensical material in answer to equally
meaningless and silly questions. Such impostors do not realize that it
is not only not good but is a positive evil to do all this....

The early masters discussed the Sufistic problems honestly and earnestly
only to point out through their wise word the true answers to them. They
turned to handle them only when they had severed their connection with
the materialistic world, had chastened themselves through long and
austere prayers, practices, and discipline, and had arrived at the
clearest knowledge of reality, which knowledge found its full and
necessary expression in their honest, sincere, and truthful actions.
Such early masters used to be models of men who having burnt their boats
of worldly affairs lived in constant contact with the Almighty.”[^3]

In his *Kitab al-Ta\`arruf*, another very early work, Kalabadhi (d.
378/988) wrote: “Finally the meaning departed and the name remained, the
substance vanished and the shadow took its place: realization became an
ornament, and verification a decoration. He who knew not (the truth)
pretended to possess it, he who had never so much as described it,
adorned himself with it; he who had it much upon his tongue, denied it
by his acts, and he who displayed it in his exposition, concealed it by
his actual conduct.”[^4]

In his *Risalah*, al-Qushairi (d.465/1072) too talks in the same vein:
\`There set in decadence in this Path (Sufism) to such an extent that
both reality and the path were lost to men. Neither were the old
teachers to be found who could guide the young seekers of the true path,
nor were the young stalwarts to be seen anywhere whose life one could
take as a model. Piety left us bag and baggage. Greed and avarice became
the rule of the day. And all hearts lost genuine respect for the
Shari'ah. “[^5]

Later on, the author of *Kashf al-Mahjub*, 'Ali Hujwiri (d. c.
456/1063), came out even in stronger terms against what was prevalent in
his days : “God has created us among men who give the name of
*Shari*\`*ah* to all that their base selves crave for, and who give the
name of honour and science to all those tricks with which they seek
worldly power and glory, and who call double-dealing the fear of God,
and who label the art of concealing hatred of men in their hearts the
virtue of tolerance.”[^6]

\`Attar, who came much later, is perhaps, just because of that, more
explicit than his predecessors: “Ours is the period in which this mode
of talking (the truth) has taken on the veil of complete concealment. It
has become fashionable with the charlatans to parade as the wise and the
virtuous, and the genuine men of love and insight have become rare like
any­thing. We are living in such times that the evil-doers have pushed
the good and the virtuous into complete oblivion.”[^7]

The great concern for truth that all those writers felt comes out
indirectly also in the special mode of recording and reporting
statements from great Sufis which all of them generally (and al-Qushairi
especially) adopt. Practically every point that al-Qushairi makes,
regarding every feature, major or minor, of Sufi way of life, is
supported by him with three types of evidence. (1) Some statement from
the Qur'an, better than which there is no basis for any prin­ciple
governing the life of the faithful. (2) Some *hadith* or some incident
in the life of the Holy Prophet. (3) Some comment or some incident in
the life of a great Sufi.

So far as the first of these is concerned, we know, the matter is very
simple. Nobody can afford to misquote the Qur'an, for the danger of
discovery is always there. As to the second and third types of evidence,
the risks of mis­quoting are always there. It was to avoid these risks
that scholars of Hadith had devised the special techniques which came
later on to be known as tech­niques of *isnad* (the method of basing
traditions on the authority of narrators), and *Asma' al-Rijal* (the
chain of narrators supporting a tradition). The care that the
Hadith-writers took regarding their *isnad* and its various links was so
great that it became the model of authentic reporting in all historical
writings. Al-Qushairi follows this technique of Hadith-writing in
practically everything he reports and every point regarding the
practices of the Sufis he makes, to such an extent that nearly half of
his long treatise consists of nothing but the *isnad*.

B
-

Although none of our sources goes beyond the fifth/eleventh century, we
have evidence, in these very sources, that people had started taking
interest in Sufism, and in using the words *al-tasawwuf* and *sufi*.

Sarraj starts by repudiating the view that the word *sufi* is of recent
(relative to Sarraj's days) origin and that the people of Baghdad were
the first to use it. He thinks, on the other hand, that the word was
current in the days of the *Tabi\`in* (the Successors of the Companions
of the Prophet) as well as the *Tab' Tabi\`in* (the Successors of these
Successors). By implication, he would say, although he does not
verbalize it, that the word was current even in the days of the Prophet
and his Companions, because, as he states explicitly, it was current in
pre-Islamic days.

To show that the word *sufi* was current in the days of *Tab' Tabi'in*,
Sarraj quotes a comment from Sufyan of Thaur: “If it were not for Abu
Hashim the Sufi I would not have understood the true meaning of
...”'[^8]

It is easy to identify Sufyan of Thaur's period if one were to recall
the well-­known story of Qadi Shuraib's appointment as the Qadi of
Baghdad by the Caliph Abu Ja'far Mansur. Sufyan, according to Hujwiri,
was one of the original four great saints and scholars of the day whom
the Caliph had called up to select from among them the one who was
really fit to administer justice to the people of his vast empires. [^9]

To show that the word *sufi* was current in the days of *Tabi'in*,
Sarraj quotes a comment from Hasan of Basrah: “I saw a Sufi going round
the Ka'bah; I offered him something, but he did not accept it
saying…”[^10]

That Hasan of Basrah belonged to the period of *Tabi'in* is borne out by
Hujwiri who includes him among the eminent Sufis of this period.[^11]
The exact part of this period to which Hasan of Basrah belonged is
brought out by 'Attar who mentions that Hasan was a child when the
Prophet was still alive, and on growing he took 'Ali bin abi Talib or
his son Hasan as his preceptor. Hasan had met, according to 'Attar, a
hundred and thirty Companions of the Prophet of whom seventy had fought
at Badr. Hasan died in 110/728.[^12]

Sarraj anticipates the question why none of the Companions of the Holy
Prophet was ever called a Sufi if this word was current during his time.
He answers this question by emphasizing that since the honour of having
the Prophet as one's preceptor in person and. having worked with the
Prophet for the glory of God was in the eyes of every true believer the
highest honour, nobody ever thought of calling the Companions of the
Prophet by any other name. It was for this reason that he whom God gave
this distinction was considered to be the embodiment of all that was the
noblest in a Sufi without his being called so.[^13]

To show that the word Sufi was current in the pre-Islamic days Sarraj
quotes from the “History of Mecca” by Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Yasar, and
from others, that there was a period in the history of Mecca when
everybody had gone away from Mecca so that nobody was left there to pay
homage to the Ka'bah and to go round it. During these days a Sufi used
to come from a distant place in order to go round the Ka'bah in the
prescribed manner. If this story is true, Sarraj points out, then it is
evident that the word *sufi* was current in the pre-Islamic days, and
was used for men of excellence and virtue.[^14]

Having brought out that the word *sufi* was current even in pre-Islamic
days, Sarraj argues that it is derived from *suf* which stands for
coarse woolen clothes which had come to be accepted as the conventional
dress of the pious, even of the prophets, among the Semitic people. And
to show that it was an established custom among the Arabs to refer to
men by their specific con­ventional garb rather than by their specific
attributes and traits, Sarraj quotes from the Qur'an*:* ***wa qal
al-hawariyyun***, emphasizing that the Companions of Jesus Christ were
referred to by their white garb rather than their virtuous traits.[^15]

The two comments from Sufyan of Thaur and Hasan of Basrah quoted by
Sarraj as evidence of the fact that the word *sufi* was used by *Tab'
Tabi'in* as well as *Tabi'in*, have been quoted by several later authors
too. Dr. Zaki Mubarak, author of *al-Tasawwuf al-Islami fi al-Adab
wa’l-Akhlaq* (second edition, 1954), quotes the comment attributed to
Hasan of Basrah from 'Afif al-Din 'Abd Allah bin Asad of Yafa'i's book
*Nashr al-Mahasin al-Ghaliyah fi Fadl al-Aslah al-Maqamat al-'Aliyyah*,
and the comment attributed to Sufyan of Thaur from Zahr al -Adab of Abu
Ishaq al-Husri (who must not be confused with Abu al-Hasan 'Ali son of
Ibrahim al-Husri al-Basri, a pupil of Shibli, who died in the year
371/981 and from whom Sarraj himself quotes quite a few comments). Even
if these later authors had ultimately taken these com­ments from Sarraj,
which is not improbable, their quoting them at least points to the fact
that they did not regard Sarraj's point of view altogether
un­acceptable.”[^16]

Sarraj's view that the word *sufi* was current in pre-Islamic days is
supported similarly by Abi al-Farab ibn al-Jauzi, Zamakhshari, and
Firuzabadi. Dr. Zaki Mubarak quotes the following extract from ibn
al-Jauzi's book *Talbis Iblis*: “Mubammad ibn Nasir related to us from
Abi Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Said al-­Hibal who said: 'Abu Muhammad 'Abd
al-Ghani ibn Said al-Hafiz said: I asked Walid ibn al-Qasim: What is it
on account of which a person is called a Sufi? And he answered: There
were a people in the pre-Islamic days known as al-Sufiyyah; they had
given up every worldly thing for the sake of God Almighty, and had made
Ka'bah their permanent abode, and place of wor­ship.' Those who lived
like them came to be known as al-Sufiyyah.”[^17]

Kalabadhi mentions that there had been seventeen Sufi writers before him
who had published the sciences of allusion in books and treatises, and
eleven Sufis who had written on conduct.

Al-Qushairi states explicitly in one place that the word *tasawwuf* had
been used by people before the second/eighth century: “Those among the
Sunnites who took extreme care in keeping their contact with God alive
and saving themselves from the paths of negligence came to be known by
the special name of *ahl al-tasawwuf*. And this name for these leaders
of the pious became well known among people before 200/815.”[^18]

Men who followed the Path of Sufism had started using the word *sufi* as
part of their titles and names long before *Risalat al-Qushairiyyah* was
com­posed.

Hujwiri traces back the use of the word *sufi* even to the Holy Prophet;
for example he remarks in one place: “And the Prophet, peace and
blessings of God be upon him, said, \`He who hears the voice of the
people of *tasawwuf* and yet does not take their words to heart is
listed in the eyes of God as one of the negligent ones.”'[^19]

C
-

Sufism went through considerable development and modification as the
Muslims came into contact with peoples of other races and cultures in
the course of their history. Consequently, what came to be known as
Sufism later on must be distinguished from what Sufism was in its early
days. For, in spite of a great deal of what in later Sufism may be
recognized as nothing but an elaboration of what was there earlier, it
would be instructive to find out at least what the earlier form was. The
ideal thing from this point of view would be to go back to the writers
of the first and second/seventh and eighth centuries. But unfortunately
the sources available to us do not go so far back. We will have,
therefore, to be content with whatever can be culled from the sources
available.

Qushairi makes a large number of statements about the characteristics of
a true Sufi of his own days or of two or three generations earlier.
Hujwiri holds practically the same view; only his account is more
detailed.

One of the first things that Qushairi emphasizes regarding a Sufi is
that he is absolutely convinced that of all the paths of life open to a
man his path is the best. This is how Qushairi expresses it: “And the
grounds on which their path was built were stronger than the grounds on
which the paths of others were established, be they men of tradition and
culture, or men of thought and intellect “[^20]

Having felt convinced that Sufism is the best of all the paths, the Sufi
has to take a few decisions regarding his relation to God, man, and the
world. For it is in the light of these relations that he can be
distinguished from others. In a way these relations constitute the
criteria on the basis of which a genuine Sufi could be distinguished
from those who just pretended to be so.

Out of these three types of relations the Sufi's relation to God is the
most important, because the other two, strictly speaking, are derived
from and based on it. Qushairi makes the following significant
statements in connection with the Sufi's relation to God.

1. The first and foremost thing is that one's belief in God should
contain no element of doubt. It should not be contaminated with
new-fangled notions and misguiding concepts, and should be firmly rooted
in self-evident facts.[^21]

Doubt in this context means vagueness about the attributes of God and
scep­ticism regarding His existence. Obviously for the Sufi to avoid
this vagueness and scepticism is possible only if he relies on whatever
has come down to him by way of the Qur'an and the Sunnah. That this is
so is pointed out by the warning against “new-fangled” notions and
“misguiding concepts.” What these notions and concepts were, one can
easily find out from what both Qushairi and Hujwiri bring under the
heading of Malahidah and Qaramitah, etc. But what is most remarkable in
this connection is the emphasis the Sufi lays on factual evidence, for
he believes that the purely conceptual is not the only relation man can
have with God; this relation can be experiential too.

2. A person's relation to God should be so thorough, comprehensive, and
intimate that it would lead him to feel as if he lives and does
everything not because he is doing it all, but because God is doing it
all. In identifying him­self with God he would go through the double
process of losing his mortal self in Him and experiencing Him in every
act of his own self. As a consequence of this the Sufi, from the very
beginning, endeavours to have a life about which it may be truly said
that it is a life with and in Him.[^22]

3. Another way of putting the point stressed above is that the Sufi not
only stops referring all his acts to his mortal self, but he builds up
the positive attitude that it is the divine will which must be accepted
by the Sufi as supreme, not on this or that occasion, nor in such and
such particular situation, but always, and in every situation of which
his life is composed.[^23]

4. The Sufi's relation to God is a pure relation in the sense that it is
a relation just between him and his God without any material link.[^24]

5. This relation rids man of all occupation with affairs worldly and
mundane.[^25]

6. The Sufi must regard himself as having been created for nobody and
nothing except God.[^26]

Regarding their relations to their fellow-beings and the world at large,
the early Sufis were quite explicit in emphasizing that the *Shari'ah*
is the frame­work within which these relations have to be built and
maintained. With this in view they enjoined on every Sufi to pursue all
the sciences on which the *Shari'ah* is based;[^27] it was enjoined
especially that he should seek enlighten­ment about the way the Holy
Prophet lived his life so that the Sunnah might become the guiding light
for him in everything he does and every relationship he builds.[^28]

While the different schools of Sufis had each its own unique pattern of
Sufi techniques, they were all agreed on one common framework of
ultimate reference, and that was the framework of the
*Shari*\`*ah*.[^29]

Apart from emphasizing that for a Sufi it is necessary at every stage to
keep the *Shari*\`ah in view as the ultimate criterion, the early Sufis
seldom missed to point out that those who did not care much for the
*Shari'ah* got themselves involved in confusion and contradiction. The
early Sufis were always anxious that their fundamental position must be
clearly distinguished from that of the orthodox scholars and the
theologians, as well as the innovators and the sophists.

The distinction between the Sufi's position and that of the orthodox
theo­logian lies in the fact that the theologian regards the Law
(*Shari'ah*) and Reality (*Haqiqah*) as one and the same, while the Sufi
maintains that the two are so different from each other that unless one
explicitly recognizes the differ­ence, one is apt to commit a
fundamental error.[^30] Reality from this point of view is a special
aspect of God, such that man can never completely comprehend it, whereas
the *Shari'ah* is a code of human conduct which man can and must aspire
to understand and act upon as completely as possible.

The identity of reality and the *Shari'ah* which the Sufi attributes to
the theologian does not appear to be easy to understand. Going by what
one finds in the writings of the leaders of the four schools of *Fiqh*,
one would say that the theologian is very logical and cautious in his
views regarding the attributes of God. He would be the last person to
identify the *Shari'ah* and the *Haqiqah*, for whereas the understanding
of *Shari'ah* requires no special faculty other than the one which an
average mortal requires for solving the problems of his daily life, the
understanding of *Haqiqah* requires a special capacity with which the
prophets alone are endowed.

Regarding the distinction between the Sufis and the innovators and
sophists, it is pointed out that while the Sufis hold that the
*Shari'ah* and *Haqiqah*, in spite of their theoretical distinction,
always operate in intimate relation, the innovators maintain that the
*Shari'ah* is operative only so long as a man has not established
contact with reality; for whenever he does establish this contact, the
*Shari'ah* stops being operative and becomes altogether useless and
futile.[^31]

The broad significance of this distinction is that the early Sufi never
re­garded himself as completely free from the bonds of the *Shari'ah*.
He never dared claim himself, as some of Carmathians and others did, as
law unto himself, or as a lawgiver to others.

Apart from these distinctions between the position taken up by the Sufis
on the one hand and theologians, Carmathians, etc., on the other, the
early Sufi felt the need of another distinction; and that was the
distinction between his attitude towards the *Shari'ah* and that of the
average Muslim.
He held that, while for the average man of religion a large number of
con­veniences and concessions are permissible within the framework of
the *Shari*\`ah, there are no such concessions and conveniences for the
Sufi. The latter does not believe in sparing himself so far as the rules
and regulations of the *Shari'ah* are concerned. For him there is no
“take it easy” in the *Shari'ah.* The early Sufi believed in an
extremely high level of conformity with the Law. As there is no
transgression for the Sufi, there is no relaxation for him. Even the
relaxation permissible to others is a threat to him.[^32]

This unsparing attitude of the Sufi is not the result of his belief in
asceticism *per se*. It is rather the logical result of his basic
attitude towards God which is his starting point, and by virtue of which
alone he is justified in calling himself a Sufi. The concessions given
by the *Shari'ah* to an average Muslim are determined by his station in
life in so far as he accepts the rights and obligations conferred or
enjoined on him by the various groups of which he willingly accepts the
membership. For the Sufi there is no such membership of social groups,
to begin with; and, therefore, he can claim no special rights and
obligations for the fulfilment of which concessions and conveniences
within the Shari'ah may be necessary.

This point becomes clear when one compares the attitude of the Sufi with
that of the ascetic. Whereas the ascetic believes in the strategy of now
sacrificing this asset or resource, now that in his search for goodness,
the Sufi believes in an all-out bid to reach God. There is nothing too
precious, too dear, or too delicate to be spent and expended in the
Sufi's endeavour at reaching the fountain which alone can quench his
thirst.[^33]

It would be easier to understand this attitude still further if we bear
in mind why the early Sufi regarded the *jihad* with the self as the
bigger and the more difficult and worthwhile form of *jihad* than the
*jihad* against the political enemy with the help of the sword. For the
Sufi engaged in the *jihad* against himself, all actions stemming from
his narrow personal considerations lead to evil directly or indirectly.

This belief, that everything that is narrowly selfish and personal must
directly or indirectly lead to evil, is closely related, in the mind of
the early Sufi, to his attitude towards God as the only reality, which
in technical lan­guage is known as *tawhid*. It is the Sufi's acceptance
of *tawhid* as basic and fundamental that helps him build the right type
of relation with God without which there is nothing in his life because
of which he may be called a Sufi. It would be necessary, therefore, to
state clearly what *tawhid* meant to the early Sufis.

A Sufi like Junaid of Baghdad believed that *tawhid* means that a man
has the knowledge, as sure as any scientific knowledge today would be,
that God is unique in His timelessness, and that there is none like Him,
and, further, that nothing and nobody can carry out the actions which
He, and He alone, is capable of carrying out.[^34] On another occasion
Junaid puts his ideas about *tawhid* thus: It is the maximum of
certainty with which you believe that all motion as well as lack of
motion of things created is the act of God.[^35]

Ja\`far al-Sadiq explained *tawhid* by saying: He who thinks that Allah
is in some­ thing, or of something, or on something, commits the sin of
making things other than God His equals, because if God be on something
it would mean He is being supported or carried by that something, and if
God be in some­ thing it would mean that He is encircled by that
something, and if He is of something it means that He is in time and in
space.[^36]

Abu 'Ali Rudhbari expressed what *tawhid* meant to him by saying: God is
other than that which man's thinking and imagining makes Him out to be,
because He Himself says in the Qur'an, “There is nothing like Him and He
hears all and sees all.”[^37]

Abu \`Ali al-Daqqaq, the teacher of Qushairi, puts his ideas about
*tawhid* in one pithy comment: Somebody asked a Sufi where is God, and
he replied, “Woe be to you, you wish to see with your physical eyes
where God is.”[^38]

Husain ibn Mansur thought the first step in *tawhid* means denying the
possi­bility of there being an equal of God as completely as
possible.[^39] Husri re­garded that *tawhid* is based on five
principles: (1) absolute negation of God's temporality, (2) complete
assertion of the eternity of God, (3) relinquishing of lands and abodes,
(4) separation from brethren, and (5) complete disregard of that which
one knows and that which one does not know.

Explaining the third principle, Hujwiri says: It means the forsaking by
the disciple of the established ways of seeking comfort and convenience
for one's own self.

While explaining the last one of the principles, he says: Man's
know­ledge of things is built upon the answers to his own hows and whys
provided by his own intellect, imagination, or observation; all that
such man-made knowledge asserts about *tawhid* is contradicted by the
true notion of *tawhid*, and that which man's ignorance regards as
*tawhid* is contradicted by man-­made knowledge itself. Hence *tawhid*
is neither encompassed by that which man knows, nor by that which man
does not know.[^40]

Offering a positive com­ment of his own, this is how Hujwiri expresses
what *tawhid* means: It is the sifting and absolute distinguishing of
the eternal from that which is in time, in the sense that you must not
regard the eternal as subject to the laws which govern that which is in
time. You must not regard being in time as in any way similar to not
being in time. You must accept God to be eternal and yourself to be in
time. Nothing that is yours, or is like you, can be attributed to Him,
and nothing which is an attribute of His can qualify you, because there
is no mixing of the eternal and that which is in time; the eternal was
there even before the birth of the possibility of the becoming of that
which is in time.[^41]

Keeping in mind the simple, almost naive, formulations of *tawhid* in
the comments given above, one cannot help thinking that the men
responsible for these formulations were not so much experts in
philosophical polemics, as they were practical men concerned primarily
with the guidance of their dis­ciples. None of these formulations can
stand the rigour of logical analysis, and yet every one of the
formulations can provide a framework of practical con­duct.

It is in view of this that, in spite of discerning traces of syllogistic
pattern here and there, one must regard the efforts of the early Sufis
as primarily the result of their training in the traditions of the
Qur'an and the Sunnah, rather than the influences, Greek or Manichaean,
of philosophical thought, to which men like Qushairi and Hujwiri, and
their predecessors like Junaid, must have been exposed. It took several
centuries more for these philosophical influences to become practically
the core of Sufi thinking. But during the period with which we are
concerned Sufi thinking was mostly free of such influences.

The early Sufi believed that once he had set the pattern of his life in
the mould of the attitudes and relations, described somewhat in detail
above, he was ready to make a start in realizing his ultimate ambition,
namely, the ambition of experiencing God in such a way that he might be
able to say, like every Sufi: “What for others is just a matter of
conjecture and vague hypothesis is for him there like the most certain
entity, and what for others is a matter of conceptual understanding of
God is for him something to be experienced as an existent about the
reality of which there can be no possible doubt, so that he can sing
with the poet:

“My night is aglow with the beauteous grandeur of the face,
While the darkness of night envelops everyone else,
While others are enshrouded in the pitch darkness of night,
I am experiencing the brilliant light of the day.”[^42]

But how he should make a start, and what exactly he should do after
having made a start, are matters of controversy among the Sufis. These
controversies are more keen and intense among the later Sufis than among
the early ones. The intensity of these controversies among the later
Sufis can be judged from the simple fact that, as we come out of the
period of early Sufism and get into the later period we find no Sufi who
is not anxious to link himself to one of the orders like Qadriyyah,
Chishtiyyah, Naqshbandiyyah, Qalandriyyah, Shattariyyah, Uwaisiyyah,
Suhrawardiyyah, Malamtiyyah, etc.

Among the early Sufis, on the other hand, we find practically no trace
of such anxiety. For example, one finds little mention of such orders in
Qushairi, though Hujwiri, who came after Qushairi, shows a good deal of
order-consciousness. This order-consciousness of Hujwiri, which most
probably reflects the order­-consciousness of his contemporary Sufis,
finds expression in a discussion of such orders as: al-Muhasibiyyah,
al-Taifuriyyah, al-Junaidiyyah, al-Qassariy­yah, al-Saiyariyyah,
al-Suhailiyyah, al-Kharraziyyah, al-Nuriyyah, etc.

Without going into a detailed discussion of what among the early as well
as the later Sufis constituted the basis of inter-order distinctions,
one can safely say that at least one basis of such distinctions was just
this matter of how one should make a start, and what one should do after
having made a start. It seems every one of these orders, more the later
ones than the earlier, had its own prescribed technique.

That in Kalabadhi and Qushairi there is little mention of Sufi orders -
and Hujwiri discusses them with a good deal of keenness - indicates only
that whereas the specific techniques of the respec­tive orders might
have been introduced in their rudimentary form in the days of the
masters after whom the orders came to be known, it took several
generations of followers and practitioners to recognize the merits of
these techniques and give them their adequate and more or less perfected
forms.

If one could, therefore, overlook the rudiments of techniques which some
of the early Sufis might have introduced for the benefit of their
respective groups of disciples, one could discover a large body of
precepts which constituted the universally accepted techniques which all
early Sufis regarded as indispensable. It is such techniques that
Qushairi emphasizes in his chapter: “The Last Words to the Disciples,”
and it is to some of these that we must now turn.

The first step which is regarded absolutely necessary by Qushairi in
this connection is that the disciple should seek a preceptor and put
himself entirely under his guidance. For, if the disciple does not do
that and relies entirely on his own initiative and efforts, he is never
going to succeed.[^43]
The disciple who has no preceptor finds Satan himself acting as
one.[^44] Without a preceptor no disciple can achieve more than the
mastering of industrious techniques of piety which by themselves never
lead to his seeing the light and achieving an experiential contact with
the Creator.[^45]

The early Sufis regarded reliance on just one's own initiative as
misleading, perhaps because they considered the experiences of a
beginner to be mostly theoretical, for when he thinks he is in contact
with reality, he may actually be just imagining things; or he may be a
victim of illusions and hallucinations. If it is just the disciple's own
insight, limited as it is in the beginning, and nothing else, on which
he has to depend, he will find it almost impossible to distinguish
between the genuine Sufi experiences and what he is at the time
experiencing.

If, on the other hand, he is under the guidance of an established master
and preceptor and observes the discipline, he is in no danger of falling
a victim to illusions and hallucinations; and in case he does fall
victim to such confusions, he has, in his preceptor, one who can bring
him back to the right path. The preceptor can do it because he is in
actual living contact with reality, and his first-hand experience of
reality can help the disciple verify whether his own experiences are
genuine or otherwise.

This prerequisite, that every disciple must take a preceptor or else he
is doomed, raises several issues which were discussed in detail by most
of the early Sufis. One of these issues was: Is not the *Shari’ah*
enough for a Muslim? Must the disciple accept the position that the
framework of the *Shari’ah* is of necessity inadequate?

The most popular answer to such a question among the early Sufis was
that in the *Shari’ah* there is room for the average, below average, as
well as the above average. That which is for the above average in it is
rooted in that segment of the *Shari’ah* which the Holy Prophet
bequeathed only to the chosen few of his Companions, for it was meant
only for them, and not for the com­mon man.

What distinguished this segment of the *Shari\`ah* from the other
segments was that an average man's code of conduct could be complete
with­out it, and yet it did not clash with it. To the average man it was
something within the *Shari\`ah* and, at the same time, over and above
the *Shari’ah*, in so far as he needed it.

The discussion of who the chosen few were, for whom this segment of the
*Shari’ah* was meant, and what their distinguishing character­istics
were, will be too detailed for us to enter into here. Suffice it to say
that they were the ones who, on the one hand, had the laudable ambition
of shaping their whole lives, and not just parts of it, on the model of
the Holy Prophet, and who, on the other hand, were regarded by the
Prophet as adequate and competent personalities for carrying the extra
load of intimate insight into the nature of Reality, that is, God.

It was from this point of view that the early Sufis regarded the
*Shari’ah* of the average Muslim as just not enough for him. And it was
to make up for the deficiencies of the average man's *Shari\`ah* that he
sought the help, guidance, and discipline of a preceptor, belonging to a
line of preceptors ultimately ending up with the Holy Prophet from whom
the first man in the line got his unique insight.

One additional reason which is sometimes offered by some early Sufis as
an explanation for the necessity of a preceptor is that every genuine
insight into God's being is an experience of a magnitude altogether
beyond the capacity of an average mortal. The collapsing of the Prophet
Moses at getting just a glimpse of His being is cited by them as an
extreme example of it. If a disciple is lucky enough, through just his
own endeavours, to get such an intimate insight into the being of God,
then left just to his own personal resources he may collapse and find
further progress altogether impossible.

The early Sufis' insistence on every disciple taking a preceptor raises
some other issues altogether different from the ones we have discussed
so far. The pre-Islamic Arab tribes insisted on certain groups of their
members specializing in their genealogical trees, customs, war-records,
naturally under some teachers. Likewise the early Islamic period saw
schools of *Tafsir*, *Fiqh*, etc., coming into existence.

The pattern of pupil-teacher relationship was, therefore, not altogether
unknown to the early Sufis. But what the pupil in all these fields
learnt from the teacher fell under the heading of knowledge in the usual
sense of the term. He who had more knowledge and information could
impart it to him who was prepared to sweat for it. The question arises:
Was this type of pupil-teacher relationship the model of the
disciple-preceptor relationship in the Sufis' special field?

There is no simple answer to this question. That the Arabs were familiar
with the possibility of one's having knowledge of the phenomena other
than the natural ones goes without saying. That the Jews and the
Christians among them were familiar with the knowledge of the divine,
distinct from the mun­dane, is also well known. But what is not clear is
whether in the days im­mediately preceding Islam the disciple-preceptor
type of relation was developed and cultivated in an institutionalized
form or not.

For, on the one hand, we have the Semitic institution of the Prophet who
by virtue, not of any ascetic practices of his own, but by virtue merely
of divine blessing, is chosen to have living contact with the Almighty
and, thus, become His agent for leading the Semitic people to the
righteous path; and, on the other, we have the insti­tutions of the
Rabbi and the *Rahib*, who by virtue of the ascetic practices to which
they devote their entire lives can acquire some sort of contact with the
Almighty which puts them above the average mortal. The Rabbi and the
*Rahib* in this sense are in the same category as the *Kahins* of the
pagan Arabs, i.e. men who through the practices they learnt from their
masters were thought to have achieved a contact with reality which could
not have been achieved by those who did not have the benefit of those
practices. Of course, the reality with which the Rabbi and the *Rahib*
establish contact must be distinguished from the reality with which the
pagan *Kahin* established contact.

If one looks at the disciple-preceptor relation of the early Sufi
against this cultural background of the Semitic peoples, it is easy to
see how much of it is influenced by the Jewish and Christian practices.
But that is not tantamount to calling Sufism un-Islamic. Strictly
speaking, the Sufi disciple-preceptor relationship is as different from
its Jewish and Christian models as Islam is different from Judaism and
Christianity, for the roots of such models of rela­tions go into the
over-all systems from which they spring.

The Sufi disciple-preceptor relation would be un-Islamic if it could be
de­monstrated that the features which distinguish it from its Jewish and
Christian models are not derived from Islam but are, rather, derived
from sources other than Islamic. One could say, without going into
further discussion; that these extra-Jewish and extra-Christian elements
in the systems of the early Sufis were not derived from sources other
than the Qur'an and the Sunnah. And one could cite, in support, cases
like that of Shibli, the preceptor, and Husri, the disciple. Shibli told
Husri in the very beginning of their relationship that if between one
Friday and the next, when he had to come to Shibli, i, e., for one whole
week, any thought of anything, or any being other than God entered his
mind, his coming to Shibli was altogether forbidden.[^46]

The case of Shibli and Husri is instructive from another point too. It
illus­trates in a simple and concrete form what exactly the Sufi
preceptor does for his disciple. To think of nothing and to live a life
involved in nothing but God, not only for one whole week, but week after
week, is the least that is expected of a beginner. Such a way of life is
easier described than actually lived. Life as an average mortal lives
presents no parallel to this kind of involvement.

For the Sufi, especially the beginner, in spite of his having selected
the Path of Sufism, is still a member of a living society which does not
stop making demands on him; and he needs attending to so many other
things just to survive and remain strong enough to carry out the task
that the Shari\`ah prescribes for him even in the context in which he
has put himself. To carry out adequately all this and yet let no thought
other than that of God enter his mind even for the fraction of a moment
seems, at the face of it, quite an impossibility.

The only parallel one finds in ordinary life is that of a lover. The
lover is seldom forgetful of his love in spite of all his activities of
daily life; rather, he does everything ultimately for the sake of his
beloved. Even so the Sufi does everything for the sake of his beloved,
God. Once this becomes possible, acts not only like those of the
prescribed five prayers a day, but even those remotely connected with
praying, become acts carried out by him with God constituting the
con­stant frame of reference.

The case of an ordinary lover is easier to understand for the simple
reason that, as we all know, there is a lot within us which can never
find expression or satisfaction without one's being in love. The person
with whom one is in love offers a living answer to so many of the
problems of the lover's personality that, without being in love with
just such and such a person, the lover might have remained incomplete
himself.

In so far as there is this personal, specific, and concrete element in
every lover-beloved relation, it falls below the Sufi-God relation. But
in so far as every genuine lover-beloved relation means the living by
the lover a life which, even when it does not appear to be lived for the
sake of the beloved, is actually coloured by the tender thoughts of the
beloved deep in the heart of the lover, the lover-beloved relation
offers the only parallel in ordinary life for the Sufi-God relation of
the type Shibli de­manded of Husri.

How the Sufi comes to fall in love with God, the unseen, is one of the
greatest mysteries of Sufism. One may, however, safely infer that unless
there is a preceptor this would be impossible for a beginner. The
conceptual unseen somehow must be made experiential, for otherwise the
Sufi can never have a more personalized and intimate understanding of
Him than just an intellectual grasp of that which His logically defined
nature can provide.

One may say that the preceptor helps his disciple fall in love with God
first by turning the intellectual acceptance of God by him into an
emotional acceptance. Once the disciple has worked through this stage,
and succeeded in converting his own intellectual acceptance of his
Creator into an emotional acceptance, he is ready for the next stage,
the stage of finding this emotional acceptance of the Creator so
overwhelming that every other reality, social, biological, etc., is
completely subordinated to it. And if one were to go into it one may
find that these are just the first stages in the Sufi's long, life-long,
career in God.

Since our purpose at present is not so much the detailed description of
the various stages in the Sufi's development as the finding out of how
the precep­tor helps his disciple in falling in love with God, we will
stop at this point. But before we pass on to the next point we must
stress one thing: it is all very well to try to explain the
preceptor-disciple relation in terms of modem psy­chology, but we must
not overlook the fact that this in itself is no more than a conjecture.

Instead of relying on such explanations the best thing would be to go
back to the accounts of the Sufis themselves with an open mind. If and
when they open their lips to describe how they came to fall in love with
God and what happened to them from that point on, we must lend credence
to their word, for otherwise we shall be left with no data on which to
build our own explanations. Unfortunately, there is very little in the
literature concerning the early Sufis which could throw light on the
actual experiences of the disciple in his progress and development, and
we have, consequently, to be content with just the hints we find here
and there.

Even the most intimate emotional involvement of the Sufi with the
Creator does not result in his losing the perspective of his material
surroundings. Account after account of a genuine Sufi's life will
convince even the most sceptical that, if at all, the over-all
perspective of a Sufi is more realistic than the perspective of even the
most realistic of the ordinary mortals among whom he has to live.
Keeping this in mind it would not be very difficult for any student of
Sufism to reject the charge usually levelled against the Sufis that they
are mostly unrealistic persons wrapped up most of the time in the
pseudo-­universe of which God, a distorted father image, is the centre.

For the early Sufi, who was lucky to have met many of those who had the
privilege of seeing the Holy Prophet and learning the Islamic way of
life through their personal contact with him, God was the Being not of
mere conceptual nature, but rather a Being who was responsible for the
Heavenly Journey of the Prophet; the Being to whom in their hour of
distress they could turn and call aloud: “When is Allah going to help
us!” and the Being from whom they expected to get the response in
concrete terms which their anguished hearts desired. For such early
Sufis God was not a pseudo-father image;. He was rather the most real
and living Being, and the ultimate refuge of those lost in delusions and
hal­lucinations.

But when all is said and done we must admit that the techniques the
pre­ceptor employs to emotionalize the disciple's intellectual grasp of
God are mystery to all save those who are lucky enough to enter into
such a relation with a preceptor. All that we can do by way of making an
effort at an in­tellectual and theoretical understanding of these
techniques is to describe and discuss briefly such of the hints as
Qushairi gives in the chapter mentioned above.

One of the first things which the disciple learns to do in order to
establish his relation on a firm and operative footing is to put himself
completely into the preceptor's hands. This attitude of complete faith
in and reliance on the preceptor may lead the disciple sometimes into
actions which, to all intents and purposes, go against the most explicit
injunctions of the *Shari’ah*. But the disciple, in spite of his
awareness of what the *Shari’ah* demands of him, must obey the
preceptor. This aspect of the preceptor-disciple relations has been
emphasized by the early Sufis as much as by the later ones. And it came
in for very strong criticism from the orthodox theologians.

But, in spite of the emphasis the early Sufis laid on the role of the
*Shari’ah* in their lives, they justified this attitude of blind
obedience of the preceptor, on the ground that it was just a passing
phase in the development of the beginner, and a necessary phase because,
without it, it was impossible for the beginner to get out of the
personal and self-centred frame of reference which throughout his life
up to the point he took a preceptor had been his only operative frame of
reference. The way Qushairi puts the whole idea is: when the disciple
has rid himself completely of the influence of his worldly position,
status, and wealth, it be­comes incumbent on him to set right his
relation with God by deciding never to say no to his *Shaikh*.[^47]

Once the disciple has put himself completely in the hands of his
preceptor, the chances are that he will soon start having experiences of
reality which till then were altogether unknown to him. This first
contact with reality might not always be conducive to happy results.
Sometimes the novitiate feels the urge of communicating these novel and
marvellous experiences of his to any­body and everybody just to test
whether he still is in possession of his senses; sometimes he
communicates with others to share his delight as well as his agony with
them and seek strength from such a sharing of experiences; and sometimes
he communicates with others because of some other emotional urges. All
this is forbidden. He should keep his experiences of reality as his most
precious personal secrets to himself and divulge them to nobody except
his preceptor. [^48]

Although the early Sufi writers have given no explicit reason for this
in­junction, their general tone suggests that the first experiences of
reality of a Sufi are based on such a delicate relation between him and
his Creator that unless extreme care is taken the Sufi runs the risk of
losing all capacity for such experiences. It was felt that until the
newly developed relationship be­tween the beginner's personality and his
Creator is properly stabilized he should be as watchful and jealous of
this unique achievement as possible. And there is no way of doing that
better than sharing all such experiences with the pre­ceptor, for he
can, through his identification with the disciple, lend him his own
strength and stability.

Having worked with the disciple through these early experiences, the
Shaikh finds out the strength as well the weaknesses of the disciple. In
the light of this understanding the preceptor then selects one of the
various names of the Almighty and takes him through an involvement with
it in such a way that, by the time he finishes this period of training,
he is completely influenced by it in everything he does.

There are several stages in this which the disciple must pass through
under the watchful supervision of the Shaikh. He first repeats this name
of the Almighty with just his tongue. Then he puts his heart and soul
into it to such an extent that it is not just the tongue which utters
the name of the Almighty, but even his heart and soul utter nothing but
this name. Then the disciple is told to keep engaged in the uttering of
the name all the time and continue thus till he feels actually as if he
is with his heart and soul occupied with and engaged in nothing but his
Creator. [^49]

It is at this last stage that the disciple achieves for the first time
that involvement with the Almighty which alone makes it possible for him
to go on in his en­deavour to achieve an infinitely progressive type of
involvement with Him.

The beginner's ability to achieve a view of the universe around him as
nothing but that aspect of Being which is signified by the particular
name of the Almighty, on which the master trained him, depends a great
deal on the influence exerted on him by the master's personality. But
apart from this there is a considerable amount of hard work which has to
be done by the beginner himself by way of long prayers, series of
night-long vigils, self-denial in food, sleep, rest, etc. This hard work
which is planned and prescribed by the master has to be carried out by
the disciple, however arduous and inconvenient it may be. To this hard
work the early Sufis gave the name of *mujahadah*.

The true significance of *mujahadah* is realized only when one finds in
the accounts of the early Sufis how much of the first experiencing of
reality depends on it. Hujwiri holds, for example, that *mushahadah* (i,
e., the first seeing of the Almighty with the mind's eye) can never
occur without *mujahadah*.[^50]

One explanation of the significance of the beginner's hard work
(*mujahadah*), in so far as it is a necessary condition for his first
contact with reality (*mushahadah*), is that it is a process of
disciplined prayers and ascetic practices which ultimately results in
such a refinement of the Sufi's personality as to rid it of all that is
base and low in it. This disciplined and refined personality is more
ready to receive the first vision of reality than the original
personality of the beginner which basically is self-centred and crude.

But even the most stringent discipline of this type (*mujahadah*) is not
considered by the early Sufis to be the sole and necessary means for the
first contact with reality (*mushahadah*). As Hujwiri puts it, all such
discipline is the Sufi's own work, but this work brings the proper
reward in its wake only when the Creator wills it.[^51]

Why the early Sufis, in spite of rating the Sufi's labour so high, did
not recognize it as the necessary means for the first contact with
reality, was perhaps due to the fact that they had at the back of their
minds the possibility that this very hard labour could produce in the
Sufis a sense of self-righteousness verging on conceit. And this conceit
was the one thing which, they thought, had been the cause of Satan's
downfall, about whom the Qur'an is very explicit: he refused and felt
conceited.[^52] It was with this in mind that the early Sufis regarded
the first contact with reality always a matter of grace rather than
something earned by the Sufi just because of his having worked so hard.

The first contact with reality is regarded by the Sufis as just the
beginning to which there is no end, because reality is infinite. But the
beginning has a unique importance. Without it there would be, as one
might say, no series of contacts to follow. Although there is not much
explicit mention of it in the accounts of early Sufis, scores of
accounts of later Sufis bear out the fact that sometimes a beginner may
toil year after year in fruitless vigils and fasts and may find his
labours completely unrewarded.

There is a kind of a barrier be­tween the mortal self of the Sufi, on
the one hand, and the glorious Being of the Creator, on the other, which
must be broken for the infinite series of ever­more-intimate contacts
between the two to follow. It is the first crack in this barrier, which,
in spite of its being just a crack, gives it its unique significance.
For without it there is no possibility of the more adequate removal of
the barrier which has yet to come.

What happens after the first contact between the beginner and his
Creator is a secret which nobody has ever completely revealed, for the
simple reason, among others, that the experiences of the Sufi from this
point on are on a plane altogether different from the plane of the
average mortal. Communication between the Sufi and the average mortal is
consequently extremely hazardous, if not altogether impossible. If the
Sufi uses the language of the average mortal, he may mean one thing and
actually say another; and if he uses the language he creates in order to
give expression to his unique experiences, he may not be understood at
all.

All that we are in possession of, therefore, in the writings of the
early Sufis regarding the states and relations through which they pass
after the first crack in the barrier between them and their Creator, is
a collection of carefully coined and scrupulously selected terms which
some of them employ to convey something at least of what they see in the
course of their journey into the Infinite.

Two such terms are station (*maqam*) and state (*hal*). Each one stands
for a specific type of development the Sufi goes through. The basis of
distinction between them is the same as the one between *mujahadah* and
*mushahadah*. Station is the general term which covers all those stages
which after the initial contact with reality are considered achievable
through the Sufi's own toil and labour. State, on the other hand, covers
all those states which are the result of the ceaseless flow of grace of
which the Sufi remains the recipient as long as he does not falter and
remains steadfast in his pursuit of reality. This is expressed by
Hujwiri in the following words: *Maqam* is consequent upon one’s own
actions, *hal* is one of the blessings; *maqam* is one of the rewards
which are earned by the Sufi, while *hal* is one of the blessings
conferred on him independently of his actual actions [^53]

That of the almost infinite series of stations a perfect Sufi may
achieve only a few, is explicitly mentioned by the early Sufis. But we
know which the first is and which the last, for Hujwiri sums up the
whole thing in two sentences:

(1) *Tawbah* (renunciation of all that had been evil in the Sufi’s life
up-to-date) is the beginning of the series of *maqamat*;[^54] (2)
*rida’* (absolute satisfaction with the state in which God keeps the
Sufi) is the last of the series. [^55]

Hujwiri indicates what he believes to be the true relation between
*maqam* and *hal* by adding: *Rida’* is the last of the series of
*maqamat* but the first of the series of *ahwal*. This shows that in
spite of the earlier impression that the two lines which intersect at
many points, the correct theoretical position is that *ahwal* begin
where *maqamat* end. This is in keeping with the basic attitude of the
Sufi that in whatever he achieves he is in the last resort indebted more
to his Creator than to his own personal endeavours. This point of view
looks more logical too.

If *maqamat* are achieved by the Sufi through his personal endeavour,
the series cannot be infinite merely because his personal endeavour must
have a limit. *Ahwal*, on the other hand, since they are based on acts
of the grace of the Infinite, must of necessity be infinite as a series.
The two series could not run parallel; and if one has to end before the
other begins, it must be the finite, for the infinite will never come to
an end.

The discussion of the *maqamat* being a finite series of states, and
*ahwal* being an infinite series of states, through which a Sufi may
travel, raises an interesting issue. Are we really justified in
believing that the Sufi's *ahwal* constitute an infinite series of
states of development to which there is no end? Whatever else one might
say in answer to the question, within the frame­work of the *Shari'ah*,
the answer in the affirmative is completely ruled out. There must be a
point at which the development of the Sufi must stop in order to remain
short of the status of a *nabi* or a *rasul* (a prophet without a book,
or the one with a book).

Another interesting point that comes out of the discussion of the early
Sufi's concept of *maqam* and *hal* is related to his attitude towards
the problem of free-will. One can infer from the early Sufi's attitude,
regarding *maqam* and *hal*, that with regard to the former he believes
in individual freedom and initia­tive as well as responsibility, and
regarding the latter he believes that individ­ual freedom and initiative
can take him only up to a point and no further.

Another pair of terms that was common among the early Sufis was that of
knowledge (*'ilm*) and gnosis (*ma'rifah*). The difference between the
two is brought out first by pointing out that, whereas the theologians
(‘*ulama’*) make no distinction between them, the Sufis believe that the
one must never be confused with the other. For the theologian all sure
and certain knowledge is *'ilm*; therefore, *ma'rifah*, in the sense in
which the Sufis use it, is also *'ilm* and nothing else. They
consequently think that “the possessor of knowledge” (*'alim*) and “the
possessor of gnosis” (*'arif*) mean one and the same thing. But, as
Hujwiri points out, the theologians contradict themselves when they
assert that whereas ‘*alim* is a descriptive term and can be used for
God, the term *arif* cannot be used thus.[^56]

The Sufis think that between knowledge and gnosis there is a basic
distinc­tion which should never be lost sight of. Knowledge, in their
eyes, is that which in the last resort, when analysed, never takes us
beyond empty verbal form; gnosis, on the other hand, is that awareness
which when analysed ends up in direct experience of concrete facts,
processes, and things. Knowledge, there­fore, seldom influences one's
real conduct, while gnosis can seldom remain without influencing it.
From their point of view, knowledge is a rudimentary form of gnosis.
Consequently, the possessor of knowledge may not at the same time
possess gnosis, whereas the possessor of gnosis must have at one stage
possessed knowledge.[^57]

Apart from this way of distinguishing gnosis from knowledge, the early
Sufis tried to bring out the distinction in yet another way. This they
did by emphasizing that, whereas in the case of one's knowledge
regarding something communication is both possible and desirable, in the
case of one's gnosis it is neither possible, nor desirable. In order
fully to appreciate this distinction between the two modes of knowledge
which the early Sufis regarded basic and fundamental one must keep in
mind the fact that in their eyes it is only the knowledge of the
ultimately Real which can develop from knowledge into gnosis;
apprehension of other facts, things, or processes can never develop
beyond knowledge and, therefore, must remain short of gnosis.

Theoretically, this implies the impossibility of gnosis and the
possibility only of knowledge of one's own self.[^58] From this point of
view, the attitude of the early Sufi so far as knowledge of reality is
concerned is as different from that of the positivist as of any
traditional metaphysician.

Another way in which Hujwiri tries to bring out the distinction between
knowledge and gnosis is that knowledge can be acquired, while gnosis is
a gift of God;[^59] therefore, it can never be a substitute for gnosis.

All these distinctions between knowledge and gnosis are summed up by
Qushairi in what he relates from his preceptor, Abu 'Ali al-Daqqaq:
Gnosis is achieved by one who has knowledge of the Real in all the
various aspects and then carries out his dealings with everybody within
the constant framework of reference to God, gets rid of his own base
features ... and does not permit even a single thought to enter his mind
which attracts him to anything but God ... he who has achieved all this
is known as a gnostic and his state is known as that of gnosis. Such a
person achieves gnosis of his Creator in proportion to his estrangement
from his own self.[^60]

Keeping this statement in mind, one could say that the involvement of
the gnostic with his Creator is an involvement as concrete and actual as
one can think of; it is not mere conceiving of this or that virtue and
just imposing on oneself the intellectual framework thus evolved.

Another pair of terms popular among the early Sufis is that of *fana'*
and *baqa'*. As to the definition of these terms there is considerable
agreement be­tween the early Sufis. But when they come to interpret
these definitions in detail, differences crop up. This is illustrated
even in the attitudes of Qushairi and Hujwiri. Qushairi maintains, he
whom the glory of reality overwhelms to such an extent that he observes
neither in itself, nor in its effects, nor in the form of its traces and
tracks, anything other than reality, is described as one who has
achieved *fana'*, in respect of things created, and *baqa'* in respect
of the Creator.[^61]

Hujwiri, on the other hand, maintains: *Fana'* is the complete loss by
the mortal self of the conditions of his being, and *baqa'* is his being
lost in the vision of the Real. He achieves *fana'* through the vision
of his own actions and *baqa'* through the vision of the acts of God.
His dealings with others are coloured by reference to Him and not to his
own mortal self. Hence, he who loses all that is mortal and finite in
his mortal self achieves permanence proportionately in the vision of
divineness of the Real. [^62]

This withdrawing from one's own self, and everything else, into the
Creator is easier to understand if we. take into consideration an
explanatory comment of Qushairi: So far as his evil actions and
conditions are concerned, *fana'* of the mortal self means his getting
rid of all traces of these as completely as possible; while in respect
of his own self and other persons and things, *fana'* means just the
loss by him of his consciousness of his own self and that of other
persons and things as the frame of reference for his actions ... for
when he is said to have achieved *fana'* with regard to his self and
other persons and things, it is still recognized that his self exists
and other persons and things exist too; only he has lost consciousness
of his self, on the one hand, and of other persons and things, on the
other. [^63]

Summing up all this one could say *fana'* means the complete
disappearance of three things: (1) the bad actions, tendencies, and
conduct, (2) the low and base self, and (3) the world at large. So far
as the first form of *fana'* is concerned, the disappearance means their
disappearing altogether from existence; so far as the second and third
forms of *fana'* are concerned it means that, in spite of the self and
others still being in existence, the Sufi has become oblivious of their
existence.

Hujwiri interprets *fana'* and *baqa'* still in another way by
connecting the two with the unity of God (*tawhid*). Both *fana'* and
*baqa'* are rooted in one's being sincere in accepting unity, for, when
one accepts unity one must also accept as being completely in the hands
of God. One who is, thus, in the hands of Another has the status of one
who has achieved *fana'*. Such a person must accept his complete
helplessness.

For him there is no other status than that of a person who has been made
what he is by the Lord. So he must build up the permanent attitude of
total submission (*rida'*) towards his Creator. Any­body who interprets
*fana'* and *baqa'* in any other way than this, i, e., regards *fana'*
as the actual disappearing of the mortal self, and *baqa'* as the actual
per­manence in the Real, is no other than a sophist. [^64]

That which distinguishes this comment of Hujwiri's from Qushairi's
com­ments in general, and the one that follows in particular, is the
consciousness of the corrupting influences that the Carmathians,
Malahad, etc., had started exercising in his days. He wished to keep the
definitions of *fana'* and *baqa'* as precise as possible, lest they
should become tools in the hands of those who were interested in getting
Sufism rid of its roots in the *Shari'ah* and *Tawhid*.

This is how Qushairi describes *fana’* and *baqa'* in the comment
particularly pointed out above: “When a person has achieved *fana'* of
his self, as described so far, he goes from the vision of his *fana'*
into the higher stage of his actual *fana'*.... The first stage in this
ascent is the *fana'* of his self and all its attributes through his
permanence in the attributes of the Real. Then comes the second stage of
his losing his status in the attributes of the Real and achieving a
vision of God Himself. And last of all he loses his status in the vision
of the reality by merging himself completely in the being of the
Real.[^65]

One thing that, in all fairness to Qushairi, must be pointed out
regarding this last comment of his is that in spite of his mode of
expression being very much like that of the Malahad, the Carmathians,
etc., against whom Hujwiri wishes to warn his readers, Qushairi does not
mean to maintain that *fana'* is the actual *fana'* of the mortal self
and *baqa'* is its actual *baqa'* in the Real as the Carmathians, etc.,
maintained. Qushairi, on the other hand, maintains, as would be clear
from the comments from him quoted earlier, what in substance is
maintained by Hujwiri himself.

Although there are scores of such pairs and groups of terms as have been
discussed above, what has been said so far should be enough to give us
some idea at least of what type of men the early Sufis were, and what
went into making them what they were. If, on the other hand, we were to
go into a detailed study of their mode of life we will not be able to do
justice to it with­out taking into consideration not only their basic
attitudes, as has been done so far, but even the specific applications
of these to each and every little detail of their daily lives.

The early Sufi was involved in his Creator in a relationship, an
extremely pale example of which is the relation of the maddest love
between two human beings. As the lover thinks of nothing, dreams of
nothing, sees nothing, and feels nothing but his beloved and of his
beloved all the time, a Sufi thinks of nothing, dreams of nothing, sees
nothing, and feels nothing but his beloved and of his beloved, that is,
his Creator.

The result is that when one studies the lives of these Sufis, one finds
that they take not even a single step in their lives without feeling
sure within themselves that this and nothing else will please Him. How
they should walk when they tread the earth, how they should talk when
they mix with their fellow-men, how they should dress, what they should
eat, what they should drink, what they should do when they get up in the
morning if they go to sleep at all -- each and every little detail of
everything relating to these matters is prescribed for them. And the
basic principle underlying all such prescriptions is that even the
maximum of obedience, service, sacrifice, devotion, and love is not
enough; so they should always regard the maximum as the minimum, and
constantly strive for a devotion more thorough and a love more intense.

It is this burning desire to lose oneself in the Creator on an
ever-increasing scale in everything, major or minor, over the whole
period of one's life, which distinguishes the early Sufi from everybody
else.

[^1]: This chapter is based mainly on the following source books : (i)
Abu Nasr 'Abd Allah b. 'Ali al-Sarraj al-Tusi, al-Kitab al-Luma' fi
al-Tasawwuf; (ii) Khwajah Farid al-Din 'Attar, Tadhkirat al-Auliya';
(iii) Makhdum 'All Hujwiri, Kashf al-Mahjub; (iv) Abu Bakr al-Kalabadhi
i, Kitab al-Ta'rruf li Madhhab Ahl at-Tasaw­wuf translated from Arabic
by A. J. Arberry: The Doctrine of the Sufis, Cambridge University Press,
London 1935 (v) Abu al-Qasim al-Qushairi, al-Risalat al-Qushairiyyah,
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Arabiyyah al-Kubra, Misr, 1330 A.H. The Kitab al-Luma'
is regarded as one of the oldest, if not the oldest, Sufi texts
available. Its author is 'Abd Allah ibn 'Ali ibn Muhanunad ibn Yahya Abu
Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi who died in 378/988. He is quoted by Abu 'Abd
al-Rahman al-­Sulami (d. 412/1021), the author of Tabaqat al-Sufiyyah
(itself one of the oldest texts), Abu al-Qasim al-Qushairi, Makhdum 'Ali
Hujwiri, Farid al Din 'Attar, al-Ghazali, and scores of early as well as
later writers on Sufism. He is considered to have written several books,
but Kitab al-Luma' is the only one which has come down to us. According
to Nicholson, Sarraj quotes from such well-known Sufis and scholars as
Abu Dawud Sijistani, Abu Said al-Kharraz,Abu Said al-'Arabi, Ibrahim
al-Khawwas, Amr bin 'Uthman al-Makki, Junaid, and through him Abu Yazid
al-Bistami.

[^2]: Abu Nasr 'Abd Allah bin 'Ali al-Sarraj al-Tusi, Kitab al-Luma' fi
al-Tasawwuf, ed. R. A. Nicholson, Luzac & Co., London, 1914, p. 2.

[^3]: Ibid. pp. 3-4.

[^4]: Abu Bakr al-Kalabadhi, Kitab al-Ta\`arruf li Madhhab Ahl
al-Tasawwuf, translated under the title The Doctrine of the Sufis by A.
J. Arberry, Cambridge University Press, London, 1935, p.3.

[^5]: Abu al-Qasim al-Qushairi, al-Risalat al-Qushiariyyah, Dar al-Kutub
al-‘Arabiyyah al-Kubra, Misr, 1330 A.H., p.2.

[^6]: Makhdum ‘Ali Hujwiri, Kashf al-Mahjub, Silyanov Press, Samarqand,
1330 A.H., p.12.

[^7]: Khwajah Farid al-Din ‘Attar, Tadhkirat al-Auliya’, Karimi Press,
Bombay, 1321 A.H., pp.5-6.

[^8]: Al-Sarraj, op.cit., p.22.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Hujwiri, op.cit., pp. 108-10.

[^12]: ‘Attar, op.cit., p.18.

[^13]: Al-Sarraj, op.cit., pp.21-22.

[^14]: Ibid., p.22.

[^15]: Ibid., p.21.

[^16]: Zaki Mubarak, al-Tasawwuf al-Islami fi al-Adab wa’l Akhlaq, Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Arabi, Cairo, 1954, Vol. 1, p.63.

[^17]: Ibid., pp.49-50.

[^18]: Al-Qushairi, op.cit., p.8.

[^19]: Hujwiri, op.cit., p.34.

[^20]: Al-Qushairi, op.cit., p.180.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 126.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 127.

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Ibid.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: Ibid. p.181.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 8.

[^29]: Hujwiri, op. cit., p. 217.

[^30]: Ibid., pp. 446-47..

[^31]: Ibid. p.446.

[^32]: Al-Qushairi, op.cit., p.181.

[^33]: Ibid., pp.182, 186.

[^34]: Ibid., p. 4.

[^35]: Ibid., p.5.

[^36]: Ibid., p.6.

[^37]: Ibid., p.5.

[^38]: Ibid., p.6.

[^39]: Hujwiri, op.cit., p.335.

[^40]: Ibid., pp.335-6.

[^41]: Ibid., p.334.

[^42]: A1-Qushairi, op. cit., p.180.

[^43]: Ibid., p. 181.

[^44]: Ibid.

[^45]: Ibid

[^46]: Ibid. p.182.

[^47]: Ibid.

[^48]: Ibid.

[^49]: Ibid.

[^50]: Hujwiri, op. cit., p. 250.

[^51]: Ibid., p.252.

[^52]: Qur’an, ii, 34.

[^53]: Hujwiri, op.cit., p.223.

[^54]: Ibid.

[^55]: Ibid., p.224.

[^56]: Ibid. p.445.

[^57]: Ibid. p.320.

[^58]: Ibid., p. 329.

[^59]: Ibid., p. 322.

[^60]: Al-Qushairi, op cit., p. 141.

[^61]: Ibid., p.37.

[^62]: Ibid., p.299.

[^63]: Ibid., p.37.

[^64]: Hujwiri, op.cit., p.299.

[^65]: Al-Qushairi, op.cit., p.37.


