Introduction
============

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) says:

Indeed Allah likes that young man or woman spends his/her youth in
Allah’s obedience.

When Adam and Eve stepped on this earth for the first time, they were in
their youths, handsome young people having a good physique and a
beautiful body. In the histories of the world most of the greatest feats
were performed by those who were in their youth and according to the
heavenly books, most of the prophets when they were appointed to convey
divine teachings to the people, were either youths or had recently
stepped into their adolescence.

Accomplishments in scientific and technological fields, illumination of
historical realities and other important inventions were the results of
the enlightened thinking of only the young generation and results of
their hard work. Everywhere the faces of youths are prominent.

The people of the world, in these recent times have begun to pay more
attention to the young generation, though there was a time when power in
various fields was mostly concentrated in the hands of aged people and
they used to impose their will on all. However, slowly the world became

mindful of the fact that more regard should be paid to the new
generation and the young people of the community.

In order to encourage and guide the youths and to prevent them from
being misguided, there are various establishments, societies, newspapers
and magazines etc. We even have special ministries for youth affairs.
All this is so because the life of the youth is most precious. Youth is
that time of life when responsibilities of a person increase and these
important days pass away very soon, but it is the time when the
personality of the youth is shaped. The foundations of a brilliant
future are made firm in this period. In these days the youth selects and
chalks out a program for his life according to his own choice. This time
is so crucial that if a proper program is not selected and a proper path
not chosen, one would have to suffer its consequences forever, and the
realization would come only when there is no recourse except to face
shame and humiliation, while regret is not a cure.

Therefore it is necessary that at this critical and important juncture
of life parents, and their adolescent children, in the light of reason
and contemplation, choose the correct path. On this juncture, one should
not merely consider the transient world but also keep the hereafter in
view. Where along with the world, the success of the hereafter is also
assured. Though in education of youths today only those fields and
subjects are selected in which there are more worldly benefits. The aim
of education is the material world and its comforts, and this is
repeated so many times before the young people that they form a mindset
that the aim of life is only to earn money and obtain material comforts.
The effect of it is that the youth instead of becoming a perfect

human being becomes a machine for earning money. Then gradually his
youth begins to decline and he nears old age. All the parts of that
machine of youth deteriorate and become useless. When no scope remains
for rejuvenation, these same people become a burden for the future
generations who await their death restlessly.

These days slogans of progress are raised with regard to young people.
What progress does it imply? Mostly when the parents of young
adolescents speak of progress, they speak only in terms of this material
and transient world. Only the shine and luster of the world and efforts
to excel each other in obtaining material wealth and desires to fulfill
lusts, while the holy teachings of Islam have not made them criteria of
progress and success. Otherwise, instead of the prophets, Nimrod,
Pharaoh, Qarun and Abu Sufyan would have been considered successful
people.

In the light of Islamic teachings, the criteria of progress and success
are faith, good deeds, ethics and good character. Those who possess them
are the most advanced and their lives, most successful.

Parents are advised to, in addition to providing worldly education to
their children, also pay attention to their ethical training that would
make them perfect human beings. Because the youth of their children is a
divine bounty and it is very important to teach them discipline and
restraint. For progress and success of young people proper atmosphere is
necessary at home and in the locality as well as at school and college.

The youth of today feels insulted and thinks he has some shortcomings
while the parents think that since their child

has grown up their respect and control has decreased. The youthful child
has become disobedient and rebellious and is a prey to bad habits. He
hates good behavior. But the question is that the child who was till
yesterday obedient and good, how he became so much disobedient after
reaching adolescence? Instead of becoming imbued with good moral
behavior why he became a collection of bad habits and vices? This
applies to those children who were in their early childhood very much
well behaved and obedient. Gradually they became disobedient and did not
remain in the control of the parents. Since these changes do not appear
all at once but gradually become apparent the youth and their parents do
not notice these changes and their demands. The result is seen in the
tense atmosphere of the house. Now either the children become absolutely
submissive to the parents and themselves form no independent views. They
refer to their parents in every matter. They ask their parents regarding
the most trivial matter and do not take any decision of their own. But
the effect of this is that the personality of the youths is undermined
and when their future life of independence begins they find it difficult
to take their own decision.

Sometimes it is also that the youth is so sure of the correctness of his
views and opinion that he considers every advice and view of his parents
wrong and useless. He opposes them at every step. Not only this, he also
begins to make fun of them. Though this type of practice makes the
youths independent it takes away their ethical capacities, which are the
essence of human perfection.

The divine religion is a moderate and disciplined system of life and at
every step Islam has paid due regard to justice

and equity. Islam is against extremism in every aspect. Neither it
advocates absolute control of the parents nor does it accept
disobedience and rebellion of the young generation. Rather it endorses
the independence of the youth but in the shade of the correct guidance
of the parents.

This is indicated in the tradition of the Prophet who says: More than
the elegance of youth, I like the advice of senior people.[1] That is
why we have to admit that being a young man or woman is not something
great, but it is great to be a perfect human being. For which in
addition to education, moral training is very much necessary.

In the heydays of the youth there is desire for independence, the wish
to express ones personality, free atmosphere of college, lack of ethical
training in educational syllabi etc. In such an atmosphere who can teach
humanity to the new generation? Who can save them from the evils of
materialism? Who can enrich them with ethics?

Keeping these points in view we present this book that deals with the
role of youth and their status and position. Furthermore there are
analyses of the influence exercised by the youths, both male and female
in a clear manner. Our respected readers may study about the importance
of youth in Quran, and the illuminated History of Islam, and then derive
lessons therefrom.

***Hujjat-ul-Islam Sayyid Ali Akbar Rizvi Qummi***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Wasaelush Shia, Vol. 4, Pg. 97

 

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](02.htm)
