Muhammad-the Trustworthy
========================

### The Most Popular Youth Of Mecca Whom Almighty God Appointed As His Last Messenger

In Arabic, the word Muhammad has a unique importance and distinction.
Ever since the evolution of this language, no one except Muhammad the
son of Abdullah was given this name. Its meanings include: the one who
is noble, virtuous, honest, trustworthy, and reliable. Whenever we utter
or hear this holy name all these high human qualities come to our mind.

Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was the only memorial of Abdullah the youngest of
the twelve sons of Abdul Muttalib. Abdullah was very handsome with a
shapely body. That is why young girls of Mecca were always desirous of
marrying him. So much so that some of them were eager to have at least a
temporary wedlock. Some were waiting just for a nod from him for
engagement. But Almighty God also makes a choice selection for His
chosen servants. Abdul Muttalib gave preference to the noblest tribe of
Bani Zahra in Mecca and married his son Abdullah with Amina the daughter
of Wahab.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See *Sirat,* Ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, Pg. 101

When Abdullah was only twenty-five he went to Syria for trade purpose
and camped in Medina on this return journey. He fell ill and expired in
Medina and was buried there.

When Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was born his father had already died. He also
lost the affectionate shade of his mother, Amina when he was only five
years old.

Losing both of his parents who were yet young was such a painful matter
that Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) remembered it throughout his life. He passed
the first eight years of his childhood under the care of his
grandfather, Abdul Muttalib. When Abdul Muttalib expired, he came to the
house of his uncle, Abu Talib according to the will of his grandfather
and received very affectionate nourishment till he was twenty-two.

At the age of twelve he had accompanied his uncle, Abu Talib in a trade
caravan, which was going to sell goods in Syria . Thereafter he used to
do so for several years. During those days, the wealthiest lady of Mecca
, Khadijah, who was also called ‘Empress of the Arabs’, was exporting
her trade goods to Syria . Abu Talib also was carrying her trade goods
to Syria . His young nephew Muhammad was helping him in the said trade
caravans.

According to the famous historian Ibn Hisham the young Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) had taken part in the battle of Fujjar when he was about
fourteen or fifteen. That battle was fought between Bani Quraish and
Bani Qais. The latter tribe lived on the shores of Yemen . It had
started when Bani Qais, disregarding the holiness of the prohibited
months killed a man of Bani Quraish. Prophet Muhammad’s uncles Zubair,
Hamzah and Abbas (sons of Abdul Muttalib) had also taken

their nephew (the Holy Prophet) to that war. The Holy Prophet despite
his young age was warding off the arrows shot by the enemies towards Abu
Talib.

According to the historian, Muhammad ibn Ishaq; the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) was then twenty.[1]

Ever since his young days, Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was the center of
attention of all men and women in Mecca . Even the noblest persons gave
him respect and honor because of his spirituality and high moral
virtues. His truthfulness and his honesty were exemplary. All historians
have written at length about the high-ranking morality of Muhammad. It
is in the fitness of things to quote here from the writings of a famous
Western Historian, Geur Geutha, who was from Rome and had spent many
years in Arabia as a diplomat. He wrote a book titled: *Muhammad, The
Prophet who should be introduced from a new angle.* Here are some lines
from this book:

“It will be totally true and factual to say that Muhammad was one of
those gentlemen who had suffered many pains. In this respect none can
equal him because Muhammad had, very patiently, confronted many troubles
patiently right from his childhood. Though he was under the affectionate
guardianship of his uncle Abu Talib, the latter had a very big
responsibility of maintaining a very big family where means of provision
were limited. It was difficult for him even to provide proper dress and
footwear etc. That is why, at an age when other children play games,
Muhammad had, under compulsion, to spend all of his time in earning
livelihood. He was looking after sheep both in scorching

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See *Sirat,* Ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, Pg. 12

heat and chilling cold in the dry climate of Arab sandy lands.[1]

This non-Muslim further writes: “A child whose father and mother had
expired before he was even eight years old, had to earn his livelihood
by hard work. He knew that he must help himself, as there was none to
ward off his difficulties. Innumerable troubles and the weight of
limitless responsibilities to be faced single-handed had made him
forbearing and serene. That is why when he was only twelve, his uncle,
Abu Talib thought of taking him along the trade caravans.[2]

It should be noted that there are many shortcomings in this book, as the
writer is from Europe who gathered material from general sources. Yet
“Maktab-e-Islam” has published a book about it wherein he has been
quoted and hence we have quoted here some historically important and
valuable things.

In one of his several trade journeys he was passing through Jordan when
a Christian monk came out of his monastery and saw Muhammad, who was
then only eleven years old. The monk who knew Abu Talib came to the
latter and said, “O Abu Talib! Take back this boy to Mecca . Otherwise,
if any Jew sees him he will kill him on any excuse. If it is not
possible for you to take him back to Mecca , take him to Syria , then
take extra care of him.” The clergy had read in Bible some signs of the
last Messenger of God, which he could see in Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). So he
congratulated Abu

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] From Persian translation by Zabeehullah Mansoor,pp. 304 [2] Ibid

Talib saying, “Your nephew has a very bright future. Take utmost care of
him in every possible manner.”

After returning from the journey, as Abu Talib had become very tired,
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) used to take his flock of sheep and goats every
morning for grazing in the wilderness. He stood for the whole day in the
hot sun taking care of the animals.

Years before he was made the divine messenger by God, people of Mecca
used to call him Amin (trustworthy) and Saboor (Extremely patient). In
Arabic, ‘Amin’ also means absolutely faithful.

In the days of his youth, traders wanted him to sell their goods and to
take his due remuneration. Muhammad did sell their trade goods but
always took less than what was due to him as reported by Qais ibn Zaid.

Ibn Hanbal writes: After returning from his trade journeys Muhammad
always ascertained about his friends. If he found someone in distress,
he distributed a portion of his hard-earned money to the needy. This was
indeed exemplary on the part of a trader or businessman.[1]

The Pact of Hilful Fuzul
------------------------

This event took place in the earlier days of youth of Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.). This nobly active youth gathered the youths of the tribes
like Bani Hashim, Bani Asad, Bani Zuhra, Bani Qaiyim in the house of an
old gentleman named Abdullah ibn Jazan and formed an organization in
which oath was taken from every youth that he would help every

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Musnad,* Cairo , 1368 H.E., Pg. 225

oppressed person in Mecca or who came to Mecca from another place and
met with problems; that if someone oppresses others he will be made to
give what was due to the oppressed justly. This pact was called Hilful
Fuzul.

It is all the more worthwhile to hear the truth from others. Just see
what an expert western historian has written:

The Hilful Fuzul organization was like an army formed by a group of
brave and courageous justice-loving youths. It was constituted to ensure
that each and every oppressed person gets justice and his or her dues.
These soldiers were not taking any remuneration from anyone but were
serving the society voluntarily. In those days the Arab Bedouins acted
freely in whatever way they liked. There was none to check their
behavior. If anyone from a tribe killed a member of another Arab tribe
the whole tribe of the killed one would wage an all out war against the
whole tribe of the killer. There were no norms for warfare.

There was neither police in Mecca nor any court. Every tribe formed
their own rules. If anyone arrived in Mecca from another area and fell a
victim of oppression there, he had no one to help. He would have to bear
the injustice or return from Mecca , complain to his tribe who may come
and fight with the Meccans in revenge. But if any tribe from outside
arrived to fight with any Meccan tribe, it was being regarded as an
insult to the tribe of Quraish and all the Meccan tribes would jointly
fight with the outsiders. Therefore, hardly any tribe from out of Mecca
ever dared to wage a war with Meccans.

In such circumstances the above-mentioned youths of Hilful Fuzul used to
help every oppressed person. They gathered

around the Holy Ka’ba and swore that they would never forget their
responsibility of assisting every oppressed person and would assure that
the oppressed one got his rightful dues, even if the oppressor was the
richest or the most influential person. That is why these volunteers
used to rush to help even if the oppressed one did not belong to Mecca ,
even if he came from another part of the country.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) himself once said: The best part of my past
life was spent in the activities of Hilful Fuzul. That service has given
me much honor and respect. I would not have stepped out of that
agreement even if I were to be offered one hundred red camels.

The same western author writes further: This noble formation of Hilful
Fuzul was the main achievement of the youthful days of Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.), which took place before he was made the messenger of God. It
is noteworthy that the idea of providing justice to everyone came to
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) at a time when nobody there even thought of any kind
of human rights. Thus it was a very big revolution in social life. His
activities weakened all oppressors and when the Holy Quran spread its
light every sort of ignorance and darkness was removed from the land.
Before that no one ever dared to question an oppressor.

In addition to the aforesaid moral virtues Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was full
of God-given intelligence and wisdom. Otherwise how could he be a
prophet? His power of making the most appropriate decisions in every
social, personal or political problem was extremely wonderful.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Muhammad, the Prophet who should be introducedfrom a new angle*

His Marriage with Khadijah
--------------------------

As mentioned earlier Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was also, like other traders of
Mecca , taking benefit of the business of Mecca ’s most wealthy
businesswoman Khadijah. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was twenty five year
old and yet unmarried. His noble and healthful youth was the talk of the
town. His morals and modesty were exemplary. His way of walking, style
of talking, mode of dressing and dining and his habit of looking with
lowered eyes had made him distinguished among all. When he returned from
his second trade journey, he as usual, went to Khadijah to present
business accounts.

The noble businesswoman looked at him carefully and observed that this
modest youth was a very attractive young man with bright eyes and dark
hair, which he used to comb nicely. While talking and smiling the
appearance of his milk white teeth added to his elegance. In addition to
all these beauties he had an attractive body odor, which every companion
would like to feel. That was why he was almost always circled by a group
of youths. In those days the Arabs were very fond of scent, which they
applied to their bodies and even to their homes and the Holy Ka’ba. But
the historians say that Muhammad never used external scent and yet his
body remained ever fragrant. He always talked slowly with enough pauses
so that the other person could hear him clearly and would then never
forget.

When Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) finished submission of trade accounts, Khadijah
turned towards him and asked some indirect questions whereby Muhammad
might get the cue that she was interested in marrying him and she might
also get an idea about his opinion in this regard. But

Muhammad’s response indicated that he was till then not prepared for
matrimony. Muhammad’s attractive black eyes, his long black hair, his
pleasing smile and the fragrance spreading from his body had awed
Khadijah. She liked him very much but could not find ability to put her
proposal directly to him.

Historians of Islam have noted that when Khadijah was taking this point
with Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) the face of the latter radiated in a way that
astonished the former to such an extent that she then and there decided
that she will get this handsome and virtuous youth of Bani Hashim for
herself at any cost.

Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) had no riches. He was just like many other traders
who carried Khadijah’s trade goods from one place to other. He did not
have even a house of his own. He was living in the house of his uncle,
Abu Talib. Yet he was a very respectful youth of twenty-five while
Khadijah was forty. Thus there was a difference of fifteen years in
their ages. She doubted whether Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) would agree to this
matrimony! So she approached Abu Talib and told him the secret of her
heart. She said, “Many of the noble and wealthy chiefs wanted my hand
but I have rejected all of them. But now, my wish for Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) is beyond my control and therefore I myself am directly
putting up this proposal before you. You may proceed further.” She
added, “If Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) overlooks the difference in our age I
will not look at any of the Arab customs, which demand equality in
wealth and position etc.”

Finally Khadijah who had married twice earlier and who held a very high
position in the society of Mecca attained the honor of marrying Mecca ’s
most eligible bachelor, Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).[1]

Abu Talib discussed this matter with Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and finally got
his approval. The wedding ceremony was to be held in the house of
Khadijah. Abu Talib read out the formula of marriage. Then turning
towards Khadijah’s uncle, Amr ibn Asad said,

“My brother’s son Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul Muttalib is such a
virtuous youth who cannot be compared with anybody else in Mecca . His
lineage is also the noblest of all. Of course he does not have wealth
but then wealth is not a thing, which remains with one forever. Such
material things part very soon. He has inclined towards Khadijah and so
has Khadijah towards him. Both are prepared to share love with one
another. So now you may fix the dower. I am prepared to give it and
ready to recite the marriage contract.”

Thus the two very distinguished personalities were joined together in a
bond of matrimony.

After this marriage, Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) became a very wealthy gentleman
in Mecca , as Khadijah gave all her property in his authority.
Thereafter he called his cousin, Ali; took him in his guardianship and
made him a manager of his trade and business.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sayed Karrar Husain Waiz Hindi has in his book *MaleekatulArab*
proved through various narrations that Khadijah was neither then 40year
old nor had she married twice before. God knows best. (Translator)

After a lapse of eleven years he offered freedom to a Syrian slave, who
was previously a Christian named Zaid ibn Haritha, who was gifted to him
(Muhammad). But the faithful slave did not agree to be away from
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) and stayed with him.

Ever since Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) married Khadijah and became wealthy he
made every effort to help the needy and the poor. “Finally, I find it
necessary to say that no other divine book has put so much emphasis on
helping the poor as has the Holy Quran which God revealed to Prophet
Muhammad.”[1]

Bloodshed avoided
-----------------

Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was thirty-five when the tribe of Quraish barely
escaped a very big and bloody civil war. The building of Ka’ba had
become dilapidated. The wall around it was about six feet high and there
was no ceiling above. At the entrance of Ka’ba there was a very old well
about which it was said that there was a great treasure hidden in it and
there was a fear of its being looted by robbers. This house of Ka’ba was
holy in the eyes of the idol-worshippers and thus a center of their
aspirations. Therefore the leaders of Quraish intended to pull it down
for rebuilding.

In the meantime a ship belonging to Byzantine traders arrived at the
port of Jeddah . It broke up in the sea and the Quraish chiefs bought
all the wood for constructing a ceiling for Ka’ba. An Egyptian carpenter
was then living in Mecca . He offered to build the ceiling with the help
of Meccans. However the people of Mecca feared that perhaps

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, Pg. 33

such a demolition might bring trouble for them. There lived a very big
snake in the well of Ka’ba. It used to come out of the well daily and
return after taking a round over Ka’ba walls. This had frightened the
Meccans more.

One day when that snake was lying on the Ka’ba wall, an eagle swooped
down suddenly from the sky, picked up the snake and flew away. The
Quraish took this as a good omen and said, “The danger from the snake is
also now averted. The Egyptian carpenter is also offering his service
voluntarily. Ample wood is also available. Thus when God has removed
fear from us why should we not start reconstruction of Ka’ba at once?”

First of all, Walid ibn Mughaira took up a shovel saying, “By God! I
intend nothing except the construction of the House of God.” He
demolished a corner of Ka’ba. But again there were some people who
passed that night very anxiously in fright fearing some sudden trouble
as Mughaira had demolished a part of the Holy House. When nothing
happened during the night, all got reassured next morning and all joined
in the demolition work. They enlarged its dimensions for making it
better and beautiful.

The job was nearing completion when it was decided that the Black Stone
should be put at its original place. But, here every tribe wanted to
take this honor, which would show their nobility. The dispute turned
into near fighting and arms were also taken up. Finally chiefs of all
the tribes gathered in the Holy Precincts for larger consultation to
settle the dispute.

Among those chiefs, Abu Umayyah Makhzoomi was senior-most in age and
experience. He suggested, “You may make

your adjudicator the man who first enters the Masjid next morning, and
then act as he decides.”

As there was no other solution, all agreed and waited for the next dawn
anxiously. They saw that it was the Prophet of Islam, Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) who stepped in first of all. All at once exclaimed, “Since
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) is honest and trustworthy we are prepared to accept
his arbitration.”

They requested Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) to find out the solution for which
they had put full faith in him. Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) said, “Please bring
a large sheet of cloth and spread it on the ground.” Then he himself
picked up Hajre Aswad and placed the stone in the middle of that sheet
and asked all the chiefs to hold the sheet, raise it and bring it to the
desired level. When they did so, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) once again
took up that stone with his own hands and inserted it at its place. Thus
he saved the Meccans from bloodshed.[1]

The Quraish were now fully convinced of the intelligence of Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.). As he was then quite young, one of the old and aged among
them said, “Woe unto you. Despite so many old, aged and experienced men
you made a youth your judge and accepted his decision when he is the
youngest of all! By the goddesses Lat and Uzza, after this feat,
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) has taken up the reigns of leadership in his hands
forever and now his name and fame will spread all around.”[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Sirat,* Ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, Pg. 125-127 [2] *Murujuz Zahab,* Vol.
2, Pg. 2780

Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was a portrait of God-given wisdom and intelligence.
His morals were exemplary; so he attained his rightful rank. Just have a
look at his earlier life. When he opened his eyes, his father was no
more. His mother also passed away when he was yet five years old. He
arrived in the house of his uncle Abu Talib when he was only eight.
There he found an affectionate aunt. His uncle was full of love for him,
though he was under crushing pressure of various responsibilities.

The young Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) continued to assist his dear uncle most
painstakingly and carefully. His respect continued to rise in the eyes
of all. His honesty and selflessness was unfurling the flag of his
future leadership.

When forty years of such a noble and hard life passed away, Almighty
Allah made him His Messenger and commanded him to announce the same in
public.

Angel Jibraeel arrived in the cave of Mt. Hira where Muhammad was busy
remembering his Lord. The reader was reading from the unseen, which was
to remove darkness from the world and to establish Divine Rule in the
world.

In the words of poet Sadi Shirazi:

Moon veiled its face seeing the brightness of Muhammad’s radiance.

Tall trees appear short before the high stature of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).

The height of skies is nothing compared with the loftiness of Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.).

The virtues of all the earlier divine messengers, Adam, Ibrahim, Isa and
Musa are combined in the nobility of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.).

Both the sun and the moon appear dim before the brightness of Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.).

I wish I could see Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) at least in my dreams.

O Sadi! If you have to love anyone, love of Muhammad is sufficient.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](12.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](14.htm)
