Imam Ali (a.s)
==============

### A Matchless Youth Of Islam

Top raking in the battlefield as well as the field of knowledge

Turn over the pages of world history and see if you can find a man who
was as brave, courageous, wise and intelligent as Ali Ibn Abi Talib?
Doubtlessly ever since the beginning of creation, Ali (a.s) is, for the
entire creation, a personality which personifies divine secret. He came
down to earth as a light, which beautified the world. His pure life, his
noble race, his spiritual loftiness, his high virtues, extraordinary
courage and bravery all show that he was rising higher and higher in
rank upwards towards heavens.

The good name of his father was Abde Manaf, the second; also known as
Abu Talib. Abu Talib was the son of Abdul Muttalib who was a very great
personality belonging to the tribe of Quraish in the family of Bani
Hashim. The blessed name of his mother was Fatima binte Asad. She was
the daughter of Ibn Abde Manaf. She had also a distinguished
personality.

The basic nobility of Ali (a.s) is that he was the first child, both of
whose parents belonged to the Hashemite race. His

another gracefulness is that he was born in the Holy Ka’ba. No one else
could get this honor either before his birth or afterwards. His
respected mother is the ninth woman who embraced Islam at the invitation
extended by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and thus she is among those
fortunate ladies who hastened in embracing the true religion.

As mentioned earlier when Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was only eight years old
Abdul Muttalib passed away and the young Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was put
under the care of Abu Talib and Fatima binte Asad. They gave the
orphaned child parental love and affection. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
could not forget that love even for a second in his whole life.

Days passed by and finally came the time when Fatima binte Asad felt
labor pains. In restlessness she came to the wall of the Ka’ba and
raising her hands towards the heavens prayed,

“My Lord! I put faith in You and in all the Messengers sent by You and
in all the Holy Books revealed by You. I also testify the prophethood of
Ibrahim (a.s) who founded this holy house of Ka’ba. O God! Please for
the sake of the magnificence of the House of Ka’ba and of high ranks of
the one who founded this Holy House, make easy for me the delivery of
the child which is in my womb and which is talking with me and which is
my companion in solitude and about whose greatness I have full faith
that he is one of the signs of Your Highness and Might.”

Those who were present became spellbound to see that the wall of Ka’ba
split and Fatima entered the Holy House and immediately thereafter the
wall became, as it was earlier

before her entry. The life partner of Abu Talib remained in the Holy
Ka’ba for three days as a guest of Almighty God. On the fourth day
people again saw that the wall split and Fatima came out with a child in
her arms.

Addressing the people Fatima Binte Asad proudly said, “O people! By
granting this pious and virtuous child God Almighty has granted me a
rank over all the women of the world because till today no woman had the
honor of delivering in this House of God. He provided this special
facility and kept me as His guest for three days and when I desired to
go out He again opened the walls for me and there came a voice from the
unseen, “Give this child the name ‘Ali’ which is derived from My name,
Aliyul A’laa.”[1]

This was no dream or vision. It all happened before the eyes of people
in broad daylight. The great philosopher Mir Damad says:

The Lion of God (Asadullah) came into existence. Whatever was secret has
come out in the open.

‘Asad’ means tiger. This daughter of a tiger gave birth to a tiger child
and that too in Ka’ba the House of God, the holiest piece of land in the
whole world.

In those earlier days of Muhammad’s prophethood when all the Arab tribes
stood up against him and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and all those who
had embraced Islam were in the risk of losing their lives at every step,
Abu Talib was the only one who had given Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Highest of the high

Abu Talib was extremely intelligent, wise and brave. The time
immediately after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) announced that he was the
Messenger of God was the most crucial time for Islam. Abu Talib and his
son Ali were ever ready to protect the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). Abu
Talib was then safeguarding the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) while
maintaining his relations with the chiefs of Quraish. Thus he provided
every possible facility for the spread of the Holy Prophet’s message
assisting him in the most intelligent manner.

Ten years after the declaration of prophethood when Abu Talib died, the
Holy Prophet was seen weeping in the funeral gathering and saying, “O my
beloved uncle! How will I live after your passing away? This is indeed a
very difficult situation.” He called this year, ‘The Year of Sorrow’
because in this year he lost two of his most dear and helpful
personalities viz. Abu Talib and Khadijah (a.s).

We have mentioned earlier that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had lived
since he was eight till he married Khadijah, in the house of Abu Talib
and that Abu Talib and his wife Fatima binte Asad were as good as the
Holy Prophet’s parents in love and affection. When Fatima binte Asad
expired in Medina the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) used his shirt as her
shroud cloth and then himself lowered her pious body in the grave and
recalled the days when he was under her loving care and stayed at the
grave so that she might feel happy and peace.

Yes, Ali (a.s) was the son of such gentle and honorable parents. When
Ali was six years old, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) brought him to his
own home and nurtured him

with utmost care. It is no exaggeration to say that Ali (a.s) was
brought up in the lap of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and to mention that
Ali and Muhammad were both two parts of a single radiance (Noor). This
is also what the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has said.

Three years later, when Almighty God made Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) His
Messenger for the guidance of entire mankind when he was busy
worshipping Only One God in the cave of Mt. Hira and when he returned
home after getting the first revelations, first of all he narrated the
whole event to his younger cousin, Ali (a.s) who was then only nine.

Ali (a.s) accepted the Holy Prophet’s invitation wholeheartedly and
testified that Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was the Messenger of Allah. Thus he
proved that for whom God created distinction in an unparalleled manner
had nothing to do with seniority of age. This is the first Muslim who
understood the meaning of Islam in its totality and attached himself
with it fully.

History shows that Ali had never accorded any respect to idols. He had
always remained aloof from idol-worship. Even since he opened his eyes
he began to recognize himself and found himself in the cool shade of the
affection of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.). The Messenger of God informed him of
the events relating to his prophethood and Ali (a.s) readily testified
Muhammad’s messengership. Ali (a.s) has touched upon this matter in
*Nahjul Balagha:*

“If they are asking you to curse me (their intention is that) you may
not know that I am the one who first of all put faith in Only One God.”

It is because of this that the Ahle Sunnat people, who recognize him as
the fourth caliph, remember him with the title of ‘Karam Allaahu
wajhahu’ (high ranking is the face which never bowed before idols) and
to the names of other caliphs they add ‘Raziallaahu anhum’ meaning ‘May
God be pleased with them.’

It was only Ali who testified to the Messenger of God
-----------------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) did not propagate the call of Islam openly
for three years after he was made God’s Messenger. The wisdom behind it
was that he wanted to bring into effect this program stage-by-stage or
step-by-step because all the Arab tribes, especially those in Mecca were
staunch idol-worshippers. They would have jointly erected a common wall
in the path of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) whose call was to worship
Only One God. After three years God Almighty commanded the Holy Prophet
to announce to all of his relatives that God had made him His Messenger,
and to start guiding people towards Islam.

*And warn your nearest relations,*[1]

Accordingly the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) invited all of his uncles and
their sons for a feast in the house of his uncle, Abu Talib. Forty
members of Bani Hashim attended. After dinner, the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) addressed them, “O sons of Abdul Muttalib! God Almighty has
made me His messenger for guiding all and especially my near and dear
relatives and God has commanded me to warn you against His disobedience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Shoara 26:214

So I intend to give you two orders, which are very easy for you to carry
out, but they are very weighty in the balance of Divine Justice. O sons
of Abdul Muttalib! By carrying out these two divine commands, you will
become the leaders of the whole world and the whole world will accept
your leadership.

These two commands, if obeyed by you, will admit you to Paradise and you
will be protected from the fire of Hell. Those two commands are ‘Belief
in God’ and ‘recognizing me as God’s messenger’. Please also hear and
remember that the one who, before leaving this place, will accept my
call and will assist me in my mission will be my deputy, my minister and
my legatee.”

Obviously, for the audience, this was a suggestion, which was beyond
their imagination. All were wondering at what Muhammad was saying. There
was a pin drop silence. All sat with their heads bowed down and no one
gave any response. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) repeated his words thrice
but none responded positively. Yes, at all the three occasions, a
13-year-old boy got up and every time announced courageously, “O Prophet
of God! I will assist you.”

At last the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) announced before all, “O Ali! You
are my brother, my deputy, my minister and my legatee.” This tradition
is present in the books of both the Sunnis and Shias and it is known as
‘the tradition of warning’ (Hadith-e-Inzaar).[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] It can be seen in books like *Tabaqat* byMuhammad Ibn Saad, Vol. 1,
Pg. 124, *Kanzul Ummal* Vol. 6, Pg. 397 quotedby Tabari, Abu Naeem
Isfahani, Baihaqi and others.

On the Bed of the Messenger, Ali’s Self-sacrifice
-------------------------------------------------

Ten years after Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was made the Messenger of Allah, the
chiefs of Quraish held a secret meeting and planned that Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) be either killed or be externed from Mecca or he may be
imprisoned. The chiefs of forty tribes attended that meeting. Majority
opinion was to assassinate the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). Forty persons
surrounded the Holy Prophet’s house that very night. This was one of the
most remarkable events in the history of Islam in which a youth of
Islam, with his extraordinary courage and faith foiled the evil plan of
Quraish.

According to the devilish plan the tribal chiefs had decided to attack a
sleeping Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) by all the forty fellows at a time to turn
it into a mob offence so that the charge may not fall on any one tribe
or man and revenge may be weakened.

But the Omnipotent Allah wanted to protect His Messenger, so under
divine order Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) left his house earlier that night
making Ali (a.s) sleep in his bed; so that the enemies might remain
unaware of his flight. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said to Ali (a.s),

“O Ali! You sleep in my bed so that the enemies might not feel any doubt
about my presence here.” Ali (a.s) replied, “Will your precious life be
protected by my sleeping in your honor’s bed?” The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) answered, “Yes, O Ali!” So Ali (a.s) did as he was asked to
do. Ali (a.s) was only twenty-three at that time. He slept quite
restfully and later mentioned that he had never before slept so
comfortably and deeply. Thus Ali (a.s) protected the Holy Prophet’s life
by risking his own life.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) escaped from the siege and took shelter in a
mountain cave of Thawr , which was outside Mecca . Ali (a.s) was in the
bed of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). The forty planners thought that
Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) was asleep.

Soon after midnight when the entire city was fast asleep these forty
evil fellows, with arms in their hands entered the house of Khadijah and
surrounded the bed, which was in the middle of the courtyard. But then,
suddenly, they saw that Ali (a.s) removed the sheet from his face and
roared, “I am Ali Ibn Abi Talib. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) has left
the town.”

This stunned all of them who had naked swords in their hands. None of
them dared to step forward. They saw that their conspiracy had failed
completely, so they left the place in shame.

This courageous deed of Ali in a dark night now shines like a dazzling
star in the annals of Islamic history. This crown on a youthful Ali will
continue to shine forever. At that eventful moment the conveyor of
divine revelations, angel Gabriel came down to the earth and sat by the
side of Ali (a.s) saying: Well done, well done, son of Abu Talib.
Almighty God takes pride in mentioning this great deed of yours to
angels; and then he recited this verse of Quran, which praises his
bravery, faithfulness and courage:

*And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah;
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants.*[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See *Usdul Ghabah,* Ibn Athir, Vol. 4, Pg.25, *Mustadrak,* Nishapuri
Vol. 3, Pg. 4, *Musnad,* Ahmed bin Hanbal,Vol. 1, Pg. 341

The 25 year old hero of the <span style="mso-bookmark:_Toc109315469"> Battle <span style="mso-bookmark:_Toc109315469"> of Badr</span></span>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first and the greatest confrontation of Islam with blasphemy is the
Battle of Badr. It took place in the second year of Migration (Hijrah)
at a place called Badr, which was at a distance of about eighteen
kilometers from Medina and about six kilometers from the Red Sea . On
one side was a huge number of Meccan infidels along with a considerable
number of seditious polytheists. On the other was only a small army of
new Muslims numbering three hundred and thirteen.

When the polytheists of Mecca came to know that in Medina, the teachings
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and his Islamic mission was gaining
ground and number of new converts was rising day after day, they decided
to root out all the youthful Muslims before their mission spreads all
around. In the army of idol-worshippers there were one thousand
experienced warriors. With them were also women belonging to every tribe
for entertaining them and for inspiring them to fight on with their
songs and music.

When the Prophet of Islam came to know that the army of infidels was
advancing towards Medina he prepared an army of the above mentioned
three hundred and thirteen fighters comprised of both, the emigrants who
had migrated from Mecca and the Helpers (Ansar) who were resident new
Muslims. Both the armies came face to face at Badr.

Obviously the strength of Muslims was less than one-third of the
infidels and they were also short of arms, horses and war provisions.
Yet this was such that if the Muslims were to be defeated in it, Medina
would once again go back into the hands of the polytheists and the
fifteen-year efforts of the Muslims would have gone in vain. Apparently
there was

no possibility of Muslim victory because, firstly, they were new Muslims
and so there was a likelihood of their being awed by the big and strong
Meccan army. But at that moment, Almighty God revealed this verse,

*O Prophet! Urge the believers to war; if there are twenty patient ones
of you they shall overcome two hundred, and if there are a hundred of
you they shall overcome a thousand of those who disbelieve, because they
are a people who do not understand.* [1]

This verse encouraged Muslims and doubled their resolve for sacrifice
and made them firmer in fighting and the resultant condition of Muslims
frightened the enemy forces.

When both the armies confronted one another closely, according to the
custom in those days, three great champion warriors came out of the
enemy army named Utbah, his brother Shayba and his son Walid. Walid was
very proud. He was of heavy built and had very strong muscles.

As commanded by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), his uncle Hamzah who was
the chief of the Muslim army and who had fought many battles
courageously, stepped out for a test of strength. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) also made another Muslim champion, Ubaidah and Ali to
accompany Hamzah. These three stood firmly to confront Utbah, Shayba and
Walid respectively. Hamzah was the commander of the Muslim army and he
was well known for his bravery. People also knew a lot about the battle
experience of Utbah. But no one knew about the level of courage and
bravery and the fighting spirit of young Ali.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Anfal 8:65

The battle commenced, Shayba attacking Hamzah, Ubaid hitting Utbah and
Walid pounced on Ali (a.s). Both the armies stared anxiously at the
contest. When the battle hotted up, Ali (a.s) gave a strong strike and
cut off the right hand of Walid. Walid wanted to run away but Ali did
not allow him escape and brought him down dead.

Ubaidah attacked his uncle, Utbah with his sword, which tore up the
latter’s skull. But in the same condition of serious injury Utbah gave a
hit of his sword to Ubaidah’s thigh, which made him faint and die in a
few moments. Thus Ubaidah was martyred. Then Ali went forward to help
his uncle Hamzah. He saw that both rivals had lost their swords as well
as their shields and were fighting an unarmed battle like wrestlers.
Both were badly tired but continued their struggle. Ali very
intelligently aimed at Shayba’s head and when he saw Hamzah riding
Shayba, he requested the latter to push down the head of Shayba. No
sooner it was done, Ali’s sword finished Shayba with a lightning strike
of his sword.

Thereafter Abu Sufyan’s son Hanzala who was also a very strong sandow
pounced on Ali (a.s) but Ali (a.s) foiled his attack and finished him
with his sword. Seeing this all other fighters of the army of
polytheists attacked Ali simultaneously but Ali (a.s) continued to kill
them one after another. Now the morale of the Muslim army rose up and
the small Islamic battalion courageously attacked the multitude of armed
enemies, routed them, killed seventy of their well-known persons, chief
of whom was Abu Jahl. Out of these seventy, Ali had finished
thirty-six.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *A'laamul Waraa,* Pg. 86

Utbah was the first to start fighting on behalf of the Meccan infidels.
He was the father of Abu Sufyan’s wife; Hind. Abu Sufyan was also the
chief of the tribe of Bani Umayyah. It was the fire stoked by him that
resulted in the Battle of Badr. This cunning woman (Hind) and her crafty
husband Abu Sufyan both were deadly enemies of the Prophet of Islam. In
this battle Hind’s father, uncle, brother and son had all fallen prey to
Ali’s sword. Therefore the fire of enmity in their hearts against Ali
(a.s) never cooled and finally her hypocrite son Muawiyah and her dirty
grandson Yazid made a severe strike on Islam and took complete revenge
from the martyrs of Kerbala thus showing their original nature.

The defeat of Meccan warriors despite their superiority in number and
arms became a topic of discussion through Arabia . Ali’s heroism became
a talk of the town everywhere. The news reached upto Abyssinia and King
Negus called migrant Ja’far Ibn Abi Talib and his companions to convey
this good news.

After the Battle of Badr, Abu Sufyan’s wife continued to mourn her
father, son, uncle and brothers (Utbah, Hanzala, Shayba and Walid) who
were, in her words “Like moons for me”. She said, “O Ali! You have
broken my back by killing them.”[1]

Ali (a.s) himself, in reply to a letter from Muawiyah, writes:

“O Muawiyah! You are threatening me with war! I am the same Abul Hasan
who finished your grandfather, brother,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Irshad* of Mufid, *A'laamul Waraa,* Tabarsi, and *Tafsir* of Ali
IbnIbrahim and *Sharh Nahjul Balagha,*Ibn Abil Hadid

uncle and your mother’s uncle in the Battle of Badr. That same sword is
still in the hands of Ali.” [1]

“There is no brave youth but Ali and there is no sword but Zulfiqar”
--------------------------------------------------------------------

A year passed after the Battle of Badr. Hind’s fire-spitting wailings
were still ringing in the atmosphere of Mecca . Abu Sufyan’s heart was
full of fire. He did not sit calmly even for a day, and continued to
gather war material and men. So those who had fled from Badr after
defeat again gathered at a place and all the idolatrous Arab tribes also
got prepared to help Abu Sufyan. He rallied three thousand men. Women of
Meccan infidels also made a group for assisting and inspiring their men.
A big army with war material, horses and camels left Mecca and advanced
towards the field of Uhad, which is at a distance of about six
kilometers from Medina .

In response, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) also made war preparations. He
gathered an army of 700 to oppose 3000. This was the second biggest war
between Islam and disbelief, and that too very near to Medina , the
center of Muslims. This city was in risk due to this war. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) himself arranged the rows of the Muslim army and
appointed fifty persons in a narrow pass between two mountains, making
Abdullah ibn Zubair their chief and instructed them emphatically never
to leave that position disregarding the victory or defeat of Muslims.
They were cautioned to remain armed all the time, as it was a strategic
pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Sharh NahjulBalagha*, Faizul Islam, 5: 822

Command of the opponents was in the hands of Abu Sufyan. He also
arranged his army and giving the flag in the hands of Talha ibn Abi
Talha told him, “The cause of our defeat in Badr was the flag-bearer who
could not uphold the flag.” The flag-bearer of the infidel army Talha
ibn Abi Talha came forward and addressing Muslims cried, “O Muslims! It
is your belief that if I die by your hands I will go to Hell and if you
are killed by my hand you will get Paradise . So whosoever desires to go
to Paradise may step forward so that I may send him straight to Paradise
.”

In response, Ali (a.s) who was then only twenty-six went forward into
the battlefield. Talha hit him with his sword but Ali (a.s) averted the
strike with his shield and gave a strike in return with his own sword,
Zulfiqar, cutting off both his legs. Talha came down and the flag, which
was a sign of the enemy’s power, also fell on the ground. Ali (a.s)
wanted to kill Talha but the latter entreated him to consider his family
affinity administering an oath, therefore Ali spared his life.

When Muslims asked Ali (a.s) the reason for leaving him alive, he
replied, “The injury is deadly and he is not likely to live any more.”
According to the *History* of Tabari, when the flag-bearer of the
infidel army fell on the ground, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) exclaimed
loudly, “Allah is the Greatest (Allaho Akbar)” and asked Ali (a.s), “Why
did you not kill him instantly?” Ali (a.s) replied, “At that very moment
his wife came up before me and administered an oath. So I left him
alive.”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Tarikh,* Tabari, Vol. 3

Then Abu Saeed ibn Abi Talha stepped forward and picked up the flag of
the polytheists but Ali gave no respite even to him and finished him
with a stroke of his sword. His brother, Usman ibn Abi Talha was
standing behind and he took up the flag; Ali killed him also. The next
one to pick up that flag was another brother, Harith ibn Abi Talha. Ali
also dispatched him to Hell soon.

When all the four brothers were killed, Abu Aziz, son of Uthman raised
their flag. But he could also not survive the hit of Ali and died.
Thereafter their flag was picked by one Abdullah ibn Jamila but he too
could not save himself from the sword of Ali. Thereafter the enemy flag
was picked up by Artaab ibn Sharahjil, who was the chief of the tribe
called Abdud Daar. He too was found dead very soon cut by the sword of
Ali (a.s). After him came forward Sawaab, a slave of that tribe to hold
their flag but he also was slashed by Ali’s sword.

Thereafter began retreat of the enemy and Muslim army men fell on the
defeated army. Ali (a.s), his uncle Hamzah and Abu Dujanah Ansari fought
very bravely and routed the enemy forces who began to flee leaving
behind them their dead and taking with them whatever provision they
could. Some of the Muslims followed the fleeing army and some engaged in
gathering war booty.

When the group of warriors whom the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had
stationed in the narrow mountain pass saw that the enemy was defeated,
they also left their position and began to gather booty. Only twelve of
them headed by Abdullah ibn Zubair did not budge from their position and
were martyred by a trick of Abu Sufyan. Abu Sufyan

ordered Walid to attack Muslims from the said narrow pass. Accordingly
Walid killed the twelve of them and attacked the unaware Muslim fighters
who were busy gathering war booty. In the meantime the fleeing army also
returned and a very severe war restarted in favor of the polytheists, as
the Muslims were unprepared for such a sudden change of events.

Seventy Muslims were martyred and the remaining began to flee. The
polytheists even attacked the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). Only Ali, Talha
and Zubair surrounded the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) to defend him. The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) suffered a serious wound on his holy forehead
and his teeth were also broken inuring his pious lips. Now the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) ordered, “Break the strength of the infidels.” So
this hero of Islam attacked them forcefully, which again scattered them.
All of them fell on Ali (a.s) who fought furiously and killed two of
them.

Imam Sadiq (a.s) says, “When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) saw that
Muslims were fleeing from the battlefield he became very sorrowful and
angry. He asked Ali (a.s), “Why did you not go with the fleeing
fellows?” Ali replied, “How can we turn back after embracing Islam? I am
your follower.” The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) asked Ali, “Stop the army
attacks with force.” Hearing this, Ali (a.s) became furious and he gave
such a heavy counter attack to the infidels that their army became
scattered and the one who was leading them died.

At that moment the conveyor of revelation came to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) from the unseen and said, “O Messenger of Allah! This is
called courage and sacrifice as was

exhibited by Ali (a.s).” The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied, “Verily
Ali is from me and I am from Ali.” Jibraeel exclaimed, “I am from both
of you!”

Surely the courage, bravery and self-sacrifice of Ali have become
proverbial in this world of encounters. At a time when the army of
polytheists had defeated the Muslims and surrounded the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.), attacking him from all sides and when Islam was in severe
danger, it was Ali (a.s) who was moving around the lamp of prophethood
like a moth caring the least for his own life. He was not only defending
the Prophet but was also attacking the enemy. In such a risky situation
Ali (a.s) fought so bravely and continued to attack the enemy so
furiously that their courage broke down and they retreated. Ali (a.s)
suffered ninety wounds all over his body in this exemplary fight. When
Ali (a.s) was fighting in this way there came a voice from the unseen:

There is no hero youth like Ali and no sword like Zulfiqar.[1]

When Abu Sufyan observed that many Muslims were martyred and the field
of battle had almost become vacant, he, in order to inspire his army and
with a view to demoralize the Muslims who had hidden behind mountains
raised a slogan loudly, “Long live my God Hubal.”

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), in order to maintain the morale of Muslims
asked Ali (a.s) to raise such a slogan that it may take out the wind out
of the enemy cry. Ali said loudly

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *A'laamul Waraa, Tarikh,* Tabari Vol. 3, Pg.17 and *Tafsir,* Ali
Ibrahim: Pg. 106

ringing the atmosphere: Allah is my Lord, Who is the Greatest.

Abu Sufyan was compelled to raise another slogan: There is Uzza goddess
of the polytheists with us and you have no Uzza. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) asked Ali (a.s) to reply: Our Helper and Protector is the
Creator of the universe, Allah and He is not with you. Finally the
Sufiyanis lost courage and leaving the battlefield retreated to Mecca .

Ali (a.s) had bathed himself in his own blood. Each of his ninety wounds
was bleeding. The great physician, Abu Ubaidah observed Ali (a.s) and
said, “I want to give you First Aid and take you to Medina on a
stretcher for further remedy. I have never seen anyone who could fight
after receiving so many injuries. How did you do all this?”[1]

But Tabari has written in his *History* that Ali (a.s), in such a
seriously wounded condition, brought water in his shield and began to
wash the blood from the pious face of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
saying, “May God’s chastisement fall on those who colored the face of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) in blood.”[2]

A courageous attack in the darkness of the night
------------------------------------------------

Bani Nuzayr was the tribe of the black-hearted Jews, who lived around
the suburbs of Medina . After breaking treaties with Muslims, this tribe
had begun to conspire to kill the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). When the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Tarikh,* Tabari Vol. 3, Yaqubi Vol. 2, IbnAthir Vol. 2, *A'laamul
Wara*, Tabarsi Pg. 9, *Muhammad Payghambari*…Pg. 25, 261 [2] *Tarikh,*
Tabari, Vol. 3, Pg. 20

learnt about it he prepared an army under the command of Ali (a.s) in
the year 2 A.H.

This army surrounded the tribe of Bani Nuzayr. Ali (a.s) had erected a
tent for the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) at some distance. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) was resting in it one night when a Jew shot an arrow towards
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) but it missed the target and the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) remained safe. But he said, “Uproot this tent from
here and pitch it in a lower area.” So the order was carried out
accordingly.

The Muslim warriors who were guarding the Holy Prophet’s tent could not
find Ali (a.s) nearby. They asked the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) about
Ali’s whereabouts. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) replied, “I can see that
presently Ali (a.s) is engaged in a job, which would benefit all of
you.”

Very soon thereafter Ali (a.s) returned to the tent with the head of the
Jew who had shot the above-mentioned arrow towards the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.). Ali (a.s) threw that head at the feet of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.). The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) asked, “O Ali! How could you
know about him?” Ali (a.s) replied, “I had kept a watch from a secret
place on the group of enemy men. This man was sitting in their midst.
All of them had naked swords in their hands but I attacked so suddenly
that my sword hit its target killing this fellow. Others escaped.”
Thereafter Ali (a.s) took ten guards from his army and followed those
who had fled and killed them all before they could enter their fort.

As this tribe of Banu Nuzayr was likely to cause serious harms and as
they were not prepared to embrace Islam

either, they were allowed to pack their baggage from that area and move
to Syria to join other Jews there.  

Battle of the Ditch and Ali's Bravery
-------------------------------------

A year after the Battle of Uhad, Jews living around Medina extended
their hands of friendship towards idolatrous Arab tribes. This aided the
idolaters to recollect their strength. Ten thousand warring Jews also
joined the idolaters and they advanced to crush Muslims in Medina .

Salman Farsi, whom the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had honored by calling
him 'Min Ahlil Bait' (among Ahlul Bait) suggested that a ditch might be
dug all around Medina , as was a practice in Iran during wars. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) accepted this suggestion for protecting the life and
property of the people of Medina from outside attacks. The Jews and
polytheists wondered on seeing this new technique, which they had never
seen before.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) ordered that the aged, children and women
should gather at a safer place and proper arrangements be made for their
protection. At the eight gates of the city, Emigrant (Muhajir) and
Helper (Ansar) warriors were posted and the Holy Prophet's cousin Zubair
was made their chief.

The attacking armies surrounded Medina and camped outside the city for
twenty-seven days. At last a very strong sandow of Quraish spurred his
horse to jump over a comparatively narrow part of the ditch and entered
the field crying loudly, "Is there anyone among Muslims who can come
forward to fight with me?" His loud voice was heard all over the city
but none dared to meet his challenge.

It was only Ali (a.s) who got up and sought the permission of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) to challenge Amr ibn Abde Wudd but the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) asked him to sit down. Amr sounded another challenge but all
kept sitting head down like cold bodies.

Once again the brave youth of Islam, Ali (a.s) sought the Prophet's
leave but for reasons known only to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) he was
again asked to restrain himself. But for the third time the enemy of
Islam sarcastically said, "Is there none who can face me?" As written in
history books, all were sitting meekly when Ali (a.s) sought permission
for the third time and was allowed to proceed and fight the arrogant
sandow.

Amr could now see that a gate of the city opened and a youth advanced
towards him. When he came nearer, Amr recognized the
twenty-seven-year-old youth was none but Ali Ibn Abi Talib. Ali (a.s)
told Amr, "Do not make so much haste. The one whose heart and mind are
bright and whose determination is firmer than mountains is coming to
give you a proper response."

Amr, exhibiting his pride, did not even look at Ali (a.s). Ali (a.s)
once again addressed him saying, "I am a solider of Islam, I give you
three options because I have heard that you are in the habit of
accepting one of three options put before you. My first condition is
that you should embrace Islam. If this not possible for you, then you
should go back from where you have come."

Amr rejected both these demands saying, "I can neither accept Islam nor
can I return because my tribe's women will taunt at me." Then Ali (a.s)
said, "Then come forward and

fight with me." Amr laughed at these words of young Ali and said, "Is
there no one among you who can accept my challenge? I do not intend to
kill you with my sword because my relations with Abu Talib were cordial
and you are still very young. It is insulting for me to fight you."

Ali said, "But I want to fight you. My last wish is that since I am on
my feet, you too should come down from your horse and start fighting."

Amr got down from his horse and in a fit of anger gave a stroke of his
sword on the head of Ali (a.s). Ali (a.s) averted that stroke with his
shield very brilliantly, but the stroke was so powerful that the shield
broke into two and Ali's head was injured.

Now the lion of Islam, Ali (a.s), also frowned menacingly and gave such
a powerful stroke with his sword, Zulfiqar that it cut down one of the
sandow's thigh and touched the other one. The champion fell to the
ground and Ali (a.s) mounted his chest and was about to behead him, but
the arrogant fellow spat on the radiant face of Ali (a.s).

Ali (a.s) got down from him and cleaned the spit with his sleeve. After
a few moments when his anger cooled down he again climbed Amr's chest.
The Quraish sandow asked, "Why had you gone away for a while? And why
did you come again? Ali (a.s) replied, "Had I killed you at that very
moment my feeling of personal revenge would have tampered my holy
intention of fighting only for Islam and for God's pleasure. Now I want
to decapitate the enemy of Islam." And he cut off Amr's head and threw
the severed head at the feet of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

Thus was killed a champion on which an idolater army was taking pride.
Their morale broke down while the morale of Muslims rose and even weak
person became brave. The danger lurking on the life of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) was thus removed by Ali (a.s). It was in this war that the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) uttered these historical words of truth:

The stroke of Ali (a.s) on the day of the Battle of Ditch is more
valuable than the combined worship of men and jinns.

When Ali (a.s) was sent to fight with Amr, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
had also said, "The whole faith is going to confront whole disbelief."

The victory of Islam in the Battle of Ditch is another name of Ali's
success which broke the backbone of the conspiracies of the polytheists
and which made the path clear for Islam to advance all around. Such were
the everlasting effects of the great deeds of this youth of Islam, named
Ali (a.s), the invincible hero of Islam.

After Amr was killed, his sister who was in the army of the Meccans
sought the Holy Prophet's permission to have a last look at her fallen
brother. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) allowed it. When she reached the
corpse she found that the extremely precious coat-of-mail worn by her
dead brother was safe and intact and that his killer had not even
touched it. She asked astonishingly, "Who killed my brother?" People
told her that Ali (a.s) had killed him. Amr's sister exclaimed, "I am
proud of the fact that my brother's killer is extraordinary in bravery
and has high respectable virtues." Then she sang: Had my brother's
killer been anyone other

than a brave and honest man like Ali (a.s) I would have continued
weeping on Amr forever.[1]

Ali (a.s) and the Jews of Bani Quraiza
--------------------------------------

The tribe of Bani Quraiza had broken their treaty with the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and joined in conspiring against Islam. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) proceeded toward them taking Ali (a.s) with him as the
commander of the Muslim army and surrounded the area where Bani Quraiza
resided and gave them a deserving punishment by killing all the
troublemaker Jew soldiers including their chief, Huyy ibn Akhtab. When
this Huyy ibn Akhtab came to know that his killer was also Ali (a.s) who
had killed Amr ibn Abde Wudd, he exclaimed, "I have the honor of being
killed by this very great man indeed." Ali (a.s) retorted, "Yes, the
good are been killed by the evil ones and the evil ones are being killed
by the good ones." [2]

After the removal of Bani Quraiza Jews, the risk, which was around
Medina , was also removed forever and their women and property came in
the control of Muslims.

Test of Ali's Steadfastness and Courage in the presence of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The world saw one of the most astonishing events relating to Ali on the
day when he was asked by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) to write the
historical treaty of Hudaibiyah. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) intended to
perform the Optional

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Tarikh,* Tabari, *Tarikh,* Ibn Athir,Ibn Abil Hadid, *A'laamul
Waraa, Majmaul Bayan*, Tabarsi. [2] *Irshad* of Mufid

Pilgrimage (Umrah) with a large number of Muslims in the 6<sup>th</sup>
year of the Hijri era (after migration to Medina ).

When they reached a place called Hudaibiyah, Suhail ibn Amr, a deputy of
the Meccan idolaters came and requested the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) not
to proceed further, because if armed Muslims were to enter Mecca a
battle would necessarily ensue causing much bloodshed. Thereafter the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was requested to prepare a treaty whereby the
armed Muslims might not harm the Meccans. This, Suhail was a cunning
fellow who intended to look after the interests of Meccans in every
respect.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) called Ali (a.s) and asked him to prepare a
treaty so that he might put his seal of confirmation on it. Ali, in the
presence of all great men of Islam, placed a red leather sheet on his
thigh and inscribed:

In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

But Suhail objected to it saying, "As this matter is for both the
parties, write it in such a way that it may be acceptable to us also.
Write: In Your Name O Allah."

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) told Ali, "O Ali! Erase 'Bismillah' and
write as he says." The bright-hearted youthful Ali became rather
restless and said, ""O Messenger of Allah! Had it not been your order, I
would have never erased 'Bismillah'."

Then the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) dictated saying, "Now write: This
agreement takes place between Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah and
Suhail ibn Amr."

But Amr objected again saying, "If I accept the words "Rasoolullah' (The
Messenger of God) then it would mean that I have believed in your
messengership or prophethood. So change these words and write 'Muhammad
son of Abdullah'."

Ali retorted, "Muhammad is truly and definitely the Messenger of Allah."
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) told Ali, "Remove the words "Rasoolullaah'."
Ali, very painfully said, "O Messenger of Allah! My hand does not dare
to erase the words 'Rasoolullaah'." The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said,
"Just place my hand on these words so that I may erase them myself." Ali
(a.s) complied with this order and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) erased
the said words and asked Ali to write: 'Muhammad ibn Abdullah' there and
complete the agreement.[1]

From this event, can one not measure the extent of Ali's faith,
sincerity and love for the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)? This is the brave
youth of early Islam who when he got up to defend Islam, no one even
dared to look at him with a bad intention. This is the youth who, after
the passing away of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) from this world, took up
the banner of guiding the Muslim Ummah and who shed all his perspiration
and all of his blood to water the tree of Islam.

Ali (a.s) - the conqueror of Khyber
-----------------------------------

The Muslims returned to Medina after the Treaty of Hudaibiyah. Only
twenty days had passed when the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) heard that the
Jews who had fled Medina had joined the Jews of Khyber. Khyber was a
huge fort with

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *A'alaamul Waraa,* Pg. 1

a number of small castles in it. Nearly 14000 Jew warriors were already
there. They had sufficient arms and ammunition, water and other
provisions. These Jews decided to attack the Prophet of Islam at a
convenient time and take revenge. On hearing about this, the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) took pre-emptive action and invaded them before they
could attack the Muslims.

There was a ditch dug all around Khyber. So Muslims surrounded it and
camped outside Khyber for about three weeks. The famous historian,
Waqidi, has written that this event took place in the 7<sup>th</sup>
year of the Hijri era. About 14000 Jews were living in Khyber, which is
situated at a distance of 16 Farsakhs (nearly 96 Kilometers) from Medina
on the road to Syria . (It should be noted that a sufficient number of
Jews were living in Syria also). Therefore there was a constant danger
to Muslims from the Jews living in Khyber as they could attack Medina at
any moment, as their hearts were full of hatred towards the Prophet of
Islam.

After waiting for twenty days, Abu Bakr took permission from the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.), and took up the banner of Islam and advanced towards
Khyber but returned without success. The next day Umar took up the flag
but he also returned defeated by the Jews. He also struck terror in the
hearts of Muslims by narrating the strength and bravery of the Jews.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) frowned and said, "Tomorrow, I will hand
over the flag of Islam to a man who never shows his back to the enemy,
who loves God and His Prophet and whom God and His Prophet also love and
who does not return until he gets victory by the help of God Almighty."

Muslims gathered around the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) next morning. Both
Abu Bakr and Umar had wished and hoped that they would be given the flag
to make an attack.

Saad ibn Waqqas who was considered a brave warrior says, "I was sitting
just in front of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) so as to attract his
attention. I even got up once under some pretext but I lost all hope
when the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) said, 'Call Ali (a.s).' Those sitting
around him said, 'Ali (a.s) is suffering from sore eyes and is not able
to see even the ground under his feet.' Yet the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
said, 'Bring Ali (a.s) to me.'

Ali (a.s) was brought to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) who hugged him,
applied his saliva to his eyes, which removed all pain and made them
bright. Giving the flag of Islam in Ali's hands, the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) prayed to Allah: O Lord! Give victory to Ali (a.s).'"

Saad says, "Ali (a.s) jumped up from his place and rushed at a lightning
speed to the fort of Khyber. The Muslim army behind him also attacked
the fort."

Jabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari says, "Ali (a.s) took such a swift action that
I could not even wear my armor." Saad shouted, "O Ali (a.s)! Just wait a
moment so that the brave warriors of Islam may back you up closely." But
Ali heard nothing and reached the fort. As usual the gate of that fort
opened and the deadly warrior of the Jews named Marhab came out and
attacked Ali swiftly with his sword.

Ali (a.s), the thirty-year-old tiger of Allah, who had won many wars
before, offered a return blow. People saw that Ali's sword Zulfiqar,
flashed like lightning and Marhab fell on the ground dead. No sooner
than Marhab died, the

Muslim army fell on the enemy soldiers who retreated and closed the huge
gate of their fort. Ali (a.s) swiftly reached that gate and gave a
mighty jerk to it. Pulling up the heavy gate Ali (a.s) gave it a turn by
his hand and flung it away. Muslims went inside the fort and won the war
capturing Khyber.

Three champions of the Jews named Harith, Marhab and Yasar (all
brothers) got killed in Khyber by the sword of Ali (a.s). Their back
broke and they became ready for a truce with Muslims. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) embraced Ali (a.s) affectionately and said, "O Ali! Allah and
His Messenger are pleased with you." Tears rolled down Ali's eyes. The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) asked the reason for weeping. Ali replied, "O
Messenger of Allah! These are tears of joy. They came out on hearing
that God and His Prophet are pleased with me."

Did the companions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) not see how much
strength was there in the arms of Ali (a.s)? Did they not observe how
easily and quickly Ali (a.s) uprooted the heavy iron gate, which
required many men just for opening and closing it; Ali flung that heavy
gate in such a manner that it covered the ditch around that fort?
Muhammad Ibn Jurair Tabari a famous Sunni historian reports from Rafe
who says, "I was one of the eight persons who were there when Ali (a.s)
flung away that heavy gate. All of us together tried to move that gate
aside but could not even move it."

What calls for consideration is the event when after the Holy Prophet's
passing away, this Ali was dragged with a rope around his neck! The
famous Shia scholar, Shaykh

Mufid writes: That gate of Khyber required twenty persons for opening
and closing it. Praising this tiger of God, Ibn Abil Hadid says:

Forty people were unable to move that iron gate.

The existence of Jews in the land of Hijaz was likely to create a danger
to Muslims at any moment. But Ali (a.s) provided ease and peace to
Medinites. But how strange is it that when the bravery of Ali is
discussed, the readers of history raise various explanations. Was Khyber
to be won without Ali (a.s)? Has the shadow of Jews ever fallen on
Medina after the capture of Khyber? Perhaps God Almighty wanted that Ali
(a.s) should rise up in strong support for the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
so that even the biggest trouble to confront Islam and Muslims should be
averted by Ali's sword, Zulfiqar and none should dare attack them
again.[1]

Valor of Ali (a.s)
------------------

Mecca was conquered in the 8<sup>th</sup> year of the Hijri era. Eight
years after the Holy Prophet's migration to Medina when Muhammad
(s.a.w.s.) entered Mecca with a 12000-strong army, the Meccans, without
any ado, threw away their weapons and declared faith in Islam before the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). The Prophet of Islam entered Ka'ba and broke
down all the idols with the help of Ali (a.s). Thereafter, the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) told Ali (a.s), "Put

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] This eventful Battle of Khyber is recorded in almostall Shia and
Sunni books like *A'laamul Waraa,* Tabarsi, *Tarikh*,Tabari, Yaqubi, Ibn
Hisham, *Kamil,* Ibn Athir and *Sahih Bukhari* etc.

your feet on my shoulder to reach the roof and throw down the idols
installed over there."

Obeying the command, Ali (a.s) placed his right foot on the holy
shoulder, reached the roof and after breaking the said idols threw them
down and then he jumped to the ground directly (without touching the
holy shoulders). The Prophet (s.a.w.s.) asked, "O Ali (a.s)! Why did you
not get the support of my shoulder while coming down? I was waiting for
it." Ali replied: O Messenger of God! You had commanded me to do so only
for going up and not for coming down. How could I do that without your
command? I am thankful to Allah that I averted any disrespect to the
honor of His Messenger."

Only Ali was entitled to propagate
----------------------------------

Surah Barat was revealed in the 9<sup>th</sup> year of the Hijri era.
The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) handed over this Surah to Abu Bakr and asked
him to proceed to Mecca and read it out to the Hajj pilgrims. It should
be remembered that, till then the polytheists also were joining the Hajj
Pilgrimage.

Abu Bakr had not gone a long distance when again the angel bringing
Divine Revelation came and said to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.): Allah
Almighty says that this duty cannot be carried out by anyone except you
or one who is from you. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) told Ali (a.s),
"Just get mounted immediately and take the Surah Barat from the hands of
Abu Bakr. Tell him that the Prophet has said that this job is not to be
done by him."

When Ali contacted Abu Bakr and conveyed the Prophet's message, Abu Bakr
asked, "Is there any revelation about me

also?" Ali replied, "The propagation of this Surah cannot be done except
by the Prophet of God or by me."

Then Ali reached Ka'ba, which was till then in the control of the
polytheists who were carrying out the undesirable rituals of the days of
darkness and ignorance. There the brave messenger of the Prophet's
message drew out his sword (as this Surah Barat was a warning to
polytheists) and waving it said,

*And an announcement from Allah and His Apostle to the people on the day
of the greater pilgrimage that Allah and His Apostle are free from
liability to the idolaters; therefore if you repent, it will be better
for you, and if you turn back, then know that you will not weaken Allah;
and announce a painful punishment to those who disbelieve.*[1]

Thereafter he said, "From next year, no polytheist will be allowed to
perform Hajj here and henceforth no one is permitted to circumambulate
the holy Ka'ba naked. If I see anyone naked I will compel him or her to
put on clothes." The polytheists got dressed at once and continued
circumambulating the Ka'ba.[2]

Ali-Soul of the Prophet-Self of the Messenger
---------------------------------------------

It was in the 9<sup>th</sup> year of Hijri era when a group of Christian
priests from Najran came to Medina to have a dialogue with the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) with regard to the truth of the Holy Prophet's
messengership in the light of their own

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Tawbah 9:3 [2] This is mentioned in reliable Tafsir and
Hadithbooks by both the Shias and the Sunnis and there is no dispute
regarding thisevent.

beliefs. They asked the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), "You say that Jesus is
a servant of God and not the Son of God. But is it possible that someone
could be born without a father?" The angel Jibraeel arrived with the
holy verse:

*Surely the likeness of Isa is with Allah as the likeness of Adam; He
created him from dust, then said to him, Be, and he was.*[1]

Stepping forward, the Prophet said, "Isa was born without a father but
Almighty God created Adam without father and mother."

The Christian spiritualists of Najran could not offer any reply and they
became spellbound; yet they remained stubborn illogically. Prejudice
prevented them from embracing Islam and from conceding to the
truthfulness of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) due to their ego.

Under divine orders, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) invited them to an
imprecation ceremony (Mubahila). He said:

*Come let us call our sons and your sons and our women and your women
and our selves and your selves, then let us be earnest in prayer, and
pray for the curse of Allah on the liars.* [2]

The Christian scholars accepted the proposal and the next day they
arrived before the people of the town along with their sons and women
and their near and dear ones. After some time, they saw the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) approaching them, holding the finger of Imam Hasan (a.s)
while Imam Husain (a.s) was in his arms. Behind him was his dearest

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Aale Imran 3:59 [2] Surah Aale Imran 3:60

daughter, Fatima Zahra (a.s) and behind her walked the Master of the
Universe, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s).

The Christian scholars asked the people, "Who are these persons with
whom Muhammad (s.a.w.s.) is coming?" The Muslims replied, "The one whose
finger the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) is holding is his grandson Hasan
(a.s), the one who is in his arms is his another grandson Husain; the
lady behind him is his daughter, Fatima and one behind her is the
Prophet's cousin and son-in-law, Ali (a.s)."

The Christian priests could see that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was
stepping forward with full confidence, peace of mind and total certainty
as if he had no fear at all in calling for God's curse. The radiance of
the faces of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and his nearest and dearest
ones dazzled their eyes and affected them to such an extent that their
legs began to tremble. All of them jointly came up to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) and requested him, "Please avert cursing. We are prepared to
pay whatever tax (Jizyah) you propose." The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
conceded their demand and allowed them to go back and did not raise his
hands for inviting divine curse.

Ali (a.s) was thirty-two at that time when people knew him as the self
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). It was as if an announcement was made on
that day that Ali was the shining face of Islam who had full confidence
and trust of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). This explanation is still
ringing in the history books and in the commentaries of the Holy Quran.

This high ranking group of the best personalities of Islam was such that
a group of priests from Najran came forward

and said, "Verily, if the hands of these persons were to rise in
condemnation of the liars then none among Christians would survive on
the surface of the earth."

Ali - The Real Leader of Islam
------------------------------

The list of Ali's spiritual virtues, his angelic habits and his
wonderful achievements is very long. No one else equals it, especially
in bravery, courage and moral nobility. The summary of the Holy
Prophet's twenty-three years' propagation is that none other than Ali
(a.s) was entitled to and worthy of being the vicegerent of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.).

So the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) made arrangement for announcing it in
such a way that when he was returning from his last Hajj he halted at a
place called Ghadeer Khumm and, obeying Allah's orders, bestowed his
legacy (vicegerency) to Ali (a.s). Angel Jibraeel came to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) at this place and said, "Almighty Allah says that you
should pronounce before the people whatever We have revealed to you (in
the matter of immediate vicegerency of Ali (a.s). If you do not it would
mean that you did not perform the duty of messengership. So convey this
matter to the people and fear not, because God will protect you from the
evil of the people."

The sun was shedding fire at midday on the sandy land of Arabia . The
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) of Islam issued orders for halting pilgrim
caravans. He also ordered that who have gone ahead should be called back
and those who were behind should be allowed to reach there. When all
Muslims gathered at Ghadeer Khumm the sun was at its zenith. The Hajj
pilgrims were covering their faces with their clothes to

protect themselves from scorching heat. Some had sat down under the
shades of their camels.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) ordered that a platform should be prepared
and a pulpit raised with the packsaddles of camels. When this was done,
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) climbed that high platform and took Ali
(a.s) by his hand and raised it so much that the whiteness of his armpit
could be seen. The minimum number of that audience is recorded as twenty
thousand though some historians have mentioned the figure of one hundred
and twenty thousand. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) announced:

O People! Very soon I will go away from you. After me, God Almighty has
made Ali (a.s) your leader and guardian and my vicegerent. Then he
added: O Allah! Befriend one who is friendly with Ali, and be the enemy
of one who has enmity with Ali.

Thus, in a sense, the Day of Ghadeer is the Day of Coronation of the
Lion of Allah. This most courageous and bravest youth of Islam was only
thirty-two at that time.

A Persian poet, Sarmad has so rightly said:

Though all the days belong to Almighty God Who is Omnipotent and
Ever-lasting, the holiest of all the days is the Day of Ghadeer.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](13.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](15.htm)
