Ibrahim-friend of Allah
=======================

The earlier times speak to us through history. However it is a different
matter that we do not listen to them.

They announce loudly that great historical revolutions have occurred
only when a courageous youth had come forward with a strong and
unwavering decision to do something important. On the other hand the
weak-hearted, who are unable to make any change in their mode of life
can never change the course of history. Worse than that, if timid and
selfish people gather around the oppressor ruling class an atmosphere is
created wherein common masses submit to every unjust calamity as their
destiny and turn superstitious. But when this situation becomes too
troublesome to be tolerated any more, Almighty God raises from those
masses an epoch-making character who changes the future of his
community; who draws his people out of the alleys of misguidance, making
them march ahead on the path of truth.

In ancient times, in Iraq , there were two big cities called “Kildan”
and “ Babel ” which were ruled upon by King Nimrod. He was a merciless
and very oppressive ruler who had made his people live very painful life
for a long time.

People in his kingdom had no rights whatsoever and were not allowed to
make any demand or complaint. This miserable condition had made people
so demoralized that they were like walking corpses. Nimrod was becoming
more and more merciless day by day and none in his kingdom could do
anything but obey him without having any hope of salvation.

King Nimrod, like his people was an idol-worshipper who considered idols
worthy of worship; and trustworthy objects; and their temples the
holiest and most sacred places. So, Nimrod also was taking every care of
those old and worn out idols, knowing well that this idol-worship was
the biggest testimony of his people’s ignorance and intellectual
poverty.

For quite a long time, Nimrod continued to observe that the residents of
Kildan were losing every iota of their intelligence to such an extent
that they were considering a pearl a pebble and vice versa: that they
were thinking that those lifeless objects were the molders of their
destiny. So, Nimrod took undue benefit of his people’s dark ignorance
and told them that he himself was ‘God’.

The renegade Nimrod saw that not a single person objected to his claim
of divinity. He was all the more glad to see his weak, demoralized and
courageless community prostrating before his pomp, glory and royal
grandeur and accepting him as God.

The citizens of Babel were also compelled to, besides worshipping all
the idols, to consider Nimrod as possessor of divine powers and one who
could give life and take life. With the passage of time this situation
subjected them to

further fearfulness, mindlessness, restlessness and ever-increasing
corruption and demoralization, because they were deifying both, the
idols and King Nimrod. Their former gods were dumb while the latter
vocal. No family had escaped the tortures and oppression of Nimrod.

In such a dark and fearful atmosphere, Almighty Allah, the most merciful
God, commanded His intelligent and wise youthful servant, Ibrahim (a.s)
to announce his messengership and prophethood. His father, Tarukh, had
expired before Ibrahim was born. So he was nourished and brought up by
his maternal grandfather Azar.[1]

Accordingly Ibrahim (a.s) arose and took steps against King Nimrod and
all the misguided unbelievers so that he could propagate the oneness of
Only One God, and making them aware of his message, awaken them from
their sleep of ignorance.

Ibrahim knew well that he was alone as his community was quite
courageless; while against him was the powerful army of Nimrod and hence
he must very careful. So Ibrahim (a.s) started his missionary work from
his own house, thinking that if his family members agree with him, he
would go ahead in his work slowly.

Therefore, addressing his maternal grandfather, Azar very politely, he
tried to convince him with his logical arguments and said, ”You are a
wise man. Have can you consider these lifeless idols gods? I can see
that you are, along with your

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] This is what the original Persian writer of thisbook says, though it
is generally believed that Azar was an uncle of ProphetIbrahim-God knows
best. (Translator)

community, advancing on the path of sheer ignorance.” In this way,
Almighty God removed all the curtains which were in front of the nature
of Ibrahim so that he could see the angels (forces) in the skies and on
the earth and could observe God’s might and His innumerable creations in
the unending space and so that Ibrahim’s faith may become solid.[1]

Ever since Ibrahim (a.s) became intelligent enough and began to
recognize the people of his community he used to look abhorrently at the
stagnant and lifeless idols and at the throngs of people who rushed to
worship them on the basis of their self-imagined attributes. He remained
very unhappy at this condition.

In view of all these conditions, he moved forward to remove the
difficulties and hindrances, which were likely to confront him first.
His maternal grandfather, Azar, who besides being an idol-worshipper was
also a well-known idol-maker, became his foremost roadblock. So Ibrahim
started the work of his messengership on him. In order to reform him, he
said very politely and affectionately:

*O my father! Why do you worship what neither hears nor sees, nor does
it avail you in the least?*

*O my father! Truly the knowledge has come to me, which has not come to
you, therefore follow me, I will guide you on a right path.*

*O my father! Serve not the Satan; surely the Satan is disobedient to
the Beneficent God.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Anam 6:74-75

*O my father! Surely I fear that a punishment from the Beneficent God
should afflict you so that you should be a friend of the Satan.[1]*

Thereafter Ibrahim went to Azar and addressed the ignorant
idol-worshippers as mentioned by God Almighty in this manner:

*And certainly we gave to Ibrahim his rectitude before and we knew him
fully well. When he said to his father and his people: “What are these
images to whose worship you cleave? They said: we found our fathers
worshipping them. He said: certainly you have been, (both) you and your
fathers, in manifest error. They said: have you brought to us the truth,
or are you one of the triflers? He said: Nay! Your lord is the lord of
the heavens and the earth, who brought them into existence, and I am of
those who bear witness to this.[2]*

When Azar and his people heard these strange words from Ibrahim (a.s)
they became extremely angry with his courageous movement. Azar, besides
being himself an idol-worshipper, was also afraid that if Nimrod were to
hear this and comes to know that Ibrahim (a.s) was mocking the community
and its gods and criticizing them, first of all, he would be asked (by
Azar) why did he not took the son of his daughter (Ibrahim) to task and
allowed him so much liberty? So he frowned terribly and addressed
Ibrahim in these harsh words:

*Do you dislike my gods, O Ibrahim? If you do not desist I will
certainly revile you, and leave me for a time. [3]*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Maryam 19:41-45 [2] Surah Anbiya 21:51-56 [3] Surah Maryam
19:46

Though Ibrahim (a.s) had got up to pull down the palace of idol-worship
and superstition, when he observed that both Azar and all his community
became so much enraged in the first instance, he thought that it was not
advisable to push the matter further for the time being. However, what
happened in the first stage of Ibrahim’s call was that the ears, which
were unable to hear any good or truthful words, could hear his voice and
also a part of the rust on their hearts was erased to some extent. So he
left his people in that condition for a while that their anger may cool
down and then people may be able to think with a cool heart and mind…

The call of Ibrahim declared the truth, gradually the news reached the
residents of Urr, another city of Kildan . Ibrahim’s message spread
speedily all around and some intelligent and wise people agreed with
him. They gave up the worship of gods having shapes, bodies and figures.
They also began to advise others to abandon the wrong deed. They warned
the people about the anger and punishment of the only true God if they
disobeyed Him.

The people of his community used to celebrate an annual feast, when all
the residents used to go out of the city and make merry in the open. On
one such occasion the entire city had become empty of people leaving
only Ibrahim there, as he mostly remained aloof and was fed up with the
meaningless old rituals of his community and used to laugh at them
indignantly. Considering this an opportunity he took yet another step in
his missionary work.

Ibrahim was a youth with God-given strength and capability. His arms
were strong, chest wide and eyes

bright. He took up an axe in his strong hands and moved calmly towards
the temple where people of the town worshipped man-made idols. He broke
down all idols with his axe and also disfigured all the indecent images
drawn on temple walls. He left only the biggest idol untouched with a
hope that he might then be able to call his people to worship only one
God.

*And by Allah! I will certainly do something against your idols after
you go away, turning back. So he broke them into pieces, except the
chief of them, that haply they may turn to it.[1]*

Ibrahim (a.s) collected the broken limbs etc. of the idols and kept them
aside; and when he was satisfied that he had rooted out the mindlessness
and ignorance of polytheism, returned home to take some rest. He was
awaiting a hue and cry from people after their return from the annual
feast. The people used to cook food articles and gift them to the idols
in the temple before going to celebrate. After returning from the feast
they brought back the articles home to eat them as sacred benediction.
They believed that being pleased by their offer those gods would grant
increase in their livelihood.

But this time when they returned from the feast they witnessed a very
strange event; that all the idols were lying broken except the big one.
The limbs of all the idols lay in a heap at one place. They were so
shocked and spellbound that they could not utter a word for quite some
time. Finally when they came out of the shock they began to speak and
talk with one another as to who has oppressed their gods so

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Anbiya 21:57-58

much. Whoever it might be, his offence was definitely intolerable!

Someone mentioned the name of Ibrahim (a.s) saying that there lived in
that town a man called Ibrahim who spoke ill of these idols. He must
have done this deed. All agreed on this point and were convinced that
only Ibrahim was responsible for this escapade. The people were so
enraged that they summoned Ibrahim at once for questioning.

Accordingly a committee of judges was formed which appointed a court to
which Ibrahim (a.s) was summoned. He was charge-sheeted for the said
offence of breaking down their idols so mercilessly. All the people of
the town gathered at the court. It must have been a scene worth seeing
indeed. There was commotion all around. Ibrahim was then produced before
this court for committing a crime of idol breaking.

The huge audience was on their toes, eager to see the outcome of the
trial. On one side was Ibrahim (a.s) and on the other, a heap of broken
limbs of their gods made of stone and wood. The judges were red hot in
anger. At last they shouted, “O Ibrahim! Have you brought this calamity
on our gods?” The representative of monotheism replied calmly in a
single sentence, which woke the sleeping consciences and he turned the
tables calling people to his mission. He said, “This must be the deed of
this biggest idol. What happened later may be inquired from him if he is
able to speak.”

These words of Ibrahim (a.s) affected the hearts of people so much that
all put their fingers between their teeth. No one was able to respond.
The judges spoke to one another: It was

our fault that we did not appoint anyone to look after and protect our
gods in our absence. All looked down and then said, “When you know that
they cannot speak why you ask such a meaningless question?”

Ibrahim was waiting only for this response, so he said fearlessly, “You
people call on and worship these gods who can neither give profit nor
any loss. Why do you not understand and worship the only one God, Who is
Almighty? Why do you not think upon this?”

Those who were seated on the chairs of justice became dumb on hearing
these true words from Ibrahim. When they could not reply they became
restless and pronounced the judgment: Light up a huge fire and fling
Ibrahim in it by means of a big catapult so that he may be burnt to
ashes. Help your gods in this way to make them pleased with you.

But the Most Merciful and Beneficent Allah made the fire cool (with His
perfect Power) and Ibrahim came out of it safe and sound.

In the words of the Holy Quran:

*They said: Who has done this to our gods? Most surely he is one of the
unjust. They said: We heard a youth called Ibrahim speak of them. Said
they: Then bring him before the eyes of the people, perhaps they may
bear witness. They said: Have you done this to our gods, O Ibrahim? He
said: Surely (some doer) has done it; the chief of them is this,
therefore ask them, if they can speak. Then they turned to themselves
and said: Surely you yourselves are the unjust; Then they were made to
hang down their heads: Certainly you know that they do not speak. He
said: What! Do you then serve besides Allah what brings you not any
benefit at all, nor does it harm you? Fie on*

*you and on what you serve besides Allah; what! Do you not then
understand? They said: Burn him and help your gods, if you are going to
do (anything). We said: O fire! Be a comfort and peace to Ibrahim; and
they desired a war on him, but We made them the greatest losers.[1]*

The story of idol breaking by Ibrahim (a.s) and defeat of the judges in
the court of Nimrod spread in the entire community like wild fire.
Ibrahim’s (a.s) success became the talk of the town. A big group of
people sided with Ibrahim (a.s) and, convinced by his logical arguments
began to worship only one God and thus through the messengership of
Ibrahim (a.s) became Muslims.

On the other hand, all those idol-worshippers whose hearts had become
crooked and who were eating the bones thrown to them by Nimrod and thus
had become his slaves shamelessly and meekly continued to oppose the
truth which had become manifest and stuck to their false beliefs.

When Nimrod who was the God of their gods heard about all this he was
enraged. He ordered that young Ibrahim (a.s) should be brought before
him so that he could see the one who had dared to perform such a big
adventure disregarding his pomp and power. When Ibrahim (a.s) entered
the royal court of Nimrod he found Nimrod sitting on his throne with
such pomp that his courtiers could not look at him and were trembling
due to his awe. But Ibrahim (a.s) was the representative of monotheism.
He stood straight before Nimrod quite fearlessly. Nimrod looked at him
and said, “Why did you do this dangerous deed which created turmoil in
the entire town? I am the God of these people and their

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Anbiya 21:59-70

lord; and their destiny is in my hands. Have they any other God than
myself?” Ibrahim (a.s) replied, “Yes, He is my God Who is the creator of
the entire universe. Whenever He wishes he takes back the lives of His
creation.” Nimrod retorted, “This is not a thing, which I cannot do. I
allow my servants to live freely when I wish and I am able to kill them
when I wish to do so and thus their life and death is in my hands.”

When Ibrahim (a.s) saw that this fellow was boasting too much on the
basis of his kingship, he took a step further and said, “I worship the
God who raises the sun from the east. If you have any power, let us see
whether you can bring it out from the west.” This argument of Ibrahim
(a.s) fell on Nimrod’s head like a big rock and he became speechless,
spellbound and defeated:

*Have you not considered (Nimrod) who disputed with Ibrahim (a.s) about
his lord, because Allah had given him the kingdom? When Ibrahim (a.s)
said: my lord is He who gives life and causes to die, he said: I give
life and cause death. Ibrahim (a.s) said: so surely Allah causes the sun
to rise from the east, then make it rise from the west: thus he who
disbelieved was confused: and Allah does not guide aright the unjust
people.[1]*

This is the story of a young man whose name was Ibrahim (a.s), the
friend (Khalil) of Allah. God chose him for fetching out people from the
darkness of ignorance and misguidance. It was the result of Ibrahim’s
rising youthfulness and the accompanying unlimited capabilities that he
defeated the material powers and false arguments making the truth
manifest and bright.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Baqarah 2:258

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](01.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](03.htm)
