Itab Ibn Usaid
==============

### The Young Man Who Was Appointed As The Governor Of Mecca By The Messenger Of Allah

The magnificent army of Islam entered Mecca in the eighth year of Hijrah
to find that there was no opposition from the Meccans. They all
surrendered themselves to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.). The Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) issued directions that the inhabitants of Mecca must
not be harmed and none should cause any hurt to any Meccan. Seeing the
good behavior of Muhammad, the people of Mecca accepted Islam and the
surroundings echoed with the sound of “Allah-o-Akbar” (Allah is the
Greatest). The Holy Quran has termed this a “manifest victory”. Till the
eighth year of Hijrah, Islam had spread to every nook and corner of the
Arab world. Only the polytheists of Taif and Hawazan had remained firm
on their false beliefs. Now it was necessary to exterminate them and
clean up all future risks from the path of Islam so that Hijaz can be
purified of idols and idolaters forever.

Not a long time had elapsed after the conquest of Mecca , when the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) ordered the valiant and fearless fighters of the
Muslim army to march towards Hunain in order to put an end to the menace
of the

infidelity of Taif and Hawazin. Mecca had been conquered recently, and
the army of Islam was leaving Mecca to march towards Hunain. Therefore
it was necessary to appoint an able and a determined person to govern
the affairs of Mecca so that none could create mischief in the near
future. Also that same governor would assure that Islamic values and
Islamic law is upheld in Mecca at all times to come because there was a
great risk that mischievous people find disorganization and confusion
and create such disruption that the newly converted Muslims may very
soon renegade towards apostasy and the period of ignorance would be back
in Mecca.

The Chief of Islam, Muhammad al-Mustafa selected a twenty-one-year-old
youth, named Ibn Usaid and appointed him as the governor, entrusting him
with the affairs of Mecca .

It is noteworthy that a youth of twenty-one years was bestowed the
governorship of Mecca . The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) also advised
Itab that he must pray with the people. Thus Itab became the first
person to establish congregational prayers in Mecca .[1]

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) called Itab ibn Usaid and said, “Do you know
what post has been entrusted to you? And over which community have you
been made a ruler? You are appointed as the ruler and governor over the
people of the sanctuary of Allah and the holy town of Mecca . If I had
found anyone more worthy than you among the Muslims, I would have
definitely given the rulership and administration of Mecca to him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Sirah Halabiyyah* Vol. 3, Pg. 120

At the time the great leader of Islam, Muhammad al-Mustafa gave the
command of Mecca to Itab ibn Usaid when he was only twenty-one.[1]

When this young man was given such a great and important post, a wave of
shock and discontent passed through the nobles of Mecca . They began to
remark how Muhammad could appoint a person who has just stepped into
youth, as a ruler over the people of Mecca while there were many
qualified, able and senior leaders present? They alleged that Muhammad
actually wanted the historical town of Mecca to remain backward and
underdeveloped and that is why he has entrusted the administration of
Mecca to an inexperienced and immature youth. When these talks reached
the ears of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) he wrote a long letter to the
nobles of Mecca . Therein he explained in detail the capability,
qualifications and suitability of Itab ibn Usaid. He also reiterated
that it was the duty of the Meccans to obey Itab ibn Usaid and do
exactly as he says. In the end the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) replied
to their objections in brief:

“None of you has the right to object against the young age of Itab ibn
Usaid because greatness and excellence do not depend on seniority of
age. Rather the criterion of human greatness and excellence is
spirituality.”[2]

The firmness of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) on his decision of
appointing Itab ibn Usaid as the governor of Mecca and his
justifications to those aged nobles of Mecca who objected against this
appointment proves that Islam has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Usud al-Ghaba* Vol. 3 Pg. 358 [2] *Nasikhut Tawarikh,* Pg. 387

always favored and trusted fresh blood to lead the affairs of the
community. Islam has always encouraged and trusted the new generation.

This revolutionary method of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and his
unflinching support for Itab ibn Usaid is noteworthy for all Muslims
that they must always fight with their words and actions, ignorance,
mindless bigotry and groupism and governance and rulership should be
given to the qualified and worthy youths of the community so that it can
benefit from the young generation.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Jawan Az-Nazar Aql-o-Ahsasat,* GuftarFalsafi; Vol. 1, Pg. 18

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](19.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](21.htm)
