Usamah Ibn Zaid
===============

### Commander-In-Chief Of The Largest Army Of Islam

Haritha was a Syrian who followed the Christian faith. He belonged to an
affluent family. Zaid was his son. He had just entered his youth when
one day he accompanied his mother on a journey to visit some relatives.
On the way they were waylaid by some bandits who kidnapped him and sold
him as a slave in the market of Ukaz. Hakim ibn Hazm purchased him for
Khadijah, his paternal aunt. When Khadijah married the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.s.) she gifted Zaid to him.

According to historians Zaid was the second person after Ali (a.s) to
accept the Islamic faith. On the other hand Haritha was in search for
his son when someone informed him that Zaid was in Mecca . When Haritha
came to Mecca to take away his son, Zaid, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
also did not object and he said that Zaid could go with him if he so
liked. However, Zaid was not prepared to go with his father. Haritha
also permitted him to remain with the Prophet and himself returned to
Syria . Later, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) proposed the marriage
of Zaid with the daughter of his paternal aunt, Zainab. The two were
married in the due course.

But this marriage did not last long, because Zainab considered herself
from the nobility of Mecca and she was since day one not agreeable to
marry Zaid who was a mere slave. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), time and
again urged them to mend their differences and lead a peaceful married
life but all this did not have much effect on Zainab. At last Zaid could
not bear the sharp tongue of Zainab anymore and came to the Prophet and
requested him to effect their divorce so that he could attain some
peace.

Thus, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) had them divorced and after the
stipulated waiting period married Zainab himself. This was so because
the Prophet himself was the initiator of the marriage of Zaid and
Zainab. Secondly it was a sort of recompense for Zainab. Also, since the
Prophet was the son of the maternal uncle of Zainab the relationship
between the families also survived the crisis. Zainab’s objection was
also addressed since the Prophet belonged to the nobility of Mecca .

After that the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) married Zaid to Umme Aiman,
one of his maidservants. Umme Aiman was an understanding and an
accomplished lady. The marriage proved successful to both the spouses
and they began to live a happy and peaceful life. Umme Aiman gave birth
to a male child whom Zaid named Usamah.[1]

Usamah belongs to the group of those young men who were born at the time
of the birth of Islam in Mecca . He was a capable, intelligent and an
accomplished young man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Al-Isabah,* Vol. 1, Pg. 545

In the battle of Muta when Ja'far Ibn Abi Talib was martyred, according
to the directions previously issued by the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.)
the leadership of the Muslim army fell on Zaid. Zaid engaged the foes in
a fierce contest but at last he was also martyred. After the martyrdom
of Zaid, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) dispatched an army against the
Romans under the command of Usamah to avenge the death of his father,
Zaid. This is a brief account of history so far. Now listen to what
Falsafi says about what happened after that:

In the final days of his life in the world, the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.) persuaded the Muslims to fight a war against the powerful
country of Byzantine. He organized a huge army and it included the great
warriors, stalwarts and battle-hardened officers. Commanders and
powerful chiefs of the Ansar and Muhajir communities were also a part of
this army. In other words there was no person of any importance among
the Arabs, who was not enrolled in this army.

On the day the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) went outside Medina to inspect
the army he saw a gigantic and magnificent host ready to defend
religion. Seeing the magnificence of the militia, it was necessary for
the Prophet that he appoints an able and intelligent commander to lead
the army who was qualified to head such a dangerous expedition. The
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) summoned Usamah ibn Zaid and entrusted him
the command of the army, handing him the standard of Islam and putting
the whole army in his charge.

A noteworthy point here is that Usamah was only eighteen years of age at
that time.[1] Though I have no right to say that such an example is not
found in the history of mankind, at least I can say that such examples
are very rare when a youth of eighteen has commanded an army of
thousands.

Today in the civilized world it has become common for young people to be
appointed to important posts. This is so because their intelligent and
integrity is found worthy of such responsibilities. Yet we cannot as yet
imagine a youth being appointed the chief of Army of the American nation
or a European country to lead an expedition against a powerful enemy
having all the latest weapons and training.

The Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.s.) established such an example that it
continues to inspire the world even today. It is a very important lesson
in support of the youth, which helps in garnering the capabilities and
intellects of young people for profitable ends. What is noteworthy is
that the huge Byzantine army was poised for attack and on the other hand
the standard of the army of Islam was in the hands of Usamah, a lad of
eighteen.

The best of the trained warriors who had passed through the most
difficult circumstances in the wars of Islam, and defeated the
machinations of the foes and those military chiefs of Islam, who had
broken the strength of the enemies with great courage, valor and
fearlessness and those Arab stalwarts who had fulfilled the most
difficult conditions in the propagation of Islam through the perfection
of their abilities, now all these experienced personnel had enrolled for
this expedition due to the prophetic command and they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Usud al-Ghaba,* Vol. 1, Pg. 64

were now under the control and command of Usamah, the commander-in-chief
of the army.

This matter of subordination to a youth of eighteen was very distasteful
for them and they had to bear it without being able to raise any
objection against it. The Prophet’s decision that the standard bearer of
the army would be Usamah, a boy of eighteen was beyond imagination. Thus
the majority of the leaders were shocked at this and they looked at the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) in bewilderment. Some of them were such
that they lost the ability to digest this decision and they spoke up
whatever lay hidden in their hearts: What is this? Those emigrants who
were in the forefront in the battles of Islam and who also acted upon
the principles and laws of Islam, how can such seniors be put under the
command of an eighteen-year-old boy?

When the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) heard about the discontent and
whisperings among the military chiefs he was very angry. He mounted the
pulpit and after due praise and glorification of the Almighty said:

“O people! What types of objections am I hearing from your side against
the appointment of Usamah ibn Zaid as the commander? These ridicules and
criticisms from your side are not new. When some years ago I appointed
Zaid ibn Haritha, the father of Usamah as the leader, the same types of
objections were raised. I swear by the Almighty that at that time also
Zaid ibn Haritha was the most capable and qualified person for
commanding the army and his son Usamah also is the most capable and
qualified for leading the army. A sort of revolt has begun to simmer in
the ranks. You must obey him.”

The persuasion of the Prophet and his support of the young generation
affected the people and the bias they had towards the youthful
generation was removed gradually. In the due course they began to regret
their mistake.

Abu Ayyub Ansari, one of the best companions of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.), who had always followed and always claimed loyalty to Islam,
participated in many battles and proved his unflinching support for the
religion of God, he refused to participate in only this expedition. Only
for the reason that the standard bearer and the commander-in-chief was a
youth of lesser years.

After some years Abu Ayyub was remorseful of this. All the time he
remained restless due to his opposition and sighed in regret: What my
end would be? What right did I have to question the appointment of the
commander-in-chief? Why did I oppose the leadership of this youth?[1]

The confirmation and emphasis of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) on
the appointment of Usamah as the chief and the commander that all the
Arab people may gather under his charge is a very important topic in the
history of Islam that invites contemplations of all those who possess
reason. At that time the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) was indisposed and was
passing the last days of his worldly life. When Abu Bakr and Umar came
to visit him he was very angry with them and he said, “Go, go, go to the
army of Usamah! Curse of Allah be on one who agrees for the battle but
avoids joining the army of Usamah.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Usud al-Ghaba,* Vol. 2, Pg. 81

Taking leave of the Prophet when Abu Bakr came to Usamah’s army, it was
ready to move. They were waiting for the final news from Abu Bakr who
said that the army had to march forward. The army thus departed for
Syria but when it reached there Abu Bakr deposed Usamah and appointed
Yazid Ibn Abu Sufyan at the command.

When the deposed Usamah returned to Medina he stood besides the
Prophet’s mosque and announced in a loud voice, “O people of Medina ! It
was only yesterday that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) had appointed me as
the commander and the standard bearer of the army. And today he is
opposing the orders of the Prophet and trying to impose his orders on
me! He has deposed me from the commandership of the Islamic army.”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *A'laamul Wara,* Pg. 135

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](22.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](24.htm)
