Guides of Islam
===============

### Those Who Fulfilled The Responsibility Of Guiding The People When They Were Of Young Age

We consider ourselves as Shias; that is the followers of the family of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.). We accept the Imams of Ahle Bayt as
our guides and leaders with textual and intellectual proofs. The history
of Islam without any difference of Shia and Sunni has proved clearly
that these

Holy Personalities were the most excellent and superior personalities of
their times from every aspect.

They possessed to the level of perfection all the qualities that are
required in a leader and guide like knowledge and intelligence, piety
and excellence, determination and faith, patience and forbearance. That
is all the praiseworthy qualities were present in them. It is not only
the claim of Shias, but all the scholars of Islam are unanimous on this.
Self-respect, nobility of character, generosity and charity, eloquence,
trustworthiness and justice are the hallmarks of the People of the House
of infallibility and purity. When the general populace of Islam sees
these qualities it is compelled to respect and honor them. Both friends
and enemies are compelled to humble themselves before their lofty
manners.

The Imams of Ahle Bayt were having the most perfect personalities from
both the physical and spiritual aspects. A fact that becomes apparent
from this subject is that all the Imams were similar in lineage,
character, thinking, speech and actions, without any difference
whatsoever. Extremism and conservativeness had no role in their
families. They all walked on the path of equity and moderation in every
circumstance and in all matters. They were sober in all aspects of
sleeping, eating, dressing, speaking and thinking etc. They were
disciplined also in all these matters, and they were exactly similar to
each other. The miracle of their personality was that if one of their
enemies aimed to discredit them he himself became the target of that
calumny.

Though the Holy Imams were endowed with infallibility and were so
excellent due to their divine station and

heavenly status but the atmosphere of their homes was such that all
those who were bred and brought up in them exhibited the most perfect
qualities, nobility of character, knowledge and sobriety. Their faces
showed the excellence of their beings.

For example, there was none among them who had any bodily defect. All
were of good disposition, elegant, strong and of moderate physique. Are
all these not the signs of the training and nurturing of the family of
the Prophet of Islam? Who can refuse that all those who belonged to this
household had their names written in golden letters in the pages of
history?

The Imams of Ahle Bayt always lived in the same way whether before or
after attaining the office of Imamate. Even before getting the position
they always acted in a kind and amicable way. They possessed the same
elegance; attraction and the same nobility that even the enemy could not
claim that they had a particular defect or weakness before becoming
Imams. Their discussions with different types of people, their easy
answers to difficult questions are all recorded in books. Only these
examples of lofty character have testified for us, whose practical and
theoretical value is such that no sight could even reach their high
status.

For the information of our readers we give below the names of the twelve
leaders of Islam and their age at the time of attaining Imamate. So that
it can be seen at what young age our Infallible Imams performed, not
those great feats, but rather fulfilled the duties of Imamate which is a
heavenly office bestowed by the Almighty.

Amirul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s)             32 years

Imam Hasan (a.s)                       37 years

Imam Husain (a.s)                      47 years

Imam Ali Ibnul Husain (a.s)         23 years

Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s)       38 years

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s)           31 years

Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s)           20 years

Imam Ali ar-Reza (a.s)                35 years

Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s)        8 years

Imam Ali Naqi (a.s)                     8 years

Imam Hasan Askari (a.s)              22 years

Imam-e-Zamana (a.s)                  5 years

When these great personages occupied the office of Imamate it was a time
when the majority of Muslims were such that the ability of guidance,
faith and rightful justice had died in them. The religion of the
Prophet’s period had changed and was distorted. Many evils like
oppression, corruption, moral ills, materialism etc. that were against
Quranic teachings were growing and spreading in all the Islamic lands.
Actually that age was also like the present time and it was the
prevalent view that religion was not an aim but a channel to achieve an
aim. On the basis of this, the Islamic society of that time had gone
much ahead in seeking material wealth and worldly posts and positions.
Thus they had completely forgotten the role of the family of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), their capabilities and spirituality. On
the other hand the ruling powers were also trying to assure that people
do not follow in the footsteps of

Ahle Bayt because the lives of the purified Imams was the source of
every excellence and the mirror of all the great human qualities.

In conclusion we can say that though twelve centuries have passed the
Islamic world had not produced equals of these purified Imams. Because
if there had been anyone their equal he would certainly have found a
mention in history.

The above was a brief discussion regarding the young age and youth of
the Holy Imams. We have dealt this topic with utmost brevity though
volumes could have been written on this subject.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](24.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](26.htm)
