Youths of Kerbala
=================

### Who Became Famed In The History Of Mankind

The confrontation of Imam Husain (a.s) with the forces of Yazid in
Kerbala is the unique episode in the history of mankind, which will
remain outstanding till the Day of Judgment. Yes, why we cannot call it
the greatest episode of history? Has anyone ever come across a battle
where a band of seventy-two faced a huge army minimally estimated to be
comprised of 30,000 well-trained and well-equipped fighters? In addition
to this, the band of seventy-two was initially invited as guests. Then
the same people who had invited them took up weapons against them,
obstructed their way and forced them to camp in the arid desert and
burning sands. Then they stopped food and water supply to this small
battalion, while it comprised of people who were absolutely harmless and
innocent.

It is worth contemplation…

Who were these personages? Were they descendants of the Prophet or not?
Which Prophet? That same Prophet whom these 30,000 strong army followed.
By whose name they received their livelihood and passed their days.

Those people who were unprepared for battle and unwilling for martial
confrontation, because they had not come with the aim of fighting.

Also, the most remarkable fact about this group was that its majority
consisted of women and children in whose veins flowed the blood of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) and each of them was a gem of the treasure
of Prophethood.

The tragedy of Imam Husain (a.s), the terrible incident of Ashura
(10<sup>th</sup> of Mohurrum) and the horrible scenes of carnage
occurred in the 61<sup>st</sup> year of Hijrah when seventy-two purified
youths and loyal personages were martyred. This episode blackened the
face of history and the head of mankind bowed down in shame.

The people of Kufa had invited the grandson of the Prophet, Imam Husain
(a.s) to Kufa so that he could lead them in revolt against Yazid; the
deboucherous son of Muawiyah like Imam Ali (a.s) had confronted
Muawiyah. After that these disloyal and materialist Kufaites martyred
the honorable son of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.), along with his
companions, brothers and sons in such a cruel way that to describe these
atrocities burns the tongue of the narrator and the pen breaks due to
shame.

Among these martyrs were eighteen youths of Bani Hashim from the family
of Abu Talib. They displayed such daring in the battle that their equal
is not found anywhere in history. Imam Reza (a.s) told Reyan Ibn
Shabeeb:

“O son of Shabeeb! There were such eighteen youths from Bani Hashim in
Kerbala as have no equal on the face of the earth. Except for Imam
Husain (a.s) who was fifty-seven at that time all these eighteen persons
from Bani Hashim were

in their youth. Among them was a thirty-five-year-old man and even some
boys hardly aged twelve or ten years. In other words we can say that the
battle of Kerbala was one where the youths predominated.

The following are the martyrs of Kerbala:
-----------------------------------------

6 sons of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s)

3 sons of Imam Hasan (a.s)

2 sons of Zainab binte Ali (a.s), who was the sister of Imam Husain
(a.s) and the wife of Abdullah Ibn Ja'far ibn Abi Talib.

5 sons of Aqil Ibn Abi Talib (a.s)

2 sons of Imam Husain (a.s).

This is the list of the names of those young people who achieved
martyrdom in the service of their Holy Imam, the honorable Abu Abdillah
(a.s). They laid down their lives for the sake of Islam through their
perfected valor and unflinching loyalty. They saved the honor of Islam
at this dangerous juncture in history by giving up their own blood. When
Yazid, the son of Muawiyah arose as an ugly blemish on the shirt of
humanity, these youths rose up to confront him and stood like firm
mountains against him. It was such a magnificent contest and a great
revolution, which squeezed the history of centuries into a few moments,
which made the faces of these youths brilliant and shining like the sun.

Even though centuries may pass but the memory of these young men of
Kerbala would always remain fresh.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](26.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](28.htm)
