Ali Akbar
=========

### The Brilliant Sun Of Youth

Among the elegant faces of the family of prophethood was one whose name
is written, spoken and heard always with the appellation of “the youth”.
This is Ali ibn al-Husain, commonly called Ali Akbar, (That is Ali, the
elder).

This son of Imam Husain (a.s) had just stepped into adolescence. A
brilliant face and such a beautiful way of speech and movement that it
seemed Providence had created him with special care. On the day of
Ashura he was eighteen years old. His mother was the noble lady named
Laila. She was a descendant of Urwah Ibn Masood Thaqafi, one of the four
bravest warriors of Arabs in the period prior to Islam. Imam Husain
(a.s) had named all his sons after his respected father. May be since
the names of all the three sons was Ali, they were addressed with
different appellations of Ali Akbar (Ali, the elder) and Ali Asghar
(Ali, the younger) etc. for the sake of identification.

Ali Akbar resembled Ali (a.s) in his intelligence, valor and
personality, and his physical appearance, facial features; way of
walking and talking was exactly like that of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.).

Ali Akbar was the first youth to have taken to the field in Kerbala.
According to some other reports he was the first of the youths of Bani
Hashim who attacked the opponent army with great zeal and achieved
martyrdom for the assistance of his respected father.

When Ali Akbar came to Imam Husain seeking permission to take to the
battlefield, the Imam glanced at an army of 30000 and then looked at Ali
Akbar, that he was going to fight that huge multitude all alone. (We
don’t know how Imam Husain felt at that moment). Though he gave the
permission, he added, “My son, Ali Akbar! Bid farewell to your paternal
aunt, mother and sisters and then go out for the battle.” Ali Akbar went
inside the tent and the ladies surrounded him. There was absolute chaos
in the tent. The ladies were saying, “O the memento of the Prophet of
Islam, have mercy on our honor and alienhood. We would not be able to
live without you.”

But Ali Akbar was such a dignified young man that he saw his father
besieged by the foes; and the ferocious army was ready to murder the son
of the Prophet. How was it possible to continue seeing the oppressed
condition of this father and the painful circumstances to which the
women and children were subjected? Thus he bid farewell to the ladies of
his family and left for the battleground.

The holy Imam accompanied him for some distance. Then he looked at the
sky in an expectant way and said, “O my Lord! Be a witness that one who
is going to the battlefield resembles Your Prophet in the ways of
talking and walking, facial features and habits. Whenever, we, Ahle
Bayt, wanted to have a view of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) we used to
look

at Ali Akbar and cool our hearts. O God! Remove the bounties of the
world from these army men and subject them to confusion and calamities,
in such a way that they can never rule upon us. Because they had invited
us to come here, and now they are opposed to us and ready to fight and
kill us.”

After that the oppressed one of Kerbala called the son of Saad and said,
“May Allah cut off your generations and may you never obtain what you
lust for. And may Allah give power to such an oppressor over you as he
beheads you when you are in bed. Because due to the martyrdom of this
elegant youth you have cut off my generations that were to arrive
through him, and you have not even paid any regard to my relationship
with my maternal grandfather (the Prophet).”

Ali Akbar arrived in the battlefield and in keeping with custom of that
time recited a zealous Rajaz (versified introduction of himself and his
aim in brief):

I am Ali the son of Husain, whose grandfather was the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.s.). By Allah! We are the rightfully deserving ones of the
vicegerency of Allah. By God! These spurious descendants cannot rule
over us. I would indeed fight with you with a sword and even if the
sword breaks, I would fight with a dagger till it breaks, so that you
know the power of a Hashemite youth.”

After that he launched a terrific attack and scattered the rows of
warriors and came back to his place. He attacked in the same way again
and again till all the rows and columns of the opponent army were in
disarray.

Thirst…such thirst as cannot be imagined. It was only thirst that had
changed the condition of Ali Akbar. After he had killed a hundred and
twenty Nasibis (enemies of Ahle Bayt), there were screams for help in
the army of Yazid. This youth who displayed the valor of Ali (a.s) came
back to his father and said, “Father! Thirst is killing me. If I could
get only a little water I would change the face of this battle.” Imam
Husain (a.s) did not say that there was no water and that he too was
thirsty like Ali Akbar. He kept his tongue in the mouth of his son so
that he could suck whatever moisture was there in it. However, Ali Akbar
pulled back his tongue and said, “Father! Your tongue is drier than
mine!”

After this, Ali Akbar returned to the battlefield and this time enemies
surrounded him and attacked him from all sides in unison. Repeated
strokes fell on him and his body was cut into pieces and he fell down
from his horse.

According to a narration when Imam Husain (a.s) came to his son, he had
already departed for Paradise . Imam Husain (a.s) placed his head on his
thigh and recited the dirge:

“My son, you have bid farewell to the world. You are released from the
griefs and sorrows of the world but your father is left alone for
martyrdom.”

At that time when the world had become dark for the Imam he called out,
“O youths! Take the last remains of your brother from the field to the
camp…”

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](27.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](29.htm)
