Ismail and the Great Sacrifice
==============================

### The Young Man Who Offered His Life In The Path Of Truth

The brave soldier of monotheism had finished his fight with the
idol-worshippers of Babel . Thereafter when the residents of the town
knew well that he was the messenger of God and the only aim of his
mission was to make people aware of God and the realization of His
Radiance (Noor) and when the influence of Nimrod ended in Babel, he took
his wife, Sarah with him and, bidding farewell to Babel went towards
Syria. After concluding a long journey he stayed at Harran .

The residents of this place were worshipping the sun, moon and stars.
Ibrahim (a.s) staged grand discussions with people here also and drew
the attention of people towards the true God Who is the Lord Creator of
the earth, the skies and everything else in the cosmos. He established
and proved that the sun, the moon and the stars fade away after shinning
for a while and hence they cannot be gods. God, the creator and the
protector of the universe remains ever-present and He can be the only
one who created the skies, stars and the earth and who is managing all
of them under His own administration.

Here also a group of intelligent and wise people accepted the words of
Ibrahim (a.s) and took to the path of truth while another group rose up
in protest. Ibrahim (a.s) thought that it was not wise, at that time, to
take further risks and proceeded towards Palestine and settled there. He
stayed there for quite a long time. When a severe drought occurred
there, he entered Egypt passing through the desert of Sinai . At first,
the king of Egypt showed enmity towards him. But thereafter, he was
gifted a big herd of sheep and the king also gave him from his harem an
honorable lady named Hajrah so that she may live with Sarah and help her
in the household work.

Ibrahim (a.s) spent a large part of his life in Egypt . Rise in the
number of his sheep made him wealthy. When the people of Palestine had
passed out from famine and forgotten his efforts, Ibrahim (a.s) went
back to live there. He established a traveler guesthouse where people
could lodge and board. Travelers from Jordan , Lebanon and Syria used to
stay there and benefit from the said facilities.

When, even after a long married life, Sarah could not bear a child, she
proposed to Ibrahim (a.s) that he should marry her companion Hajrah
telling him that God-willing he may get children through her (Hajrah)
whereby the progeny of Prophet Hud (a.s) may continue on the earth.
Since this step of Sarah was an instance of sacrifice and selflessness,
God Almighty considered it worthy of respect.

In short, Prophet Ibrahim (a.s) married Hajrah and she bore a son for
him who was named Ismail (a.s). When Sarah saw that now the progeny of
Hud would continue through Hajrah she become worried and restless to an
unbearable

extent. So she told Ibrahim (a.s) to take away the newborn child and its
mother (Hajrah) to a faraway place from where she might not hear
anything at all about them. God Almighty ordered Ibrahim (a.s) to
fulfill the demand of Sarah and to leave the child and mother in a far
off place and then return to Palestine .

Ibrahim (a.s) carried out the divine command. He left Ismail and Hajrah
in Hijaz (now called Mecca ) praying to God:

*O our Lord! Surely I have settled a part of my offspring in a valley
unproductive of fruit near Thy Sacred House, our Lord! That they may
keep up prayer; therefore make the hearts of some people yearn towards
them and provide them with fruits; haply they may be grateful:[1]*

Now also see the miracle of destiny. This event gained such a high
regard in human history that its sounds still ring in human ears
throughout the world though centuries have passed away. Hajrah and
Ismail (a.s) made their residence at the place, which is now known as
Mecca near the Sanctified Mosque (Masjidul Haram). In those olden days,
it was a barren stony area, which used to hot up so much as to change
the color of human face. There was no water all around and hence it was
without human habitation. But history gives witness that a spring of
water had gushed out from the spot where Ismail (a.s) had rubbed his
tiny heels when thirsty. Thereafter, by and by, people of the Jurham
tribe began to come and settle there and kind Arab women treated Hajrah
and her child Ismail (a.s) with much respect and served them
affectionately.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Ibrahim 14:37

Days continued to pass away until Ismail (a.s) became a youth. One day
when Ibrahim (a.s) got fed up with his people’s disobedience and came
towards Hijaz, he found that everything had changed over there. The
lonely place had turned well inhabited and a big spring of fresh water
was flowing profusely where there was no drop of water when he had left
his wife and son there years ago. God commanded Ibrahim (a.s) to
reconstruct His House (Baitullaah) which was founded by Adam (a.s) and
which was later destroyed in the flood of Noah (a.s).

Accordingly, Ismail (a.s) fetched stones from Mt. Zee Tuwa to Ibrahim
(a.s) who was raising the walls of the Ka’ba. The House was thus
reconstructed. Now it was the duty of Ibrahim (a.s) to call all the
servants of God (every human being) to visit this House of God. In this
way, this building has continued to be till today the center of
worshipping only one God. Not only this, it also is one of the most
ancient monuments of human civilization and culture. It is its first
milestone. Human history will forever remember how an old father had,
with the assistance of his youthful son, built a House, which made Mecca
an honored place in the precious land of Hijaz .[1]

In the meanwhile, one night Ibrahim (a.s) saw in his dream that he was
sacrificing his son in the path of God; that he had cut off the head of
his son Ismail. As dreams of prophets carry revelations from God, next
morning, Ibrahim (a.s) described his dream to his son Ismail (a.s). The
Merciful God has mentioned this in Quran as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Refer verses 125-131 of Surah Baqarah

*So We gave him the good news of a boy, possessing forbearance.*[1]

When Ismail (a.s) became a major and youthful he (Ibrahim) said:

*O my son! Surely I have seen in a dream that I should sacrifice you;
consider then what you see.*[2]

Almighty God had intended to test Ibrahim and his youthful son Ismail
(a.s) and to examine and measure the faith of an old father and also to
see to what extent a youthful son remains steadfast on the true path so
that the whole world may also know how powerful are their intentions and
how solid are the faiths of the divine messengers and heavenly guides.

*Ismail said: O my father! Do what you are commanded; if Allah please,
you will find me of the patient ones.*[3]

When Ibrahim (a.s) carried out Almighty God's command and arranged for
the slaughter, Ismail (a.s) said:

“O my dear father! Please while slaughtering me, tie me tightly with a
rope so that I may not be able to move my hands and legs at the time of
slau­ghtering so that it may not weaken your intention. Please also cut
away my clothes so that they may not redden with my blood, which my dear
mother may see. Sharpen the knife well so that my neck may be severed
swiftly and I may submit my life to God. I say this because death of a
youthful son is very painful to the father.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Saffat 37:101 [2] Ibid 102 [3] Ibid 101

When Ibrahim (a.s) saw that his son was so much obedient to God and so
ready to sacrifice his life willingly he said, “O my son! You have
proved yourself to be my best partner in carrying out God's command.”[1]

Thereafter he embraced his son very lovingly and affectionately and
kissed his head and face. Tears rolled out from eyes of both of them.

History was presenting a very painful scene. There was a distance of two
farsangs (about 12 Kms) between the plains of Mina and the House of God
(Ka’ba). Atmosphere was calm, quiet and serene. There was a sharp knife
in the hand of a weak and aged father. God had commanded him to
slaughter his son with his own hands. Both father and son were
absolutely and faithfully ready to obey divine orders. Ibrahim, the
Friend of God, was an affectionate father and hence his heart was full
of love for his son, especially a son who had been the center of his
hopes and aspirations throughout his life.

But God commanded Ibrahim (a.s) to sacrifice his son in His path. Now
Ibrahim was a messenger of God who could not budge at all from his duty
because he knew well the strategy behind God’s command and was fully
convinced that God is the best well-wisher of His servants. So he
encouraged himself and was ready to cut off his son's head.

Ismail (a.s) said, “O father! Place my face on the ground and blindfold
yourself so that paternal love may not come in the way of obedience to
God.” He did accordingly and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Majmaul Bayan, Tabarsi

everything came to an end within moments. But at that time the conveyor
of revelation announced from Mina saying:

*O Ibrahim You have indeed shown the truth of the vision; surely thus do
We reward the doers of good: Most surely this is a manifest trial. And
We ransomed him with a great sacrifice. And We perpetu­ated (praise) to
him among the later generations. Peace be upon Ibrahim. Thus do We
reward the doers of good. Surely he was one of Our believing
servants.*[1]

“Now slaughter this sheep instead of Ismail so that this ritual may last
till the Day of Judgment.”

Ibrahim returned to the town, gathered the people and informed them that
God Almighty thus tried him and his son. Then both the father and the
son expressed their profound pleasure and happiness over their success.
God Almighty rewarded both of them greatly and it became a ritual to
slaughter animals at Mina during every Hajj. This continues in Islam and
every year Muslims all over the world and pilgrims of Hajj renew this
sacrifice. It became a duty of the Muslims of the entire world to
remember forever the faithfulness and devotional sacrifice of Ibrahim
(a.s) and the exemplary selflessness and self-sacrifice shown by Ismail
(a.s) in his youth. Muslims have to remember this great sacrifice
through animal sacrifice in every part of the world, and to celebrate
feast (Eid) of happiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Saffat 37:103-111

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](02.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](04.htm)
