Abul Fazl Al-abbas
==================

### The Most Luminous Personality Of The Youths Of Bani Hashim

Abul Fazl Abbas was the most prominent young man of the Bani Hashim. He
was the standard bearer of the Imam’s force. He is the epitome of
loyalty and his name would signify devotion for all the days to come.
His mother was Fatima, Ummul Baneen who was from a tribe famed for its
valor and bravery.

This noble lady had four sons of whom Abbas was the eldest. On the day
of Ashura they laid down their lives in such an exemplary manner that
even today their blood is gushing with fervor on the sands of Kerbala
and their names are engraved in the history of Islam.

Abbas in the Arabic language means an awful lion. That is a lion, which
commands intense awe. Thus he was true to his name in awe-inspiring
demeanor. He had a very elegant countenance and a tall physique. When he
mounted a horse his knees came very close to the ears of the animal. In
addition to a well-built stature he possessed unsurpassed physical
strength and great spirituality. He was considered

second only to his brother Imam Husain (a.s) among the youths of Bani
Hashim.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq (a.s) says, “My uncle, Abbas was a man of
enlightened conscience whose faith was very strong. He performed Jihad
in the way of Allah along with Abu Abdillah (Imam Husain) and passed the
divine test with flying colors.”

The fourth Imam has said, “May Allah have mercy on my uncle Abbas who
sacrificed his life for the sake of his brother in such a manner that
both his arms were severed. The Almighty Allah bestowed him with a pair
of wings with the help of which he glides in Paradise with the angels in
the same way as Allah bestowed Ja'far Ibn Abi Talib.

Abbas is a martyr at whom on the Day of Judgment the assembly of all the
martyrs would vie that if only they all had been like him. Abbas had the
honor of being trained under three Imams; that is his respected father,
Amirul Momineen Ali (a.s) and his honorable brothers Imam Hasan and Imam
Husain (a.s). His countenance shone like a full moon and he had
unsurpassed elegance. That is why, on the basis of his collective merits
he was given the honorific of “Moon of the Hashimites” (Qamar-e-Bani
Hashim).

In Kerbala the age of Abbas was thirty-four years. On the basis of this
he was the Chief of the Youths of Bani Hashim and according to the
unanimity of all the writers and historians he was the most influential
and remarkable personality of Kerbala. That is why he was the center of
attention of the Infallible Imam.

Abbas was the standard bearer of the battalion of Imam Husain (a.s).
When except for him none remained on the

side of the Imam he sought permission for Jihad to display his martial
feats also. However, instead of according him permission for Jihad, the
Imam told him to arrange water for the holy family and the thirsty
children who all were on the verge of death.

This ferocious warrior who was second only to Ali (a.s) in his martial
expertise attacked the army of the enemies, which had surrounded the
banks of Euphrates . There were hardened fighters among them, well
versed with the techniques of swordsmanship and archery but Abbas
launched a scathing attack on them dispersing the rows and rows of
militia to clear his way to water. History records that he slew eighty
foes and put his horse into the water. Then he filled the water skin and
like a streak of lightning turned to head towards the Imam’s encampment.

Now he only concentrated on how he could convey this water to the camps.
The thirst of Imam Husain (a.s) and the parched throats of the young
children and ladies had affected him so much that he took a handful of
water and threw it back with distaste saying how could the slave drink
when the master was thirsty? Can there be a better example of loyalty,
devotion and manliness?

On his return the army that had fled also came back and surrounded him
from all sides but the brave one continued to deflect their attacks and
kept on racing his steed towards his destination. When the foes realized
that attacking him from the front was of no use, some of them attacked
from the right severing his right arm. However, the valiant warrior
said, “By Allah! Even if my right hand is gone I will

continue to fight for the sake of religion in this condition.” So saying
he transferred the standard to his left hand.

Soon however a malicious attacker hit from the left and severed his left
hand and the standard came to the ground. At that moment he said, “O
life! Why to fear these infidels? Good news that the mercy of Allah
awaits you! These oppressors have severed my left hand also. O Allah!
Make these unjust people taste the fire of hell.” Just then an arrow
pierced the water skin and all water spilled on the sands. When the
water was gone, Abbas became broken hearted and did not wish that he
should go to the camp anymore. Just then an oppressor hit his head with
a mace, due to which he fell down from the horse.

Who can estimate the valor and courage of this valiant youth? For whom,
when Imam Husain reached his wounded brother, he sat near him and heaved
a sigh of sorrow and said, “O my brother your grief has broken my back.
Now I have also washed my hands off this world. It is the time when
after you the enemies will attack us.” As he worded these statements a
flood of tears flowed from his eyes. An Arabic poet has mentioned this
in a beautiful way:

You must weep most on the young man on whom the Imam also wept.

It is that brother of Husain and the son of Imam Ali.

It is Abul Fazl Abbas bathed in his own blood.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Al-Irshad,* Shaykh Mufid and *NafasulMahmoom*

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](29.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](31.htm)
