The Universal Reformer of Mankind
=================================

### Who Would Appear As An Elegant Young Man

The most remarkable thing about this episode is that according to the
faith of the Shias of Ahle Bayt, from the time of his birth upto his
Minor occultation and from that time throughout his Major occultation,
and even after the golden period of his reappearance he had been and
would be an eyewitness of all the happenings in this world. Years after
years and centuries after centuries the world is making an estimation of
his birth, his childhood, his outstanding companions who are absolutely
exceptional in every aspect. Islam has also mentioned a great deal about
this young miraculous child.

Two centuries before his birth, there was a general declaration by the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and Imams that the ninth descendant of Imam
Husain (a.s) would have a concealed birth resembling that of Prophet
Musa (a.s).

None but very few selected people would know about his birth and this
information would be restricted only among the Shia community. He would
have two occultations. One shall be a Minor occultation and the other
Major. That is a short and a prolonged disappearance. When mankind would

fall into despondence and everywhere there shall be hopelessness, hunger
and poverty and every kind of calamity, injustice and oppression, the
Almighty Allah would cause his reappearance in the form of a
forty-year-old youth though he would have lived for hundreds of years.
He would be having a well-built and strong physique. He would be much
above the creatures from the aspect of knowledge, intelligence and
physical prowess.

Ten thousand exceptional companions of his would provide help and
assistance to the afflicted people of the world. The Imam would unearth
the hidden treasures of the earth. He would make the barren earth full
of vegetation. He would correct all the evils and through his beneficial
programs remove the widespread laziness, sloth and weakness from the
people of the world and make the weak-willed and indolent people full of
zest and a new life. That is he would enliven the earth once more.
Universal justice shall be established and the brotherhood of mankind
shall be given the greatest prominence. His government would have
innumerable programs of uplifting the conditions of the people of the
world. There would be no government and no religion in the world except
the rulership of the Progeny of Muhammad and the religion of Islam.

Since traditions had clearly mentioned that the ninth descendant of Imam
Husain (a.s) would destroy all oppression in the world, the Bani Abbas
Caliph summoned Imams Ali Naqi and Hasan Askari (a.s) so that he could
keep a close surveillance on them since they were the tenth and the
eleventh Imams of the Shias. Mutawakkil also wanted to assure that Imam
Hasan Askari (a.s) does not

marry since he was supposed to father a male child who would be the
expected Mahdi.

In spite of all the restrictions and surveillance that Mutawakkil had
arranged for this purpose, Imam Mahdi (a.s) was born in 255 A.H. in an
utmost concealed manner. Imam Askari (a.s) lived for another five years
after his birth and after that he was martyred by poison. During these
five years, the most selected people of the community who were
trustworthy, reliable and pious had the honor of seeing Imam Mahdi
(a.s). These people posed religious questions in order to become certain
of his high station.

This is the twelfth Imam through whom the Almighty desired to reform
this material world so that weak and suppressed people could live
peacefully in it and universal justice and equity is established. The
people could move about freely and they learn to live a life of
righteousness. Also that they may benefit from God-given bounties
depending upon their eligibility and disposition. The Imam may also
eradicate every type of injustice and oppression, force and compulsion,
illness, griefs, difficulties, supervision, opposition, racial and color
discrimination and the mankind can see how man can lead a free life.

When his respected father passed away from this temporal world he was
only five years old. In this period of five years, none but some of the
most trusted and reliable persons knew that Imam Askari (a.s) had a son.
The male and female spies appointed by the caliph continued to assure
the caliph that the Imam was issueless. That is the reason that Ja'far,
the Imam’s brother, who was an evildoer and an agent of the caliph,
stepped forward to recite the funeral prayer. At that moment an
extremely beautiful and

elegant child came out from behind the curtain and came to Ja'far, the
liar and pulled him aside saying, “Uncle! I would recite the funeral
prayer of my respected father.”

The young lad recited the funeral prayers then passed through the
gathering and left the room. All those present there came to know that
the eleventh Imam had not passed away childless. When the caliph was
informed about this, he sent his soldiers who searched every room, every
nook and corner of the house to find the boy and arrest him. So that he
may be put to death and the world can be rid of the twelfth Imam. The
search party inspected the whole house but the Imam was not to be found
anywhere. He went into the cellar of his house and from there he
disappeared to reappear when Allah, the Almighty wills; and that he may
fill the earth with justice and equity like it would have been full of
injustice and oppression.

Abu Sult Harwi asked Imam Reza (a.s), “What would be the signs of your
Qaem at the time of his reappearance?” Imam replied, “His sign is that
he would be senior in age but in the view of people he would appear to
be a man of forty years or even less. Another sign is that, even through
the passage of time he will not age till the time he passes away. He
would always remain in the same condition of youth.”

Imam Sadiq (a.s) says, “Our Qaem would appear in the form of an elegant
youth while the people would say in surprise: We were expecting him to
be an aged gentlemen.”

Reyan ibn Sult asked Imam Reza (a.s), “Are you the master of affair?”
The Imam replied, “I am not the master of the affair, who would fill the
earth with justice and equity like it would be filled with injustice and
oppression. You see that there is weakness and senility in my body. That
is why

I cannot be the master of affair. Master of affair is the one who at the
time of his reappearance would be senior in age but his appearance would
that of a youth and his body shall be strong.”

If he wants he could catch hold of a huge tree and uproot it, it would
not be impossible for him. Thus when he stands between two mountains and
raises a cry the huge boulders of the mountains would fragment into
pebbles and begin falling to the earth. He is my fourth descendant. As
long as Allah wills he would remain in concealment and when he reappears
he would fill the earth with justice and equity like it would be filled
with injustice and inequity.”

Amirul Momineen (a.s) says, “In the last days of calamity and ignorance
of the people, God will appoint a person and will support him and
protect his followers through angels. He will help him through
miraculous signs and give him victory over all the people of the world,
so that whether they like it or not they will convert to the true
religion. He will fill the earth with justice and equity, and brilliance
and rationality. The distances between places will shrink for him in
such a way that no unbeliever will remain except that (the appointed
one) will bring (to him) faith, and no sinful person would remain except
that he will become pious. Even the beasts would live freely. The
fertility of the earth would increase. Every part of the earth would be
covered with vegetation. Bounties would descend from the sky and the
earth would expose its hidden treasures. He would rule the earth from
the east to the west for forty years. Those would be fortunate who are
born during his divine rule and listen to the words spoken by him.”[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Refer *Mahdi Maood,* Vol. 13, Biharul Anwar, Allamah Majlisi

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](32.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](34.htm)
