Yusuf - the Truthful One
========================

### Human History’s Matchless Youth Having An Iron Will And A Unique Foresight

Yusuf (a.s) was the son of Prophet Yaqub (a.s) the son of Ishaq (a.s),
the son of Ibrahim through his first wife Sarah. Yusuf (a.s) once saw in
his dream that, “the stars, the sun and the moon have come down on earth
and they are bowing to him.” When Yusuf (a.s) mentioned this dream to
his dear father Yaqub, the latter said, “You will acquire a very high
rank. So much so that your father, mother and eleven brothers would bow
down before you to accord you respect.” Then he added, “Do not mention
this dream to your brothers otherwise they will burn in jealousy and may
create some trouble.”

The brothers anyway came to know about the dream and Yaqub’s
interpretation thereof. As a reaction, they took, by some excuse, Yusuf
(a.s) to a forest out of Canaan in Palestine . There they threw him in a
well. Then they smeared Yusuf’s shirt in wolf’s blood and brought that
shirt to their father and said weeping that a wolf had devoured Yusuf
(a.s).

But actually Yusuf (a.s) was safe and sound in that well. After a few
days a caravan proceeding towards Egypt passed by that well. They
lowered a bucket in that well and Yusuf (a.s) came out in that bucket.
The caravan men took Yusuf (a.s) to a slave market and sold him away. At
that time Yusuf (a.s) was only nine years old. The person who bought
Yusuf (a.s) was the King of Egypt having in his hands all power in the
country. The Holy Quran has mentioned him as the Aziz of Egypt. The king
of Egypt was one of the Arab Pharaohs who ruled over Egypt for
centuries.[1] The Aziz of Egypt was almost sure that Yusuf (a.s)
belonged to a respectable family and was of a noble race. So he told his
wife, Zulaikha, “Take full care of him. Perhaps he can be very useful to
us and maybe I could take him as a son.”

Zulaikha was a very beautiful and pompous woman while the Aziz was
sexually impotent, therefore he was unable to satisfy her sexual urges.
On the other hand, Yusuf (a.s) who had entered this royal house was so
handsome, healthy and attractive due to his good manners that he
immediately won the love of anyone who saw him once. As an added value
to his noble personality, besides being very handsome he was also
extremely modest. This had made him doubly attractive.

Yusuf (a.s) had passed nine years in the house of Zulaikha. During all
these times, Zulaikha used to sit by the side of Yusuf (a.s). Gradually
she began to be infatuated with Yusuf (a.s). This misplaced love and the
elegance of Yusuf (a.s) by

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Maybe he was from the line of Pharaohs, one ofwhom had confronted
Musa (a.s.) and who were very oppressive rulers of theirtimes.

and by broke down all the threads of Zulaikha’s patience and she became
almost mad after him. Now she saw only Yusuf (a.s) all the time even
during her dreams.

One day when the Aziz of Egypt had gone to Saqooyah for some business of
the state, Zulaikha called Yusuf (a.s) in her bedroom. She had adorned
and beautified herself attractively. When Yusuf (a.s) entered her room,
she locked up all doors and told Yusuf (a.s), “O Yusuf (a.s)! Now I am
in your control and possession.” Yusuf (a.s) replied, “I seek protection
from God. I will never indulge in this evil affair. You are the wife of
the Aziz of Egypt. I cannot ever encroach upon his rights. He has done
me favors and provided me all kinds of facilities in his palace. How can
I be dishonest to him?” Saying this, Yusuf (a.s) ran towards the door so
that he could save himself from the sin. Zulaikha also ran after him and
caught up the hind portion of his shirt. She tried hard to draw him back
to her room. In this tussle, a part of Yusuf’s shirt was torn and
remained in the hands of Zulaikha. Yusuf (a.s) was successful in running
out of her room.

Accidentally the husband of Zulaikha, the Aziz of Egypt returned from
his journey and saw this strange episode. Zulaikha at once made an
allegation against Yusuf (a.s) saying, “If somebody attacks the honor of
your wife, the only punishment of such a crime is either imprisonment or
severe torture.” Yusuf (a.s) said, “This is a lie. I never intended
anything evil nor had I at all advanced towards Zulaikha. It was only
she who had ordered me to come to her room and only her intention was
evil.” The Aziz saw that the hind part of Yusuf’s shirt was torn. So he
understood that Zulaikha was the guilty one and he

retorted, “All this is a dishonesty and dishonesty of women. In fact you
are the offender.”

It is said proverbially that love and musk fragrance cannot remain
hidden; it is necessarily manifested. So the secret of Zulaikha’s love
and distress too became open. Women of Egypt began to gossip that
Zulaikha had lost her heart to a slave from Canaan and that she was mad
after him. Thus she became a target of taunts among the ladies of Egypt
.

When Zulaikha became aware of her disgrace, she invited the leading
ladies of the town for a feast in her palace. She adorned her apartment;
spread valuable carpets on the floor and placed precious pillows by
walls. When the women of Egypt’s high society arrived in the profusely
decorated apartment of Zulaikha, she made all of them sit comfortably on
the soft seats and according to the custom in vogue in those days, gave
everyone of them a lemon and a knife and then said, “I request all the
honorable ladies to please cut this lemon when Yusuf (a.s) is made to
pass before us.” Then she commanded that Yusuf (a.s) should be brought
over there. Accordingly Yusuf (a.s) arrived and passed away before them
as ordered. When the eyes of the ladies fell on that handsome youthful
gentleman, and they saw his radiant face and his admirable stature all
of them became uncontrollable and, in this state of awe cut their
fingers instead of the fruits. All exclaimed at once, “By God! Yusuf
(a.s) is not a man. Rather he is an angel coming down from the heavens!”

Zulaikha found this occasion fit for her and she said, “This is the man
about whom you are taunting and maligning me. Just listen; you have
observed him only for a split second

whereas I have remained before him for years. Now when the situation has
come to this extent I, hereby, announce that if he does not do what I
command him he will either pass his life in prison or I will disgrace
him in such a way that he will not be able to come out in the open.”

In the words of the Holy Quran:

*So, when she heard of their sly talk she sent for them and prepared for
them a repast, and gave each of them a knife, and said (to Yusuf): come
forth to them. So when they saw him, they deemed him great, and cut
their hands (in amazement), and said: Remote is Allah (from
imperfection); this is not a mortal; this is but a noble angel.*[1]

Many ladies belonging to the high society of Egypt saw that a great
personality was serving in the palace of Zulaikha and they cut off their
fingers being struck by his elegance! Among them were even some who at
once desired to be embraced by Yusuf(a.s)!

When Yusuf (a.s) found himself in a strange situation wherein, on one
hand, his handsome youthfulness had made Zulaikha madly desirous of him,
so many high status ladies of Egyptian elite were keeping their eyes on
him and also that Zulaikha had already threatened that he would be
jailed if he did not submit to her desire, he raised his hands towards
the heavens praying to the Almighty God:

*My Lord! The prison is dearer to me than that to which they invite me;
and if Thou turn not away their device from me, I will yearn towards
them and become (one) of the ignorant.* [2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surah Yusuf 12:31 [2] Surah Yusuf 12:33

Prophet Yusuf (a.s) was a messenger of God. He was as steadfast as a
rock in his stand. Zulaikha and other noble ladies of Egypt did not like
it. Finally Yusuf (a.s) was sent to jail at the behest of Zulaikha. On
the day of his imprisonment two other men were brought to that jail. One
of them was a bartender for the Pharaoh and another a baker in the royal
kitchen. Both were charged with allegations of poisoning the king. These
inmates looked at Yusuf (a.s) with full respect saying:[1]

*Surely we see you to be of the doers of good.*[2]

By and by, two years passed away in which Yusuf (a.s) remained with the
said two inmates. During these years, whenever these prisoners saw a
dream they narrated it to Yusuf (a.s) and the latter gave its
interpretation, which came true. One day both the prisoners came to
Yusuf (a.s) and described their dreams to him. One had seen a true dream
and the other mentioned an untrue vision. Yusuf (a.s) interpreted that
the bartender would be freed and reinstated in his job whereas the baker
who had narrated a false dream would be hanged. What Yusuf (a.s) said
came true.

After a long time, Pharaoh saw a dreadful dream. He saw that there were
seven thin cows and seven healthy and fat cows and that the fat cows ate
up the thin cows; also that there were seven dry and seven fresh green
clusters of corn, which were destroyed. The Pharaoh called interpreters
of dreams but all of them said that his dream was too confusing to be
interpreted by them and hence they were

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Almighty God has always remembered His messengerslike this. [2]
Surah Yusuf 12:36

helpless. Now the bartender who had spent two years in jail was also
present and he recalled his experience to Pharaoh, “I know a man who can
interpret your dream. His name is Yusuf and he is now in jail.”

Pharaoh ordered his men to go to the prison and narrate his dream to
Yusuf and get his interpretation. So some people went to jail and
requested Yusuf to interpret the royal dream. Yusuf (a.s) said, “Go to
your king and tell him that there will come seven years of full and
plentiful crops followed by another seven years of severe famine. So you
should keep aside the required quantity of grain produced in the first
seven years and store up the rest just as the corn is stored safely in
its clusters. The grain so saved should be utilized for feeding the
famine-struck people in the next seven years of draught so that people
may not starve.”

The Pharaoh was much pleased with such a wise advice of Yusuf (a.s) who
was leading a prisoner’s life. He was also astonished with Yusuf’s
intelligence and foresight. He called Yusuf (a.s) to his court.

When the king’s men approached Yusuf (a.s) in jail to take him to the
king, Yusuf said, “Go back to your king and ask him to explain why I was
imprisoned? What was my offense? The ruler should first inquire into
this matter and a find out why the high society women of Egypt had cut
their fingers in Zulaikha’s apartment? My God knows full well why they
did thus?”

The Pharaoh was struck with wonder by Yusuf’s reply. He summoned the
elite women to his court and asked for their explanation. All of them at
once replied that Yusuf (a.s) was not at all at fault. He was totally
innocent. Now Zulaikha’s

love spoke up truly. She got up and revealed the entire episode. She
said, “Yusuf (a.s) is not guilty on any account. It was I who had called
Yusuf (a.s) to my bedroom. What Yusuf is saying is hundred percent true.
His character is absolutely blotless and clean.”

Then the Pharaoh sent a message to Yusuf (a.s) conveying to him that
Zulaikha had confessed her sin and it has been fully proved that he was
quite unjustly sent to jail. “You are not guilty. Please come out of
prison with full respect and honor and see for yourself what will happen
to Zulaikha and the concerned womenfolk. They will be punished for their
offence.”

Yusuf (a.s) entered the court with all honor and told the Pharaoh, “I do
not wish that the ladies be punished.” After a brief but exhaustive talk
with Yusuf (a.s) the king was so much impressed by Yusuf’s all round
personality, intelligence and honesty that he at once gave up all of his
royal state affairs and requested Yusuf (a.s) to take the charge of the
state as he saw that it would make Egypt prosperous and the people of
his country happy during the aforementioned years of prosperity followed
by the said seven years of famine. Taking up the state affairs in his
hands, Yusuf (a.s) ordered that all the land should be brought under
cultivation; that after harvest the produce should be preserved and that
enough stock be stored up for use in time of need.

Seven years passed away gradually giving abundant crop. A big quantity
of it was stored up. Then came the time of draught. People felt severe
shortage of food grains and

became fearful of starving. Yusuf (a.s) made the following arrangements
for selling the stored stuff:

The First Year of Famine: The grain was sold in exchange of gold and
silver. Thus all the precious metal in possession of people was
transferred to the state treasury.

The Second Year of Famine: Grain was sold in exchange of ornaments,
jewels and arms etc to the populace. Thus all precious things came in
public trust.

The Third Year of Famine: Wheat was sold to people in exchange of
animals like cows, sheep and goats, which transferred all animals to
state control.

The Fourth Year: State acquired all slaves and bondmaids in exchange of
wheat.

Fifth Year: People sold their houses and bought wheat from the state to
save their lives.

Sixth Year: People sold all of their private irrigation fields and
canals to state for buying wheat. Thus all this facility came in state
control.

Seventh Year: Wheat was sold on condition that every man and woman would
serve as a state servant. Thus everyone in populace became slaves to the
state.

In this way Yusuf (a.s) became the controller of all the people and
their possessions. No one starved or remained hungry and all began to
say that Egypt had never before seen such an intelligent ruler who saved
the people in extremely severe years of famine unprecedented in history.

When the emergency was over, Yusuf (a.s) approached the Pharaoh and
said, “I never wanted to make people, through

these reforms, feel that they are my slaves as it would only mean that a
calamity called starvation turned into the trouble called slavery or
bondage. You saw that Almighty Allah saved the people through my hands.”
The Pharaoh replied, “You are absolutely right. Now the entire populace
of Egypt is under your control. It is now for you to deal with them as
you please.”

Prophet Yusuf (a.s) said, “I call God Almighty to witness. I believe
that Allah is Omnipresent and Omniscient. Thereafter I make you a
witness and say that I have freed each and everyone of the countrymen. I
am returning all the things, which were acquired from them to them, that
they may once again live a happy and prosperous life.”

The Pharaoh who had now become aged died after some time. Yusuf (a.s)
became the ruler of Egypt both according to the custom in vogue and also
as a result of his popular service to the people and he came to be known
as the Aziz of Egypt. His fame spread far and wide all around.

Thereafter Yusuf (a.s) called Zulaikha who had become a widow following
the death of the Aziz of Egypt and asked her as to why did she do all
that; why she disgraced herself and jailed him for years? Zulaikha
replied, “Satan had, at that time excited me to do wrong. I am very
sorry for that. Now I have put faith in your God.” Then Yusuf (a.s)
proposed to marry Zulaikha, which she accepted. Then Yusuf (a.s) prayed
to Almighty Allah. “My Lord! Zulaikha is very much repentant over her
offence. You are All-powerful. Kindly return her youth to her.” Yusuf’s
prayer was answered by God and Zulaikha became youthful once again.

But now her beauty had doubled. Thus started the new life of Yusuf
(a.s).

The news about the new generous ruler reached Prophet Yaqub (a.s) and
his other sons. As they also were hit by famine they intended to go to
Egypt for importing grains to Palestine . So Yusuf’s brothers made
another journey to Egypt . In their second journey they found that this
ruler was Yusuf (a.s) whom they had thrown into a well. They told one
another, “How wonderful that Yusuf (a.s) not only came out of the well
but also attained such status that we now see him as the Aziz of Egypt!”
On the other hand they were also feeling guilty and were afraid what
would happen if Yusuf (a.s) recognized them.

But Yusuf (a.s) knew them very well. He called them to himself and told
them all that had happened. The brothers bowed their heads in shame.
Prophet Yusuf (a.s) gave pardon to all of them, behaved very nicely with
them and also invited them along with another brother and their parents
to Egypt .

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](03.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](05.htm)
