Muhammad Ibn Babawayh
=====================

### An Enlightened Adolescent And A Teacher Of Aged Pupils

Muhammad ibn Babawayh, known as Shaykh Sadooq in the world of knowledge,
lived in the fourth century Hijri. He is considered the father of the
science of traditions and is a well-known personality of Shias. His
father was Ali Ibn Babawayh and he was the most prominent scholar of Qom
and he wrote twenty books, which are well known in the literary circles.
He had married the daughter of his uncle but even after the passage of
so many years they did not have any issue. In 305 A.H. he traveled to
Baghdad and met Husayn Ibn Rauh Nawbakhti, the special deputy of the
twelfth Imam (a.s) and through him sent a request letter to the Imam of
the time. Husain ibn Rauh conveyed his request to the Imam who replied
as follows:

“You will not have any children with this wife. I have petitioned Allah
in this regard and soon you will get two righteous and worthy sons from
a lady of Daylam.” Shaykh Sadooq has mentioned this episode in the
introduction to his book, *Kamal*

*uddin*. Thus not many days passed when Ali Ibn Babawayh married a
Dailamite lady and two sons were born through her. One he named Muhammad
and other Husain. The two became well known scholars of their time.

The elder was Muhammad who later became famous as Shaykh Sadooq. He had
extraordinary intelligence and an analytical mind and he was
incomparable in his intellect, wisdom and perfections.

Muhammad was born in Qom . He first studied under his respected father,
and then received instructions from Muhammad ibn Walid Qummi and other
scholars of Qom . Not much time passed when he earned for himself a
distinguished place in the literary circles.

While yet in his youth he occupied the position of a teacher and also
initiated the work of writing and compilation. His honorable father
expired in 329 A.H. and from that very year he acquired the position of
“point of reference” (Marjaiyat) and the people of areas around Qom used
to refer to him regarding their problems and religious questions.

Traditionalists and jurists, senior in age used to attend his classes.
Despite the fact that he had just stepped into his youth, many senior
scholars used to attend his daily lectures on the science of traditions.
This proves that he possessed extraordinary capabilities and an
exceptional memory.

Scholars of traditions and intellectuals were perplexed at his memory
and intellectual perfections. And when people expressed their
astonishment to him he said, “What is astonishing about it? I am born
through the prayers of the Imam of the time.”

When his fame spread beyond the area Ruknud Dawla the ruler of Rayy
invited him. He went to Rayy upon the royal invitation where he was
accorded the most honorable welcome by the vizier, Sahib ibn Abbad. Thus
he spent most

of his life in Rayy. The spiritually inclined Shias of this province
used to visit him and benefit from his knowledge.

Later Ibn Babawayh traveled to Khorasan, Nishapur, and Balkh and
performed the Hajj pilgrimage and Ziarat of the holy Imams in Hijaz and
Iraq . During his stay in Kufa and Baghdad , the Shias there gained from
his religious knowledge and continued to visit him one after the other.
Then he returned to Iran and passed away in Rayy in the year 381 A.H.
Many of his students later became famous as great scholars of their
times, like Shaykh Mufid and Husain ibn Ubaidullah Ghazaeri etc.

Shaykh Sadooq has written three hundred books on religious sciences, of
which the most important are Man *La Yahzarul Faqih,* which is one of
the four canonical books of Shias. Other famous books, *Khisal, Maniul
Akhbar, Ilalush Sharai, Itiqadat, Uyun Akhbar Reza* and *Tawheed.*

The tradition scholars and jurists of the Shia world look upon Shaykh
Sadooq with utmost respect due to his scholarly services and since the
last thousand years till today they all agree about his greatness,
reliability, truthfulness and insight. They consider him so well versed
in the science of traditions that they say, ‘as if he understands even
the modulation and accent of Ahle Bayt (a.s)’.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](39.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](41.htm)
