Sayyid Razi
===========

### The Young Scholar Of Great Fame Who Had Just Entered Youth

Doubtlessly, Sayyid Razi is the most famed Shia scholar and he possessed
an enlightened disposition and was a high caliber intellectual. He is
the luminous star that shone on the skies of Baghdad , which had always
been the center of the world of knowledge in every age. This brilliant
scholar was born in 359 A.H. in the city of Baghdad .

He belonged to a family, every member of which, whether male or female
possessed a sound mind, was accomplished in every aspect and faithful to
religious laws. All of them were appointed to rear and train this child.
During his childhood itself he was endowed with all the good qualities
and fine traits of character and intellect. His fame began to spread
while he was just a young boy and people prophesied that one day he
would become a distinguished scholar.

When Sayyid Razi joined the school he astonished his teacher and
classmates by his exceptional abilities. Therefore as he scaled the
steps of progress his retractors

and enemies also increased. But there also was no dearth of
intellectuals who accorded him due respect and honor.

Thus among the strange anecdotes connected with his life is also the
mention about the fact that his classmates and teachers used to be
perplexed at his accomplishments. Sayyid Razi and his brother Sayyid
Murtada became famous scholars in their adolescence when they obtained
knowledge of religious jurisprudence and other sciences from their
teacher Shaykh Mufid. Sayyid Razi studied *Sharh Usul-e-Khamsa* and
*Al-Umdah* under Qadi Abdul Jabbar the renowned Mutazalite scholar of
Sunni faith. In the same way he studied traditions under Muhammad ibn
Imran Murzabani and Abu Musa Talakbar, both of whom were great Shia
scholars.

According to the report of Abu Hafs ibn Umar Kattani, his teacher in
jurisprudence was Abu Wabi and in recitation it was Muhammad ibn Amwani
Khwarezmi and it is said that he studied *Tahani* under Muhammad Asadi
Ikfani and Syntax and Arabic grammar from Ali Ibn Isa Rumani. He was
trained in prosody under Abu Ishaq Zajjaj, who was considered the father
of prosody. He obtained knowledge of rhyming from Akhfash, who is
considered a master of Arabic grammar. He also studied some Arabic under
Ibn Haba and eloquence and literature under Ibn Nabaya. Sayyid Razi had
obtained expertise in all the above-mentioned sciences even before he
reached the age of maturity, and he began to be considered an expert of
Arabic language and literature.

This young lad, whose fame spread among the common people as well as the
nobles regarding his intellectual

capacities and his insight, began to compose verse while he was yet ten
years old. When he was twelve he composed a panegyric in the honor of
his chaste and accomplished mother, which reflected the extent of his
literary merits. A collection of the panegyrics he composed at that age
is present and people with literary taste read it and are perplexed at
his deep insight, control over the language and God-given intellectual
capabilities.

He began to write and teach from the age of eighteen. By the time he was
twenty he had mastered all the sciences of his age.

Sayyid Razi was very much obsessed about acquiring knowledge. If he had
any opportunity to learn something from anybody he did not hesitate to
disregard his self-esteem and went ahead to learn it. In this matter he
did not discriminate between Shia or Sunni, Muslim or non-Muslim.

By the time he was twenty he had become a master of jurisprudence,
traditions, exegesis of Quran and other religious sciences in Arabic.
According to Thalabi who was his contemporary: Sayyid Razi was the
inheritor of his ancestor Abu Talib as regards his literary arts. This
was so because great luminaries of the literary world have appeared in
the progeny of Abu Talib.

Though many great men of letters lived during the Buwayhid period there
was none who could surpass the eloquence and literary merits of Sayyid
Razi either in prose or poetry.

Sahib ibn Abbad was a scholar and a litterateur of the Buwayhid dynasty.
He served the royalty as a vizier. He had

collected the couplets of Mutanabbi, a renowned poet of Arabia that he
used to quote now and then. When he heard the verses of Sayyid Razi, he
sent a messenger to him with instructions that he should compile the
verses of Sayyid Razi for him. At that time Sayyid Razi was twenty-six
years old.

When he was twenty-three, he composed an ode about Abu Tahir Nasirud
Dawla. Such were the beautiful words and expressions of this composition
that the teacher of Sayyid Razi, “Janna” wrote a commentary on the
verses. Thus at such a young age he earned great accolades from his
teacher. Such a relationship between a teacher and a student is rare.

Sayyid Razi was a man of self-respect, honor, chastity, generosity and
all the perfect qualities. There was none who could equal him during his
time. He was very particular in performing religious duties. He did not
like flattery and false praise.

He never accepted any recompense for the verses he composed in honor of
the rulers. He refused many times the gifts sent by Bahaud Dawla
Dailami. Even when he composed verses in praise of his own father and
the father tried to make a present to him in return he refused to accept
it saying: Is gift a recompense of a couplet? But Sayed Razi himself was
very generous and charitable.

Sayyid Razi had a friend named Abu Ishaq. For years they communicated
through letters. This person was a Sabian and a man of letters of his
time. He also had mystic tendencies. When he died Sayyid Razi composed a
dirge in his favor while the Ahle Sunnat people made fun of him. Upon
this Sayyid Razi justified, “I have expressed sorrow at

the passing away of a man of letters and the loss incurred to the
literary world. I am not concerned about the way he looked or what type
of body he had.”

Before Sayyid Razi, his father was the Amir of Hajj for the Shia
pilgrims and also an ambassador between different Islamic kingdoms. He
was responsible for working out treaties and agreements between various
principalities. After his demise the exalted post came to Sayyid Razi
when he was just twenty-one years old. This proves the extraordinary
merits and excellence of this young scholar.

The duty of the Amir of Hajj was to make arrangements for the Hajj
pilgrims and provide them with all the facilities on the way to and from
Mecca and Medina . The curatorship of the two holy sanctuaries were also
included in this.

Though previously this duty was discharged by his father and brother
jointly, now the responsibility was solely his at the age of twenty-one.

Sayyid Razi was only 47 years old when he passed away from this world in
406 A.H. leaving behind a legacy for those in quest of knowledge. The
voice of his writings still echoes in the world of knowledge.

The news of the untimely and sudden demise of Sayyid Razi spread in the
city like forest fire. People rushed barefoot to his residence. All the
scholars, intellectuals and jurists whether Shia or Sunni rushed to
participate in his funeral. His elder brother, Sayyid Murtada was so
shocked that he saw the bier once and went to the shrine of the seventh
Imam and sat there in grief. He did not even have the strength to
accompany the funeral procession.

The Shia vizier, Fakhrul Mulk performed the funeral prayer and buried
the late scholar. Then he came to the shrine of the seventh Imam and
took Sayyid Murtada back to his residence from there. We should remember
that Sayyid Razi is the compiler of *Nahjul Balagha,* which is a book
second in importance only to the Holy Quran. Shias and Sunnis both
accept that it is a priceless gift for the world of Islam.

*Nahjul Balagha* is such a book that since the time it was compiled till
today, that is, even after a thousand years, it remains an object of
attention for the litterateurs, scholars and intellectuals of the world.
Not only this, it also shows the high merits of the compiler and his
enlightened thinking.

Sayyid Razi collected the sermons, letters, advices and sayings of his
ancestor Amirul Momineen (a.s) and arranged them in a beautiful way. The
book contains the secrets of a successful life and a prosperous
hereafter. Treasures of wisdom are found in this book of the sayings and
writings of the Master of the Faithful. The arrangement is very
convenient and presentable. Sayyid Razi labored a great deal sifting
through the multitudes of books and manuscripts to make the collection.
In addition to this he wrote an eloquent and meaningful introduction
where he mentioned subtle points and delicate matters of the expressions
of Ali (a.s).

Sayyid Razi has performed such a magnificent service by compiling this
book that it would continue to provide enlightenment to all those who
are in search of knowledge and research.

This is so because the personality of Ali (a.s) is only next to the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) that provides directions for salvation to mankind.
Thus such a comprehensive, authoritative and a perfect book is a great
service to mankind in general and the Shias in particular.

Thus the influences of Sayyid Razi would endure as long as *Nahjul
Balagha* survives.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Yatimatud Dahr,* Thalabi Vol. 3 pg. 116, *Lisanul Mizan,* Ibn Hajar
Vol. 5 Pg. 141, *Ad-DarajatulRafia* Pg. 268, *Rawdatul Jannat* etc.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](40.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](42.htm)
