Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin
==================

### The Son Of Allamah Hilli

Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin, Muhammad, the worthy son of Allamah Hilli is among
the enlightened minds of the Shias. Like his father Allamah Hilli this
young man was such a great juristic scholar that he became famous in the
world of knowledge. Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin was born in the Islamic month of
Jamadius Thani in 682 A.H. in his native town of Hilla , which was a
center of education and was situated in southern Iraq . His father, his
grandfather, Sadidul Deen and the mentor of his father, Muhaqqiq Hilli
were all jurists of the Shia faith and each of them holds a special
place in the field of Islamic knowledge.

Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin obtained his primary education and knowledge of the
prevalent sciences of that time like, theology, logic and traditions
etc. from his father. It is noteworthy that he had already completed his
studies in the above sciences before he reached the age of maturity.

The famous personality, Martyr Qadi Nurullah Shustari writes in his
book, *Majlisul Momineen:* Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin was the revivalist of the
textual and rational sciences. He was a researcher of great insight and
had a broad vision.

Thus a Shafei intellectual narrates that when he came to the court of
Sultan Muhammad Khuda Banda in Qazwin with his father he showed himself
to be an accomplished and meritorious personality.

Hafiz Abroo writes in *Majma-ut-Tawarikh* that in 709 A.H. when Sultan
Muhammad Khuda Banda accepted Shiaism at the behest of Allamah Hilli,
Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin accompanied his father to Iran . At that time his age
was twenty-five years and in those days he was considered a first class
scholar.

Qadi Nurullah says that due to the teachings and training of his
respected father the brilliance of Ijtihad (Islamic jurisprudence) shone
from his forehead. He himself writes in his commentary on *Qawaid* that
he suggested to his father to write a comprehensive book on Shia Islamic
Jurisprudence. He says that at that time he had already studied numerous
books of Shia scholars. Qadi Nurullah says that at the time his age must
not be more than ten years because the difference between his year of
birth and the writing of *Qawaid* is less than that. Therefore when his
father wrote it he had already become a Mujtahid. However, it is not
surprising because there are instances of people mastering the religious
sciences even at the age of as young as four years. An example is of
Shaykh Taqiuddin Hasan ibn Dawood, a friend and classmate of Sayyid
Ghayasuddin (Abdul Karim) Ibn Tawus, who had become needless of a
teacher at the age of four.

It is narrated from Ibrahim ibn Saeed Jauhari that he saw a four-year
child being brought in arms to the court of caliph Mamun the Abbaside.
The child recited the Holy Quran and

spoke about religious topics, and as his age demanded when he felt
hungry he began to cry like ordinary children. Ibn Sina has also
testified to this episode.

The famous jurist and intellectual Muhammad ibn Hasan Isfahani, known by
the title of Fazil-e-Hindi writes in the beginning of *Kashful Itham,*
which is a commentary on Allamah Hilli’s *Qawaid* quoting the words of
Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin that, “It is possible that many people may be
surprised how a ten-year-old lad could reach the level of jurisprudence.
But I know that he was born in 682 A.H. and his father wrote in 692 or
693 A.H. that Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin has at the age of ten already crossed
the last step of Ijtihad. Then he writes that it is the grace of Allah.
He bestows it to whomsoever He wishes; nothing is beyond His power.

However, the most noteworthy point is that Allamah Hilli addresses
Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin and says, “O my son! I have written in detail for you
in this book all the Islamic laws and religious verdicts.”

Thus in other words the text of this book is also very eloquent and very
unambiguous.

As we have mentioned above, Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin accomplished the lofty
levels of an intellectual and scholarly qualities while in his youth.
The father and son were unique in their level of intellectual merits.
When they reached Hilla from Iran they again focused their attention on
the completion of their writings and immersed themselves in teaching and
training students who went out to become famous scholars whose fame
still endures in the world of knowledge. The most famous student was
Shahid Awwal, the first martyr, who is a great Shia luminary.

Important writings of Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin include *Sharh Mubadi Al-Usul,
Sharh Tahzibul Usul, Sharh Nahjul Mustarshideen* and *Al-Fawaid dar
Sharh Mushkilate Qawaid.* Most of these were commentaries on the books
of his father and they show the depth of his insight.

Though Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin occupied an outstanding position in the field
of religious knowledge, he also possessed incomparable expertise in
literature and ethics. One never finds such a father and son pair who in
spite of each of them being so much accomplished accorded so much
respect and honor for each other.

For example Allamah Hilli writes in the introduction of his book,
*Alfayn* that consists of two thousand proofs in support of the Imamate
of Ali (a.s), “I have dictated the text of this book at the behest of my
dear son, Muhammad. May Allah improve his affairs of the world and the
Hereafter. He is also never deficient in according honor and respect to
his parents. May Allah give him the joys of the two worlds as he spends
all his mental and emotional capacities in my obedience. I am satisfied
with his words and actions.”

Allamah Hilli completed the last volume of this book in the year he
traveled to Iran with his son who was twenty-five years old at that
time.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](42.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](44.htm)
