Amina Begum
===========

### The Brilliant Daughter Of Allamah Majlisi

The family of Allamah Majlisi has to its credit incomparable services
for the cause of Islam four hundred years ago in Iran especially and the
world in general. Allamah Majlisi is known as Majlisi, the second. He
was the son of Mulla Muhammad Taqi Majlisi or Majlisi, the first; and
his name was Mulla Muhammad Baqir. He is the author of the Islamic
Encyclopedia titled, *Biharul Anwar*. Both these gentlemen are objects
of pride for the whole Shia community and are greatly venerated in Iran
. The father and son, both were like shoreless oceans of knowledge. They
had presence of mind and were intelligent to a degree of perfection. It
would not be misplaced to say that the two Majlisi’s left a heritage of
writings that are the foundations of a revivalist movement in the Shia
religion. Majlisi, the first had a long list of students who went on to
become great scholars of their own standing. The name that heads this
list is that of Mullah Salih Mazandarani.

Mullah Salih Mazandarani was such a sincere and serious student that he
was always immersed in his pursuits of knowledge. However he was very
weak financially and had to undergo many difficulties during the period
of his

education. He didn’t even had enough to purchase a lamp to study at
night. His father was also not able to provide assistance to his son.

When Mulla Salih arrived in Isfahan for religious studies he had already
completed much of education in spite of his young age. Thus when he
arrived in Isfahan he easily got admission in the religious college of
Mulla Taqi Majlisi . Within a short time he had earned a place of honor
in the view of his teacher and other students due to his sincerity and
exceptional talents.

Though he had reached the age of marriage he was still a bachelor. Thus
his teacher Allamah Majlisi thought that it was a pity that such a good
student who was an example for others should remain unmarried. Hence he
decided to see that he is married as soon as possible.

One day after the class Allamah Majlisi called Mulla Salih and said to
him, “If you say, I can get you married so that you are freed from the
troublesome life of bachelorhood?” Mulla Salih bowed down his head
before his teacher implying his willingness.

Allamah Majlisi came home and told his daughter Amina Begum, who was
herself an accomplished scholar of religion and had literary expertise,
“I have found a husband for you, who though weak financially has no
equal in terms of merits, excellence and knowledge. But now you have to
take a decision about it. I am waiting so that you may inform me.”

The chaste and intelligent daughter said to her father respectfully,
“Dear father! Poverty and financial problems are no defects for men.” In
this way she expressed her

willingness. Thus at an auspicious hour the two were married and Mulla
Salih brought his bride to the bridal chamber.

When the son-in-law moved the veil and looked at the beautiful face of
the bride he thanked Allah and then went into a corner of the room and
immersed himself in study.

By chance he came across a problem that he could not solve. No matter
how many books he referred he could not find the answer. At last the
bride herself asked, “Tell me what the problem is and which book would
have the solution to it?”

At last it was dawn and the son-in-law left the house without having
touched the bride and headed towards his classes. Amina Begum came to
the study table to see the problem that her husband had failed to
resolve. She found the solution to it and also noted down the reference
of the book that contained the answer.

Mulla Salih returned home and as was his practice sat down to study. He
was surprised to find that his wife Amina Begum had solved the problem
and also noted down the references in her own handwriting. That very
moment he spread the prayer rug and spent the whole night in worship and
continued to thank Allah. Three days passed in the same manner and Mulla
Salih did not even speak to his wife.

When Mulla Majlisi came to know about it he called his son-in-law and
asked him, “If you do not like my daughter, I can look for another woman
for you to marry.”

Mulla Salih replied, “It is not that I do not like your righteous and
brilliant daughter. Rather I want to thank

Allah about it as much as I can for giving me such a wife. But I know
that how much ever I thank for it I found it to be less. Therefore I
remain engrossed in worship.”

When Mulla Majlisi heard this from his gifted son-in-law and intelligent
student, he said, “Yes, it is true that if a person confesses that he is
deficient in thanking Allah to the degree He is deserving of it, Allah
includes him among the thankful ones.”

Amina Begum was a pious lady and herself a jurist of Islamic law. She
also wrote books on religious laws. In addition to this she also
assisted her brother Mulla Baqir Majlisi in collecting traditions and
making arrangements for his magnum opus, *Biharul Anwar.* Even her
husband Mulla Salih used to seek her counsel on the text of Allamah
Hilli’s *Qawaid* and benefit from her advice.

We should also know that many great personalities of Shia Islam came
into existence through this accomplished lady. The great Wahid
Behbahani, Allamah Bahrul Uloom, Sayyid Ali Tabatabai (writer of
*Riyaz*) and Allamah Burujardi of the current age and many other great
Shia luminaries belong to her lineage. A noteworthy point about this
lady is that both her father and husband were geniuses of their own
times. Muhaddith Qummi writes in *Qawaidur Rizvia* that the Late Majlisi
the first, writes in the explanation of the chapter of the Prayer of the
Dead from the book *Man La Yahzarul Faqih:* By the grace of Allah, I
know these gentlemen since the last four years. They had sincere faith
in Allah, prayers, heaven and hell as if they were before their eyes.
They used to perform the midnight prayer. They used to recite the
Morning Prayer in congregation. They

used to impart good advice to the children, and obtain the knowledge of
Quranic verses and traditions from their respected father.”

Wahid Behbahani writes in his journal *Ijtihad al-Akhbar:* “My
grandfather, Mulla Salih had written marginal notes on *Maalim* when he
was very young. Whoever reads these notes is astonished how he could
have penned them at such a tender age?”

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](43.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](45.htm)
