Fazil Hindi
===========

### A Child Prodigy And An Intelligent Youth

There is an intellectual among our scholars who led a life of anonymity.
His name was Muhammad ibn Hasan ibn Muhammad Isfahani, and he was known
by the appellation of Fazil-e-Hindi. If he is called as a great
personality it is not beyond reality because he was indeed a great
personality but what is actually needed is to bring out his personality
from the shadows of anonymity. This is so because he was not an ordinary
scholar; he has to his credit great services in the field of knowledge.

This great personality was born in 1062 A.H. in Isfahan and since he had
traveled to India ( Hindustan ) during his childhood he began to be
addressed as Fazil-e-Hindi.

His father Tajuddin Hasan ibn Muhammad Isfahani was among the great
scholars of his time. He is the writer of the commentary of
*Baher-e-Mawaj.*

Fazil-e-Hindi is not known to the general readers, not even among the
scholars. But the religious jurisprudents and the great Shia
intellectuals know him well. Al-Hajj Mirza Husain Noori narrates from
his teacher Shaykh Iraqain that the writer of *Jawahir* has expressed
great trust in the book of

*Kashful Atham.* Till the time he did not have this book in front of him
he never wrote any portion of *Jawahir* and he used to say, “But for
Fazil-e-Hindi the science of religious jurisprudence would have become
extinct in Iran .”

The great jurisprudent Shaykh Asadullah Shustari in his first book
*Maqabis* presents Fazil-e-Hindi in such a way as if he is arguing about
Imamate and the rights of Ali (a.s) with the Ahle Sunnat. Thus in one of
his commentaries he writes, “Among his writings is the book,
*Al-Manahij-ul-Sawiya* which is the commentary of *Rawdatul Hayya.* I
have seen some of its volumes.”

His book *Salat* is authoritative, lucid and brimming with benefits and
research. It was completed in 1088 A.H., which shows that the author was
only twenty-five at that time. This young man also experienced those
days when the Afghans created great mischief and Isfahan was broken away
from Iran . Those days he spent a very difficult life of grief and
calamities. Fazil-e-Hindi has written around eighty books and he expired
in 1137 A.H. The most well known of his book is *Kashful Atham,* which
is the commentary on Allamah Hilli’s *Qawaid*. In the introduction of
this book he has repeated the words of Fakhrul Muhaqqiqin that why
people are surprised if some are endowed with knowledge at a young age.
Allah gives to whom He pleases.

He says, “I myself was not even thirteen when I had studied all the
prevalent sciences. I was not even eleven when I had started writing and
compiling books. When I was fifteen I

wrote *Munyatul Harees Dar Sharh Talkhis*. I was only eighteen when I
used to lecture on Taftazani…[1]

Therefore the readers must know that the level of their competence was
so high that it would not be out of place to call them geniuses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Mustadrakul Wasail,* Vol. 3, pg. 402

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](44.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](46.htm)
