Shahabuddin Suhurwardi
======================

### A Story Of A Young Philosopher Who Had The World Of Capabilities

There was a small town near Zanjan. Shahabuddin Yahya ibn Habash
Suhurwardi, known as Shaykh Ishraq was an inhabitant of this town. He
was born there and became famous for his knowledge and intelligence. It
is said that he was born before 550 A.H.

When he had entered his youth he traveled to Muragha and there he
studied medicine and science of principles under Majduddin Habili. In
that same period he visited Isfahan and studied the best books of
philosophy under Zahiruddin Fari or Farsi. After that he met all the
great personalities of the area and visited and toured many places.
First he toured the various cities of Iran and met the great
intellectuals and scholars of the time, held discussions with them and
impressed them by his knowledge.

During the time he was studying in Muragha under Majduddin, Fakhruddin
Razi was his class fellow. Fakhruddin also obtained many sciences from
Majduddin.

Ibn Khallikan writes in his book *Wafayatul Ayan:*

Suhurwardi was unique in his command on sciences and arts. He had
comprehensive knowledge about philosophy and medicine and in
jurisprudence he possessed an astonishing capability. He had great
intellect and insight.” Then he writes: He was killed in the last part
of 576 A.H. At the time of his death he was thirty-six years old.[1]

Ibn Hajar Asqalani, who was a great scholar of his time, writes in his
book *Lisanul Mizan:* He never held discussions with anyone but that he
had the upper hand. Then he says: It is related from Fakhruddin Mardini
that he said: I am fearful of this young man that his intelligence and
sagacity would destroy others.

It is narrated from Sifr Halabi that he said: Suhurwardi arrived in
Aleppo in 573 A.H. and lodged at Madrasa Halawiyah. He secured the
permission to enter the gathering of Iftikhar Halabi who was the teacher
there. There he entered into a very prolonged discussion.

Ibn Abi Asiba says: Shaykh Ishraqi did not have any desire for any
material thing.[2]

Yafai also writes in *Miratul Jinan:* He was an expert in medicine,
philosophy, principles of jurisprudence and theology. He was endowed
with great intelligence and sagacity. He was an eloquent speaker and
very good at debates. It is said that he was even conversant with
alchemy.

In such a short period of life, that is less than 36 years, Suhurwardi
wrote more or less 50 books, most of whom are present with me. He writes
in a very engaging way and his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Wafayatul Ayan* Vol. 5 pg. 314 [2] Ibn Hajar Asqalani,
*LisanulMizan* Vol. 3, pg. 157

writings are very fine from the literary point of view. And whatever he
wrote in Persian, the prose of it is a masterpiece of that age because
later the same text became a story of a philosopher whom a community
began to follow.[1]

During the fourth century of Hijrah, the power of the Abbaside caliph
had become very restricted and the provincial rulers were mostly Shias.
And they had great expertise in rational sciences, traditions and
narrative reports. Hence they commanded great influence in the Islamic
lands. Thus this age is known as the golden age of philosophy.

From the aspects of his subjects and conditions Suhurwardi continued to
lay the standards of discussions for two centuries after that though all
his life he was also involved in teaching, writing and compilation. As a
result of his innovative theories he left a great legacy for the people
of later times, due to which he would be remembered forever.

His writings are either in Arabic or Persian, and in both the languages
his style is very engaging and lucid, which shows his intellectuals
capabilities and high thinking that the Almighty had bestowed to this
young man.

The following books of Suhurwardi were collected by the author of
*Hikmatul Ishraq: Matarahat, Talwihat, Hikmatul Ishraq, Alwahul Amadiya,
Ilaihakul Nuriya, Al-Maqalat, Bistanul Quloob, Al-Bariqatul Ilahiya,
Lawame-ul-Anwar, Itiqatadatul Hikma, Risalatul Ishq, Risala-fi-Jalatul
Tafwiliya, Risale Aqle Surkh, Rozi ba Jamat-e-Sufiya, Aawaz*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Hikmatul Ishraq Suhurwardi,* Dr. SayyidJa'far Sajjadi pg. 68

*Pare Jibraeel, Partu Nama Yazdan Shinakht, Safir Simurgh,
Bakht-e-Moran, Risalatul Tayr, Dawatul Kawakib, Alwahul Farsiya,
Ilaihakul Farsiya, Al-Wardatul Ilahiya, Tauraqul Anwar, Al-Naghmatul
Samawiya* etc.

A noteworthy matter is that Suhurwardi says in his book, *Hikmatul
Ishraq:* There are many treatises that I have written in my boyhood.
Qutubuddin, the commentator of *Hikmatul Ishraq* says: By treatises he
means the books of *Alwah, Hiyakul Anwar* and other many treatises.

The most important books of Suhurwardi are: *Hikmatul Ishraq, Hiyakul
Anwar, Risalatul Ishq, Mataharat* and *Talwihat.*

Suhurwardi wrote *Hikmatul Ishraq* in Arabic. Qutubuddin Shirazi wrote
the commentary of this book in Arabic. He was a great scholar of his
time. Dr. Ja'far Sajjadi, a professor at Tehran University has
translated this book into Persian.

Among the commentators on the books of Suhurwardi are the names of those
who are highly respected scholars. In the seventh and eighth century Ibn
Kamuna Shaharzori and Allamah Hilli wrote glosses on *Talwihat.* In the
ninth century Jalaluddin Dawani wrote a gloss on *Hiyakul Anwar*. In the
ninth and tenth century respectively Jalaluddin Dawani and Abdur Razzaq
Lahiji wrote glosses on *Hiyakul Anwar*. Many other scholars have also
passed who have written much on Suhurwardi. They include Khwaja
Nasiruddin Tusi the famous philosopher of the seventh century. He has
written extensively on the philosophy of Suhurwardi and defended him
against the philosophy of Ibn Sina.

After Iran other countries of Asia like India benefited a great deal by
the philosophy of Suhurwardi and during the Safavid rule in Iran the
Ishraqi philosophy exercised great influence on the Islamic thinking.

In India many books of Suhurwardi were translated into Sanskrit at the
behest of the Mughal kings. These books were also translated into
Hebrew. Thus his thoughts were spreading to people of other faiths like
the Hindus and Jews.

Qutubuddin Shirazi says that the book of *Hikmatul Ishraq* is full of
wisdom and learning though small in size.

In *Itiqadatul Hikma*, Suhurwardi writes: Some people say philosophers
and thinkers do not have faith in Allah and the Last Day: Thus I have
compiled in this book the sayings of great philosophers about their
beliefs.”

It is very interesting to note that though Fakhruddin Razi was a staunch
opponent of philosophy he was a classmate of Suhurwardi and after
Suhurwardi was murdered, when once Fakhruddin Razi was given a copy of
*Talwihat* he first kissed the book then remembering his student days
wept in nostalgia.

In the final years of his life Suhurwardi traveled to Syria and stayed
in Damascus for sometime. He met the scholars there and engaged them in
debates and discussions. Then he went to Aleppo and repeated his
methods. In Aleppo , Malik Zahir was ruling in place of his father,
Salauddin Ayyubi who was in Egypt . Though initially Malik Zahir
accorded welcome to Suhurwardi and gave him a place of honor in his
court, later when the Sunni scholars defeated by him in debates
complained to Salauddin Ayyubi, Malik Zahir was

compelled to have him imprisoned. Later he was given a choice to choose
death by starvation or execution. It is said that Suhurwardi chose the
former as he was much in favor of penance. However some people say that
he was finally executed.

Thus this young philosopher became a target of religious bigotry.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](45.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](47.htm)
