Sibuya
======

### The Iranian Brain Who Later Became The Father Of Arabic Literature

Amr ibn Uthman ibn Qambar, popularly known as Sibuya was a master of
Arabic syntax and is accepted as the father of this field.

Ibn Nadim says that Sibuya was a slave of a person of Bani Harith ibn
Kaab tribe and he was connected to Bayda a hamlet near Shiraz but was
born in Basra . Some people say that he was born in Bayda itself but
came to Iraq during his childhood and resided at Basra .

Sibuya started learning Arabic syntax, which was the most important
field of study in those days. His first teacher in the subject was
Khalil ibn Ahmed an expert of Arabic syntax. He also studied under Isa
Ibn Umar, Yunus Ibn Habib and Akhfash and also gained from the teachings
of Asami. But the fact was that he reached the pinnacle of perfection in
his particular field due to his own merits, divinely gifted intelligence
and hard work. According to Ibn Nadim, if anyone has the proficiency to
judge the books written in the past he would indeed admit that the book

written by Sibuya is such that none like it has ever been authored
before and none shall ever be compiled like it.

Ibn Khallikan writes that Sibuya is among the ancient scholars of Arabic
syntax and grammar and he was the most intelligent and expert in the
field of Arabic language. Till date he is the final authority on the
subject. After the *Al-Kitab* no book has ever been written of the same
caliber. All the books compiled after it owe everything to this book.

Jahiz, himself a reputed Arabic grammarian says, “One day I thought of
going to meet the vizier of Abdul Malik. I deliberated on what gift I
should take for him and decided that nothing was worthier in my view
than *Al-Kitab.* After I presented him with the book I mentioned my view
also.” The scholarly vizier replied, “Indeed, you could not have given
me a better present.”

Ibn Khallikan narrates from Ibn Natah that he said, “A gentleman was
sitting with Khalil ibn Ahmad when Sibuya arrived. Khalil said, “Welcome
to the one who is never tired of taking classes.” Abu Amr Mahzumi
narrates that Sibuya was not as much fond of any of his teachers as he
was of Khalil. “I never saw Khalil according such a welcome to any other
student.”

All the experts of the Arabic language have unanimously without any
difference of opinion remembered Sibuya as “The Teacher”. They all
benefited from his writings and explanations.

The most surprising thing is that an Iranian youth had scaled these
heights of expertise in Arabic grammar and he became a teacher to the
Arabs and taught them the intricacies of their own tongue. All the
Arabic scholars

accept the prominence of Sibuya. It is not that being an Iranian himself
the writer of this book is heaping undeserving praises on this young
man.

But when we contemplate, the closest companion of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.s.) was Salman Farsi, the leader of the greatest school of Sunni
jurisprudence was Abu Hanifah, also an Iranian, the compiler of the most
important book of Ahle Sunnat *Sahih Bukhari* was Muhammad Ibn Ismail
Bukhari, an Iranian. The greatest philosophers of the Islamic world Abu
Farabi and Ibn Sina were Persians. The father of gnosticism, Imam
Ghazzali was an Iranian and so on…

It is an admitted fact that Iran has greatly contributed to the
expansion of the study of Arabic.

The book of Sibuya gained such prominence that it was also published
from Berlin , Germany , India and Cairo , Egypt .

It is said that Sibuya was once engaged in a debate with Hamzah Kasai
the tutor of Amin the son of Harun Rashid and that Sibuya was defeated
in this debate. Sibuya could not bear the defeat hence he developed
tuberculosis fever and died due to it. Some however say the Sibuya
surrendered willingly, considering that Hamzah was the tutor of Harun’s
child. In any case he developed the aforesaid illness and passed away
when he was only thirty-two years of age.

After his debate with Hamzah, Sibuya came to Shiraz from Baghdad , and
passed away after some days. He is buried in Shiraz . According to the
writer of *Athaarul Ajam* his tomb is in the Sang Siyah locality.

We should however remember that the debate of Sibuya with Hamzah did not
conclude with Sibuya’s defeat. The facts were in support of Sibuya but
the unscrupulous opponents distorted the arguments and ruled in favor of
Hamzah.

This episode is recorded in detail in *History* of Ibn Khallikan under
the heading of “Qaziya-e-Zamboor” and according to this author Sibuya
expired at the age of thirty.[1]

As far as his importance is concerned, his book *Al-Kitab* is sufficient
because we know that Abu Hayyan Gharnati, the famous Arab grammarian of
Spain relied on the books of Sibuya and he had memorized them all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] *Fihrist,* Ibn Nadim, Persian translation,pg. 89, *Wafayatul Ayan*
of Ibn Khallikan, Vol. 3, pg. 133, *DanishmandanSukhan Sarapan-e-Fars,*
Vol. 3, pg. 211

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](47.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)
