Musa and Daughters of Shuaib
============================

### Astonishing Story Of An Exemplary Young Man

The stay of Yusuf (a.s) in Egypt and his becoming the ruler of that
country became the cause for Prophet Yaqub and his household to leave
Palestine for Egypt . So they came to live there. As the name of Yaqub
was Israel his progeny called themselves Bani Israel. Yaqub (a.s) was
the son of Prophet Ishaq (a.s) who was the second son of Ibrahim (a.s)
through Sarah. Bani Israel , or the progeny of Yaqub were living here
for a long time a life of happiness and prosperity. But then, they were
gripped in severe trouble when one of the Pharaohs began to oppress them
mercilessly. As they were much oppressed they were known as immigrants
in Egypt , who had come there through Yusuf (a.s) who himself was also
an immigrant. Now they had occupied key posts of administration.

The oppressor Pharaoh considered them as outsiders and hence disliked
them. Another reason why the Pharaoh was dealing harshly with Bani
Israel was that, like Nimrod, the Pharaoh also depended for
consultations on ignorant persons who flattered him to such an extent
that he began to call himself God and put pressure on all Egyptians to
believe that he was god instead of the Only One God.

The courageless Egyptians too bowed before him and accepted the Pharaoh
as their god on earth blindly and obeyed his orders. But among them were
also the Bani Israel who were God-worshippers. They knew that they were
the progeny of God’s true messengers Ibrahim, Ishaq and Yaqub. They
refused to accept Pharaoh as god. Their denial to obey Pharaoh made the
latter all the more oppressive towards them making their life
unbearable.

The cruel hand of the ruling Pharaoh oppressed Bani Israel like anything
and also did not spare his own populace. There were some tribes who
dared to raise their heads but they were suppressed by force. He killed
their men folk and spared the women (to mourn their murdered men). This
is why the Pharaoh is known as one of the most corrupt mischief-maker
rulers of the world.[1]

The Pharaoh had oppressed Bani Israel to such an extent continuously
that every one of them was deprived with each and every facility of life
and put to every trouble. They could not see any ray of hope to become
free. In the meantime yet another calamity befell them. A court
astrologer of Pharaoh informed him that a child will would be born in
Bani Israel who would end the monarchy of Pharaoh and reduce him to
nothing, and that child was then in the womb of his mother.

This dreadful news made the Pharaoh extremely unhappy even though he was
claiming to be god who could give life to anyone he wished and to cause
anyone he wished to die. He had all material means to rule over people,
which had made him extremely proud. Yet this news made him very

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Please see Surah Qasas, Verse 3 in the Holy Quran

restless and he feared that his sovereignty was about to end soon. So he
prepared a heinous plan. He decided that every child in the womb of a
woman belonging to Bani Israel should be destroyed before birth and
those who were already born should be killed.

Under this cruel plan, the spies of the Pharaoh kept an eye on the
womenfolk of Bani Israel. There tore up the belly of every
pregnant-looking lady, killing the male child and allowing the female
child to live. This torture continued for quite a long time.

But the powerless man forgets that his might is nothing before the Might
of the Real Possessor Almighty Allah. He despite all that is in his
hands can never thwart God’s design and planning. The Most Merciful God
brings to life that He wants, instantly.[1]

History bears witness that unwise communities have formed fronts against
the Divine Messengers of God and tried to destroy them to prevent them
from doing their missionary work. But they have always failed badly and
died disgracefully. For example, monarchs like Nimrod, Pharaohs, and
Haman etc who were rebellious rulers were wiped out and no one
remembered them. But the voices of God’s messengers like Ibrahim,
Ismail, Yusuf, Isa and Muhammad are ringing in our ears even today in
every part of the world.

Despite all hindrances and objections and the huge spy network, Musa’s
honorable mother did become pregnant and Musa’s conception took place in
her holy womb. By the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See Surah Yasin, Verse 81

power of God no one could trace any sign of her pregnancy until the time
of coming in the world of the child about whom the Pharaoh was told that
he would ruin his rule and end his corrupt oppression.

Musa (a.s) was born quite secretly by the might of God. But his mother
became fearful that being a woman she would not be able to protect her
son from the hands of merciless men appointed by Pharaoh for constant
watch. But Almighty Allah revealed to her, asking her to take the child
in her arms affectionately and to suckle him and if danger arises drop
him in the river Nile without any anxiety as Allah would return him to
her very soon and would give him a high rank of a great messenger.[1]

This hidden divine announcement calmed the anxious mother’s heart and
she began to nourish her son comfortably and three months passed away in
this manner.[2]

Musa’s mother observed that Pharaoh’s agents were becoming more and more
oppressive and she became fearful once again. She prepared a small box
and placed her dearer- than-life child in it and floated the box in the
river waters as commanded by Almighty God. Simultaneously she instructed
her daughter (Musa’s sister) to stroll by the bank of the river
observing the sight so that the child may not be harmed. Musa’s sister
then saw that some of the coastguards of the Pharaoh’s riverside palace
dived into the river and fetched out that box. How were they to know
that they were

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See Surah Qasas [2] See *Majmaul Bayan*

not carrying a box but were paving the way to their own destruction![1]

It should be kept in mind that Pharaoh’s wife had seen that box floating
in the river and that it was she who had ordered her servants to bring
that box to her. When the box was opened she saw a moon-like little
child joyfully sucking its thumb.

Pharaoh’s wife, the lady named Asiya, was very much attracted with the
newfound baby. So she said to Pharaoh, “This is the coolness of my eyes
and yours. Do not kill him. He may prove beneficial to us later on or we
may adopt him as our son.” But these people did not know what was the
secret behind this entire happening.[2]

On the other hand, Musa’s sister entered Pharaoh’s palace and became a
resident servant of his wife, the queen. She saw that ladies who were
called to suckle Musa failed as Musa turned away his face from every one
of them. Musa’s sister told the queen, “I know a very good wet nurse. If
you so desire I may call her. Maybe the baby will suck at her.”[3]

At first, the royal guards suspected some plan in this but when all of
them saw that the child was not turning his face to anyone of the
midwives, they were obliged to bring Musa’s mother, guided by his
sister, to the palace. No sooner than Musa’s mother placed her breast in
the mouth of the child, Musa began to suckle. In this way Almighty Allah
returned Musa to his respected mother so that she

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See Surah Qasas [2] See Surah Qasas, verse 9 [3] See Surah Qasas,
verse 12

might be happy and not remain sorrowful, and know that God’s promise
always comes true though many people are not aware of this truth.[1]

Musa (a.s) began to be nourished under affection of the Pharaoh and his
wife Queen Asiya. Being his wet nurse Musa’s mother was also accorded
much respect in the palace. Drinking pure milk of his mother Prophet
Musa was brought up nicely and entered his youth.

When Musa (a.s) became major people could see that he was a handsome,
healthy and a strong young man. His arms were strong, face radiant,
forehead broad and eyes bright. His youthfulness was indeed worth
observing. He was recognized as the son of King Pharaoh and Queen Asiya.
He possessed every comfort and had full freedom. On the other hand his
wisdom and intelligence had also become a talk of the town. But the
people did not know that these were the signs of his prophethood, which
was to bring a revolution one day; that it would be a revolution to free
people from the bondage of Pharaoh and break the ego of the proud
despot.

By and by poor, needy and oppressed people began to realize that Prophet
Musa was very kind and sympathetic towards the enslaved masses. So they
sought his help in times of trouble. Musa (a.s) also rushed to help them
in every possible way.

One day Musa (a.s) by chance entered a town called Manaf and saw that a
servant of Pharaoh was quarrelling with a man from Bani Israel. The
Israeli requested Musa to help

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See Surah Qasas, Verse 13

him. Musa stepped forward and gave a hard fist on the face of the royal
servant, which proved fatal instantly. Musa (a.s) repented for this hard
hit and said to himself: This can only be called an act of the devil. He
prayed to God saying: My Lord! I never intended to kill this man. I am
so repentant and ashamed. Please pardon me.[1]

After some days he once again saw that Israeli quarrelling with another
man of the Pharaoh. The Israeli once again called Musa (a.s) to help
him. But Musa (a.s) warned the Israeli saying that he appeared to be a
quarrelsome man and that sometime back he was also fighting with another
man. But when he saw that the life of the Israeli was in danger he tried
to scold and turn away the man of Pharaoh. But the Pharaoh’s man thought
that Musa was about to attack him so he said, “O Musa! You seem intent
to kill me as you had killed another man earlier. It means, you want to
become oppressive and do not want to make peace.” [2]

In this way the Israeli exposed the secret of the earlier killing.
Pharaoh’s men gathered intelligence of the whole affair and reported to
the king who ordered Prophet Musa’s arrest.

At this critical moment, a faithful person among the people of Pharaoh
(Believer of the People of Firon) tried his best to save Musa (a.s) from
arrest. First of all he, very secretly sent Musa (a.s) to his town. Then
he told him, “As the Pharaoh has spread a wide network of his agents
everywhere in his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See Surah Qasas, verses 16-17 [2] See Surah Qasas, verse 19

territory it is better you leave this place and migrate somewhere
else.”[1]

Musa also thought it advisable not to take any more risk. So he left the
town and moved towards Palestine . He traveled for ten days to leave the
desert of Sinai behind him. Then he advanced towards Madayan after a
troublesome journey. On entering the limits of Madayan, which was under
the trusteeship of Prophet Shuaib (a.s), Musa (a.s) found himself a
helpless foreigner. No one knew him there. But what consoled him was a
feeling that now he was out of the sight of Pharaoh’s secret service
agents and hoped that he would be able to live a peaceful life there –
God willing. The people of Madayan were Arabs and so was Shuaib (a.s).

On the outskirts of Madayan, Musa saw some people gathered around a well
all of whom wanted to water their animals. He found two women waiting
their turn, as they wanted to water their sheep when the men folk
dispersed.

Helping the weak has always been a part of the nature of God’s
messengers and divine representatives. So Musa (a.s) went forward and
asked the ladies, “Why are you standing far away? To what tribe do you
belong?” The young ladies who were Shuaib’s daughters, replied, “We want
to water our sheep but cannot do so before the rush is over. Our father
is aged and weak and has none to help him except us.” Musa who was till
then hearing with his head down now raised is head to find that the two
youthful bashful ladies were figures of respectable modesty. He was
astonished. He thought over the entire issue and about the dignity and
honor of the two ladies. He then told them, “It

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See Surah Qasas. Verse 23

is not advisable for you to keep standing here in the presence of so
many people. If you permit, I may take your sheep to the well and water
them.” The respectable ladies did not think it proper that an alien and
unknown man should help them by moving other people aside for giving
water to their animals. So they did not agree with Musa’s proposal.

Prophet Musa asked again, “Is there any other well over here?” The
ladies replied, “There is a well nearby which is covered with a big
rock. When need arises some sandows remove the heavy rock and get water
therefrom.” Prophet Musa went to that well along with the two young
ladies and removed the heavy rock with his strong and powerful arms. The
ladies gave water to their sheep comfortably, thanked Musa (a.s) and
went home.

Musa (a.s) replaced the rock and slept under a nearby tree as he was, by
now, quite tired. His feeling of loneliness grew and he prayed to God
Almighty, “My Lord! I am in dire need of Your Mercy and Kindness.”

When the daughters reached home somewhat late Shuaib (a.s) asked them
for the reason of the inordinate delay. They narrated what had happened
and also told their father that the gentleman who helped them was
resting under a tree near the well. Prophet Shuaib sent one of his
daughters to summon Musa so that he could observe him closely. The
daughter approached Prophet Musa in a very modest and dignified manner
and said, “My father has called you so that he can give you the
remuneration for watering our sheep.”

Prophet Musa was a solitary person in this area and he had no place of
his own. So he took benefit of this chance and accompanied the lady.
Incidentally a strong wind began to blow the dress of this beautiful
girl who was trying hard to cover her body properly. Naturally Musa’s
eye fell on this unusual scene and it was indeed very distressing for a
messenger of God. He never liked that his eye should fall on another
woman even involuntarily. So he, with a view to protect his eyes, and
also in order to safeguard the dignity, respect and honor of the girl
asked her, “Kindly stop for a while. Let me step forward and walk ahead
of you. When there is crossroad, please throw a stone to guide me in
which direction I should walk further. In this way I will reach your
home in an appropriate manner – God willing.”

The girl also was, after all, a daughter of a God’s messenger and she at
once knew the intention of Musa. So she got all the more impressed with
his strong moral character and told herself: Indeed this gentleman,
besides being righteous, also possesses very high moral qualities.

Musa entered the house of Prophet Shuaib (a.s) and saluted and after a
while narrated to the great old gentleman what had happened to him since
his birth until then. Shuaib said, “You may stay here fearlessly. You
have distanced yourself away from the reach of the Pharaoh. God Almighty
has protected you.”

Now one of the daughters told her father, “Dear father! It is better to
take benefit from this gentleman’s capabilities and services as the best
servant or employee is one who is honest as well as strong physically,
morally and spiritually.”

In this way, Musa the honest youth who had traveled for hundreds of
miles in red hot sandy land got a chance to breathe comfortably in a
distant city and that too in the house of a God’s messenger!

One day Prophet Shuaib told Musa, “I intend to give you one of my
daughters in marriage but on condition that you live with us for eight
years and look after the sheep. If you extend this stay upto ten years
it would be much better. But, I make God a witness that I am not putting
any force on you. O Musa! I am among the righteous servants of Allah and
therefore I can never apply any kind of force to anyone in any matter.”

Musa (a.s) agreed and married Shuaib’s daughter. Her name was Safura,
the girl who was sent to summon Musa and who remembered that Musa was
anxious to save his eyes from falling on her body when the wind blew
strongly.

By and by Musa completed ten years in Prophet Shuaib’s service with
perfect honesty and love and did his job painstakingly. He left no stone
unturned in taking full care of the sheep. On completion of his ten-year
service, Musa sought permission to leave for Egypt and visit his mother
and younger brother, Harun. Shuaib (a.s) allowed him and Musa (a.s)
moved with his wife towards Egypt . After entering the Sinai desert Musa
decried a fire radiating on a hill. When he went there he saw that there
was a spruce fir tree from which flames of fire leapt out but without
burning the green tree! Musa was observing this phenomenon with
abounding wonder when a voice reached his ears from the direction of the
tree: It was a revelation from God saying: From now onwards you are a
messenger of God and a guide

for His creation. Go to Egypt for guiding the Pharaoh and his misguided
community.[1]

Thus a shepherd attained his goal after serving Shuaib wholeheartedly
for several years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See Surah Qasas: 22-30 Commentary from *MajmaulBayan* of Tabarsi

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](04.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](06.htm)
