David and Goliath
=================

### A Youth Full Of Faith Encounters An Experienced Warrior

It was a dreary and desolate desert for miles and miles and the Bani
Israel, after their exit from Egypt roamed in this lonely desert for
years in search of shelter. Many died and those who survived remained
painfully restless. After a long time some of them entered the holy land
of Palestine and settled there. It was a fertile region where Bani
Israel worked hard for a living, which became satisfactory after some
time.

In that era it was the only God-worshipping sect so God shed His mercy
on them and that too in such a way that He gave to them the Ark of the
Covenant wherein was the secret of their unity and survival so that
people may preserve it as a relic from God and that they may, looking at
it, never forget to remember Almighty Allah and seek His protection in
times of trouble and hardships of war and so that they may find it a
source of solace of the hearts.

Hardly two generations had passed when the moral structure of Bani
Israel decayed. They began to disobey God, to revolt against God through
dishonesty and every other evil behavior and filled the atmosphere with

corruption. Sinfulness spread throughout their society and their people
lived a life full of immorality and shamelessness.

The idol-worshipper community of Palestine was fed up by the troublesome
mischiefs of Bani Israel so they united to drive Bani Israel out of
their land or kill them wherever they were found and confiscate their
wealth, property and houses and separate their sons from fathers and
vice versa and also take away the aforesaid Ark of Covenant from them.

The idol-worshippers of Palestine were a powerful community. Their
constant attacks broke down the power of Bani Israel and disgrace became
their destiny while their pomp turned into dust.

When seven years of such troublesome and disgraceful conditions passed
away, God raised among them His messenger named Saul. Leading persons of
Bani Israel approached him in a significant number and requested him,
“Kindly announce your honor’s kingship so that you may provide for us
means of making our lives righteous and that we may become united,
integrated and able to wage a war in the path of God.”

Shamoil asked them, “Are you sure if I announce my kingship and a time
for fighting comes before us, you will not flee from battlefield on
seeing the enemy’s army?”

They replied, “How is it possible for us to find excuses at such a
critical moment making us more vulnerable when we have been driven out
of our homes and our sons are snatched away from us. We are quite ready
to face the hardship together.” Then Shamoil (a.s) said, “Then fear God

and do not disobey His commands. He has appointed Talut as your
commander and king.”

Till that time God’s prophethood had remained in the progeny of Lavi the
son of Prophet Yaqub (a.s) and wealth and rulership was in the progeny
of Yehuda, another son of Prophet Yaqub. The community chiefs asked
Shamoil (a.s), “Talut comes from the progeny of Ibn Yamin the youngest
son of Prophet Yaqub (a.s). How did he get kingship? How can he rule
over us?”

Bani Israel had always been material-minded. They had never been
convinced of fact and truth that there also is a power beyond the
apparent world. They relied only on what they could perceive through
physical faculties without any regard for the spirit. So a number of
them who considered themselves members of Yehudi race did not come
forward to be united under the flag of a king lacking in wealth.

Shamoil (a.s) told them, “The Most Merciful God has made Talut your king
because he possesses all virtues required for military discipline and
control. He is very brave, courageous and fearless and his wisdom and
foresight is also exemplary and he got these virtues and qualification
in inheritance. His physique is also very strong and symmetrical. He
never steps backward in a battle. Above all he is appointed as your king
by the Almighty Lord. God is great. He grants rule to whomever He
wants.” Bani Israel had to accept Talut as their commander but they also
asked Shamoil, “What is the proof that God has made Talut our king?”

Shamoil replied, “The proof or evidence is that he will procure for you
the Ark of Covenant which God had sent down for the peace of your hearts
and minds and which

contains the relics of Musa and Harun (a.s) and is carried by angels. Is
this not a sufficient proof?”

When Bani Israel went out of the town they saw the said casket there and
this satisfied them. They gathered their might and an army of seventy
thousand men rallied under the flag of Talut but Talut had no trust in
the major part of that army. He knew it well that this tribe, which had
wandered in wilderness for years, had become totally demoralized. As
they had become so weak they might not withstand the enemy assault and
could flee from the battlefield. Therefore he decided to test their
solidarity and integrity before going to war so that those who fail
could be dismissed from the army or kept in the rear.

Talut informed his soldiers about the tactics of the enemy and then
said, “God wants to take a test through a water canal. Whoever will
drink its water will be disobeying my command. Who will remain patient
will be allowed to drink only a handful of its water. One who fails in
this test will lose my trust and those who remain steadfast and patient,
obeying my order, will gain my confidence and their rank will rise in my
view.”

As the soldiers had walked quite a long time in hot sandy land they were
very thirsty. Many of them were not prepared to obey the command of
Talut. They fell on the water and drank it fully. Only three hundred and
thirteen of them were trustworthy and faithful who remained thirsty
obeying their chief’s command. This test showed that the majority of
them were useless and weak hearted. Only 313 of them were trustworthy
and steadfast in their determination that could be relied upon. When the
soldiers

of Talut crossed that canal (which had probably branched from a
Jordanian river flowing in Syria) they saw Goliath advancing towards
them along with his huge army in several battalions, well equipped with
weapons. Observing their preparations, the soldiers of Talut exclaimed,
“We cannot confront this huge army. How long could we fight them? How
can we defeat them?” But the faithful 313 announced, “Almighty Allah has
always made His few obedient servants victorious over the enemy’s major
big armies. Why should we be afraid when our Lord is with us?” Among
this group of courageous and brave minority group was a youth from the
village of Bait Tam . He was the youngest of the brothers enrolled in
the army of Talut.

When the warriors of Talut lined up to face the army of Goliath they
prayed, “Our Lord! Grant us steadfastness and patience so that we may
not step back while battling with the enemy and grant us victory.”

At this critical juncture Talut could see that those in his throng who
were demoralized and fearful could not show the wisdom of even praying
to God. Talut was giving encouragement to each and everyone in his army.
Once he addressed them jointly saying, “Today I promise that one among
you who shows maximum bravery and kills Goliath will be given my
daughter in marriage. I will make him the king and he will inherit me.”

The chief of the army, Goliath, was a very strong and tough sandow from
Amaliqah. He came forward and challenged Talut’s army: “Is there anyone
among you who can fight with me?”

The fate of this fight depended on the life or death of this champion
athlete. If he were to remain alive, it would be impossible for the army
of Talut to win.

At this fateful time the eyes of Talut were searching the youths in his
army to see who comes forward courageously but in his army there was
none who could show such tremendous bravery while the challenging voice
of Goliath was ringing in the air.

Then suddenly came out from Talut’s side a youth named Dawood. He
approached Talut and whispered to him, “Please allow me to fight
Goliath.” Talut could see that on the one hand was an experienced
champion from Amaliqah and on the other this growing youth whose
moustache was about to sprout. Talut told the youthful boy, “You are
still young in age. Compared to this giant, your stature is also very
small and unripe in experience. Be patient for a while so that anyone
stronger than you may come forward. Then we will see.”

Now Dawood spelt out his iron will and strong determination in a serious
and fearless manner saying, “Please do not look at my young age and
short stature. God-willing you will see that this chief of the enemy
army will be downed with my hands.”

When Talut saw that this youth was full of courage, faith and wisdom and
that he is so strong in his determination and that there was not even an
iota of fear in his heart and was insisting so strongly to fight with
this well known champion he was obliged to accept his request and
allowed him to fight with that giant. But, as it was then customary,
Talut put the armor on that youth’s body with his own

hands, placed an iron helmet on his head and handed him a spear. But as
Dawood had never before worn such an armor he removed it and also threw
down both his helmet and the spear. He advanced only holding in his
hands a stick with which he herded his sheep and a sling, picking up a
few stones from the ground. Talut who saw this with astonishment asked,
“Will you fight this champion warrior with stick and stones instead of
arrows and spears?”

Dawood answered courageously, “Yes! With the help of God Almighty you
will see how I use my simple weapons with wonder. These stones will
write the story of the victory of Talut and the death of Goliath.”
Saying this, he came out of the ranks and stood before Goliath.

It was indeed a very strange battle scene. On one side was the proud and
hopeful army of Goliath and on the other a small battalion of
disheartened and overawed soldiers. All witnessed this astonishing
encounter between two extremely unequal fighters.

Looking at the small, weak and young man who had come out to fight with
him Goliath exclaimed sarcastically, “O youngster! Are you going to
fight with me with this weak body and without arms and armor?”

Dawood replied, “I have gifted all war weapons to you. I will confront
you only in this simple style because I have full faith in my Lord. You
will soon see how those who have trust and faith in God win.” Then
Dawood put a stone in his sling and began to rotate it around his head
and once he found full strength in his arms he dropped one of the
strings of his sling, aiming the stone at the forehead of Goliath. The
stone hit its target and blood began to flow

profusely from Goliath’s head. At the next instant Dawood shot another
stone which pierced the champion’s brain and he came down crashing to
the ground. Within no time the 313 brave warriors of Talut fell upon the
huge army of Goliath, scattered them and returned victoriously.

After this great and manifest victory Dawood (a.s) received the honor of
being Talut’s son-in-law. He became a great king of Bani Israel and
Almighty Allah granted him prophethood as well as kingship.

[![ back](images/back.gif)  
 Back](05.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
 Index](index.htm)

[![ Forward](images/next.gif)  
 Next](07.htm)
