The Guardian After the Prophet
==============================

In another narrative mentioned in the previous lesson, pertaining to
Imam Ali (a.s)'s military excursion to Yemen, we saw that the Prophet
sent two groups of soldiers to Yemen: One was under the command of the
Imam and the other under the jurisdiction of Khaled Ibn Valid with the
stipulation that if these two divisions should meet, their leadership
would be taken over by Ali (a.s). Khaled, who possessed the habits and
particularities of the ignorant Arabs, was angered by this order.
Therefore after the completion of his mission he sent several persons to
the Prophet with a letter of complaint against Ali (a.s).

Barideh, the companion who bore the letter said:

"I gave the letter I was carrying to the Holy Prophet. The letter was
read to him. The Prophet became so enraged that I saw its traces in his
blessed face. It was then that I said: "O' Holy Prophet! I seek refuge
to you. Khaled sent the letter and ordered me to deliver it to you. I
obeyed him because he was my commander". The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) then
said: "Do not speak against Ali, he is of me and I am of him and he is
your guardian, leader and authority after me". 153

In one of the texts of this Hadith something is added to the above.
According to it, after Barideh saw the Prophets reaction and his great
rage he begins to doubt his own faith in Islam. Because of this he
says:

"O' Prophet of God! I swear you by the friendship between us---since I
have enraged you --- give me your hand so that I may once again pledge
my allegiance to Islam with you, and that my sins may be forgiven".
154

According to this narrative the Imam is the guardian, authority and
master over the Muslims after the Prophet; precisely meaning the
Prophets successor in the guardianship he has over the peoples lives and
property --- of course, this power and authority being used in all
aspects in the best interests of their religious and worldly duties.

In another narrative by Ibn Abbas we read that the Prophet had said to
Amir al-Mu'meneen:

"Your are the master, guardian and authority of every believer after
me". 155

In the fourth narrative, we observed that because the narrator had
brought a complaint against the Imam to the Prophet, he says:

"No, don't speak like this regarding Ali. After me, he has the highest
mastery, weight of judgement and strength of determination over the
people".

On the basis of the narratives spoken of until now, we saw that the
Prophet spoke of and described positions such as his Caliphate, ministry
and executorship in relation to the Imam (Ali), introducing him as
possessing those honours and positions and also saying that he is the
Master of all believers after him.

In the story of the ring and its bestowal on a beggar in the mosque,
which caused the revelation of this noble verse:

"Verily, your Master is only Allah and His Apostle and those who
believe, those who establish prayers, and pay the Zakat while bowed (in
worship)". 156

There is also mention of the Imams mastership over the nation with
regard to which there have been many references made in the writings of
the Imams mastership over the nation with regard to which there have
been many references made in the writings of the Sunnite school. These
were all narratives from the authoritative books of the Sunnite school,
and they showed the final testimony of the Holy Prophet. As such, at the
time of his death what happened? In those serious moments the Prophet
wished to write down his last testimony which pertained to the peoples
Caliph, executor and master, and have it witnessed.

According to the Prophets orders in times like these a letter would be
written, he would stamp it, sign it, and have it witnessed and then for
example he would have it sent to the Arab tribes or the leaders of other
countries. In the last hours of his life he had this very intention but
they didn't allow it and spoke to him in a way that endangered the
foundation for the acceptance of his prophethood in the community. It
was because of this that the Prophet prefered to remain silent.

We have also seen that the matter of the executorship was not only
mentioned at this time but throughout the Prophets lifetime at all
critical times. This matter was proclaimed at times of war, treatise and
in hours of danger to Islams existence, in all of its aspects. This was
done so often that these creditable texts have come down to us in the
Sunnite schools most authoritative writings; despite all of the
strangulation in subsequent eras, and the killings of the Ummayeds and
Abbasids. Killings and pillage, with all of those amputations of legs
and arms, done to prevent the narration of this heritage, so that it
wouldn't gain circulation in following generations.

According to all of the proceeding research the fundamental beliefs of
the Shiite school is that the Imamate is an appointment by God and the
Prophet is the messenger of this order from God among the people.

May God make us one of the followers of Ahlu'l bait.

AMEN

We were discussing how the Islamic nation altered the last Prophets
religious law (Shari'ah). We also saw how in the past the powerful of
certain nations with the aid of Jewish Rabbis and priests altered the
religious law of their own prophets to the point that nothing was left
of that law which would cause the growth and guidance of the people.
They covered so much truth with falsity and altered the divine truths to
such an extent that if all of mankind endeavoured that could never
arrive at the true law and way of God. It was at this time that God once
again gave life and renewal to religion by sending the Arch Prophet
(Ulul Azm). In the past nation divine wisdom deemed it appropriate that
the Prophethood should end with that of Mohammad Ibn Abdullah (s.a.w).
Also, by necessity of His lordship, the laws for perfecting mans way of
life must be kept at his disposal. Under these circumstances, after the
religion had been upturned by the powerful and evil, as the unchanging
laws of creation dictated, what should the people do? There will never
be another prophet and the people cannot live correctly without laws of
guidance, so what must be done?

It was because of this that ,God renewed and established the religious
law of the Last Prophet in the environs of this nation. Each of the
Imams of Ahlu'l bait were a part in the re-establishment of true Islam
in the nation; which will be studied after the discussion on concealment
and alteration. We will see precisely how God re-established Islam with
the treaty of Imam Hassan (a.s), the martyrdom of Imam Hussein (a.s),
the imprisonment of Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (a.s), the speeches of Imam
Baqir, Sadiq and Reza (a.s) and the occultation of Imam Hujjat ibn
al-Hasan al-Askary.

In the proceeding discussion we spoke of means and agency the powerful
in the nation resorted to in order to alter and separate true Islam from
the community. That agency, was the prevention of narrating the Hadiths
and quotations of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w). I thought that the
discussion we had on this topic was sufficient but from the question
that were posed it became clear that the discussion on this matter must
be enlarged.

The question posed on this matter was; why did the Caliphs and powerful
in the nation prevent the narration of the Prophets words? In return I
must ask if in principle this question is relevant or not? What do you
mean by "Why"? Could anything justify this deed? Take for example Moses
who was named prophet among the tribes of Israel to guide them. Now, the
descendants of Aaron who were the peoples religious leaders after Moses
say; No, do not repeat the words and opinions of Moses (a.s).

We see that this command could have no possible justification but even
so we will look into the factors behind this prohibition and we will
quote and assess the very words of this agents pertaining to their
reasons for it:

1) Aishah said: My father had collected five hundred of the Prophets
Hadiths in a book and had given it to me for safe-keeping. One night I
noticed that he was very restless in bed, tossing and turning about and
unable to go to sleep. I said: Is there a problem or some bad news that
has made you so upset? In the morning he said: My daughter, bring me the
Hadiths you have. Then he asked for fire and he burned the book
containing the Prophets Hadiths. After burning the book he calmed down.
I asked him the reason for this deed and he said: I was afraid that
among the Hadiths I had written in this book there would be a Hadith
that had no grounds and I had narrated it out of my trust in someone,
and then I would be held responsible. 157

2) Historians narrate: During the era of his Caliphate Umar ibn
Al-Khattab decided to gather and write down the Prophets Hadiths. He
asked the Prophets companions for their general opinion and they all
gave their ideas about it. For a month Umar deliberated on the matter
and at last he arrived at his final decision. In the morning he informed
the people of his final decision: I had been thinking of writing down
the Prophets Hadiths but then I remembered that other nations before you
had written books and had become so engrossed in them that they forgot
their Divine scripture. I swear to God that I will not mix His scripture
with anything. 158

We will look into both of these, Hadiths so that we may discover the
reason the prohibition of the narration and written recording of the
Prophets Hadiths. Primarily, these two Caliphs had the idea that if it
was possible they should do something to gain control of the narration,
propagation, and recording of the Prophets Hadiths. This in reality
meant that only those Hadiths should be narrated and recorded which did
not oppose the political policies of the Caliphate and government of the
time. This was the first stage. But after much attention and
deliberation; keeping Abu Bakr awake at night, and forcing Umar to
undergo one months consideration and thought, they arrived at the
conclusion that the controlled, limited propagation of Hadiths is
impossible. If Abu Bakr was supposed to write down the Hadiths and then
deliver them to the people, could it be said and could the people be
made to believe that these alone are the Prophets Hadiths and other
Hadiths are not the Prophets? Salman also says in relation to this: I
remember the Hadiths and I write them down. Its not right that you
should write them down while I may not. You understood the Prophet and I
also understood him. You heard his words and saw his actions, I also
heard and saw. Therefore our Hadiths are not at all different.

Abu Dharr can say the same thing. He will also be able to write down
Hadiths, and no one will have the power to prevent the recorders of
Hadiths from doing so. Ammar will also write them down. Meghdad will
then say: I will also write them. Other companions will also have the
same kind of remarks each in some way or form. Under such circumstances
there will no longer be any excuse for the Caliph being able to record
Hadiths while others may not. So, to begin with, the reason Abu Bakr
began to record Hadiths himself, and the reason Umar told the people
they could only narrate Hadiths related to acts of worship, 159 was
because they wanted to control the Hadiths. However, when they realized
that this way was practically impossible; Abu Bakr burned the Hadiths in
the book he had written himself and Umar spoke to the people saying: O'
People! I have heard that you possess certain books. The dearest of
these books according to God is the one which is based on greater
truthfulness and authority. Everyone possessing one of these books
should bring it to me so that I may look it over and consider its
(veracity). The people thought that he wished to read them and correct
them and alleviate all controversy over them, they brought him their
books and he burned them all. 160 Abu Bakr said: "I feared that I had
heard a Hadith from someone I trusted but as a matter of fact that
Hadith would be false. I didn't wish to be responsible for the
promulgation for a false Hadith. If this was really true then why did he
say at another time, Do not narrate Hadiths from the Prophet. 161 Does
the narration of other persons, even reputable ones who themselves
remembered the Prophets words, cause the Caliph to be responsible? He
offers the excuse that: "because you differ with one another on the
narrations of these Hadiths, in future generations their differences
will be even more than yours". 162

We must learn the meaning of the words "differences" before we can
arrive at the true meaning of Abu Bakrs statement. The variances of
literal or written form in one Hadith is not seen as a "difference". In
the terminology of the "study of Hadith" this type of difference is
called "narration according to meaning", and there is no objection to
it. This is because the original meaning is retained even though it
might differ slightly from another in words or expressions. The Holy
Quran itself contains many examples of this type of difference. For
example in the Quran we read:

"Don't kill your children because of hunger". 163

and in another place

"Don't kill your children for fear of hunger".

These two verses are literally slightly different but their original
meaning is the same and they had the same aim. They do not call this - a
difference because it was only narrated according to its meaning can
never be seen as a true "difference".

Now, let us see how these literal differences which result in
narrations according to meaning come to be. This type of difference may
have one of two reasons:

1) Sometimes the holy prophet spoke of some fact in different places at
different times which of course was because of its importance. In these
circumstances, every time the Prophet repeated his message he spoke
using particular words and expressions. Therefore, one of his companions
would narrate one of these wordings, and another of his companions
another wordings, and another of his companions another wording. When we
saw that the Prophet had said in one Hadith:

"Ali is your leader and authority after me".

and in another place:

"Ali is every believers authority after me".

These were two separate Hadiths not one Hadith with literal
differences. In such circumstances they do not call this a difference
because the Prophet himself had spoken two separate time. We know this
because in the Hadith itself it states that this remark was made by the
prophet in such a place -- the place also specified -- and spoken in
such terms; while in another Hadith in another place --- that place also
specified there exists another wording that delivers the very same fact
or reality. The result is that in two places two phrases were spoken to
express one special meaning, and this form of literal difference is not
in principle called a "difference".

2) Sometimes a large number of persons heard a Hadith from the Prophet
in a certain gathering or meeting. All of them understood its meaning
but when they relate, (because they can't remember the exact words used
by the Prophet), each of them expresses the understood meaning in the
form of certain wards and expressions. We have seen that this is no real
difference, and has been called "narration according to meaning in the
study of Hadith". So where are the differences and what form do they
possess? Real difference is where there is contradiction, the denial of
a fact or when something proved is denied. For example when we have one
Hadith that states the Prophets said: "Write down my Hadiths" and
another one which says he said: "Don't write down my Hadiths". This is a
true difference.

However according to Abu Bakrs words, the differences he mentioned did
not mean that and really meant literal differences. We say this because
if he meant differences as far as contradictions there could be no more
than what already existed and future generations could not come along
and increase them.

Also, if he meant differences resulting in contradictions and nothing
else, then only such Hadith should have been prohibited, not the
unconditional prohibition of all Hadiths! And last of all, if no
Hadiths - according to Abu Bakrs words -- were to be related, where are
they supposed to gain an understanding of Islam? Isn't the explanation
and commentary on the Quran supposed to come from the Prophet? Shouldn't
the detailed account of the rules of prayer, fasting, almsgiving and
Hajj be received from the Prophet? 164 and isn't it true that Islam is
in the Quran and life and words of the Prophet and if nothing is
narrated from the Prophet, Islam cannot be understood and known? Here
the primary aim of the caliph in preventing the narration of Hadith is
made clear. But when the Caliph Umar said: "I will not mix Gods'
scripture with something else like previous nations did, then forgetting
the scriptures".

We ask, wasn't it possible for them to write down the Quran and say:
This is the Quran, thus preserving it in a book, and also for them to do
the same with the Hadiths? They transcribed Gods scripture, the Quran,
and after it was written it was distributed throughout the Islamic
world, not one copy but thousands of copies. After this the possibility
of it being confused with Hadith had been eliminated. So why was there a
prohibition of the recording of Hadith until the year 100 A.H? Why?

The official authorities and Caliphs could have collected the Hadiths
of the Prophet in the following manner: After gathering a group of the
Prophets close followers who were of the first to embrace Islam, a
committee could be formed for the collection of Hadiths, such persons
as; Abdullah Ibn Massoud, Abu Dharr, Ammar Ibn Yasir, Khabbab, Bilal,
and others like them. Afterwards they would announce to the Prophets
companions (99% of them living in Medina), that any of them who had
heard a Hadith of the Prophet should come to the committee and relate
it. The committee after studying them would record them. In this way a
collection of the Prophets Hadiths, thus carefully recorded would take
its place in the peoples minds and view, so that opinions regarding the
credibility of the Hadiths would be unified just as they did with the
Quran. The Quran, which was compiled in this very way has remained in
the hands of mankind as thus to this very day there being no form of
alteration in it. With this plan the Hadiths could have been collected
and would in no way become confused with the Quran. This is the way the
books "Sahih" by Muslim or Bukhari have remained the same today as they
were the day they were written. So it becomes clear that the real reason
for the prohibition was not what they said it to be. Now we will point
out two historical documents, narratives which clearly show the real
reason for the prohibition of the propagation of these Hadiths:

1) The first narrative is by Abdullah Ibn Amr-e-Ibn Aas. He says: I
wrote down everything I heard come out of the Prophets mouth. The men of
Quraish prohibited me from doing so, saying: You write down everything
you hear the Prophet say. The Prophet is only human and speaks during
times of anger and happiness (meaning that the reason the Prophet speaks
at these times is because of those feelings not because of some fact or
reality. When I heard this I refrained from writing down these words.
One day I told the Holy Prophet of this occurance. That Holy Man made a
gesture towards his mouth and said: Write, I swear by He who holds my
life in the palm of his hand, that nothing but truth comes out of this
mouth.

In order to understand this Hadith it is necessary for us to recognize
the speakers of the prohibition Abdullahs writing? We know that the
Prophets companions in Medina were separated into two groups. The
immigrants and the helpers. The immigrants - for the most part - were
the Quraishites who had migrated there from Mecca. The helpers were the
native Medinans who had come to the Prophets and their immigrant fellows
aid, thus receiving the name "Helpers" (Ansars). In terms of lineage and
in special historical terminology they gave the name to the Helpers, and
the name to the immigrants of Quraish. As such, those who prohibited
Abdullah from writing down the Prophets sayings were the Quraish meaning
the immigrants. Here it is necessary for us to go into a brief study of
the groups in Arabic society in order to clarify this discussion: The
groups which fought against Islam during the Prophets lifetime consisted
of two large groups: The Jews and The Quraish.

Most of the wars wages against the Prophet were instigated by the
Quraish. The battle of Badr took place with one thousand Quraishite
warriors. In the battle of Uhud three thousand persons of the
inhabitants of Mecca, Quraish and their sworn mercenaries came to battle
with the Prophet of Islam. During the battle of Khandaq the leadership
was held by the Quraishite warriors and leaders. They were the ones who
for several years in the life of the Muslims in Mecca, tortured and
tormented them making them homeless in deserts and foreign countries.
They were the ones who repeatedly planed to murder the Prophet, at one
time coming close to accomplishing it. They broke the teeth and forehead
of the Holy Prophet, and killed his honourable uncle. The worst, most
rigid enemies of Islam and the Prophet were from this tribe: Abu Jahl,
Abu Lahab, Abu Sufyan, Utbah, Aas, etc. These persons and their
descendants hid behind a veil of hypocrisy after the victories of Islam.
Even though the Jews were a strong group and relentless, clever enemies
they lost to the Prophets decisiveness and Islams power, and after the
fall of Khaybar they were removed from Arabias political and social
scene.

Despite all of this Islam remained, and the Qurasishite enemies a group
of whom wished to protect themselves from the sharp eyes of Islam, hid
behind a camouflaging veil of hypocrisy without forgetting their enmity
with Islam and the Prophet. All of those verses revealed about the
hypocrites, warning of their great danger, were revealed about this
group and the hypocrites of Medina. Of course the Quraishite hypocrites
were more dangerous because they were better hidden and less known of.

Hakam ibn Abil Aas came to Medina and had accepted Islam but sometimes
he would walk behind the Prophet and mock his distinctive movements.
When the Prophet walked it was as if he was walking down-hill and or as
if he were walking in mud. He picked up his feet heavily and his
shoulders moved back and forth. Behind him Hakam also made the same
movements, making faces and sometimes even sticking out his tongue.
After a while, in which he shamelessly repeated these movements the
Prophet (s.a.w) turned around and said to him:

"Remain as you are". 165 Hakam was never freed from this curse and
until the end of his life remained in that ridiculous form. This man was
Hakam the father of Marwan, the fourth Ummayed Caliph and the
grandfather of all the Ummayed Caliphs after him, Abdul Malik, Valid
etc.

One day the Prophet was sitting in his house. Hakam came along and
placed his eye at the keyhole looking inside the room. Ali was also
present in the room. The Holy Prophet said: Ali bring him inside. Amir
al Mu'meneen quickly went outside and brought Hakam inside by the leg,
the same way they drag sheep. The Prophet then said: "May Gods curse be
upon him and all of his descendents, except for the faithful among them
whom are few".

Abu Sufyan was another of the important men of Quraish. When he was
their chief he opposed Islam with all his might and tried to destroy it
by any means available. After Mecca was conquered, to all outward
appearances he became a Muslim and went to Medina. One day the former
Shaikh and chief of Quraish, Abu Sufian, was astride a mule while one of
his sons walked before and one of his sons walked behind the mule. When
they passed the Prophet he said: God Almighty, curse the rider, the
leader and the propeller of this mount. 166 We know that the two sons
who accompanied Abu Sufian were Muawieh who later became the governor of
Shaam (Syria), and later the ruler over all the Muslims, and the other
was Yazid who during the rules of Abu Bakr and Umar became Major General
of the army and had a hand in the conquests of the northern part of
Arabia. These were two examples. There were also other examples. For
example Aas, Amr's father, Muaviehs advisor and governor of Islamic
Egypt is one of them. He is included in the group of persons cursed by
the Prophet. The Holy Prophet said many similar things which severely
stained the reputations of the Quraishites who became leaders after him.
Wasn't the correct policy for them to adopt upon coming to power, that
of preventing the words of the Prophet from being repeated?!

Isn't it true that Quraish came to power after the Prophet; Muavieh,
and Marwan ibn Hakam and persons before and after him and after them
becoming Caliph, governor and powerful. It was very easy for them to by
any means possible prevent the narration of these types of remarks;
which ruined their own and their family members reputations. They even
used the excuse of not wishing to confuse the Quran with Hadith when
asking the prohibition. The truth and basis of their words was what
Abdullah ibn Amr-e-Ibn Aas related from them:

"The Prophet is only human and speaks out of happiness and
annoyance"'.

We observed that the second Caliph had commanded the people to only
narrate hadiths on matters of religious practice, which was only the
beginning. Afterwards, this amount of freedom was taken away from them.
He said that they could only narrate Hadiths related to prayer, fasting,
Hajj and their like. But Hadiths which for example stated: "Ali is the
authority and leader after me"."This Iranian man Salman is a member of
our household", "Abu Dharr is similar to Jesus in asceticism", or Hakam,
Muavieh and others are such and such, also that which in the Prophets
lifetime was said about the remarks of two Caliphs in the battle of
Badr, or their escape from the battle of Khaybar or Uthmans fleeing at
Uhud, must not be related. The minute freedom the narration of Hadiths
quickly gave way to a complete, unconditional prohibition.

Here I will relate to you story which most of you have more or less
heard so that we may more accurately understand the reasons and means
for the prohibition of the promulgation of Hadiths.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) was in his death bed. These were the last
moments of mankinds contact with the Divine before this connection would
be severed and the era of revelation would end. A few of the Prophets
companions were gathered at his bedside. The wives of the Prophet,
naturally his daughter Fatimah (a.s) among them, were there behind a
curtain. The narrator of this occurance is Umar Ibn Khattab who narrates
it for Ibn Abbas, saying: We were there with the Prophet. Between us and
the women a curtain was drawn. The Messenger of God (s.a.w) began to
speak saying: Rinse me with seven skins of water, (in those days cold
water was used to bring down some types of fever) after you have done
this bring me a piece of paper and some ink so I may write you something
with which you will never go astray. [the expression used was which
means so you will never go astray. because means 'never'] The Prophets
wives said from behind the curtain: Do as the Prophet wishes. I (Umar)
said: Be quiet. You are like the women who gathered around Joseph
wanting him. If the Prophet is sick you cry and if he regains his health
you seize him by the collar wanting your spending money. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) said: They are better than you. 167

Jabir narrates as such: At the time of the Prophets death and during
his last hours he asked for a piece of paper in order to write his
nation a letter, so that they would never go astray nor lead others
astray. Those who were around his bed made so much noise and spoke such
idle nonsense that the Prophet refrained form doing so. 168

Ibn Abbas said: The Holy Prophet said at the time of his death; Bring
me a piece of paper and ink so that I may write something so that
afterwards you will never go astray. Umar Ibn Khattab began talking and
making a lot of noise saying: All of these cities remain and haven't
been conquered, who should conquer them!? Zainab binte Jahsh the
Prophet's wife said: Do as the Prophet ordered don't you hear that he
wishes to make his last will?! Once again the noise began. It was then
that the Prophet said: get up and leave. When they stood and left the
room the Holy Prophet passed away. 169

Judging from the differences which exist in these Hadiths and the ones
that will be related later, I presume that the Prophet repeated his
directions several times each time the opposition group saying something
to sabotage it. The Prophet insisted because of the love and avidity he
had for his guidance, and they in turn prevented the progress of his
speech by creating noise.

I think that the first time the Prophet asked them to bring him paper
and ink so that he could write his last will, those around him who knew
what he would write, said: No, it's not necessary, we have the Quran and
that enough for us. The second time the Prophet repeated his desire they
said: Sickness has overcome the Prophet, the Quran is all we need. The
third time his orders were repeated they said: This man is talking in
delirium. The Quran is enough, for us.

In Bukhari's book "Sahih", there is a Hadith regarding this event from
Saeed Ibn Jobair. He quotes from Ibn Abbas who witnessed the occurance.
(Ibn Abbas said: "Thursday, what a thursday!" Then he began to cry and
he shed so much tears that the pebbles on the ground in front of him
were soaked. Then he said that the Prophet's illness gained severity on
that day, and he said: Bring me a piece of paper so that I may write you
a letter and after this you will never be led astray. Those present
differed, one group said: Do as the Prophet commands, while another
group said: No, don't bring the paper!)

If in these circumstances someone wished nothing to be done its
possible that he would create confusion in some way, bringing up words
and remarks that would defeat the original matter at hand, and prevent
it being carried out. It was such at that time. (Those around him began
to argue even though it wasn't right for them to create such noise and
dispute in the Holy Prophets presence). The Holy Quran has told us: Do
not speak louder than the Prophet. 170 Ibn Abbas then adds: (the
bystanders said: The Prophet speaks in delirium - and the Prophet, just
like a kind and sympathetic father who has been confronted by his
child's impolite, rebellious, disobedient words said: Leave me alone.
This pain and suffering is more agreeable to me than your degrading
statements).171

In the Hadith of this same narrator in Muslims books "Sahih" we read
such: (Thursday! what a sinister Thursday!? Then tears fell from Ibn
Abbas's eyes and I saw them as streams on his cheeks, then he said:
Bring me the shoulder-blade bone of a sheep and ink (or a clay slate and
ink) so I may write you a writing that will prevent you from ever going
astray. They said: The Prophet speaks irrelevantly) 172

Another narrative is related in Bukhari's book "Sahih" in which Ibn
Abbas says: [At the time when the Prophet's death was near there were
certain men present in his home and room, amongst them Umar Ibn Khattab.
The Prophet said: Bring me something so I may write you a letter that
will keep you from ever going astray. At this Umar said: The Prophets'
illness has prevailed over him and his words are not based on sufficient
health and mind we have the Quran, Gods scripture being enough for us].
(Those who were present began to argue and they divided in two groups.
One group agreeing with Umar and the other opposing him. The Prophet
said: Get up from my side. 173 This noise and dispute in my presence is
not allowed).

We see that in the Prophets' presence, in front of him, at the moment
he wished to write down his last message, in order to leave as a
heritage his last and most important words of guidance for the people,
what they said and did. How do you think the Prophet felt at that time
and what suffering did his dear ones Ali, Fatimah, Hassan and Hussein
endure? At the most sensitive moments of ones life, the time of death
and that of a great, learned man, not allowing him to speak or deliver
his last will, this brings great grief and suffering. If also the
guidance of one nation, the guidance of millions of human beings and
even all human beings until eternity is at stake, what then is the
enormity of this suffering?

In another place we find these words: When the noise and dispute
heightened and the Prophet became upset at their actions he said: "Get
up" and in some other narratives Ibn Abbas adds this sentence: The
tragedy, the whole tragedy was that they didn't allow the Prophet to
write his will". 174

It is completely clear that the great tragedy and suffering o f the
Prophets and their executors was not their being killed, because
martyrdom in the way of God was their honour. The true tragedy and
suffering was when a prophet in his last hours wished to write for his
nation his final message; (a message which would be their sure way to
salvation and would prevent their possible fundamental differences) and
his closest followers didn't allow it and prevented it. Meaning that
they obstructed guidance and were a barrier to salvation. We understand
the depth of the Prophets' inner suffering when he said: "No Prophet was
tormented as they tormented me. Indeed, which prophets' companions
treated their prophet in such a way?

Alright, lets see why they didn't allow him? In one narrative, after
Umars last remark (This man speaks in delirium) we read: They said to
the Holy Prophet: Should we bring the tablet and pen? He answered: After
that remark what do you want to bring! What did the Prophet mean by that
remark? A person who after years of claiming to follow him stands before
him and looking him in the eye says: This man speaks in delirium. This
very person, especially if he obtains a group of supporters - which he
will later be able to prove that the Prophet wrote this letter when he
was "not of sound mind", and that his words in this letter are based on
delirium and nothing else! Maybe he would even add something like: - -
in such a state the Prophet couldn't write his will. Even if he had
written it, he (Umar) would have said: We had said that at that time the
Prophet was speaking in delirium. This will is as such based on
delirium. Then persons such as Abu Ubaydah Ibn Jarrah, and Amr-e-Aas
would also back him up (their good friend) saying: Yes we were witnesses
to the fact that the Prophet was not well and his mind was not clear,
and in that state the will was written. If remarks made in delirium had
been proved regarding the Prophet, his words would have lost their
credibility and his prophethood would have been harmed bringing about
doubt in the minds of some. Later this would become an unabolishable
point of disgrace in Islams' pure being. They certainly would have every
means to prove their point and further their aim.

**Now we will return to our original discussion.**

Did Umar and his friends prevent the Prophet from writing his will
because they were afraid the Prophets will would be confused or mixed
with the Quran? Was it for this reason they told Abdullah the son of
Amr-e-Aas not to write down the Prophets words? Or is the matter
something else and the reason elsewise. We see that it is clearly proved
that they were afraid some remark would remain from the Prophet which
would become a barrier to their own interests and desires, and destroy
the hopes and aims they had nurtured for many long years.

This powerful group prevented the recording of the Prophets words
during his lifetime, and after the Prophet they tried to prevent the
words memorized by his companions from being recorded and related.
Weren't those who gained the governorship and leadership after the
Prophet all from Quraish, and all of the Immigrants (Muhajerin)? Weren't
the Prophets words in reproach of and damnation for them and their
descendants?

Up until now our discussion has been on the first means of alteration
which was the prohibition of the narration of the Prophets Hadith;
preventing his words from reaching the people outside of Medina and the
new Muslims, those who had not seen the Prophet in person. This was so
that the Caliphates administration could train them in thought just as
they themselves wished, and raise them as they so desired.

