History Confirms Our Opinions
=============================

In order to better clarify the events we narrated we will once again
return to history.

During the Prophets dying moments, Abu Bakr was in his own home (which
was on the outskirts of Medina in 'Sunh'. 175

Historians, writers of Hadiths, and geographical experts all agree that
Sunh, the location of Abu Bakr's home, was outside the city of Medina.
Even upon gaining the leadership he remained there for some time,
sometimes coming mounted to lead the communal prayers and sometimes not
coming at all, when Umar prayed in his place. 176 As such, Abu Bakr was
not in Medina at the time of the Prophets death. The events that led to
him leaving for home were as such: Abu Bakr led the morning prayers
without the Prophets permission. When the Prophet heard his voice he
opened his eyes and lifted his head from Ali's lap saying: Pick me up.
Ali took him under one arm and Fadhl Ibn Abbas took him under the other
and they brought him to the mosque. The Prophet was so ill and in so
much pain that he couldn't put his feet on the ground. According to
Bukhari in his book "Sahih". 177 The Prophets legs were like two sticks
being pulled on the ground and as such drew lines in the dirt. In this
condition he went towards the "Mehrab" (pulpit), pushed Abu Bakr aside
thus interrupting the prayer, then he himself beginning the
prayer........

Abu Bakr was thus confronted with defeat, and so he wouldn't be
completely broken and totally set aside from the scene, after prayers he
went to the Prophet saying: Allow me to go home! The Prophet possessing
modesty and decency gave him permission without saying anything else to
him and he left for Sunh. Therefore all of the events before and
simultaneous with the Prophets death occured without the presence of Abu
Bakr. The political directors on the scene however felt danger and were
afraid that an oath of allegiance would be pledged without Abu Bakr
being there, and so to say the god of the governorship and leadership of
the nation would inevitably slip from their hands. Because of this they
acted out another plan. Umar began screaming: The Prophet has not died.
Like Moses he has gone to his lord - Moses disappeared from among his
people for forty days and after forty days he returned, but the people
had said he had died - I swear to God that the Prophet will return just
as Moses returned and he will cut off the arms and legs of those who
thought him dead. 178 And in another narration; I will cut off the head
of any one who says he is dead with this sword. These actions, which
were performed with great energy and vigor, surprised everyone and made
them hesitate, some asking him: Has the Prophet spoken to you about this
or made a special testimony to you on the matter of his death? After
which he gave a negative reply.

Umar screamed and threatened so much that his mouth foamed. 179 In the
middle of all this, Salem, Abu Huzaifehs freed slave, one of his close
aids and one of those loyal to his party (cause) went to Sunh to bring
Abu Bakr. The raving and threats continue until Abu Bakr enters the
center of the crowd. When Umar saw Abu Bakr his shouting and clamour was
forgotten and he sat down. 180 During that time one of the Prophets
companions had recited Quranic verses for him which proved the Prophets'
death; but he had not listened, and payed no attention. Amr-e-Ibn Ghais
Ibn Zardeh read this for him:

'---Arabic text---'

181 and others mentioned other reasons but it had no effect on him.
Just seeing Abu Bakr and hearing his speech (even though he only
repeated those very verses) pacified Umar.

Historians have given various explanations for this occurance. Some
say: Because of Umars great affection and love for the Prophet he
couldn't believe his death. Some said: He had lost control of his senses
because of the severity of the tragedy and thus his actions on that day
were not based on a sound state of mind. But we think that the great
scholar Ibn Abi al-Hadids opinion is correct when he said:

[When Umar heard of the Prophets death he feared the peoples revolt and
uprising on the matter of the Imamate. He was afraid that the Ansar
(helpers) or some others would take over the leadership and government.
Consequently he saw it expedient to keep the people quiet in any way
possible, and for this reason he said what he said and caused the people
to hesitate and doubt so that the religion and government remained
intact. All of this went on until Abu Bakr arrived.]

As such we see that the party was at work and was striving to gain
control of the events taking place. Preventing the Prophet from writing
his last testimony in the final moments of his life was only for fear of
the written, decisive appointment of the next leader. After his death
they also took control of events so that this appointment could not be
made by oath of allegiance.......

Here, although it does not deal with the particular incident at hand
the narration of this historical point is necessary in our discussion We
may read in Tabaris book "Tarikh" and in other creditable records; When
Abu Bakr was at his dying hour he called for Uthman. No one else was
present. Abu Bakr said; Write this down:

In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. This is what Abu
Bakr testifies as his last will to the Muslims......

saying this he fained. Uthman continued writing:

I have appointed Umar Ibn al-Khattab as my successor and in doing so
had your best interest in mind.

At this moment Abu Bakr came to and said to Uthman:

Read to me what you have written.

Uthman read the will to him: Abu Bakr said:

"Allahu Akbar"

and then added:

I think you feared if I died in this state of unconsciousness the
people would end up in dispute?

Uthman said:

Yes!

Abu Bakr then said:

'---Arabic text---'

and then signed Uthmans' writing.

Afterwards they took the will to the mosque. Umar was sitting among the
people and with a stick in his hand he says:

O' People, listen to and obey the words of the Holy Prophets' (s.a.w)
Caliph, he says: I have done all I could in your best interests!

Pay attention here that Umar does not say Abu Bakr was talking in
delirium and doesn't think that pain has overtaken him, and does not
take refuge in Gods scripture. Those were all peculiar to the Prophets
last testimony. We ask you, was the matter as simple as it appeared or
did they by any possible means wish to prevent the Prophet from writing
his will? Was the real reason for the prohibition of narrating Hadiths
fear that they would become confused with the Quran. Or did they fear
that the pure and good men among the companions would be clarified, who
were not of their group and party - or that the insurgents and
hypocrites would be revealed.

Haven't we read in the Quran:

"There are some people in Medina who are so experienced at hypocrisy
that you don't recognize them, We recognize them. You as a human being
even with all of your greatness, intelligence and insight can not
distinguish them from the others who are faithful, we must inform you of
their existence in revelation".

According to explicit Quranic verses these persons existed in Medina
among the Muslims and were so mysterious and sly that the only way to
recognize them was to rely on divine revelation and the words of the
Prophet. Because of this the words of the Prophet must not be related so
that in their midst curtains would be drawn and a group discovered. In
this way we have come to understand the reasons for the occurance in
Abdullah Ibn Amr-e-Aas's Hadith and the events subsequent to the
Prophets death. We have also arrived at the reasons for the prohibition
of the narration and recording of Hadith. We have discovered the
mysteries and secrets surrounding this important event.

Up to this point we have studied the first means for the alteration,
change and concealment of Islamic truths which was the prohibition of
the relating and writing of the Prophets Hadiths; and we have judged it
within the limits of these short discussions. For one hundred years
Hadiths were not written, and they trained the Muslims just as they
wished. In other words, the ruling administration took hold of the
peoples religious, political and social limits and rules and in all of
these subjects gave the people their own way of thought, controlling
them as such. They gained this power when the Prophets Hadith, the
second pillar of Islam, was eliminated from the social scene and
lifestyle for the Muslim community. Only that which caused no harm to
the ruling administration and did not oppose the governments political
policies was propagated.

