3 Causes of Distortions
=======================

**Introduction: A review of past discussions.**

Our primary discussion revolved around discovering what Islam
originally was and what it became afterwards. This was so that as a
result we could find out what our duty is in this time and era and
understand our responsibilities in this respect.

It was on this very course that we were informed of the Prophet's
prediction that whatever occured in past nations and religions would
also occur in this nation: or [to a hair]. In considering this, we said
and observed that previous religions were upturned and altered by the
bullies and evil persons of past eras, who took over the religion after
each prophet. These alterations continued, until the entire religious
creed brought to that nation by its prophet had completely lost its
genuineness, and no matter how they strived, the human race could not
once again discover its original form.

These events, based on Divine Sunnat and human nature, also occured in
this nation. Mohammads (s.a.w) religious creed was the final Divine
Message, and because Divine grace necessitates that the human race must
never be without guidance, and it must be attainable after the necessary
striving and effort; the altered religious creed and upturned Islam in
the Final Prophets nation was once again restored by the self-sacrifices
of the Holy Imams, returned to the nation and place within reach of
those who desired the truth.

This was the main format of our discussion which we have once again
repeated here.

In the Previous book we studied in detail one of the important factors
in the alteration of religious creeds. In reality it may be called the
cornerstone of alteration; and its the concealment of the Prophets
Hadiths and the prevention of their propagation and publication. If with
regard to previous nations the Quran says: '---Arabic text---' in this
nation not only do those in charge conceal religious truths they also
prevent the devoted followers of Islam and the Quran from repeating them
and they burn their written copies of Hadiths. How can religion come to
us this way? Here it is that the first and most important means of
alteration gains its embodiment.

In our discussion and study we will now refer to the second means used
by the governments leaders and powerful, to alter Islam. This means,
being a follow-up on the first means, came about in the following
manner; In the first phase these bullies prevented the propagation of
Islams second pillar (the Prophets Sunnat) for as long as they could.
However, just as they knew that despite strict control a black market in
trade could exist, they also knew the there would be some persons among
the public who would propagate factual Hadiths, that opposed the
governments policies. For this reason, a special plan was necessary in
order to deal with this. We have seen that Maesam Tamar narrated Hadiths
for the people from a cross and they heard them and wrote them down.
They cut off Rashid Hejrys legs and arms leaving him to die but during
this he told his neighbours to come record Hadiths instead of crying.
They exiled Abu Dharr from city talk, and despite all of that he related
Hadiths. Which were related against the Caliphs will? They solved this
problem with one plan, and that being the second plan and means for the
alteration of Islam tried by them!

By God, how strange, painful and tormenting! Tears should be shed over
this, not Sayed Al-Shohada! This is because this deed was a three headed
arrow shot at the heart of Islam. No person was injured and no blood
spilled, but they killed the spirit, way of thought and peace that
hundreds died to preserve!? It also once again became necessary for tens
of the worlds pure generations to sacrifice their precious blood for its
return.

What did they do? They devised a plan to eradicate the validity of the
Prophets words, so that if someone should hear a Hadiths of the Prophet
it would bear no credibility with which a fact could be proven or a
correct action advanced; in other words the ability to recognize true
Islam and act thus wise would be eradicated!

Is such a thing really possible? In Mosess (a.s) nation was it possible
for his community and people to prove that his words, remarks and
speeches were unreliable and worthless? What would be left of that
Prophets religious creed if that was proved. It is with the utmost
regret that we say that this occured in the Islamic nation! This
religious sanctity and value was attacked from various sides, and much
effort was put into this aim! We ask; after all of these attacks and
efforts, what value was left for the Holy Prophets words among the
Muslim people? Wasn't it only rational and natural that they would lose
their belief in the Prophets Hadiths - the second pillar of Islam?

The effects of this deed was much more than that which we saw in the
study of their remarks such as:

'---Arabic text---'

182 At that time they declared that the book of God was enough for
them; nothing else being necessary. Here, however, they fabricated
events and created reasons to prove that other things (in other words,
the Prophets remark) according to principle have no worth, value or
credibility!?

182) A discussion and study of these remarks by the leaders after the
Prophet may be found in "Book two" of this series.

**The Second Factor In Alteration**

Certain narratives may be found in Muslims "Sahih", Ahmads "Musnad" and
other authoritative records. According to these narratives A'ishah is
their relator. Even though there are other narrators, I will relate it
first from A'ishah because the credibility of her Hadiths is greater
than the others in the eyes of the Sunnite sect.

According to the narrative of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in "Musnad" it is as
such: Aishah says:

"A large number of people from various Arab tribes had come to see the
Prophet, and gathering around him they were requesting various things of
him. Their number reached such an extent that they were pressing upon
the Prophet causing him discomfort. In order to aid the Prophet the
immigrants rose and pushed away the tribal Arabs from around him,
clearing the way the tribal Arabs from around him, clearing the way for
him to reach A'ishahs doorstep but he was forced to let go of his cloak
loosing it in the crowd. Upon reaching A'ishahs doorstep he jumped upon
it saying: "May God curse them!" Aishah says that she said: O' Messenger
of God they are eternally damned, you cursed them and your curse will
cause their damnation! The Prophet answered: O' daughter of Abu Bakr, By
God no, those whom I cursed will not be damned - This lie reaches its
peak here. See how far this falsity goes and what they say to remove the
credibility from The Prophets words - The Prophet said: I have made a
covenant with my Lord a covenant containing no infringements: I said to
my God: My lord, I am a human being just as all other average persons in
that I became angry. If at such a time I should make an unworthy or bad
remark to a believer make that remark an atonement for his sins, so that
my curse will become the atonement for their sins. 183

In another narrative by Aishah in Muslims "sahih" she says: "two men
came to see the prophet and held a discussion with him. I didn't hear
what they said but the holy prophet became very angry because of their
words and gave them curses and ill words in reply. When they left I
said: If some will find good fortune those two never will He said; why,
what has happened? I said: because you cursed those two and called them
names! He said: Don't you know what covenant I have made with my lord. I
made a covenant saying: My Lord! I am a human being. For every Muslim
that I call names or curse, make this curse or ill words purity and
zakat for them, as a result of my curse purify and cleanse him". 184

Now, after all of these narratives from the most creditable record,
relate that the Prophet had cursed Muawieh! This curse will be seen as
proof of his purity! If you were to relate that the Prophet cursed Abu
Sufian or others, what negative effect will it have? This curse means
superiority, not inferiority! It is an honour, not disgrace and shame!

The third narrative is also narrated from Aishah who says: "The Prophet
brought a prisoner to me. After the Prophet left, the prisoner escaped
as a result of my carelessness. The Prophet returned and asked me what
happened to the prisoner. I told him that while I was busy talking with
the other women the prisoner escaped. He said: Why? May God cut off your
two hands. Then I was thinking that because of the Prophets curse my
hand will certainly be cut off. I kept looking at my hands and wondering
which would be cut off first, and became completely immersed in this
thought! The Prophet came home and saw how I was staring at my hands,
turning them over repeatedly. He said: What happened! Are you crazy that
you move your hands such? I said: You cursed me, I'm turning my hands
and looking at them to see which come off first! Then the Prophet looked
towards the sky and after words of prayer said: O' God, I am a human
being and just as other people became angry, I am also enraged. If at
such a time I curse a believing man or woman make that curse purity and
cleanliness for them!" 185

The fourth narrative is also from A'ishah. She says:

"The Holy Prophet would begin praying and then pray so long that I
tired. He would say: O' God, I am a human being! Don't punish or requite
me for cursing and or tormenting a believer, or other person! 186

Another narrative has been related from Ai'shah that tells of a day
when the Prophet entered her house, sat facing the Qibleh, and raising
his hands said: My lord I am but a human-being don't reprimand or punish
me if I have scourged or tormented one of your slaves! 187

In yet another place she says: I saw the Prophet with his hands raised
in prayer, while he was saying: My lord, I am only a human-being, don't
punish or reprimand me if I have persecuted a believer or have spoken
ill words to him. 188

These types of narratives, the majority of which are related by
A'ishah, are not only one or two in number. Numerous examples of them
may be found in famous collections of Hadiths. 189

There are also narratives in the most important Sunnite collections of
Hadiths related by the Prophets companion Abu Harireh, another of their
creditable narrators says:

The Holy Prophet said: My lord, I am making an agreement with you that
you will never break. I am only human, If I have persecuted, cursed or
damned a believer, make resurrection day he will gain you favour and
closeness. 190

In another narrative he says: The Prophet said: My Lord, Mohammad is
but a human-being, just as all other men become angry (wrongly or
rightly) he also is angered. I have made a deal with you that you will
never break. Whenever I persecute, curse, or whip a believer, make this
act of mine an atonement for his sins and gaining of your favour so that
he will be close to you on resurrection day. 191

From these authoritative Hadiths in Sunnite sources we draw the
conclusion that the Prophets cursing of Muawieh, Abu Sufian and other
Quraishite leaders is only the reason and means of their closeness to
God, causing their purity and an atonement of their sins. Therefore, it
becomes clear who reaps the greatest benefit from these Hadiths, those
who for many years to follow, were the Muslims leaders, having control
over the people lives, property, religion and customs.

Again A'ishah relates that the Prophet said: I have make an agreement
with my lord upon which there may be no infringement. I said to him
such: My lord I am only human, I become angry just as they do I become
upset and hurt. So for every Muslim that I have hit (for this reason),
cursed or prosecuted, make these acts of mine forgiveness, mercy and
favour for him so that they may be close to you on the last Day. 192 In
another place she claims that she heard the Prophet say: O A'ishah don't
you know about the pact I have made with my lord? I said in this pact: O
lord I am a human-being and just as a human-being is angered I too
become angry, so for every Muslim I have cursed make my curse pardon for
him! 193

She also says that the Prophet told me: Don't you know O A'ishah, that
in my prayers to God I told him that I am only human and will inevitably
become angry; for every curse I make based on this, regarding one of
blessing, good, pardon, mercy and purity for them! 194

They related many narratives from the Prophet on this matter, not one
or two, not one or two ways. When these types of narratives exist, how
can the Prophets Hadiths be an indication of the truth and iterator of
reality? What form will his identity as a Prophet or even as a Muslim
take!?

The instances of these improper curses and ill words were shown by
A'ishah to be not just one, or two or three times. At one time it is a
group of Beduin Arabs. These servants of God had come to Medina and had
requests of the Prophet. He cursed them. One time he cursed two Muslims
who had come to see him. One time he cursed A'ishah and so
on.......Secondly each time he said: I have asked of God and have made
an agreement with him that these curses should be make for the cursed,
blessing, pardon, mercy and proof of their esteem!

**Lets Look into these Narratives**

Now we will examine the narratives related above. In Bukharis "Sahih",
Muslims' "Sahih", Abu Davouds' "Sunan" Ahmads' "Musnad" and Abu Avaneh's
"Musnad" this narrative has been related from Abdullah Ibn Massoud. he
quotes the Prophet as saying:

"To insult a Muslim is debauchery and to fight him is blasphemy". 195

Another narrative from Sabet Ibn Zahak has been related, he being a
companion of "Bayat Rezvan'. Here the Holy Prophet states:

"And if he damns him its the same as if he had killed him". 196

Abu Davoud relates: One of the Prophets companions had been caught in a
heavy wind and as it blew the cloak off of his shoulders he cursed the
wind. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) said: Don't curse the wind. It is
something that doesn't deserve to be cursed the curse returns to the
curses". 197

The same relates from the companion Abu Darda: The Holy Prophet said:
"If a curse is not deserved by the curse the curse returns to the
curser". 198

Ibn Massoud narrates that the Prophet said: "A believer is not a
reproacher, a frequent curser, or a speaker of ill or foul words". 199

It has been related from Abu Darda that the Prophet said: "Those who
undeservingly curse someone, will neither be an interceder nor a witness
for the people. 200

And it has also been related that the Prophet said to one of his
wives:

"I forbid you to be a frequent curser"

"Cursing a believer is the same as killing him".

"Its not proper for a believer to be a frequent curser".

"You cannot be a frequent curser and also one of the pious."

O' Abu Bakr, frequent curser and pious. By God no!

These two qualities may not be found in one person". 201

Again it has been related that A'ishah had said: I was with the Prophet
when I cursed the camel that I was riding. The prophet said: "Something
that has been cursed should not remain in our company, let it go, remove
it from this caravan". 202

Also she said: I was riding a camel and I cursed it. The Prophet said:
"Now that you have cursed that camel don't ride it again". 203

In Muslims "Sahih" this narrative is found in which one day a woman of
the Ansar cursed her camel.. The Prophet then said: "Take away that
camels saddle and free it. The cursed camel must not be with us". 204

With regard to these Hadiths how could it be possible for the Prophet
himself to have cursed all of those Muslims and believers
undeservingly?

In highly creditable records of history and Hadiths it has been related
from A'ishah that: The Prophet has never cursed a believer in order for
such to be said or remembered". 205

Doesn't this statement represent a weak memory? The same person who
relates. all those improper cursings of Muslims by the Prophet says: The
Prophet never cursed a Muslim.

In those same creditable records A'ishah once again relates the Prophet
never took his revenge from someone because of the torment they caused
him except for times when Divine laws were infringed upon. He never
punished someone with his own hand. He only punished them in the way of
God. No one ever requested something of him that he replied no; except
for when their request was something prohibited by God, because at such
times he was more distant from the prohibited than any other person. And
whenever he was confronted by two paths and had the option to choose
between two ways of doing something he always chose the way and path
that was easier for the people.

In another place A'ishah once again says 206: I never saw the Prophet
strike a female or male slave or servant and he never at any time beat
or struck one of his wives. In principle he never hit anyone except of
curse in times of war and Jehad. He never took revenge of someone for
saying something about him unless the matter was related to God and
religion, at such times he wouldn't certainly react. He was never
presented with two ways of doing something that he didn't choose the
easiest for the people unless the easiest was a sin since at such times
he was always the furthest from sin.

Another time we hear from A'ishah that: The Prophet never used bad
language and never made a noise or a commotion in the streets or market.
He didn't forgive, possessing remission and overlooking such things.
207

Several Jews were passing by the prophet and instead of saying:
"Greeting to You", they said "Death to you". A'ishah who was present
there-according to her own words - said: May death be to you and may God
damn you and his wrath be upon you!! The Prophet said: Calm down
A'ishah. You must show moderateness and leniency. Refrain form bad and
foul language. 208

These are things which A'ishah herself has related, and narratives that
have remained for us of the Holy Prophet. We also saw a few Quranic
verses at the beginning of this lesson. God says to us in the Holy Quran
that:
"Certainly an Apostle has come to you from among yourselves; grievous
to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous respecting
you; to the believers (he is) compassionate, merciful". 209

And also:

"Noon I swear by the pen and what the angels write. By the grace of
your lord you are not mad. And most surely you shall have a reward never
to be cut off. And most surely you conform (yourself) to sublime
morality". 210

We see that God speaks of His Prophet in this way and describes him as
such, but the narratives existing in the Caliphate schools authoritative
texts try prophets actions and words is carnal desire. They insist
because of his anger or displeasure with regard to certain persons, are
not related to the truth or reality.

**Again we return to the Quran:**

"I swear by the star when it goes down. Your companion does not err,
does he go astray; nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but
revelation that is revealed". 211

Of course we know that there are two types of revelation; its either
the Quran of which both the words and meanings are from God, or the
Prophets Hadiths in which the meaning and concept was inspired by
revelation and the words and expressions used to express it were chosen
by the Prophet himself. Either way the Prophet did not speak out of his
own desire. This was the Quranic insight regarding the Prophet and the
correct Islamic recognition of him.

**Why Did They Say Such Things?**

Now, with the knowledge that the first group of Hadiths are false lets
see why these sorts of Hadith came to be, and why these acts were
ascribed to the Prophet? These Hadiths strived to make the Prophets
commendations and refutals worthless and even further than that make the
Prophets words in general valueless and uncreditable. This was done so
that if a Hadith or Hadiths escaped the strict censorship of Hadiths
that went against the Caliphates policies, they could never be freed
from these bonds! The result of this being that if a commendation of
Salman is related from the Prophet or if they repeat a remark of his
about Ammar such as: "Ammar is one with the truth, and is never
separated from the truth" Or if from his holy mouth it would be heard
that he said about Abu Dharr:

"The earth or heavens has not produced one more truthful than Abu
Dharr".

It would no longer bear any value or have any credibility or worth.

In our previous lessons we learned that Quraish during the Prophets
lifetime had told Abdullah Ibn Amr-e-Ibn Aas:

You write down everything you hear the Prophet say? Even though he is
like all of us human beings and speaks in states of anger and
satisfaction. Sometimes he is pleased with someone and is happy, in
return praising him and commending him. At another time he is angry with
someone and speaks ill words to him, reproaching or slandering him. And
you write down and record everything he says on the basis of this human
characteristic. We also saw that Abdullah refrained from writing down
the Prophet's words and eventually told the Prophet of the Quraishits
remarks. The Prophet said: (Write down my Hadiths as you used to, I
swear by who holds my life in the hands of his power, nothing but the
truth comes out of these two lips. Words and Hadiths are the same at all
times, all are the truth).

After looking at this Hadith we may better understand the reason for
the propagation for the narratives under consideration. We may also
realize why the Quraishites, who later took over the highest government
positions, devalued the Prophets curses!!

In order for you to acknowledge the truth of our words we will refer to
Muslims book "Sahih" and he has named it as such:

"Regarding the person the Prophet curses or speaks ill language to and
Gods making that curse or ill words cleanliness and purity for him".

Under this chapter title Muslim mentions some of the narratives of Abu
Huraireh, A'ishah and others of which we have seem examples, then at the
end of this chapter he narrates the story of the Prophet cursing
Muavieh. The story goes like this:

"Several times the Prophet sent Abdullah Ibn Abbas after Muavieh,
summoning him. Each time Ibn Abbas would return saying that: "Muaveh is
eating". Eventually the Prophet said: "May God never make him full" And
they have narrated that until the end of his life Muavieh ate so much
they he tired but never became full.

We had seen that one day the Prophet saw Abu Sufian astride a camel
while his two sons Yazid and Muavieh were with him, one to propel the
camel and the other to halt it. he said:

"May God damn the rider, propeller and puller of that camel".

You see that due to the Hadiths under consideration these types of
curses for persons such as Abu Sufian, and Muavieh will have no meaning
for them except blessing, purity and remission. Therefore no matter how
many narratives of the Prophet you relate regarding his lacking in
creditability they will only be a praise and eulogy of their superiority
and greatness.

Also, previously we saw that the Prophet had cursed Hakam Ibn Al-As and
all of his descendants - except for the faithful among them whom he said
were very few. We also know that most of the Ummayed caliphs were the
descendents of this very Hakam: Abdul Mulk, Solaiman, Hesham, Valid and
Yazid etc.... All of them were damned in this curse! Do you think that
the powerful and Caliphs did not plot to remedy such narratives? Of
course they thought of a remedy and went to great efforts to put it to
work!

This group of bullies should think of a remedy for this categorical
narrative from Umar Ibn Marwah Jahmi.

He says: Hakam Ibn Abi Al-As, the third Caliph Uthman's paternal uncle,
Marwan's father and the grandfather of the Caliphs of Bani Ummayed, came
to the prophets door and asked permission to enter The Prophet,
recognizing his voice said: "It's a serpent that has come, let him come
in. Damn him and everyone of his offspring except for the truly faithful
who will be of course very few. They will attain high positions in this
world but not in the next!!"

There are many authoritative historical narratives and stories
regarding this matter but we will stop here because they are sufficient
to clarify the reason for the fabrication of the narratives spoken of
here. In this way we come to recognize and understand the reason for the
fabrication of narratives which removed the creditability from the
Prophets statements. We also came to realize how the Prophets words of
praise for one group of persons and revealing some persons or curses
regarding a certain other group lost their value becoming worthless.

