The Prophet Is Unfamiliar With Worldly Affairs
==============================================

What we have seen until now was one group of narratives designed to
make the Prophets Hadiths worthless. Also on these lines there exists
another group of narratives with the same plan in mind. We will now look
into them.

They have narrated from A'ishah and Anas that: "One day the Holy
Prophet was passing by a Palm-Grove. A group of men were busy
pollinating the Female trees. We know that all trees have males and
females including date-palms and the female is the one which bears
fruit. The male date-palm has a cluster called (Tala') in Arabic. The
palm-grove's owners cut off the male palms clusters and shake them on
the female trees new clusters so that the male palms pollen will fall on
the female palms clusters, dates being produced as a result. If this is
not done the dates will not grow and sweeten, and there will be no
dates. This is known by all of the people who live in regions that grow
palms and is not something that is hidden or kept secret.

After this necessary remark we now return to the main event. When
passing a group of men who were busy pollenating their palm trees, the
Prophet sees what they were doing and tells them that if they didn't do
that, the dates would turn out better. The Muslims obeyed his order and
as a result the dates of Medina were ruined that year. Another day as
the Prophet was passing by the Palm-grove and seeing the dates that were
all ruined by his order said; Why are your dates spoiled? They replied:
You told us that if we didn't pollenate the palms our dates would be
better and when we followed your advice our dates were spoiled! The
Prophet said: [You are more informed of your worldly duties than I, and
know better how to go about them!!!] 212

What is the result of these types of Hadiths which exist in the most
creditable Sunnite books? Doesn't it bear the consequence of saying that
the prophets statements regarding worldly affairs have little value? For
example if the Prophet has appointed a leader or guardian for the people
after himself it would have little weight because the people can find a
better leader themselves and appoint him; since he had said himself, and
proved with his own actions that the people are more informed and
intelligent with regards to the worldly duties!

The next result was that the people would get the idea that religion
had come to teach them how to pray, fast, supplicate and finally how to
worship but has no hand in worldly affairs, having left these matters to
them since they were more knowledged of such things. These types of
Hadiths want to say that if the Prophet teaches prayer, fasting and
worship there is no problem but he makes mistakes in worldly affairs
since he has spoken his own opinion, having received no divine
instruction in these matters. Doesn't this go on to say that religion
and politics are separate and that religion has nothing to do with
social life and matters related to the human world, having nothing to
say and no message on these lines. Doesn't this resemble the Christian
saying: [leave Caesar, and God's work to God]

Until this day I haven't seen anyone find fault with these Hadiths. No
scholar has questioned them. In all of the books on Hadiths and research
into weak Hadiths the narratives above mentioned are not included. Why?
Because these narratives appear in "Sahih" by Muslim, and this book and
their life have no room for fault or question in the Caliphate school
and are held as completely creditable.

How do you think someone who believes in the factuality of these
Hadiths thinks about the Holy prophet, and in what level of humanity,
intelligence and common sense do they recognize him to be? Do they in
principle see him on the level of an average human being in possessing
reasoning and thought? A Prophet that the Holy Quran in all truth has
said about him:

By the grace of your Lord you are not mad.

The Quraishite infidels only ascribed the Prophet with madness but
these types of Hadiths prove it in practice. If you were to travel to a
region where palm groves are abundant and ask any youth how palms are
made fertile you will see that they know all about the matter of
artificial pollenation, and also know that without it the palms will
bear no fruit.

However, these narratives say that even though the Prophet was over
fifty years old he didn't know about this simple matter. It is also
interesting to know that orientalists have also payed close attention to
these Hadiths and have written books having them in mind. In reality the
real reason that orientalists have based all of their studies on the
Caliphate schools books and records is the existence of these weak
points, thus introducing Islam and its Prophet according to the view
points found in them; because this way they can better make Islam the
target of their hostile attacks and criticisms.

The original instigators however strived to bring the Prophets
personality even lower than that of an average person with these
narratives. This was so first of all they could remove all credibility
from his words which represent Islam, and second of all so that Caliphs
after him would be comparable with him and even better than him. This
would as a result give the Caliphate its necessary credibility and
value.
**The Prophet Forgets Quranic Verses.**

The third group in this type of narrative which attacks the Holy
Prophets identity are those which try to prove that the Prophet was
forgetful. They say that he even forgot the Quranic verses revealed to
himself, taught to the people himself, and was commanded by God to
explain and interpret, as if he wasn't familiar with it at all. We see
these statements in the narratives to follow:

1) According to a narrative reported by Bukhari, Muslim and other
creditable experts of Hadiths, Aishah and Abu Huraireh have related: One
day while the Prophet was sitting in the Mosque he heard a Muslim
reciting the Quran, then saying: May God have mercy on him. This reciter
and reader of the Quran has reminded me of verses that I had completely
forgotten and had been dropping from a certain surah in the Quran. 213
In this narrative such has been related form A'ishah. Now lets see what
God says in the Quran:

We will make you recite so you shall not forget". 214

Quranic commentators have said: Before this verse was revealed, the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w) would repeat the Quranic verses as they were
revealed so he wouldn't forget them. Even before the verse was completed
he began reciting it. But after this verse was revealed the Prophet was
no longer afraid of forgetting them and he became content with God's
support. As such we see that in other verses the Prophet is commanded:

"Do not move you tongue with it to make haste with it, surely on Us
(devolves) the collection of it and the reciting of it. Therefore when
We have recited it, follow it's recitation. Again on us (devolves) the
explaining of it". 215

And again we find in the Quran itself this command:

....and do not make haste with the Quran before its revelation is made
complete to you......216

In creditable narratives there exists information which strongly
condemns these Hadiths. In Bukharis book "Sahih", Ibn Majeh's "Sunan"
and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal's "Musnad" we read that The Holy Prophet read the
Quran to the angel Gabriel once a year but in the year of his death this
was done twice. 217 This means that the Prophet read the entire Quran
from beginning to end and Gabriel listened.

In another place it is discussed and proved historically that the
Prophet had a special method for teaching the Quran to the Muslims. When
the verses were revealed which all concerned one topic he would recite
them for the people so they could memorize them, and so those who knew
how to write could record them on stone, bone, wood or leather. In this
way all of the Muslims recited the Quran, wrote it down and memorized
it. Afterwards the Prophet would begin to teach the practical and
theoretical interpretation of these verses and until they had not
learned it he would not move on to others. 218

We must judge fairly; with this orderly method of teaching and training
and the great amount of importance the Prophet placed on the teaching of
the Quran to the people and with attention to the fact that all of the
knowledge in that age was limited to the Quran, can we accept that the
Prophet refrained from protecting the Quran (his religions principle
book), or was careless with regard to it, forgetting or omitting several
of its verses.

2) They have narrated another narration of Abu Huraireh in Bukhari and
Muslim, relating that he said:

In one prayer-the narrator forgets whether it was evening or night
prayer-The Prophet performed two Rakats of the prayer with us, and
before the prayer was finished, after two rakats he gave the greetings
and stood and moved away towards the place he always stood when making a
speech. He stood there and clapped his hands together just as an angry
person would. He hit his right hand with his left. Pay attention that
this fabricator so precisely relates this narrative that you won't think
its a lie. Those who were in a hurry left the mosque first. Abu Huraireh
continues: Abu Bakr and Umar were there but their awe and reverence of
the Prophet prevented them from speaking. I thought that perhaps there
had been a new revelation and the prayer had been shortened to two
rakats. Zolyadain got up, 219 - he was one of the companions who was
called this because his hands were unusually long- and he said:

"O Prophet of God, did you forget or has the prayer been shortened to
two Rakats? The Prophet replied: I neither forgot nor has the prayer
been shortened. Then he asked the others; Is what Zolyadain said true?
Have I prayed less than I should have? The companion replied; Yes,
Prophet of God you recited less than required!!

The Prophet returned to his place and performed the amount of the
prayer he had forgotten, gave the greetings and Takbeer and after
performing a prostration returned to the place for delivering sermons.
Abu Huraireh says: The Holy prophet returned to his place of prayer
after hearing the companions words and performed the amount of prayer he
had forgotten with the congregation. If the prayer had three rakats he
performed one more and if it had four rakats two more were performed
with the people. Everyone followed him in the prayer, afterwards
performing extra prostrations. Notice that Abu Hurairah depicts himself
as completely circumspect in this narrative saying that he doesn't know
exactly which prayer it was so the listener will believe his veracity.

To study this narrative we must look at history. History tells us:
Zolyadain was martyred in the second year of the Hejrat in the battle of
Badr, and Abu Huraireh came to Medina from Yemen in the eighth year of
the Hejrat, then accepting Islam. Abu Huraireh came to Medina almost
five years after Zolyadains death and had never even see Medina during
the time Zolyadain was living there. Abu Huraireh told this story as a
narrative at a time when Zolyadain was not around nor most of the other
companions, and no-one dared to complain about it or refute it. Maybe
this story was made up when he was the governor of Medina in place of
Marwan Ibn Hakam during Muawiehs' rule and slandering and creating lies
related to the Prophet had buyers, while an enormous amount of the money
in the public treasury went to creating such Hadiths!!

Afterwards, caliphate Scholars inferred various religious laws from
this narrative for example turning you back on the Qibleh during the
prayer is alright and because of that you don't have to re-recite the
prayer, speaking during prayer is allowed and etc.

219) In five narratives in Bukharis "Sahih" and in Muslims book this
name has been mentioned and in other places Zol Shemalain which are two
nick-names for Abd-o-Amr Ibn Hanzlah from the tribe of Khaza'eh. This
man was martyred in the battle of Badr, 5 years before Abu Huraireh
became a Muslim and moved to Medina.

3) Once again in Bukharis "Sahih" and Ahmads "Musnad" it is narrated
from Abu Huraireh that:

Everyone had gathered for communal prayer, everyone was formed in rows
behind the Prophet ready to perform the prayer. The Prophets was in his
place ready to lead them in the prayer. Everything and everyone was
ready for the Prophets takbeer when suddenly the Prophet remembered he
was in a state of impurity! Abu Huraireh adds: The prophet said to us:
Stay in your places just as you are now. He then went home performed his
"ghusl" and then returned to the Mosque. He went to his place of prayer
while there was water dripping from his head, recited the takbeer, and
led the prayer while we performed it with him. 220

If such events occured in the Prophets lifetime, or if they are related
truthfully or falsely by persons who appear to be of his supporters,
what esteem will remain for him? He is so forgetful and careless that he
performs a three or four rakat prayer in two rakats, or on another day
he forgets his own Quran and when a Muslim recites it says: I had
omitted this verse from the Quran, this man reminded me of it, may God
have mercy on him. You will see that as a result of the narration of
this collection of Hadiths, what will be left of the prophet and what
worth and esteem will he find in the views of those who believe these
Hadiths!

We will end this lecture with one more narrative by Abu Huraireh. This
narrative shows the real identity of Abu Huraireh the great narrator of
these types of narratives, which unfortunately exist in the most
creditable Sunnite books of Hadiths. One day Abu Huraireh said amongst a
group of Muslims:

"The best alms is the property a rich person leaves for his children! A
listener who afterwards also related this narrative said: I said to him:
"Did you hear that from the Prophet himself?" This proves that a group
of Abu Huraireh contemporaries also recognized him for what he was or at
least they had come to doubt his words or him because of the numerous
Hadiths Abu Huraireh, seeing the doubt in the listener of his words or
realizing his disbelief, admits an enormous fact saying:

"No I didn't hear it from the Prophet, in truth its from Abu Hurairehs'
sack!! 221

This narrative from Bukharis book "Sahih" is narrated in Ahmads
"Musnad" using different expressions which is even more interesting.
According to the narrative in Ahmad Ibn Hanbals "Musnad" the people say
to him:

"Did you hear that remark from the Prophet, did the Prophet say that,
or did you take it from your own sack? Abu Huraireh said: This narrative
is from my own sack. 222

Can it be known how many of these manufactured Hadiths came from his
own sack? Can it be known to what extent these types of Hadiths changed
the visage of our revered Islam? It can be considered probable that of
the collection of more than five thousand Hadiths by Abu Huraireh many
are his own creations or according to his contemporaries interpretation,
came out of his own sack!

Our lecture and study revolved around the second means by which Islam
was altered. These narratives with their efforts to discredit the
prophets words and lower his esteem removed the reliability from an
enormous part of true Islam. Therefore if the Prophet scolded or cursed,
and if the Prophet praised, commended or payed tribute it has no
credibility or true basis because he is human and life every other human
becomes angered or happy. Also if he speaks of this worlds matters and
gives advice, whatever he says has no basis or credit, being worthless.
Later of course they studied these types of Hadiths and with great
effort tried to create religious foundations and basis for them. They
said: The Prophets words were based on his own personal vote and
opinion. He gave an opinion and exegisis and others who opposed him on
these matters, like the Caliphs, all gave their exegesis and expressed
their opinions and vote. These types of oppositions are seen as the
opposition of two jurisprudents with one another and there is no
objection to it. As such, if the Prophet made a remark, or if he gave a
command or exegesis regarding some matter and the caliphs in opposition
to his exegesis said something and went against him they have also given
their exegesis. The Prophet gave his opinion and they gave theirs, it is
one exegesis against another. It's evident that its true when we said
that these narrative make up the foundation of religious belief, and
even worse, that these types of narratives also alter Islam, this is
because the basis of exegesis is personal vote and opinion, and this
personal vote and opinion is also a great source for upturning Islamic
religious law.

These type of narrative, which discredited the Prophets words, was an
arrow with two targets. Of course, as we will see in the future - God
Willing there are also arrows with three targets which will be studied
next week. But when we said that these narratives were arrows with two
targets it was because first of all they discredited the Prophet and his
identity. We know that when the Prophet has fallen from esteem,
practical credibility and superior identity, injury and harm also
befalls the people's religion and beliefs because he is a part of
Islams' text, his identity and actions being a section of Islam. In this
way both the Prophet and his religion were attacked. It is here that the
second large factor in the alteration of Islam is formed; because they
spoke in opposition to the Quranic verses which state clearly:

"The Prophet does not speak of his own and his words are based alone on
Divine revelation"

Insisting on the opposite and apparently they proving that the Prophet
spoke out of his own will and carnal desire. For this very reason the
Prophets Hadiths value was broken and brought down to the level of other
persons words. Therefore if in one corner of the Islamic world the
Prophets Hadiths reached the people secretly it did not still retain its
necessary value and credibility since some companions or the Caliphs
could oppose it and put themselves forward as compared with them.

For example if the Prophet taught Divine rules regarding "Mat'atul Haj"
and "Mat'atun Nesa" and the Caliph dares to say and the people accept
that:

'---Arabic text---'

Since the Prophet has spoken of one matter in worldly affairs and the
Caliph spoke words on that same matter opposing the Prophets not only is
it alright, but its also completely creditable. Because of this the
people practiced the Caliphs command and refrained from the prophets:
This is a particularity of the Caliphate School.

Ali Ibn Abi Talib and his sons up until Hojat Ibn Al Hassan (a.s) did
not add to or detract even one word from the Prophets sayings and never
spoke of their own. Imam Mohammad Baqir (a.s) and or Imam Ja'far
Al-Sadeq (a.s) didn't say: "I say!" or "I prohibit" and other things
such as these, and their students such as Zarareh, Mohammad Ibn Muslim
and Hesham until this day have not spoken of their own vote or opinion.
They said: "The Prophet said such or God said this". 223

**This is a particular of the school of Ahlul Bait.**

We were discussing which instruments were used to change some of the
aspects and laws of Islam after the Prophet. Just as we saw in detail,
the first factor was that they didn't allow the Hadith of the
commentator and expositor of the Quran and missionary of Islamic law,
spoken in completion of this mission. The prohibition of relating
Hadiths stayed in effect for many long years and that of their written
recording up until the end of the first century A.H, meaning it lasted
approximately 100 years.

During that time if anyone wrote down Hadiths they were collected and
burned. In addition to this, a group of the famous companions of the
Prophet such as Abu Dharr and Ibn Massoud, who lived outside of Medina
and far from the watchful eyes of the Caliphate narrated Hadiths, were
summoned to Medina and were kept under surveillance.

The first factor in the alteration and changing of Islamic law and
world perspective was this, the power which didn't allow the Prophets
Hadiths to be promulgated amongst the people and become available to the
Muslims. We include this prohibition in the series of factors in
alteration since we know that the new Muslims wanted to know about
Islam, wanted to know what their Prophet did and said in various
situations and events, they wanted an interpretation of the Quran,
wanted to know about their religious duties in social and personal
matters. If as such the ruling power prevents the narration and
recording of the Prophets words, the people will have no choice but to
turn to other places and sources and thus become possible that they will
come to rely on incompetent persons. Those in power and the rulers of
that time took the necessary steps to take care of this necessity and
natural course. Kaab al-Ahbaar the Jew was charged with the
interpretation of the Quran and to answer questions regarding God and
resurrection. Kaab al-Ahbaar is not a name but a title and shows the
persons position and post. Habr means scholar and Kaab al- Ahbaar means
the leader of Jewish religious scholars. He, Tamim Dary and Wahab Ibn
No'beh are those from whom the people learned the interpretation of the
Quran and the learnings of Islamic resurrection and God. Kaab sat in the
mosque and people asked him of matters concerning interpretation. He
appeared with the Caliph Uthman and gave answers to questions regarding
practical Islamic laws.

By regarding this we can clearly understand the truth of how in this
way, altered Judaism and Christianity and the many years of ridiculous
beliefs that have been crammed into it, affected the realm of Islam, and
found their way into the center of God's religion. Because of all this
the prohibition of the promulgation of Hadith is one of the biggest
factors of alteration in the various aspects of Islam. In the future -
God willing - we will return to this matter and we will research and
study new matters related to it.

**The Secret Propagation Of Hadiths.**

We also pointed out in the past that man will always think of a way or
a solution for fighting a governments despotism and severity and the
prohibitions of powerful rulers. Secretly and under ground they will
strive to obtain their sought after desire. On the matter at hand,
meaning the prohibition of promulgating the Prophets hadiths, whose very
secret struggles and sometimes open ones of the people against the
Government came to be. As such, far from the eyes of the governments
officers and secretly, these Hadiths were to some extent narrated and
spread about. Such as we have seen, a group of them were hung and
narrated Hadiths, and or sat under the sword of an executioner and
repeated the prophets words. In this way, contrary to the ruling powers
wishes, some of the prophets hadiths were promulgated., This event
caused the principle agents for the Caliphates government, anxiety and
fear. It was because of this that a special program became necessary for
the execution of the Caliphates principle political plan.

