A New Policy
============

The ruling authority thought that they must think of a way to remove
the credibility from the promulgated hadiths. Because of this they
centered their efforts on trying to remove the Prophet's Hadith and
words from their worth, credibility, holiness and heavenlyness. We know
this plan and action as the second large - scale factor in the
alteration of Islam, having talked about and studied various angles of
it in the previous lesson.

In the previous lesson we saw that by narrating certain Hadiths, all of
the Prophets praise and eulogy concerning Islams true heroes and great
men, and all of the refutals, condemnation, curses and reproaches
uttered by him with regard to Islams hidden and apparent enemies were
discredited. They said that the Prophet said: I am also human, and like
all of them I am angered and made happy and I speak based on these
states. Likewise, we saw that in one place they related the Prophet as
saying: You are more informed and intelligent than I in your own worldly
affairs. The result being that its not necessary for you to heed these
kinds of remarks from me or follow my example in these sorts of matters.
It is certain that these narratives removed the credibility from an
enormous group of the remarks and sayings of the Prophet.

But more important and higher than all of this was that a series of
Hadiths was fabricated from the most creditable of the Caliphate schools
narrators, and in them the effort was made to bring the position and
place of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) even lower than an average persons. I
had said this many times previously but now I wish to link the factor
and principle reason for this act. The effort was made in these
fabricated Hadiths to introduce the Holy prophet (s.a.w) in such a way
that would bring him lower than an intelligent and orderly person and an
average Muslim! Did they really do that? Were they able to enact their
plan? With all due regret the answer is positive. The real pain and
suffering is here! The Killing tragedy is here! Martyrdom was not pain
for these great men but an honour, a desire. Of course it is pain but
only a physical pain, meaning a small pain that they buy in the way of
God! The real pain is that of Islam's destruction and the obliteration
of the spirit and being of its Prophet. This large group of Hadiths
strived to remove the Prophets esteemed identity or in reality destroy
true Islam. Isn't the Holy Prophet important and doesn't he have a hand
in Islams being. Aren't his sayings the commentator and clarifier of the
Quran, and speaker of Islams laws and beliefs? According to this,
destroying his position, identity and esteem, and his words, means the
destruction of all of Islams foundation and all of the basis for Gods
religion, and last of all upturning the whole structure for the way to
mans good-fortune.

I have narrated this incident for you, but tonight for this lecture I
see it necessary to once again repeat it so that we may recognize the
reason and root of these types of fabricated events and Hadiths and
grasp the primary reason for their creation.

**Muaviehs Sinister Aim**

The source of this historical incident is firstly the commentary of
Allameh Ibn Abi al-Hadid on the Nahjul Balgheh. Also, older than that
"Moravej al-Dhohab" by Massoudy which is an extremely creditable record
of Islamic history, and older and more valuable than these is the book
"al-Mowaffaqiat" by Zobair Ibn Bekar who was highly bigoted regarding
the Prophets descendants and because of this possesses greater validity
in relating this incident. This book is also one of the oldest sources
for the history of Islam and it was probably written about 1100 years
ago.

Zobair Ibn Bekar narrates from Motarref son of Mogheerat Ibn Sha'ba: I
along with my father Moghaireh had gone on a trip to Sham and had
visited Muavieh - All that time Moghaireh was Muaviehs governor in
Kufeh, and their friendship had probably been from the "age of
ignorance" - Every evening my father went to Muaviehs evening parties
and held conversations with him. When he came home each night he would
talk in wonder of Muavieh and his insight, sagacity and intelligence.
Even though he himself was one of the intelligent Arabs he remarked with
great surprise that which he saw in Muavieh. One night, however, after
visiting Muavieh I saw he wasn't eating, being extremely upset and deep
in thought. I hesitated for an hour or so because I thought that my
fathers annoyance was from something we had done and or because of
something that had occured regarding us . Eventually I could wait no
longer and I turned to my father saying: Why are you so upset and
annoyed tonight?

He said: My son! I have come back from seeing the most malicious and
filthy of persons!

I said: What! why do you say that?

Every night he had participated in Muaviehs evening parties and
returned home with a mouth full of commendation and praise for Muavieh
and his intelligence, sagacity and cleverness but tonight says: I have
come from the company of the most malicious and unbelieving of persons?
I thus asked the reason for this, saying: What happened?

He replied: Muaviehs party was free of others and we were talking very
privately with complete cordiality and sincerity. I said to him: "O'
Amir al-Mu'meneen! You have obtained your desires and wishes. Now, with
your advanced age, how appropriate it would be for you to practice
justice and treat others with kindness. If you were to look kindly upon
you kin - Bani Hashem - and observe the bonds of relationship with them
it is in order. I swear to God! Today they possess nothing that could
arouse fear and alarm in you. They are you paternal cousins, be good to
them and observe the bonds of your relationship so that in the future
you will be remembered in good terms".

Muavieh answered: Woe is you! This desire is quite impossible and
incapable of being carried out. Abu Bakr ruled and was just and bore all
of those burdens, but by God! when he died his name died alongside him.
Of course it is possible that someone will say: Abu Bakr! Then Umar came
to power, strived and suffered during those ten years but only a few
days after his death nothing remained of him except that sometimes a
speaker will say: Umar!

Then our brother Uthman obtained the Caliphate. There was no man with a
lineage like his! He did as he did and they treated him as they did but
when he was killed, by God, his name also died and his actions and deeds
were forgotten!

This is while the name of this man, the son of Abu Kabsheh (he means
the Holy Prophet, this being the nick-name that the Quraishite infidels
gave as a taunt to him) is called out five times everyday throughout the
Islamic world, and is remembered in greatness:

'---Arabic text---'

O Motherless, under such circumstances what deed will be remembered and
what good name is everlasting?! No by God! I will not sit still until I
bury the name and bury this memory and favourable mention! 224

**Muaviehs' Efforts To Achieve This Aim**

Muavieh remained faithful to his pledge and put all of his effort into
achieving it. According to our belief these Hadiths were fabricated
during Muaviehs time. In principle he created workshops for Hadith
narrating and the fabrication of narratives, and his enactors of this
sinister policy were persons such as Abu Huraireh, Amr-e-As, Moghaireh
Ibn Shobeh, Malek Ibn Ons and Samorat Ibn Jondab. It is in the Hadiths
of some of them that the Prophet is stripped of his identity, esteem and
worth and is brought down to the level of an average human-being and
even lower. In comparison to Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and even Muavieh and
Yazid he is introduced as inferior. This is what we called in the
previous lesson a three headed arrow, one with three targets. In this
plot they accomplished three deeds. They altered Islamic law, ruined the
Prophets reputation and esteem and raised the agents and rulers after
him to a level higher than him, giving them a more eminent identity! You
will confirm that this was a three sectioned arrow with three targets.

The Hadiths and narratives which took charge of this sinister and Islam
wrecking mission exist in Bukharis "Sahih", Muslims' "Sahih" and tens of
other texts. We, however, will rely on Bukhari's book because according
to the Caliphate school it is the most authoritative religious texts
after the Quran! They name the most authoritative religious texts like
this: The Holy Quran, Bukharis's "Sahih", Muslims "Sahih" Abu Davouds
"Sunan" etc. This school and its followers do not deem lawful, doubt or
hesitation regarding even one word of Bukharis "Sahih".

A narrative is related from A'ishah; the Prophet entered my room and
home while two female singers were singing songs of the age of ignorance
and it's wars. The Prophet walked in and without any reaction went and
lay down on his bed. Just then Abu Bakr entered and when he saw the two
singers he spoke to me harshly saying: Satanic music and singing in the
Prophets' presence?

In another narrative from the same book Abu Bakr says: O' servants of
God are you performing Satanic Music and singing? (he repeats this three
times). The Holy Prophet turned to him saying: Leave them alone, each
group and nation has a holiday and today is ours (either the days of
Qurban or Arafah). Let them sing. After this incident and these words,
as soon as my father turned his back on them I made a gesture towards
them and they quickly left my room and home.

In those same narratives by A'ishah, such is related: It was a holiday
and several of the people of Abyssinia were celebrating and dancing.
They had come to the mosque and as was their custom were dancing with
swords. I asked the Prophet or either he suggested: Do you want to see
their celebrating and dancing? I said I did and gave a positive answer.
The Prophet picked me up!! and while my face was next to his I started
watching the Abyssians swords dance inside the mosque. They danced. I
watched and the prophet repeatedly said: O' Abyssinians, continue. This
scene continued and I remained on the Prophet's shoulders until I became
tired and weary". The Prophet who felt my fatigue said: "Is that enough
for you?" I replied: "Yes!" He said: "Then go".

Pay attention that these statements are recorded in the books "Sahih"
of Bukhari and Muslim, texts which have the highest place credibility in
the Caliphate school.

In another narrative again A'ishah says: It was a holiday, a group of
Abyssinians had come to the Prophets mosque and were engaged in dance
and celebration. The Prophet called me to watch their dancing. I went to
the Prophet and placed my head on his shoulder and from there watched
the Abyssinians special dance. This situation continued until I wearied
and stopped watching.

In another place she says: There were some players. I told the Prophet
that I'd like to and wish to see their performance. The Holy Prophet
stood in the doorway facing the mosque and I stood behind him placing my
head on his shoulder and watching from between his shoulder and ear.
That group was performing then in the mosque. In another Hadith she
says: I put my head on the Prophet shoulder and the Prophet lowered
himself and his shoulder, then I watched from over his shoulder until I
was satisfied and tired of doing so. In the above narratives this is
related: know the value of and appreciate teen-age girls who according
to their nature at that age wish to see and are fond of play, dancing
and pleasure. If you have a teen-age daughter and she wishes to hear
music and song, or look at strange men and or watch dancing, don't
prevent her just as the Prophet treated me, not interfering in or
preventing what I did.

In yet another narrative she says: I was looking into the mosque from
behind the Prophet while the Abyssinians were dancing and performing.
The Prophet would say to them: O Abyssinians clap and dance and perform
so the Jews and Christians will know that there is freedom in our
religion, and these acts are lawful! The Abyssinians who were gladened
and joyful at the Prophets reaction said: "Abul Qasem, good!!

At this moment Umar entered the mosque. Because of his formidable
presence the Abyssinians were frightened and scattered in all
directions. Not only did they not fear the Prophet, they received
encouragement and persuasion' from him, but they did not resist Umar for
even a moment.

In another narrative, we read: (Unfortunately all of these Hadiths were
related from Ai'shah). The Prophet was sitting at home in his room when
upon hearing the people shouting and making noise outside he went to see
what it was all about. He saw that an Abyssian women was dancing and the
noise was theirs'. He said: O' Aishah come and look. I went close to him
and placing my face against his back looked at the scene from over his
shoulder. Some time passed in this manner. The Prophet asked me A'ishah
are you finished watching? I said, No! He asked me this several times
and every time I repeated the negative answer, even though he was tired
and started shifting his feet! I did this because I wanted to know how
much worth and esteem he held for me!! Suddenly Umar entered the mosque.
The people dispersed and the children all ran to some corner. The
Prophet said: I saw that the Human and Jinne devils fled from Umar!!
225

Yes, these devils are not frightened by the Prophets' presence in their
gathering, and he enjoys dance and song, listening to it and watching
it. Umar however is possessed with such appalling presence and spiritual
reverence that all of the devils are frightened upon seeing him and
flee. And he is in principle an abstinator from singing and dancing! We
realize what these narratives do and also the great width of their
destructive perimeter. These types of narratives, just as we have seen,
were all narrated from Ai'shah while we don't know whether she really
said all of these things or if someone else related them in her name
because of her credibility.

There are also narratives from Abu Huraireh on this matter. It is said:
When the Abyssians were performing with their swords in the Prophets
presence, Umar suddenly entered the mosque. He bent over to grab some
gravel from the floor of the mosque in order to prevent them from doing
such. The Prophet said: Umar leave them alone, let them keep up with
their performance. 226

If we study these narratives in their entirety we will see the plot
designed therein; lowering the rank and esteem of the great Prophet of
Islam to a point lower than normal persons especially that of the
leaders after him. Now if you were to say for example: The Prophet said
repeatedly and we have learned from various records that:

"Ali is from me and I am from Ali". Some will reply what was the
Prophet himself that Ali should be like and the same as him. It is for
example Umar who has such a superiour personality and worth and or the
Caliph Abu Bakr who has such an extraordinary.

Secondly, the fact that all of these events occur in the Prophets
mosque; the Abyssian womans' dance, the singing and music of another
group and the sword dance of the Abyssian men, left very little value
and worth for Islams' second great mosque, one built by the Prophet
himself.!

In this series of narratives there are Hadiths on the Muslims'
weddings, and the Prophets actions in these weddings show that the
Prophet liked music and dance. In Bukharis "Sahih" under the chapter
called "Zamrobod-deff" in the book "Nekah" and also the chapter
"Shohoodul Malaekate Badra" from the book "Fazael", and also in "
Tabaghat al-Kobra by Ibn Saad this narrative has been related. We will
quote it from Bukhari because in the Caliphate school it is seen as the
most authoritative book after the Quran. The story is related from
Rabee, daughter of Moavaz Ibn Afra, She says: On my wedding day the
Prophet came to our house and sat next to me on my special seat. The
girls present there began singing and playing musical instruments (a
drum and cymbals). All of them sang the usual songs sung at weddings
except one who sang the song:

"There is a prophet among us who knows of future events".

The Prophet said: Don't sing such songs, sing what you sang before!

God knows that I know of no other words more destructive or an arrow
more effective aimed at the heart of the Prophet and his Imams. Of
course they even went one step further which we will see in our future
discussion - God willing. In this narrative it is said that the Prophet
enters the home of a Muslim and sits next to his newly wed bride while
the girls present there begin singing and playing music as the Prophet
easily listens!? Under these circumstances what can we expect of the
general Muslim population?

If the head of a household is fond of playing drums then of course all
of the family members will become dancers. If the Prophet of Islam is
like this; what must the Muslims do? It is clear that they said such
things so that you could not find fault with the Caliph Yazid Ibn
Muawieh or his father Muaviehs.

In Bukharis "Sahih" 7/26, a narrative is related from Sahl Saeedy he
says that the Prophet attented Abu Aseed Saedy's wedding The bride
approached him and offered a drink of date syrup which she gave to him
with her own hand. This was a show of their respect for the Prophet.

In another narrative it is related from A'ishah that one of the women
of the Ansars was married and we attended the wedding party. When we
returned the Prophet said: Didn't you have any music or song along with
you that could have been used in that party. The Ansar are made glad and
happy by music and song. Why didn't we have a singer come along with us
In another narrative it is related that the Prophet said to A'ishah:
When you sent the bride to her husbands home did you send a singer with
her" A'isheh replied: No! The Prophet then says: (That's too bad
because) the Ansar are a people who enjoy poetry and song, I wish you
had done so Then the prophet ascertained a poem which the singer must
perform in her performance:

In Bukharis' "Sahih" and Ibn Majehs "Sunan" it is related from Anas Ibn
Malek, that one day the Prophet was passing through one of Medinas
alleys when he was met by some women and children who were returning
from a wedding celebration. They were clapping and singing. The Prophet
told them: God knows that you are the dearest people to me. There is yet
another narrative related from A'ishah She says: I had made some dolls
to play with and sometimes little girls would come to our house and we
would play together. Whenever the prophet came home however, the little
girls would run away The Prophet would then go after them and return
them to the room, telling them: Remain and play with the dolls!!

Now it is necessary for us to go into a study of these Hadiths and
evaluate them according to religious standards. Of course the evaluation
of each of these Hadiths would be a separate study in itself but now we
will evaluate them all far as one lecture and study requires.

**Music And Singing According To Islam**

In the Caliphate schools authoritative books of Hadiths there are also
other narratives. Anas says: The prophet said:

God has sent me for the peoples guidance and mercy and has given me the
mission to destroy the instruments of debauchery and music such as the
drum (tombak).

In another narrative Mojahed says: I was walking with Abdullah Ibn Umar
when on the way we heard the sound of a drum. Abdullah put his fingers
in his ears and walked for a while until he was far from that place. He
then took his fingers out of his ears and still hearing the sound again
put them in his ears. He repeated that action three times. Then Abdullah
said:

This is what the Prophet used to do.

Under the noble Quranic verse:

'---Arabic text---'

it is related from Aishah that: The Prophet made the buying of selling
of servant female singers and their being trained to sing, illegal. The
interpretation of this verse was asked of Abdullah ibn Massoud and he
said: I swear by God that the meaning of "Lahwol Hadees" is music and
singing. Ibn Massoud and other great Islamic scholars of old also
interpreted this verse as such.

On the interpretation of the verse in which God says to Satan:
"Stimulate with your voice (meaning adultery, drinking liquor, gambling
etc.) anyone that you are able toll, Abdullah Ibn Massoud says: The
voice of Satan in this verse is intended to mean music and singing.

These were just a few of the Hadiths and Quranic verses that inform us
of Islams opinion of music and singing.

**Islams Viewpoint With Regard To Statues**

Now with regard to statues or the dolls that A'ishah played with we
will refer to the correct Islamic viewpoint. This narrative is form
A'ishah herself. She says: I bought a pillow which had pictures printed
on it and brought it home. When the Prophet came home he stood in the
doorway and would not enter. I said: I repent committing whatever sin I
have committed! He said: What kind of pillow is that? In the end I took
the pillow and returned it to its owner.

In several narratives, which probably add up to more than ten, the
Prophet said: "On resurrection day the severest tortures will be
inflicted upon those who created images in this world and they will be
told to give life to what they have created.!"

In another of these narratives we read that: "God will torture the
creators of images in that. very image". He also said: 'The creators of
these images will suffer on resurrection day". In yet another narrative
we learn that with regard to suffering, he who created things resembling
divine creations will suffer the most......

**Sitting With Strange Women**

As for the narratives which stated that the Prophet attended a wedding
party and sat next to the bride in her special place and or took a drink
from her hand, this famous narrative will be enlightening. Umm Salameh
said: Maymouneh and I (another of the Prophets' wives were sitting with
the Prophet when his blind companion Ibn Umm Maktoum entered the room.
The Prophet said: "Cover yourselves and conceal yourselves from him. Go
behind the curtain". I said: "O Messenger of God, he's blind, he can't
see us?! He said: "Are you two also blind and unable to see him? These
narratives are not from Shiite texts but from creditable Sunnite texts.
Can you imagine that such a Prophet with all of this care and modesty
would sit next to a bride and watch singing and dancing?!

In a narrative from Bukharis "Sahih" where the Prophet says: Refrain
from entering a womens' room or home (other then women who are mahram to
you)! One of the men of the Ansar says: "O' Messenger of God, what about
other female family members such as my brothers' wife?! The Prophet
replied: "This is death, destruction (this is where Satan tempts)". In
the following narration it is related that the Prophet said: "A man
should never remain alone with a woman (who is not mahram)".

These narratives clearly show the narrations under study are nothing
but lies. This is because first of all narrations stating the opposite
have been related from creditable narrators such as Ibn Abbas who is
accepted by both schools, and second of all because they go against the
laws and rules of the Muslims, the Quran and Islam.

**The Purpose Behind The Fabrication Of These Hadiths.**

Very well, now let us see why they fabricated such Hadiths and what
intention they had in doing so. We believe there were several purposes
behind these lies and fabrications:

1) One of the important purposes that existed in this act was Muaviehs
dangerous anti- Islamic aim which was his desire to bury '---Arabic
text---' testifying to Mohammad being the Prophet of God. We can see
clearly how these Hadiths are well capable of carrying out this sinister
aim and intention, and how they are capable of burying the Holy Name of
the Prophet of Islam under a multitude of enourmous lies and false
accusations! Of course if it wasn't for Hussains uprising and the
efforts of the Imams of Ahlul Bait these dangerous plans would have been
successfully carried out and reached their goal. It was the pure blood
of Karbalas martyrs and the sufferings fo the Ahlul Bait of the Prophet
that once again revived the Prophethood of Mohammad (s.a.w) which was
headed for destruction. God willing in later discussions we will study
further on this topic.

So, Muavieh wished to bury the Prophets name. He used these Hadiths to
enact his plan. They wished to discredit the Prophet which of course was
accomplished in this collection of narratives.

The Wahabi sect which has grown stronger in the last centuries (having
gained power and the reigns of government) sprung up from here, and its
beliefs regarding the Prophet and his religion took root in these very
Hadiths. No matter how much the Shiite and Sunnit scholars stive and
discredit the Wahhabi beliefs what good does it have and where will it
get them unless they can remedy these types of Hadiths and dry up these
roots? If you were to place a stack of papers in front of an open door
or window the wind will blow, scatter, and disarray them. No matter how
many times you put them in order there is no use, leaving no choice but
to close the door or window. In order for us to assimilate Wahabism we
must begin here, and not begin by first of all disputing the opinions of
Mohammad Ibn Abdul Wahab or Ibn Taymieh. Until these types of false
Hadiths exist and possess value and credibility the matter of Wahabish
will not completely be solved.

