4 - Causes of Distortions
=========================

**Introduction: A Review**

Our discussion revolved around the topic of what pure Islam was, into
what form it was changed, and what our present obligation is in relation
to it.

We also saw that according to the prophecies of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w), whatever occured in past nations will also occur in this
nation.

This nation altered some of the aspects of Islam in precisely the same
way predicted.

In other nations, after the alteration of God's religious creed a new
prophet would be appointed to once more renew the Divine cannon.

The religion of the "Last Prophet", however, was the last heavenly
message to mankind. With regard to this, what destiny awaited it after
all of these alterations, and what must be done about it?

The obligation to revive religion in this nation became the
responsibility of the Imams of Ahlul Bait (a.s)

In our research into the various methods used in the alteration of
Islam, we discovered various different methods. The first and probably
most important means was that in the first eras of Islam those in
positions of power, to their utmost ability prevented the relating and
recording of the Prophet's Hadiths (which is the second pillar of
Islam). As a result of this, many collections of Hadiths were burned.
Various persons were kept under surveillance. Mouths and tongues were
silenced. Some persons were exiled or imprisoned and so on.

However, in the face of all these acts of force and all of that
severity, Hadiths were promulgated underground and even in the open
under torture. Because of this, these ruling forces sought to solve
forever the matter of the Prophets Hadiths, and the prohibitions that
would likely arise as a result of self-interests and its' desires.

These efforts then took the form of a series of fabricated narratives
aimed at destroying the Prophets' superior character and the sacredness
of his words.

In one group of these Hadiths the collections of the Prophets praise
and refutals regarding certain positive and negative Islamic
personalities were remedied. They quoted the Prophet as having said to
God: O' Lord, I sometimes speak in commendation or reproach of someone
because of anger or happiness (at that time). Make my reproaches and
curses a means for purity, growth and favour for the recipient of
such!!

In another group of these narratives the Prophets' commands and
directives concerning the improvement of the peoples worldly duties;
politics, domestic matters, economics, leadership, the Imamate and their
like, are remedied. According to one of these fabricated narratives the
Prophet says: You are better informed of your own worldly matters than
I, you are more experienced and aware of how to perform your own duties,
(meaning; disregard my words on these matters, or rather, act according
to your own judgement, thoughts and plans).

In the third group it is sought to bring down the Prophets
extraordinary character and identity to a level lower than that of the
average man, and then even lower. Among these the Prophet is shown as
being forgetful; forgetting Quranic verses, entering the mosque in a
state of impurity and preparing to pray etc. In another of these
narratives they speak of him being placed under a spell. This spell was
seen as being so strong that the Prophet lost his usual intelligence and
understanding. In other fabricated narratives we see the prophet as a
man who will not turn away from music, song and dance. Not only does he
enjoy it, listens to it, and watches it, he also scolds those who become
upset because of it!

This was a summary of our previous discussions, necessarily repeated
here because; they included the most sensitive points in Islams
historical fate, consist of the most important points in a study of
Islam and they may play a vital role in revealing the role of the Holy
Imams (a.s) in the revival of religion.

**The First "Divine Revelation" According To The Caliphate School**

Now we must study the narratives which assail the Holy atmosphere
surrounding Divine revelation. It is here that the tragedy of Islam
reaches its peak and the known and unknown enemies of Islam transgress
the innermost bounds of Islams' sacred realm and genuine danger treatens
all of Islam.

The narratives pertaining to this matter have appeared in four or five
forms. The two most important ones were related from A'ishah and Obaid
ibn Omair lessy. From among these two more detailed narratives, which
relate in greater detail, A'ishahs' is considered the most creditable.
This narrative may be found in the majority of the most authoritative
Sunnite texts, such as Bukharis' "Sahih", Muslims "Sahih", Ahmad Ibn
Hanbals' "Musnad" and many others.

1) In the narrative quoted from A'ishah the events surrounding the
first revelation are pictured this way. In the beginning, revelation
manifested themselves for the Prophet in the form of true visions. These
visions were as bright as the light of dawn. Afterwards, an interest in
solitude and seclusion emerged in him. He spent many nights in the cave
of Hera 227 worshipping, and every once in a while he would return home
to procure the provisions needed during his seclusion and after doing so
he would return to the cave. The Prophet lived in this way until
suddenly one day he cam upon "The Lord". Gabriel came to him and said:
"O Mohammad you are the Messenger of God". The Prophet said: "I was
standing and then suddenly fell to my knees".

This meeting ended there and afterwards I started to go home even
though my whole body had commenced to tremble, and I went to khadijeh
saying: "Cover me, cover me, Cover me!" It took a while for the fear and
disturbance of mind brought on by that initial meeting to be remedied.
It was then that Gabriel appeared to me once more saying: "Mohammad, you
are the Messenger of God".

In those moments I decided to throw myself off of a mountain cliff!!
And at the very moment of my decision Gabriel appeared to me for the
third time saying; "O Mohammad, I am Gabriel and you are the messenger
of God". Then he said: "Read". I replied: "What should I read?" He took
me and pressed me hard three times. The pressure was so severe that I
was close to fainting. Then he said: "Read, in the name of you lord who
created" I read, and at the end of this meeting went to Khadijeh saying:
"I am extremely afraid for myself". Then I related for her the events
which had occured.

Khadijeh said: These are good-tidings for you. I swear by God that the
Lord will not render you inferior. You are good to your family, truthful
and trustworthy, and you bear the peoples burden of suffering while
supporting them.

Afterwards she took me to see Varagheh-t-ibn Nufel and said to him:
"Listen to your cousins words". Varagheh asked me: "What's the story?" I
then repeated for him what had happened. Varagheh then said: This is the
tiding which was revealed to Moses (a.s). Oh, how I wish I could have a
part in this movement (which will be founded by you)....228

2) The second historical narrative is related from a man named
Obaidullah Ibn Shaddad and in it the reason for the Prophets' fear
(mentioned in the previous narrative) is clarified. In this narrative it
is stated that after the first revelation in the cave was revealed to
him, the Prophet went back to Khadijeh and told her: 229

"O' Khadijeh, I fear that I have gone crazy as a result of contact with
Jinn".

Khadijeh replies: "No, never! By God, I swear that your lord would
never do such to you.......230

3) In the lengthiest of the narratives regarding this matter, the
events surrounding the first revelation to the Holy Prophet are
described like this. The narrator is Obaid Ibn Omair leesy. He says: Now
I will begin the story of the revelation and Gabriels' appearance to the
Prophet. One month each year the Prophet would take up residence in Hera
for worship and this was a custom practiced by the Quraish who
worshipped every year in this manner. The Prophet would worship in this
certain month every year and if a needy person approached him during
that time he would satisfy his hunger.

When the month ended and the period of worship was completed the
Prophet would return to Mecca. First of all he would enter the Masjid
al-Haram and circumambulate it seven or more times and then he would go
home. The days went on in this manner until the year that the lord
willed to bestow his munificence upon him and clothe him with the robes
of prophetic mission and in this way show mercy on his servants.

This event occured in the month of Ramazan. According to his custom,
the Prophet had gone to Hira for worship and his familiarity was also
with him(!). On the night that God determined to bestow his munificence
upon him and give him the prophetic mission, Gabriel came to him. The
Prophet said: He came to me and had with him a veil on which there was
some writing. I was asleep at that time. He said to me: "Read" I said:
"I cant read". He took me and pressed me hard until I felt as if I were
dying, then he let me go. After that he said: "Read" and I said: "What
should I read?" I said this so I wouldn't be put through that strong,
killing pressure again. he said:

'---Arabic text---'

I read it and he left. I woke up and it was as if what I had read had
been engraved upon my heart.

The Prophet said: I had seen none of Gods' creatures as my enemies with
the exception of poets and madmen and couldn't even beware to look at
them! The Prophet then said: This unfortunate soul (meaning myself) has
either become a poet or insane but the Quraish should never hear these
words in order to be able to repeat them. I will climb to some mountain
height and throw myself off of it, killing myself and being freed of
this misfortune!!

I left the cave of Hera and went halfway down the mountain path with
the intent of suicide. A sound from the heavens attracted my attention.
I heard it say: "O' Mohammad you are the messenger of God and I am
Gabriel". The Prophet said: I looked up at the sky and saw Gabriel in
the form of a man standing in the distant horizon. I stood to look at
him and was kept from my intent to commit suicide. I took not a step
forward nor backward and in each direction I looked at the sky I saw him
just as I first saw him..... He left and I returned to my family and
Khadijeh. I sat on her lap and hugged her(!)

Khadijeh said: O' Abul Ghassem where were you? By God my messengers
have been looking for you all over Mecca. The Prophet said: I told her;
this unfortunate soul (meaning myself) has either become a poet or
insane and possessed by Jinn!

She said: Abul Ghassem I take refuge in God for you from such things.
God will not decree such a fate for you with the qualities I see in you,
such as truthfulness, trustworthiness, superior character traits and
your attention to family ties. Why do you ever say such things cousin,
maybe you have seen something?

I said: Yes, and then related for her the incident which had occured.

Khadijeh said in reply: These are good-tidings for you cousin. Be firm
in this way. I swear by He who holds my life in his powerful hands that
I have hopes that you are the Prophet of this nation.

Then she got up, dressed, and went to see Varagheh ibn Nufel who was
her cousin. Varagheh was a Christian and a scholar familiar with the
Torah and New Testaments. Khadijeh informed him of all she had heard me
say. Varagheh in a state of great excitement said: It is very holy, very
holy! Khadijeh, I swear by He who holds Varagheh's life in his powerful
hand that if you speak the truth Gabriel has come to him the same one
who appeared to Moses. I think that he is the Prophet of this nation.
Relay my message to him and tell him that he must remain firm in his
way!

Khadijeh returned home land told the Prophet of Varaghes words and in
this way the Prophet was relieved of some of his worries, and the mental
disturbance caused by the belief that he had become a poet or insane
came to an end.

In a meeting between the Prophet and Varagheh which took place in the
Masjid al-Haram a few days later, Varagheh questions the Prophet
regarding his feelings and about the incidents which have occured. The
Prophet then relates them for him and Varagheh says: "I swear by he who
holds my life in his powerful hand that you are the prophet of this
nation and Gabriel has appeared to you, the same who appeared to Moses
(a.s). They will certainly refute you and torment you and they will turn
you out of your city and birthplace and form an uprising against you. If
I am here on that day I will help you in a way pleasing to God". then he
bent over and kissed the Prophets forehead. As the Prophets' suffering
had thus been comforted he returned home with a more positive, resolute
attitude(!!) 231

4) In another narrative which Akrameh relates from Abdullah ibn Abbas,
the event is described in this way: One day while the Prophet was in the
land of Ajyaad near Safa he suddenly saw an angel appear in the distant
horizon of the sky, who had one foot placed on top of the other and who
was calling: "O' Mohammad I am Gabriel, O' Mohammad I am Gabriel".

The Prophet was frightened by this abrupt appearance and encounter. He
repeatedly looked down but each time he looked up he would still see the
angel in the horizon. It was for this reason that he did not remain
there and quickly returned home to his wife Khadijeh informing her of
the incident, saying: O' Khadijeh, I regard no one else as an enemy the
way I do these idols and Kahins, and now I fear that I myself have
become a Kahin!

Khadijeh replied: No, that is not so, don't say such things. God would
never treat you like that because you observe family ties and.......
232

5) In Ovateh Ibn Zobairs' narrative, the Prophets words are related as
such:

"O' Khadijeh, I see a light and hear sounds. If fear that I may have
become a Kahin.........." 233

6) Another narrative is related by Akrameh from Ibn Abbas and repeats
the Prophets words in this way:

"O' Khadijeh, I hear sounds and see a light and fear that I have become
insane.......... 234

**An Evaluation Of These Narratives**

The narratives we have seen are capable of being evaluated from many
aspects and after a proper assessment, their weakness in documentation
and the lies and fabrications in the texts are very clearly seen. We
will link at each one carefully with regard to the aspects mentioned,
and come to recognize the signs of fabrication and lies in them.

An evaluation of each of the documents and texts shows a few of the
factors involved in the weakness and worthlessness of the above
mentioned narrative.

**A Study Of Their Documentation**

In the previous narratives five narrators appear and the documentation
for these narratives originate with them, or at least have been
attributed to them. In other words, these five are the beginning of a
series or chain of narrators. They are: Aishah, Abdullah ibn Shaddad,
Obaid Ibn Omair, Abdullah Ibn Abbas and last of all Orvateh Ibn
Zobair.

History testifies to the fact that none of these persons were present
at the time of this event, because they hadn't even been born by that
time! Since:

1) Aishahs' birth date is known to be either the fourth, fifth, or
sixth year of the mission (Besat) 235

2) Abdullah Ibn Shaddad leesy is not counted as being one of the
Prophets' companions (Sahabeh) and is one of the followers (Tabe'een),
or the generation after the companions. He was born during the Prophets'
lifetime but because of his young age he couldn't have understood the
Prophets' words at that time. He was killed in Kufeh in the year 81 A.H.
236

3) Obaid ibn Omair was also born towards the end of the Prophets' life
time an as such, just like Abdullah ibn Shaddad he is not considered as
being one of the companions. 237

4) Abdullah ibn Abbas was born in the tenth year of the mission or
three years before the migration. 238 We may add here that the person
who quotes from him is Akrameh, whom scholars have testified to being a
liar who attributed his fabrications to Ibn Abbas. 239

5) Orvateh Ibn Zobair was born during Omar's rule and is counted as
being one of the second generation of followers. 240

As such, none of the original narrators of the event were living at
that time and we know that an event cannot be related unless the
narrator was present there at that time or had heard it form an
eye-witness to that event. In all of the above mentioned narratives :the
narrator relates the event without mentioning an intermediator and among
them only Obaid Ibn Omair relates it from the prophet himself, while he
had never even seen the Prophet; since we saw previously that he was
born at the end of the Prophets life and biographers have not placed him
in the group of "companions', considering him one of the "followers".
Thus, such narrative is also lacking in historical and traditional
worth. Of course we also went into an evaluation of these narrators'
characters as well as their honesty but have not included it here
because it would require a whole lesson in itself.


