Awaiting the Last Prophet
=========================

**The Hermitage Of Bahira The Monk**

Every year, just as usual, the Quraishite merchants made their annual
trips to Syria and Yemen. Occasionally, Abu Talib the leader and Sheikh
of Quraish also participated in these commercial journeys. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) who was in the care of his honoured uncle Abu Talib
after his grand-fathers' death, accompanied him on one of these
journeys. The Prophet was only about twelve years old when he travelled
to Syria.

The Quraishite caravan was ready to embark. Abu Talibs' nephew held
onto his uncles' hand and insisted and pleaded that they take him along.
Even though the kind and great Sheikh of Quraish knew of the discomforts
and dangers in the journey he couldn't disappoint his nephew, whom he
loved very much. The caravan embarked, but before reaching its
destination, on the outskirts of Bostra 268 a certain events occured
which interrupted Abu Talibs travel plans.

For many years the Christian monotheist monk 269 named (Bahira) had a
hermitage in the land of Bostra and spent his time there in worship. He
was well-read in the religious texts of old. It is known that
generations of Christian monks had lived in this hermitage who each
succeeded another at his death. A book was passed on to each of them
which was handed down as a priceless heirloom, all of their knowledge
being culminated in this book.

Every year the Quraishite caravan stopped near this hermitage to rest
but they never saw Bahira and couldn't get in touch with him. This year
however upon arriving there they saw Bahira who had come out of the
hermitage to invite them to have something to eat. A man of the Quraish
remarked to him; "Bahira, by God what you have done today is indeed
mystifying. For many years we have been passing by your monastery and
you never did such!" Bahira replied: "Yes, you are correct, but now you
are my guests and I wish to honour you and prepare a meal for you".

Everyone gathered for the meal while only the Holy Prophet remained
with the cargo because of his tender age. When the Christian scholar and
monk looked at his guests and failed to see the one after whom he
sought, he said: "Quraishites, none of you must be absent from my meal".
They answered him: "Everyone is here except a young boy who has remained
behind to watch over the cargo". He said: "No! all of you must come".
One Quraishite said: "We deserve to be scolded because we have failed to
bring along with us the son of Abdullah ibn Abdul Mutalib". They brought
the Prophet to the table. The priest only looked at this young guest.

He was paying close attention to this young Quraishite, his actions,
movements, height and facial characteristics. When the meal was over and
all had taken their leave he said: "Young man, I want you to answer all
of my questions by the legitimacy of Lat and Uzza!" The Prophet replied:
"Do not request anything of me in the name of Lat and Uzza, by God I
swear that I look on nothing else with such hatred and enmity!". Bahira
said: "Then swear by God that you will inform me of what I will ask
you". The Prophet said: "Ask whatever you wish". Bahira asked about the
things he felt when he was asleep or awake and received answers which
corelated with all he had expected. Then he looked at the Prophets' back
in order to find the mole between his shoulders which would later be
called the seal of prophethood. He found it just as he expected and in
the place he knew it should be. After this inspection he turned to Abu
Talib and said: "What relation is this young man to you?" Abu Talib
answered: "He is my son". Bahira said: "He is not your son. His father
should not be living". Abu Talib said: "Yes, he is my brothers' son".
Bahira asked: "What happened to his father?" Abu Talib answered: "His
father died when his mother was pregnant with him". Bahira said: "You
spoke the truth. Take your nephew back to his own city and fear the
Jews' plots and grudges against him and be on your guard. I swear by God
that if they see him and come to know and recognize what I know about
him and recognize in him he will be in danger. This nephew will come to
attain an exalted position in the future". 270

**The Second Journey To Syria**

The Prophet was now twenty five years of age. Not only because of his
being one of the grand children of the honoured Sheikh and leader of the
tribe but also because of his outstanding qualities and superior
character, he had obtained special esteem and was known by the nik-name,
Amin (Trustworthy).

One day in that very year Abu Talib said to him: "Nephew, I am a man of
little worldly wealth, times are hard and I have suffered many years of
hard-ship and still suffer them. We have no wealth or merchandise to use
to deliver us from these difficulties, but right now the Quraishite
caravan of merchandise is ready to leave for Syria and Khadijeh daughter
of Khuwaylid usually sends men in these caravans for trade. If you were
to introduce yourself to her we will find a way out (of this
predicament).

Word of this discussion reached Khadijeh. She sent a messenger to
invite the Prophet for this purpose and sent more goods with the caravan
for trade than in any other year. The Prophet left for Sham (Syria) with
the Quraishite caravan accompanied by Khadijehs special servant. Just as
usual the caravan arrived at Bostra, stopped there and set up camp. The
Prophet, along with Misrah and their goods took up a place in the citys'
market. The place they arrived at was near a hermitage where a monk
named Nastoor lived. There was also a very old lotus tree next to this
hermitage. After the cargo was unloaded the Prophet took refuge in the
shade of this tree and sat there leaning against its trunk.

Nastoor, the Christian monk, stuck his head out of the hermitage window
and said to Misrah, whom he knew from previous trips: "Misrah, who is
that sitting under this tree?". Misrah answered: "He is a Quraishite
from Mecca". The monk told him: "There is none other than a prophet
under this tree!" The monk told him: "This is Gods' final prophet. Oh,
how I wish I could be there when he is appointed and receives the
command to declare his mission......"

In the days that followed, the prophet went to the market of Bostra and
displayed his goods for sale, and after selling the goods he had with
him he began to but the merchandise he required. During these
transactions he had a difference of. opinion with someone and that man
said: "Swear by Lat and Uzza!" the Prophet answered: "I have never sworn
by these two and whenever I pass them I turn away!" The man answered: "I
agree with whatever you say". At another time when that same gentleman
saw Misrah alone he told him: "By God, I swear that this man is a
Prophet! I swear by He who holds my life in his powerful hands that this
is the very one the scholars and theologians have discovered news of
with clear and complete descriptions and explanations in their texts.

These conversations made an impression on Misrahs mind and soul and had
a strong effect on his conscience, causing him to become more attached
to the Prophet on this trip after already having been fascinated by his
character. 271

**The Wise Man From Iran**

Abdullah Ibn Abbas said: Salman Farsy told the story of his acceptance
of Islam in this way:

I was an Iranian from Isfehan. My birthplace was a village named (Jay)
and my father was its' owner and leader. My father loved me very much,
so much that he kept me at home just as a girl and wouldn't allow me to
go out. I was so diligent in my religion, which was Zoroastrianism, that
I was chosen to serve the holy fire. One day as I was going at my
fathers' command to his farm, I came upon a Christian chaper. I heard
the Christians praying and entered the chapel. The Christians' prayer
service fascinated me immensely as it was the first time I had ever seen
such a thing. I remained there so long that I had completely forgotten
to complete my fathers' task, and the day turned to night. When my
father found out about that days' events and my attraction and attention
to Christianity he became extremely upset, and he imprisoned me in our
home. Without my fathers' knowledge, however, I retained connections
with the Christians and asked them to inform me if a caravan headed for
a Christian country came to our area. It was in this way that I escaped
my imprisonment and travelled to Syria with that caravan and took up
with a Christian scholar, choosing him as my instructor and teacher.
This man, however, was a hypocrite and committed sinful deeds, but after
his death another priest took his place in the church who was the
epitome of asceticism and worship. I became devoted to him and spent
many years with him as a student. At his death he sent me to a wise man
in Mousel 272 and I spent a few years in the company of this wise man
who was also very virtuous just as his friend was.

When the time of his death drew near I asked him to tell me of another
learned teacher. This old man told me of a virtuous scholar in
Naseebain. 273 When he died I went to Naseebain and to see this citys'
scholar and teacher, and had the advantage of his learning until the
time of his death. After him, according to his recommendation I went to
Amourieh 274 and there I found another example of those scholarly,
devout men. I was in this scholars' company for another period of time.
When he also was ready to leave this world and I asked him for a
substitution, he told me: By God, I swear that I know of no one today to
whom I may send you who believes in what we believe and who strives in
our way. The time is near, however, for the appearance of a prophet who
will be appointed to the religion of Abraham and who will rise in the
land of the Arabs. The location of his migration will be a land in which
date-palms grow and a land full of volcanic rock walled on two sides.
275 He accepts gifts but avoids alms, and between his shoulders there is
the stamp of prophethood (a large black mole from which hair grows). If
you can, go to that land. 276

**The Syrian Jew**

Only a few years remained until the appearance of Islam when a man of
the Syrian Jews named (Ibn Haiban) travelled to Medina. Those who had
seen him spoke of his superior qualities and said: "Whenever we were
plaqued by drought we would go to him and ask him to pray for rain". At
these times Ibn Haiban would usually say: "No, I will not pray until you
give some alms".

We would ask: "What should we give?"

He would ask: "For each person a portion of wheat or barley".

We would do as he asked and then he would pray, and before we even
reached home the sky would darken with clouds and it would begin to rain
on our heads. Many times this event was repeated and because of this Ibn
Haiban obtained much esteem and influence among the Jews of Medina.

One day we heard that Ibn Haiban was in the last hours of his life. The
Jews gathered around him and in their company he said: "O' Jews what do
you think has brought me from the blessed, flourishing land of Syria to
this poor country?" Everyone replied: "You know better!" He said: "I
came here from Syria and have been awaiting the appearance of a prophet
whose mission is near, because this city is the place of his migration.
I was hoping that I would find him and follow him. Unfortunately this
hope will be obliterated with my death. If you, however, hear of his
name or news of him don't let anyone take the lead from you in belief in
him....."

Ibn Haiban completed his last words and then died. On the morning of
Bani Qurayza's defeat, three Jews named Salabah, Oseed and Asad in whom
because of their youth habits and customs had not yet become firmly
rooted, remembering Ibn Haibans words and testament they said to their
family and relatives: "By God, this man is the very prophet Ibn Haiban
described for us, fear God and follow him!" The Jews replied: "No,
thats' not him". These three youths insisted once again: "Yes, by God
this man is him for sure". Then they left their fortress and joined the
Islamic Army and accepted the Islamic religion. 277

