The Sacrificing Scholar
=======================

Mokhairegh was a Jewish scholar. He lived in Medina and had much wealth
in the form of gardens and Palm-groves. Historians say: He knew the
Prophet of Islam and had seen and learned of his particularities and
description from scholarly inheritances of the past.

When the prophet migrated from Mecca and before he entered Medina he
stopped in a city called Ghoba and it was there that the two Jewish
scholars Abdullah Ibn Salam and Mokhaireegh came to see him and accepted
Islam. 278 Then the battle of Uhud occured. This battle took place on a
Saturday which was the official day of rest for the Jews. On this day,
Mokhaireegh cried out to his people: "O' Jews, I swear to God, you
certainly know that aiding Mohammad is your duty!" The Jews replied:
"But today is Saturday and work and other activity is forbidden on this
day". Mokhaireegh replied: "There is no more Saturday for you and this
custom just like other Jewish customs and rites was abolished with the
coming of Islam".

He then took his sword, left his home and went to the Prophet at Uhud.
He testified at that time that "If I am killed in this battle my
property becomes Mohammads' (s.a.w) and he may do as he wishes with it".
He was killed on that day and became a martyr. 279

**There Was Also Bigotry**

Zobair ibn Bata was the most learned of the Jewish scholars. Before the
Prophets' appearance he had spoken of his name (Ahmad), his
particularities and the country of his appearance. Zobair would say: "I
had seen a book in my fathers' house which he kept from my sight and
which he sealed so I would be unable to use it. But after his death I
obtained this book and my predictions are based upon this ancient
book".

Time passed and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) appeared. When new of this
mission in Mecca reached Zobair ibn Bata, he went as soon as he could to
his fathers book and erased what it contained about the Prophet. From
then on he kept what he knew of the Prophet to himself and concealed it,
and when others asked he would say that this man was not the expected
Prophet!! 280

In old and creditable histories we read: The Jews of Medina especially
the Bani Qurayza were familiar with the Prophet of Islam's name. They
had seen it in their own religious writings and taught it to their
children as news of a future full of good-tidings. They reminded them
that the place of this prophets' migration would be their own city
Medina. When the Prophet was appointed and migrated to that city,
however; they were afflicted with racial jealousy and bigotry claiming
that this person is not the prophet previously spoken of. 281

**In Conclusion**

According to all of these records, of which only a small portion of
that which has been left to us may be shown you, all coming from
creditable texts of the caliphate school, we become more familiar with
the truth of this noble verse which states:

"The people of the Book knew the Prophet as they did one of their own
sons".

What we wished to prove in this relatively long discussion was that
contrary to the narratives concerning the first revelation which
proclaimed signs of doubt and unfamiliarity in the Prophet regarding his
prophethood; the Prophet himself along with those around him and many
Jews and Christians living in Arabia were familiar with his prophethood
and they knew him by his particularities and qualities and even more
important by his name and reputation.

If we were to overlook "knowledge of the invisible" and its' aids, and
look upon the Prophet before the "Besat as a regular human being, when
we look at his life history we see that on his and his great uncle Abu
Talibs first trip to Syria they were completely informed of his
prophethood its signs and indications. Special precautions were also
taken in his daily life to protect this treasure for the future from
possible danger. On the second trip to Syria the same events reoccured
in a different way, other persons being confronted with this matter and
gaining of it.

The result here is that the narratives which spoke of the Prophets'
doubt and surprise at the first revelation merely lie, especially since
none of them, as far as their documentation is concerned, go back to the
time of this events' occurance. Therefore these types of narratives of
narratives lack credibility because of the errors and voids existing in
their documents and texts. Thus, by looking at the breach that they
could make in the Prophets' integrity and prophethood, we can guess how
these narratives took their place in Muawiehs' general plan for the
destruction of the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w), and how to this day they
have enacted this sinister duty.

**Western Islamologists And The Narratives Of The First Revelation.**

It is interesting to note that western orientalists and Islamologists
who strive with their utmost integrity and sincerity to destroy the
credibility of Islam and the Prophet, have not ignored this group of
narratives and extract the greatest amount of benefit from them. That
which is added to the writings of these westerners is a scientific and
psychological analysis of the event which gives greater credence to its
factuality in the eyes of the unfamiliar. For evidence of this we will
first of all rely on the writing of Professor Montgomery Watt, the
British Islamologist, in the book "Mohammad, Prophet and Statement'.

"It is surprising that a person who lived in a remote city like Mecca
in the seventh century could acquire the belief that he has been
appointed a prophet by God(?) so it is not surprising if we hear that
Mohammad was beset by fear and doubt.......another of his fears was the
fear of insanity because the Arabs of that time believed that these
kinds of persons were possessed by spirits and demons. A group of the
inhabitants of Mecca interpreted Mohammads' inspirations this way and he
himself often wondered if they were right or not!......They say that in
the early days and the receiving of the first revelation, his wife
Khadijeh and her cousin Varagheh encouraged him to accept that he had
been appointed to the prophethood..... Apart from all that, the claim of
a Christian that the way the revelation was revealed to Mohammad was in
every way similar to the way the revelation was revealed to Moses,
strengthened Mohammad in his belief!" 282

Professor Montgomery Watt, Professor of Islamic studies at Edinburgh
University, mentions in another of his books this very discussion
including a narration of the various narratives involved, and studies
them in detail and at great length with no doubt as to their
authenticity and factuality arriving at the same conclusion we saw
summarized above. 283

Of course, the use of these types of narratives is not restricted to
the English orientalist Watt alone. Others in the past followed the same
path and just as we saw in the past they were usually looking for weak
points in Islam, the Prophet and all of the other things Holy in Islam.
Unfortunately they find what they are looking for in some of the
narratives of the Caliphate school, and of course, without a doubt they
rely on these types of books for documentation, in particular Tabaris
"Tarikh", Ibn Heshams' "Sireh" and Bukharis "Sahih". The first western
writing which speaks of this subject according to the above mentioned
fabricated narratives, is historical and was written by Theophanes the
Byzantine historian. 284 A summary of Theophanes' opinion may be found
in the well-know creditable book on western Islamic studies "The
Encyclopedia of Islam". 285 A. J. Wensinck the author of the article
"Bahira" in this book bring up a summary of Theophanes remarks after
disregarding historical examples of the information regarding the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) known by the people of the Book as fables without
offering an explanation as to why, and even though these remarks don't
even collate with the fabricated narratives he refrains from any
investigation or research surrounding it. We may name other books by
Europeans which have spoken with reliance on the fabricated narratives
regarding the first revelation; "Islam and the Arab" written by
Professor Zoomlandu an English orientalist and The History of Nations
and Islamic Government" by Professor Karl Bruckelman.

**An Eyewitness speaks:**

A comparison between the Caliphate schools narratives and those
existent in the Ahlul Bait school shows that a historical occurance may
only be related by one who was an eyewitness to it. This principle is a
definate law in the study of history. Just as we saw previously,
according to this decisive principle we saw all of the narratives
related to the first revelation as weak and worthless. Now with
attention to and reliance on the words of the only person who witnessed
the event and heard of some of its aspects from the Prophet himself we
will proceed to investigate into it.

Amir al-Mo'meneen Ali (a.s) who in addition to being the legatee of all
Islamic truths and its witness from the first hours of Islams' birth,
describes the first revelation like this:

"From the time of his weaning Allah had put a great angel with him to
take him along the path of high character and good behaviour throughout
day and night, while I used to follow him like a young camel following
in the footsteps of its mother. Every day he would show me in the form
of a banner some of his high traits and commanded me to follow it. Every
year he used to go in seclusion to the hill of Hira where I saw him but
no one else saw him. In those days Islam did not exist in any house
except that of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w) and Khadijeh while I was the
third after these two. I used to see and watch the effulgence of divine
revelation and message, and smelled the scent of prophethood.

When the revelation descended on the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w) I heard
the moan of Satan. I said: "O' Prophet of Allah what is this moan?". And
he replied: "This is Satan who has lost all hope of being worshipped. O'
Ali, you see all that I see and you hear all that I hear, except you are
not a prophet but you are a vicegerent and you are surely on (the path
of) virtue". 286

In order to show other examples of the Imamate schools' viewpoint
regarding the matter of the Prophethood and revelation we will refer to
another narrative by Imam Hadi (a.s).

"When the Prophet of God abandoned trade in Syria, he spent that which
he had accumulated in the way of god. Afterwards, each morning he would
climb Mount Hira and from its highest summit he would look at traces of
Divine mercy and the thought provoking, extraordinary signs of his power
in nature. He would look at the regions of the sky and the far reaches
of the earth, become immersed in thought and be busy at worship".

These conditions continued thus until the Prophet reached the age of
forty. The lord saw that his heart was the best, humblest, most modest
and devoted of hearts before him and therefore he commanded the gates
and kingdom of Heaven and the message to be opened to him and He opened
his eyes as a Prophet of the truths existent in the Heavens. He also
commanded the Angels to descend to him. As a result of His grace he also
commanded descendence upon him from the throne and also sent Gabriel
down to him to take his arm and shake it.

Gabriel said: "O' Mohammad, read."

The Prophet replied: "What should I read?".

He said: "Read in the name of your Lord who created......

Then he revealed to him that which the Lord had sent as a revelation to
him and returned to the heavens. The Prophet descended the mountain as a
sick person afflicted by fever and trembling because of the immensity
and glory of the lord which had appeared unto him.

That which worried him and caused him fear and distress was the
Quraishites refutal and the thought that they would consider him insane
or possessed by a demon. This was even though he had been the most
intelligent of Gods creatures from the beginning of his life and the
most dear among them, and more than any one else felt enmity towards
Satan within himself. Therefore, in order for the lord to give him
courage in the face of .all the enmity and opposition awaiting him, he
gave the power of speech to all of the objects around him, the stones,
cliffs, mountains. Everywhere the Prophet arrived he would hear this
proclamation; "Greeting to you O' Mohammad. Greetings to you O' friend
of God. Greetings to you O' Messenger of God!" 287

**A Summary**

In the Caliphate schools narratives related to the first revelation
such was said:

Gabriel pressed the Prophet three times with such severity that he felt
as if he were dying and then said to him:

"Read........"

After the first revelation came to an end the prophet was extremely
afraid and worried that it had been by Genies. He saw the possibility
that he had gone crazy or had become a Kahin, and because of this
decided to throw himself off of the mountain top so he would be killed
and be rid of this suffering.

Gabriel, however, interrupted him and didn't allow him to go through
with his intention. The Prophet returned home in a confused state of
mind and related his fear of insanity and of being possessed to his wife
Khadijeh. Khadijeh heard all of her great husbands words, who was at the
time upset and afraid, with a patience verging on reverence. Not only
did she retain control of her own emotions, she also consoled her
husband and assured him that God would not abandon him.

Afterwards, in order to accumulate more information and assurance, she
went to see Varagheh the Christian scholar. After hearing the news that
Khadijeh had brought him, Varagheh have Khadijeh assurance of her
husbands prophethood. In a meeting with the Prophet himself he also
spoke to him with his comforting words, and also taught him that which
he did not know.

In an evaluation of the above mentioned narratives we saw that all of
them were related by persons who had not been born by the time of this
occurance (thirteen years prior to the Besat), for them to be able to
relate it as an eyewitness.

We then compared them to the most authoritative text in Islam, the
Quran. In the exalted Quranic verses it was mentioned that: A promise or
covenant was taken from the Prophets to believe in the possessors of the
mission after them, especially the Last Prophet (s.a.w), give tidings of
this mission to their people asking them to believe in him and to aid
him if they were alive during his lifetime.

And also that: Jesus son of Mary (a.s) gave tiding to his people that
after. me a prophet will come who is known as Ahmad ('---Arabic
text---')

And also that: When the Quran descended from God and was the
confirmation of their book the Torah they cultivated blasphemy in
relation to it even though before that in their wars they asked for
Gods' aid in this prophets name so they would attain victory and
success.

And also that: They who follow the illiterate, uneducated Prophet who
saw his name and situation in the Torah and New Testament......

Finally, the Quran ends up with saying:

The scholars of the people of the Book knew the Prophet just as their
own sons.

This matter is clear to the point of certainty, that by taking into
account all of the Qurans intimidations and accusations, if these
statements didn't have strong backing in truthfulness and correctness,
it would have been easy for Biblical scholars to scrutinize the Torah
and New Testament and prove contrary to these statements. As a result,
this would with no effort at all have destroyed Islam and fourteen
centuries of was and combat wouldn't have been necessary to do so.

Fortunately, however, that didn't happen and in those days the above
mentioned tidings existed in the copies of the testaments in which even
today, despite all of the changes and omissions which have occured in
them, we may still read in some copies of the Torah that: (The lord came
from Mount Sinai, rose like the sun over Edom, shone on his people from
Mount Paran, entered with ten-thousand of the esteemed a fiery religious
law in his right hand). And this verse which has remained intact in
older Bibles is a mention of Moses mission from Mount Sinai, Jesus'
mission from Edom, and the Last Prophet from the cave of Hira in the
Paran mountains, with a religious law consisting of war and battle with
idolators and seditious persons. Being accompanied by ten-thousand
persons only occured during the last Prophets' lifetime and refers to
the conquest of Mecca in the eight year of the mission.

We also read in a copy of the Book John:

John 16:7-15: But I am telling you the truth: it is better for you that
I go away, because if I do not go, the Helper ('---Arabic text---'=
Ahmad) will not come to you.........."

As a result of all of these tidings, Christian and Jewish scholars were
in expectation of the Last prophet's (s.a.w) mission some of them having
migrated to Medina and its outskirts in hopes of seeing him, their names
and descriptions existing in historical records.

Among them we may find:

Bahira the monk who had a home on the Quraishite commercial road to
Sham (Syria) and when at the age of twelve the Prophet passes by on this
road and stopped near his hermitage he recognized him by way of signs
and marks, and attained the blessing of meeting him.

Another is a monk which history has mentioned by the name Nastoora who
met the Prophet on his second trip to Syria accompanied by Khadijehs
servant Misrah, and spoke of his prophethood.

Also the great Jewish scholar Ibn Haiban who had migrated from Syria to
Medina to see the Prophet but died before his appearance and mission.

And also Mokhairegh another Jewish scholar who met the Prophet at
"Ghoba" at the beginning of his migration and accepted Islam and was
later martyred in the battle of Uhud.

Last of all we have Salman Farsy who came to Medina with this very hope
and was successful in seeing the Prophet and accepted Islam.

The Jews were so familiar with the news of his appearance that they
taught their children about it and gave them tiding of his nearing
appearance saying: He was appointed in our land and will migrate to our
city Medina.

The people of the Book at that time lived in great expectation of him
and told their children of the signs and indications of his coming, the
same way that Shiites today await the coming of Imam Zaman (a.s) and
speak of the sings of his appearance.

With all of these stories and historical events a few of which we
related here, along with the encounters that occured between the
scholars of that time and the Prophet and is friends and relatives such
as his Uncle Abu Talib, Misrah, Khadijeh and others, how could the
Prophet himself be ignored of all of them? Could it be that others could
understood those highly unusual events and recognize he who was
introduced in their contents as the last Prophet while he himself not
only didn't see those events, he didn't understand them nor did he
discover the manner of his unusual and outstanding character.

In light of all these events especially those we related from
authoritative texts of the Caliphate school, how could the scholars of
this school believe those false and disgracing reports regarding the
first revelation; the cornerstone for the structure of Islam? How could
they write that when Gabriel revealed the first Surah of the Quran to
the Prophet he thought he was a genie or a devil and himself insane,
possessed or a soothsayer?

Really, which mysterious hands created these false reports and what was
the reason for their introduction into the first-rate Islamic books and
texts of the Caliphate school?

Christians and Jewish scholars who have researched into Islam have
referred exclusively to these fabricated narratives of the first
revelation since they wished to attack Islam from beneath a veil of
knowledge, learning and research. They presented these narratives in
their books with a series of sociological and psychological studies and
investigations, and in this way caused serious damage to a correct
understanding of Islam in Eastern and Western Education.

Professor Montgomery Watt the English Orientalist in his books,
"Mohammad, Prophet and Statesmen" and "Mohammad at Mecca", along with
other Western orientalists mentioned earlier and their Eastern Students
have relied on these narratives and have profiled from them in
introducing Islam, seeing them as indisputable facts related to Islam
and as irrefutable narratives.

The real truth, however, is what the Imams of Ahlul Bait (a.s) taught
the students of their own school. It is therefore proper that we should
compare them to the previously mentioned reports.

None of the Caliphate schools narratives regarding the first revelation
were related by an eye-witness to the events, indeed in principle none
of them were living at the time of its occurance. The only eye-witness
to this event is Imam Ali (a.s). He related this incident like this in
one of his sermons:

"From the time of his weaning Allah had put an angel with him to take
him along the path of high character and good behaviour throughout day
and night.....Every year he used to go in seclusion to the hill of Hira
where I saw him but no one else saw him..... When the revelation
descended on the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w) I heard the. moan of Satan. I
said: O' Prophet of Allah what is this moan?". and he replied "This is
Satan who has lost all hope of being worshipped".

In another narrative from Imam Ali al-Hadi (a.s) the incident is
described as such:

"At the age of forty the Lord opened the gates to the Heavens to the
Prophet so he could see the truths there, He gave permission to the
angels to descend to him and He sent Gabriel to him. Gabriel shook his
arm and said: "Read!". He said: "What should I read?"

Gabriel said:

'---Arabic text---'

and he read for him Gods' revelation and returned to heaven.

The Prophet descended the mountain, while because of the vision of the
lords' greatness and magnificence he was afflicted with fever and
trembling just as a sick person. He feared that the Quraish would call
him insane. God gave him consolation. Everything around him spoke to him
and greeted him as a Prophet. From everything this call was heard:

"Greetings to you O' Mohammad of God......"

What happened that European Jewish and Christian orientalists and their
Eastern students have not taken the story of the first revelation from
the Prophets descendants, while we know that "The inhabitants of one
house are more familiar with the events that take place within", only
relying on the shattering, disgracing reports of the caliphate school?
Why has knowledge of Islam been entirely based on the texts and records
of the Caliphate school? And why have the opinions and narratives of the
Imams of Ahlul Bait been completely forgotten, being found no where in
Western Studies of Islam? Doesn't this prove that Western Orientalism is
in principle only built upon enmity and acts of spite?

The calculated course of action created by the internal enemies of
Islam to destroy the exalted reputation of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w), did
not end with the previous discussion. Its' malevolent designers went
even further than that. They not only just said and circulated the idea
that the Prophet doubted the revelation revealed to him, hesitated for a
time and thought that he had been possessed by genies and demons, 288
they progressed to an even more dangerous point. In a series of
narratives existing in the majority of commentaries of the Sunni or
Caliphate school they circulated the rumour that; not only did he doubt
his own prophet hood and suspect the interference of genies and demons
in his prophetic mission, on the contrary Satan really did interfere in
this matter inspiring parallel verses containing idolatrous
subject-matter correlating with his own Satanic view, as verses revealed
by God. The Prophet then accepting these parallel verses believing them
to be Gods genuine revelation and not realizing Satans direct
interference in this matter.

This is one of the highest stages enacted by the wicked hands of Islams
enemies in the Ummayad era 289 which strived to eradicate the basis for
the Holy Prophets reputation and prophethood and also destroy the final
stronghold - infallibility in receiving and propagating the divine
revelations and mission.

The dangerous, Islam destroying fable of "Gharaniq" has gained
widespread circulation in important and well-known commentaries, in
first-hand and creditable histories and last of all in the writings of
the Caliphate schools biographers of the Prophet.

For an investigation of this matter we will first refer to the
commentary and History of the Imam of the Caliphate schools commentators
and historians, Mohamad ibn Jarir ibn Tabri (Died 310 A.H). This is
because his narratives as far as documentation is concerned possess the
oldest records and is more detailed and lengthy in its wording in
comparison to others and is also more effective than others in sowing
doubt and misgivings.

