The Narratives of the "gharaniq" Fable in the Caliphate School
==============================================================

The commentators of this issue have said in an interpretation of the
fifty second verse of the Suah Haj:

"And we did not send before you any apostle or prophet, but when he
desired, the Shaitan made a suggestion respecting his desire; but Allah
annuls that which the Shaitan casts, then does Allah establish His
communications, and Allah is Knowing, Wise".

Tabari, the Imam of the caliphate schools commentators has narrated the
narratives and saying related to the interpretation of the words
'---Arabic text---' and '---Arabic text---' and divides them into two
parts: 290

A-Part one of Tabaris narratives in interpretation of '---Arabic
text---' and '---Arabic text---'

In this part Tabari mentions narratives which hold the view that
because of the Prophets great interest and fervour in converting his
tribe, he thought to himself that he should speak to them according tot
heir inclination regarding their idols and gods, and at times he even
disliked speaking ill of them for this very reason. To enlarge upon this
opinion Tabari seeks proof for it in the following group of
narratives.

1) Tabari relates the first narrative from Mohammad ibn Ka'b Gharzy and
Mohammad ibn Gahis. These two say: One day the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)
attended one of the assemblies of the Quraish. On that day he was hoping
that something would not be revealed to him which would cause the
Quraishites hatred and aversion. At that time, however, the Lord
inspired in him the Surah Najm. The Prophet recited it as it was until
he came to the verse.

'---Arabic text---'

and it was there that satan inspired him to add:

'---Arabic text---'

He spoke these words and then continued on with reciting the rest of
the Surah. At the end of the surah he prostrated and everyone present
also placed their foreheads on the ground and prostrated with him while
only Valib ibn Moghaireh - because of old age and lack of strength to
bend over - took a handful of dirt from the ground and prostrated on it.
Everyone was happy with what they heard. The Quraishite idolators said:
"We know that Allah gives life and death and possesses the power to
create and sustain but our gods have intercession with Him. Now that you
have set aside a part for them we will follow you!."

These two narrators then said: That night when Gabriel appeared to the
Prophet, he recited the surah for Gabriel. When he came to the words
that Satan had inspired in him. Gabriel said: "I did not reveal these
words to you!" The Prophet said "Then I calumniated them and have
ascribed words to God which he has not spoken?".

It was for this reason that the Lord revealed the following to the
Prophet (s.a.w): 291

"And surely they had purposed to turn you away from that which We have
revealed to you, that you should forge against Us other than that, and
then they would certainly have taken you for a friend".

The occurance left the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) saddened and depressed
until these verses were revealed: 292

"And We did not send before you any apostle or prophet, but when he
desired, the Shaitan made a suggestion respecting his desire; but Allah
annuls that which the Shaitan casts, then does Allah establish His
communications, and Allah is Knowing, Wise".

The narrator then says: The Muslim Emigrants who had migrated to the
land of Abyssinia heard the rumour that the entire Meccan population had
become Muslims. Because of this they started out to return to their
tribe. They said: "Our own people are better and dearer to us". Upon
arriving at Mecca, however, and joining their tribe they saw that when
the above mentioned verses were annuled they had once again turned away
(from Islam and the Muslims). 293

2- This narrative has only been related from Mohammad ibn Ka'b Gharzy,
and he says: The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) saw his tribe turning away from
him and it was extremely distressing for him to see them keeping aloof
from Divine commands and that which was revealed from God. Because of
this, he hoped and desired his heart that something be revealed to him
from God that create closeness, affinity and unity between himself and
his tribe. It was also because of his concern for them and the avidity
in his heart for their guidance that he wished the severity of the
revelations (regarding the prohibition of the tribes corruption and
wrong doings) would change to moderation.

At the time when these hopes gained strength and he spoke to himself
about them in his heart, the lord revealed to him the Surah "Najm"

'---Arabic text---'

This revelation continued until the noble verse:

'---Arabic text---'

when Satan inspired him to say those very things which he desired and
hoped would be revealed for his tribe and that was:

'---Arabic text---'

When the idolators heard these words they listened to them because it
made them happy that the Prophet mentioned their Gods. Also, the
believers did not detract from their affirmation of the Prophet and did
not lose their belief in that which he brought from God. They did not
accuse him, of error or lapse. The Surah continued and it reached the
part which required a prostration at its end and then was finished. The
Prophet prostrated and the believers prostrated along with him in
affirmation of their Prophet while the idolators present in the mosque
joined them because of the eulogy made regarding their gods. Therefore,
there was no one in the mosque left who had not prostrated, believer or
idolator. Only Valid ibn Moghaireh couldn't bend over because of his
old-age and inability and because of this he took a handful of dirt and
prostrated on the palm of his hand. Then the people left the mosque and
went their separate ways. The Quraishites left the mosque in a happy
mood because of these remarks, and were saying: Mohammad remembered our
gods with the best of statements and among that which he recited was
this passage:

'---Arabic text---'

reports of this all-inclusive prostration reached Abyssinia and the
prophets followers who had migrated there were informed of it and it was
even said that the Quraishites had accepted Islam. A group of them
started out for Mecca and also a few remained where they were.

Gabriel appeared to Mohammad and said: O' Mohammad what have you done?
You read for the people (as the Quran) which I did not bring to you and
you said things which had not been revealed to you". The Prophet became
extremely sad and apprehensive because of this remark and was frightened
of the Lord!

Afterwards, God revealed certain verses to him. He was kind to his
prophet and consoled him, making the weight of the occurance easier for
him to bear. He informed him that; "Also before you no messenger of
prophet hoped or desired for something that the Satan didn't interfere
in his desire and inspire him to speak certain things. While of course
afterwards the lord abrogates the satanic expressions and strengthens
his own verses. This means that you are like the previous prophets and
apostles". Then the lord revealed the following:

'---Arabic text---'

in this way eliminating the Prophets sadness and grief and replacing
the fear in his heart with security, and abrogating the satanic
inspirations;
