A Study of the Quranic Verses
=============================

**The First Group Of These Verses -The Surah "Najm".**

The Surah "Najm" is one of the short Meccan Surahs which was revealed
all at once 303 and during the time that the Prophet was in Mecca. The
verses among which the matter of Satans suggestion is propounded begins
at verse 17 and ends with verse 30. It is therefore necessary for us to
begin our study with an examination of these verses for an understanding
of their content in order for us to be able to perceive the position of
the Satanic words among them.

Verses 18-30 of this Surah discusses the three famous Arab idols who
were named Lat, Manat and Uzza. The Arabs believed that these idols were
the images of divine angels and they also believed that angels were the
daughters of God. The Quran has spoken as such of these beliefs and has
criticized them. For example: In the Surah "Saffat" from verse 149 and
following it is said:

"Then ask them whether your lord has daughters and sons. Or did we
create the angels females while they were witnesses?"

And in Surah "Zukhruf" verse 17-20 it is said:

"And when one of them is given news of that of which he sets up as a
likeness for the Beneficient God, his face becomes black and he is full
of rage.......And they make the angels them who are the servants of the
Beneficient God - female divinities)..........."

And in Surah "Nahl" verses 57-58 we read:

"And they ascribe daughters to Allah, glory be to Him; and for
themselves (they would have) what they desire. And when a daughter is
announced to one of them his face becomes black and he is full of
wrath".

Also in the Surah "Bani Israel" verse 40:

What! has then your lord preferred to give you sons, and (for himself)
taken daughters from among the angels? Most surely you utter a grievous
saying".

The Qurans ideological battle with the Arab idolators who believed in
these weak-minded, superstitious beliefs, took shape in different ways
and was introduced in each place in a particular way and with special
logical reasons. One of these examples is in Surah "Najm" our present
point of discussion.

The Almighty Lord says in this surah:

"Have you then considered the Lat, and the Uzza, and Manat, the third,
the last?"

and know that according to the Arab idolators belief they were the
images of Gods female angels(!) and it is for this reason that
afterwards we read:

"What! for you the males and for him the females! This indeed is an
unjust division!"
Then he tells of. the principle source of this type of beliefs error

They are naught but names which you have named, you and your fathers;
Allah has not sent for them any authority. They follow naught but con
lecture and the low desires which (their) souls incline to; and
certainly the guidance has come to them from their lord".

Here, God propounds and refutes another of the idolators beliefs with
regard to their idols and that being their ower of intercession. "Shall
man have what he wishes?" certainly not "For Allah is the hereafter and
the former (life)" it in not in mans' control and according to his
carnal desires. In principle, intercession has certain precise
conditions. "And how many an angel is there in the heavens whose
intercession does not avail at all except after Allah has given
permission to whom He pleases and chooses", After this lecture, God once
again questions the idolators beliefs regarding the angels saying: "Most
surely they who do not believe in the hereafter name the angels with
female names.........". 304

You can see that in all of the above verses from Surah "Najm", not only
is there no trace of praise for the Quraishites gods, on the contrary
there is only criticism and ridicule for their idolatrous beliefs. It
discusses the fact that the idolators said these things about their
idols out of ignorance and stupidity and by following their carnal
desires, possessing no realm reason for their actions, Afterwards, it
also adds that in principle the idolators or their minds cannot grasp
higher understanding and knowledge and only extends to the material
world incapable of understanding better than or beyond that. He then
commands the Prophet to keep aloof from them and to turn away from them
keeping his path seperate from theirs.

We don't know how this matter escaped the fabricators of this fable and
how they failed to realize that the Meccan idolators were not so
ignorant of the Arabic language to not understand the Surah "Najm's"
attack on and clash with their beliefs, and fail to perceive all of this
reproach, taunting and ridicule? We all know that the Arabs of Mecca,
the Quraishites, were pure, untouched Arabs whose entire culture
consisted of only emotion-stirring discourses, lyric and epic poetry,
odes, eulogies, and satires. With one eulogy they would become so joyous
they could almost fly, and one satirical poem could enrage them to the
point of initiating bloody wars, causing the blood of their brave sons
to flow upon the sandy region of Arabia's deserts for many years.
According to the remarks in the previous narratives, despite all this it
seems that they didn't understand those taunts and attacks at all.

The ignored tens of verses of refutal because of two verses of praise
which followed them and joined the Muslims' ranks with one prostration.
It also seems that they didn't perceive the contradiction and contrast
between the Satanic verses and the Qurans rash and harsh verses and by
satisfying themselves with only those two verses they fell to the ground
in prostration.

They, who despite all their hatred and enmity, listened to all of these
verses very carefully 305 being so astonished at the beauty and
eloquence of the words and their meanings that they had no choice but to
call it magic. 306 How could they then fail to perceive this change in
content and modification in the way of speech, especially with such
speed and in a short Surah!! Not only did they not perceive it but the
great scholars and first-rate commentators of the Caliphate school were
also caught up in the web of this ignorance!! Aren't these things
strange and amazing?!

**2**

In the second part we will proceed to a study of the verses in the
Surah "Haj" and discuss this noble verse: '---Arabic text---' We must
also study the three points we are confronted with in this verse so that
its understanding and interpretation will be made possible. These three
points are:

A: '---Arabic text---'
B: Satans suggestion or inspiration.
C: Gods abrogation of the satanic suggestions and strengthening of his
own verses.

The plural of this word being written Some have said that it means
(Talavat) reading or (Ghara'at) recitation of the Quran, and we learned
previously of those who possess this opinion. It could also mean
(reghabat) desire, or (Arazou) wish, such as many others have said and
with which we agree. These are the only two possible meanings for this
word.

When we look at the various derivations of this word in the Holy Quran
we see that only the second supposition suits the collection of verses
in which the derivatives of this word have been used in some way.

"Amanee" which is the plural form of "Amniyeh" has been used five times
in the Holy Quran, among them:

"And they say: None shall enter the garden (of paradise) except, he who
is a Jew or a Christian. These are their vain desires. Say: Bring your
proof if you are truthful". 307 "(This) shall not be in accordance with
your vain desires nor in accordance with the vain desires of the
followers of the Book; whoever does evil, he shall be requited with it,
and besides Allah he will find for himself, neither a guardian nor a
helper". 308

Therefore, the research done by the linguists of '---Arabic text---'
was correct when they interpreted the above mentioned word as such:
"Amniyeh" is something someone desires and wants and of course most of
the time the word is used with regard to futile wishes which are
incorrect and impossible, like that of an unusually long life or
delaying resurrection day". 309

The word "Tamannna" which is close to the word "Amniyeh" is rooted and
meaning, has come to us in different forms in the Quran. It may, in no
way, have meanings other than desiring or wishing. Pay attention to
examples of these verses:

"And those who yearned for his place only the day before began to
say...."310 "Say: If the future abode with Allah is specially for you to
the exclusion of the people, then yearn for death if you are truthful".
311 "And they will never yearn for it because of what their hands have
sent before: and Allah is cognizant of the unjust". 312

Thus, "Majma logat-e-Arab" was correct in its opinion regarding this
word when they interpreted it as such:

'---Arabic text---'

"To desire a certain thing which is liked, meaning to wish for it and
set ones' heart on achieving it". 313 Then they add: "The Apostles' or
prophets '---Arabic text---' means his desire to propagate his
invitation and establish his mission. Satan also places doubt, suspicion
and hesitation in the hearts of those who are called to accept this
mission and invitiation, and strives to make the Prophets' great desire
and wish unattainable". 314

Based on the previous points, "Tamanna" and "Amniyeh" are used in the
Quran to mean wish and desire, and when we look carefully at the
position of this verse in the above-mentioned Surah we see that this
verse of the Surah Haj is located in a completely unified group of
verses according to their topic. This unified collection begins with
verse 42 and continued up to verse 65. In these verses the lord says:

(If they refute you, the people of Noah and Aad and Samud and the
people of Abraham and lot and also the inhabitants of Madyain refuted
(their prophets), and Moses was also refuted. Afterwards we gave the
unbelievers respite and time and then we punished them. How numerous the
cities of the oppressors are which we have destroyed and now the walls
and roofs of these cities are collapsed and the water in their wells
remain unused and their castles uninhabited). And He once again repeats,
(How numerous the cities of oppression are which we gave respite but
eventually destroyed, and the return is unto Me). He then begins to
speak to the prophet and consoles him telling him not to suffer because
of their refutal and blasphemy; because you are only a messenger and a
warner while you have no responsibility for the peoples faith and
practice, and if they do not practice you are not responsible. Then He
says: As far as your propagation is concerned the people are divided
into two groups: the believers and the unbelievers.

"......Then (as for) those who strive to oppose our communications,
they shall be the inmates of the flaming fire".

For those who believe in the Quran and perform good deeds there will be
(on resurrection day) forgiveness, and (in heaven) honourable sustenance
and as for those who strive to annul our verses or show weakness and
breaks in the position of miracles, they are the inhabitants of Hell.
After this distinction He once again comforts His prophet saying:

And we did not send before you any prophet or Apostle but when he
desired and wished for progress for his invitation Satan made
suggestions and problems preventing his achieving these wishes (to annul
the divine verses and show its failure and unsuccess) . So the lord took
away and destroyed the Satanic doubts, objections and obstacles in the
way of his invitation and removed all traces of it).

In other Quranic verses this two sided battle is shown, the lord his
prophet and verses on one side and on the other side those possessing
satanic qualities, their objections, doubts and obstructions, where the
victory of Gods' front is clearly proclaimed:

"The lord casts the truth against the falsehood and in this way breaks
and destroys the falsehood". 315

And in another place:

"The unbelievers come to you so they may dispute with you and say: This
Quran which you have brought with you is nothing but the stories and
fables of the ancients. They prohibit the people from (hearing and
accepting) it, and they themselves go far away from it and they destroy
nothing but their own souls while they perceive not". 316

And also:

"Just as we have made enemies for you we made for every prophet an
enemy from among the devils, men and jinn, and some of them suggest to
others varnished falsehoods. If your lord pleased (to constrain them)
they would not have done it. Therefore leave them with what they forge".
317

That which was mentioned under the name "Mo'aajezeen" in verse 51 of
the Surah Haj and showed the efforts of the two fronts, truth and
falsehood to defeat each to her may be found in many other Quranic
verses. We saw three examples of it above and we refrain from mentioning
other examples of it above and we refrain from mentioning other
examples. In addition, we deem it necessary to point out that from verse
51 onward of this very surah a few verses come in interpretation and
explanation of this very word and the noble verse containing it and
shows the battle between truth and falsehood. On one side the suggestion
of doubts and objections by Satans party and on the other side their
abrogation by God is spoken of after which the divine trial and the
positive and negative reactions of the believers and unbelievers is
explained.

According to what we just read "Tamanna" and "Amniyeh" is the Prophets
strong relish and desire, and his effort in the way of the peoples
guidance and prosperity, and on these grounds the (Satanic suggestion)
is the doubt and temptations that Satan creates in the peoples
guidance.

"Naskh" is also the abrogation, destruction and rendering inoperative
these doubts and objections while "Ahkam" is the clarifying of doubts
and showing Satans temptatio ns by way of the Holy Quran miraculous
verses.

This was the interpretation of verse 52 of the Surah Haj with regard to
its position among other verses in the same surah, which are united with
it in subject-matter. Of course this is if "Tamanna" and "Amniyeh" mean
desire, which and liking as was Gods intent. If, however, these two
words are seen as meaning recitation and reading, the interpretation is
the same but the translation meaning of this verse becomes thus:

"No prophet or Apostle was sent before you unless when he recited the
scripture and its verses (to the people) Satan would put doubts,
objections and false beliefs regarding it in his peoples hearts saying
to them: 'These are tricks and stories of the ancients, and has been
culminated with doubts with other verses and in this way disposes of
them........"

In the Surah "Saba" this very meaning and intention is delivered in a
different way:

"And when Our clear communications are recited to them, they say: This
is naught but a man who desires to turn you away from that which your
fathers worshipped. And they say: This is naught but a lie which is
forged. And those who disbelieve say of the truth when it comes to them:
This is only clear enchantment". 318

**The Qurans Interpretation Of This Verse.**

It is a well known matter in the Quran and Islamic history that the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w) loved guiding his people and in doing so he never
had an idle moment, suffered, and went without sleep in hopes that he
could lead them on the road to prosperity, The lord says regarding him:
(Then maybe you will kill yourself with grief, sorrowing after them, if
they do not believe in this announcement). 319

On the opposing side, however, among the Quraishites the prophets'
tribe and family there were persons like Abu Lahab and Nozr ibn Haras
who inspired doubts in other members of the tribe and even those who
entered Mecca for the pilgrimage or other reasons. They circulated doubt
and error in the community regarding the Prophets invitation and the
verses he read from the Book of God, causing a group to draw away from
Islam, and for the prophets' - invitation to have no effect on him. It
is for this reason that in these numerous and repetitive verses it is
spoken of the fact that a group strive to annul the Quran, for example,
calling it enchantment, his fables, or the result of foreigners
teachings.

The Satanic suggestions referred to these types of Satanic persons who
spoke these words and phrases;

"We heard (the words and verses of the Quran and) if we wish we can
bring verses like them. These are but stories of the ancients". 320

"And they say: This Quran is stories of the ancients that he (the
prophet) writes after persons read them to him morning and night (and
then proclaims)". 321

Also in the Surah Nahl we read this about the statements made by the
anti-Islamic groups and their satanic suggestions to the people:

"And certainly we know that they say: Only a mortal teaches him. The
tongue of him whom they reproach is barbarous, and this is clear Arabic
tongue". 322

And then in Surah "Mudassir" some more of them are related:

"Surely he reflected and guessed, but may he be cursed how he plotted,
again may he be cursed how he plotted; Then he looked, then he frowned
and scowled, then he turned back and was big with pride, Then he said:
This is naught but enchantment, narrated (from others) This is naught
but the word of a mortal". 323

Also in the Surah Ha-mim verse 26 we read the following:

"And those who disbelieve say: Do not listen to this Quran and make
noise therein, perhaps you may overcome".

These types of remarks and other things resembling it are the Satanic
inspirations and the doubts and objections that human beings circulated
regarding the Holy Quram, these were the various battles that took place
to abolish the Quran. The lord abbrogated all of these and destroyed
them and on the opposite gave strength to his own verses by giving them
miraculous superiority and super human meanings and by challenging human
beings to try and produce verses like them or similar to them for
example He said:

"If you are in doubt as to that which we revealed to our servant, then
produce a chapter like it and call on your witnesses besides Allah if
you are truthful......But if you do (it) not and never shall you do
(it), then be on guard against the fire......." 324

It was in this way that the lord supported his own verses and
strengthened them, making the satanic inspirations weak and worthless,
abbrogating their effects on the Quranic verses. This was just like His
annihilation and abbrogation of satanic suggestions, temptations and
efforts in past nations.

In this way Satans suggestion in the Apostle whether this word means
recitation or wish, desire or liking, consists of suggesting doubts in
the Holy Quran which itself may be accomplished in two ways:

1) An invisible satan in the form of Jinn suggests a thought,
temptation or doubt. This means that he places doubts in the hearts of
the idolators who are afflicted with the disease of blasphemy and moves
them to promulgate these types of doubts and objections.

2) In principle the planners of temptations, doubt, objection and
protests are human beings possessing Satanic characteristics. The Holy
Quran makes explicit mention of both of these types of Satanic
suggestions, saying:

"And thus did we make for every prophet an enemy, the Shaitans from
among men, and jinn, some of them suggesting to others varnished
falsehood to deceive (them)...." 325

The devils had put all of their efforts to work in order to destroy the
divine verses but the lord abbrogated their effects. Satan and the
Satanic persons exchanged views and suggested to each other misleading
and deceiving words to confront the divine movement of Islam. they
strove to remove the credibility and value from the divine verses. The
Lord, however, strengthened his verses by clarifying these temptations
and refuting doubts. These types of confrontations and battles were not
only just to the Final Prophet (s.a.w). Every apostle and Prophet who
desired to guide his people and nation and recited for them the Lords
scripture, became entangled in their treachery and dangerous plots,
whole on the contrary the Lord destroyed and made worthless these doubts
and temptations.

