The Infallibility of the Prophets
=================================

The scholars of the Caliphate school who narrated this fable at least
believed in the Prophets infallibility with regard to the delivery of
Gods' messages even though they did not believe in their purity with
regard to all of their words and deeds as those who were trained in the
Ahlul Bait school. This of course in itself necessitates acceptance of
their infallibility in receiving and safeguarding these revelations;
because if we don't accept the Prophets infallibility in receiving and
safeguarding the revelation there will be conflict and incompatibility
with regard to their infallibility in its propagation which is agreed
upon by all. If a prophet cannot learn heavenly instruction without
errors and mistakes and cannot safeguard it in the proper way; how can
he accomplish his mission completely and thoroughly. Therefore, the
belief in these types of narratives by some of the scholars of this
school is incompatible and inconsistent with their belief in the
prophets infallibility in the propagation, acceptance and safeguarding
of divine revelation.

This is because according to these false narratives the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) did not remain immune from Satanic suggestions and divine
protection and infallibility in propagation did not apply to him; With
the elimination of infallibility and divine protection, at least in this
matter, what confidence and trust in the Holy Quran will remain? If
Satan could interfere in one place of the Quran, what reason could exist
to keep other parts of it immune from him. Isn't it even possible to
say: The verse dealing with the abrogation of satanic suggestion - (if
this fable is indeed true) - is itself a satanic suggestion under the
shelter of which he could infiltrate the rest of his anti - Islamic
subject matter into the Quran!!

Here, we realize what a dangerous objective that they had in mind when
fabricating these types of narratives, and how in this way they wished
to discredit the strongest proof of Islam.

In the false and fabricated narratives studied in previous lessons
their entire attack was only on the Prophet of Islams' identity and to
try and destroy its heavenly and Holy esteem while on the contrary the
Quran, which was proof of Islam and its everlasting miracle, was not
exposed to an attack of doubt and suspicion.

Now, however, they have taken a step further and not only is the
Prophet attacked, so is the Quran and the revelation, and its undoubted
immunity is given up to doubt and uncertainty!!!

**Discovering The Truth.**

All of the research that has been conducted up until now and all of the
comparative discussions that we have observed in which the texts and
documents of these narratives were analyzed from various viewpoints were
appropriate and suitable. Its effectiveness, however, was only before
discovering the truth behind this event and the essential reality of
what happened, and when the veil is removed from the reality of the
event there will be no further need for that discussion and research.
Now for the truth behind the event: The great historian of the second
century A.H Ibn Kolby who died in 204 A.H wrote in his book Al-Asnaam:

"The Quraishites circled the Ka'aba in Mecca saying:

'---Arabic text---'

The Quraishites believed that these idols were the daughters of God!
and had the power of intercession with Him. When God sent his prophet to
them, however, He revealed to him (in opposition to these vain beliefs)
that: 367

'---Arabic text---'

Therefore the speakers of these words were the Quraishites and not the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w). The Quraishites did not say this only once, on the
contrary it was customary for them to recite this during their
circulation around the Ka'aba. During the Haj and Umreh and during
circumbulations they always spoke and repeated these words as an
invocation. The Surah Najm was then revealed to reflect this type of
belief and weak-minded idolatrous thoughts spoken of in the above
mentioned words. It contained proof of the futility of their beliefs and
words, and reproached and reprimanded them. Unfortunately, however, the
narrative mentioned and discussed here reversed the truth, and with an
enormous lie and foul calumny they attributed these words to the great
Prophet of Islam. Words that never even occured to him or were ever
spoken by him. They misrepresented the facts by deceitful means!!

Now that this is so we must find the roots of the appearance of such
narratives and search for the reasons and means for their invention.
After referring to and researching first-hand records and references, we
see that in Islams distant historical past some of the researchers from
among Islams scholars found the reason and discovered the means. This
researcher is Mohammad ibn Eshaq ibn Khazimeh (died 311 A.H). In
reference to the Gharaniq narratives he has said: "These narratives have
been created and furnished by atheists and dualists". 368 This scholar
also wrote a book on this matter which unfortunately has not remained
for us today to enable us to find out about the range of his studies and
research and become further acquainted with this fact.

Now, in order to gain an acquaintance with the perimeters of the
dualists deeds and the limits of their destruction we will refer to the
writings of the authorities on the matter. Researchers from among the
experts on Hadith have investigated the circumstances surrounding the
plots and destructive acts of the dualists and atheists in the first
centuries of Islam, and have given explanations which to an extent
remove the veil of mystery surrounding this deed. In a description of
those persons who purposefully lied in the narration of hadiths, Ibn
Jozy a sixth century researcher and expert on hadiths (died 597 A.H)
says:

'There was one group of dualists whose aim was the misgiving in the
hearts of the people and to play with beliefs. One maternal uncle and
Hammad ibn Salamehs step son. Ibn Abil Auja (one of the well-known
second century dualists) entered fabricated hadiths into his step
father, Hammad ibn Salamehs books of Hadith.

Ibn Jozy adds: "The great expert on Hadiths Abu Ahmad taken before
Mohammad ibn Sulaiman ibn Ali (because of dualism and atheism) he
ordered his head to be severed. Because Ibn Abil Auja was certain of his
death he said: I swear to God that I have spread among you four thousand
fabricated, false hadiths which have made the permitted, prohibited, and
the prohibited, permitted. I have changed your days of fasting to days
of fast-breaking and your days of fast-breaking to days of fasting. It
has also been related that Mahdi Abbasi has said: A man of the dualists
admitted to me that he had fabricated and furnished four hundred false
Hadiths which circulated among the Muslims".

Ibn Jozy said: "Among those who fabricated false Hadiths we have:
(Moghaireh ibn Sa'id) and (Bayan) and then he mentions this remark by
Ibn Numayr: Moghaireh was a sorcerer and Bayan was a dualist and Khalib
ibn Abdullah Ghasry, the Hakem, killed them both and burned their
bodies. Among these dualists there were certain persons who deceived the
scholars of Hadiths and entered fabricated Hadiths in their books of
hadiths, and later these experts repeated them to others thinking that
they were their own narrations. It is related from Hakam ibn Mobarak
that: Hammad ibn Zay d declare: The dualists and atheist ascribed
twelve-thousand false hadiths to the Prophet (s.a.w)". 369

In addition to these, this humble servant of God has shown in the books
"Abdullah ibn Saba wa Asaateer Okhra" 2 volumes, and "Khamsooon wa Me'ah
Sahabi Moghtalek" 2 volumes, the results of a series of destructive
deeds committed by the dualist of those eras in upturning the truth in
Islamic history. They have gone so far in alteration and fabrication and
mixing the truth with falsities that they have made the darkness of
night seem like the light of day and the light of day seem like the
darkness of night. Among the members of this group we introduced a
person known as a dualist and atheist named Saif ibn Amir Tamimi and who
by writing two books "Alfottoh wa reddah" and "Jamal wa maseer-e-A'esha
wa Ali" filled the history of Islam with lies. Among the discoveries
presented in this humble servants writings, dualists, we came up upon
great companions, conquerors, epic, poets, battlegrounds, cities and
lands, rivers and mountains which never existed being nothing but lies,
fabrications, alterations and inventions!! 370

From what we have said it has become clear that these types of hadiths
and narratives were fabricated by the dualists and atheists in the first
years of Islams history so that the Muslims beliefs and ways of thought
would be disturbed and that doubt, misgivings and disbelief would become
prevalent among them. Following this aim, the hadiths under study were
suggested to the gullible, simple-minded scholars of Hadith, or entered
into their books without the authors being aware of such. This humble
servant believes that the time of the fabrication of such hadiths was
the beginning of the second century A.H because experts have said thet
Ibn Eshagh (died 152 A.H) included some of them in his book Seerat
un-Nabi. 371

It doesn't matter what time these fabrication were created, since their
results have been spread throughout the books on commentary and history
of the Caliphate school, and have been handed down generation to
generation until they have reached this era; thus having formed the way
of thought of many of this schools adherents. In the modern era this
tragedy took on a new aspect and European and American Orientalists
entered the scene gaining access to these types of sources. These
scholars, who went about their scientific investigations with
colonialist interests and aims, found what they desired and hoped for in
these types of books and these kinds of narratives. Therefore, with
special bombastic style and varnishing borrowed from the knowledge of
the era they included them in their own books and published them in the
worlds scientific communities under the title of "Islamic studies" and
under the heading of "research and investigation" into the Prophet of
Islams life and the Quran. Most regretfully they didn't stop at just
narrating these fabrications, but used their own suppositions for the
furnishing and glorification of these narratives and introduced them as
a historical analysis of the matter and a study of the social and
individual reasons for the event, of course under the heading of an
impartial, exact inquiry. In the following pages we will see examples of
these types of inquiries which were undertaken by famous orientalists on
the environs of the Gharaniq fable, and we will also obtain a deeper
recognition of the limits and value of this groups scientific works and
investigative inquiries.

**"The Words Of Islamologists'".**

First- Professor Montgomery Watt, professor of Islamic studies and head
of the Arabic Department of Edinbugh University in Scotland, in a book
quoted from in previous lessons says that:

"In the minds of the Meccans, monotheism was vague, and they didn't see
it as being the exact opposite of polytheism, this matter being clearly
represented in the story of the (Satanic verses)! Mohammad, who was
tired and worn out by the Meccans opposition, awaited a revelation which
would clear up the difficulties with the Meccan leaders. It was under
these circumstances that a revelation was revealed which did not exceed
two or three verses, and gave permission for the mediation of some of
the gods in the temples surrounding Mecca. Later he realized that these
verses were not inspired to him from God but were really satanic
suggestions. At first he wanted to accept them and this shows that in
this stage of monotheism he did not refrain from paying respect to or
praying to certain supernatural beings which they knew as a kind of
Angel! 372

In another place in this book we read: "The various descriptions of
this events circumstances are quite diverse, so first of all we had
better refer to an explanation of the creditable (!) .... Apparently
there was a time in which Mohammad introduced verses in the Quran which
probably gave permission for the intercedence of the idols. The contents
of one of these verses is:

'---Arabic text---'

A while later another revelation was revealed to him which abrogated
the above verses.... Both the first and second verses had been
circulated everywhere and the explanation for this correction and
abrogation was that Satan had slipped his own inspiration into the first
verses without Mohammad being aware of such. This story is very strange
and amazing. A Prophet who propagandizes the greatest monotheistic
religion gives permission for idolatry (!) In truth this event is so
strange that it proves its being based on fact (!) and it is not
conceivable that someone fabricated it and wished the Muslims to believe
it..... One of the fascinating aspects of this story is that it reveals
to us Mohammads opinions and beliefs in relation to his time. Even
though Mohammad was sure that the speaker of these verses was not
himself and was being revealed to him, in the beginning he was not aware
that these verses were contrary to the religion he was the propagator of
(!) Doesn't this mean that he himself was an idolator at this
time?!......" 373
Second- Professor Watt in another of his books in a lengthy discussion
entitled "The Satanic verses, its causes and interpretations" writes
such: "Islamic scholars and Jurisprudents who have no understanding of
the Western term evolution (gradual development or perfection) believe,
that in Mohammads case he was completely aware of the total content of
Islamic belief, and it is extremely difficult for them to accept the
fact that he didn't see the revealing of "the satanic verses" as being
contrary to his beliefs. This is while the truth of the matter is that
his monotheism, just as the monotheism of his enlightened
contemporaries, is not free of complexity, ambiguity and mystery (!) and
they don't think of the acceptance of these gods as opposing or
antithetical to "Tauhid", and no doubt they see Lat, Uzza, and Manat as
being heavenly creatures but of a lower rank in relation to
God.....There is no doubt Mohammad succeeded in gaining the Quraishite
leaders' interest in his beliefs by these means. Efforts were made in
order for him to agree to a form of permission for worship in the
temples surrounding Meccca, and he was initially ready to accept this
because of its material advantages, because he knew that this would help
in an effortless, easy advancement of his ideas. Later, as a result of
divine counsel, he realised that this association and sympathy with the
idolators would be fatal for Islam.

As a result he announced a foresaking of idolatry and he went about
this with such strong words and so vigorous that he closed the way for
any kind of co-operation with them). 374

Third- Joseph Sshact Danish Orientalist and Islamologist, Professor of
Arabic in Leeden University and also Professor of the Universities of
Cairo, Algeria, Oxford in England, Fryboug in Switzerland and Columbia
in the Unites States, in the article "Osool" of the Encyclopedia of
Islam, mentions the fabricated, false story of Gharaniq and Satans
interference. He says: "Among the Muslims there is no one who doubts the
Qurans irrefutability and immunity from mistakes, in spite of the
efforts Satan may have made to taint it and mix his words and ideas with
the Quran". 375

Fourth- F. Buhl the great orientalist and Islamologist from Denmark
(1850-1932), Professor of the University of Leipzig, in the Encyclopedia
of Islam under the article Quran, he mentions this very fabricated,
false story after the necessary prelude and introduction saying: "The
Prophet possessed readiness to recognize and discern the words which
were inspired to him from his unconscious mind.....he was responsible
for battling with the secret sound of Satan......But sometimes he
intended to intermingle the revelation with these secret proclamations
from Satan. This matter is completely clear in verse 98 of the Surah
Nahl. In order to keep himself immune from these Satanic proclamations
he asked for his protection from God.

Reliable narratives (!!) show that at least one time he permitted
himself to be tempted by Satan and praised Lat, Uzza and Manat.
Afterwards, however, he discovered his error and verse 19 of Surah Najm
was revealed to him". 376
This group of Orientalists, in addition to personal motives and
sometimes ignorance, were in the clutches of the Western colonialist
forces and were the hirelings and wage-earners of the Foreign Ministry
or Colonial Department of the great imperialistic governments. Apart
from them, however, another group went about the work involved in
Oriental studies and Islamic studies. They are church scholars who in
the first place follow the aim of Christianizing the world and secondly
are the wage earners and aids of the colonialist Imperialist governments
with a mediator. Somtimes in bigotry this group excels (outdoes) the
firs-rate scholars. One of the outstanding examples of this group is P.
F Lammens (1862-1937). Eighty of his articles in the first edition of
the "Encyclopedia of Islam" and many of his other books and articles
show the height of his bigotry and enmity towards Islam and Ahlul Bait.
This group of scholars also gained access to the Gharanig Fable and they
use it against Islam in their writings. Among them is one writing which
was published in Egypt in Arabic at the beginning of the twentieth
century, which was compiled by a group of American Christian scholars
against Islam. The writer or writers of this article, which appeared in
four parts and was named "Al-Hedayah", after narrating the Gharaniq
Fable said that they knew it was the greatest proof of the prophets
attachment to and inclination towards the idols. 377

