Alteration and Its Dimensions in Past Nations
=============================================

In a short, analogic, comparatory discussion we will study the ways of
alteration, replacement and concealment in previous nations so that with
greater clarity we will come to know the final Divine law and its fate.
We will consult the only accurate unaltered record in our possession of
the history of divine religions, The Holy Quran to see how previous
divine religions were destroyed:

**1) On Concealment:**

«And (remember) when Allah laid a charge on those who had received the
Scripture (He said): You are to expound it to mankind and not to hide
it. But they flung it behind their backs and bought thereby a little
gain.» 38

«Those who hide the proofs and the guidance which We revealed, after We
had made it clear in the Scripture: such are accursed of Allah and
accursed of those who have the power to curse» 39

«o! those who hide aught of the scripture which Allah hath revealed,
and purchase a small gain therewith, they eat into their bellies nothing
but fire. Allah will not speak to them on the day of Resurrection, nor
will Me make them grow. Theres' will be a painful doom.» 40

**2) On mixing the truth with falsities:**

«O people of the scripture! Why confound ye truth with falsehood and
knowingly conceal the truth» 41 «Confound not truth with falsehood, nor
knowingly conceal the truth» 42

**3) Alteration**

«Have you any hope that they will be true to you when a party of them
used to listen to the word of Allah, then used to change it, after they
had understood it, knowingly?» 43

«....and of the Jews: listeners for the sake of falsehood, listeners on
behalf of other folk who come not unto thee, changing words from their
context....» 44

«Some of those who are Jews change words from their context and say:
"We hear and disobey; hear thou as one who heareth not" and "listen to
us" distorting with their tongues and slandering religion.....» 45

From a careful study of the proceeding verses we discover that
different nations used different methods to plunder heavenly truths and
divine religions. A group of them hide or concealed these truths,
another mixed the truth with falsehood creating suspicion and the third
group only changed directions to alter meaning or intention, having
nothing to do with its outer appearance and literality. In short, by
using these methods they would alter the Scriptures or Testaments and
progressed to the point where it became impossible to recognize the
truth from falsehood.

Of course the primary motive for these treacherous acts and plundering
was that Heavenly truths were always and in every place at war and in
conflict with a part of mans' sensual passions and desires. The validity
and value of these types of realities closed the way to the enactment
and practice of sensual desires for the powerful and pleasure seeking.
Either these pleasures and countless conveniences must be refuted; those
realities removed from their valid, recognized position; or changed in
essence and nature. The powerful persons of nearly all nations chose the
third method. This was because they were not willing to accept the first
method which meant forsaking their pleasures and the second method was
not feasible because refuting religious truths in their entirety would
damage their position making life difficult for them. As such, the best
method was to alter and plunder all of its meanings and realities under
the pretense of religion. This was the fate of all Divine religions and
past religious laws, they were altered in this fashion. The Holy Quran
groups these crimes and malicious acts under the word revolt, injustice.
46

Previously we learned that the exigency of Divine Lordship is that his
laws---being the only laws that ring true for mankind---be sent to the
prophets in the form of revelations which are then taught to us by them.
We also learned that because they are messengers, Divine messengers have
no responsibility except that of propagation. In addition to that
however, every prophet before being Gods messenger is also a Muslim.
That which is required of us with regard to our being Muslim is also
required of him. Being a Muslim he must pray, fast, perform the rites of
Hajj, perform Holy War (Jehad) and establish a just government. All of
these are Islamic responsibilities, not those of prophetic mission. In
the sense that the prophet is a messenger of God and an apostle he has
no other responsibility but that of propagation.

Now, with the preliminary information we have acquired we will proceed
to the main topic of this series of lectures, being the role and
responsibilities of the Holy Imams (a.s) in Islamic society.

**Imamate and Caliphate**

In Islam there exists two schools of thought and insight: The Imamate
school and the Caliphate schools.

In the Imamate school, the Imam possesses certain particularities,
Among them that he must be infallible of all sin and error ("Masum" =
infallible). Another is that he may only be appointed by God, the
Prophet having no role in his appointment except for the propagation and
proclamation of Gods command. 'The Almighty God" chooses, and the
prophet relays the news of this divine appointment to the people.

Of these Imams, the first being Amirul Mu'meneen Ali (a.s) and the last
being Hujjat ibn al-Hassan Mahdi (a.s), that which we know and recognize
in relation to Ali is the same for Hujjat ibn al-Hassan. That which is
proved for Ali; infallibility, divine appointment, divine inspiration,
and knowledge of all the aspects of eternal Islam, exists for all of the
Imams and is proved.

But in the Caliphate school, the people choose the Caliph and he comes
to hold the position of Caliph by the peoples choice. Here, what is
confirmed for Abu Bakr has been confirmed until the end of the Ottoman
Caliphate. The Caliphate is determined by a vote and an oath of
allegiance and this never differs.

This discussion was only a very small introduction. We will now see
that in the Imamate school and based on its views, how Imam Ali (a.s) is
seen and what the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) said on his behalf.

A study of the Prophets life will clearly show that the propagation of
divine law by him was not unrelated to the events of time and place. For
instance, when something happened and the Prophet was consulted
concerning it, Gabriel would reveal the related judgement by way of
revelation. In domestic or social matters, conflicts would arise,
someone would ask a question, or an issue would be brought up by friend
or foe with the Prophet (s.a.w). Following these situations a revelation
would be revealed that solved the disagreement or answered the
question.

We will refer to a very important event in Islamic history and learn
from it. In the eighth year of the Hejrat, the Prophet conquered Mecca
and returned to Medina.

Now the Muslims possess the mightiest power in Arabia. However other
scattered forces exist in Arabia which have not come under the banner of
Islam, and a group of the pagan Arab tribes still loyal to the customs
of the ignorant Arabs come to Mecca. These pagans circumambulate the
"House of God" in Mecca and perform all of the other rites customary
just as the Muslims.

After Islam gained power and Mecca was conquered, all of these rites
were performed by the Muslims. The Muslim and pagan both performed
Abrahams great rite and each went in his own way having nothing to do
with the other.

The Chapter of Bara'ah in the Holy Quran, was revealed as a strong
command to end the mixing of Muslim and Pagan. In these verses God
explicitly informs the pagans that:

"(This is a declaration of) immunity by Allah and his Apostle towards
those the idolaters with whom you made an agreement. So go about in the
land for four months and know that Allah will bring disgrace to the
unbelievers. And an announcement from Allah and His Apostle to the
people on the day of the greater pilgrimage that Allah and His Apostle
are free from liability to the idolaters;.... 47

So it was thus that the proclamation for combat with all of the Arab
polytheists was given. This was Allahs command and judgement and must be
communicated as such to the Arab pagans and polytheists. The Prophet is
the one delegated for the duty of propagation. The initial proclamation
of the Quran and each of Gods laws to its audience is the particular
concern of the ("Masum") infallible. Those bound by, or the audience
intended for a particular divine law must initially hear it, from one of
the infallible.

The Holy Quran stipulates that; our invisible officers (Angels) look
after those possessed of prophetic mission in all aspects and ways
during the propagation of divine law, so that the message will be given
without encountering the danger of mistakes or errors. As a result
Heavenly truths reach the people in their true entirety. 48 This is the
very principle we mentioned as the purity of first hand propagation
which consists of this divine practice:

**«The initial propagation must be undertaken by an infallible
(Masum)»**

Here a point is necessary to make because without it this subject will
not be correctly understood. The ideas that must be relayed to the
people may be divided into two parts: first are those of which both the
terminology and their meanings or intent are from God such as the Quran
and other divinely inspired scriptures, second are those whose ideas and
meanings are Heavenly but its terminology coming from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) and those are the traditions.

The Holy Quran was revealed to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) by God, both
the very terminology, the words and all of their meanings and intent are
from Him. Of course the Quran only contains the major and main topics of
Islamic matters and doesn't usually deal with specific matters. But
there also exists a series of Islamic laws and learnings and other
specifics such as how many "Rakats" (units or sections) make up one
prayer, what is recited in "Rukoo" (genuflection) and "Sujud"
(prostration) during prayer, how do we say the "Tashahud" (testimony) in
the rite of Hajj how many times must we circumambulate the Kaaba, where
is "Meeghat" (a certain place for beginning Hajj rites), how do we put
on the pilgrims clothing, when are alms necessary and all other
secondary details. These are not in the Holy Quran. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) with reliance on revelation but with his own terminology and
words explained them. In this series of religious laws the meanings and
ideas are from God but the speech from the Prophet.

That which in word and meaning was from God; the Holy Quran and its
propagation to the duty bound, was finished by the last year of the Holy
Prophets (s.a.w) life, and the Prophet proclaimed it to all of the
people. However, the ideas and truths which must be explained in
prophetic traditions are of two types. One type included those which the
Muslims of that time needed and wanted. The Prophet informed everyone of
these. The other type were those which would not be enacted during the
Prophets time and would be enacted in later times, there as such being
no urgent need for their proclamation in the Prophets time. For example;
if the leader of the Muslims is not infallible,(the prophet or Imam the
rightful one) what is the duty of the Muslims, and how should they act
towards him? This verdict was not needed during the Prophets time. Also,
if between two groups of Muslims war should break out, how should the
oppressive side be treated and the property taken from them holds what
verdict in Islamic law? These laws and their like had no opportunity for
enactment during the Prophets day and age. Later however, during the age
of Imam Ali (a.s) it became reality and its practical verdict was
enacted by the Imam. Also, if the Muslims should go to war against the
rightful leader what must be done with their captives and how should the
spoils of war be taken possession of? All of these were matters brought
up later and there was no need for their verdicts during the Prophets
time so they weren't explained.

It was all of these events and hundreds and thousands of other events
that had laws, rules, and verdicts, and God related and explained them
to His prophet by way of revelation. In these sorts of maters the
Prophet left their verdicts as a trust with Amirul Mo'meneen Ali
(a.s),49 and it was he who had the responsibility of their communication
after the Prophet (s.a.w)!

Another division of the matters necessary to be propagated could be
into those being proclaimed for the first time without an intermediary,
and those proclaimed by an intermediary.

The laws necessary for their duty-bound must initially be proclaimed by
a person completely infallible and free of sin, error and prejudice.
Prayer, the Fast, Zakat and Jehad and every other Divine Law must
initially be taught by a missionary who is infallible (Masum) to the
duty bound. This must be done by one who is appointed by God, and
infallible of errors and mistakes and if not Gods law may become subject
to subtraction and additions, mistakes and forgetfulness. Of course,
after correctly learning religious law every Muslim may and must
proclaim it to others. One Muslim may say to the other: the Prophet
(s.a.w) taught me to pray like this, he taught the particulars of a
certain law like this or he performed some particular action like this.
An ordinary Muslim, one who is not infallible ("Masum") may not say the
following without mentioning an intermediary; God requires you to pray
in this manner. No, in principle the right to say such does not exists
for those other than the infallible. This is the precise, important
point here.

According to this principle the Islamic laws which were not proclaimed
during the Prophets lifetime must have been proclaimed by what person?
While we answer this question we will draw closer to the role and deed
of the Holy Imams (a.s).

49) In creditable Shi'ite Traditions it is said that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) informed Ali (a.s) of all of the matters needed by man and he
(Ali) collected and put these down in a book called « «'''»
=collection», which was kept by Ahlu'l bait as a scientific legacy. We
have also seen much of this book in Sunni Traditions. We will discuss
this book further in the future. If God wills.

