A Man of Myself
===============

The verses of Bara'ah were revealed and it addressed the pagans as a
group specially. They were in Mecca far from the Prophets (s.a.w) reach
and the Medinites were not subject to the propagation of these verses.
These verses were not meant for them and are remarks and commands for
the pagans exclusively. Previously we learned and will see more clearly
in the future, that according to Islamic thought, propagation of verses
to those they address must be accomplished by an infallible. Our point
is a clear and prominent point in the text of this story. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) sent for Abu Bakr and giving him the verses told him;
mount and go to Mecca and proclaim these verse to those subject to them,
the pagans.

Here we have a revelation from God, those subject to it not being the
Muslims of Medina so that the Prophet could have delivered it himself,
and the first propagation having been carried out by an infallible
(Masum). If this revelation had been meant for the people of Medina of
course Abu Bakr being one of them could have proclaimed it everywhere
and to everyone as second hand propagation. We have however seen that
this was not so and the word was especially meant for the pagans and
carried the announcement of Islams position regarding its encounters
with them in the future. Hence, the delivery of these verses in Mecca
was only correct if done by the Prophet (s.a.w).

Abu Bakr mounts and starts out towards Mecca. Gabriel appears and
brings to the Prophet (s.a.w) this categorical divine command: "That is
the propagation of Gods verdict, first hand propagation at that. Either
you must see to it yourself or someone who is of you".

This was the basis of this incident.

Now we will take a look at the related traditions. Here we will refer
to the point that all of the traditions we will read are from
authorative Sunni writings and we have not used Shi'ite sources. In
principle it was not necessary for us to do so because the authorative
Sunni narratives cover almost all aspects of this incident.

Tirmidhi in "As-Sahih", Nasa'i in "al-Khasa'is" and Ahmad bin Hanbal in
"Masnad" and many other famous narrators have narrated it and we will
report it literally from Tirmidhi's "Sahih". Anas ibn Malik had reported
that the Prophet (s.a.w) sent the Bara'ah verses with Abu Bakr to Mecca
but called him back from the road saying:

"Its not suitable and these verses must not be read to the people
except by a man of my family" 50

Who are those of the Prophets family? They are those included in and
covered by this noble verse:

"Allah's wish is but to remove uncleanness far from you O' folk of the
Household, and cleanse you with a thorough cleansing". 51

And they are far from any uncleanness they possess the condition for
first hand propagation or in other words they possess infallibility and
divine immunity. Therefore, now that the Prophet (s.a.w) himself cannot
deliver these verses to those they are addressed to, someone must see to
this important task who possesses the special conditions for first hand
propagation. For this reason the Prophet (s.a.w) sent for Ali (a.s) and
gave the verses to him so that he would undertake this duty.

Several traditions of Imam Ali (a.s) exist on this matter. In one of
them, Zayd ibn Yasee relates as such from the Imam:

"The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) dispatched Abu Bakr to the people of Mecca
with the Surah of Bara'ah. After Abu Bakrs departure he sent Ali after
him saying, "Get the letter (containing the verses) from him and take it
to Mecca". The Imam went after Abu Bakr, retrieved the letter and took
off for Mecca to perform his duty. Abu Bakr returned to Medina in
distress. He was upset and feared that something had been revealed from
Heaven about him to the Prophet (s.a.w). When he arrived in Medina he
went to see the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) asking: "Has something been
revealed about me?"

The Holy Prophet replied: "No! nothing has been revealed about you on
this matter. It is only that I was given the duty to either deliver
these verses myself or send a person of my family for this purpose" 52

In another tradition the Imam himself relates:

"I told the Holy Prophet (s.a.w): O' Prophet of God! I am not eloquent
nor an orator! The Prophet replied: There is no other way or solution
and is inevitable that either I take these verses or you deliver them. I
then said: Now that I have no alternative and there is no other
solution, then I will take them. The Prophet then said: Go without a
doubt the Exalted Lord will keep your tongue on the truth, and truth and
will guide your heart".

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) said this and then placed his blessed hand on
Ali's mouth. 53

Another existing tradition related by the Imam (a.s) reads like this:

"The verses of the Surah of Bara'ah were revealed to the Holy Prophet
and he called for Abu Bakr and gave the verses to him to take to Mecca
and proclaim them to its inhabitants. But after a short period he
summoned me and said: Go after Abu Bakr and wherever you reach him
retrieve the letter from him, take the verses to Mecca and proclaim them
to the inhabitants there. I met Abu Bakr in "Johfeh" and retrieved the
letter from him. Abu Bakr then returned to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)
saying: O' Apostle of Allah, has something been revealed concerning me.
The Prophet replied: No, But Gabriel came to me and said: "Other than
you or a man of you no one may pronounce the prophetic message on your
behalf". 54 There is another tradition from Sa'ad Waqqas. This companion
of the Prophet (s.a.w) says:

"The Prophet (s.a.w) sent Abu Bakr with the verses of Bara' ah towards
Mecca. He was still on the way when the Prophet sent Ali after him (to
get the verses from him and go himself to perform the duty of
Proclamation). Ali (a.s) got the verses and went with them to Mecca. Abu
Bakr returned to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) in much distress and sadness
and complained to him. The Prophet saying: 55

Once again according to this tradition, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) makes
the propagation restricted to himself or a man of himself saying:
"Myself or a man from me must perform the duty of propagation and the
communication of this divine Mission."

Ibn Abbas spoke in more detail. He reports that the Prophet sent Abu
Bakr and Omar together to Mecca placing the letter in Abu Bakrs hands.
These two started out and progressed a distance. Away along the road
they saw a man on a camel coming towards them and they called out:

"Who are you?"

The man astride the camel replied:

"It is I, Ali! Abu Bakr give me the letter! (the letter containing the
verses of Bara'ah)"

Abu Bakr asked him:

"Has something happened?"

Amir-ul-Mo'meneen Ali (a.s) replied:

"Its alright, its nothing bad with regard to you".

Then Ali (a.s) took the letter from him and started out towards Mecca
in order to announce it to the pagans. Omar and Abu Bakr upon their
return to Medina asked the Prophet:

"What's new regarding us, and what has happened?" The Prophet
replied:

"Its alright, however; 56

"I have been told and the order has been given, that no one shall
deliver the divine message except myself or a man who is from me".

The last tradition will be quoted from Abu Bakr himself. Zayd ibn Yasee
quotes from Abu Bakr that the Prophet sent him to Mecca with the verses
of Bara'ah and this message:

«From this year onwards pagans may not perform the Haj, while no longer
may naked persons circumambulate the Kaaba such as was the custom in
ignorant times, and no one except the Muslims will enter Heaven. Those
who have treaties with the Holy Prophet their treaties are valid and
standing for their lawful term, and Allah and his prophet like not the
idolators»

Abu Bakr, with this message and the Quranic verses goes off to fulfill
his duty, but in his absence the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) sent for Ali
directing him:

"Go towards Mecca and try to catch up Abu Bakr, send him back to me and
you go on to proclaim the Quranic verses and my command".

Ali completed the prophets orders Abu Bakr also returned to Medina and
when he went to the Prophet, in tears he said:

O' Apostle of God! Has something happened concerning me?" The Prophet
replied:

"No, All is well, but 57 I have been ordered by God that no one but
myself or a man from myself must propagate".

The afore mentioned events and the Prophets comments about Imam Ali
(a.s) have been recorded in the writings of other narrators, of which we
will refrain from conveying here. Those who wish for a greater detailed
account may refer to the writings of traditions and exegesis.

This event was related to the Propagation and message of the Surah of
Bara'ah. The Prophet was here commanded that only himself or a man like
himself may rise to its proclamation. We have also seen that at this
time and among all of the supporters and family of the Prophet it was
only Ali (a.s) who was introduced as possessing this distinction. The
conclusion here is that «only Ali is a man such as the Apostle of God»

This is another event in Islamic history which brings across this very
meaning and reality, bringing greater clarity to the sentence (a man of
myself) It also removes the inadmissible probabilities some have given
its meanings, probabilities that declared the esteem and merit of the
Imam which exist in the depth of these words as being nothing.

It was during the "Battle of Uhud" with all of its difficulties and
unpleasentness. The Muslims, upon hearing the diabolic shout «Mohammad
has been killed!», decided to flee rather than remain. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) remained, injured and alone. Only a few of the Muslims remained
with him and according to the narratives of some historians they were
Ali (a.s) and two others. In this battle the Imam had killed the pagan
standard bearers one after the other. Now that the Muslims had fled and
the Prophet had remained alone, he was rushing back and forth in every
direction fighting off the numerous enemy soldiers and the pagan ranks
who were attacking the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) each time the Prophet would
repeat this sentence:

"O' Ali, ward these (soldiers) off !

The Imam and his sword alone would attack them, breaking off their
rushing attack, placing his own life in danger to protect that of the
Prophet (s.a.w). Gabriel, who was present here at the Prophets side on
this battlefield said:

«O Messenger of Allah, this is an example of Ali's devotion and
selflessness, his fellowship is with you!»

The Prophet replied:

«Ali's sacrifices in my way are not surprising; because "he is of me
and I am of him"

Gabriel then said:

«I am also of you both"» 58

In this historical event, all of the speech surrounds the words
"Mennie" and "Menkoma". The Prophet (s.a.w) says Ali is of me and I am
also of Ali. Gabriel says: I am also of you. The Prophet does not refute
his remark. What do these words mean? What could be the meaning behind
these three being of one another? How are they alike? What is the common
aspect between them? Which meanings does the word "Min" relay here?

Gabriel was not a human being and was not the paternal cousin or close
relative of the Prophet, and therefore we cannot see the words «I am of
you» as being in this manner. The only relation he had to the Prophet
was in their partnership delivering the divine message. He received
revelation from God and delivered it to the Prophet (s.a.w). The Prophet
also received divine commands. Sometimes delivering them himself and
sometimes "Ali delivering them to the Muslims.

So, the sentence «---» all say that we are similar and equal in the
distinction of propagation (of divine law), to such an extent that these
three are as parts of one anothers being.

Remarks of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) which shows Ali (a.s) as having
such a similarity and affinity to the Prophet in the duty of propagation
(that he is as a part of his being), are not restricted to the event of
the propagation of the surah of Bara'ah. For example, in the farewell
pilgrimage when he delivered a great number of his most important
messages and commandments to the Muslim people he also reminded them of
this fact. He explains this unparalleled similarity and closeness with
complete clarity, and also its result in the cooperation and partnership
in the primary process of the Prophetic Mission (the propagation).

The Prophets companion Habashy Ibn Jonadeh said:

During the farewell pilgrimage the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) said:

"Ali is of me, and I am of Ali, and no one may deliver the prophetic
message on my behalf other than myself or Ali". 59

In another famous tradition we read: The Prophet sent Imam Amirul
Mo'meneen (a.s) to Yemen bestowing upon him military command Khaled had
gone for this purpose before him. When he was sending the divisions he
gave the command of the first division to Khaled and the second to Ali
(a.s) then saying:

"If the two divisions should meet and merge, then the command of both
will be in Ali's hands." 60

The Imam went to this battle and returned the victor. A small group of
the army instigated by Khaled, upon their return to Medina, brought
complaints against Ali (a.s) to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w). The Prophet
was so enraged by their actions that anger was immediately seen in his
face.

Then he said:

"What do you want of Ali? What do you want of Ali? What do you want of
Ali? Ali is on me and I of him and he is the master and leader of every
believer after me." 61

In another tradition where Hassan (a.s) and Hussein (a.s) are present
the same remark is made. This tradition is found in the book
"Al-Riazal-Nazarath" The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) said to Ali (a.s):

"Three blessings have been bestowed upon you and on no one else, not
even myself; you have the distinction of being my son in-law and I do
not possess this virtue. You have a wife such as "Sediqeh" my daughter,
while I have had no such wife and two children have bestowed upon you
such as Hassan and Hussein(a.s), while from my loins no such children
have come to be. But you are not separate from me, you and Hassan and
Hussein are of me and I am of you" 62

In reference to the Imams of Ahlu'l bait (a.s) this remark exists in
various forms. According to a tradition by one of the Prophets
companions Maqdaam bin Ma'di Karb, the Prophet placed Imam Hassan (a.s)
in childhood on his lap saying 63 «This is of me». In reference to Imam
Hussein (a.s) he also said:

(Hussein is of me and I am also of Hussein) 64

Regarding the last member of Ahlu'l-bait, the last Imam of this
household, Imam Mahdi (a.s) he also said:

(Mahdi is of me) 65 and/or:
(Mahdi is of our household) 66

All of these remarks show that this entire group had the responsibility
of propagation. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) holds the responsibility for
the propagation of the Divine Message. The Holy Imams (a.s) were also
charged with this duty. The difference between the two is that Ali (a.s)
and the other Imams received the Divine Message from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) and the Prophet received it from God. The conclusion here is
that; our Imams, up until the last one Hujjat ibn al Hassan (a.s), all
being of Ahlu'l-bait are all responsible for the propagation as their
first and foremost duty and responsibility. A duty and responsibility
that could never be abandoned. These great men, placing no worth on
their own life, sacrificed everything for the fulfillment of their duty.
However, the other duties of the Holy Imams are as affairs of their
concern. Holding public prayer is of his concerns. Establishing and
enforcing Islamic law is one of their concerns and the creation of an
Islamic community and a just government is also the same. This means
that if no one followed them and they acquired no assistance its
possible the just government wouldn't come into practice. But with or
without the help of others, propagation could not be abandoned. This
duty carries no conditions and is unconditional. But, all other
concerns, even though they are mandatory they are also conditional.

Now, how these great men performed their main duties and how they
proclaimed it, and what they propagated, are matters and questions that
must be clarified in the following discussions. They were the bearers of
religious laws, the protectors and guards of Islam and they completely
and properly performed the duties of the preservation and propagation of
Islam. In future lessons we will study these subjects of discourse.

The religious creed of the Final Prophet (s.a.w) - just like in
previous nations-- ceased to be and as Amir-ul-Mo'meneen (a.s) said;
took the form of a reversed cloak or a bowl turned over. 67 The efforts
of the powerful with the aid of a few traitorous, fake scholars,
proceeded to alter Gods religion, destroying it in the process. In this
nation, Islam fell victim to this very fate; to the point that of Islam
only a name remained. The exhausting efforts and self sacrifices of the
Holy Imams (a.s) gave new life to the final religious creed, and
returned it to the community where it came to practice in various
aspects of time and place. God had appointed these great men for the
guardianship and protection of Islam. First of all they were the bearers
of all Islamic truths and learning, and secondly they had been charged
with the duty of propagation the banishment of alterations and the
campaign against change. Here I repeat; the Holy Imams special
responsibility was the same as that of the Prophet, and exclusive in one
word, and that being (propagation) In this nation, that which man
required and the Prophets era needed was proclaimed by the Prophet
(s.a.w) himself, and that which was not then needed was handed over to
Ali (a.s); so that he and his eleven descendents would then be the
guardians and deliverers of Islamic views in all ages.

"Lo! religion with Allah (is) The surrender (to his will guidance)
Those who (formerly) received the Scripture differed only after
knowledge came unto them, through transgression among themselves. Whose
disbelieveth the revelations of Allah(will find that). Lo! Allah is
swift in reckoning". "And if they argue with thee, (O Mohammad), say: I
have surrendered my purpose to Allah and (so have) those who follow me.
And say unto those who have received the scriptures and those who read
not: Have ye (too) surrendered? If they surrender, then truly they are
rightly guided, and if they turn away, then it is. thy duty only to
convey the message (unto them). Allah is seer of (his) bondmen".

Holy Quran: "The Family of Imran", verses 19-20.

In our preliminary discussions we had a few important Islamic terms to
consider: "Elah", "Abd", "Rab" and "Islam". After research into the
first three terms we arrived at a discussion on the environs of the term
«Islam» and in the interim we brought up the famous tradition of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w). Previously we placed the very important term« »
under detailed evaluation, therefore we will skirt it here briefly. 68
In previously discussion we cited the noble tradition of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) which contained the remark that:

«A day will come for the people when there will remain nothing of the
Quran but its format meaning its written word. And also of Islam, except
for its name nothing else will remain. The people will be called by this
name but they will be the furthest persons from Islam......»

And we spoke of this part of it which says

«nothing else of Islam will remain except for its name»,

and we wanted to know that form Islam had during the Holy Prophets time
and afterwards what form it took.

We saw that the God of creation, based on his lordship must train his
creatures and give them growth until the point of maturity. True
lordship requires that the best needs of His creatures be known
precisely and provided in the necessary amount far from waste and
dissipation. The exchangless divine laws throughout creation and His
enactment of laws in the human world all bubble up from the spring of
God's lordship and is the way towards anatomical, evolutionary
perfection throughout creation.

We have observed that the ordinary battles and conflicts of the
Prophets with the evil forces of their era or their nations were over
the acceptance of God's Lordship. The prophets strived to have mankind
accept the world comprising divine order and give order to their lives
in accordance with His widespread commands. They would tell him (man)
that; your lord and the organizer of your life is that same organizer
and perfector of the Heavens and Earth, sun, moon and stars, and these
creatures will in no way escape from under the weight of divine order.

We know that divine order in mans life is called Islam and this was not
the particular name for only the religious creed of the Final Prophet
(s.a.w). In the Quran we read:

«Gods religion is Islam, and the differences that the Jews and
Christians have introduced into it, each going in a different direction,
was only because of oppression and tyranny»

('The Family of Imran: 19)

and

«He hath ordained for you that religion which He commended unto Noah,
and that which We inspire in the (Mohammad), and that which We commended
unto Abraham and Moses and Jesus......» ("Counsel": 13)

This Islam appeared in four staegs in the society and has come to be in
four "essences of existence":

**1) Nominal Existence:**

In the past we saw that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) had remarked that of
Islam nothing will remain except this form of its appearance and
existence.

**2) Conceptional Existence:**

Those meanings that the Prophet explained in relation to legal words
and expressions. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) used a series of terms and
words that were generally known 69 but he explained new meanings for
these literal forms which of course are not unrelated to their literal
meanings. Upto this point the active stage has not come to be and the
Prophet strives to his utmost to circulate these words with their new
meanings among the people and cause them to be propagated. We have also
seen that the primary output of the first prophets was this very
propagation and nothing else.

**3) Practical Existence:**

Then the prophet strives to bring these Islamic meanings to the stage
of practice and earn its active existence. When a Muslim performed his
ablutions, prayed, gave zakat, went to Jehad and called people to
goodness (Amr bil Maroof) he has found Islams' in practice. Up until the
second stage, or in other words the terminological existence both the
Muslims and all others during the Prophets time understood. Abu Lahab,
Abu Jahl, and Abu Sufyan on the opposing side, and Ammar, Abu Dhar and
Khabbab on the agreeing side heard the words "Salat" and "Zakat" and
understood their meanings. They recognized the principle terms of Islam
such as "Rab" and "Elah" with their correct meanings. In this aspect
during the Prophets era the Muslim and non-Muslim were equal in their
understanding of the pronounciation and meanings of all these terms. It
is from this stage onward that Muslims and non-Muslims are separated.
After the proclamation the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) goes to Jehad striving
to make these terms and meanings find their active existence. Here it
was that Islamic identity appeared.

It is impossible to present applied Islam in a place without existing
the nominal and conceptual existence. Therefore exists no Muslim without
knowing Islam. Propagation is meaningless unless until Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) does not convey the Islamic Terminology.

69) In Arabic, "Salat" means prayer, "Soum" means thrift, "Hajj" means
intention and "Zakat" means growth, or cleanliness.

**4) Islamic Society:**

Now that in Mecca and Medina the third essence of existence" was
established, the Prophet begins to establish tits fourth "essence of
existence" taking the name Islamic society. This Islamic society became
established when Islamic individuals made an allegiance to the Prophet
(s.a.w) to build a one hundred percent Islamic community.

The previous prophets who were given the duty of the propagation of
Gods religion, Islam, also placed all of their efforts on this very
ideal and aspiration. A group of them such as: Moses, Solomon, and David
were also successful in the establishment and completion of Islams four
essences of existence. During the last Prophets (s.a.w) time they were
also established by him and they were able to emerge.

One inevitable practice existed throughout the history of mankind. This
practice may be interpreted into a worldwide general rule. It is summed
up in these sentences: Every true statement, and every just way and rule
that conflicts with carnal desires and hinders extravagance in the
exploitation of human and natural resources, restricting wealth for
certain persons will create for itself a strong group of enemies who
will stop at no form of sabotage regarding it. However, since the
religion of God especially that of the last Prophet (s.a.w) enjoyed
heavenly assistance 70 and its victory in first stage held a divine
guarantee, 71 these alert, powerful enemies had no choice but to hide
under the mask of hypocrisy. Of course with the death of the Prophets
and the disappearance of heavenly assistance this group came out of
hiding causing the hatred they had stored in their hearts to appear.

From this very central point and by this very group, the truth and
religion of God was being altered and turned over, and to the point that
they were successful they changed and adjusted heavenly and religious
truth. Of course they kept the other appearances of religion, and in its
name they exploited Gods servants by forcing upon them their own
opinions and choices.

With regard to all of these preliminaries it might still appear strange
and astonishing that we believe, the prayer, fasting, Zakat,....and the
beliefs and thoughts that were propagated by the Prophet (s.a.w) do not
exist amongst an enormous group of todays Muslims. Of course its
existence in name remained. What has disappeared is its correct meaning
and intent. For example, the law of divorce thrice which is one of the
laws of true Islamic creed, possesses certain conditions and if they are
fulfilled this divorce as such also ceases to be and becomes
non-existent. What has remained is the name of this Islamic law.

In previous centuries, in the era of the proceeding prophets and also
in the period following him, Islam would be completely annihilated. The
Islam that Moses son of Emran (a.s) proclaimed and circulated was
completely destroyed and annihilated. Thus a prophet possessed of divine
law, like Jesus (a.s) was appointed to once again restore Islam. After
him the Islam he proclaimed was eventually forgotten and another
prophetic mission became necessary.

Isn't it true that the name of the religion which God revealed to all
of His great prophets was Islam? Isn't it also true that the alterations
of past ages didn't even stop at this name, also changing it? Wasn't the
name of Moses's religious law Islam from which it was changed to
Judaism? As such its existence in name was destroyed. Wasn't the name of
the religion revealed to Jesus (a.s) Islam, while afterwards alterations
and changes went to such an extent that even that name was changed
becoming Christianity? We know all of the answers to these questions are
positive.

Christians see themselves as being the followers of Jesus, son of Mary
but did he bring these beliefs and practices to be? Did he introduce
wine-drinking as a religious rite? 72 Did he command not to circumcise?
73 Last of all, did he introduce God to the people as being made up of
the Trinity, «Thee father», «the son», and «the holy spirit»?74
Certainly not!

Of Jesus's religious creed nothing has remained, the name has gone and
the meaning has been destroyed. The Islamic individuals trained by that
lord have all gone. Of the Islamic society that he or any other prophets
in other ways established not a truce remains. Therefore, (of the Islam
that previous prophets proclaimed not even its name has remained) But
with regard to the religion of the Last Prophet (s.a.w), he himself had
said: There will come a time when Islam will become a name without
content, and nothing will remain of it but its name, Yes, such a time
arrived according to the Prophets prediction and it came very quickly.
In a few years all of Islams meanings were plundered and only its name
remained.

The alteration of the last Prophets religion began at his death, the
culmination of this being during the long period of Muaviehs rule. He
and his hirelings of which some also bore the titles of the Prophets
companions, went to work in earnest at ransacking all of the aspects and
facets of "Pure Islam". The official Islam that is believed in by most
of the worlds Muslims, was established during this age.

Now we will think about and see what a momentous task and what great
pains were placed on the shoulders and in the hearts of the Holy Imams
(a.s) for the campaign against this altered Islam. What an enormous
burden of pain and suffering they carry on their shoulders, on the one
hand because of their fundamental knowledge of Islam and on the other
hand because they see with their own eyes the Prophets legacy in the
Islamic community being plundered. Here we realize what an enormous and
serious task the Holy Imams (a.s) have. We believe, and with Gods help
will prove that it was they who returned the four essences of Islams'
existence to the community.

72) The sanctification of bread and wine called "The Lords. supper" is
performed in remembrance of the Israelis flight from Egypt or
(Passover). This is one of the most important Christian rites. They
believe that during this rite the priest performs the miracle of
changing the bread and wine into the blood and flesh of Jesus. (Mathew,
chapter 26, verses: 266, 27. and 28; Luke. ch. 22, verses: 19,.

73) Circumcision is a definate law of the Torah (you and your
descendant must all agree to circumcise every male among you) Genesis
17:10, 11 and (From now on you must circumcise every baby boy when he is
eight years old). But among the Christians it was abolished on the order
of the Apostle Paul and his like and in other words the religious creed
was altered. (Galatians 2:7-10, Acts 15)

74) In the summer of 325 A.D. nearly three hundred Bishops of Eastern
cities gathered in the city of Nicaea near constantinople and after
lengthy discussions adopted a formal statement of the tenets of
Christian faith, establishing the primary principles of Christian
thought, chiefly the doctrine of the trinity. (See V M. Miller: The
History of Civilization 9/345, and John Nass: History of Religious
Communities. 425)


