Nations Alterations
===================

In previous discourses, by citing the Holy Quran we studied the reasons
and means for the alteration, change and destruction for divine
religious creed. Now as an introduction to our next discussion we will
briefly repeat it:

"And (remember) when Allah laid a charge on those who had received the
Scripture (he said): Ye are to expound it to mankind and not to hide it.
But they flung it behind their backs and bought thereby a little gain."
("The Family of Imran": 187)

"And with those who say: "Lo! We are Christians, We made a covenant,
but they forgot that whereof they were admonished." ("The Table Spread:
14)

"Some of the Jews change words from their context". ("Women": 46)

"O People of the Scripture! Why confound ye truth with falsehood and
knowingly conceal the truth". ("The Family of Imran": 71)

In these verses there are references to several of their deeds. They
concealed, placing falsehoods on the truth like clothing. They made the
truth suspicious by mixing these two together. They knew they were doing
this and it wasn't out of ignorance.

From these verses and the numerous other verses on this subject we
learn that after the death of their prophets, past nations over the
years forgot some of the truth, concealed some and sometimes mixed the
truth with falsities creating doubtful subject matter. Sometimes they
would create some remarks delivering them to the people as the words of
God. They changed their divine books by these means, altering and
plundering them.

**The Last Nation**

In numerous traditions recorded in creditable Shi'ite and Sunni books,
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) is seen to have remarked:

«This nation will do just as the previous nations and will follow them
minutely»

Imam Sadiq (a.s) quotes from his fathers as narrating that the Holy
Prophet said:

"That which occured in past nations will also occur in this nation.
Just like one arrow is like another arrow, and a pair of horse-shoes are
like each other, that nation is like other nations. 75

In another tradition, Imam Sadiq (a.s) also quotes from his fathers as
saying the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) said:

"I swear by He who sent me as a Prophet and harbinger of good news that
my nation will travel the same route past nations travelled to the point
that if a snake of Bani Israel entered a hole, of this nation a snake
will also enter that hole". 76

Creditable Sunnite books narrate from Abu Sa'id Khudri that the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) said:

"You, my nation! You follow the practices of the ancients and you will
go inch by inch and cubit by cubit the ways the ancients travelled; if
they went one inch you will also go one inch, and if they went one cubit
you will also go one cubit, to the point where if one of them had
entered a lizards hole one of you will also enter a lizards hole." 77
The followers questioned: Do you mean the Jews and the Christians when
you mention the ancients? Will we be like the Jews and Christians? Will
we do as they? The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) replied: Then who do I speak
of?"

Based on another tradition of these books it is quoted from Abu
Hurayrah that the Holy Prophet said:

"The resurrection day will not come unless my nation follows the way
and method of past nations, and follows them minutely and to the
letter!" They asked him:

"O Messenger of Allah, like the Persians and Romans? He replied: "Are
there people other than these?" 78

Traditions are numerous but we didn't set out to give a complete
account of all of them. Those who wish may refer to a more detailed
book. 79 In Conclusion, we saw that according to Quranic verses past
nations concealed heavenly truths and therefore in this nation there
must also be concealment of the truth. We saw that in previous nations
there was alteration, and truths were changed, so in this nation change
and alteration must also exist. Among the followers of previous prophets
truth and falsehoods had been mixed, so in this nation this must also be
so.

The study of how the above events took place, how truth and falsehood
were mixed, how realities were concealed, how beliefs were changed and
altered, how far these changes and alterations went and their effect on
pure Islam are all subjects that will be enlightened in the future If
Almighty Allah wills.

Previously, we were repeately reminded that after its prophet, every
religion was altered and this alteration went so far that it made it
impossible to gain access to its truths and realities. From that time
God would appoint another prophet to once again revive and bring to life
that lost religion. This rule existed in relation to Abraham (a.s) and
Noah (a.s), it also occured in relation to Moses (a.s) and Jesus (a.s).
When the religion of Jesus (a.s) was lost and no matter how hard they
tried they could not find it again, the last Prophet (s.a.w) was
appointed, revived Islam, and delivered it to mankind in its entirety.
Now eternal wisdom sees it appropriate that this religion remains until
resurrection day because this was His last word and most complete
leadership for mankind. 80

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) was responsible for the propagation of Islam,
proclaiming, protecting, circulating and promoting its laws and
learnings and was charged with the explanation of Islamic terms and
meanings, while he must also establish Islamic identity and the the
Muslim society. As such, after his death God left certain persons among
the nation to take over the Prophets' responsibilities. This is the
serious duty that makes up the essential output of each of the Holy
Imams (a.s) and they performed this duty up until the time of Hujjat ibn
al-Hassan. Their strivings, their peace, uprising, suppressions, their
being poisoned and their living were all for this very cause.

After their prophet this nation did as previous nations did. They
altered Islamic truths and creed, they changed it and concealed it until
during the time of Muavieh; «Nothing remained of Islam but its name and
of the Quran but its writing» Imam Husseins uprising and his bloody
Ashura became an unpenetrable dam before alteration. From this time
onward fundamental alteration did not take place. The revival of Islam,
and Islam of which only the terminology remained, was begun in the time
of Imam Baqir (a.s). The continuous strivings and struggles of the Imams
of this nation returned the correct meanings and concepts to the
community. Once again Islamic individuals were trained, an Islamic
community was founded and in short Islam in all of its dimensions
returned amidst the people. 81 God willing we will study all of these
subjects in our following discussion.

80) With regard to the Holy Prophets identity we read in the Holy Quran
("The Clans": 40) "Mohammad is not the father of any man among you, but
he is the Messenger of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets...." Also
regarding His book (The Bee: 89) "And We reveal the Scripture unto thee
as an exposition of all things". Also (Cattle: 116) "Perfected is the
Word of thy Lord in truth and Justice. There is naught that can change
His words. He is the Hearer, and Knower". And ("Fusilat": 42) "It is an
unassailable Scripture. Falsehood cannot come at it from before it or
behind it".

81) Proof of this statement is the undertaking of future discussion-If
God will.

