2 - Causes of Distortions
=========================

In previous discussions we spoke of the Prophets tradition which stated
that:

(There will come a time for my nation when nothing will remain of Islam
except a name, and of the Quran only its written word)

Also, in an explanatory introduction given for an understanding of this
tradition, we observed that Islam, as God's everlasting religion, has
four states of existence:

**First Existence:**

Existence in name (Nominal) which is the very terminology that Islam
obtained from the Arabic vocabulary and language, and set forth in the
society with new meanings.

**Second Existence:**

Islams' existence in meaning, or its conceptional existence which
consists of the very meanings that Islamic religious law gave to its
chosen terms.

**Third Existence:**

Islams' existence in practice, found in its believers and followers. It
is here that Islamic identity gains its manifestation, meaning that
persons come to exist who have recognized this name, and its meanings
and apply it.

**Fourth Existence:**

Or Islamic Society which is based on the three previous existences, and
may not possibly exist without them. It is founded when the Prophet
finds a society with those persons who practice Islam and have made a
promise to obey and be faithful to him. This groups promise of
allegiance or loyalty on one hand and the Prophets leadership on the
other, lay the foundation for this society.

The formation of an Islamic society and just government is the
tremendous religious precept all persons in the society are held
responsible for. But most of all the Prophet and Imam. This is not the
Prophets or Imams special religious responsibility even if others do not
cooperate with him, No! It is this great man's task to strive towards
this end, and the obligation of all others to aid him. As such, in the
quoted words of the Imam of the Pious we see that he said:

"Behold, by Him Who split the grain (to grow) and created living
beings, if people had not come to me and supporters had not exhausted
the argument and if there had been no pledge of Allah with the learned
to the effect that they should not acquiesce in the gluttony of the
oppressor and the hunger of the oppressed I would have cast the rope of
the Caliphate on its own shoulders, and would have given the last one
the same treatment as to the first one". 82

The second point being discussed that according to successive Shi'ite
and Sunni traditions, the Prophet, had said that whatever happened in
previous nations will also occur in this nation. Following that, we also
read in various Quranic Verses that previous nations altered Divine
religious laws, concealed some of its realities and changed others.
Sometimes, they also mixed falsities with the truth. Thus in the words
of the Prophet all of these deeds would also inevitably occur in this
nation. This claim is the principal basis of our present discussion and
we will prove this point in our following discussions; " God willing"

"The Prophet and the Propagation of Sunnat"

The most blessed God classified Islamic beliefs, morals and laws into
two groups, while delivering them to mankind:

First we have the Holy Quran which contains only the main topics
concerning general Islamic matters, truths and laws and one cannot
become a Muslim by referring to it exclusively. This means that we would
be lacking practical injunctions to pray or fast, or go on the
pilgrimage to Mecca and fulfill all of its required duties, or marry
lawfully or take a divorce and so on...... The basis for all of these
laws is in the Quran, but their detailed explanations, descriptions and
commentaries have been made through the teaching of the Prophet and
apostles. We do know that the series of Islams first-hand apostles
begins with the Holy Prophet and ends with the twelfth Imam, Hujjat Ibn
al-Hassan al-Askary. The reasons for this statement were brought to
light previously and will become clearer in the future discussions. The
conclusion here being that Islam is in the Quran and in the sayings of
the Holy Prophet and his revered executors, in other words in these two
we have the great collection of our valuable Islamic inheritance. 83

Now let us see what those who wished to alter Islam did after the Holy
Prophets demise. The accurate answer to this question requires a
preliminary study to remove all room for error. Thus, we refer to the
era of the prophet.

The Holy Prophet said:

"May God bless he who hears my sayings; takes them to heart,
understands and preserves them, then delivers them to those who have not
heard them....84 (The main topic of this statement being the propagation
of the Prophets sayings) For, there may be many a people who bear
knowledge and learning but do not perceive it. Whereas a person may bear
knowledge and relay it to those more perceiving than themselves. Meaning
that they relay this trust to someone who puts it to more use than
themselves".

Elsewhere he says:

"Those who are present and hear my words must deliver them to those who
are absent because there is the possibility that the listener will
deliver the words to one who is more perceptible than himself".

In another tradition, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) says:

"He through whom a narration is delivered to my nation, and in this way
a tradition (Sunnah) established or heresay eradicated, will be rewarded
Heaven".

And yet elsewhere he says:

"He who learns two of my narrations and benefits from them or conveys
them to another who in turn benefits from them, has done better than
sixty years of worship void of insight or wisdom".

Imam Ali (a.s) narrates:

"The Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h) said: My lord, keep my successors in your
favour-repeating this phrase three times- Then someone asked him: O'
Messenger of God, who are your Caliphs? He replied: Those who will come
after me and narrate and relate my sayings and deeds".

**The Terminology Caliph**

In previous discussions we observed that according to Quranic
stipulation 85 the special duty of the Prophet as a Messenger of God, is
delivering His message alone and of fulfilling the mission of
propagating Divine law. It is in this regard that Caliph is required.
His Caliph is the person who does the same as himself in other words he
delivers religious laws and injunctions to the people. Of course, during
his time the Prophet is the only person rightful and worthy to have
leadership over the people. He in turn hands over this authority to his
successor meaning that the lawful successor then becomes the only
rightful and worthy leader possessing the authority invested in him.
This post however, has no connection with the Caliphate being another
feature of the Prophets and his executors features. In short, government
is separate from the Caliphate.

Caliphate, in the sense we have studied and understood it, is
inseparable and incapable of nullification from the Prophets' executor.
He must in any way possible perform the particular duties of the
Caliphate and he does perform them. However, such as we have seen, in
leadership (government) others are also involved. In other words, in the
required duty of founding a government other Muslims are also included
and all of them must strive and work together so that an Islamic society
and Just government will be formed.

In Islamic Sciences two types of terminologies exist: The first is
"Estelah-e-Shar'i" or canonical terms and the other
"Estelah-e-Motashr'eh" or canonized terms. Coining a term and naming
mean the same thing, with the difference that a term is a word existing
in a language which has been used by a person or group and given a new
meaning not unrelated to its original meaning. In this manner the naming
or coining of a term becomes ascribed to that person or group, such as
medical terms in Medical science and mathematical terms in mathematical
science. Therefore, if the naming is the Legislator, or in other words
God or the Holy Prophet, it is called an Estelah-e-Shar'i. On the other
hand if a terminology used by the Muslim public or Islamic scholars it
will be known as Estelah-e-Motashareh. For example, the words "Salat",
"Wudhu" and "Hajj" are canonical terms, and these special names come
from the Legislator and are given for a series of ritual rites. On the
other hand however, the terms "Ijtehad" 86 "Ghias" and "Estehsan"
existing in Sunni Jurisprudence are terms which are not related by the
legislator. Having been used by Muslims in their present meanings they
gradually came to appear as "Shar'i" terms.

A big mistake has been made regarding the word "Caliph", which is a
very well known word related to the matter of Imamate and Leadership.
Everyone, even those in educated spheres, think that the word Caliph
with its well-known meaning is a "Shar'i" Islamic term. In reality this
is not true, since the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) did not give the term Caliph
to his successor in the leadership and governing of the nation. Also,
the Caliph which is mentioned in the Quran is not the Caliph of the
Prophet but is Caliph of Allah, as such, Adam is a Caliph and David is a
Caliph. When we read in the Quran:

Lo! I am about to place a viceroy in the Earth.

Or

O David! Lo! We have set thee as a viceroy in the earth.

It is meant here Divine Caliphate. It is quite clear that David is not
the Caliph of a prophet, he being a prophet himself, and Adam is not the
Caliph of a previous prophet because there was no prophet before him.

In Islamic canonical terminology, governors are called Bearers of God's
command not Caliph. Caliph in its meaning as Islamic governor is a
"Motashareh" term, the people first giving it this meaning and later
being used as a scholarly term by jurists and scholars.

At first the word Caliph was used as a prefix in addition to another
word, for example in Khalifato Rasool Allah being coined in parallel to
the original Khalifatollah in the Holy Quran, or Khalifato Abih which
was being used by the common people in the society.

In all of these uses the word Caliph was used as possessing its literal
meaning and was always accompanied by a noun in the genetive case.
Later, because of frequent use in the Islamic community the word Caliph
without the genetive case was used for the governor or ruler himself. In
other words, because of frequent use the Muslims changed the three
segment name for their governor, shortening it. They modified it into
something else. As such, because of the frequency of use it came to be
the proper noun for the leaders of the Islamic community. It was from
here that confusion was created and it wasn't understood that this
coining of a term was gradual, occuring after the Prophet and over a
period of time.

Therefore, whenever we come across the word Caliph in the Prophet's
Hadiths it possesses the literal meaning given to it in the Arabic
language, and not any other meaning. Having this in mind, the Hadith
that states: (Allahomma Arham Kholafaie) speaks of the Prophets
successors according to the characteristic meaning of Caliphate not of
the governors who rule after him. These successors and Caliphs are those
who know the Hadiths and precepts of the Holy Prophet well and relay
them to the people. Now that we have clarified the term Caliph used in
the previous Hadith we will return to our original discussion.

86) The term Ijtehad also exist in the school of Ahlu'al bait but does
not have the meaning in practice that the caliphate school gave it:
Because in the Caliphate school it contained the meanings (Exercising
personal opinion) and (giving ones vote) but in the Imamate school it
only means striving to understand God's law, and a Mojtahed never allows
himself to exercise his own personal opinion. Of course as an
explanation of this term in Fundamentalist texts of both schools one
sentence is used. However in practice the Caliphate school allows the
interference in Religious law, the opinions of Scholars and Prophetic
companions other than the infallible. While the Imamate school only
gives validity to the words of and His Messenger.

**"The Written Sunnat"**

The Hadiths we narrated all clarified one fact, and that being that the
Holy Prophet encouraged and urged the Muslims to relay his hadiths to
others and to relate and narrate his sayings for others. Leaving these
hadiths behind we also come to several narrations of the Prophet which
carry the command for the written recording of his hadiths. Not only was
the narrating of his hadiths ordered, so was their written recording. As
an example of this the Prophet once said:

"Bind knowledge and place it in chains".

It was asked: How can knowledge be bound? He replied:

"Binding knowledge through writing it down".

Abdullah ibn Umar relates

"I went to the Holy Prophet and asked him: O' Messenger of God, should
I bind knowledge? The Prophet said in reply: "Yes". "I then asked him
how I should go about it". He replied thus: "By writing it down".

A hadith exists in creditable Sunnite texts such as "Sahih" by Bukhari
and "Sunan" by Tirmidhi which speaks of a Yemenese man name Abu Shat.
This man had travelled from his homeland to see the Prophet. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) delivered a sermon. After hearing the sermon Abu Shat
said to the Prophet:

"O' Messenger of God! Write down these words for me".

The Prophet then ordered:

Write (my words) for Abu Shat".

Thus we see that the Prophet himself had given orders to have his
sayings and hadiths written down. No question or doubt remains in
reference to this matter, and all have narrated it. Some of you may
think, Why we should be talking about this and what meaning it could
possibly have? They are the hadiths narrated by the Prophet and must be
written down and related. There is no room for any presumptions because
this is the way to recognize and understand Islam! Of course this way of
reasoning and rationale is correct. Any Muslim who thinks correctly will
come to no other conclusion. Unfortunately however, we will later see
how and to what extent the governors of those days prevented the writing
and relating of the Prophets' hadiths. First we will prove that the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w) ordered that his sayings be recorded and related to
others. We may later look into the deeds of the leaders who followed
him.

In another hadith whose narrator is Abdullah ibn Amr-e-As., we read:

"I asked the Holy Prophet: "O' Messenger of God, should I write down
everything I hear you say?" He replied: "Yes". I then said: "Even when
you are happy or angry?" He replied: "Yes, because I speak none other
than the truth whether I be happy or angry". 87

These examples which we have related to your are a few out of a large
group of hadiths which we must be excused from relating because it would
greatly lengthen this brief discussion. Now we will go on to another
group of hadiths and study a few examples.

**Sunnat Alongside The Quran**

In Abu Davouds "Sahih" and Tirmidhis "Sahih" and those of Ibn Majeh and
Darmy and also Ahmad ibn Hanbals "Musnad" a common hadith is related, of
which the wording here is from Abu Davoud. The narrator is one of the
Prophets' followers known as Meghdam Ibn Ma'adi Karb. He quotes the
Prophet as saying:

"Know that God has sent His book the Quran to me and along with it many
other truths similar to it." In explanation of this statement we say
that: the Prophet received two types of revelations. In one type both
the words and meanings were from God and that being the Holy Quran. In
this sense all other Divine Scriptures are partners with the Quran, with
the difference that while the Quran is miraculously possessed of great
eloquence, other Divine Scriptures lack such advantage. In the second
type of revelation only the meaning is from God while its words are from
the Prophet himself. In this form, all of the meanings and concepts are
revealed to the Holy Apostle and afterwards formed into words by the
Prophet. This group of revelations are called Hadith or Narratives.

In this statement the Prophet says that God has favoured him by sending
him the Quran, and also of the same amount as the Quran he has been sent
non Quranic revelations. He then adds:

"Beware, there will be many a persons with full bellies who, while
resting their belly-pots, out of contentment; you have the Quran, that
which you find as lawful within it see as lawful and that which is
unlawful therein see as unlawful".

According to Tirmidhis version he adds after this:

"That which the Prophet has made unlawful in the Quran".

In a narrative from the book "Musnad" by Ahmad Hanbal, the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w) makes a strange remark when he says to his followers and
companions: "The time is coming when a group of you-my supporters and
companions- will refute me! When my hadith is related to them they will
lean back and say: The book of God; the Quran is with us whatever is
unlawful. Therein we will see as unlawful and what it commands as lawful
we will see as lawful! (No, this statement is not correct) Know that
whatever the Prophet has declared unlawful is the word of God".

Another narrator named Obaidullah ibn Abi Rafea relates from his
father, the well-known companion of the Prophet that the Prophet had
said to his companions:

"Lest there be one among you who while being recited with one of my
traditions or hadiths say, ("No I don't know of this and don't accept
it"), I act by the command and rule that I find in the Quran". [or
according to another text]

"I don't find this in God's Scripture".

In our time there are people who speak as such just as the prophet
foresaw. Doesn't the Prophets aggravation and protest pertain to them?
Doesn't this create a burden on their conscience?

Arbaz Ibn Jarieh-e-Selmy relates:

"We the companions, along with the Prophet arrived at Khaybar. The
fortresses had been conquered. The Jewish commander of Khaybar who was a
rough, rude man came to the Prophet and with great aggravation said: "O'
Mohammad! In your opinion, is it lawful that they should kill our
livestock and eat the fruit of our orchards and take advantage of our
wives and reputations?'." The Prophet (s.a.w) became angry and told
Abdul Rahman Ibn Auf: "Mount your horse and call out "Heaven is only for
the believing people. Everyone gather for prayer".

According to Islamic law communal prayer with the Prophet is only
recommended. and Friday prayer is obligatory. However, when the call is
given "Everyone gather for communal prayer", communal prayer also
becomes obligatory and everyone should take part and perform the
communal prayer along with the Prophet. Because of this, when the call
was given the people gathered for prayer. The Prophet led the prayer and
afterwards mounted the pulpit and delivered a sermon saying:

"Is there anyone among you who while leaning back in his place thinks
that God has prohibited nothing else for you except that prohibited in
the Quran? One who thinks that the unlawful is only that which is found
in the Quran and other than that there exists nothing else unlawful.
Know that by God I have preached to you and have thus commanded and
prohibited you. Whatever I said: whether out of necessity or in respect,
is the same as if it were in the Quran. God does not deem it lawful that
you should enter the homes of the people of the book without
permission........" 88

In the book "Musnad" by Ahmad Hanbal there is another tradition where
the Prophet says:

"Don't let me hear that when they relate one of my hadiths for one of
you, he will then say: Read the Quran for me, find it for me in the
Quran!"

These Hadiths along with all of the prophecies of the Holy Prophet
which contained in them, came to pass in reality. From the last moments
of the Prophets life until the era of the Ummayads they acted upon this
political plan:

"Don't relate Hadiths, don't read narrations and don't write them down.
The Quran is enough for us".

