The Whole of Islam
==================

A summary of what we said so far would be that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)
in one of Hadiths stressed the point that his hadiths should be narrated
and recorded. In another group he said:

"Don't let it be that someone out of annoyance or aggravation should
say "Show it to me in the Quran, when one of my Hadiths is narrated for
him. No, this statement is incorrect. You must not say that I speak not
except on the basis of revelation, I say nothing except the truth".

Remembering these introductory facts we may now go on to a study of the
alterations they made after the prophets death. From that moment on, his
supporters (who were the subjects of his speeches address) turned to
oppose him, thus becoming the vast source of the alteration of Islamic
truths.

In the following discussions we will prove that the Prophet (s.a.w)
dictated the collection of religious commandments to Imam Ali (a.s), and
the Imam also recorded them in a book called [Al-Jame'ah]. If you had
heard the terms, [Jafr] and [Jame'ah] mentioned in the Shi'ite Hadiths,
[Jame'ah] is this very book. After Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s) this
valuable collection was passed onto each of the Holy Imams (a.s). And
occasionally they would show it to other certain persons and they used
to extract Hadiths form it. According to existing reliable sources, this
collection was made of leather and was seventy [Dhera] long. As such the
Holy Prophet dictated his Hadith or that which was revealed to him and
which mankind needed until Resurrection Day, all of it, to Imam Ali and
he, in turn, wrote it down and left it for the Holy Imams.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w) communicated to his supporters and companions
those of the Islamic religious laws which were needed by the Muslims of
his time. This means those laws that concerned events which occured at
that time and the Muslims questioned him about, or points that was
necessary to notify them of. There was a series of matters however,
whose time of enactment had not yet arrived. These, he left as a trust
with his executor Imam Ali (a.s) so that in their time he or his
descendants would relate them to the people. The Holy Prophet proclaimed
the command or ruling of that which was needed during his own lifetime
and then commanded that his sayings be related to others and for them to
be written down for safekeeping as a legacy for future generations.
Islam at that time was comprised of the Holy Quran and these types of
the Prophets saying and or the relating of his religious actions,
together making up the Prophets "Sunnat", which is in turn comprised of
two parts, "Hadith" and "Sireh".

**TO RELATE THE PROPHET'S NARRATION BECOMES PRHIBITED**

What happened after the Prophets death? Dhahaby one of the great Sunni
scholars, relates that after Abu Bakr took over the leadership of the
government he gathered the Muslims and the companions of the Prophet
(s.a.w) saying:

"You relate the Prophets Hadith and certainly you disagree on certain
points with one another, and in the future you will find more of these
points of disagreement. It is for certain that after you the general
public will have even more differences of opinion. As such, you should
relate nothing from the Prophet. Tell anyone who asks you that there is
the Quran among us, and to see its allowances as lawful and its
prohibitions as unlawful". 89

(We see what a strange excuse he found and how he disguised wrong as
right and we also see to what extent and precision the Holy Prophets'
(s.a.w) prediction came to pass).

Qarzat Ibn Ka'ab one of the Prophets companions relates another
event:

"When Umar was sending us to take over the governing of Iraq he
accompanied us to Sarar on foot and then said: "Do you know why I
escorted you and saw you off? We replied: "You saw us off to show your
respect for us and to honour us!" He said: "Other than that I had
something else in mind. You are going to a city where the resonance of
the sound of its people reciting the Quran reaches the ears as the
resonance of the sound of honey bees in their hives. Be careful lest you
keep them from this by relating the Hadith of the Prophet of God
(s.a.w). Do not narrate Hadith for them. I am your partner in (the
spiritual reward of) this deed.

Qarzat added that: "After these words by the caliph, I narrated not so
much as one more Hadith of the prophet".

The inhabitants of Iraq having just become Muslims had never seen the
Prophet of Islam (s.a.w). These new Muslims who have not seen their
Prophet are avid and thirsty to obtain facts concerning him, and to hear
his words and Hadith, and to become familiar with his actions and way of
life. Because of this it is very probable that they would have said to
Qarzat:

"Relate some Hadiths for us"

and Qarzat replied:

"Umar has prohibited us, we cannot relate Hadith". 90

There is another narrative on this matter which is very strange and in
which the precise meaning of concealment is seen. If in the past the
leaders themselves concealed divine truths, here they used strict
prohibition so that others would conceal Hadiths and refrain from the
relating of narratives.

Historians say that a short while before Umars death he sent persons to
various parts of the Islamic world to summon a few of the Prophets
companions to Medina. People such as Abu Dharr, Abdullah ibn Massoud,
Abu Darda, Abdullah ibn Hudhaifeh and others. After he gathered them he
said:

"What are these Hadiths which you have spread throughout the world!?"

Those present said:

"Do you prohibit our narration of Hadiths?"

He replied:

"No, I don't prohibit you but you will stay right here with me in
Medina and by God while I am alive you will not leave my sight or this
city. We are more intelligent and better know which of the Hadiths you
relate should be accepted and which ones rejected. They however, the
rest of the people, don't know what to accept and what to reject".

This group of the Prophets companions remained in the city of Medina
and in the vicinity of the caliph until his death, and were in reality
under observation. What, type of Hadiths are those which only their
administration recognizes, and may separate the acceptable from the
unacceptable among them while the rest of the Muslims don't know of and
cannot separate? Pay close attention that the Caliph does not accuse
this group of lying. Among them there happened to be Abu Dharr "upon
whose truthfulness the sun had never cast a shadow". 91

We have no choice here but to interpret that the unacceptable Hadiths
were those which were not agreeable with the governments policies at
that time because of this the narrators and relators of such Hadiths
were kept under observation so they couldn't further circulate them.

Some historians have said: "Umar imprisoned three of the Prophets
companions; Ibn Massoud, Abu Darda, and Abu Massoud Ansary in Medina and
proclaimed that their crime was narrating the Prophets Hadith too
frequently. He said to them: You have excessively related the hadiths of
the Holy prophet. 92

These were examples from a series of existing records related to the
prevention of the promulgation of hadith. This matter does not stop here
but goes onward. During the second caliphs rule the people possessed
writings, in them having collected Hadiths for themselves. For example,
one companion remembered fifty of the Prophets Hadith and having written
them down on small pieces of leather or bone had created a small book of
Hadith. Another had gathered thirty and still another had collected some
more and so on..... In this way the people possess numerous writings of
the Prophets hadith.

One day while in the pulpit the Caliph made the people swear to hand
him their writings. The Caliph is very powerful and no-one has the
strength to resist him, since he commanded them they had no choice but
to bring them to him. After everyone had brought their writings he
ordered their burning.

This was the fate of Hadith and the form of their narration during the
time of Umar, of course to the extent that these records aided us.
During Uthmans era this situation did not change. During his rule,
Uthman declared from the pulpit: "The Hadiths which ere not narrated
during Abu Bakr and Umars rule must not be related". We also know that
Umar had said: "Do not narrate Hadiths with the exception of those
related to precepts or matters or worship".

As such, the prohibition of the narration and relating of the Prophets
Hadith was in effect during Uthmans lengthy Caliphate and the Caliphates
administration controlled this with all of their might.

During Muaviehs' rule the situation continued in the same manner and
even worse. He had said from the pulpit: "O' People! Refrain from
narrating the Prophets' Hadith except for those which were related
during Umars' time".

Of course this matter did not have only this one aspect and it is not
true that there was no contention with relation to this immense movement
to halt the promulgation of Hadith. There was a group, who with regard
to the enormity of this destruction began an unending struggle against
it. We will content ourselves with only two or three historical events
in this regard.

**ON THE FRONT OF RIGHT AND TRUTH**

During the time of Hajj, Abu Dhar is sitting in the center Jamareh, the
place where the pilgrims stone the statue representing Satan. The people
recognize and respect him. A group of them gather around him and pose
questions. Of course they are asking about religious matters. Abu Dharr
does not answer them of his own but with reliance on the sayings of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w). While he is speaking a man comes and stands over
him saying: "Haven't they prohibited you from giving your opinions on
religious matters?" Abu Dharr looked up at the man and answered:

"Are you my authority? If you were to place your sword here (he points
to the back of his neck) and wish to cut off my head and I know that
your doing so because I relate Hadith, and if in the time it takes your
sword to reach my neck I have the time to repeat one more of the
Prophets (s.a.w) words, I will do so".

This Hadith was narrated by Darmy in his book "Sunan" and by Ibn Sa'd
in "Tabaqat al-Kobra". Bukhari has also narrated this Hadith but
according to his method he has in a way left out the sensitive points so
that no harm would be done to anyones dignity (among the caliphs and
governors).

The governors and Caliphs administrations in those days could not
silence and estrain Abu Dharr and they therefore, sent him into exile.
They deported Abu Dharr from Medina, the city which possessed the body
of his beloved Prophet, to Syria.

During his stay in Syria he also continued to repeat Hadiths,
encouraging the people to do only what was lawful and keeping them from
doing the unlawful. He narrated the Prophets Hadith with regard to the
suspended religious commands at that time.

"Ahnaf ibn Ghais Tamimy" the leader of Bani Tamim said that he had gone
to the Friday prayer in Sham (Syria): "After the prayer I saw a man from
whom the people fled wherever he went in the mosque. He prayed, but
quickly. I went to him and sat down. (Ahnaf had witnessed a strange
event; what could be wrong with this old and that when every corner he
goes to, everyone runs from him.) I asked him: "O' servant of God, who
are you? The man replied: "Who are you? I answered: "I am Ahnaf Ibn
Ghais!" The man said: "Get up quickly and leave my side so that my
illness will not affect you". I said: "How can your ill affect me? (do
you have a contagious disease that your illness will affect me?) He
replied: "The man Muavieh - has ordered that no-one may sit with me".
93

Now that the governors administrations commands have no affect on Abu
Dharr and exile or threats are not effective on him, he refusing to give
up his duty of narrating the Prophet of Islams' forgotten words; the man
is sure that no-one may sit with Abu Dharr and hear Gods' words and the
Prophets' Hadith.

Is it possible to, better than this, conceal the truths of Islam? Even
in Sum, Abu Dharr paid no attention to the orders given by the
government. In opposition to it he narrated the Prophets Hadith and said
things that were against the interests of the government of that time
and the policies of Muavieh and Uthman. 94

Muavieh tried every way with him but this brave, God-fearing old man
was not to be overawed. Muavieh was thus paralyzed. One night
one-hundred dinars were brought to Abu Dharr, sent by Muavieh. That very
night Abu Dharr distributed it among the poor and needy. The next
morning Muaviehs' messenger arrived at his door saying: "I brought that
money to you by mistake. Help me and save my life, give back the
money."' Abu Dharr said: "Wait, I distributed it among the poor and the
needy, I'll go and collect it". 95

Neither gold nor force, threats nor tempting had any effect on Abu
Dharr, because of this Muavieh wrote to Uthman saying: "If you have any
need for Sham, summon Abu Dharr". The Caliph ordered that Abu Dharr be
sent to Medina. The entire journey was made in misery. The world long
route from Sham to Medina was made under the pressure of Muaviehs'
officers on bare-backed camels, without dismounting and at a gallop
through scorching deserts. The old mans thighs were chaffed and. worn
away from the pressures and suffering he had born on the road. 96 In
this very afflicted state and with a battered body he entered Uthmans
governmental palace. Abdul Rahman Ibn Auf, an old supporter of the
Caliph, had died and a great amount of his gold had been brought to
Uthman so he could distribute it among his heirs. They poured the gold
on the floor in front of Uthman. It was so much that a person who was
standing on the other side of the gathering couldn't be seen. The Caliph
wished to distribute the gold among the heirs. He says: "I wish peace of
soul for Abdul Rahman. He gave alms, was a frequent host and has left
behind what you see here". Ka'ab al-Ahbar answered: "What you say is
true O' Amir al-Mu'meneen!".

Abu Dharr in that very tired and depressed state raised his cane
bringing it down on Kaab al-Ahbars' head saying: "you son of a Jew! You
wish to teach us our own religion!" Then he recited this Quranic
verse:

"As for those who accumulate gold and silver making of it a treasure,
and don't spend it in the way of God, give them tidings of a painful
punishment". 97 Of course the accumulating of gold and silver as a
treasure is different from owning property. Owning gardens, businesses
and capital, etc. is not prohibited or unlawful. According to Islamic
law, if money is used, brought to the market or put to some use, there
is no objection regardless of the amount, and is not unlawful. On the
other hand however, the stockpiling of money is despised by God. The
debate regarding treasure is a special topic of study in Islam about
which this brief study is incapable of going into in depth. 98

Some historians have described the gathering of Uthman and Ka'ab
al-Ahbar, and Abu Dharrs' argument with them in a different way. To
complete this discussion we will now mention this narration. Uthman-"If
someone pays the zakat (Islamic poor tax) on his wealth and property,
has he any other moral obligation with regard to it?" Ka'ab al Ahbar-
"Not at all Amir al-Mu'meneen".

Abu Dharr placed his hand on Ka'abs' chest and pushed him away saying:
"You lied O' son of a Jew". Then he recited this Quranic verse:

"Goodness is not that you turn your face to the East or West but it is
that which......, and spends his money out of love for God....." 99

Uthman asked: "Is it wrong for us to borrow money from the Islamic
Public Treasury and use it in our own affairs, afterwards returning it?"
Ka'abal Ahbar- "No, its alright".

Abu Dharr placed his cane on Kaabs' chest and pushed him back saying:
"How carelessly you express your own viewpoint with regard to our
religion". 100

Uthman couldn't tolerate these strong outbursts by Abu Dharr in his own
presence with his court scholar. This was especially because these
statements were backed by various sayings of the Prophet. As a result
they threw Abu Dharr out of the home he migrated to, returning him to
his original home "Rabadheh" in the bare desert where there was no-one
to hear his words, and so he could not relate the Hadith of his friend,
the Prophet, and explain the laws of Islam May God rest his soul in
Peace and be satisfied with him.

The martyrdom and death of Meysam Tammar and Rashid Hejry were also for
this very reason. Meysam Tammar is the distinguished student of Amir
al-Mo'meneen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s). He narrates Hadith from him, and
became aquainted with Islam at his side. In the last year of his life
either 58 or 60 A.H., Meysam went on the pilgrimage to God's house and
from there went on to Medina. In Medina he went to the home of
Umm-e-Salamah. Out of respect for him Umm-e-Salamah gave him a special
perfume called "Ghalieh". Meysam said: If at this moment my beard is
tinged by this perfume it wont be long before it will be tinged with
blood out of my love for the family of Prophet.

Umme-Salamah said: How often I heard the Prophet mention you and
recommend you to Ali.

Meysam was a freed slave and of Persian origin and not an Arab. He had
been taught by Amir al-Mo'meneen Ali (a.s) and had learned the
interpretation and allegorical explanation for the Quran from him. After
leaving the home of Umm-e-salameh, he ran into Ibn Abbas Habr Alameh
saying to him (whom was at that time a first class scholar); "Ibn Abbas
bring paper and a pen and sit here so that I may recite Quranic
interpretations for you, as I learned from Amir al-Mo'meneen Ali (a.s)
and relates the interpretations of these two greatest teachers.

In the midst of this Meysam fortells his future. He says to Ibn Abbas:
"How would you feel if your were to see me on a gallow, the ninth of
nine persons to be hung, my gallow being shorter than the others and
closer to the ground?"

This type of statement greatly surprised Ibn Abbas.

He said:

"Have you become a fortune-teller? Do you tell fortunes and give
warnings of the unseen?"

Ibn Abbas said this and moved to tear up the writings he had made of
Meysams' Quranic interpretations.

Meysam said:

"Stop! If what I told you occurs as I described and it be proven that I
spoke the truth, use these writings and if my words prove false tear
them up".

Meysam returned to Kufeh. This was during the rule of Ibn Ziad with all
of his oppression, injustice and cruelty. Two days after his return he
was arrested by Ibn Ziads officers and taken before the governor.

Ibn Ziad: You are Meysam?

Meysam: Yes I am.

Ibn Ziad: Keep away from Abu Torab.

Meysam: I don't know Abu Torab.

Ibn Ziad: Stay away from Ali Ibn Abi Talib.

Meysam: What will happen if I don't?

Ibn Ziad: I will have you killed.

Meysam: Imam Amiral-Mu'meneen Ali(a.s) had told me that before long,
you would hang me, kill me, and that you would also cut out my tongue.

Ibn Ziad: I will make Ali's prediction a lie. I will cut off you hands
and feet and then hang you but I will not cut out your tongue. He then
ordered his officers to amputate Meysams hands and feet and hang him on
a cross.

At that time the gallows or cross was a wooden pole with its two
farthest ends fixed on two supports. They would tie the convicts hands
to it and leave him to die on his own, In this state Meysam began
calling from the gallows: "O' People, anyone who wishes to learn of the
unrelated Hadiths of Ali Ibn Abi Talib, come and hear!".

The people gathered and from the gallows he related amazing Hadiths for
them. Hadiths which had remained imprisoned in hearts and not even a few
of their most intelligent had the nerve to relate, the strict censorship
existing in that environment not having permitted their circulation.
They were now being heard from the tongue of Meysam, the self
sacrificing friend of Imam Amir al-Mu'meneen, from the gallows. Ibn Ziad
was informed that if he didn't cut out this man's tongue they were
afraid he would cause the people of Kufeh to rise up against him. Thus,
Ibn Ziad comanded one of his officers to go and cut out Meysams tongue.
The officer went to Meysam's cross and ordered him to stick out his
tongue. Saying: "O' Meysam stick out your tongue, Amir has ordered that
it be cut out".

Meysam replied: "That son of a whore wished to make myself and my
Master-Ali, out as liers. Here, this is my tongue".

The officer cut out his tongue and after struggling an hour or so on
the gallow, he died. 101

The end of Rashid Hejry's life was also the same, He also had his
tongue cut out and was killed because he narrated Hadith. When he was
taken before Ibn Ziad, he said to him: "Tell us some of your Master's
lie!"

Rashid replied: "I swear to God that neither he nor I are liers and
that he truthfully informed me that you will cut off my hands, feet and
tongue".

Ibn Ziad said: "Now is that so. I will prove his statement false. Cut
off his hands and feet and throw him out!"

When they took him home in that pitiful condition his daughter asked
him: "Does it hurt?"

He answered: "By God no my little girl, except for the discomfort one
feels when he is trapped in a crowd, and the crowd presses against
him".

After that his neighbors and friends came to his house. On seeing
Rashid in that condition they began to cry. Rashid said:

"Don't cry, instead bring paper and pen so that I may narrate for you
what my Master Amir al-Mu'meneen Ali (a.s) has taught me".

He then began to speak and told the people of Amir al-Mu'meneens'
Hadiths. News of this reached Ibn Ziad and the officer who performed the
amputations was sent to cut out his tongue. That night, Rashid the brave
said farewell to the transient world. 102

If Meysam, Abu Dharr and Rashid sacrificed their tongues and
occasionally their lives in order to promulgate Hadiths it was because
they knew that this was where the main battleground was. They knew that
this was the point where wrong doers would plunder Islam and cause the
way of humanity to be lost. These men with their deep, accurate
understanding of Islam, knew that one of the most fundamental dangers to
Islam and one of the strongest means for the destruction of Islams
central core was the concealment of the Prophets Hadith. Therefore, they
invited death to safeguard this cause, life being worth little in
relation to it.

This group with their promulgation of Hadith on the battleground of
right, are the keepers of Islamic truths. The opposing side also knows
that in order to alter them they must be first of all, taken from
circulation. In order to do this they ordered that no-one was allowed to
relate Hadith or even to write them. This command for the prohibition of
relating Hadith then came to be granted certain limitations. This was
because in principle it was impossible to prevent absolutely, the
relating of Hadiths. However, with regard to the writing and recording
of Hadith the prohibition remained in effect until 100 A.H. It was in
this year that the Caliph gave permission for the recording of Hadith.
In all of these the Hadiths had not been officially written and recorded
in any form and a compiled collection or book had not come to be. The
order given allowing the writing of Hadith is one of a series of
admirable deeds performed by Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz (60-101 A.H). He not
only returned Fadak to the Prophets' family and prohibited the cursing
of Amir al-Mu'meneen (a.s), but also during his Caliphate he wrote
letter of command to the people of Medina telling those who knew Hadith
to write them down because he feared that if not, knowledge and learning
would be lost. With this letter, that which had previously there had
been no choice, the order was the Caliphs'.

From this time on many Hadiths were related and written. Huge
collections of Hadiths were compiled. Classes to teach Hadiths with
numerous students were created. We don't know what happened to the
Hadiths they had forged which related the Prophet saying not to narrate
my Hadiths. These Hadiths disappeared as if they never existed. Yes, the
unlawful became lawful because the caliph commanded so. This prohibition
became allowable because the Caliph wanted it so. Isn't it true that the
Caliph is Ulul Amr i.e. the highest authority. God said:

"Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from among
you......."

One Caliph ordered: "don't write Hadith" and they didn't write, and
another Caliph ordered: "write Hadith", and they wrote. As a result, for
ninety years, except for Ali (a.s), Imam Hassan, Imam Hossein, Abu
Dharr, Salman, Obaid Allah ibn Abi Rafae, Meysam, Rashid and others like
them, no-one wrote Hadith, and the narration of Hadith was limited only
to the best interests of the Caliphs and strongmen of that time.

The prohibition of the promulgation of Hadith was the foundation for
alteration. The Caliphate wants a type of Islam to be promulgated which
will for example not have persons saying, that according to the
Prophets' words the palace built by Muavieh in Sham is unlawful. Or, if
Yazid became caliph and was a liquor drinker and a fornicator, no one
would say that the Prophets actions and behavior was different and
doesn't collate with that of this caliph.

Accordingly, until the Prophets Hadith, the records of his deeds and
the true history of his life exist, the Muslims can not be silenced, and
at every time it is possible that a God-fearing Muslim will cry out and
disgrace the transgressors. It is for this reason that the Prophets
Hadith must not be related or appear in writing, must not be repeated or
circulated. As for the results they achieved from this primary
foundation, and the ways they altered the facts, that will-God
willing-be seen in future chapters.

Peace and Blessings be upon Mohammad and his progeny.

We were saying that according to traditions narrated successive
witnesses in Shiite and Sunni texts, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) foretold
that everything that occured in past nations would also occur in this
nation. Then we saw the alterations, changes concealments of past
nations. The result of which being that all of these sorts of tragic
events must also materialize in this nation. In short, we said that in
this nation various forms of change, modification and concealment of the
facts also existed, and by these means, Islam in all of its aspects
became the victim of alteration. However, at the time when Islam came to
resemble a reversed cloak or an overturned bowl, God out of His grace
and with the efforts of the Holy Imams of Ahlu'l bait (a.s) once again
revived it and returned it to the society.

That was the basis of our discussion. Now we will go on to a study of
the means by which these evil oppressor of the nation were able to alter
Islam. Such as we proved earlier, the first means was concealment, just
like in previous nations:

"Surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that We
revealed after We made it clear in the Book for men, these it is whom
Allah shall curse, and those, who curse shall curse them (too)". Baqarah
154.

Concealment also existed in this nation and it became the foundation
for the modification and alteration of Islam. Now let us to see what do
they conceal? In the previous discussion of this thesis we looked at the
traditions and words of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) or in other words the
second pillar of Islam. We saw that they not only concealed them but
they also silenced the companions and supporters of the Prophet so that
they couldn't narrate Hadith from him. This even occured to the point
that they didn't even allow the Prophet to write his will from his death
bed.

At this point the listeners brought up a problem, according to which it
was said that the Prophet shouldn't have made a will. The answer to this
question and problem interrupted our discussion and took it to the
matter of the Mastership, one of its strongest documentations being the
repeated, decisive bequests of the Prophet.

My debates have always been from a group that were propounded during
the time of the Holy Imams and continued until the major occultation,
only later to be entrusted to oblivion, and in the next thousand years
acquiring the least attention. The debates which were always under
consideration from that time to the present, Shi'ite scholars having
thoroughly researched and performing the necessary steps accordingly,
had no room for repetition in order for me to try my hand at them. The
Mastership is one of those topics into which research has never ended.
Because of this I didn't think that there was still any need for it to
be discussed and therefore didn't mention it in my lectures or writings,
thus passing it by. However, questions that arose from the subject
matter in the previous lesson have forced me to proceed briefly on this
matter, and go into the arguments regarding it as much as a short
skirting will allow.

