The Basis For the Two Schools' Ways of Thinking
===============================================

From the time of the Prophets' (s.a.w) death until the present day, two
schools have existed in the Islamic world. The Imamate school and the
Caliphate School. What do these two schools say with regard to the
matter of the governor and leader after the Prophet?

The Caliphate school say: The Leader and governor is elective.

The Imamate school says: The leader and governor is appointed
(selective).

The group which says that the appointment of the leader is based on
election also believe that the electing is done by the people, and after
the Prophet it is they who pick the governor.

On the other hand, the Imamate school says that the designation of the
leader is by appointment, this appointment being made by God and not the
Prophet (s.a.w). God the highest appoints, and the Prophet (s.a.w)
informs the people of this divine appointment and selection.

This was a summary of the belief of the two schools. Now we must go
into a more detailed study of these two schools principals. First of all
we will evaluate the Caliphate schools opinions.

The scholars of the Caliphate school possess books in which they have
described such things as law and the says and means for forming a
government and also the necessities for this, the governors duties, the
rights of the Islamic government with regard to the people and the
peoples rights with regard to the government, how ministers should be
chosen, how the Friday Imam and the judges are appointed, how taxes
should be collected, the amounts of "Zakat", "Kharaj" and "Jezieh" 103
who should receive it and how, and so on. These books are the official
writings of the Caliphate schools famous, authoritative and trustworthy
scholars.

We have taken our information on this schools beliefs with regard to
the appointment of the Muslims leader from these books and thus proceed
to evaluate them. We saw previously that in the Caliphate school they
named the leader "Caliph". The person who was elected by the people was
called (Khalifato Rosool) or "Caliph of the Prophet" which for brevity
was later changed to "Caliph". We also learned that in Islam there are
some terms which occured during the Prophets' lifetime, either these
terms or names being chosen by the Prophet himself, or chosen by God and
narrated by the Prophet. This type of terming or naming being called
"Islamic terms" and "Shar'i terms" meaning terms or names that were
chosen legally or by the legislator. There is also another group of
words called "Motashareh terms" which were chosen by the Muslims
themselves or by Islamic scholars. We said that the word Caliph with its
present meaning (religious leader and leader of the Muslim world) is not
a Shar'i or canonical term. This means that during the Prophets'
lifetime this word did not possess this meaning, the Muslims themselves
or the followers of the Caliphate school have given it this meaning.

According to this, whenever we see the word caliph in the Quran or
Tradition it has its literal meaning, the very meaning the Arabs
understood it to have, its completely literal meaning. If a scholar were
to appoint someone to take his place, and leave all of his duties for
him to perform, such a person would become "Khalifatul'alim" or "Caliph
of the scholar". Or if a merchant were to appoint someone to take his
place in his business making him his successor, he thus becomes
"Khalifato-at-tajir" or "Caliph of the Merchant".

Because it is used in conjunction with God in the Quran it means
"Khalifaullah" or "Caliph of Allah". He is the man who has obtained the
power of authority to do Gods work in the world. In the Prophets
tradition, caliph means that person who performs the special duty of the
Prophet, or first hand propagation, and who in reality was charged with
the continuation of the Prophet's work. Since the never ending duty of
the Prophet is the propagation of Islamic religious law, his caliph is
also the propagator of religious law. As such, neither in the Quran, nor
in Tradition does the word Caliph carry the meaning of Islamic leader or
governor. On the contrary, in the tradition of the Prophet, whenever we
see this word, for example where it is said "Khalifati feekom" with
regard to Ali (a.s), it does not mean governor or leader but means that;
after me the propagation of Islam is his responsibility. The explanation
and interpretation of the Quran is his responsibility. 104 After
clarifying this matter we will begin a study of the reasoning of these
two schools. The description and reason behind the Caliphate schools
opinions will be extracted from the books we mentioned earlier, named
"Al-Ahkamu's-sultaniyyah" by Qazi Mawardi (born in the year 450 A.H.)
and Qazi Abu Ya'la (born in the year 458 A.H) both high ranking judges
during their time. They describe this matter in the following manner in
their books which both have the same name. In The Caliphat School The
Imamate, which is the Caliphate after the Apostle may come to be held in
three ways:

**1) A Caliph appoints his successor, or the next Caliph.**

This means that if Haroun al-Rashid said: Amin and Mamoun are the next
caliphs after me, the Muslims are obliged to accept, this caliph being
the legal Islamic one and according to the religion acceptance of him
being required. These two scholars say: There is no room for dispute in
this matter and the acceptance of the Caliph in this manner was by a
concensus of opinions. Their reasoning with regard to this kind of
appointment, and its genuiness and correctness is because when Abu Bakr
appointed Umar as his successor the people did not oppose his choice;
the acceptance of the entire Muslim community showed that they saw this
method as being correct. As such, because of Abu Bakr's action and the
peoples lack of protest, this method of appointment of one Caliph with
regard to the next was deemed correct. In the Caliphate school the
authenticity and accuracy of this method has no room for dispute. 105

2) The Caliph is appointed by the people: In this manner of the Caliphs
appointment the experts in the Caliphate school differ in opinion.
Mowardi says: The majority of scholars believe that the Caliph is chosen
by five of the wise men or elders of the nations, or one of them chooses
and the other four agree. 106 The reason he gives for this opinion is
that with regard to Abu Bakrs caliphate five persons swore an oath of
allegiance to him and this oath gained recognition and was accepted. The
five persons mentioned above were Umar Ibn Khattab, Abu
Ubaidah-e-Jarrah, Salem (Abu Hudhaifas' freed slave), No'man ibn Bashir,
and Aseed ibn Hadir. This was how the oath was given at Saghifeh and Abu
Bakr achieved the post of Caliph. When the Caliph, chosen at Saghifeh
was proposed to the people, they also willy-nilly accepted him. 107 So
for this reason - the deed of these five persons - the appointment of
the Caliph is made by the oath and consent of five of the elders and is
thus carried out. Another reason for this way of thought is the
statement of Umar ibn Khattab in the commission for the appointment of
his successor. He stated at that time, that if five of the six members
agreed on one person, that person will become caliph. Most of the
Caliphate schools scholars agree on this idea.

Another group of caliphate scholars say that the Caliphate resembles a
marriage contract. Just as a marriage requires a notary and two
witnesses, the appointment of a Caliph requires one person to swear the
oath of allegiance and two persons to express their agreement.
Accordingly, three elders are sufficient for the appointment of a caliph
and governor.

A third group believes that it is sufficient for only one person to
swear allegiance to a Caliph. The appointment by one person and oath by
the same elects the Caliph of the great Islamic nation. Their reason for
this belief is that Abbas Ibn Abdul Mutalib told Ali:

"Give me your hand so that I may swear my allegiance to you. The people
will say that the Prophets uncle gave his allegiance to his paternal
cousin, and therefore no one will disagree on this matter". 108

Their second reason for this belief is because the oath of allegiance
is like the ruling or directive of a judge since both are valid and
binding and opposition to it is not permissible. According to the two
reasons, even if only one person swears allegiance to someone with
regard to the Caliphate, his Caliphate is thus established becoming
legal and official. 109

3) A Caliph obtains the caliphate by military victory and force.
According to this opinion if the leadership of the Muslims comes to be
as a result of military strength and superiority, that victor is the
rightful caliph and his Caliphate is official in Islamic law; and
according to Judge Ya'las' words:

"With regard to the person who gains rule over the Islamic nation by
sword and force, thus being called Amir al-Mu'meneen (Commander of the
faithful) and Caliph; it becomes unlawful and prohibited for those who
believe in God and resurrection day to spend even one night not
accepting him as Imam, regardless of whether this person (Caliph) is an
infallible person or whether is fallible". 110

Fazlollah Ibn Ruzbahaan the authoritative scholar of the Caliphate
school in the book of Suluk al-Molk, writes with regard to this manner
of establishing the Caliphate:

The fourth means for obtaining the sultanate or Imamate is ascendancy
or power; scholars have said that if an Imam dies and afterwards someone
takes charge of the Imamate without receiving the allegiance oath, and
without being appointed Caliph by someone, forcing the people to accept
him with force and military division, his Imamate is lawful without
allegiance whether he be of Quraish or not, Arab or other than Arab,
whether he possesses the pre-requisits or whether he is ignorant and
lewd ......... He may be known as Imam and Caliph". 111

**The Caliph and The Muslims**

If someone attains the caliphate by one of the previous means; force,
the allegiance of one person, or three or five persons, or by the
appointment of the previous Caliph, it becomes obligatory for the
Muslims to recognize him in this name and position just as it is for
them to recognize God and His Prophet. This is but one opinion. The
majority believe that if the people know only who is Caliph, that is
sufficient, a detailed recognition of him being unnecessary and a
general recognition sufficing. 112 They upon narrating a series of
narrations found in their most creditable books written by their most
famous narrators, say that according to them it doesn't matter what the
Caliph does; whatever oppression and tyranny, extortion and debauchery,
its not lawful to draw swords upon him and or oppose him or leave him.

Hudhaifeh narrates from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)

"After me there will be leaders who will not follow in my footsteps,
and won't act according to my method. Some of them will possess hearts
like those of devils while appearing to be human beings! 112

Hudhaifeh said:

I said: O' Apostle of God, if I should become a witness of such a time
what must I do in response?" He said: "You must listen to him thoroughly
and obey him absolutely. Even if he strikes you on the back and seizes
your property, you must obey him and listen to his commands!"

Ibn Abbas relates from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)

"If someone should witness in his leader or governor some
unpleasantness, he must be forbearing; because if someone strays so much
as an inch from the Caliphates rule and those Muslims who support it,
when he dies he will be as those who died in the age of ignorance".
113

In another of Ibn Abbas's narratives the Prophet is quoted as saying:

"No one must choose to stray from a government, even so much as an
inch; because if he dies in this condition he will have left the world
as those who died in the age of ignorance idolatry". 114

As a footnote to these traditions, one of the renowned scholars of the
Caliphate school says in a section called "Lozoom-e-Ta'atul Amr" or "The
neccessity of obeying the rulers".

"The majority in the Sunnite sect, in other words the scholars,
relators of Tradition and narrators say that a Hakem who is debaucherous
and oppressive and who tramples the people's rights may not be deposed
or removed from his position. According to law it is also prohibited and
unlawful to revolt against him, but it is obligatory to council and
advice him, making him fear God and the resurrection day; This is
because we have Tradition from the Prophet which prevent us from
rebelling against the Caliph. The word in short is that revolt against
the leaders and governors of the Muslim majority is unlawful, even if he
is a tyrant or a debaucherous person".

According to this belief, insurrection with regard to Yazid ibn
Muavieh, the drunken, dog-loving murderer, and with regard to Abdul
Malik whose soldiers destroyed the Ka'ba with Catapults, and war against
Valid who made the Quran the target of arrows, is not permitted and is
unlawful.

'Nouve' the scholar and commentator on Muslims "Sahih" says in addition
to the above:

"Many consecutive Hadiths were given and they prove the above statement
and in addition the Sunnite sect has by consensus agreed that the leader
may not be deposed from the Imamate because of debauchery". 115 This
scholar then claims proof with this Quranic verse:

"Obey Allah and obey the apostle and those in authority from among
you". 116

Then he added that since the ruler were the authorities in all matters
they must be obeyed. This was a summary of the remarks found .in the
authoritative books on religious science, Hadith, and their commentaries
in the Caliphate school.

**In The Imamate School**

On the other hand this matter has another form, in the Imamate school,
just as we have seen, the Imamate is established by Divine appointment.
The leaders and scholars of this support their belief with this Quranic
verse:

"And when his Lord tried Abraham with certain words, he fulfilled them.
He said: Surely I will make you an Imam of men". 117

What background did the words that God used to test Abraham (a.s) have?
Did they contain orders for the sacrifice of his son Ismael? Was it a
command to battle with the great evil man of that time Namrood, or was
it an order to enter the fire and willingly burn? Could this verse mean
all of these things together? It's really unclear. 118 Whatever it is,
it must have been tremendous to contend as a test for Abraham. As such,
when this great Prophet passed all of the sensitive points successfully,
and as always proved his life to be of pure service and devotion to his
lord, he attained the exalted rank of Imamate. What can the rank of
Imamate be when is attained after prophethood and God's friendship and
it brings Abraham the great such joy that he requests it for his son?
Apart from all this we have seen that the Imamate is based on Divine
division and covenant, and that alone.

Upon hearing this Divine message and attaining exalted position,
because of the circumstances of his human nature; Abraham requests of
his God that this rank be retained for his sons as well. Because of his
human nature he loves his children and wishes them to obtain this
heart-felt honour as well:

He asked God:

"And of my offspring?

And God replied:

"My Covenant does not include the unjust". 119

Who is the unjust? In Quranic use, sometimes a person who does
injustice to himself. For example someone who worships idols, drinks
liquor or commits suicide has done himself Injustice. Unjust is also
used with regard to those who do injustice to others and infringe upon
their rights. For example, someone who seizes the peoples property,
gains unlawful profit from them, or violates their chastity, and also
anyone who in anyway opposes Gods command will be known as unjust
according to Islamic insight. 120 A person who for even just a moment
existed in self injustice or injustice to other is called unjust; and
according to the precise equilibrium of God's order is unfit to obtain
His covenant meaning the Imamate. Just as we have seen and according to
clear Quranic reasoning, the Imam must be "Masum" or infallible.

Other then this noble verse, in other Quranic verse the Imamate has
been mentioned and has presented it as being based on Divine division
covenant:

"And We made them Imams who guided (people) by Our command, and We
revealed to them the doing of good and the keeping up of prayer and the
giving of alms, and Us (alone) did they serve". 121

"And We made them Imams to guide by Our command when they were patient,
and they were certain of Our communications". 122

According to the school of Ahlu'l bait and based on the Holy Quran the
Imamate is established solely by divine appointment, fabrication and
covenant, with no exceptions.

The second matter with regard to the Imamate is that of the Imams
infallibility (Ismah) which was stipulated in verse 124 of the Surah
Baqarah previously mentioned with regard to Abrahams Imamate. Now, if we
refer once again to the Quran we will see in this noble verse:

"Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O' people of
the house! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying". 123

The term "Ahlul bait" 124 used in this verse is a Shar'i or legal term
coined by the Quran. With absolute resolution the Holy Prophet (s.a.w)
revealed the group as being those who were present during his lifetime.
He gathered Ali, Fatemah, Hassan Hussain under his cloak 125 announcing
this verse which had then been revealed to him when been revealed him;
and in this way explicitly specified that his wives were not members of
this group. In this way "Ahlul-bait" became the name of this group and
whenever we hear it spoken of in Islam it means them, and they are
"Masum" or infallible (pure).

**Further Investigation Into The First Condition**

Such as we have seen, in the school of Ahlu'l bait the Imamate is
established by appointment and this appointment must be by God. The
Prophet is only responsible for relaying this message. He himself did
not appoint Ali or recommend his governorship. The Holy Prophet, just as
he propagated the command for prayer thus only acting as God's
Messenger, and relayed the command for Haj which was also a command from
God as thus only relating His message......... it is same with regard to
the Imamate. He propagandizes the Imamate from God, the appointment an
installation being from God. According to this, what the Prophet (s.a.w)
says in reference to the Imamate, is the same as that which he relates
and explain in relating to prayer, Hajj, zakat, and Jehad. Regarding
prayer he says pray this way; first of all perform Ablutions like this,
recite the Surah Hamd in the first and second Rakat, do such and such in
the Rukoo and in Sajdeh such. It is he who says how many Rakat each
prayer should contain or what its preliminaries and requirements
are.........of course the Prophet does not say these things on his own,
he relates from God, he propagates God's words. In this way it has been
completely clarified that the Prophets words on the matter of the
Imamate are from God:

Now, in the limits of this brief discussion we will study the Hadiths
and statements made by the Holy Prophet on the matter of Imamate. We may
divide this type of texts into two varieties:

1) Traditions regarding all of the Imams of Ahlu'l bait (a.s)
2) Traditions in which the name of a specific Imam of Ahlu'l bait is
mentioned.

In the first group of Hadiths none of the proper names of the Imams
(a.s) are mentioned, but the Imamate of Ahlu'l bait in general is
propounded in them. First of all we will evaluate this group of
Hadiths:

**A: Hadithu'thaqalayn (Hadith of Two Precious Things)**

Our first Hadith is narrated from the book "Sahih" by Muslim, 126 but
it may also be found in most other reputable books; for example Ahmad's
"Musnad", "Sunan" by Darmy and "Sunan" by Bayhaqi and "Mustadrak
al-Sahihain" by Al-Hakim. 127 Zaid ibn Arqam says:

On the way from Mecca to Medina (on the return trip of "the farewell
pilgrimage"), next to a pool called "Khumm" the Prophet delivered this
sermon to the people:

"O people, know that I am only a human being. The time draws near when
I will be called (to the next world), and for me to accept God's
invitation. I am leaving behind among you, two most precious thing:
God's scripture which contains guidance and light, don't let it go and
hold it tight, and my descendants who are my family members".

And according to the version in "Mustadrak" he adds:

"Beware how you behave towards these two remaining things after I am
gone. They will not separate from each other until they meet me at the
pool of 'Kowsar"'. It is with reliance on the Prophets last sentence
that we believe one of the Imams of Ahlu'l bait their number being
ascertained in other creditable Hadiths - will have such a lengthy life
that he will remain alive until the worlds end. So that, joined and
allied with Gods scripture they will always be existent in the human
world. Also, so that the Prophets statement regarding their lack of
separation will come true.

Jabir relates something similar to this from the Prophets' sermon on
"the ninth day of Zilhaj" (Arafah). He says:
"O' People, I am leaving something behind among you, which so long as
you keep hold of you will never go astray: God's Book and my
Descendants: Who are my family members (Ahlu'l bait)." 128 After
relating this narrative, Tirmidhi adds that the Hadith was also related
by Abu Dharr, Abu Saeed al-Khudri, Zaid ibn Sabet and Hudhayfeh Ibn
al-Aseed. This narration has been related by in so many ways by various
persons that their repetition and study requires the proper opportunity
for such. At this time we only wish to rely on this Hadith to the point
where we may show that the Prophet made the Imamate exclusively in his
Ahlu'l bait, and made them allied with and inseparable from the Quran.
This is because the Prophet sees guidance as being in their hands and in
the Quran. Holding onto and adhering to them results in inevitable
deliverance from deviation and from being misled according to the
Prophets insight. He warns that you should beware and be careful how you
act towards them after me. He also says that these two will never
separate and that they will meet him at the pool of 'Kowsar'; the
entrance place for the saved on resurrection day.

The fact that the "Divine scriptures" are theoretically the peoples
Imam, and their leader in thought, belief, character and action, is an
indisputable Quranic matter. 129 It is also with regard to and reliance
on this very principle that the Imamate of the Prophets Ahlu'l bait is
proved because of their being placed along side the Quran. In other
words, Islam is described and propounded in the Quran theoretically, and
actively and in outer personification it appears in the Ahlu'l bait.
Therefore, if we accept the Qurans Imamate in that form, then we have no
choice but to accept the Imamate of Ahlu'l bait in this form. Another
point made here in the Prophet's words is with regard to guidance being
exclusive in his valuable legacy; (the Quran and his Ahlu'l bait). Since
we know that Quranic guidance is confined to the generalities of Islamic
matters of faith, morals knowledge; then it is inevitable that the
explanation and clarification of these matters related in the Quran will
become the duty and responsibility of Ahlu'l bait. In this way, guidance
will be complete and consummate.

**B: Narratives of The Number of Imams.**

In another group of narratives the number of Imams, Caliphs, or leaders
after the Prophet is ascertained and of course their names are not
mentioned. Until now I have found these narratives related by four of
the Prophets companions: Jaber Ibn Saorah is one of these persons and
his narrative can be found in "Sahih" by Muslim and Bukhari, and the
"Sunan" of Abu Davoud and Tirmidhi and also the "Musnad" of Ahmad and
the "Musnad" of Teialsi and so on. 130

Jabirs narrative will be related from the book "Sahih" of Muslim. He
says:

"I had gone with my father to see the Holy Prophet (s.a.w), (he) the
great man said: (Religion «Islam» will always remain until the day of
resurrection and until there has been twelve Caliphs, all from
Quraish)"

In this narration nothing more is related, but in the "Nahjul Balaghe"
Amir al-Mu'meneen adds the part which has been eliminated saying:

Surely Imams would be from Quraish. They have been planted in this life
through Hashim. It would not suit other nor would other tie suitable as
heads of affairs". 131

In another narration related in Ahmads "Musnad", and Hakems'
"Mustadrak" and so on.........A man named Masrough who is the narrator
of the Hadith said: "While in Kufeh we were sitting with Abdullah Ibn
Massoud and he was teaching us the Quran. A man asked him: O' Abu Abdul
Rahman didn't you ask the Prophet how many Caliphs this nation will
have? Abdullah then said in reply. Since I have come to Iraq no-one has
asked me that question. And He then added: Yes we asked the Prophet
about that matter and he said:

"Twelve, the same number as the leaders of Israel". 132

This narrative was also related by Anas Ibn Malik, Abdullah ibn Amr
ibn-e-Aas, each of these narratives having been reported by successive
other witnesses which gives them concate notion and greater credibility
and reliability.

