Section 3: The Might of Allah Manifesting in Nature
===================================================

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 20
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ ءَايَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَكُم مِن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ إِذَآ أَنتُم بَشَرٌ
تَنتَشِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “And one of His signs is that He created you from dust, and then,
behold, you are human beings scattered (in the world).”***

The best way of theology is contemplation in creation.

The signs of Allah are not countable; what is mentioned contains a few
ones from a great deal of them.

This verse, as well as a part of the later verses, reiterates some
interesting points from among the proofs of Monotheism and signs of
Allah in the system of the world of existence, and it completes the
former discussions. It can be said that these very noble verses, on the
whole, form an important part of the monotheistic verses of the Qur’an.

These verses, all of which begin with “***one of His signs***” and have
a special harmony, an interesting tone, and deep and effective meaning
with each other, have totally been formed by seven verses, six of which
are consecutive and one of them is separate from others.[^1]

These seven verses have an interesting division from the point of
extroversive verses and introversive verses. Three verses are about the
introversive verses (the signs of Allah in the man’s self, and three
verses are about extroversive verses, (the signs of the greatness of
Allah outside of man’s self), and one verse talks about both of them.

It is interesting that the verses which begin with this sentence are not
more than eleven that seven of them have occurred in this very Surah,
Ar-Room, and two verses are mentioned in Surah Fussilat, No. 41[^2], and
two verses are in Surah Shawra, No. 42[^3]. All of these eleven noble
verses are truly as a complete collection about Monotheism.

Before beginning the commentary of these verses, it is necessary to
mention that though what is stated in these verses, at first, is
understandable for almost all people, but by the development of man’s
knowledge in every field some new points are gradually revealed to the
scientists, a part of which will be pointed out through the commentary
of these verses.

At first, here the Qur’an refers to the creation of man for whom is the
first and the most important merit of Allah.

It says:

***“And one of His signs is that He created you from dust, and then,
behold, you are human beings scattered (in the world).”***

In this verse two signs of the greatness of Allah (s.w.t.) are pointed
out: one is the creation of man from dust, which may be a hint to the
creation of the first man, i.e. Adam, or the creation of all humankind
from dust, because foodstuff, which constructs the man’s being, directly
or indirectly, is wholly taken from dust.

The second matter is the increase of man and that Adam’s children are
scattered throughout the earth. If the speciality of scattering human
beings were not created in Adam’s offspring, man would be destroyed soon
and his posterity could be vanished.

Verily, how far is the distance between the dust and the man with these
delicacies!

If we compare the delicate curtains inside the eye, which are more
delicate, sensitive and tender than a petal, or the extraordinary
delicate and sensitive cells of mind, with dust we will then understand
how Excellent is the Lord Who has applied an amazing power to produce
such sensitive, exact, and worthy systems from dust, a dark and
worthless matter?

Dust itself has neither light, nor warmth, nor beauty, nor freshness,
nor movement, but it is the origin of man with these wonderful
qualities.

The One Who, from such a dead being that is counted as the lowest
beings, produces a wonderful living creature such as man, is worthy of
any kind of praise for this His endless power and knowledge:

***“…Blessed be Allah, the Best of the creators.”***[^4]

By the way, this statement points to this fact that there is no
difference between human beings and the origin of all of them is one
thing. All human beings have an unbreakable relation with dust and,
naturally, they all will finally return to the dust, too.

It is noteworthy that in the Arabic language the word ***/’iŏa/*** is
usually used for the things which often suddenly occur. The application
of it here may point to the fact that Allah gave such an ability of
proliferation to man that in a short time suddenly his progeny scattered
throughout the world and brought the organized human society into being.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 21
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ ءَايَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُم مِنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجاً
لّـِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُم مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً إِنَّ
فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “And of His signs is that He crated spouses for you from
yourselves, that you may repose in them, and He has set between you love
and mercy; verily there are signs in this, for a people who reflect.”***

A spouse must be the cause of peace, not the cause of agitation and
anxiety.

The aim of marriage is not often only satisfying the sexual instinct,
but the aim is mostly reaching to a spiritual and bodily tranquillity.

This holy verse refers to another part of the extroversive verses which
are in a stage after the creation of man.

It says:

***“And of His signs is that He crated spouses for you from yourselves,
that you may repose in them…”***

And since the continuation of this relation between spouses, in
particular, and between all human beings, in general, needs a heartily
and spiritual attraction, next to the above statement, the Qur’an adds:

***“…and He has set between you love and mercy…”***

For more emphasis, at the end of the holy verse, the Qur’an continues
saying:

***“…verily there are signs in this, for a people who reflect.”***

It is interesting that the Holy Qur’an introduces the aim of marriage as
peace and tranquillity, and here by applying the Arabic expressive
phrase: ***/litaskunu/ (that you may repose)*** it has implicitly stated
many subjects. Similar to this meaning is also mentioned in Surah
Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 189.

Verily the existence of spouses with this special quality, which is the
cause of tranquillity of their lives, is counted one of the great
bounties of Allah, because these two genders are complementary of each
other and each generally causes the mirth, fruitfulness, and development
of the other, so that every one of them is imperfect without the other.

And it is natural that there should be such an honourable attraction
between a being and its complement.

From this statement we can conclude that those who turn away from this
Allah’s way of treatment have an incomplete life, because one of their
developing stages has stopped, (except that some particular conditions
and a necessity truly requires that one remains single).

However, this tranquillity is from the point of both body and spirit,
and from the point of both individual and social.

The sicknesses, which happen to the man’s body because of the
abandonment of marriage, are not deniable.

Also, the lack of spiritual equilibrium and the psychological
uneasiness, which the single persons are faced with, are, more or less,
clear to everybody.

From the social viewpoint, the unmarried persons feel responsibility
less than others and, for this reason, suicide is more common among them
than among others, and they commit horrible crimes more than others,
too.

When a person turns from the stage of celibacy into the stage of family
and married life, he finds a new personality in him and feels a further
responsibility; and this is the meaning of feeling tranquillity under
the light of marriage.

The issues of ‘love’ and ‘mercy’, in fact, are the ‘clay’ and the
‘adhesive substance’, of constructional materials of the human society,
because a society is formed by each one of the individuals of human
beings, like a huge and glorious building which is made of brakes and
pieces of stone.

If these separate individuals, and those different parts do not relate
to each other and combine with each other, there will not appear a
‘society’ or ‘a building’. He, Who has created man for social life, has
provided this necessary relation in his soul, too.

There may be some differences between the meaning of the Arabic words
***/mawaddat/ (love)*** and /rahmat/ (mercy, as follows:

1- ‘Love’ is the motive of relation and communication at the beginning,
but at the end, when one of the two spouses may become so weak that can
not give any service, ‘mercy’ substitutes it.

2- ‘Love’ is used concerning the adults who are able to serve each
other, but little children and babies are fostered under the shadow of
‘Mercy’.

3- ‘Love’ is often mutual, but ‘mercy’ is unilateral and is done as an
act of donation and altruism, because for the existence of a society the
mutual services, the source of which is love, are sometimes necessary,
and sometimes free services are needed, which require ‘donation’ and
‘mercy’.

This verse, of course, states ‘love’ and ‘mercy’ between two spouses,
but this probability also exists that the application of the Qur’anic
word ***/baynakum/ (between you)*** refers to all human beings, and ‘two
spouses’ is counted of its clear extensions, since not only the family
life but also the life in the whole human society is not possible
without these two principles: ‘love’ and ‘mercy’.

So, the destruction of these two relations, and even with their weakness
and scantiness, brings thousands of calamities, unhappiness, and social
uneasiness.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 22
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ ءَايَاتِهِ خَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلاَفُ
أَلْسِنَتِكُمْ وَأَلْوَانِكُمْ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَاتٍ
لِلْعَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “And of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth,
and the variety of your languages and your colours; verily there are
signs in this for the learned.”***

The difference of races and languages is a way toward theology.

This holy verse is a combination of the extroversive and introversive
signs. At first, it refers to the divine creation of the heavens and the
earth and says:

***“And of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth…”***

The heavens, with those plenty of spheres, those many systems and
galaxies; are some things that the man’s thought can not perceive their
greatness, and his mind gets tired by studying them. The more man’s
knowledge develops the more new points are revealed from their
greatness.

Once man considered the heavenly stars the same number of them that he
could see by his eyes. (The scientists had counted the stars which can
be been with natural eyes about five to six thousand stars.)

But when some stronger and greater telescopes were made, the greatness
and multiplicity of stars of heaven increased more, so much that today
the scientists believe that our galaxy, which is one of the abundant
galaxies of the heaven, contains, more than one hundred million stars;
and our sun, with its glary glory, is counted as one of its mean stars.

And only Allah knows how many stars exist in all galaxies, the number of
which is not known to anyone yet.

Also, the more the natural sciences, geology, botany, zoology, anatomy,
physiology, psychology and its branches develop, the more new wonders
are discovered about the creation of the earth, each of which is a sign
out of the signs of the greatness of Allah.

Then the words of the verse tend to speak about one of the great
introversive signs, when it says:

***“…and the variety of your languages and your colours;…”***

No doubt, without knowing individuals, the recognition of social life of
human beings is impossible. If it happens that one day all the members
of humankind have the same form, the same feature, and the same size, on
the same day the regularity of their life will be disturbed.

Neither father, child and spouse is recognized from strangers, nor
criminal from innocent, nor debtor from loaner, nor commander from the
submissive, nor the boss from employee, nor host from guest, nor friend
from enemy. Then, what a wonderful tumult appears!

Sometimes this case happens concerning the twins who are completely
similar to each other, and there appear so many difficulties in their
relations and communications with other people.

We have heard that one of the similar twins once was sick and the Mother
gave the medicine to the other. Therefore, in order to organize the
human societies, Allah has made the sounds and colours different.

As Fakhr-i-Razi in the explanation of the verse under discussion says:
the cognition of a person by another person should be performed either
by the eyes, or by the ears.

For recognition Allah has created eyes, colours, faces, and different
shapes, and for the recognition by the ears He created difference in
songs, tones and sounds so that no one can find two persons in the world
whose features and tones of sound are the same from all points of view,
i.e., the man’s face which is a small limb, and the tone of his sound,
which is a simple matter, by Allah’s power, are produced in many
billions of different shapes, and this is among the signs of His
greatness.

Of course, there is also another probability, to which some great
commentators have pointed out, that the difference of languages means
the difference in languages such as Arabic, Persian, and the like; and
the difference of colours refers to the difference of races that every
one of them has a colour.

However, the Arabic word ***/’ixtilaf/ (variety)*** can have a vast
meaning which envelops both this commentary and the previous commentary,
and whichever meaning it may have, this variety in creation testifies to
His greatness and Power.

In his encyclopaedia, Farid Wajdi narrates from Newton, the famous
western scientist, who said:

*“Do never doubt about the Creator of the world, Allah, because it is
not rational that necessity and cause and effect without sense alone be
the leader of existence, since necessity in any place and any time can
not be considered that these various heavens and colourful creatures are
issued from Him.*

*And it is not possible that the existence, with its system, order of
its parts, and the needed proportions consistent with the changes of
time and place, appear, but all these affairs must certainly originate
from a source which has Knowledge, Wisdom, and Will.”*[^5]

At the end of the above verse, the Holy Qur’an says:

***“…verily there are signs in this for the learned.”***

The reason of it is that the learned ones are aware of these secrets
more than other people.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 23
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ ءَايَاتِهِ مَنَامُكُم بِالَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ وَابْتِغَآؤُكُم
مِن فَضْلِهِ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَسْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “And of His signs is your sleeping by night and day and your
seeking after His grace; verily there are signs in this for a people who
hear.”***

This holy verse refers to another part of these great signs.

At first, the verse attracts the attentions to the phenomenon of ‘sleep’
as an important phenomenon of creation and a design from the wise system
of its creator, and says:

***“And of His signs is your sleeping by night and day and your seeking
after His grace…”***

Then, at the end of the verse, the Qur’an adds:

***“…verily there are signs in this for a people who hear.”***

This fact is not concealed for any one that all ‘living creatures’ are
in need of rest in order to renew their strength and obtain necessary
preparation for continuation of work and activity. It is a kind of rest
that necessarily comes to them, and it forces the studious and greedy
ones to have it.

For gaining this aim what can be considered better than sleep which
compulsorily comes to man and forces him to sleep when he stops many
bodily activities and an important part of his mental reactions? In
sleep only some organs of body such as heart, the two lungs, and a part
of mind, which are necessary for the continuation of life, go on their
job very quietly and calmly.

This great merit of Allah causes man’s body and spirit to be cleaned,
and by the occurrence of the state of sleep, which is a kind of pause in
the work of the body, a rest will be obtained, and man finds a sort of
liveliness, mirth, and new strength in him.

Admittedly, if sleep did not exist, the man’s spirit would become faded
and worn out very soon and before long senility and infirmity would meet
him. That is why a suitable and calm sleep is usually the cause of
health, prolongation of lifetime and duration of the youth cheerfulness.

It is noteworthy that, firstly, the word ‘sleeping’ has been stated
before the Qur’anic phrase ‘***seeking after His grace***’ which in the
verses of the Qur’an means: struggle for sustenance. This indicates that
sleeping is considered as a foundation for it, since without having
enough sleeping ‘seeking after His grace’ is difficult.

Secondly: it is true that sleeping usually happens at night, and
struggle for ways of making a living is done during the day, but it is
not so that man can not change this program when it is necessary.

Allah has created man in a way that he can change his sleeping program
and adapts it with his own necessities and needs. The application of
‘your sleeping by night and day’ seems to be a hint to this very point.

No doubt the main program of sleeping relates to night, and for the sake
of the rest emerged from darkness, night consists of a special
precedence in this respect.

But sometimes there may appear some circumstances in man’s life that,
for example, he has to travel by night and sleeps and rests during the
day. What kind of difficulties would there happen if the program of
arranging the time of sleeping were not at the disposal of man?

In our age, in particular, when many of the manufacturing, healing and
medical institutes have to ceaselessly work during day and night and
their cessation is impossible and, therefore, the employees and workers
are busy working in three shifts, the importance of the above subject is
more manifest than any other time.

The need of both body and spirit of man to sleeping is so much so that
man can rarely bear not to sleep for a long time, and this length of
time is not more than a few nights and days.

That is why hindrance from sleeping has always been known as the most
painful tortures by the tyrant and the arrogant. And also it is for this
very reason that one of the effective ways of treating many human
diseases is that the patience is made sleep deeply, and by this way they
increase the might and ability of the patience.

Of course, no one can define a proper amount of sleeping as ‘the
necessary amount of sleeping’ for all people. This matter depends on the
age, and conditions of persons and also on their spiritual and bodily
state. What is important is that ‘enough sleeping’ is that amount after
which man feels that he is satiated from this point of view, just like
when he feels he has been satiated by water and food.

This is also notable that besides the ‘length’ of the time of sleeping,
its depth has also a special importance. It happens that one hour of a
deep sleeping has the effect of several hours of superficial sleeping in
reconstruction of man’s spirit and body.

Of course, where a deep sleeping is not possible for a person, a
‘slumber’ is also among the bounties of Allah, as Surah Al-’Anfal, No.
8, verse 11, concerning the strivers of the Battle of Badr, mentions it,
because in battlefield sleeping is often neither possible nor useful.

However, the bounty of sleeping and rest and tranquillity resulted from
it, and also the strength and the mirth which appear after sleeping, are
among the divine bounties that are describable by no statement.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 24
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ ءَايَاتِهِ يُرِيكُمُ الْبَرْقَ خَوْفاً وَطَمَعاً وَيُنَزّ‌ِلُ
مِنَ السَّمَآءِ مَآءً فَيُحْيِي بِهِ الاَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا إِنَّ
فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “And of His signs is that He shows you the lightning for fear and
for hope and that He sends down water from the heaven and gives life
therewith to the earth after its death; verily there are signs in this
for a people who understand.”***

Fear and hope together can be constructive.

Neither heavenly lightning nor falling rain and growing plants on the
earth are casual, but they are performed upon a just and accurate
program. This holy verse, which states the fifth part of the signs of
the greatness of Allah, again refers to the extroversive signs and pays
attention to the subject of rain, lightning, and the life of the earth
after its death.

It says:

***“And of His signs is that He shows you the lightning for fear and for
hope…”***

The danger emerged from lightning, which sometimes in the form of
thunderbolt, burns everything in its realm and turns them into ashes,
causes fear; and hope, here, appears because of rainfall which often
falls after thunder-storm in the form of a shower.

Thus, lightning is a harbinger for the descent of rainfall. (This is
besides the various important benefits of lightning which the modern
science has revealed, and a few of which were pointed out at the
beginning of Surah Ar-Ra‘d.)

Then the Qur’an adds:

***“…and that He sends down water from the heaven and gives life
therewith to the earth after its death…”***

The dry and hot land, every spot of which seems dead, after receiving
some refreshing drops of rain will become so alive and green that the
effects of life are seen in it in the form of plants and flowers, and
sometimes it is not really believable that this is the same former dead
land.

At the end of the verse, as an emphasis, the Qur’an says:

***“…verily there are signs in this for a people who understand.”***

These are those who understand that there is a proper power in this
accurate program, which leads it, and such a power can never be the
effect of casual events, and blind and deaf necessities.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 25
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ ءَايَاتِهِ أَن تَقُومَ السَّمَآءُ وَالأَرْضُ بِأَمْرِهِ ثُمَّ
إِذَا دَعَاكُمْ دَعْوَةً مِنَ الأَرْضِ إِذَآ أَنتُمْ تَخْرُجُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “And of His signs is that the heaven and the earth subsist by His
command, then (after your death) when He summons you once (and) suddenly
out of the earth, behold, you come forth.”***

In these verses not only the creation of man from dust has been counted
as a sign of Divine Power, but also both death and man’s coming out from
his grave are the signs of His Power.

Of course, the belief in the Origin is preliminary for the belief in
Resurrection. The One Who can set up the system of existence will also
restore you to life after death.

In this holy verse and in the previous five verses, Allah has addressed
people for fifteen times and has mentioned His bounties. This is one of
the methods of propagation.

However, in this verse the Qur’an continues the discussion upon the
extroversive signs in the field of the contrivance of the regulation of
the heaven and the earth as well as its perseverance and permanence,
where it says:

***“And of His signs is that the heaven and the earth subsist by His
command…”***

That is, not only the creation of the heavens, which was mentioned in
the previous holy verses, is a sign, but also their erecting and the
permanence of their regulation is another sign, because, in their
regular rotations, these tremendous bodies are in need of many things
that the most important one among them is the complicated computation of
equilibrium of the power of polarization.

Allah, the Mighty, the Great, has arranged this equilibrium so minute
that they rotate millions of years in their own orbits without any
deviation.

In other words, the previous holy verse referred to Unity of creation
while this verse refers to the Unity of Lordship and contrivance.

The application of the Arabic word ***/taqum/ (subsist)*** is a tender
application which has been taken out of the states of man, because the
best state of man’s states for continuing the activities is the state of
subsisting in which he is able to fulfil all his needs and he dominates
over all his surroundings.

The application of /’amr/ (command) here refers to Allah’s utmost power
that for the continuation of life and order of this vast world only His
command is enough.

By using the existence of the preparation of Unity for Resurrection, at
the end of the verse the Qur’an has turned the discussion to this
subject, Resurrection, and says:

***“…then (after your death) when He summons you once (and) suddenly out
of the Earth, behold, you come forth.”***

We have repeatedly seen in the verses of the Qur’an that Allah proves
the subject of Resurrection by emphasizing on His signs in the heaven
and the earth, and also the verse under discussion is one of them.

The Qur’anic phrase ***/da‘akum/ (He summons you)*** points to this fact
that as for the contrivance and the order of the world His one command
is enough, for quickening of the dead, uprising, and Resurrection His
one command is enough, too; specially with regard to the Qur’anic
sentence ***/’iŏa ’antum taxrujun/ (behold, you come forth)*** wherein
the Arabic word ***/’iŏa/*** makes it clear that by one invitation
everybody suddenly comes out.

By the way, the application of /da‘watan minal ’ard/ (He summons you
once (and) suddenly out of the earth) is a clear indication to ‘the
resurrection of the body’, meaning that on the Day of Resurrection man
will be summoned from this earth. (Be careful)

### A Complete Course of Theology

1- Through former six holy verses, there were mentioned different
discussions about theology which, on the whole, form an interesting
course, including: the creation of the heaven, and the creation of man
from dust; the love of family, and the restful sleep at night and during
the day; the contrivance of the order and the above world, and the
lightning of the sky, the rainfall, and the difference in languages and
colours.

All of these subjects are a suitable collection of the extroversive and
introversive verses.

It is interesting that in every one of these six verses two sections of
the proofs of Unity have been mentioned in order that one prepares the
preparation and the other strengthens and approves it. It is just like
bringing two witnesses for proving a claim; thus, these six verses form
twelve truthful witnesses for the unlimited Power of Allah.

2- At the end of four verses out of these six verses, there has been
emphasized that there are clear signs in these affairs for a people who
reflect, for the learned, for a people who hear, for a people who
understand, but this meaning is not seen in the first nor in the last
verse.

In this regard, Fakhr-i-Razi explains as follows: the lack of its
mentioning in the first verse may be for the sake that the first and the
second verses, which have come one after another and both of them are
among the introversive verses, are the same.

And in the last verse, the matter is so evident that it needs not
further explanation and emphasizing on understanding and
contemplation.[^6]

It is interesting that at first the Holy Qur’an speaks of
‘***reflection***’ and then of ‘***knowledge***’, because contemplation
is the foundation and preparation of knowledge.

Next to it the words are about ‘the hearing ear’, since under the light
of knowledge and awareness man is ready to hear and accept the Truth, as
the Holy Qur’an says:

***“…therefore give good news to my servants,”***

***“those who listen to the word, then follow the best of it…”***[^7]

And at the last stage, the words are about ‘wisdom’, because those who
have a hearing ear will finally reach the stage of good understanding.

This point is also noteworthy that at the end of the first verse the
Qur’an refers to the creation of man and that his progeny have been
scattered in the earth:

***“…then, behold, you are human beings scattered (in the
world)”***[^8]***,***

and in the last verse the words are also about the man’s resurrection in
the Hereafter,

***“…behold, you come forth.”***

3- The concerning scientists have abundantly discussed about sleeping
and its specialties, but it seems that its all parts and secrets have
not been made manifest yet, and its whole complicated facts have not
been revealed.

There is still a discussion among the scientists that what action and
reaction happen in the body of man that in a moment suddenly a part of
the activities of his mind and body stop and there appears a change
throughout his spirit and body?

Some believe that the main factor of sleeping is a ‘physical factor’.
They believe that the circulation of blood from brain to other parts of
the body causes this phenomenon to happen. In order to prove their own
belief, they have used a special bed called ‘scale bed’ which
distinguishes the circulation of the blood from brain to other limbs.

Some other scientists believe that the factor of sleeping is a ‘chemical
factor’. They believe that at the time of effort and struggle there
appear some poisons in the body, which cause a part of brain to stop
working, and, as a result, man falls asleep. Then, when these poisons
are absorbed by the body and are frustrated, the person awakes and gets
up.

Some others believe in a nervous factor for sleeping. They say there is
a special active nervous system in brain which works automatically and,
as the result of tiredness, it temporarily stops working.

But concerning all of these various attitudes, there are many questions
and ambiguous points the answers of which have not been clearly given
yet, and sleeping has ever kept its mysterious feature.

One of the wonders of the world of sleeping, which some scientists have
recently revealed, is that at the time of sleeping and temporarily
stopping of a great part of mind, some of its cells, which must be
called ‘the guardian cells’, will remain vigilant, and they never forget
the recommendations that man gives them before the time of sleeping
about the moment of vigilance so that, at the necessary time, they
awaken the brain wholly and cause it to work.

For example, when the tired mother goes to bed at night while her
suckling child is inside the cradle beside her, she involuntarily
recommends this matter to her ‘guardian cells’, which are the
communicator between soul and body, that whenever her child makes the
least sound they would awaken her, but other sounds and noises are not
so important for them.

Therefore, a thunderbolt may not cause her to wake up. Those guardian
cells have undertaken this important duty!

We ourselves have also experimented this matter that whenever we have
decided to get up soon in the morning, or even in midnight, when we want
to travel or pursue an important program and recommend this matter to
us, often we wake up on time, while in other times we may remain in
sleeping for hours.

In short, since sleeping is one of the spiritual phenomena, and spirit
is a world full of secrets, it is not surprising that its all dimensions
have not been made clear yet, but the more we contemplate upon it we
will be more acquainted with the greatness of the Creator of this
phenomenon.

All these statements were about sleeping, but there are a great deal of
discussions concerning dream and to dream a dream a part of which was
referred to in the commentary of Surah Yusuf, No. 12.

4- The love of two spouses: Though the relation of a person with his
parents and his brother is a genealogical relation, and it concerns to
the relative deep roots while the relation of two spouses is because of
a legal agreement, but many times it happens that the love and affection
emerged from it precedes even the relative love of parents, and this, in
fact, is the same thing that has been referred to in verses under
discussion with the expressive sentence:

***“…and He has set between you love and mercy…”***

An Islamic tradition indicates that, after the Battle of ’Uhud, the
Prophet of Islam (S) told Jahish’s daughter:

*“Your uncle, Hamzah, became martyr.”*

She answered:

***“Verily We belong to Allah, and certainly unto Him shall we
return.***

*I want the recompense of this calamity from Allah.”*

But when she was informed of the martyrdom of her husband, she put her
hand on her head and cried loudly:

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Nothing is equal to husband with a woman!”*[^9]

Surah Ar-Room – Verses 26-27
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهُ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ كُلٌّ لَّهُ قَانِتُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي يَبْدَأُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ وَهُوَ أَهْوَنُ
عَلَيْهِ وَلَهُ الْمَثَلُ الأَعْلَي فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ
وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. “To Him belongs every being that is the heavens and the earth;
all are subservient unto Him.”***  
***27. “And He it is Who originates the creation, then He brings it back
again, and it is easier for Him (than the first creation), and His is
the Sublime Similitude in the heavens and the earth, and He is the
Might, the Wise.”***

The objective meaning of the Qur’anic phrase ***/man fis-samawat/ (every
being that is in the heavens)*** is either the angels, who are obedient
to the command of Allah, or some other intelligent beings over there
whom are not recognized to humankind.

This holy verse says:

***“To Him belongs every being that is the heavens and the earth…”***

And since all of them belong to Him, they are humble and subservient
before Him.

The verse says:

***“…all are subservient unto Him.”***

Thus, it is clear here that the purpose of ownership and also obedience
is a genetic ownership and obedience; that is, from the point of the
laws of creation everything in His authority and, desirably or
undesirably, all are subservient to His laws in the world of creation.

Even the disobedient haughty persons and the sinful law-breakers also
have to obey Allah’s genetic laws.

The reason of this ownership is His divinity and Lordship. The One Who
has created the beings from the beginning and has undertaken their
management, surely He must be the essential owner, too, not other than
Him.

And in view of the fact that all the beings of the world of existence
are equal from this point of view, it makes clear that there is no
partner for Him in ownership; even the polytheists’ imaginary objects of
worship are totally owned by the Lord of sovereignty and they obey His
command.

By the way, it should be noted that the Qur’anic word ***/qanit/*** is
derived from /qunut/ which originally means: ‘obedience accompanied with
humility’.[^10]

The holy Prophet (S) in a tradition said:

*“Every time (the word) /qunut/ (is mentioned) in the Qur’an it means
obedience.”*

But sometimes it is either genetic obedience and sometimes it is
religious obedience.

Some commentators have rendered the word /qanitun/ here into ‘being
witnessed unto ‘Unity of Allah’ which, in fact, is the statement of one
of the extensions of obedience, because giving witness to the Unity of
Allah is a kind of obedience to Him.

In this verse the themes of Origin and Resurrection have been woven into
each other. In the next verse, the Holy Qur’an returns again to the
subject of Resurrection and says:

***“And He it is Who originates the creation, then He brings it back
again, and it is easier for Him (than the first creation)…”***

The noble Qur’an has proved the subject of possibility of Resurrection
with the shortest reasoning in this holy verse. It announces that you
believe that the origin of creation belongs to Him, why does its return
again, which is easier than that, not belong to Him?

The reason of its being easier than its originating at first is that: at
the beginning there was nothing existed and Allah absolutely created it,
while in returning something, at least, the main materials are present:
a part of it is inside the dust of the earth, another part is scattered
in the sky, and the only problem is to organize and to shape it.

Here, there is a point which must be noted, and it is from the window of
our thought that something is easy and another one is difficult.

For the Essence Who is infinite, being easy or difficult is the same. In
principle, being difficult or easy is meaningful where a limited power
is spoken of, that the possessor of that power can fulfil something well
and easily, or rather with difficulty. But when the words are about an
infinite power, being difficult or easy becomes meaningless.

In other words, taking the greatest mountains from the earth for Allah
is as easy as taking a piece of straw.

And perhaps it is why that at the end of the holy verse the Qur’an says:

***“…and His is the Sublime Similitude in the heavens and the earth…”***

Its reason is that any complete description we consider for anything in
the heavens and in the earth from the point of knowledge, power,
ownership, greatness, graciousness, its most complete and perfect
extension is with Allah, because all of beings have a limited scale of
it, but His is unlimited.

The attributes of all things are casual, but those of His are essential
and He is the main source of all virtues. Even our words which are often
used for stating our daily aims cannot describe His qualifications, as
we already saw its example in the Qur’anic word ***/’ahwan/ (easier)***.

The abovementioned sentence is similar to what is said in Surah
Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 180:

***“And to Allah belong the most beautiful names, so call on Him by
them…”,***

and in Surah Ash-Shaura, No. 42, verse 11 Qur’an says:

***“…there is nothing whatever like unto Him…”***

Finally, at the end of this holy verse, as an emphasis or as reasoning,
it says:

***“…and He is the Might, the Wise.”***

He is Mighty and invincible but, in the meantime that He Has an infinite
Power, He does not do anything undue and all His deeds are based on
Wisdom.

[^1]: verse 46 of the current Surah

[^2]: verses 37 and 38

[^3]: verses 29 and 32

[^4]: Surah Al-Mu’minun, No. 23, verse 14

[^5]: Encyclopedia by Farid Wajdi, Vol. 1, P. 496

[^6]: Tafsir-i-Kabir by Fakhr-i-Razi, following the verse under
discussion.

[^7]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verses 17 and 18

[^8]: The current Surah, verse 20

[^9]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P. 174

[^10]: Mufradat by Raqib


