Section 6: The Evidence of Those Given Knowledge and Faith
==========================================================

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 54
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُم مِن ضَعْفٍ ثُمَّ جَعَلَ مِن بَعْدِ ضَعْفٍ
قُوَّةً ثُمَّ جَعَلَ مِن بَعْدِ قُوَّةٍ ضَعْفاً وَشَيْبَةً يَخْلُقُ
مَا يَشَآءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الْعَلِيمُ الْقَدِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “Allah is He Who created you out of weakness, then He gave
strength after weakness, then after strength He appointed weakness and
grey hair; He creates what He pleases, and He is the Knowing, the
Powerful.”***

At the beginning of his creation, man is thoroughly full of weakness.

The man’s stages of weakness and power are designed wisely in a program.

Of course, this noble verse refers to one of the proofs of Monotheism,
i.e., the proof of poverty and needlessness. It completes the
discussions about Monotheism cited throughout this Surah.

It says:

***“Allah is He Who created you out of weakness, then He gave strength
after weakness, then after strength He appointed weakness and grey hair;
He creates what He pleases, and He is the Knowing, the Powerful.”***

At the beginning you were so weak that you were not able even to send
away a fly from yourself, or hold up your saliva; this is from the point
of body; and from the mental view-point, as the Qur’anic term ***/la
ta‘lamun/*** indicates, (you did not know anything) you did not know
even your kind parents who permanently took care of you.

But, little by little, you became bodily and mentally powerful and, just
like a person who ascend a mountain from its lap until he reaches its
top, you began to come down from other side of it and you reached the
bottom of the valley of weakness and became unable bodily and
spiritually.

These changes, and these ascents and descents are the best proof for
this fact that neither that power was yours nor was this weakness, but
both of them were from the side of Allah, and this itself is a sign that
another one turns the wheel of your entity, and whatever you have is
accidental.

This is the same meaning that Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) has pointed to
in his saying where he says:

*“I came to know Allah, the Glorifies, through the breaking of
determinations, change of intentions and losing of courage.”*[^1]

It is interesting that the Holy Qur’an also adds the Arabic word
***/šaybah/ (grey hair)*** for the second weakness of man during his
lifetime, but in regard to the first weakness it does not mention
‘childhood’.

This difference may point to the fact that the weakness of senility is
rather more painful, because firstly contrary to the weakness of
childhood, it has a direction toward death and annihilation and,
secondly, the expectation from the aged, old, and experienced persons is
never like that from the babies, while sometimes their weakness and
disability are equal, and this is very instructive.

It is this stage that draws the disobedient powerful persons to
weakness, despicableness, and helplessness.

The last sentence of the verse, which is an indication to the knowledge
and Power of Allah, is both a glad tidings and a warning implying that
He is aware of all your deeds and intentions and also He is able to give
you both reward and retribution.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 55
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ يُقْسِمُ الْمُـجْرِمُونَ مَا لَبِثُوا
غَيْرَ سَاعَةٍ كَذَلِكَ كَانُوا يُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “And on the Day that the Hour (of Judgment) will be established,
the guilty will swear that they tarried not but an hour; thus were they
used to being deluded.”***

He who is accustomed to perjure in this world, will use it in the
Hereafter, too.

We formerly said that the discussions around ‘Origin’ and ‘Resurrection’
are said close to each other in this Surah. In the above verse,
following the former discussions about Origin and Resurrection, again
the Qur’an speaks about the subject of Resurrection and illustrates
another painful scene of the state of the guilty on that Day.

It says:

***“And on the Day that the Hour (of Judgment) will be established, the
guilty will swear that they tarried not but an hour…”***

Yes, in the past, too, the guilty were wholly deprived from
understanding the reality in such a way. The verse continues saying:

***“…thus were they used to being deluded.”***

The application of the Qur’anic word ***/sa‘ah/ (hour)*** instead of
‘the Day of Hereafter’, as we have formerly pointed out, is either for
the sake that the Hereafter will be set in a sudden moment, or because
the men’s deeds will quickly be reckoned because Allah, the Aware, is
swift at reckoning. And we know that the word ***/sa‘ah/*** in the
Arabic language means a very small part of time.

Since there is no word mentioned about the place of this establishment
in the verse, some commentators have said that it may refer to the time
of staying in the world, which is, in fact, no more than a fleet moment.

But the next verse is a clear evidence that the purpose of it is staying
in the purgatory world, or the world after death and before
Resurrection, because the Qur’anic sentence:

***“…Certainly you have tarried according to Allah’s Book till the Day
of Resurrection…”***

concludes the end of these two to the Hereafter, and this is not correct
but concerning the purgatory world.

We also know this fact that the quality of purgatory is not the same for
all. Some people have an aware life in purgatory (intermediate world),
while there is another group who are like ones who go asleep deeply as
if they would awake from their sleep on the Hereafter Day and consider
thousands of days as one hour.

There will remain two matters here to be discussed. The first is that
how can the guilty make such a wrong oath?

The answer to this question is clear. They truly think such that the
purgatory term is a very short course, because they have had a state
similar to sleep.

Did not ‘the people of the cave’, who were some believing righteous
people, consider that they had slept for a day or a part of a day after
awakening from their very long sleeping?

Or one of the Divine prophets, whose story is mentioned in Surah
Al-Baqarah, verse 259, after one hundred years that he had passed away;
returned to life again and he did not say that the gap between two kinds
of life was one day or a part of a day.

What is the problem that, regarding to the particular state of the
people of the Hell, the guilty have such a consideration because of
unawareness?

That is why, as the next verse announces, the aware believers will tell
them that they are wrong and they have tarried in the purgatory world
until the Day of Hereafter and they are in the Day of Resurrection.

By this statement, the second matter i.e., the commentary of the
Qur’anic sentence:

***“…thus were they used to being deluded”***

is made clear, for the Arabic word: originally means: ‘the change of
real feature and declining from Truth, and because of their peculiar
condition in purgatory, this group have naturally remained far from
realities and cannot discriminate the length of the time of their
staying in purgatory.

Regarding to what was said in the above, there seems no need to pose the
long discussions of a group of commentators who explain why the guilty
ones tell intentionally lies on the Hereafter Day, since, in this stage,
there is no reference of their intentional falsehood in the verse.

Of course, in other verses of the holy Qur’an, there are seen some
examples concerning the lie and falsehood of the guilty on the Day of
Resurrection the answer of which has been given in detail when
commenting on Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 187, but this discussion
does not relate to the subject of the discussion concerning these
verses.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 56
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ اُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ وَالإِيمَانَ لَقَدْ لَبِثْتُمْ فِي
كِتَابِ اللَّهِ إِلَي يَوْمِ الْبَعْثِ فَهَذَا يَوْمُ الْبَعْثِ
وَلَكِنَّكُمْ كُنتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “And those who have been given knowledge and faith will say (to
the guilty); ‘certainly you have tarried according to Allah’s Book till
the Day of Resurrection, so this is the Day of Resurrection, but you did
not know’.”***

Knowledge and faith are two great Divine gifts which are bestowed on
men:

***“…who have been given knowledge and faith…”.***

This holy verse also reiterates the response of the aware believers to
the words of unaware guilty who have no proper information about the
situation of purgatory and Hereafter.

It says:

***“And those who have been given knowledge and faith will say (to the
guilty); ‘certainly you have tarried according to Allah’s Book till the
Day of Resurrection, so this is the Day of Resurrection, but you did not
know’.”***

Mentioning the word of knowledge before the word faith in the holy verse
is for the sake that knowledge is the foundation of faith.

The application of the Qur’anic phrase ***/fi kitab-i-llah/ (according
to Allah’s Book)*** may refer to the genetic Book, or to the heavenly
Book, or both of them. It means it was by the genetic and religious
command of Allah (s.w.t.) that they were determined to remain in
purgatory for such a length of time and then be mustered on the Day of
Resurrection.

As for the purpose of /’allaŏina ’utul ‘il mawal ’iman/ (those who have
been given knowledge and faith) that who they are, some commentators
have said that it points to the Divine angels who have both knowledge
and faith, while some others have said that it refers to the aware
believers; and the second interpretation is more apparent.

Some authentic Islamic narrations indicate that it has been rendered
into the progeny of Hadrat Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as), the Immaculate
Imams (as) which is of the statement of clear extensions and it does not
confine the vast meaning of the verse.

This point is also necessary to be mentioned that some commentators
believe that the dialogue between these two groups about ‘purgatory’,
that one of them imagines its time as long as one hour and the next one
knows its real amount of time originates from this point that since the
first group are waiting for the Divine punishment they are willing that
it can be postponed more and they consider the distances short though
they are very long.

But the second group, who are waiting for Paradise and its bounties
knowingly, see this distance long.[^2]

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 57
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَوْمَئِذٍ لاَّ يَنفَعُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ وَلاَ هُمْ
يُسْتَعْتَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. “So on that Day their excuse shall not profit those who did
injustice, nor will they be allowed to make amends.”***

The man’s fate and the manner of his presence in Hereafter is in pledge
of his own deed. Of course, repentance and apology are effective only in
this world, and in the Hereafter such things are not useful.

The Arabic term ***/yusta‘tabun/ (to make amends)*** is derived from
/‘utbah/ with the sense of distress and when it is used in this Arabic
form it means repentance and the distress being dismissed.

However, when the guilty confront the painful facts of the Hereafter,
they try to repent and apologize, but the Holy Qur’an says:

***“So on that Day their excuse shall not profit those who did
injustice…”***

This matter is noteworthy that some verses of the Qur’an indicate that
the guilty will never be allowed to apologize, for example, it says:

***“Nor will it be open to them to put forth excuse,”***[^3]

but here it says:

***“…their excuse shall not profit…”***

which apparently means that they will apologize but it will not be
useful.

Of course, there is not any contradiction between these verses, because
Hereafter has different stages.

In some stages they are never allowed to apologize or even speak and
their mouths will be sealed and only their hands, feet, and limbs, as
well as the land on which they have committed sins, will speak about
their deeds, while in some other stages their tongue will be relieved
and they apologize, but it will not profit them.

One of their apologies is that they put their own sins on the shoulder
of the chiefs of disbelief and hypocrisy.

They will tell them:

***“…Has it not been for you, we should certainly have been
believers.”***[^4]

But in answer to them, in Hereafter, they will say:

***“…Was it we who kept you back from guidance after it reached
you?…”***[^5]

And sometimes in the state of apology they try to accuse Satan for their
own deviation and they will blame him for his temptations.

But Satan answers them:

***“…therefore, do not blame me, but blame yourselves…”***[^6]

Satan says: he did not force them to do any things, he only invited them
friendly and they accepted it, too.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 58
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ضَرَبْنَا لِلنَّاسِ فِي هَذَا الْقُرْءَانِ مِن كُلّ‌ِ مَثَلٍ
وَلَئِن جِئْتَهُم بِاَيَةٍ لَّيَقُولَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِنْ
أَنتُمْ إِلاَّ مُبْطِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “And indeed We have set forth for the people in this Qur’an,
every kind of similitude, and if you bring unto them a sign, certainly
those who disbelieve will say: ‘You are naught but follow
falsehood’.”***

Qur’an is a book of guidance containing some similitudes. This method is
of the best ways of expressing the facts. That is why Allah has set
forth them in different fields.

Of course, the materials of the Holy Qur’an are the cause of completing
the argument, and he who understands the truth, and the argument is made
clear to him, surely his excuse is not accepted any more.

However, Allah has brought forth every kind of similitude for people in
the Holy Qur’an. He has repeatedly stated some promises and threats,
enjoinments and prohibitions, glad tidings and warnings, extroversive
signs and introversive signs, proofs upon Origin and Resurrection, news
of unseen, and, in short, about everything that may affect positively in
men’s selves.

In fact, the Holy Qur’an, in general, and Surah Ar-Room, in particular,
is a fairly collection of awakening subjects for every group of people
and for any form of thought and belief.

The Qur’an is a collection of instructive lessons, ethical matters,
practical programs and ideological affairs in a way that all possible
methods for influencing in man’s thought and inviting them to the path
of happiness have been used.

Yet, there are some people that none of these issues affect their dark
and black hearts. That is why any verse or sign which is brought for
them upon the truth, these disbelievers will say that you are followers
of falsehood and these things are some baseless affairs.

The verse in this regard says:

***“And indeed We have set forth for the people in this Qur’an, every
kind of similitude, and if you bring unto them a sign, certainly those
who disbelieve will say: ‘You are naught but follow falsehood’.”***

The application of the Qur’anic term ***/mubtilun/*** here is an
inclusive meaning which encompasses all the undue labels and
attributions of the polytheists: the attribution of falsehood, sorcery,
insanity the superstitious fables, and fair tales, each of which is a
feature from the false features.

Yes, they always accused the Divine prophets to one of these things in
order to make the pure hearted people neglectful by them for a few days.

The addressee in the word /’antum/ (you) may be the holy Prophet (S) and
the true believers, or it may refer to all of the adherents of the Truth
and the whole Divine prophets and leaders, since this group of obstinate
disbelievers opposed the whole adherents of this school of thought.

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 59
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَلِكَ يَطْبَعُ اللَّهُ عَلَي قُلُوبِ الَّذِينَ لاَيَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***59. “Thus does Allah set a seal on the hearts of those who do not
know.”***

This is the verse which states clearly the reason of this group’s
opposition. It clearly implies that this impenetrability and limitless
enmity against any reality is for the sake that they have lost their
sense of recognition and comprehension as the result of multiplicity of
sin and obstinacy and understand nothing at all.

Yes, the verse says:

***“Thus does Allah set a seal on the hearts of those who do not
know.”***

The Arabic word ***/yatba‘u/*** is derived from /tab‘/ in the sense of
‘to seal’.

It refers to the action that both in the past and present time it has
been common that, in order that something can remain intact and that no
one absolutely interferes in it, its door is firmly fastened and, after
putting some material on it, the lock or tie on its door is sealed.

It is evident that opening its door is impossible except by breaking
that seal, and this is an action which will be divulged soon.

The Qur’an uses this clear meaning ironically pointing to the
impenetrable hearts and those who have entirely lost their conscience,
awareness, and safe and sound intellect so that there is no hope for
their guidance.

It is noteworthy that in the former verses knowledge was introduced as
the foundation of Faith, and in this holy verse ignorance is the
foundation of disbelief (and the lack of submission before the truth).

Surah Ar-Room – Verse 60
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْبِرْ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ وَلاَ يَسْتَخِفَّنَّكَ الَّذِينَ
لاَيُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***60. “So be patient, verily the promise of Allah is True, and let not
those who have no certainty hold you in light estimation.”***

Surah Ar-Room began with the prophecy of victory and ended with the
promise of Allah (s.w.t.) to the triumphant of the Truth.

This is the last verse of Surah Ar-Room and contains two important
instructions and one great glad tiding for the holy Prophet of Islam (S)
in order to invite him to steadfastness in this constant struggle
against these ignorant and very obstinate persons.

At first, it implicitly says: now that the case is like that, he (S)
should be patient against all these events, the whole harms, hindrances,
and undue accusations, because patience and perseverance is the main key
to victory.

The verse begins saying:

***“So be patient…”***

Then, in order to encourage the Prophet (S) in this way more than
before, it adds:

***“…verily the promise of Allah is True…”***

Allah has promised the Prophet (S) and the believers to be victorious,
to have the vicar of Allah on the earth, the triumph of Islam against
paganism, the light against darkness, and knowledge against ignorance,
and that this promise will actually be fulfilled.

The Qur’anic word ***/wa‘d/*** here refers to the numerous promises of
the Qur’an about the victory of the believers.

Among those victories is what is mentioned in this very Surah, verse 47
where it says:

***“…and helping the believers is ever incumbent on Us.”***

Surah Qafir, No. 40, verse 51 also says:

***“We will, without doubt, help Our messengers and those who believe,
(both) in this world’s life and on the Day when the witnesses will stand
forth.”***

And Also in Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 56, it says:

***“…Surely the party of Allah are triumphant.”***

The second command is the instruction of having control over the nerves,
and protecting the coolness and calmness in this hard and continued
struggle.

Then the holy verse continues saying:

***“…and let not those who have no certainty hold you in light
estimation.”***

Your duty is that you should have patience, tolerance, further
forbearance, and keeping the coolness which is worthy to be in a leader
to stand against these kind of persons.

The Qur’anic term ***/la yastaxifannaka/*** is derived from /xiffat/ in
the sense of lightness. That is, you must stand so heavy, firm, and
steadfast that they cannot consider you light and cause you to move. You
must stand firm in your way because they have no certainty, while you
are the centre of certainty and Faith.

As it was said before, this Surah started with promise of believers’
triumphant against the enemies and ends with the promise of victory,
too, but its main condition is counted patience and perseverance.

*O’ Allah! Bestow on us such a patience and perseverance that the storms
of difficulties and terrible events would never shake us.*

*O’ Allah! We refuge to Your Pure Essence that we may be among those in
whose hearts do not affect admonitions, advices, and exhortations.*

*O’ Allah! The enemies are organized and united, and they are equipped
with kinds of satanic weapons. We ask You the victory against our
outward enemies and inward Satans. Amin, O The Lord of the Worlds!*

[^1]: Nahjul-Balaqah, saying 250

[^2]: The commentary by Fakhr-i-Razi, following the verse.

[^3]: Surah Al-Mursalat, No. 77, verse 36

[^4]: Surah Saba‘, No. 34, verse 31

[^5]: Ibid, verse 32

[^6]: Surah ’Ibrahim, No. 14, verse 22


