Section 3: He Who Submits Himself to Allah Holds the Never-Breaking Firmest Rope
================================================================================

Surah Luqman – Verse 20
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَوْا أَنَّ اللَّهَ سَخَّرَ لَكُم مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا
فِي الأَرْضِ وَأَسْبَغَ عَلَيْكُمْ نِعَمَهُ ظَاهِرَةً وَبَاطِنَةً
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ مَن يُجَادِلُ فِي اللَّهِ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ وَلاَ هُدًي
وَلاَ كِتَابٍ مُنِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “Have you not seen that Allah has made subservient to you
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth and He has
lavished on you His blessings outward and inward? And among the people
is he who disputes concerning Allah without knowledge and without any
guidance and without any book giving light.”***

The Arabic word ***/’isbaq/*** means: ‘To (cause to) spread’ and ‘to
develop’.

In this holy verse two sorts of bounties are referred to: the outward
bounties, such as: health, sustenance, beauty and the like; and the
inward bounties, such as: faith, gnosis, certainty, good character,
unseen succour, knowledge, nature, mastership, and so on.

At last, after mentioning ten admonishments about Origin and
Resurrection, the rules of living, and ethical and social programs, for
completing them, The Holy Qur’an goes to the statement of Divine
bounties in order to move the sense of gratitude in people, a
thanksgiving that becomes the source of ‘recognition of Allah’ and
motive of obedience to Allah’s command.

Luqman addresses all humankind and say:

***“Have you not seen that Allah has made subservient to you whatever is
in the heavens and whatever is in the earth…”***

‘***Making subservient whatever is in the heavens and in the earth to
man***’ has a vast concept which encompasses both what he has in his
authority and uses them, with his own will, along-side his interests,
such as many earthly animals, and the things which are not in man’s
authority but Allah has appointed them to serve mankind, like the sun
and the moon.

Therefore, all beings subservient to the command of Allah are alongside
the path of the benefits of men whether they subservient to his command
or not. Thus, the Arabic sign ‘L’ in the Qur’anic word ***/lakum/ (for
you)*** is the ‘L’ with the meaning of benefit.

Then, it adds:

***“…and He has lavished on you His blessings outward and inward?…”***

The commentators have stated a lot of explanations on the meaning of
‘***His blessing outward and inward***’.

Some of them think of ‘outward blessings’ as a thing that is not
deniable for anyone, such as creation, life, and kinds of provisions.
They say that the inward blessings refer to those things that are not
comprehensive without care and study, (such as many spiritual powers and
constructive instincts).

Some others have rendered the ‘outward blessings’ into the outward limbs
and the ‘inward blessings’ into ‘the heart’.

Some other commentators have considered the beauty of the face and
stature and the health of the limbs as the outward blessing, and the
‘gnosis of Allah’ as the inward blessing.

Once Ibn-i-‘Abbas asked the Prophet of Islam (S) in this regard, and he
answered:

*“O’ Ibn-i-‘Abbas! The outward blessing is Islam, and your complete and
ordered creation by Allah, as well as the sustenance He has given you.
And the inward blessing is His concealing the ugliness of your deeds and
that He, the Mighty, does not disgrace you publicly in front of
people.”*

Imam Baqir (as) once in a tradition said:

*“The outward blessing is the Prophet (S), the gnosis of Allah, and
Monotheism that the Prophet (S) has brought; and the inward blessing is
love of us, Ahlul Bayt, and the covenant of friendship with us.”*

But, in fact, there is no contrast between these different commentaries,
and each of them states the clear extensions of the outward and inward
blessings without restricting their vast concepts.

At the end of the verse, the Qur’an speaks about those who are
ingratitude unto the great bounties of Allah (s.w.t.) that have inwardly
and outwardly surrounded them and they dispute against the Truth.

It says:

***“…And among the people is he who disputes concerning Allah without
knowledge and without any guidance and without any book giving
light.”***

Instead of recognizing the giver of those abundant manifest and
concealed bounties, they ignorantly and obstinately turn to polytheism
and denial.

For the explanation of the difference existing between “Knowledge”,
“guidance” and “Illuminating Book” it may be better to say that
“Knowledge” refers to the Divine teachers and leaders and those learned
ones who can help man in this path and guide him to the appointed
destination.

And the purpose of “Illuminating Book” refers to the heavenly Books
that, by the way of revelation, enlighten the man’s soul and heart.

In fact, this obstinate group neither themselves have any knowledge nor
do they seek for a leader or a guide, nor do they get help from the
Divine revelations, and since the way of guidance is only in these three
things therefore, by abandoning them they will get astray and pave the
way of Satan.

Surah Luqman – Verse 21
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ اتَّبِعُوا مَآ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ قَالُوا بَلْ
نَتَّبِعُ مَا وَجَدْنَا عَلَيْهِ ءَابَآءَنَآ أَوَلَوْ كَانَ
الشَّيْطاَنُ يَدْعُوهُمْ إِلَي عَذَابِ السَّعِيرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “And when it is said to them: ‘Follow what Allah has sent down’,
they say: ‘We shall follow that on which we found our fathers.’ What!
(Would they do it) even if Satan were calling them to the chastisement
of the blazing Fire?”***

The application of the Arabic word ***/qila/*** in this verse is a sign
to the intensity of the bigotry of the pagans.

That is, they obstinate and do not accept any true word from any
speaker, whoever he may be.

So, this holy verse points to the weak and baseless logic of this group
when it says:

***“And when it is said to them: ‘Follow what Allah has sent down’, they
say: ‘We shall follow that on which we found our fathers.’…”***

And since following the ignorant deviated ancestors is none of the three
guiding ways mentioned in the above, the Holy Qur’an has introduced it
as a Satanic way, and in this noble verse says:

***“…What! (Would they do it) even if Satan were calling them to the
chastisement of the blazing Fire?”***

In fact, here the Qur’an removes the cover of following the ancestors’
tradition, which has a deluding appearance, and makes manifest the real
feature of their deed that is, in fact, following the Satan which is
alongside the way of blazing Fire of Hell.

Yes, the leadership of Satan alone is enough that one rejects the Holy
Qur’an though it is disguised in the invitation toward the Truth, and
his leadership is certainly a false cover, and an invitation toward the
Fire of Hell and it alone is also enough for opposition and the duty is
clear, although the situation of the inviter is unknown.

Does any wise person leave out the invitation of the Divine prophets
unto Heaven and goes after the invitation of Satan unto Hell?

Surah Luqman – Verse 22
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يُسْلِمْ وَجْهَهُ إِلَي اللَّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ فَقَدِ
اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَي وَإِلَي اللَّهِ عَاقِبَةُ
الأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “And whoever submits himself (truly) to Allah and he be a doer of
good, he indeed has taken hold of the firmest hand-hold (a rope); and
unto Allah is the end of all affairs.”***

Submitting oneself to anything other than Allah is slavery and
captivity, but submitting one’s self to Allah is freedom, growth and
development. That is why the Qur’an in this verse implies that the one
who submits his heart and soul to Allah and obeys His commandments while
he is a good doer, he has grasped a firm hand-hold.

The verse says:

***“And whoever submits himself (truly) to Allah and he be a doer of
good, he indeed has taken hold of the firmest hand-hold (a rope)…”***

The purpose of the Qur’anic phrase ***/yuslim wajhahu ’ilallah/ (submits
himself (truly) to Allah)*** is, in fact, an implicit indication to a
perfect attention wholly to the Pure Essence of Allah, because the word
/wajh/ (face) has ironically been used for His Essence for the sake that
the face is the most honoured part of the body and it is the centre of
the most important senses of a person.

The application of the Qur’anic phrase ***/huwa muhsinun/ (he is a doer
of good)*** is of the kind of mentioning ‘righteous deed’ next to
‘faith’.

The Qur’anic phrase: ‘***Having taken hold of the firmest hand-hold***’
is a tender simile from this fact that for being delivered from the
depth of the valley of materials and elevating to the highest peak of
knowledge, and spirituality man needs a firm and certain true means.

This means is not anything but faith and righteous deed. Except this,
all other things are not reliable and will be the cause of fall and
death.

Moreover, it is only this mean that remains and all other means are
perishing, so, at the end of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“…and unto Allah is the end of all affairs.”***

There is a tradition recorded in Tafsir-i-Burhan, cited by the Sunnites,
saying that it has been narrated from Imam Ali-ibn-Mus-ar-Rida (as) from
the Prophet of Islam (S) who said:

*“'After me there will be a dark sedition. Only those can deliver from
it who take hold of the firmest handhold.”*

*Then it was said what the firmest handhold was, and he said:*

*“It is the mastership of sayyid-ul-Wasiyyin.”*

*They said:*

*“O’ Messenger of Allah! Who is this Sayyid-ul-Wasiyyin?”*

*He answered:*

*“Amir-ul-Mu’minin!”*

*They asked:*

*“O’ Messenger of Allah! Who is Amir-ul-Mu’minin?’*

*He answered:*

*“(He is) the master of the Muslims and their leader after me.”*

*They asked:*

*“O’ Messenger of Allah! Who is the master of the Muslims and their
leader after you?”*

*He answered:*

*“(He is) my brother, Ali-ibn-’Abitalib (as)”*

There have been narrated some other traditions in this field, too,
indicating that the purpose of /‘urwatul-wuθqa/ is the friendship of
Ahlul Bayt (as), or the friendship of the progeny of Muhammad (S), or
the friendship of the Imams out of the descendants of Imam Husayn (as).

We have repeatedly said that these interpretations are the statement of
some clear expansions, and they do not contrast with other expansions,
such as: Monotheism, piety, and the like.

Surah Luqman – Verses 23-24
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن كَفَرَ فَلاَ يَحْزُنكَ كُفْرُهُ إِلَيْنَا مَرْجِعُهُمْ
فَنُنَبّـِئُهُم بِمَا عَمِلُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ
الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُمَتّـِعُهُمْ قَلِيلاً ثُمَّ نَضْطَرُّهُمْ إِلَي عَذَابٍ غَلِيظٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “And whoever disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve you, unto
Us is their return then will We inform them of what they did. Verily
Allah is the knower of what is in the hearts.”***  
***24. “We give them to enjoy a little, then will We drive them to a
severe chastisement.”***

The holy Prophet of Islam (S) was sympathetic for all humankind and he
even did toil for the deviation and disbelief of the opponents, too.

So, Allah says:

***“And whoever disbelieves, let not his disbelief grieve you…”***

For, you have performed your duty very well, and it is the disbeliever
who has been unjust to himself.

These kinds of meanings, which have been frequently mentioned in the
Qur’an, show that the holy Prophet of Islam (S) severely toiled when he
observed that an ignorant and obstinate group of people left the way of
Allah and went astray after having a lot of clear evidences and manifest
signs; he became so sad and grieved that Allah consoled him many times.
And such kind is the way and manner of a sympathetic leader.

And also he should not be worried that a group of people enjoy the
comforts of life in this world and are not involved in punishment though
they disbelieve and are unjust and cruel, because it is not so late and
they all will return to Allah and He will inform them of both their
deeds and the bitter and evil fruits of their deeds.

The verse says:

***“…unto Us is their return then will We inform them of what they
did…”***

Allah, the knowing, is aware of not only their deeds but also of the
secrets and hidden intentions in their hearts.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Verily Allah is the knower of what is in the hearts.”***

This meaning that on the Day of Hereafter Allah will inform people of
their deeds or that He will inform them of what they differed in, has
been revealed through a great deal of verses of the Holy Qur’an.

The Qur’anic term ***/nunabbi’ukum/*** is derived from /naba’/ which,
according to what Raqib has cited in Mufradat, is used for a news that
has an important content and benefit, and it is also explicit, manifest,
and free from any falsehood.

This makes it clear that these meanings, point to the fact that on the
Hereafter Day Allah will divulge the people’s deeds in a manner that
there will remain no place of objection and denial for anyone.

He will make appear entirely whatever people do in this world and they
often forget them in this world, and He will make them ready for
reckoning and recompense. Even that which passes in the mind of a person
and none is aware of, will completely be reported to their owners.

Then in the next verse, He implies that their enjoyment of the life of
this world should not make the Prophet (S) surprise, because He gives
them a little share of the provision of the world, and whatever this
provision may be, it is scanty, and finally they will compulsorily be
driven into a just severe punishment, a punishment which is constant and
painful.

The verse says:

***“We give them to enjoy a little, then will We drive them to a severe
chastisement.”***

This meaning may point to the fact that they should not think that they
are out of the grasp of Allah’s power. He Himself desires to let them be
free to be tried, the argument be completed to them, and other aims; and
this little provision given to them is from His side, too.

And how different is the circumstance of this group who are compulsorily
and scornfully driven to the divine severe chastisement from that of
those who submit their whole entity to Allah and have taken hold the
firm rope of Allah. They live in this world piously and righteously, and
then, in Hereafter, they will enjoy the bounties of Allah with His
mercy.

Surah Luqman – Verse 25
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَأَلْتَهُم مَّنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ لَيَقُولُنَّ
اللَّهُ قُلِ الْحَمْدُ للَّهِ بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “And if you ask them: ‘Who created the heavens and the earth?
Certainly they will say: ‘Allah’. Say: ‘(All) praise is Allah’s.’ ‘Nay!
Most of them do not know’,”***

It is not concealed to pagans that Allah is the creator, since the
pagans implicitly confess their deviation.

Therefore, in this verse He says:

***“And if you ask them: ‘Who created the heavens and the earth?
certainly they will say: ‘Allah’…”***

This meaning, which has also been mentioned in other verses of the
Qur’an[^1], from one side, is an evidence that pagans were never the
deniers of the Unity of the Creator and they could not rather accept
divinity for idols; they believed only in polytheism in worship and
intercession.

And from other side, it is a reference to the fact that Monotheism and
the manifestation of this Divine Light in the nature of all humankind is
innate. Then He implies that now that they confess the Unity of the
Creator, they should be told that the entire praise is Allah’s, the One
Who is the Creator of all things, not the idols which themselves are His
creatures.

But most of them do not know and do not understand that worship must be
particular to the Creator of the world.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Say: ‘(All) praise is Allah’s.’ ‘Nay! Most of them do not
know’,”***

Surah Luqman – Verse 26
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ
الْحَمِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. “What is in the heavens and the earth is Allah’s; verily Allah is
the Self-Sufficient, the Most Praised.”***

Only Allah, the Almighty, is the Creator and the Owner of the creatures,
and also it is only He Who is Self-Sufficient and Most Praised.

In this noble verse the Qur’an refers to the ownership of Allah, because
next to proving His creative power there needs not to bring another
reason for His ownership.

In this verse the Holy Qur’an says:

***“What is in the heavens and the earth is Allah’s…”***

It is evident that the One Who is the Creator and the Owner is the
Divisor of the affairs of the world, too. Thus, by the above mentioned
explanation, three parts of Monotheism are proved: (the Unity of
creatorship, the Unity of ownership, and the Unity of Lordship.

And the One, Who is like that, is self-sufficient of all things and is
worthy of any praise.

That is why, at the end of the holy verse it says:

***“…verily Allah is the Self-Sufficient, the Most Praised.”***

Allah is All-Sufficient and is the Most Praised from any point of view,
since every merit which is found in the world belongs to Allah, the
Self-Sufficient, and whatever a person has is completely obtained from
Him, and the sources of every goodness are in His authority, and this is
a real evidence to His self-sufficiency.

In view of the fact that /hamd/ means praise for a good deed which a
person does voluntarily, and whatever good thing we see in the world is
from His side, then all praises belong to Him.

Even when we praise the beauty of a flower, and we explain the
attraction of the heavenly loves, or we honour the greatness of the
action of a self-sacrificing altruist, again we, in fact, praise Him,
because this beauty and that attraction and realness also belong to Him,
therefore, He is All-Praised.

Surah Luqman – Verse 27
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّمَا فِي الأَرْضِ مِن شَجَرَةٍ أَقْلاَمٌ وَالْبَحْرُ
يَمُدُّهُ مِن بَعْدِهِ سَبْعَةُ أَبْحُرٍ مَّا نَفِدَتْ كَلِمَاتُ
اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَزِيرٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “And if all the trees on the earth were pens and the sea added to
seven seas (were ink in the writing), (yet) would not the Words of Allah
be exhausted; Verily Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.”***

The purpose of the Arabic phrase ***/sab‘atu ’abhur/ (seven seas)*** may
be for multiplicity and the number is not properly meant. That is, if
the water of all seas becomes ink, they can not write down the entire
words (knowledge) of Allah, the Mighty, the Wise, by it.

There is an illustration from the endless knowledge of Allah (s.w.t.) in
this holy verse which has been depicted by mentioning a very expressive
and comprehensive similitude.

It says:

***“And if all the trees on the earth were pens and the sea added to
seven seas (were ink in the writing), (yet) would not the Words of Allah
be exhausted; Verily Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.”***

The Arabic word ***/yamudduhu/*** is derived from /midad/ in the sense
of ‘ink’ or a coloured substance by which something is written, and it
is originally derived from /madd/ in the sense of ‘drawing’, because the
writings are produced by drawing of a pen on the sheet of paper.

Some commentators have also cited another meaning for this term. It is
the oil which is poured in a torch and is the cause of its light. Both
of these meanings mentioned here, in fact, return to one root.

The Arabic term ***/kalimat/*** is the plural form of /kalimah/ which
originally means the words by means of which a person speaks.

Then it has been used with a wider scope of meaning which envelops
anything that can convey a matter; and since each of the different
creatures of this world is an indication to Allah’s pure Essence, as
well as His knowledge and Power, every being can be called
/kalimat-ullah/ (the word of Allah).

This term has been used particularly in respect to the nobler and more
magnificent beings, as about Jesus (as) where the Holy Qur’an says:

***“…the Messiah, Jesus son of Mary, was only a Messenger of Allah, and
His word…”***[^2]

Then, in this relation, the Qur’anic phrase ***/kalimat-ullah/*** has
been used in the sense of Allah’s knowledge.

Now we must think properly that for writing the whole knowledge of a
person usually a pen and some amount of ink is sufficient; and it is
even possible that with this very single pen some other people write
down their entire knowledge on the sheet of paper, but the Qur’an in
this holy verse says:

***“…if all the trees on the earth were pens…”***

and we know that there can be produced thousands or millions of pens
from the trunk and branches of a single tall tree.

Also, we know about three fourth of the surface of the earth that it is
covered by water with a very considerable depth. Now, how wonderful will
it be if all the oceans on the earth become ink for writing and how much
knowledge and sciences can be written down by them?

Specially by adding seven other seas to them that each of them is equal
to all the oceans of the earth, and particularly that the figure ‘seven’
here does not mean number but it is for multiplicity and denotes to
numerous seas, it makes it clear that how vast is the knowledge of
Allah, the Almighty, the Wise.

Moreover, all of them will be ended but the words of Allah will not be
exhausted.

Is there any illustration more interesting and more beautiful than this
to show such infiniteness? This figure is so expressive and
comprehensive that might take with itself the waves of man’s thought
into the unlimited horizons and causes him to be in full wonder.

Regarding this clear and expressive statement, a man feels that his
knowledge comparing the knowledge of Allah is as a zero in front of
infiniteness, and it is worthy for him to only say that his knowledge
has reached a point that he has realized his ignorance.

One of tender points that are found in this verse is that the word
/šajarah/ (tree) is said in singular form and the term /’aqlam/ (pens)
is said in plural form in order to indicate a large number of pens
provided from a single tree with its trunks and branches.

And also the application of the word /al-bahr/ (sea) in the singular
form and the Arabic signs ‘***Alif***’ and ‘***Lam***’ at its beginning
are for the sake that it encompasses all the oceans on the earth, in
particular that all the oceans of the world are connected to each other
and, indeed they can be considered as a whole vast ocean.

And it is interesting that concerning the pens it does not speak about
some additional pens, while when it speaks about the oceans it say about
other seven seas, because there will be used a few pens for writing and
that which is used very much is ink.

The figure ‘seven’ in the Arabic language is sometimes used for
multiplicity and perhaps it is for this view point that former nations
counted seven the spheres of the solar system (and in fact whatever is
seen today by natural eyes in solar system is not more than seven
spheres).

And regarding that a week is not formed by more than seven days, and the
whole globe was traditionally divided into seven sections and was called
by seven provinces, makes it clear that why the figure ‘seven’ has been
used as a complete figure and for multiplicity.

Surah Luqman – Verse 28
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا خَلْقُكُمْ وَلاَ بَعْثُكُمْ إِلاَّ كَنَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ إِنَّ
اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. “Your creation and your raising (after your death) are only as
(the creation and the raising of) a single soul; verily Allah is
Hearing, Seeing.”***

The origin of scepticism in the principle of Resurrection is sometimes
the length of time that how do the dead bodies return to life again
after a long time? Sometimes its origin is the dead themselves that how
can the rotten bones, which have been mixed and scattered, be separated
from each other?

And sometimes its cause is being informed of the deeds, behaviour, and
that how will those of all human beings be reckoned after the recreation
of the dead? In this verse, Allah answers to all of these paradoxes by a
single sentence.

The Qur’an implies that raising you all after your death is as easy for
Him as the creation of one of you, and the length of time has no role in
it. He hears and sees your murmurs and knows all your deeds, and He will
reckon all of them.

Therefore, quantity, population, time and place, and even ‘hidden and
manifest’ have no effect in Allah’s knowledge and power.

The verse says:

***“Your creation and your raising (after your death) are only as (the
creation and the raising of) a single soul; verily Allah is Hearing,
Seeing.”***

Surah Luqman – Verse 29
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُولِجُ الَّيْلَ فِي النَّهَارِ وَيُولِجُ
النَّهَارَ فِي الَّيْلِ وَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي
إِلَي أَجَلٍ مُسَمًّي وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “Have you not seen that Allah merges the night into the day and
merges the day into the night, and He has made the sun and the moon
subservient, each passing till an appointed time and that Allah is aware
of what you do?”***

The decrease and increase of the length of day and night, that occur
gradually, have an important function in the life of the living
creatures that need some more darkness or light for their lives.

This holy verse speaks about shortening and prolonging night and day as
well as the sun and the moon being made subservient by Allah. Then it
refers to the movement of each of them for an appointed time; and
finally it implies that Allah is aware of what all human beings do.

It says:

***“Have you not seen that Allah merges the night into the day and
merges the day into the night, and He has made the sun and the moon
subservient, each passing till an appointed time and that Allah is aware
of what you do?”***

That is, the aim of all existence and different changes in the system of
creation is man’s deed; then we must do something which contains the
pleasure of Allah. Most of the verses of the Qur’an do not address only
the Prophet (S), but they are sent for all people.

For example, the Qur’an says:

***“…and (to show) kindness to parents; if one of them or both of them
reach old age with you, do not say to them ‘fie’, nor repulse them, and
speak to them a gracious word.”***

And we know that the Prophet (S) lost his parents when he was a child
and they were not alive to reach old age with him.

In this verse, too, though the Prophet of Islam (S) is addressed with
the Qur’anic phrase: ***/’alam tara/ (have you not seen)***, at the end
of the verse it says:

***“…and that Allah is aware of what you do?”***

this shows that the content of the verse envelops all people in general.

Surah Luqman – Verse 30
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِاَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْحَقُّ وَأَنَّ مَا يَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِهِ
الْبَاطِلُ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْكَبِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “This is because Allah is the Truth and because whatever they
call upon besides Him is falsehood, and because Allah, He is the High,
the Great.”***

Only Allah and whatever is from His side or depends to Him is the Truth
and whatever is besides Him or depends on other than Him is falsehood
and is perishable. Therefore, this verse implies that the matters which
were mentioned in the previous verses are some evidence that Allah is
the Truth and whatever they call upon besides Him is falsehood, for
verily Allah is the High, the Great.

The verse says:

***“This is because Allah is the Truth and because whatever they call
upon besides Him is falsehood, and because Allah, He is the High, the
Great.”***

The totality of the discussions mentioned in the previous verses about
creative power, ownership, and the infinite knowledge and power of Allah
prove these things, and that the Truth is only He and other than Him is
transitory, falsehood, limited and dependant, and the attributes of
/‘aliyy/ (the High) and /kabir/ (the Great), which are above everything
and are beyond explanation, belong to His Pure Essence.

An Arabic poet says:

*“Beware that everything that is besides Allah, the High, is falsehood,
and every material bounty will finally perish.”*

The content of the verse can philosophically be stated as follows: the
Truth refers to a real and lasting being, and that real being that is
self-existent, permanent, stable, and eternal is only Allah (s.w.t.),
and the rest, whatever they may be, have not any existence in their
essence and are falsehood, because they have got their existence by the
way of depending on that eternal Truth, and as soon as He takes His
grace from them they will be wiped out in the darkness of annihilation
and non-existence.

Thus, the more relation of other beings to his Essence is,
proportionally the more legitimacy they will earn.

However, as it was said before, these verses contain ten attributes out
of the prominent attributes of Allah, the Pure, and ten Names out of the
Most Beautiful Names of Allah. They contain some strong and undeniable
reasons upon the negation of any polytheism and upon the necessity of
Unity in all stages of worship.

[^1]: like Surah Al-‘Ankabut, No. 29, verses 61-63, Surah Az-Zumar, No.
39, verse 38, and Surah Az-Zukhruf, No. 43, verse 9

[^2]: Similar to this very meaning is also mentioned in Surah
’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 45


