Section 2: The Treachery of the Hypocrites Exposed
==================================================

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 9
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ
اِذْ جَآءَتْكُمْ جُنُودٌ فَاَرْسَلْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ رِيحاً وَجُنُوداً
لَّمْ تَرَوْهَا وَكَانَ اللَّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. “O you who believe! Remember Allah’s blessing upon you when hosts
came against you, so We sent upon them a strong wind and hosts, that you
saw not, and Allah sees what you do.”***

This verse, as well as the verses next to it, relate to the Battle of
’Ahzab which occurred in the fifth year of Hejira. In this war the Jews,
pagans, and the hypocrites had decided to occupy Medina by a sudden
attack. Salman Farsi suggested and the Prophet (S) agreed that the
Muslims would dig a ditch around Medina and defend against the enemy.

In this action, digging the ditch, the Prophet (S) himself began digging
the ground, and every time that a lightning was seen as the result of
picking on a piece of stone, the Prophet (S) gave the glad tidings of
the victory of Islam over an area of the world. In this Battle, Allah
helped the Muslims by means of blowing winds and the descent of some
angels.

However, this holy verse speaks about one of the greatest Divine trials
concerning the believers and the hypocrites, and the trial of the
truthfulness of their speech in action, which was pointed out in the
previous verses.

This verse and the verses next to it discuss about one of the most
important events of the history of Islam, i.e., the Battle of ’Ahzab. It
was a war that, in fact, was counted a turning point in the history of
Islam and changed the balance of forces between Islam and infidelity in
the benefit of the Muslims, and the victory of which was as a key for
the later great victories.

In fact, the enemies of Islam were hopeless in this Battle, and after
that they could not perform any magnificent work.

The Battle of ’Ahzab, as it is clear from its name, was a conclusive war
from the side of all enemies of Islam with different groups whose
unlawful benefits would be in danger by the development of this
religion.

The first spark of fight was lit from the side of a group of the Jews by
the name of ‘Bani Nadir’ who came to Mecca and encouraged Quraysh to
fight against the Prophet (S). They promised the Quraysh to be with them
and fight until the end. Then they went to the tribe of Qatfan and made
them agree to the war.

These tribes invited their own confederate, such as the tribes ‘Bani
’Asad’ and ‘Bani Salim’, too; and since all of them had felt the danger
they united with each other to put an end to Islam for ever. They wanted
to kill the Prophet (S), to annihilate the Muslims, to occupy Medina, to
spoil it, and quench the torch of Islam.

When the Muslims saw themselves before this great group of enemy, under
the command of the Prophet (S) they began to consult, and, before
anything else, by the suggestion of Salman Farsi, dug a ditch around
Medina so that the enemy could not easily pass it and attack the city.
(That is why one of the names of this Battle is ‘The Battle of Ditch.)

Muslims tolerated some hard and dangerous moments. At that time the
lives had become close to the lips. The hypocrites were hastily running
here and there among the Muslims. The mass of the forces of the enemy
and the small number of the soldiers of Islam in front of them, and
their preparation from the point of war equipments and providing the
accessory means, illustrated a hard and painful future before the eyes
of the Muslims.

But Allah wished that the last stroke would come down on the body of the
infidelity; and the row of the hypocrites would be recognized from the
rows of Muslims; He wanted to divulge the conspirators, and put the true
Muslims under a severe examination.

As it will be explained later, this Battle, at last, ended with the
triumphant of the Muslims. A strong storm came under the command of
Allah. It destroyed all the camps and means of the disbelievers. It
caused a horrible fear to appear in their hearts. Allah sent some unseen
forces of the angels to help the Muslims.

The manifestation of some surprising powers, such as that of
Amir-ul-Mu’minin’s against ‘Amr-ubn-i-‘Abdiwudd, were also added to them
and the pagans, without being able to do anything, ran away.

This was a brief scenery of the Battle of ’Ahzab which happened in 5
A.H.[^1]

From here on, we pay to the commentary of the verse and let the details
of this Battle be discussed later under the title of ‘points’.

The Holy Qur’an, at first, summarizes this event in one verse, and then
through sixteen other verses it explains its specialties.

It says:

***“O you who believe! Remember Allah’s blessing upon you when hosts
came against you…”***

Then, it continues saying:

***“…so We sent upon them a strong wind and hosts, that you saw not, and
Allah sees what you do.”***

### Points Worthy to Be Noted

1- The application of the Qur’anic phrase: ***/’uŏkuru/ (remember)***
shows that these holy verses were revealed after the end of the Battle
when some length of time had passed during which the Muslims could
contemplate over what they had seen in that Battle and analysed them so
that it had a deep effect in them.

2- The application of the word /junud/ points to different clans of the
Age of Ignorance[^2] and the Jews of Medina inside the city.

3- The purpose of “***hosts that you saw not.***”, who came to help the
Muslims, is the same angels whose help to the believers in the Battle of
Badr has also explicitly been mentioned in the Qur’an, but, as it was
said in the commentary of verse No. 9 from Surah Al-’Anfal, there is not
any evidence that these angels, these unseen Divine forces, had formally
participated in the Battle and started fighting. But there are some
hints which show that they came down for strengthening the spirit of the
believers and to encourage them.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verses 10-11
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِذْ جَآءُوكُمْ مِنْ فَوْقِكُمْ وَمِنْ أَسْفَلَ مِنكُمْ وَاِذْ زَاغَتِ
الأَبْصَارُ وَبَلَغَتِ الْقُلُوبُ الْحَنَاجِرَ وَتَظُنُّونَ بِاللَّهِ
الظُّنُونَاْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَالِكَ ابْتُلِيَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَزُلْزِلُوا زِلْزَالاً شَدِيداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. “When they came against you from above you and from below you,
and when the eyes swerved and the hearts reached to the throats, and you
did imagine about Allah diverse thoughts,”***  
***11. “There it was that the believers were tried, and they were shaken
a tremendous shaking.”***

You can taste the sweetness of the graces of Allah when you depict the
bitter scenes before you.

The spiritual moods affect on the body. (Fear causes the ordinary
function of the eyes and the heart to be disturbed. For example, the eye
becomes terrified and the pulse of the heart becomes fast.)

This holy verse illustrates the dangerous situation of the Battle of
’Ahzab, the great power of the enemy’s army, and the intensive anxiety
of a lot of Muslims.

It implicitly says that you may remember when the enemies entered your
city from above you and from below you and surrounded Medina and when
the eyes swerved because of fear and the hearts reached to the throats
and you imagined badly about Allah with diverse thoughts.

The verse says:

***“When they came against you from above you and from below you, and
when the eyes swerved and the hearts reached to the throats, and you did
imagine about Allah diverse thoughts,”***

Many of the commentators believe that the Arabic word ***/fauq/
(above)*** mentioned in this holy verse refers to the east of Medina
wherefrom the tribe of Qatfan entered, and the word /’asfal/ (below)
refers to the west of it wherefrom the tribe of Quraysh and their
assistants came.

Of course, regarding to the fact that Mecca is located in the south of
Medina, the pagans of Mecca must have come from the south, but perhaps
the condition of the road and that of the arrival the gate of Medina
were in a state that they had to turn round a part of the city and
arrive from the west.

However, the above sentence points to the siege of this city from the
side of different enemies of Islam.

The Qur’anic phrase: ***/zaqat-il-’absar/ (the eyes swerved)*** refers
to the state that a person feels at the time of intensive horror when
his eyes turn aside and gaze on a proper fix point.

The Qur’anic sentence ***/balaqat-il-qulub-ul-hanajir/ (the hearts
reached to the throats)*** is an interesting allusion, like that which
is said in Persian language: ‘his soul reached his lips’, else the
heart, the special organ, the distributor of blood, never moves from its
place and it never reaches to the throat.

The Qur’anic sentence which says:

***“…and you did imagine about Allah diverse thoughts”***

points to this fact that in that state there had been appeared some
wrong thoughts among a group of the Muslims, because from the point of
Faith, they had not reached to a perfect stage.

Such were the same ones about whom the next verse says:

***“…they were shaken a tremendous shaking.”***

Perhaps some of them thought they would finally be defeated and the
enemy’s army, with that power and might, could be victorious. They
imagined that the last days of the life of Islam had approached and the
Prophet’s promises about the triumphant of Islam would never happen.

These thoughts, of course, had appeared in the minds of some of the
Muslims in the form of a temptation.

This is similar to that which the Qur’an mentions concerning the Battle
of ’Uhud, saying:

***“…while another group have cared only for their own selves, thinking
about Allah unjustly, the thought of ignorance…”***[^3]

It was here that the furnace of the Divine examination became hot, as
the next verse says:

***“There it was that the believers were tried, and they were shaken a
tremendous shaking.”***

It is natural that when a person falls into the tempest of thoughts, his
body is not aloof of that tempest either, and it involves in an anxiety
and agitation. Many times we have seen the persons who have mental
agitation and, while they are sitting in their seat, they ceaselessly
move, rub their hands to each other, and completely show their own
anxiety in their manner.

One of the evidences of this horrible terror was that, as it is said,
five famous heroes of Arabs, the greatest of whom was
‘Amr-ubn-i-‘Abdiwudd, had worn the clothes of war and came into the
battle-field with a special pride, and challenged for champion.
‘Amr-ubn-i-‘Abdiwudd, in particular, was boasting and ridiculed both
Hereafter, and Paradise. He said:

*“Do you not say that your slain members will be admitted in Paradise?
Is there none of you who desires to see Paradise?”*

But all of the members of the army of Islam were silent before his
shouts, and none dared to face with him, save Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) who
fought against him and caused a great victory for the Muslims.

As it is evident from its name, the Battle of ’Ahzab was a battle in
which all the clans and different groups of the enemies of Islam had
united in order to destroy the ‘young Islam’.

The Battle of ’Ahzab was the last effort, the last trial of the
infidels, and the last exhibition of the power of polytheists. It was
for this reason that when the greatest champion of the enemy, i.e.,
‘Amr-ubn-i-‘Abdiwudd stood before the brave officer of Islam,
Amir-ul-Mu’minin Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as), the Prophet (S) said:

*“The whole of Faith stood against the whole of polytheism.”*[^4]

For, in that event, the triumphant of one of these two groups over the
other was the triumphant of infidelity over Faith or Faith over
infidelity. In other words, it was a Battle which could define the
future of Islam and polytheism.

That was why, after the defeat of the enemies in this great Battle, they
could not stand firm any more, and from then on always the control of
action was in Muslims’ hand.

The star of the luck of the enemy began to decline and the basis of
their power was ruined.

Of course, at first Amir-ul-Muminin Ali (as) invited him to Islam, but
he did not accept. Then he (as) invited him to leave the battlefield, he
refused it, too, and he counted it shame for himself. The third
suggestion was that he would come down from the horse and have a battle
on foot.

‘Amr became angry and said:

*“I did not believe that a person from among Arab gives me such a
suggestion.”*

He came down from his horse and attacked against Ali (as) with his
sword.

Here, Ali (as) used a special style of fight, and quickly, and with a
particular way, he struck with sword on the enemy’s leg and pushed it
into his leg. It was at this time that the powerful body of ‘Amr fell on
the ground.

A thick dust filled the space of the battle-field. A group of hypocrites
thought that Ali (as) was killed by ‘Amr, but when they heard the sound
of Takbir, ‘proclaim His greatness’, Ali’s victory was confirmed.

Suddenly they saw Ali (as) was coming toward the camp while he had a
smile of victory on his lips and ‘Amr’s body, without head, was on the
ground in corner of the battlefield.

The slain of the famous champion of Arab was not tolerable for the army
of the clans and it ruined their hopes and desires. It was a stroke
which weakened their spirit very much and disappointed them from
victory.

So, the Prophet (S) told Ali (as) about them:

*“If they compare your action today with the deeds of all the followers
of Muhammad, your action will be preferred to their deeds, because by
the slain of ‘Amr there will remain no house of the polytheists but
there entered a disgrace in it; and there remains no house of the
believers but entered an honour in it.”*[^5]

The famous learned man of the Sunnite, Hakim-i-Neyshaburi has narrated
the same meaning about it from the Prophet (S) with a different
statement.

Here is the Prophet’s statement:

*“The struggle of Ali-ibn-Abitalib against ‘Amr-ubn-i-‘Abdiwudd on the
Day of Ditch is better than the deeds of my Ummah until the Hereafter
Day.”*[^6]

In another tradition we recite that, after the end of the Battle of
’Ahzab, the Prophet (S) said:

*“Now we fight against them and they are not able to fight against
us.”*[^7]

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 12
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإذْ يَقُولُ الْمُنَافِقُونَ وَالَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَّرَضٌ مَّا
وَعَدَنَا اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ إِلاَّ غُرُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. “And when the hypocrites, and those in whose heart was a disease,
were saying: ‘Allah and His Messenger promised us naught but a
delusion’.”***

To make the strivers of Islam disappointed and weakening their spiritual
conditions is a sign of deviation and hypocrisy. Among the companions of
the Prophet (S) there were some sceptics and some were hypocrites.

It was formerly said that the furnace of the examination in the Battle
of ’Ahzab became hot, and everybody was engaged in that great
examination. It is almost clear that, in such hard circumstances, the
people who in the ordinary conditions are apparently in one row will be
divided into different rows.

Here, too, the Muslims were divided into various rows: a group of them
were true believers, a part of them were the elect of the believers,
another part contained of some persons of a weak faith, some hypocrites,
some obstinate and intensive hypocrites; some of them were in thought of
their own home and life and wanted to run away; some of them tried to
hinder others from going to Holy war; and a group of them worked to
fasten their unity with the hypocrites. In short, everybody made
manifest his inner secrets in this wonderful resurrection and on this
“Manifestation Day.”

Former verses were upon the state of the Muslims who were of a weak
faith and the bad temptations and imaginations they had; and in this
verse the position of the hypocrites, and those in whose heart was a
disease, has been referred to.

It says:

***“And when the hypocrites, and those in whose heart was a disease,
were saying: ‘Allah and His Messenger promised us naught but a
delusion’.”***

It is recorded in the history of the Battle of ’Ahzab that during the
time when the Muslims, one by one, were digging a ditch, one day they
reached a big and hard piece of stone on which no pick affected.

The Prophet (S) was informed of this matter and he himself entered the
ditch and stood by that piece of stone. When he hit the first stroke on
it, a part of the stone was separated and a lightning came out from it.

The Prophet (S) victoriously said: “*Allahu Akbar*”, and the attending
Muslims, too, proclaimed His greatness.

For the second time, the Prophet (S) blew a strong stroke over the stone
when another part of the stone separated and a lightning came out from
it. So the Prophet (S) said: “Allahu Akbar” and the Muslims did, too.

Finally, the Prophet (S) blew the third stroke on the stone and a
lightning came out and the rest of the stone split asunder. Again, the
Prophet (S) said: “*Allahu Akbar*” and the Muslims, too, shouted:
“*Allahu Akbar*”.

Salman asked the Prophet (S) about it and he answered:

*“In the midst of the first lightning I saw the land of “Hirah” and the
castles of the kings of Iran, and Gabriel gave me the glad tidings that
my Ummah will be victorious over them.*

*In the second lightning the reddish castles of Syria and Room
manifested, and Gabriel gave me the glad tidings that my Ummah will
defeat them.*

*In the third lightning I saw the castles of San‘a and Yemen, and
Gabriel informed me that my Ummah will defeat them again. Glad tidings
be on you, O Muslims!”*

The hypocrites looked at each other and silently said:

*“What wonderful words! What false and baseless statements! He is
watching the land of Hirah and the buildings of Kasra from Medina, and
informs you of its occupation! While just now you are in the grips of a
group of Arabs (and you are in the state of defence) and you can not
even go to Baytul-Hathar (around Medina)!”*

The above verse was revealed and announced that those diseased
hypocrites say:

*“Allah and His Messenger promised us naught but a delusion.”*

They are unaware of the infinite power of Allah.[^8]

Verily, on that day, such information and glad tidings, save in the view
of the aware believers, were not anything but a delusion and pride.

But the heavenly eyes of the Prophet (S) who, in the midst of fiery
lightning produced as the result of the strokes of the picks for digging
the ditch, could see the occupation of the castles of the kings of Iran,
Room, and Yemen, and gave glad tidings to his devoted Ummah by removing
curtains from over those secrets.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 13
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَت طَّآئِفَةٌ مّـِنْهُمْ يَآ أَهْلَ يَثْرِبَ لاَ مُقَامَ
لَكُمْ فَارْجِعُوا وَيَسْتَأْذِنُ فَرِيقٌ مّـِنْهُمُ النَّبِيَّ
يَقُولُونَ اِنَّ بُيُوتَنَا عَوْرَةٌ وَمَاهِيَ بِعَوْرَةٍ إِن
يُرِيدُونَ إِلاَّ فِرَاراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. “And when a party of them said: ‘O’ you the people of Yathrib!
There is no place for you to stand (here) so go back,’ and a group of
them asked permission of the Prophet, saying: ‘Verily our houses are
exposed’; and they were not exposed. They only intended to flee away
(from battle field).”***

The hypocrites usually try to separate the believers from the religious
culture, even in nominating of things and names.

***(They say: “O’ you the people of Yathrib!”)***

We must not be neglectful of the hypocrites’ propagations for
discouraging the strivers.

Divine revelation makes the evil thoughts of hypocrites manifest and
disgraces them publicly.

This verse explains the state of a dangerous group of these very
diseased-hearted hypocrites who were more treacherous and polluted unto
others.

It says:

***“And when a party of them said: ‘O’ you the people of Yathrib! There
is no place for you to stand (here) so go back,’***

Briefly speaking, they mean that you can not do anything against this
mass of enemy so you may go out of the battle and do not send yourself
to death and that your wife and your children to be captives.

Thus, they wanted to separate the group of the Helpers from the army of
Islam. This was from one side. On the other side, a group of the same
hypocrites, who had houses in Medina, asked permission of the Prophet
(S) to return home, and they sought pretexts for it.

Among their pretexts they said that their houses had no wall, while it
was not true. They only desired to leave the scene and run away.

The Arabic word ***/‘aurat/*** is originally derived from /‘ar/ and it
is used for something that its making manifest causes shame. Also, the
word /‘aurah/ is used for the gaps appeared in clothes and the walls of
a house; and for the damageable points of boundaries; and for whatever
man is afraid of.

Here, the purpose is the houses which have not a certain door and wall
and at which the enemy may attack.

By offering these pretexts, the hypocrites intended to leave the battle
field and refuge to their own houses.

An Islamic narration indicates that the members of the tribe of ‘Bani
Harithah’ sent a person to the Prophet (S) and said that their houses
were without any guard, and none of the houses of the Helpers as well as
their own houses had a protector, and there was not any barrier between
them and the tribe of Qatfan who attacked from the east of Medina.

They asked the Prophet (S) to let them return to their own houses and
defend their wives and children.

At this time, Sa‘d-ibn-Ma‘ath, the chief of Ansar (the Helpers) arrived
and heard them. He told the Prophet (S) not to give them leave. He
added:

*“By Allah! Whenever we were confronted a difficulty, they sought the
like of this pretext. They tell a lie.”*

The Prophet (S) ordered them to stay and defend Islam, too.

Before the time the Prophet’s emigration to that city, the ancient name
of Medina, had been Yathrib. After that it was gradually called
‘Madinat-ur-Rassul’ (the city of the Prophet) the shortened form of
which was Madinah.

This city has had various names. Besides these two names (Yathrib and
Madinah), the Late Sayyid Murtada has mentioned eleven names for it,
including: Tayyibah, Tabah, Sakinah, Mahbubah, Marhumah, and Qasimah.
(Some commentators call the name of the land of this city Yathrib.)

Some narrations denote that the Prophet (S) said:

*“Do not call this city as Yathrib”.*

Perhaps, it was for the reason that /yaθrib/ is originally derived from
/θarb/ in the sense of ‘to blame’ and the Prophet (S) did not like that
name for this blessed city. However, it was not without reason that the
hypocrites addressed the people of Medina as ‘The people of Yathrib’.

Perhaps it was for this reason that the Prophet (S) hated this name; or
they wanted to announce the lack of formality of Islam and the title of
‘Madinat-ur-Rassul’ or to attract their attention to the Age of
Ignorance.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 14
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ دُخِلَتْ عَلَيْهِم مِنْ أَقْطَارِهَا ثُمَّ سُئِلُوا الْفِتْنَةَ
لأَتَوْهَا وَمَا تَلَبَّثُوا بِهَآ اِلاَّ يَسِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. “And if an entry had been made upon them from all sides of the
city. Then they had been asked to apostatise, they would certainly have
done it, and they would not have stayed in it but a little while.”***

In order to create sedition, enemy often takes help from the interior
hypocrites.

Hypocrites easily turn away from the truth and go toward the enemy and
cause disturbance.

This verse points to the weakness of the faith of this group implying
that they are so weak in expressing Islam that if enemies come into
Medina from its all sides and martially occupy this city and suggest the
hypocrites to return to the belief of polytheism and infidelity, they
quickly accept it and do not wait much time for choosing this way.

The noble verse says:

***“And if an entry had been made upon them from all sides of the city.
Then they had been asked to apostatise, they would certainly have done
it, and they would not have stayed in it but a little while.”***

It is clear that, such people, who are so weak in their faith neither
are ready to fight against the enemy, nor do they entertain martyrdom in
the way of Allah (s.w.t.), soon will they surrender and change their
way.

Thus, the objective meaning of the Qur’anic word ***/fitnah/*** here is
‘polytheism’ and disbelief.[^9]

But some other commentators offer another probability, saying that the
objective meaning of the word /fitnah/ here is fight against the
Muslims, in a manner that if this group of hypocrites are suggested to,
they will accept this invitation soon and will cooperate with seditious
ones.

But this commentary does not agree with the apparent of the sentence
which says:

***“And if an entry had been made upon them from all sides of the
city…”,***

and perhaps it is for this very reason that the majority of commentators
have chosen the first meaning.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 15
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَانُوا عَاهَدُوا اللَّهَ مِن قَبْلُ لاَ يُوَلُّونَ
الأَدْبَارَ وَكَانَ عَهْدُ اللَّهِ مَسْؤُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. “And indeed they had made a covenant with Allah before that, that
they would not turn their backs (to the enemy) and covenants with Allah
shall be questioned of.”***

To make agreement is not so important, it is loyalty which is important.
We must not take the covenant of Allah (s.w.t.) inconsiderable, because
we will surely be questioned and reprimanded.

This holy verse summons the hypocrites to judgment.

It says:

***“And indeed they had made a covenant with Allah before that, that
they would not turn their backs (to the enemy)…”***

They had formerly made a covenant to fulfil their promise in defending
Monotheism, Islam, and the Prophet (S). Do they not know that the
covenant with Allah, the Aware, will be questioned and they are
responsible before it?

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…and covenants with Allah shall be questioned of.”***

Some commentators have said this covenant is the same promise that the
tribe of ‘Bani Harithah’ had made with Allah and the Prophet (S) on the
Day of the Battle of ’Uhud.

At the time when they decided to return back from the battle field and
were regretful, they made a covenant that they would never approach
those affairs, but the same persons thought to breach their promise in
the Battle of ’Ahzab.[^10]

Some other commentators also believe that it refers to the covenant that
they made with the Prophet (S) in the Battle of Badr, or in ‘Aqabah,
before the Prophet’s migration. ’Alusi has cited this meaning in
Ruh-ul-Bayan. But it seems that the above verse has a vast meaning which
encompasses both these covenants and other covenants and promises.

In principle, everybody who embraces Islam and pays allegiance with the
Prophet (S) has made this covenant with him that he should defend Islam
and the Qur’an so seriously that he gives his life.

The emphasis on covenant here is for this reason that even the Arabs of
the Age of Ignorance used to respect the act of promise and covenant,
then how is it possible that after believing in Islam someone breaches
his covenant?

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 16
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لَّن يَنفَعَكُمُ الْفِرَارُ اِن فَرَرْتُم مِنَ الْمَوْتِ أَوِ
الْقَتْلِ وَإِذاً لاَ تُمَتَّعُونَ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. “Say: ‘Flight will never avail you if you flee from death or
slaying, and in that case you will not be allowed to enjoy yourselves
but a little’.”***

After that Allah divulged the intention of the hypocrites that their
purpose was not the protection of their houses but they wanted to escape
from the battle field, He answers them through two proofs: at first, He
commands to His Messenger as follows:

***“Say: ‘Flight will never avail you if you flee from death or slaying,
and in that case you will not be allowed to enjoy yourselves but a
little’.”***

Supposing you succeed to escape, your position will be one of these two
ones: either your life’s final term has ended and your certain death has
come, then wherever you are, death will seize you, even when you are at
home beside your wife and your children, an incident from inside or
outside puts an end to your life.

And if your life’s final term has not ended you will live in this world
for a few days disgracefully and humiliatorily and you will be as a
captive in the hand of enemies and then the divine punishment will seize
you.

In fact, this statement is like what was revealed in the Battle of ’Uhud
concerning another group of the slothful hypocrites, where the Qur’an
says:

***“…say: ‘Even if you were in your own homes, those for whom slaughter
was ordained would certainly have gone forth to their
deathbeds…”***[^11]***,***

and they would be killed.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 17
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَن ذَا الَّذِي يَعْصِمُكُم مِنَ اللَّهِ إِنْ أَرَادَ بِكُمْ
سُوءاً أَوْ أَرَادَ بِكُمْ رَحْمَةً وَلاَ يَجِدُونَ لَهُم مِن دُونِ
اللَّهِ وَلِيّاً وَلاَ نَصِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “Say: ‘Who is he that shall defend you from Allah, if He desires
punishment for you, or desires mercy for you?’ And they shall find for
themselves, apart from Allah, neither protector nor helper.”***

Mercy and punishment, or bitterness and sweetness will come to a man by
the will of Allah (s.w.t.).

The will of Allah concerning the appearance of man’s afflictions and
hardships is in this sense that, by his own authority and committing
some evil deeds (like escaping from war) man draws himself toward the
fire of the punishment of Allah and, since all things are done by
Allah’s will, these afflictions and hardships are attributed to Allah.

So, this holy verse, addressing the Prophet (S), announces:

***“Say: ‘Who is he that shall defend you from Allah, if He desires
punishment for you, or desires mercy for you?’…”***

***“…And they shall find for themselves, apart from Allah, neither
protector nor helper.”***

Therefore, now that all your pre-destined affairs are with Him, do obey
His command in the field of Holy war eagerly because it is the cause of
your honour both in the world and before Him. So, if in this way
martyrdom meets you, embrace it happily.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 18
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ يَعْلَمُ اللَّهُ الْمُعَوِّقِينَ مِنكُمْ وَالْقَآئِلِينَ
لاِخْوَانِهِمْ هَلُمَّ اِلَيْنَا وَلاَ يَأْتُونَ الْبَأْسَ إِلاَّ
قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. “Indeed Allah knows those who hinder others among you and those
who say unto their brethren: ‘Come to Us’ and they come not to the fight
but a little,”***

Allah is aware of all the evil propagations of the enemies of the truth.

This holy verse points to the state of another group of hypocrites who
withdrew from the battle field of the Battle of ’Ahzab and invited
others to abdicate it, too.

It says:

***“Indeed Allah knows those who hinder others among you and those who
say unto their brethren: ‘Come to Us’…”***

They told them to leave that dangerous battle and there came not to the
battle save a few of them who came rather unwillingly or hypocritically.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and they come not to the fight but a little,”***

The Arabic term ***/mu‘awwiqin/*** is derived from /‘auq/ which means:
‘To hinder, to dissuade from something’.

The Qur’anic term ***/ba’s/*** originally means ‘intensity’ and the
objective meaning of it here is ‘fight’.

The above verse may point to two groups. A group of hypocrites who were
among the Muslims, (that the word /minkum/ (among you) is its evidence),
and they tried to dissuade the weak-faith Muslims from the fight. These
were the same as /mu‘awwiqin/.

The second group were those who were outside of the scene from among the
hypocrites or the Jews. When these people met the soldiers of the
Prophet of Islam (S) told them to go to them and draw out themselves
from that battle. (These are the ones whom are referred to in the second
sentence.)

However, an Islamic narration indicates that it happened that one of the
companions of the Prophet (S), who had come inside the city for a
particular thing, and met his brother who had got bread and wine in his
front. He told him that how he was passing the time luxuriously in the
city while the holy Prophet of Allah (S) was busy fighting in the midst
of swords and javelins.

In answer to him, his brother said:

*“O silly man! You may come to sit with us and be happy. By the One to
Whom Muhammad makes an oath, he will never come back from this battle
field, and this huge army who are gathered there will not let him and
his companions continue their lives.”*

His brother said:

*“You are telling a lie. By Allah! I will go and inform the Prophet (S)
of what you said.”*

Then he came to the Prophet (S) and explained for him what happened. It
was then that the above verse was revealed.

Thus, the occasion of the revelation of the Qur’anic term
***/’ixwanihim/ (their brethren)*** may be meant in the sense of ‘true
brothers’ or in the sense of ‘with the same manner’, as the Qur’an says:

***“Verily, the squanderers are the brethrens (accomplices) of the
Satans…”***[^12]

At the end, the Qur’an has pointed to the kinds of brethren:

A) Natural brotherhood which comes into being by the way of parents.

B) Religious brethren which is obtained by means of having the same
religion.

C) Political and party brethren, which has been referred to in this
verse.

D) The behavioural brotherhood which is provided by obedience and
following someone; as the Qur’an introduces ***/mubaŏŏirin/
(squanderers)*** they are as brethren of Satan.[^13]

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 19
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَشِحَّةً عَلَيْكُمْ فَإِذَا جَآءَ الْخَوْفُ رَأَيْتَهُمْ يَنظُرُونَ
اِلَيْكَ تَدُورُ أَعْيُنُهُمْ كَالَّذِي يُغْشَي عَلَيْهِ مِنَ
الْمَوْتِ فَإِذَا ذَهَبَ الْخَوْفُ سَلَقُوكُم بِأَلْسِنَةٍ حِدَادٍ
أَشِحَّةً عَلَي الْخَيْرِ اُوْلَئِكَ لَمْ يُؤْمِنُوا فَاَحْبَطَ
اللَّهُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ وَكَانَ ذَلِكَ عَلَي اللَّهِ يَسِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. “Being niggardly with respect to you; but when fear comes you
will see them looking to you, their eyes rolling like one who swoons of
death; but when the fear departs, they smite you with*** ***sharp
tongues, being niggardly of the good things. Those have never believed
and so Allah has made their deeds in vain, and that is easy for
Allah.”***

The hypocrites are never benevolent for you. At the time of danger they
are niggardly for helping and attending in the battlefield.

This verse implies that the motive of all these hindrances is that they
are niggardly in all things unto you.

The holy verse says:

***“Being niggardly with respect to you…”***

The Arabic word ***/’ašihhah/*** is the plural form of /šahih/ which is
derived from /ših/ in the sense of a stinginess which is accompanied
with avarice.

They are misers not only in giving their souls in the battle field, but
also in giving financial helps for providing the tools and means of war;
in bodily helps for digging a ditch, and even for giving mental helps.
It is miserliness together with avarice and an avarice which increases
every day.

After stating their stinginess and saying that they refused to give any
donation, the Qur’an refers to stating some other qualities of theirs,
which have almost a common and general aspect in all hypocrites during
all ages and centuries.

It says:

***“…but when fear comes you will see them looking to you, their eyes
rolling like one who swoons of death…”***

Since they do not possess a correct faith and do not have a strong
support in life, when they confront a hard event they totally lose their
control, as if their souls are being taken.

Then, when the storm of afflictions subsides, they will come over to you
so expectant that as if they are the main conquerors of the battle and
shout like creditors and demand their share of the spoils with rough
words.

The verse adds:

***“…but when the fear departs, they smite you with sharp tongues, being
niggardly of the good things…”***

The Qur’anic term ***/salaqukum/*** is derived from /salq/ which
originally means: ‘to open something angrily’ whether it is the opening
of one’s hand or tongue. This expression is used in respect to those who
shout in a commanding tone and demand something.

The Arabic phrase: ***/’alsinatin hidad/*** philologically means (sharp
tongues), and here it ironically means: ‘being harsh in speech’.

At the end, the verse points to the last qualification of theirs which,
in fact, is the origin of all their misfortunes.

It says:

***“…Those have never believed and so Allah has made their deeds in
vain, and that is easy for Allah.”***

On the whole, we conclude that /mu‘awwiqin/ (hinderers) were some
hypocrites who had the following qualifications:

1- They never came to fight but a little.

2- They were never from among those who sacrifice their lives and
properties, and they did not tolerate the least distress.

3- In stormy and critical moments they entirely might lose countenance
because of intense fear.

4- At the time of victory, they considered themselves as the heirs of
the whole glories.

5- They were some faithless people so their deeds were worthless with
Allah, too.

Such is the custom and behaviour of the hypocrites in all times and in
any society. What an exact explanation the Qur’an has given about them,
by which the like of them can be recognized, and how a great many
examples of them we can see by our eyes in our own age!

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 20
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَحْسَبُونَ الأَحْزَابَ لَمْ يَذْهَبُوا وَاِن يَأْتِ الأَحْزَابُ
يَوَدُّوا لَوْ أَنَّهُمْ بَادُونَ فِي الاَعْرَابِ يَسْأَلُونَ عَنْ
أَنبَآئِكُمْ وَلَوْكَانُوا فِيكُم مَا قَاتَلُوا اِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “They think that the clans have not withdrawn, and if the clans
should come (again) they would wish they were in the deserts (wandering)
among the Bedouins, and seeking news about you, and if they were in your
midst, they would fight not but a little.”***

The coward persons who are of a weak faith always think that the enemy
is stronger than the Muslims. (The hypocrites imagined that the clans of
the Jews and polytheists would not be scattered unless they conquered
Medina.)

This verse illustrates the state of fear of this group more clearly and
explicitly. It implies that they were so frightened that, after the
disperse of clans and the army of the enemy, they thought that they had
not gone yet.

The verse says:

***“They think that the clans have not withdrawn…”***

A horrible incubus had cast its shadow over them, as if the soldiers of
disbelievers were ceaselessly marching before their eyes, and they were
threatening them with their swords and spears.

These coward fighters, these chicken-hearted hypocrites were afraid even
of their own shadows. Any sound of a horse, or every cry of a camel they
heard they twisted with fear and thought that the forces of the clans
had returned.

Then the holy verse adds:

***“…and if the clans should come (again) they would wish they were in
the deserts (wandering) among the Bedouins, and seeking news about
you…”***

Every moment they sought repeatedly the last news from any traveller
lest the clans had approached their region, and that they would hold you
under this obligation that they had always been anxious about your
situation.

Then, in the last sentence of the verse the Qur’an says:

***“…and if they were in your midst, they would fight not but a
little.”***

Therefore, you may not be so worried of their going, nor should you be
happy of their presence, because they are some worthless and useless
persons, and their absence is better than their presence.

Even this little fighting is not for the sake of Allah. It is because of
the fear of people’s blame, and for pretence and hypocrisy, since if it
were for the sake of Allah it would have not any limit and they would
stand in this field until the end of their lives.

[^1]: What was said in the above was a brief from the detail discussion
that Ibn-Athir, has recorded in his Book, ‘Kamil’.

[^2]: such as: Quraysh, Qatfan, Bani-Salim, Bani ’Asad, Bani Fazarah,
Bani Ashja‘, and Bani Marrah

[^3]: Surah ’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 154

[^4]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 20, P. 215

[^5]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 20, P. 216

[^6]: Mostadrak-i-Hakim, Vol. 3, P. 32

[^7]: Tarikh-i-Kamil-i-Ibn-i-Athir, Vol. 2, P. 184

[^8]: This event is mentioned in ‘Kamil-i-Ibn-i-’Athir, Vol. 2, P. 179

[^9]: As other verses of the holy Qur’an say, like Surah Al-Baqarah, No.
2, verse 193.

[^10]: Tafsir-i-Qurtabi, Tafsir-i-Fi-Zilal under the verse

[^11]: Surah ’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 154

[^12]: Surah Al-’Isra’, No. 17, verse 27

[^13]: Surah Al-’Isra’, No. 17, verse 27


