Section 6: The Prophet Sent as a Witness, a Bearer of Glad-tiding and Bright Lamp
=================================================================================

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verses 41-42
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا اذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ ذِكْراً كَثِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَبّـِحُوهُ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***41. “O You who have believed! Remember Allah with much
remembrance,”***  
***42. “And glorify Him morning and evening.”***

The holy Prophet (S) said:

*“Whoever remembers Allah constantly, the good of this world and the
next has been given to him.”*[^1]

And Imam Sadiq (as) said that everything has a limit except the
remembrance of Allah.[^2]

An Islamic tradition indicates that the heart and soul may rust like
iron and the remembrance of Allah is a means to remove it and to make it
bright.

So, the Qur’an says:

***“O You who have believed! Remember Allah with much remembrance,”***

***“And glorify Him morning and evening.”***

Yes, since the factors of negligence are abundantly found in material
life of man, and the arrows of the temptations of Satans are being
thrown from every side to him, there is no way to defend save by ‘much
remembrance’ in its real meaning, i.e., with full attention to Allah,
not only by mere murmuring it. It must be a ‘much remembrance’ that
affects on all one’s deeds and casts light on them.

Thus, in this verse, the Holy Qur’an enjoins all the believers that they
remember Allah in all cases. At the time of worship we must remember Him
(s.w.t.) and have attention and sincerity.

At the time when we are in the scene of committing sin, we must remember
Him and renounce, or if there happened a fault, we would immediately
repent and return to the right way.

At the time of affluence of bounties, we must remember Him ‘and thank
Him’; and at the time of affliction and calamity we must remember Him
and be patient and steadfast. In short, we must not forget His
remembrance in any scene out of the scenes of life.

In a tradition which has been recorded in ‘Sahih Tarmathi’ and
‘Musnad-i-Ahmad, Abu Sa‘id Khidri narrates from the Prophet of Islam (S)
who said that once he (S) was asked:

*“Which servants have the highest degree with Allah on the Hereafter
Day?”*

He answered:

*“Those who remember Allah very much.”*

However, we must note that the Qur’anic phrase: ***/ŏikran kaθira/ (with
much remembrance)*** has a vast meaning.

If in some narrations it has been rendered into the hymns of Hadrat
Zahra (as)[^3] and some commentators have commented it upon the
mentioning the Exulted Attributes, the Names Most Beautiful, and removal
Allah from what is not correct for Him, and the like, all of them are of
the kind of stating the mentioning the clear example, not for limiting
the concept of the verse, and these examples in particular.

Thus, much remembrance of Allah and His glorification every morning and
evening will not be obtained but with constant regard to Allah, and
permanent removal Him from any blemish and defections and we know that
the remembrance of Allah for man’s soul and spirit is like food and
water for the body.

Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 28 says:

***“…Behold! By Allah’s remembrance (only) the hearts are set at
rest.”***

The peace and certainty of the hearts are also the consequence of that
which had been stated in Surah Al-Fajr, No. 90, verses 27-30 saying:

***“O’ you serene soul!”***

***“Come back to your Lord well-pleased (with Him) and well-pleasing
(Him),”***

***“So enter among My servants,”***

***“And enter into My Garden.”***

### A Few Traditions Upon ‘Much Remembrance’

1- The Qur’an has stated some effects and favours for the remembrance of
Allah and it has mentioned it as one of the reasons of ‘prayer’.

It says:

***“…and establish prayer for My remembrance.”***[^4]

2- Turning away from the remembrance of Allah, will consequence a
straitened life.

Allah in the Qur’an says:

***“And whoever turns away from My remembrance, verily for him is a life
straitened…”***[^5]

3- The holy Prophet (S) said:

*“He who has a tongue busy reciting Thikr (the Name of Allah) the good
of (both) this world and the next has been given to him.”*

And Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Everything has a limit except the remembrance of Allah.”*[^6]

4- It has been narrated from Jabir-ibn-‘Abdillah (May Allah be pleased
with him) who said that he has heard the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The best Thikr (remembrance of Allah) is /la’ilaha’illalah/ (there is
no god but Allah).”*[^7]

5- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“A great bliss shall be his whose tongue is busy reciting Thikr (the
Name of Allah*).”[^8]

6- The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Do recite much /la houl-a-wala-quwwata-’illa-billah/ (There is neither
might nor strength but in Allah) for verily it is (one) of the treasures
of the Heaven.”*[^9]

7- The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Whoever whose last word is /la-’ilaha-’illalah/ (there is no god but
Allah) will enter Paradise.”*[^10]

8- Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“The pleasure of the lovers (of Allah) is the remembrance (of
Allah).”*[^11]

9- Imam Ali-ibn-’Abitalib (as) said:

*“Do remember Allah everywhere because He is surely with you (everywhere
and in any case).”*[^12]

10- Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The hymns of Fatimat-uz-Zahra (as) is of (the kind of) ‘much
remembrance’ that Allah, Almighty and Glorious, said:*

***‘…Remember Allah with much remembrance.”***[^13]

11- Some authentic Islamic narrations indicate that ‘***the remembrance
of Allah***’ is not done only by the tongue, but the real remembrance of
Allah is in that that at the time of encountering the lawful and
unlawful (things) of Allah we remember Him and desist from committing
sin.[^14]

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verses 43-44
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي يُصَلّـِي عَلَيْكُمْ وَمَلآَئِكَتُهُ لِيُخْرِجَكُم مِنَ
الظُّلُمَاتِ اِلَي النُّورِ وَكَانَ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَحِيَّتُهُمْ يَوْمَ يَلْقَوْنَهُ سَلاَمٌ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ أَجْراً
كَرِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***43. “He it is Who sends blessings on you, and (likewise do) His
angels, to bring you forth from the shadows (of infidelity) into the
light (of faith); and He is Merciful to the believers.”***  
***44. “Their greeting on the Day when they meet Him will be ‘Peace’,
and He has prepared for them an honourable reward.”***

In the previous verse the Qur’an said:

***“Remember Allah with much remembrance”.***

Now, in this verse it says:

***“He it is Who sends blessings on you…”.***

As if the blessing of Allah is your much remembrance. It is like the
holy verse which says:

***“Therefore, remember Me, (and) I will remember you…”*** [^15]

In fact, this holy verse is the result and the ultimate cause of the
constant remembrance and glorification.

It says:

***“He it is Who sends blessings on you, and (likewise do) His angels,
to bring you forth from the shadows (of infidelity) into the light (of
faith)…”***

Allah brings you out from the darkness of ignorance, polytheism, and
infidelity and leads you toward the light of faith, knowledge, and
piety, because He is Beneficent and Merciful unto the believers and that
is why He has undertaken their guidance and leadership and also has
commissioned His angels to help them.

So, at the end of the verse, it says:

***“…and He is Merciful to the believers.”***

The Qur’anic term ***/yusalli/*** is derived from /salat/ which here
means a special attention and favour; and this favour in respect to
Allah is the descent of Mercy, and in respect to the angels is seeking
forgiveness and asking mercy, as in Surah Qafir, No. 40, verse 7 we
recite that the angels who bear ‘Arsh (the throne of Allah) and those
around it:

***“…implore forgiveness for those who believe…”.***

However, this verse contains a great glad tiding for the believers who
ceaselessly remember Allah, for it explicitly indicates that, in their
motion toward Allah, they are not alone, but, based on the Qur’anic verb
***/yusalli/***, which is expressed in future tense and is an evidence
to the continuation of action, they are always under the cover of the
Mercy of Allah and His angels.

It is under the shade of this Mercy that the curtains of darkness will
be removed and the light of knowledge, wisdom, faith, and piety
brightens their hearts and souls.

Yes, this verse is a great glad tiding for all those who pave the path
of Allah, and it informs them that there is a strong help from the side
of Allah, the Almighty, that they succeed to pave the straight way.

The Arabic verb ***/Kana/*** in the sentence:

***“…and He is merciful to the believers”***

which is grammatically a past tense verb, denotes this fact that Allah
is always particularly merciful to the believers, and it is another
emphasis on this matter.

Yes, it is this special mercy of Allah that brings the believers out
from the darkness of illusions, lusts, and Satanic temptations, and
leads them to the light of intuitive faith, certainty, and domination on
one’s self, so that if His Mercy were not, this difficult path could not
be paved.

The next holy verse, in a short sentence, illustrates the rank of the
believers and their reward in the best form.

It announces as follows:

***“Their greeting on the Day when they meet Him will be ‘Peace’…”***

The Arabic word ***/tahiyyat/*** is derived from /hayat/ in the sense of
‘invocation’ for the health and life of another one.

This is a greeting which is, in fact, the sign of security from
punishment and from any kind of pain and affliction. It is a greeting
accompanied with calmness, tranquillity, and certainty.

Some commentators believe that the concept of the Qur’anic term
***/tahiyyatuhum/ (their greeting)*** refers to the greeting of the
believers to each other, but regarding to the former verses the words of
which were about the favour and Mercy of Allah and His angels in this
world, apparently this greeting is also from the side of His angels in
the Hereafter, as Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verses 23 and 24 says:

***“…and unto whom the angels will enter from every gate,”***

***“Peace (be) upon you (saying) that you persevered in patience!…”***

It was made clear from what was said that the objective meaning of the
Qur’anic phrase: ***/yauma yalqaunahu/*** is the Day of Hereafter which
has been called: ‘The day of meeting Allah’, and this collocation is
usually used in the verses of the Qur’an.

After this greeting, which, in fact, relates to the beginning of their
affair, the Qur’an has pointed to the end of their fate and says:

***“…and He has prepared for them an honourable reward.”***

This is a sentence, which being very short, contains every thing
gathered in it and points to all blessings and merits.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verses 45-46
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ اِنَّآ أَرْسَلْنَاكَ شَاهِداً وَمُبَشّـِراً
وَنَذِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَاعِياً اِلَي اللَّهِ بِاِذْنِهِ وَسِرَاجاً مُّنِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. “O Prophet! Verily We have sent you as a witness, and as a bearer
of glad tiding and as a warner,”***  
***46. “And as one inviting to Allah by His leave, and as a light-giving
lamp.”***

In these two holy verses the function of the holy Prophet (S) in the
society has been stated.

He (S) invites people toward Allah, and his style in this invitation is
glad tiding and warning. It is not only by the tongue, but his manner is
also an argument for people and as a sample for them.

Therefore, at first, it says:

***“O Prophet! Verily We have sent you as a witness…”***

From one side, he is as a witness over the deeds of the Ummah, because
he sees their deeds, as, in another place, the Qur’an says:

***“And say: ‘Act you (as you will)! Allah will see your work and (so
will) His Messenger and the believers…”***[^16]

and this cognizance will be occurred by the way of reporting the deeds
of Ummah to the Prophet (S) and immaculate Imams.

On the other side, he is as a witness to the former prophets who were in
turn witnesses to their own nations, as the Holy Qur’an says:

***“How will it be, then, when We bring from every people a witness and
We bring you a witness over those (witnesses)?”***[^17]

On the third side, your existence with your good qualities and good
temper, with your constructive programs, with your bright background and
with your actions, you are witness for the truthfulness of your school,
as well as a witness for the greatness and Power of Allah.

Then, the verse refers to the second and the third qualities.

It says:

***“…and as a bearer of glad tiding and as a warner,”***

The Prophet (S) is a bearer of glad tiding to the righteous for the
endless reward of Allah, for the eternal health and happiness, and for
honourable victory and success. He is a warner for the disbelievers and
the hypocrites against the painful punishment of Allah, against the loss
in their whole capital of their selves, and against falling into misery
both in this world and the next.

As we said before, too, glad tiding and warning must be with together
and equilibrated with each other everywhere, because half of the self of
man is formed by the interest of attracting profit, and the next half is
formed by repelling the harm. Glad tiding is a motive for the former,
and warning is a motive for the latter.

So, those who, in their programs, insist only on one part, in fact, have
not recognized man, and have not noted the motive of his action.

The next holy verse points to some other qualities of the Prophet (S).

It says:

***“And as one inviting to Allah by His leave, and as a light-giving
lamp.”***

The Prophet (S) is as a lamp of guidance in the society whose light is
the cause of growth, movement and discrimination.

Here, it is necessary to pay attention to a few points:

1- Concerning the Prophet (S) the rank of being as a witness is
mentioned before all of his other qualities since this rank needs not a
preliminary state save the self of the Prophet (S) and his prophethood,
and, as soon as he was appointed to that rank, his being witness to all
those aspects which were mentioned in the above statements will be
certain, while the rank of being as a ‘bearer of glad tiding’ and as a
‘warner’ are some things that happen after that.

2- The invitation to Allah is a stage next to that of glad tiding and
warning, since these are some means for making people prepared for
accepting the Truth. When through encouragement and warning preparation
was gained, the invitation to Allah would begin, and it is only in this
case that the invitation will be effective.

3- Here only the act of invitation is conditioned to the leave of Allah,
although all the deeds of the Prophet (S) were done by the leave and
command of Allah.

This is for the sake that the most difficult and the most important duty
of the prophets is that very invitation to Allah.

The reason of it is that the Prophet (S) must lead people to pave a path
against their desires and lusts, and this stage must be fulfilled by the
leave, command and help of Allah to be accomplished; and, in the
meantime, it makes it manifest that the Prophet does not do anything
from his own accord, and whatever he does is by the leave of Allah.

4- The application of the Qur’anic phrase ***/sirajan munira/ (a
light-giving lamp)*** as a quality of the Prophet (S), with regard that
means ‘lamp’ and /munir/ means ‘illuminative’, points to the miracles
and proofs of legitimacy and signs of truthfulness of the Prophet’s
invitation.

He is a lamp which is witness of him. He causes every kind of darkness
to be dismissed, and the eyes and the hearts to be attracted toward him,
and like sun, his existence is a reason for his legitimacy, too.

It is noteworthy that the word /siraj/ is mentioned four times in the
Qur’an.

In three occurrences, it means ‘sun’, including Surah Noah, No. 71,
verse 16, which says:

***“And made the moon a light in their midst, and made the sun as a
(Glorious) Lamp.”***

The existence of the Prophet is like an illuminating sun that removes
the darkness of ignorance, polytheism, and paganism from the horizon of
the sky of man’s soul, but in the same way that the blind do not utilize
the light of the sun, and those ones, who like bats, their eyes can not
bear seeing this light will hide themselves from it.

The obstinate blind- hearted ones have not utilized this light and will
not do, either. Abujahl used to put his finger into his ear in order not
to hear the sound of reciting the Qur’an.

Also, the existence of the Prophet (S) is the cause of tranquillity, the
cause of the fleet of the thieves of religion and faith, and the fleet
of the cruel members of the societies. He is the cause of the ease of
mind, of the elevation and growth of the essence of faith and morals;
and in short, he is the cause of vitality, activity, and motion in the
society.

The history of the Prophet’s life is a good witness over this matter.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verses 47-48
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَشّـِرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ بِاَنَّ لَهُم مّـِنَ اللَّهِ فَضْلاً
كَبِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تُطِعِ الْكَافِرِينَ وَالْمُنَافِقِينَ وَدَعْ أَذَاهُمْ
وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَي اللَّهِ وَكَفَي بِاللَّهِ وَكِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “And give the believers the glad tiding that they shall have from
Allah a great grace.”***  
***48. “And do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and heed not
their hurt, but rely on Allah, and Allah is sufficient as a
protector.”***

The Prophet (S) is commanded from the side of Allah to give glad tiding
to the believer that His special grace and favour will envelop them, and
this itself is the greatest grace of Allah.

So, here, the Qur’an says:

***“And give the believers the glad tiding that they shall have from
Allah a great grace.”***

This points to the fact that the Prophet’s glad tiding is not limited
only to the reward of the good deeds of the believers, but Allah bestows
on them from His grace so much so that the balance between their good
deed and this reward will utterly be changed, as some other noble verses
of the Qur’an certify this meaning.

In one place the Holy Qur’an says:

***“Whoever brings a good (deed), he shall have ten times its
like…”***[^18]

In another place it says:

***“The likeness of those who spend their property in the way of Allah
is as the likeness of a grain (of corn) that grows seven ears, (with) a
hundred grains in every ear. And Allah multiplies (in abundance) for
whom He wills…”***[^19]

So that, according to it, sometimes the reward of a charity will be
seven hundred times more, and sometimes more than one thousand times.

Sometimes their reward may be more than this and beyond what was said.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“And no person knows what (important reward) is hidden for them of
the joy of the eyes…”***[^20]

Thus, this verse elevates the dimensions of the great grace of Allah
higher than that which can come into existence in man’s imagination and
apprehension.

Next to that, the Qur’an refers to the second and the third instruction.

It says:

***“And do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites…”***

No doubt the Messenger of Allah (S) never did obey the disbelievers and
the hypocrites, but the importance of the matter is so much that the
Qur’an has specially stressed on it as an emphasis for the Prophet (S)
and as a warning and lesson for others.

The reason of it is that there are some important dangers in the way of
the true leaders that they may be invited to collusion that they submit,
sometimes by threat and sometimes by the way of giving some privileges.

This may happen so frequently that sometimes man makes mistake and
thinks that the way of reaching to the aim is accepting such a collusion
and submission; the same collusion and submission the result of which is
that all efforts and endeavours remain fruitless and the whole struggles
become futile.

The history of Islam announces that some pagans, or some groups of the
hypocrites, repeatedly tried to draw the Prophet of Islam (S) to such
situation. Sometimes they suggested that he should not mention the names
of their idols in a bad way and would not criticize them.

Sometimes they told him to allow them to worship his object of worship
for one year and then he would worship their objects of worship.
Sometimes they told him to respite them for one more year to continue
their own programs and then they would believe.

Sometimes they suggested him to send away the poor believers from around
him so that they, who were rich and influential, might accept him.
Sometimes they said they were ready to give him some financial
privileges, sensitive rank and position, beautiful wives and the like.

It is evident that all of them were some dangerous pitfalls on the way
of rapid progress of Islam and against rooting out paganism and
hypocrisy. If the Prophet of Islam (S) showed flexibility in the face of
one of these suggestions, the basis of the Islamic revolution would ruin
and the struggles might not result.

Then in the fourth and fifth commands, it says:

***“…and heed not their hurt, but rely on Allah, and Allah is sufficient
as a protector.”***

This part of the verse shows that in order to make the Prophet (S)
submit they had put him in an intensive pressure. They hurt him in
different ways: whether through sarcasm, slander and undue insolence, or
through bodily hurt, or by economic embargo (siege) unto him and his
companions, differently in Mecca and Medina.

The term ‘hurt’, mentioned here, is a word the meaning of which covers
all kinds of annoyance.

Raqib in Mufradat says:

*“‘Hurt’ means any kind of harm that reaches a living creature, whether
unto its spirit or unto its body, or unto his relatives, worldly or
other worldly.”*

The history indicates the Divine prophets and early believers stood
firmly against kinds of hurts and never accepted the disgrace of
submission and defeat and finally succeeded in their goals.

This is also noteworthy that the above five commandments, which have
been mentioned in the recent two holy verses, are related to each other
and are complement to each other.

Giving glad tiding to the believers for attracting the faithful forces,
the lack of collusion and submission before pagans and hypocrites, being
heedless to their hurts, and relying on Allah totally form a collection
in which the way of reaching to the goal is hidden and they are as an
inclusive instruction of action for all the truth seekers.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 49
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا إِذَا نَكَحْتُمُ الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ ثُمَّ
طَلَّقْتُمُوهُنَّ مِن قَبْلِ أَن تَمَسُّوهُنَّ فَمَا لَكُمْ
عَلَيْهِنَّ مِنْ عِدَّةٍ تَعْتَدُّونَهَا فَمَتّـِعُوهُنَّ
وَسَرّ‌ِحُوهُنَّ سَرَاحاً جَمِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “O you who have believed! When you marry believing women and then
divorce them before you touch them, you have no period to reckon against
them; so give them a present, and release them in a handsome manner.”***

The objective meaning of the Arabic word ***/nikah/***, here, is
marriage and the purpose of /tamas/ (touch) is ‘to have sexual
intercourse’, and the purpose of the Qur’anic phrase ***/sarahan
jamila/*** is a divorce without any enmity and roughness.

The Arabic word ***/‘iddah/*** is called to the term that women must
wait, and do not marry another spouse, until its end after becoming
divorced. The woman’s term in divorce is three menstrual cycles and
becoming purified; and the term of the death of her husband is four
month, and ten days.

In this verse Allah says:

***“O you who have believed! When you marry believing women and then
divorce them before you touch them, you have no period to reckon against
them…”***

Here Allah has stated an exception for the ordinance of the divorced
woman’s term saying that if the divorce occurs before the first coition
in marriage, keeping the term is not necessary. It is understood from
this meaning that the ordinance of the term (period) has been stated
before this verse.

The application of the Qur’anic word ***/mu’minat/ (believing women)***
is not an evidence for saying that marriage with non-Muslim women is
absolutely forbidden but it may refer to the precedence of them.

Therefore, it does not contrast with the narrations and the known
pronouncements of jurisprudents which consider the temporary marriage
with the women of the People of the Book permissible.

However, it is understood from the Arabic word ***/lakum/ (you have)***
and also from the Qur’anic sentence: ***/ta‘taddunaha/ (to reckon
against them)*** that woman’s keeping the term is counted a kind of
right for man, and it must be so, because it is possible that, in fact,
the woman is pregnant and marriage with another man without keeping the
term causes that the situation of the child would not be distinguished
and the man’s right in this regard might be disregarded.

Moreover, woman’s keeping term gives an opportunity to the man and woman
both that if they have accepted the divorce under the effect of ordinary
excitements, they can find a time to review and return, and this is a
right for both man and woman.

Then it refers to another ordinance from the ordinances concerning the
women who have obtained their divorce before having sexual intercourse,
which has also been mentioned in Surah Al-Baqarah, and says:

***“…so give them a present…”***

No doubt, giving a suitable present to the woman is obligatory when
there has not been appointed a dower for her, as Surah Al-Baqarah, No.
2, verse 236 says:

***“There is no sin on you if you divorce women while you have not yet
touched them nor settled any dowry on them; you make provision for
them…”***

Therefore, though the verse under discussion has an absolute meaning and
covers both the instances in which dowry has been settled or not, yet
with the frame of reference of the verse of Surah Al-Baqarah we limit
the verse under discussion to the instance that there has not been
settled a dowry, because in the case dowry is settled and the first
coition in marriage is not performed, it is incumbent to pay half of the
dowry[^21].

As some Islamic commentators and jurists said, this is also probable
that the ordinance of ‘paying a suitable present’ mentioned in the verse
under discussion is general and it envelops even the instances in which
the dowry is determined, but in these instances it is recommendable, and
in the instance that the dowry is not defined it is obligatory.

Some verses of the Holy Qur’an, as well as some Islamic narrations, have
referred to this meaning, too.[^22]

Concerning the level and amount of this present, the Holy Qur’an, in
Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 236 has stated:

***“…a provision in a fair manner…”***

Again, in this very verse, it says:

***“…the rich according to his means, and the straitened according to
his means…”***

Thus, if there have been mentioned some instance in the Islamic
narrations such as: house, servant, clothing, and the like, they are
some extensions of this general meaning which varies in respect to the
possibilities of husband and the situation of woman.

The last ordinance in the verse under discussion is that you must
release the divorced women in a fair manner and separate from them with
a proper form.

It says:

***“…and release them in a handsome manner.”***

The Qur’anic phrase ***/sarahan jamila/*** means: to leave them
respectfully and affectionately, without any enmity, roughness, cruelty
and disgrace. In short, as it is said in Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse
229 either the wife must be maintained suitably in honour or she may be
released kindly and respectably.

Both the continuation of conjugality must be with the humane criterions,
and separation. It is not so that whenever the husband decides to
separate from his wife, he counts any kind of hatred, injustice, cruelty
and taunt unto his wife permissible. This kind of manner is certainly
non-Islamic.

Some other commentators have rendered the Qur’anic phrase: ***/sarahan
jamila/*** mentioned here into the sense of divorce according to the
Islamic rule.

In the narration mentioned in the commentary of ‘Ali-ibn-’Ibrahim’ and
‘Uyun-ul-’Akhbar, this meaning is emphasized, too. But it is certain
that the meaning of /sarahan jamila/ is not limited only in this
meaning, though one of its clear expansions is this very meaning’.

Some other commentators have taken the phrase /sarahan jamila/ here with
the sense of permission of going out of house and departure, since the
woman has not a duty to keep ‘the term’, therefore she must be allowed
to go wherever she wishes.

But, regarding to the fact that the phrase /sarahan jamila/, or the
like, in other verses of the Qur’an concerns even about the women who
must keep ‘the term’, the above mentioned meaning does not seen proper.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 50
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ إِنَّآ أَحْلَلْنَا لَكَ أَزْوَاجَكَ اللاَّتِي
ءَاتَيْتَ اُجُورَهُنَ وَمَا مَلَكَتْ يَمِينُكَ مِمَّآ أَفَآءَ اللَّهُ
عَلَيْكَ وَبَنَاتِ عَمّـِك َوَبَنَاتِ عَمَّاتِكَ وَبَنَاتِ خَالِكَ
وَبَنَاتِ خَالاَتِكَ اللاَّتِي هَاجَرْنَ مَعَكَ وَامْرَأَةً
مُّؤْمِنَةً اِن وَهَبَتْ نَفْسَهَا لِلنَّبِيّ‌ِ اِنْ أَرَادَ
النَّبِيُّ أَن يَسْتَنكِحَهَا خَالِصَةً لَّكَ مِن دُونِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
قَدْ عَلِمْنَا مَا فَرَضْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ فِي أَزْوَاجِهِمْ وَمَا
مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ لِكَيْلاَ يَكُونَ عَلَيْكَ حَرَجٌ وَكَانَ
اللَّهُ غَفُوراً رَّحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. “O’ Prophet! Verily We have made lawful to you the wives whom you
have paid their dowries, and those whom your right hand possesses of
those whom Allah has assigned to you, and (marriage with) the daughters
of your paternal uncle, and the daughters of your paternal aunts, and
daughters of your maternal uncle, and the daughters of your maternal
aunts who have emigrated with you, and a believing woman if she gives
herself unto the Prophet, if the Prophet desires to wed her, for you
exclusively, not for the (rest of the) believers. Indeed We know what We
have ordained for them about their wives and those whom their right
hands possess in order that there should be no difficulty for you. And
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

It is only Allah Who defines what is lawful and what is unlawful. (Even
the Prophet (S), in his personal subjects, obeys the law of Allah.)

Islam has appointed some duties and also some special privileges for the
Prophet (S).

This verse explains seven instances that marriage with them was allowed
for the Prophet (S).

1- At first, it says:

***“O’ Prophet! Verily We have made lawful to you the wives whom you
have paid their dowries…”***

As the next sentences indicate, the objective meaning of these wives is
those wives who were not the Prophet’s relatives and got marriage with
him. Perhaps, mentioning the payment of dowry is for the same reason,
because it had been customary then that, at the time of marriage with
women other than relatives, the dowry should be paid in cash.

Moreover, hastening in giving the dowry is better, specially that the
wife is in need of it. But, however, this action is not among obligatory
deeds, and with mutual agreement the dowry, partly or wholly, can remain
as a debt that the husband is charged with it.

2- The second instance is as follows:

***“…and those whom your right hand possesses of those whom Allah has
assigned to you…”***

The Arabic phrase ***/’afa’allah/*** is derived from /fay’/ which is
called to the properties that are gained without trouble, therefore, it
is used for the spoils of war and also the natural wealth and properties
which belong to the Islamic government and have not a proper possessor.

Raqib in Mufradat says:

*“The Arabic word* ***/fay’/*** *means ‘return to a good state and if a
shadow is called /fay’/ it is for the sake that it returns.” Then, he
adds: “It is also called to the easy gained properties, since, with all
goodness it has, again it is, like shadow accidental and fleeting.”*

It is true that sometimes there are many troubles in spoils of war, but
since in comparison with other properties there is less difficulty in
them, and sometimes it happens that in a single attack a lot of
properties are gained, the word /fay’/ is used for it.

Concerning this fact that which one of the holy Prophet’s wives this
ordinance was about, some of the commentators have said that one of the
Prophet’s wives named “Mariyah Qibtiyyah” was from spoils of war and two
other his wives named: “Safiyyah” and “Juwayriyyah” were from /’anfal/
whom the Prophet (S) had manumitted and accepted them as his wives.

This itself was a part of general program of Islam for gradual
manumitting of slaves and returning their humane personality to them.

3- The third instance of those who are also lawful for him to marry with
are mentioned as follows:

***“…and (marriage with) the daughters of your paternal uncle, and the
daughters of your paternal aunts, and daughters of your maternal uncle,
and the daughters of your maternal aunts who have emigrated with
you…”***

Thus, among all his relatives only marriage with daughters of his
paternal uncle, and the daughters of his paternal aunts, and the
daughters of his maternal uncle, and the daughters of his maternal aunts
with the condition that they had emigrated with the Prophet (S) were
permissible and lawful for him.

The restriction being laid on these four groups is clear, but the
condition of emigration is for reason that in that time emigration was
an evidence for faith, and the lack of emigration was as a sign of
disbelief.

Or it is for the reason that emigration would give them some more
privileges to them, and the aim in this verse is to state the noble and
virtuous women who are worthy of marriage with the Prophet (S).

That whether these four groups are mentioned as a general ordinance in
the verse and they were practically amongst the Prophet’s wives or not,
we can mention only the marriage of the Prophet (S) with
‘Zaynab-bent-i-Jahsh’, the story of which was stated in this very Surah,
because Zaynab was the daughter of the Prophet’s maternal aunt and Jahsh
was the spouse of his aunt.

4- The fourth instance is announced as follows:

***“…and a believing woman if she gives herself unto the Prophet, if the
Prophet desires to wed her…”***

Then the Qur’an continues saying:

***“…for you exclusively, not for the (rest of the) believers. Indeed we
know what We have ordained for them about their wives and those whom
their right hands possess…”***

Therefore, if Allah has assigned some limitations in same instances in
the affairs concerning their marriage, it has been for some things that
were existed in their life and the life of the Prophet (S), and none of
these ordinances and rules was undue.

Then, the verse adds:

***“…in order that there should be no difficulty for you…”***

***“…And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

By the way, the following points must be considered about the recent
group (the women with no dowry):

First: No doubt the permission of ‘wedding a wife without dowry’ was one
of the specialties of the Prophet (S), and the verse expresses it
explicitly; that is why it is one of the ‘certain issues’ of the Islamic
jurisprudence.

Thus, no one is allowed to marry with if the dowry is not mentioned at
the time of reciting the formula of marriage, and there is not any frame
of reference to determine it either, he must pay ‘suitable dower’. The
purpose of ‘suitable dower’ is the dowry which the women of the same
conditions and specialties of her usually appoint for them.

Second: commentators are divided in that whether this general ordinance
was practised by the holy Prophet (S) or not. Some of them, such as
Ibn-‘Abbas, believe that the Prophet (S) did not marry any woman in this
way.

Therefore the above ordinance was only a general permission for the
Prophet (S) which was never practically applied. Some other commentators
have mentioned the names of three or four women among the Prophet’s
wives who married with him (S) with no dowry.

They were “Maymunah” the daughter of Harith, “Zaynab” the daughter of
“Khuzaymah” who was from the tribe of Ansar, a woman named
’Umm-i-Sharik, Jabir’s daughter who was from the tribe of Bani ’Asad,
and “Khulah”, the daughter of Hakam.

It is evident that such women only desired to earn spiritual honour
which could happen by the way of marriage with the Prophet (S).
Therefore, they accepted to marry with him without any dowry.

Third: It is clearly understood from this verse that the recitation of
the formula of marriage by the expression of /hibih/ (gift) had only
been specialized to the Prophet (S) and no other person can recite the
formula of marriage with such an expression.

But if the recitation of the formula of marriage is performed with the
expression of marriage, it is allowed even though the dowry is not
mentioned, because, as it was said, if the dowry is not mentioned, the
‘suitable dower’ must be paid. (In fact, it is like that ‘the suitable
dower’ has been stipulated.)

Fourth: The Qur’anic sentence:

***“…in order that there should be no difficulty for you…”***

is a hint to the polygamy of the Prophet and the philosophy of these
ordinances that are specialized to the Prophet of Islam (S).

This sentence indicates that the Prophet (S) has some conditions that
others have not, and this very difference has caused the difference in
such ordinances. In other words, it more clearly says that: the aim had
been that a part of the restrictions and difficulties could be decreased
for the Prophet (S) by means of these ordinances.

This is a delicate meaning which shows that the Prophet’s marriage with
different women had been for the removal of a series of social political
difficulties from his life.

We know that when the holy Prophet (S) announced Islam he was alone, and
it took a long time that people did not believe in him, except a few
persons. He roused against all the superstitious beliefs of his time and
his environment, and proclaimed the declaration of war against all. It
was natural that all the families and tribes in that place to be
mobilized against him.

He had to use all possible means to break the evil unity of the enemies,
one of which was creating relation by the way of marriage with the women
of different tribes of Arab, since the most stable relation among the
Arabs of the Age of Ignorance was counted the relative relation. There
are many evidences which show that the Prophet’s marriages were mostly
done politically.

Some of his marriages, like marriage with Zaynab, were for breaking the
rules of pagan Arab, the explanation of which was stated in the
commentary of verse 37 of the current Surah.

Some of his other marriages were for the sake of decreasing the level of
the enemies’ hostility or attracting the affection of individuals or
that of the obstinate zealous tribes.

In some history books we even read that the Prophet (S) married with
numerous women but there happened nothing save the ceremonies of
wedding, and he had no sexual intercourse with them. In some instances
he sufficed only with marriage proposal from the women of some
tribes.[^23]

They were happy and boasted only with this that a woman from their tribe
was called as the Prophet’s wife and they were honoured with it. Thus,
their social relation with the Prophet of Islam (S) became closer and
they were more decided to defend him.

The enemies of Islam had intended to use the numerous marriages of the
Prophet of Islam (S) as a means for their most horrible attacks and to
make some false stories from them, but referring to history and the
manner of the Prophet (S), makes the fact fairly manifest and introduces
the anonymous plots.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 51
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُرْجِي مَن تَشَآءُ مِنْهُنَّ وَتُؤْوِي إلَيْكَ مَن تَشَآءُ وَمَنِ
ابْتَغَيْتَ مِمَّنْ عَزَلْتَ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكَ ذَلِكَ أَدْنَي أَن
تَقَرَّ أَعْيُنُهُنَّ وَلاَ يَحْزَنَّ وَيَرْضَيْنَ بِمَآ
ءَاتَيْتَهُنَّ كُلُّهُنَّ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ
وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلِيماً حَلِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. “You may put off whom you please of them, and you may take to you
whom you please, and whom you desire of those of whom you have
separated, no blame shall be on you, this is most proper to give them
the joy of their eyes and they may not grieve, and that they should be
pleased, all of them with what you give them, and Allah knows what is in
your hearts; and Allah is Knowing, Forgiving.”***

Those who have heavy responsibilities should be offered some particular
authorities.

According to the previous statements and the proofs which were mentioned
in the explanation of the verse, the numerous marriages of the holy
Prophet (S) were often formed by political, social, and emotional
aspects, and they were, in fact, a part of the fulfilment of his Divine
messengership, but in the meantime, the opposition between his wives and
their normal woman rivals created a conflict inside the Prophet’s house,
and it would make his thought busy.

It is here that Allah has mentioned another quality of the Prophet (S)
and, by putting an end to these conflicts, made his mind free from this
point of view and, as we recite in the verse, He said:

***“You may put off whom you please of them, and you may take to you
whom you please…”***

The Arabic term ***/turji/*** is derived from /’irja’/ in the sense of
delay; and the term ***/tu’wi/*** is derived from /’iwa’/ in the sense
of ‘to take in one’s place’.

We know that one of the ordinances of Islam is that when a man has
numerous wives he must divide his time justly among them. If one night
he is with one of them, another night he must be with another wife, and
there is not any difference between them from this point of view. This
subject has been explained in the books of Islamic jurisprudence under
the title of /haqq-i-qasm/.

One of the qualities of the Prophet (S) was that this right, mentioned
in the above verse, was not upon the Prophet (S), because of the
specific conditions of his difficult life, specially when he was inside
Medina and approximately every month a war was imposed on him during
this very time that he had numerous wives.

Then he could divide his time in any form he desired, though, as the
Islamic history books explicitly denote, he tried to observe equality
among them as much as possible. Yet, the existence of this divine
ordinance gave a kind of peace to the Prophet’s wives and to the
interior environment of his life.

Then, the verse adds:

***“…and whom you desire of those of whom you have separated, no blame
shall be on you…”***

Thus, not only at the beginning the authority was with the holy Prophet
(S) but also this choice was with him in the continuation of it, and, in
other words, this choice was a ‘continuous choice’.

By this expansive and vast ordinance any kind of excuse due to the
Prophet’s wives was ceased from the programs of his life, and he could
concentrate his thought on the great and heavy responsibilities of
prophetship.

Then in order that the wives of the holy Prophet (S) should also know
that besides obtaining the honour of being the Prophet’s wives, by
submitting to this particular program of the Prophet’s time division
they have shown a kind of self-sacrifice from them and that there is no
objection upon them at all, because they have submitted to the ordinance
of Allah, it adds:

***“…this is most proper to give them the joy of their eyes and they may
not grieve, and that they should be pleased, all of them with what you
give them…”***

This is so because: firstly this is a general ordinance about all of
them, and, thus, there is no difference between them. Secondly: this is
an ordinance from the side of Allah which has been ordained for some
important interests.

Therefore, they must accept it willingly and contently in a way that
they not only should not be annoyed but also be pleased with it.

At the end, the Holy Qur’an concludes the verse with the following
sentence:

***“…and Allah knows what is in your hearts; and Allah is Knowing,
Forgiving.”***

Yes, Allah knows well that which ordinance you are heartily pleased by
and submitted to, and which one you are unpleased with. He knows that in
which of your wives you are more interested and in which one less, and
how you observe the ordinance of Allah when confronting these affairs.

Again, He knows who, protesting in their hearts, sit here and there and
object these Divine ordinances concerning the Prophet (S), and who
eagerly accept them all.

So, the application of the Qur’anic term ***/qulubikum/*** has a vast
meaning that involves both the Prophet (S) and his wives, and all the
believers who submit to these ordinances with consent, or protest and
deny them though they do not make it manifest.

In Islamic jurisprudent, there is a discussion that whether it was
obligatory for the Prophet (S) to divide his time equally among his
numerous wives in the same way that is incumbent for the Muslims in
general, or the Prophet (S) had the exception ordinance of ‘choice’.

It is known among the jurisprudents of Shi‘ah and among a group of the
jurisprudents of the Sunnites that he was made an exception of this
ordinance.

They take the above verse as its evidence that says:

***“You may put off whom you please of them, and you may take to you
whom you please…”***

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 52
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَحِلُّ لَكَ النّـِسَآءُ مِن بَعْدُ وَلآ أَن تَبَدَّلَ بِهِنَّ
مِنْ أَزْوَاجٍ وَلَوْ أَعْجَبَكَ حُسْنُهُنَّ اِلاَّ مَا مَلَكَتْ
يَمِينُكَ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ عَلَي كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ رَقِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. “Thereafter women are not lawful to you, neither for you to take
other wives in exchange for them, though their beauty may charm you,
except what your right hand possesses, and Allah is watchful over all
things.”***

Some tribes of Arab put the holy Prophet (S) under pressure to take a
wife from them so that they boasted that the Messenger of Allah was
their bridegroom. According to some expediencies, the holy Prophet (S)
married with a few women, but this verse hindered the continuation of
this action.

It says:

***“Thereafter women are not lawful to you, neither for you to take
other wives in exchange for them, though their beauty may charm you,
except what your right hand possesses, and Allah is watchful over all
things.”***

The commentators of the Holy Qur’an and the Islamic jurisprudents have
delivered many various explanations upon the commentary of this verse
and there have also been recorded many different narrations in the
Islamic sources upon this matter.

At first, without regarding the commentators’ statements, we mention
whatever is meant from the apparent of the verse and in relation with
the before and later verses, then we will refer to other matters.

The apparent meaning of the Arabic phrase ***/min ba‘du/ (thereafter)***
is that ‘thereafter new marriages are unlawful for you’. Therefore, the
Arabic word ***/ba‘du/*** means either the length of time, that is,
after this time do not choose any more wife.

Or after that, according to the command of Allah in previous verses, you
told your wives to choose to have a simple life in your house or to be
divorced, and they willingly preferred to continue their matrimonial
life with you, you should not marry any other woman thereafter.

And also, you can not divorce some of them and take other wives in
exchange for them. In other words, you can neither increase them nor can
you change the existing ones.

The commentators have taken the Qur’anic sentence: ***/walau ’a‘jabaka
husnuhunna/ (though their beauty may charm you)*** as an evidence for
the famous ordinance which is also referred to in some Islamic
narrations saying that: the one who wants to marry a lady, he can have a
look at her before, a looking that makes her situation, feature, and
body distinguish for him.

The philosophy of this ordinance is that man may choose his wife with a
complete distinction and it might prevent the later regret, which can
put the marriage agreement in danger.

An Islamic tradition indicates that the Prophet (S) told one of his
companions who wanted to marry a woman:

*“Look at her (previously) and this causes that the affection between
you will endure.”*[^24]

In another tradition, Imam Sadiq (as) in answer to this question that
whether, at the time of deciding to marry a lady, man can look at her
carefully and sees her face and her back, the Imam (as) said:

*“Yes, it does not matter that when man wants to marry a lady he looks
at her back and her face.”*[^25]

There are, of course, a lot of traditions in this regard, but some of
them explicitly denote that this look at this time should not be done by
the man lustfully and with the intention of pleasure.

This is also clear that this ordinance is specialized for the instances
that the one really intends to study about a woman to understand that if
she has the conditions he desires to marry her; but the one who has not
decided to marry and that he will probably marry later, or as a mere
study, he is not allowed to look at women.

[^1]: Kafi, Vol. 2, chapter ‘Remembrance’

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: 34 times Allah-u-Akbar, 33 times Al-Hamd-u-lillah, and 33 times
Subhan-allah

[^4]: Surah Taha, No. 20, verse 14

[^5]: Ibid, verse 124

[^6]: ’Usul-i-Kafi, Vol. 4, P. 274

[^7]: Riyad-us-Salihin, P. 542

[^8]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, Vol. 2, P. 465

[^9]: Kashf-ul-‘Iqal, Vol. 1, P. 454

[^10]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, Vol. 1, P. 418

[^11]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, Vol. 1, P. 25

[^12]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 90, P. 54

[^13]: Kafi, Vol. 2, P. 500

[^14]: Mizan-ul-Hikmah, and Safinat-ul-Bihar, section Thikr

[^15]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 152

[^16]: Surah At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 105

[^17]: Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 41

[^18]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 160

[^19]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 261

[^20]: Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 17

[^21]: as Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 237 has announced

[^22]: Like Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 241, and many traditions in
this regard in chapter 50, Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, Vol. 15, P. 59

[^23]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 22, PP. 191-192

[^24]: The commentary by Qurtabi, Vol. 8, P. 5303

[^25]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, Vol. 14, chapter 36, tradition 3


