Section 7: Those Who Annoy Allah and His Prophet Muhammad
=========================================================

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 53
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا لاَ تَدْخُلُوا بُيُوتَ النَّبِيّ‌ِ
إِلآَّ أَن يُؤْذَنَ لَكُمْ اِلَي طَعَامٍ غَيْرَ نَاظِرِينَ إِنَاهُ
وَلَكِنْ اِذَا دُعِيتُمْ فَادْخُلُوا فَاِذَا طَعِمْتُمْ فَانتَشِرُوا
وَلاَ مُسْتَأْنِسِينَ لِحَدِيثٍ اِنَّ ذَلِكُمْ كَانَ يُؤْذِي
النَّبِيَّ فَيَسْتَحْيِي مِنكُمْ وَاللَّهُ لاَ يَسْتَحْيِي مِنَ
الْحَقّ‌ِ وَإِذَا سَأَلْتُـمُوهُنَّ مَتَاعاً فَسْأَلُوهُنَّ مِن وَرآءِ
حِجَابٍ ذَلِكُمْ أَطْهَرُ لِقُلُوبِكُمْ وَقُلُوبِهِنَّ وَمَا كَانَ
لَكُمْ أَن تُؤْذُوا رَسُولَ اللَّهِ وَلآ أَن تَنكِحُوا أَزْوَاجَهُ مِن
بَعْدِهِ أَبَداً اِنَّ ذَلِكُمْ كَانَ عِندَ اللَّهِ عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. “O you who believe! Do not enter the houses of the Prophet for a
meat without waiting for the proper time, unless permission be granted
you. But when you are invited, enter, and, when your meal is ended, then
disperse; neither lingering for conversation; verily this annoys the
Prophet, and he is ashamed before you, but Allah is not ashamed before
the truth. And when you ask his wives for any object, ask them from
behind a curtain. This is purer for your hearts and for their hearts.
And it is not for you to hurt Allah’s Messenger, neither to marry his
wives after him, ever, verily this is grievous (sin) with Allah.”***

To take permission to enter into the people’s house is not allocated to
the Prophet’s house.

As we recite in Surah An-Nur:

***“…Do not enter houses other than your own houses until you have asked
permission…”***[^1]

This verse addresses the believers and clearly and expressively, in some
short sentences, states some other Islamic ordinances, specially those
relating to the rules of etiquette with the Prophet (S) and his
household.

At first, it says:

***“O you who believe! Do not enter the houses of the Prophet for a meat
without waiting for the proper time, unless permission be granted
you…”***

The Arabic term ***/’inahu/*** is derived from /’ani-ya’ni/ in the sense
of ‘the time of something’, and here it means ‘readiness of food for
eating’.

Thus, the holy verse states one of the important rules of association
that was rarely observed in that environment. This statement outwardly
is about the house of the holy Prophet (S), but surely this ordinance
does not allocate to him alone.

Never must we enter the house of anyone else without permission, (as
Surah An-Nur, No. 24, verse 27 announces, too). It is said that even the
Prophet (S), standing outside the door, asked his daughter, Fatimah
(as), to enter her house when he wanted to go into it.

Once when he wanted to go in, Jabir-ibn-‘Abdillah was with the Prophet
(S), then after that he (S) asked permission for him to enter, he (S)
asked permission for Jabir, too. Moreover, when some people are invited
for a meal, they must be punctual and do not bother the landlord out of
place.

Then the verse refers to the second ordinance, saying:

***“…But when you are invited, enter, and, when your meal is ended, then
disperse…”***

In fact, this ordinance is as an emphasis and complimentary for the
previous ordinance. You should neither enter a house out of place when
you have been invited for it, nor ignore the invitation, nor stay there
for a long time after eating the meal.

It is evident that contrasting these affairs causes trouble for the host
and it does not agree with the principles of ethics. For the third
ordinance, the verse implies that you should not form a meeting of
conversation in the house of the holy Prophet (S), nor in any other
host’s house.

It says:

***“…neither lingering for conversation…”***

Of course, sometimes it happens that the host is willing to have such a
meeting of conversation; in this case it is an exception. These wards
are about the case that the invitation is for only eating food, not for
forming the meeting of conversation.

In such a place, after eating the meal, meeting must be left, specially
that the house is that of the Prophet (S), the centre of accomplishing
the greatest divine missions, and some troublesome affairs must not
occupy his time.

Then, the Holy Qur’an states the reason of this ordinance as follows:

***“…verily this annoys the Prophet, and he is ashamed before you, but
Allah is not ashamed before the truth…”***

Of course, concerning the instances that had not a personal and private
nature, the Prophet of Allah (S) never refused to say the truth, while
to state the right of persons from the side of them is not so fair, but
it is interesting and beautiful when it is said from the side of others,
and the case in the verse is of this kind.

The ethical principles required that the Prophet (S) would not defend
himself, but Allah defended him.

Then, the fourth ordinance is stated about the subject of veil, as
follows:

***“…And when you ask his wives for any object, ask them from behind a
curtain…”***

It has been a custom among Arabs, as well as many other people, that
when they are in need of some furniture and means of life they borrow
them temporarily from the neighbour. The Prophet’s house was also one of
them and, now and then, neighbours would come and borrow something from
the wives of the Prophet (S).

It is clear that coming before the people’s sight (even with Islamic
veil) was not a good action for the Prophet’s wives, that was why it was
ordained that they would take them from behind the curtain or the door.

The point which must be taken under consideration is that the purpose of
the Qur’anic word ***/hijab/***, in this verse, is not the women’s veil,
but it is an ordinance added to it which had been particular for the
wives of the Prophet (S).

By it, for the special conditions of the wives of the Prophet (S),
people were commanded if they wanted to take something from them, they
would take it from behind the curtain, and these wives should not appear
before people in such instances, even with Islamic cover.

This ordinance, of course, has not been ordained about other women, for
whom only observing the religious cover is enough.

This command was ordained for the wives of the Prophet because of the
existence of the abundant enemies and self-interested fault-finders who
might denigrate them and the black-hearted persons might take it as a
document; then this special command was for them, or, in other words, it
was given to the people that at the time of asking something from the
Prophet’s wives they would ask them what they wanted from behind the
curtain.

Specially the application of the Qur’anic word ***/wara’/ (behind)*** is
a witness for it.

Next to this command, the Qur’an states the philosophy of it as follows:

***“…This is purer for your hearts and for their hearts…”***

The Qur’an states the fifth ordinance as follows:

***“…And it is not for you to hurt Allah’s Messenger…”***

The act of annoyance is mentioned in this verse and it is to go to the
Prophet’s house out of place, and staying there and causing bother after
eating the meal, yet, however, the concept of the verse is general and
envelops any kind of annoyance and hurt.

In Islamic narrations, there is also mentioned in occasion of revelation
indicating that some of the black hearted persons had sworn that after
the Prophet (S) they would marry with his wives. This speech was another
hurt, too.

Finally, the sixth, and the last divine ordinance, is about the
prohibition of marriage with wives of the Prophet (S) after him, as
follows:

***“…neither to marry his wives after him, ever, verily this is grievous
(sin) with Allah.”***

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 54
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِن تُبْدُوا شَيْئاً أَوْ تُخْفُوهُ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ بِكُلّ‌ِ
شَيْءٍ عَلِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “Whether you reveal anything or conceal it, verily Allah has full
knowledge of all things.”***

Allah is aware of not only our deeds but also of everything, and His
awareness is also equal upon what is hidden and what is manifest.

In this holy verse, the Qur’an has severely warned people by saying:

***“Whether you reveal anything or conceal it, verily Allah has full
knowledge of all things.”***

You should not imagine that Allah is not aware of your annoyance to His
Prophet (S). He knows both all the things you utter by your tongue and
the things you think and decide about them in your heart; then He will
reward everyone according to his action and intention proportionately.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 55
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِنَّ فِي ءَابَآئِهِنَّ وَلآ أَبْنآئِهِنَّ وَلآ
إِخْوَانِهِنَّ وَلآ أَبْنَآءِ إِخْوَانِهِنَّ وَلآ أَبْنَآءِ
أَخَوَاتِهِنَّ وَلاَ نِسَآئِهِنَّ وَلاَ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُنَّ
وَاتَّقِينَ اللَّهَ اِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلَي كُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “There is no sin for them (not to have veil) with their fathers,
nor their sons, nor their brothers, nor their brothers’ sons, nor the
sons of their sisters, nor their own women, nor of what their right
hands possess; and be in awe of Allah! Verily Allah is a witness of all
things.”***

There is no hardship or difficulty in Islam. The first grade relatives
who permanently ply in the house and among the household are on
confidential terms with each other.

Sine there has been stated an absolute ordinance in the previous verse
about the wives of the Prophet (S) and the absoluteness of this
ordinance brings this misconception into being that their very near
relatives are also obliged to perform it, and they must communicate with
them from behind the curtain, the above holy verse was revealed and
explained how they may behave.

It says:

***“There is no sin for them (not to have veil) with their fathers, nor
their sons, nor their brothers, nor their brothers’ sons, nor the sons
of their sisters, nor their own women, nor of what their right hands
possess…”***

In other words, their very near relatives, who are limited in these six
groups, are as exceptions. If someone says that there are some other
persons who are also among the very near relatives, such as paternal
uncles and maternal uncles, but they are not mentioned in these six
groups, it must be answered as follows:

In view of the fact that the Qur’an uses eloquence and elegance in their
best form, and one of the principles of eloquence is that there should
not be any extra word in the speech, so here, it has not mentioned the
paternal uncles and maternal ones, because by mentioning the children of
brother and the children of sister the allowance of paternal uncles and
maternal uncles is made clear, because it is always mutual.

In the same way that a brother’s son is a near relative to the person,
the one is also near relative to one’s brother’s child; (and we know
that such a woman is counted a paternal aunt. And Also as the sister’s
child is a near relative to the one, the one is also near relative to
the sister’s child, (and we know that such a woman is a maternal aunt).

When the paternal aunt and the maternal aunt are near relatives (mahram)
to her brother’s son and sister’s son, the paternal uncle and the
maternal uncle are also near relatives (mahram) unto brother’s daughter
and sister’s daughter, (because there is no difference between paternal
uncle and aunt, and also maternal uncle and aunt) and this is one of the
narrow things of the Qur’an.

By the way, the husband’s father and husband’s son are also counted
among the near relatives of the woman, as they are also mentioned in
Surah An-Nur, No. 24, verse 31 among the near relatives, too.

Also, the lack of mentioning the foster brothers and foster sisters and
the like in the verse is for the sake that they are counted as brother
and sister like other very near relatives and there is no need to be
mentioned independently.

At the end, the verse changes the tone of speech from absent addressee
to present addressee, when it addresses the wives of the Prophet (S) and
says:

***“…and be in awe of Allah! Verily Allah is a witness of all
things.”***

There is nothing hidden and concealed for Allah, because a curtain and a
cover and the like are nothing but some means as barriers against
committing sins, and the main root is piety that if it is absent even
these means will not be beneficial.

This point also seems necessary to be mentioned here that the Arabic
term ***/nisa’ihinna/ (their own women)*** refers to the Muslim women
entirely, because, as it was mentioned in the commentary of Surah
An-Nur, it is not suitable for Muslim women that they appear before
non-Muslim women since they may explain the things for their husbands.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 56
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ اللَّهَ وَمَلآَئِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَي النَّبِيّ‌ِ يَآ
أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا صَلُّوا عَلَيْهِ وَسَلّـِمُوا تَسْلِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “Verily Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet, O you
who believe! Send you also blessings on him, and you salute him with
submission.***

In the whole six narration books of the Sunnites there are some
narrations indicating that once the Prophet (S) was asked:

*“How should we send blessings?”*

He answered:

*“Say: ‘O’ Allah! Bless Muhammad and his descendents’.”*[^2]

It is important to recite Salawat beside the name of the Prophet (S).
The Messenger of Allah said:

*“Whoever sends blessing on me in his book and his writing(s), he will
be rewarded as long as that Salawat exists in that writing.”*[^3]

Some Islamic narrations indicate: whoever once sends blessings on
Muhammad, Allah will send blessings on him ten times and (also) his ten
faults will be concealed.[^4]

After the statements mentioned in the previous holy verses, about the
protection of the Prophet’s respect and that he should not be annoyed,
the verses under discussion at first speak about the special love of
Allah and His angels to the Prophet (S) and then He commands the
believers in this regard.

Then, the Holy Qur’an explains the evil and painful sequels for those
who annoy the Prophet (S) and finally it mentions the great sin of those
who hurt the believers by means of slander.

At first, it says:

***“Verily Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet…”***

The rank of the Prophet (S) is so high that Allah, the Creator of the
world, and all His angels, who are divinely ordered to manage this
world, send blessings on him (S).

Now that it is so, you may come into agreement with this message of the
world of existence, as the verse continues saying:

***“…O you who believe! Send you also blessings on him, and you salute
him with submission.***

The Prophet (S) is an excellent being of the world of creation. Now
that, by the grace of Allah, he is available for you, be careful not to
count him cheap. Behold not to forget his rank before Allah and with the
angels of all heavens. He is a human being. He has come out from among
you, but he is not an ordinary man, he is one in whose entity a world
can be found.

### A Few Points

1- When the Arabic word ***/salat/*** and the word ***/salawat/***,
which is its plural form, are attributed to Allah, they will be meant:
‘sending Mercy’, and when they are attributed to the angels and the
believers they are in the sense of ‘asking for mercy’.

2- The application of the term /yusallun/, which is a verb in the
present tensed, is an indication to the continuance of the verb; that
is, Allah and His angels continuously send blessings and Mercy on him, a
permanent mercy and salutation.

3- Commentators have delivered different attitudes about the difference
between the Qur’anic term ***/sallu/*** and ***/sallimu/*** among them
that which seems more suitable with the lexical form of these two Arabic
terms is that: the term ***/sallu/*** is an imperative form of the verb
that means to seek mercy and to send blessings on the Prophet (S), while
the term /sallimu/ either means to submit to the commandments of the
Prophet of Islam (S) as Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 65 concerning the
believers says:

***“…Then they find within themselves no dislike of which you decide and
submit with full submission.”***

There is a narration which indicates that once Abubasir said to Imam
Sadiq (as) that he had understood the meaning of sending blessing on the
Prophet (S) but what was the meaning of submitting to him.

The Imam answered him:

*“The purpose of it is being submitted to him in affairs.”*[^5]

Or it means to send salutation to the Prophet (S) as it is said:

*“Peace be upon you O’ Messenger of Allah!”,*

and the like, the content of which is asking safety and health for the
Prophet (S) from the presence of Allah.

Abu-Hamzah Thumali narrates from one of the friends of the Prophet (S)
by the name of Ka‘b as follows:

*“When the above verse was revealed we told him we knew the meaning of
‘peace be upon you’, but how was to send blessing on you?”*

The Prophet (S) answered:

*“Do say: ‘O’ Allah! Bless Muhammad and his descendents as You blessed
Abraham, verily You are Praised, the Glorious. And send blessings on
Muhammad and his descendents as you sent blessings on Abraham and the
progeny of Abraham; verily you are Praised, the Glorious.”*

Both the meaning of salutation and the manner of sending blessing on the
Prophet are made clear from this tradition.[^6]

These two meanings are completely different for salutation, but by
proper care they can be lead to a single point, and it is a verbal and
practical submission to the Prophet (S); since he, who sends blessings
on him and asks Allah safety for him, loves him and accepts him as a
Divine Prophet necessary to be obeyed.

4- It is noteworthy that in numerous narrations recorded by the Sunnites
and narrated from Ahlul Bayt (as) concerning the modality of sending
blessings on the Prophet (S), it has explicitly been mentioned that the
‘descendents of’ Muhammad should be added at the time of sending
blessings on Muhammad.

It is mentioned in Durr-ul-Manthur from Sahih Bukhari, and Muslim,
Abu-Dawud, Tarmathi, Nisa’i, Ibn-i-Majah, Ibn-i-Marduwayh, and some
other narrators who have narrated from ka‘b-ibn-‘Ujrah that a man told
the Prophet (S):

*“We know how to salute to you, but how should be sending blessings on
you?”*

The Prophet (S) said:

*“Do say: ‘O’ Allah! Bless Muhammad and his descendents as You blessed
Abraham; verily You are Praised, the Glorious. And send blessings on
Muhammad and his descendents as You sent blessings on Abraham and the
progeny of Abraham; verily You are Praised, the Glorious.”*

Besides the abovementioned tradition, the writer of Durr-ul-Manthur have
recorded eighteen more traditions in all of which this fact has been
stipulated that /’al-i-Muhammad/ (the progeny of Muhammad) must be
mentioned at the time of reciting Salawat.

These traditions have been taken from the famous books of the Sunnites
narrated from a group of the Companions, including Ibn-i-‘Abbas, Talhah,
Ibn-i-Mas‘ud, ’Abu Sa‘id-Khidri, ’Abu-Hurayrah, ’Abu Mas‘ud-i-’Ansari,
Baridah, Ka‘b-ibn-‘Ujrah, and Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as).

Sahih Bukhari, which is one of the most famous sources of traditions of
the Sunnites, has delivered numerous narrations in this regard. For more
details you can refer to the text of the book itself.[^7]

There are also two narrations recorded in Sahih-i-Muslim in this
regard.[^8]

This point is also noteworthy that in some narrations of the Sunnite and
many narrations of Shi‘ites even the Arabic word ***/‘ala/ (upon)*** has
not occurred as a separation between ‘Muhammad’ and ’Al-i-Muhammad’, but
the phrase is recited as this: /’allahumma salli ‘ala Muhammad-in
wa-’al-i-muhammad/. We conclude this discussion with another tradition
from the Prophet of Islam (S).

Ibn-i-Hajar cites in ‘Sawa‘iq’ that the Prophet (S) said:

*“Do not send an imperfect Salawat on me”*

They asked:

*“What is an imperfect Salawat?”*

He answered:

*“That you say: ‘O’ Allah! Send blessings on Muhammad’ and you do not
continue it. But you do say: ‘O’ Allah! Send blessings on Muhammad and
the descendents of Muhammad’.”*[^9]

It is for this very narration that a group of the great jurisprudents of
the Sunnites consider incumbent the phrase /’al-i-muhammad/ to be added
to his name in the prayer.[^10]

5- Is sending Salawat on the Prophet (S) incumbent, or not? And if it is
obligatory, where is it? This is a question which the jurisprudents
answer.

All the jurisprudents of Ahlul Bayt say that its recitation in the first
and second ‘Tashahhud’ is obligatory, and in other than that it is
recommended. Besides the traditions narrated from Ahlul Bayt (as) in
this regard, there are also a great deal of proper narration recorded in
the books of the Sunnites indicating that it is incumbent.

Among them is the famous narration that ‘Ayishah narrates.

She says:

*“I heard from the Messenger of Allah who said: ‘A prayer without
purification and without sending Salawat on me will not be accepted’.”*

Among the jurisprudents of the Sunnites, Shafi‘i says it is obligatory
to be recited in the second Tashahhud. Ahmad considers it as obligatory
in one of two narrations quoted by him; as well as another group of the
jurisprudents. But some others, like ’Abu-Hanifah, have not counted it
obligatory.[^11]

It is interesting that Shafi‘i has explicitly expressed this very
pronouncement in his famous poem, where he says:

*“O’ Ahlul Bayt of the Messenger of Allah! The love of you has been
enjoined from the side of Allah in the Qur’an. And for the glory of you,
this is enough that whoever does not send Salawat on you his prayer is
invalid.”*

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 57
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لَعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالأَخِرَةِ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذَاباً مُّهِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. “Those who annoy Allah and His Messenger, Allah has cursed them
in this world and the Hereafter, and He has prepared for them a
humiliating punishment.”***

Annoying Allah means doing something against His desire and His consent
that, instead of attracting His Mercy, one causes to bring His wrath and
curse as a consequence.

And also the purpose of annoying Allah may be that His servants are
annoyed, like the act of lending to a believer which is in fact lending
to Allah. And the purpose of annoying His Messenger (S) is to reject
him, to denigrate him, to treat impolitely with him (S), and hurting His
Ahlul Bayt (progeny) (as).

As in a few traditions we recite that the Prophet (as) said:

*“Fatimah is a part of me (my body); then whoever makes her angry, he
has made me angry.”*[^12]

This holy verse in fact states something in the face of the content of
the previous verse. It says:

*“Those who annoy Allah and His Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this
world and the Hereafter, and He has prepared for them a humiliating
punishment.”*

Concerning the purpose of the Qur’anic phrase: ‘***annoy Allah***’, some
commentators have said it is disbelief and atheism which causes the
wrath of Allah, because annoyance in respect to Allah can not have any
concept save causing Wrath.

This is also probable that ‘to annoy Allah’ is the same as to annoy the
Prophet (S) and the believers, and the word ‘Allah’ mentioned here is
for the importance and emphasis on the subject.

The annoyance of the Prophet has a vast meaning, and it envelops any
action that hurts him, including: disbelief, atheism, and opposition
with the commandments of Allah, and also undue attributions,
accusations, or creating trouble when the Prophet (S) invited them into
his own house, which was referred to in verse 53 of this very Surah,
saying:

***“…verily this annoys the Prophet…”***

Or the matter which is mentioned in Surah At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 61
where they accused the Prophet (S).

This verse says:

***“And there are among them those who hurt the Prophet and say: ‘He is
an ear!’…”***

Even from the narrations mentioned about the verse, it is understood
that hurting the household of the Prophet (S), specially Ali (as) and
Fatimah, the Prophet’s daughter (as), has also been involved in this
very verse.

In part five of Sahih-i-Bukhari it is recorded:

“*The Messenger of Allah said:*

*‘Fatimah is a part of my body, then whoever makes her angry, he has
made me angry.”*[^13]

This very tradition is mentioned in Sahih-i-Muslim in this form:

*“Verily Fatimah is a part of me (my body); whatever hurts her, it hurts
me.”*[^14]

Similar to this meaning has been narrated about Ali (as) from the
Prophet (S).[^15]

As it was said before, the word ‘curse’ mentioned in the above holy
verse is in the sense of being far from the Mercy of Allah, and this is
just the opposite point of Mercy and Salawat mentioned in the previous
verse.

In fact, curse and being far of the Mercy from the side of the Lord
Whose Mercy is vast and endless, is counted the worst kind of
punishment, specially that it is both in the world and Hereafter, (as it
is said in the verse under discussion).

Perhaps, it is for this reason that the word ‘curse’ has been mentioned
in the above verse before the phrase ‘a humiliating punishment.’

The application of the Qur’anic term ***/’a‘adda/ (He has prepared)***
is an evidence upon the emphasis and importance of this punishment.

Surah Al-’Ahzab – Verse 58
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ بِغَيْرِ مَا
اكْتَسَبُوا فَقَدِ احْتَمَلوا بُهْتَاناً وَاِثْماً مُّبِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “And those who annoy believing men and believing women without
that they have earned it, have laid upon themselves a calumny and a
manifest sin.”***

The act of hurting and annoying others, in any form it may be, is among
the sins which bring the Wrath of Allah. The most important hurt is
sarcasm and slander. So, after the hurt of both Allah and the Prophet
(S) this verse speaks about the hurt of the believers because of the
extraordinary importance that it has.

It says:

***“And those who annoy believing men and believing women without that
they have earned it, have laid upon themselves a calumny and a manifest
sin.”***

This is so because, by the way of Faith, a believer has a link with
Allah and His Prophet, and for this reason he has been mentioned in the
same line and in the row of Allah (s.w.t.) and His Messenger (S).

The phrase ‘without that they have earned it’ points to this fact that
they have not committed any sin for which they should be annoyed. This
makes it clear that if they commit a sin for which they deserve a
religious fixed punishment, just retaliation, and discretionary
punishment the execution of these things upon them does not matter.

Again, the act of enjoining right and forbidding wrong is not inside the
realm of this statement.

Prior to /’iθman mubina/ because of its importance, since calumny is
counted one of the greatest hurts, and the pain of the annoyance created
by it is even more intensive than the pain of sword and dagger, because
the pain of the wound of a dagger is reconcilable, but the wound of the
tongue is not reconcilable.

Islamic auspicious narrations also consider an extraordinary importance
for this subject.

Imam Sadiq (as) in a tradition says:

*“Allah, the Almighty, the Glorious says: ‘Whoever annoys My believing
servant, he has announced declaration of war against Me.”*[^16]

However, some of the commentators have said that it is understood from
the style of the verse that there had been some rumourmongers in Medina
who used to accuse unduly the believers, (and even the Prophet (S) was
not secure from their tongues).

Such persons are not scanty in the societies of today. Their job is to
make plots against the righteous and pious ones, as well as to forge
lies and slanders.

The Holy Qur’an has seriously attacked them with the most grievous
attacks and has introduced their deeds as calumny and a manifest sin.

The evidence for this statement will also be recited in later verses.

Imam Ali-ibn-Mus-ar-Rida (as) has narrated a tradition from his grand
father, the Prophet (S), in which he said:

*“The one who calumniates a man believer or a woman believer, or he says
something about him/her which does not exist in him/her, Allah, the
High, will set him on a heap of Fire on the Day of Hereafter until he
tolerates what he has said about him/her.”*[^17]

[^1]: Surah An-Nur, No. 24, verse 27

[^2]: Sahih-i-Bukhari, Tradition No. 5880

[^3]: The Commentary of Rauh-ul-Bayan following the verse

[^4]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the commentary

[^5]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, following the verse under discussion

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Sahih-i-Bukhari, Vol. 6, P. 151

[^8]: Sahih-i-Muslim, Vol. 1, P. 305

[^9]: Sawa‘iq, P. 144

[^10]: ‘Allamah Hilli, has narrated this saying in Tathkirah, from the
scholars of Shi‘ah added to Imam Ahmad and some Shafi‘iyyah

[^11]: Tathkirah, by ‘Allamah, Vol. 1, P. 126

[^12]: Sahih-i-Bukhari, Vol. 5, P. 26; and Sahih-i-Muslim, Vol. 4, P.
1903

[^13]: Sahih-i-Bukhari, Vol. 5, P. 26

[^14]: Sahih-i-Muslim, Vol. 4, P. 1903

[^15]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, following the verse

[^16]: ’Usul-i-Kafi, Vol. 2, P. 35

[^17]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 75, P. 194


