Surah Al-‘Ankabut, Section 5: To Argue in the Best Way Possible
===============================================================

**Part (Juz') 21**

Surah Al-‘Ankabut, Chapter 29 - Verse 45
----------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتْلُ مَآ اُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ وَأَقِمِ الصَّلاَةَ إِنَّ
الصَّلاَةَ تَنْهَي عَنِ الْفَحْشَآءِ وَالْمُنكَرِ وَلَذِكْرُ اللَّهِ
أَكْبَرُ وَاللَّهُ يَعْلَمُ مَا تَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

***45. “Recite that which has been revealed to you of the Book, and
establish the prayer, verily prayer keeps (one) away from indecency and
evil, and certainly the remembrance of Allah is greater, and Allah knows
what you do.”***

In this verse Allah’s commands to the Prophet (S) for reciting the
Qur’an and establishing the prayer have come beside each other and it is
for the sake that Qur’an and prayer are two strengthening sources of
strength.

Allah, Who informs His Prophet (S) of a heavy responsibility, tells him
to take help from two strengthening sources for performing this heavy
responsibility; one is recitation of the Qur’an, and the other is
establishing prayers.

However, after the end of different parts of the life story of the
former nations and the great prophets and the unpleasant manner of those
nations with those Divine leaders, and the painful end of their lives,
in order to comfort and console the Prophet (S) and for strengthening
his spirit and showing a general and conclusive policy, the Qur’an,
addressing him, commands him and at first says:

***“Recite that which has been revealed to you of the Book…”***

He (S) is commanded to recite these verses, because whatever he wants is
found in them: knowledge and wisdom, advice and admonition, the
criterion of the cognition of right and wrong, the means of enlightening
of the heart and spirit, and the path of every group and people to move
along, all are in the Qur’an.

He should recite it and apply it in his life, recite it and be inspired
by it and recite it and enlighten his heart by the light of its
recitation.

Next to this command, which is, indeed, an instructive one, it pays to
the second command which is the main branch of education.

It says:

***“…and establish the prayer, verily prayer keeps (one) away from
indecency and evil…”***

Of course, since the nature of prayer reminds man the strongest
restraining factor, i.e. the firm belief in origin and Resurrection, it
has an impedimental effect from indecency and evil.

He who stands in prayer, says *‘Allahu Akbar’*, and calls Allah higher
than and beyond everything, he remembers his bounties, praises and
glorifies Him, praises Him for His mercifulness and compassionateness,
remembers the Day of His Judgment, confesses his servitude to Him, seeks
for His help, asks Him to lead him to the straight Way, and he refuges
to Him for the path of those inflicted with His wrath and those gone
astray.[^1]

No doubt, there will appear a movement in the heart and spirit of such a
person toward the truth, purity, and piety.

He bows for Allah, he falls in prostration before Him, he contemplates
deeply in His greatness, and forgets overweening and self-admiration.

He certifies to His Oneness, attests to the prophecy of the Prophet
Muhammad (S), and he sends salutation to His Prophet and asks Allah in
supplication that He appoints him among the righteous servants.

All these things create a wave of spirituality in him, a wave that can
be considered as a barrier against sins.

This action is repeated several times in a day and night, and when he
gets up in the morning he is drowned in the remembrance of Allah.

At midday, when he is busy with material life, suddenly he hears the
sound of ‘Allahu ’Akbar’ called by Mu’azzin, he ceases his current
program and hastens to go to Him.

And even at the end of the day and at the beginning of the night, before
he goes to bed to rest, he prattles with Him and makes his heart the
centre of the rays of His Light. Moreover, while he is preparing himself
for establishing prayer, he washes himself and purifies himself, he
sends away unlawful things and anger from him and goes toward Him.

All these affairs have an impedimental effect against the line of
indecency and evil. But as much as every prayer contains the conditions
of perfection and the essence of worship, it keeps one away from
indecency and evil. Sometimes it is a general and inclusive prohibition
and sometimes it is a limited and partial prohibition.

It is often impossible that someone keeps up prayer but it affects him
nothing, even when his prayer is untrue, even if he is sinful. This kind
of prayer, of course, has a little effect, and if such persons did not
keep up that very prayer, they would be more polluted than that.

Speaking more clearly, the prohibition from indecency and evil has
naturally many degrees, and according to observing its conditions, every
prayer deserves some of these degrees.

### Some Traditions

1- A tradition indicates that the Prophet of Islam (S) once said:

*“The five ritual prayers is like a stream with flowing wholesome water
at the door of the house of one of you in which he washes himself five
times a day, then there will remain no dirt (over his body).”*[^2]

2- Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“I recommend you to prayer and protecting it because verily it is the
best deed and it is the pillar of your religion.”*[^3]

3- We recite in a tradition from the Prophet (S) that a young man from
the Helpers (’Ansar) once established prayer with the Prophet (S) while
he was polluted with some ugly sins. Some persons went to the Prophet
(S) and told him his circumstance.

He (S) said:

*“Verily his prayer will finally purify him from his pollution one
day.”*[^4]

4- This very effect of prayer is so important that some Islamic
traditions refer to it as the criterion of the accepted prayer and the
none-accepted prayer.

For instance, Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*“The one who likes to know whether his prayer has been accepted or not,
he should see whether his prayer hindered him from indecency and evil,
then with the same scale that it has hindered him, his prayer is
accepted from him.”*[^5]

5- Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Islam has been founded on five things: the prayer (Salat), the
poor-rate (Zakat), Hajj pilgrimage, fasting, and wilayat (mastership) of
Ahlul Bayt (as).”*[^6]

6- The Messenger of Allah (S) once said:

*“Whoever protects his five (ritual) prayers, on the Day of Hereafter
they will be light, guide, and (means of) deliverance for him.”*[^7]

7- Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The first thing that will be reckoned from a servant is the prayer.
Then if the prayer is accepted, his other (good) deeds will be accepted,
but if it is rejected his other (good) deeds will not be accepted
either.”*[^8]

8- Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“When our children are five years old, we order them to establish the
prayer, then when your children become seven years old, order them to
establish the prayer.”*[^9]

9- The Prophet (S) said:

*“Allah says: ‘Verily I have a covenant for my servant that if he
establishes the prayer in its time I may not punish him, and that I
admit him in Paradise without reckoning.”*[^10]

10- The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Whoever takes his prayer light will not be of me and by Allah he will
not arrive unto me in the pond (of Kauthar).”*[^11]

11- The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Whoever intentionally abandons the prayer his name will be written on
the door of Hell among those who enter it.”*[^12]

12- The Prophet (S) said:

*“Never comes the time of prayer but an angel calls among people: ‘O
people! Stand up and by means of your prayer, extinguish the fire you
have kindled upon your selves’.”*[^13]

Finally, at the end of the verse the Qur’an adds:

***“…and certainly the remembrance of Allah is greater…”***

The appearance of the above sentence is that there is a more important
statement for prayer than this.

That is, one of other important effects and blessings of the prayer,
which is also even more important than prohibition from indecency and
evil, is that it reminds man of Allah that is the main cause of every
goodness and prosperity.

Even the main factor of prohibition from indecency and evil is this very
‘remembrance of Allah’, too. Its superiority, in fact, is in that it is
also counted the cause and the basis.

In principle, the remembrance of Allah is the source of life and peace
for the hearts, and nothing is comparable with it.

The Qur’an says:

***“…Behold! By Allah’s remembrance (only) the hearts are set at
rest.”***[^14]

In principle, the essence of all worships, irrespective of prayer and
other than that, is the remembrance of Allah: The sayings of prayer, the
acts of prayer, the preliminary deeds of prayer and the supplications
after prayer all, indeed, revive the remembrance of Allah in man’s
heart.

It is noteworthy that in Surah Ta-Ha, No. 20, verse 14 this philosophy
of prayer has been pointed out, and Allah tells Moses:

***“…and establish prayer for My remembrance.”***

And in view of the fact that the men’s intentions and the level of the
attention of their hearts in prayer, as well as other worships, is very
different.

So at the end of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“…and Allah knows what you do.”***

Allah knows the deeds you do in hidden or manifestly, the intentions you
have in your mind, and the words you utter by your tongue.

### The Effect of Prayer in an Individual and in Society

Prayer is not a thing the philosophy of which can be concealed to
anyone, yet attention to the text of the verses of the Qur’an and
Islamic narrations lead us to some more narrow points in this grand.

1. The spirit, bases, preliminary, result and, finally, the philosophy
of prayer is the remembrance of Allah. It is that very ‘remembrance of
Allah’ which has been mentioned in the above verse as the most superior
result.

Of course, it must be a remembrance which paves the way for
contemplation, and a contemplation which leads to action; as Imam Sadiq
(as) on the commentary of the phrase: /wa liŏikr-ullah-i-’akbar/ says:

***“The remembrance of Allah at the time of performing a ‘lawful’ and
‘unlawful’ action.”***[^15]

(That is, one must remember Allah and goes to a lawful thing and
renounces an unlawful one.)

2. The prayer is a means for wiping out one’s sins and for Allah’s
forgiveness, because, more or less, prayer invites man to repenting and
amending the past.

So we recite in a tradition narrated from the Prophet (S) that he asked:

*“If there is a stream at the door of the house of one of you in which
he washes himself five times a day, will there remain anything from the
dirt over his body?”*

He was answered:

*‘No’.*

Then he (S) said:

*“Verily the parable of the prayer is like the parable of the flowing
stream. Whenever he keeps up prayer, the sins he has committed between
two ritual prayers will be vanished.”*[^16]

Thus, the wounds which the man’s soul obtains because of sins will be
cured by prayer as a vulnerary, and the rust covered the heart will be
wiped out.

3. Prayer is a barrier against the future sins, because it strengthens
the essence of faith in man, and grows the plant of piety in his heart,
and we know that ‘Faith’ and ‘piety’ are two strong dams before sins.

This is the same thing that has been stated in the above verse as the
prohibition of indecency and evil, and it is the same thing that many
Islamic Traditions refer to. There were many sinful persons whose story
life was explained to the leaders of Islam and these leaders said that
prayer would rectify them; and it did.

4. Prayer removes negligence. The greatest affliction for those who pave
the path of truth is that they forget the aim of their creation and are
utterly busy with the material life and temporary joys.

But prayer, which is established five times a day and in different
hours, it ceaselessly warns man and reminds him the aim of his creation;
it reiterates him his situation in the world. This is a great bounty
that man has a means which warns him earnestly several times a day of
his duty.

5. Prayer breaks egotism and haughtiness for everyday a person performs
seventeen units of prayer and in each of them he puts his forehead on
the dust before his Lord and he sees him not only a very small thing
before the greatness of Allah but also naught before Infinity.

Prayer removes the curtains of pride and self-loving and destroys
arrogance and self-superiority.

It is for this reason that Ali (as) in his famous tradition, wherein the
philosophies of Islamic worships are explained, next to Faith, refers to
the first worship which is prayer with this very aim and says:

***“Allah has enjoined Faith for purification from polytheism, and Salat
(prayer) for purification from vanity…”***[^17]

6. Prayer is a means of fostering the virtues of morals, and that of
man’s spiritual perfection, because it brings out man from limited
material world and surrounded nature, and invites him to the kingdom of
heavens, and makes him high in the same level with the angels. Without
any agent, he sees him before Allah and speaks with Him.

The repetition of prayer during day and night, and emphasizing on the
attributes of Allah, such as: mercifulness, compassionateness, and
greatness, especially with taking help from the different suras of the
Qur’an, which are recited next to Surah Al-Fatihah, that are the best
invitors to goodnesses and purifications, have a considerable effect in
the growth of the ethical virtues in man.

Upon the philosophy of prayer, Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) in a tradition
says:

*“For the God-fearing, prayer is a means of seeking nearness (to
Allah).”*[^18]

7. Prayer gives value and spirit to other deeds, because it makes the
essence of sincerity alive in man. Prayer is a collection of: sincere
intention, pure sayings, and noble deeds.

The repetition of these things every night and day grows the seeds of
other good deeds in man’s spirit and strengthens the essence of
sincerity in him.

In his famous tradition, Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as), after his head was
cleft by the sword of Ibn-Muljam, the wretched, said:

*“…(Fear) Allah (and) keep Allah in view in the matter of prayer,
because it is the pillar of your religion.”*[^19]

We know that when the pillar of a tent breaks or falls, the ropes around
it are useless. Such is when the relation of the servants through prayer
abolishes, other deeds lose their effect.

Besides the content of the prayer, regarding its veracity conditions, it
invites man to purification of his life, because we know the place where
he perform prayer, the pieces of his clothing, the carpet on which he
keeps up his prayer, the water with which he makes ablution or performs
a total ablution, the place where he makes and performs his ablution,
all must be purified from usurpation and from oppressing the rights of
others.

He who is polluted with oppression, injustice, usury, usurpation,
defrauding, bribery, and obtaining some unlawful properties, how can he
prepare the necessities of the prayer? Therefore, the repetition of
prayer for five times a day itself is an invitation to observing the
rights of others.

8. Besides the conditions of validity, the prayer must have the
conditions of perfection that observing them is also another effective
factor for abandoning a great deal of sins.

In jurisprudent books and tradition sources, there are also mentioned
many things as the barriers of the acceptance of the prayer, including
drinking alcoholic liquors, about which a tradition says:

*“The prayer of the drinker of alcoholic liquor is not accepted until
forty days except that he repents.”*[^20]

A large number of Islamic narrations indicate that among those whose
prayer will not be accepted is the leader of oppressors.

In some other traditions, it has been declared that the prayer of the
one who does not pay poor-alms (zakat) will not be accepted.

Also some Islamic traditions denote that eating unlawful food, or
egotism, egoism, and overweening are among the barriers of the
acceptance of prayer. It is evident that how much providing these
conditions of acceptance is constructive.

9. Prayer strengthens the spirit of discipline in man, because it must
be performed exactly at proper times since before or after their time
the prayers are not valid. Also, observing other rites and ordinances in
relation to intention, standing up, bowing, prostration, and the like
make the acceptance of discipline in life programs quite easy.

All of these are the benefits which exist in prayer, and if we add the
property of congregation prayer to it, that the spirit of prayer is its
being in congregation, it has other abundant blessings that we do not
explain them here.

We conclude our definition and explanation about the secrets and
philosophy of prayer with a tradition narrated from Ali-ibn-Musar-Rida
(as).

In answer to a letter in which the philosophy of prayer was asked, he
said:

*“The reason of the legislation of prayer is acknowledgement to the
Lordship of Allah, struggle against polytheism and idolatry, standing in
front of Allah in utmost humbleness and submission, confession to the
sins and asking forgiveness for the past faults, and putting forehead on
the ground for glorification of Allah every day.*

*Again, the aim is that man may always be sensible and reminded, so that
negligence does not encompass his heart, and he might not become proud,
but he should be humble and be interested in increasing the merits of
religion and worldly life.*

*Moreover, he must remember Allah every night and day which can be
provided under the light of prayer. It causes man not to forget his
Master, Divisor, and Creator, and the rebellious and disobedient soul
does not overcome him.*

*And this very attention to Allah and standing in front of Him restrain
man from committing sins and hinder him from kinds of mischief.”*[^21]

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 46
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تُجَادِلُوا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ إِلاَّ بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ
إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْهُمْ وَقُولُوا ءَامَنَّا بِالَّذِي
اُنزِلَ إِلَيْنَا وَأُنزِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ وَإِلَهُنَا وَإِلَهُكُمْ
وَاحِدٌ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. “And do not dispute with the People of the Book save in the best
way, except for those of them who act unjustly, and say: ‘We believe in
what has been sent down unto us and sent down unto you, and our God and
your God is One, and to Him do we submit’.”***

Islam accepts the change of ideas, correct debates between the followers
of different schools of thought, cultures and nations. A dispute is
accepted that the content of which and the style of its words are the
best.

In the former holy verses, the words were mostly about the method of
tackling the obstinate haughty, and ignorant ‘idol-worshippers’ that,
because of their conjectures, they were spoken to with a harsh logic,
and their objects of worship were considered weaker than the spider’s
web.

In the verses under discussion, the words are about the disputation with
the ‘People of the Book’ which must be milder, because, at least, they
had heard a part of the Divine prophets, instructions and the heavenly
Books and they had some more receptivity for a logical debate, and every
one must be talked with according to the standard of his wisdom,
knowledge and morals.

At first, it says:

***“And do not dispute with the People of the Book save in the best
way…”***

The Qur’anic phrase: ***/la tujadilu/ (do not dispute)*** is derived
from /jidal/ which originally means: ‘To spin thread’ and ‘fastening
it’.

This term is also used for a firm building and the like; and when two
persons begin disputing, in fact, each of them tries to turn the other
from his thought. This action is called ‘disputation’; a wrestling is
also called in Arabic /jidal/. The purpose of it, here, however, is
logical discussions and argumentations.

The application of the Qur’anic phrase ***/’allati hiya ahsan/ (the best
way)*** is a very inclusive phrase which envelopes all of the correct
and suitable ways of discussion, including the expressions, the content
of the speech, its tone, and other acts accompanied with it.

Thus, the concept of this sentence is that the expressions must be
uttered politely, the tone of speech must be friendly and its content
must be reasonable, the voice must be free from shouting and any
roughness and rudeness which cause the aspersion of honour. Also the
gesticulations, which are usually the complement of man’s statement, all
must be performed with the same method and style.

How beautiful are the expressions of the Qur’an that they carry a great
deal of meaning by a very short sentence!

All these are for the sake that the aim of disputation and discussion is
not self superiority and putty the other party to shame, but the aim is
effect of the word and its penetration in the depth of the mind of the
opposite party; and the best way for reaching this aim is this very
method of the Qur’an.

Many a time it happens that if the speaker states in a way that the
opposite party takes it as his own thought not as the speaker’s thought,
he may show inclination sooner since a man is interested in his own
thoughts as he is interested in his children.

It is just for the same reason that the Qur’an propounds many issues in
the form of question and answer so that their answers come out from the
inside of the addressee’s mind and he considers it as his own thought.

But, of course, every law has usually an exception, too. For example,
this very general principle in Islamic argumentation for some instances
may be rendered as the sign of weakness and despicableness, or the
opposite party may be so proud that this kind of humane treatment
increases his dare and boldness.

Therefore, continuing the verse, as an exception, it says:

***“…except for those of them who act unjustly…”***

These are those who acted unjustly both to themselves and to others, and
concealed many verses of Allah in order that people would not be
acquainted with the characteristics of the Prophet of Islam (S).

These are those who constantly acted unjustly and trod on the commands
of Allah where they were against their interests.

These are those who acted unjustly and brought forth some superstitions
similar to that of the polytheists who called Jesus, or Ezra, as Allah’s
child.

And, finally, those who often acted unjustly and, instead of logical
argument, used swords, betook to force, and tended to naughtiness and
conspiracy.

Then, at the end of the verse, the Qur’an introduces one of the clear
examples of ‘dispute in the best way’, which can be a living sample for
this discussion, where it announces:

***“…and say: ‘We believe in what has been sent down unto us and sent
down unto you, and our God and your God is One, and to Him do we
submit’.”***

What a beautiful meaning, and what an interesting tone! It is the tone
of Unity and faith unto whatever has been sent down from the side of
Allah, and deleting all bigotries and separations; and, finally, the
Unity of the object of worship and submitting to Allah without any
reservation.

This is an example of ‘disputation in the best way’ that whoever hears
it will be attracted to it. This shows that Islam is not the seeker of a
group, and is not the seeker of disunion, the call of Islam is the call
of unity and being submitted to any right word.

There are many examples of this discussion in the Qur’an.

Among them is the sample to which Imam Sadiq (as) refers in a tradition
where he says:

*“Disputation in the best way is like the subject which has been
mentioned at the end of Surah Ya-Sin about the rejecters of
Resurrection, when they brought the rotten bones before the Prophet (S)
and said:*

***‘…Who will give life to the bones when they are rotten?’***[^22]

*He (S) answered:*

***‘…He will give life to them Who brought them into existence at
first…’***[^23]

***‘He Who has made for you the fire (to burn) from the green
tree…’”***[^24][^25]

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 47
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ أَنزَلْنَآ إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ فَالَّذِينَ ءَاتَيْنَاهُمُ
الْكِتَابَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهِ وَمِنْ هَؤُلاَءِ مَن يُؤْمِنُ بِهِ وَمَا
يَجْحَدُ بِاَيَاتِنَآ إِلاَّ الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “And thus have We sent down unto you the Book. So (some of) those
whom we have given the Book believe in it, and of these (pagans) there
are those who believe in it, and none deny Our signs except the
unbelievers.”***

The Qur’an invites all the followers of the former religions to Islam,
because the Divine guidance is certain and necessary, though whole
people do not accept the guidance.

As an emphasis upon the four principles mentioned in the previous verse,
this verse says:

***“And thus have We sent down unto you the Book…”***

Yes, this Book (the Qur’an) has been sent down based on Unity of the
object of worship, Unity of the invitation of the former true prophets,
submitting to the command of Allah (s.w.t.) without any reservation, and
disputation in the best way.

Some commentators have said that the purpose of the abovementioned
sentence is the similarity of the descent of the Qur’an upon the Prophet
of Islam (S) to the descent of the former Books to other Divine
prophets. That is, in the same way that Allah sent down heavenly Books
to the former prophets, He sent down the Qur’an to him (S), too.

But the first commentary seems more precise, though it is possible to
consider both of them, too.

Then, the Qur’an adds:

***“…So (some of) those whom we have given the Book believe in it…”***

The reason of their belief is that not only they have found its
characteristics in their own Books but also, from the view of general
principles, its content is consistent with the content of their own
Books.

Of course, we know that the entire People of the Book (the Jews and
Christians) did not believe in the Prophet of Islam (S). Therefore, the
above sentence refers to those true believers and truth seekers free
from bigotry who deserve the appellation of ‘People of the Book’ to be
used only for them.

Then, the Qur’an adds about some people of Mecca and the pagans of
Allah:

***“…and of these (pagans) there are those who believe in it…”***

And, at the end of the verse, concerning the disbelievers of both
groups, it says:

***“…and none deny Our signs except the unbelievers.”***

Regarding to the fact that the concept of the Qur’anic word ***/jahd/***
is that: one believes in something but he denies it, the above sentence
means: even the disbelievers confess the greatness of these verses in
their hearts, and they see the signs of veracity in them and consider
the Prophet’s manner and his pure life, as well as that of his
followers, as a reason for its nobility, but they deny often t as the
result of their bigotry, stubbornness, blindly imitation from their
ancestors, or for protecting their unlawful fleeting interests.

Thus, the Holy Qur’an defines the opposition of different nations
against this heavenly Book.

On one line, there are believers, including the scholars of the People
of the Book, True believers, and the polytheists who were thirsty of the
Truth and when they found it they joined to it; and, on the other line,
there were the obstinate deniers who saw the truth but, like bats, they
hid themselves from it, because the gloom of infidelity had become as a
part of their entity and they were afraid of the light of Faith.

It is noteworthy that this group were also pagan, but the second
emphasis on their infidelity may be for the sake that they were not
offered proof before and the real infidelity exists in them just now
that the argument has been completed to them and they have abandoned the
Straight Way knowingly and pave the wrong way.

By the way, for attracting the hearts and influencing the truth into
others’ thoughts, only attaching the strong and powerful proofs are not
enough, but, in this stage, the style of speaking with the opposite
party and the method of discussion has the deepest effect.

There are many persons who are careful and narrow in discussions and
know the scientific subjects very well, but they are not so successful
in influencing in others’ hearts by their speech since they are not
acquainted well with the way of ‘dispute in the best way’ nor with the
constructive discussions.

The fact is that satisfaction of ‘intellect and thought’ alone is not
enough, but emotions, which form half of man’s entity, must become
satisfied, too.

Studying the life of the prophets, and that of the Prophet of Islam (S)
and the Immaculate Imams (as) in particular, shows that, for reaching to
their educational and propagation aims, they used the social morals,
psychological principles, and the best humane ways of influencing in
hearts.

When confronting people, they had a kind of behaviour that they could
quickly attract them toward their own aims. Though some individuals wish
to render these affairs as miracles, it is not such. If we apply their
way and method of discussion with others, we can affect them very soon
and influence in the depths of their hearts.

The Qur’an explicitly says to the Prophet of Islam (S):

***“Thus, it is due to the mercy from Allah that you have been lenient
with them, and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would certainly
have dispersed from around you…”***[^26]

It has happened many times that some persons, after hours of discussion,
not only have not gained anything from their debates, but they find the
opposite party more stable, steadfast, and zealous in his own wrong
belief. Its reason is that the method of ‘dispute in the best way’ has
not been used in that debate.

Roughness in discussion, self-superiority, despising the opposite party,
expression of pride and haughtiness, the lack of respect to others’
thoughts and the absence of sincerity in discussions all are the things
that cause the man’s failure in debates.

That is why there is a section in Islamic morals under the title of
prohibition of Jidal (dispute) and Mira’ (argument) the objective of
which is the discussions in which there is not ‘seeking the truth’, but
its aim is quarrel, self-superiority, and fixing one’s statement.

Besides the spiritual and ethical aspects, the prohibition of Jidal
(dispute) and Mira’ (argument) is for the fact that they are not
mentally successful in this kind of discussions.

The prohibition of ***Jidal (dispute)*** and ***Mira’ (argument)*** are
close to each other; but the Islamic scholars have considered some
differences between them. They believe that Mira’ is for the expression
of excellence and perfection, while Jidal is for despising.

The Arabic word ***/Jidal/*** is used for the elementary attacks in
discussion while /mira’/ is applied for the defensive attacks.

The term /jidal/ is used for the scientific issues, but the meaning of
/mira’/ is general. (Of course, there is not any contradiction between
these commentaries.)

However, the dispute and discussion with others is sometimes ‘dispute in
the best way’, and it is a discussion in which the abovementioned
conditions are exactly observed, and sometimes it is other than that
when the abovementioned affairs are forgotten in it.

We conclude this statement with a few expressive and instructive
narrations:

A tradition from the Prophet (S) indicates he said:

*“No servant perceives the reality of Faith unless he abandons Mira’
(argument) though he is right.”*[^27]

Another tradition indicates that Solomon (as), the Divine prophet, told
his son:

*“O my son! Avoid /mira’/ (argument) because not only it has no benefit,
but also it stirs up enmity between the brothers.”*[^28]

Again, it has been narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) that he said:

*“No group went astray after when they were guided except by the dispute
(in which the truth is not pursued).”*[^29]

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 48
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كُنتَ تَتْلُواْ مِن قَبْلِهِ مِن كِتَابٍ وَلاَ تَخُطَّهُ
بِيَمِينِكَ إِذاً لاَّرْتَابَ الْمُبْطِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. “And you did not recite before it any book, nor did you
transcribe one with your right hand, indeed, would the talkers of
vanities have doubted.”***

The descent of the Holy Qur’an upon the illiterate Prophet (S), who
could neither read nor write, is one of the Divine ways of completing
the argument to mankind.

We must not be proud and boast of our ability of reading and writing,
sometimes it happens that, by the Will of Allah, an illiterate person
changes the culture of human beings.

In this holy verse, one of the clear signs of veracity of the invitation
of the Prophet of Islam (S) has been pointed out which is an emphasis on
the content of the previous verse. It says:

***“And you did not recite before it any book, nor did you transcribe
one with your right hand, indeed, would the talkers of vanities have
doubted.”***

How is it possible to believe that an illiterate person, who has not
been taught by a human teacher and has not gone to any school, brings a
Book by himself and invites all mankind to challenge it but everybody is
impotent to bring the like of it? Is this not a proof to the fact that
his power gets help from the infinite power of Allah and his Book is a
heavenly revelation which has been inspired to him from the side of
Allah?

It is necessary to note this point that if a person asks how can we know
that the holy Prophet of Islam never went to school and learned to
write? In answer we say that he used to live in an environment where the
literate and educated persons were very scanty, and it is also said that
there were only seventeen persons in Mecca who could read and write.

In such a place it is impossible for an individual to be able to conceal
his being taught if he has gone to any school. If so, he will be known
everywhere and his teacher and his lesson will be introduced. Thus, how
can such a person claim that he is a true prophet while he tells a lie
so manifest?

In particular that these verses were sent down in Mecca where the
Prophet (S) lived and grew up, and before the obstinate enemies from
whose view the smallest point of weakness was not hidden.

By the way, in the commentary of Surah Al-’A‘raf, no. 7, verse 157 it
was said that there have been mentioned three meanings for the Arabic
word ***/’ummi/*** among which the meaning: ‘unschooled’ is the most
clear.[^30]

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 49
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ هُوَ ءَايَاتٌ بَيّـِنَاتٌ فِي صُدُورِ الَّذِينَ اُوتُوا الْعِلْمَ
وَمَا يَجْحَدُ بِاَيَاتِنَآ إِلاَّ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “Nay! It (Qur’an) is the clear signs in the breasts of those who
have been granted the knowledge, and none but the unjust reject Our
Signs.”***

The verses of the Holy Qur’an influence in scholars’ hearts and it is
this group who apprehend the truthfulness of the Qur’an with their whole
selves.

In this holy verse, there are stated some other signs for the legitimacy
of the Qur’an. It implies that this heavenly Book is a collection of
clear verses which influence in the breasts of the bearers of knowledge.

The verse says:

***“Nay! It (Qur’an) is the clear signs in the breasts of those who have
been granted the knowledge…”***

The application of the Qur’anic phrase: ***/’ayatun bayyinat/*** refers
to this fact that the signs of legitimacy of the Qur’an are found in the
Qur’an itself and in its verses, and its proof is with it.

In fact, it is the genetic verses that by the recitation of which man
needs no other thing to understand the truth. These verses containing of
divine legislation, from the point of both appearance and content, are
in such a manner that they all are the proof of their own truthfulness.

Besides that, the adherents and lovers of these verses are those who
have a portion of knowledge and awareness, though they are poor.

In other words, one of the ways of knowing the nobility of a school of
thought, is verification of the state of the believers of that school.

If some ignorant persons or charlatans are the supporters of someone, it
seems that he is of the same group, but if some people, who carry the
secrets of knowledge in their breasts, announce their loyalty to a
school of thought, it is the evidence of legitimacy of that school.

And, we see that a group of the learned among the People of the Book and
some pious personalities, such as Abuthar, Salman, Miqdad,
‘Ammar-i-Yasir, and a high esteemed person like Hadrat Ali (as) were the
supporter, and lovers of this school.

According to a great deal of traditions narrated from the way of Ahlul
Bayt (as) this holy verse has been rendered into the Imams of Ahlul Bayt
(as). This does not mean exclusiveness, but it is the statement of a
clear example for the Qur’anic phrase: ***/’allaŏina ’utul-‘ilm/ (those
who have been granted the knowledge)***.

When we see that some Islamic narrations declare that the purpose of the
verse is Imams, in particular, it, indeed, is an indication, to the
perfect stage of the knowledge of the Qur’an which is at their disposal,
and it does not matter that scholars, learned ones, and the mass of
people who have commonsense have a portion of the sciences of the
Qur’an.

However, this verse shows that knowledge is not limited to what is
studied through books and what is learnt in front of teachers, because,
as the Qur’an explicitly says, the Prophet (S) did not go to school and
did not learn how to write but he was the highest referent of a concept
of the Qur’anic sentence saying:

***“Those who have been granted the knowledge”.***

Therefore, beyond the formal knowledge, there is a knowledge higher than
that which may be inspired unto the heart of man in the form of a light,
which is the essence of knowledge, and other sciences are as an outward
cover for it.

An Islamic tradition says:

*“knowledge is a light that Allah puts it in the heart of whom He
desires.”*[^31]

At the end, verse the Qur’an adds:

***“…and none but the unjust reject Our Signs.”***

It is because the sings of it are clear: the bringer of it is the
unschooled Prophet (S), and some thoughtful aware persons believe in it.

Moreover, the Qur’an itself is a collection of clear verses, and its
characteristics have also been mentioned in the former Divine Books.

Yet, do reject it save those who are unjust to their selves and to the
society?

We repeat again that the Arabic word ***/jahd/*** is used for a person
who knows something but, in spite of his knowledge, he denies it.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 50
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَوْلآ اُنزِلَ عَلَيْهِ ءَايَاتٌ مِن رَّبّـِهِ قُلْ إِنَّمَا
الاَيَاتُ عِندَ اللَّهِ وَإِنَّمَآ أَنَاْ نَذِيرٌ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. “And they say: ‘Why have signs (miracles) not been sent down upon
him from his Lord? Say: ‘The signs are only with Allah, and I am only a
plain warner’.”***

The act of ‘seeking for excuses’ in the obstinate people does not end.
(After observing kinds of miracles they demanded other miracles either.)
The Prophet (S) resisted before the pretext-seekers and, answering them,
he refused them, because miracle is a Divine wise affair, not a play for
the pretext seekers.

However, those unbelievers who, as the result of obstinacy and
persisting on falsehood, never agreed to accept the logical argument of
the Qur’an, and bringing a Book, such as Qur’an, by an illiterate
person, like the Prophet of Islam (S), which was a clear proof upon his
legitimacy, tried to seek a new pretext, as the Qur’an through the
verses under discussion, as well as the other verse, implicitly
indicates that they mockingly used to say why there have not been sent
down some miracles to the Prophet of Islam (S) like the miracles which
were sent down to Moses (as) and Jesus (as) from the side of Allah. Why
has he not a Rod and white hand like Moses or a breath like the breath
of Jesus?

Why does he not destroy his enemies by great miracles, in the same way
that Moses, Shu‘ayb, Hud, Noah, and Thamud (as) did?

Or as Surah ’Isra’ from their tongue says, they used to claim some
things as follows:

***“…We shall never believe in you till you make a spring to gush forth
the earth for us,”***

***“Or till you should have a garden of date-palms and grapes in the
midst of which you cause streams to flow forth,”***

***“Or you cause the heaven, as you think, to fall in pieces upon us, or
bring Allah and the angels face to face with us,”***

***“Or there be for you a house of gold, or you should be flying into
the sky and never will we believe in your ascending unless you bring
down to us a book which we may read…”***[^32]

Without doubt, besides the Qur’an, the Prophet of Islam (S) had some
other miracles which have explicitly been mentioned in history books,
but by these words of theirs, they were not seeking for miracle. From
one side, they wanted to ignore the miracle of the Qur’an, and, from
other side, they used to ask for extemporarily miracles.

The purpose of extemporarily miracles is that the Prophet (S) should do
any extraordinary action they suggested according to their own desires.
For instance, someone suggested him to make springs to gush forth,
someone else said that he (S) had to change the mountains of Mecca into
gold; and the third sought pretext that the Prophet (S) should ascend to
sky.

Thus, they wanted to show miracles as a worthless play, and, finally, to
call him a sorcerer.

Therefore, the Qur’an in Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 111 says:

***“And even if We sent down the angels to them, and the dead spoke to
them, and We mustered all things before them, (even then) they would not
believe, unless Allah pleases; but most of them (deliberately)
ignore.”***

However, in order to answer to these obstinate pretext-seekers, the
Qur’an uses two ways:

At first, it says to the Prophet (S) to tell them that bringing miracle
is not his job that he does it according to their desires, because all
miracles are with Allah alone:

***“…The signs are only with Allah…”,***

and He knows which miracle, in what time and for which nation, is
appropriate. Allah knows who try to seek the truth and supernatural
events must be shown to them, and who seek pretext and follow their
carnal desires.

Then the verse continues saying that the Prophet of Allah (S) tells them
that he is only a plain warner, and his duty is to state the word of
Allah, while giving them miracles is only with His Pure Essence.

***“…and I am only a plain warner.”***

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 51
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلَمْ يَكْفِهِمْ أَنَّآ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ يُتْلَي
عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَرَحْمَةً وَذِكْرَي لِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. “And is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the
Book which is recited to them? Verily in this there is mercy and a
reminder for a people who believe.”***

Qur’an is an inclusive and complete Book and somehow it provides all
spiritual needs, so that it is the cause of mercy and being off from
negligence.

Following the previous verse, this holy verse says:

***“And is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the Book
which is recited to them?…”***

They ask for bodily miracles while the Qur’an is the greatest spiritual
miracle.

They ask for a temporary miracle while the Holy Qur’an is a perpetual
miracle and its verses are recited to them every night and day.

Is it possible that an unschooled person, or even supposing literate
one, brings a Book with such contents and wonderful attraction, which is
above the ability of mankind, and invites the whole human beings to
challenge it while all of them remain impotent to bring like it?

If they really demand a miracle, by the descent of the Holy Qur’an,
Allah (s.w.t.) has given them more than what they ask for. Nay, they are
not truth-seekers. They are pretext seekers.

This fact should be noted that the Qur’anic sentence:

***“Is it not enough for them?”***

is usually used for the aspects that one has accomplished something
beyond the expectation of the opposite party, and he is neglectful of it
and shows that he is neglectful. For example, he says: “*Why did you not
do me that favour?*”

Now Allah refers to a greater favour that he has ignored it. Allah says:

***“Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the
Book…?”***

Besides them all, a miracle must be consistent with the conditions of
the time, the place, and the circumstance of the Prophet’s call. The
holy Prophet (S) whose religion is perpetual must have an everlasting
miracle.

The prophet, whose invitation is worldly and it must also continue for
many centuries in future, has to have a so clear, spiritual and
intellectual miracle that it attracts the minds of wise and mindful
persons to him. Surely the Qur’an is suitable for such an aim, not the
Rod of Moses and his white hand.

At the end of the verse, for an emphasis and for further explanation,
the Qur’an says:

***“…Verily in this there is mercy and a reminder for a people who
believe.”***

Yes, the Holy Qur’an is both mercy and the means of remembrance, but
only for the believers; for those who have let the doors of their hearts
open to the Truth; for those who seek for the Light to find the right
path, such persons feel this Divine mercy with their whole entity, and
they rest under its rays. Every time they recite the verses of the
Qur’an, they find a new admonition.

The difference between the Qur’anic words ***/rahmat/*** and
***/ŏikra/*** may be in this that the Qur’an is not only one miracle and
a source of admonition, but, in addition to that, it is full of merciful
programs and laws, and it is full of constructive and educational
instructions.

For example, Moses’ Rod was only a miracle and it had not any effect in
people’s daily life, but the Qur’an is both a miracle and a complete
program for life, and a source of mercy.

[^1]: The content of Surah Al-Fatihah

[^2]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, Vol. 7, tradition 1893

[^3]: Bihar, Vol. 82, P. 209

[^4]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the explanation under the verse

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 82, P. 234

[^7]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, Vol. 7, tradition No. 18862

[^8]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, Vol. 3, P. 22

[^9]: Ibid, P. 12

[^10]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, Vol. 7, tradition No. 19036

[^11]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 82, P. 224

[^12]: Kanzul-‘Ummal, Vol. 7, Tradition No. 19090

[^13]: Bihar, Vol. 82, P. 209

[^14]: Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 28

[^15]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 82, P. 200

[^16]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, Vol. 3, P. 7

[^17]: Nahjul-Balaqah, saying No. 252

[^18]: Nahjul-Balaqah, saying No. 136

[^19]: Ibid, letter (will) 47

[^20]: Bihar, Vol. 84, P. 317 and 320

[^21]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, Vol. 3, P. 4

[^22]: Surah Ya Sin, No. 36, verse 78

[^23]: Ibid, verse 79

[^24]: Ibid, verse 80

[^25]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Vol. 4, P. 163

[^26]: Surah ’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 159

[^27]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, the term /mira’/

[^28]: ’Ihya’-ul-‘Ulum

[^29]: Ibid

[^30]: The current commentary, Vol. 6, (parts 9 and 10), PP 111, 112

[^31]: Tafsir-i-Burhan, Vol. 3, P. 254 on

[^32]: Surah ’Asra’, No. 17, verses 90-93


