Section 6: The Disbelievers Warned
==================================

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 52
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ كَفَي بِاللَّهِ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ شَهِيداً يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضِ وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا بِالْبَاطِلِ وَكَفَرُوا
بِاللَّهِ اُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. “Say: ‘Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you’. He
knows what is in the heavens and the earth; and those who believe in the
falsehood and disbelieve in Allah, these, they are the losers.”***

This verse is a cause of solace for the Prophet of Islam (S) and as a
threat for the obstinate pretext-seekers, since Allah (s.w.t.) is a
witness upon what happens between the Prophet (S) and pagans, and He
reckons everything.

So, this verse says:

***“Say: ‘Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you’…”***

It is obvious that the more aware the witness is the more valuable his
testimony is.

That is why, by the next sentence, the verse adds:

***“…He knows what is in the heavens and the earth…”***

Now, we are going to know how Allah has testified to the truthfulness of
His prophet.

This witness may be a practical witness, for when Allah gives a great
miracle, such as Qur’an, to His Prophet (S), He has signed the document
of his legitimacy. Is it possible that Allah, the Wise, the Just, gives
the Miracle to a liar (God forbid)? Therefore, giving such a miracle to
the self of the Prophet (S) is the best way of Allah’s attestation to
his prophecy.

In addition to the abovementioned practical witness, there has also been
given some oral attestations in a lot of verses of the Qur’an; as Surah
Ahzab, No. 33, verse 40 says:

***“Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but the Messenger of
Allah and the Seal of the Prophets, and Allah is Cognizant of all
things.”***

And Surah Al-Fath, No. 48, verse 29 says:

***“Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; and those who are with him are
strong against unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst each other…”***

Some commentators have said that the verse under discussion has been
sent down in Medina in answer to some chiefs of the Jews, such as
Ka‘b-ibn-’Ashraf, and his followers.

They told the Prophet (S):

*“Who testifies that you are the messenger of Allah?”*

The verse was sent down and said that Allah testifies to it.

By regarding to this statement, another commentary and explanation for
the above verse can also be understood. It shows that the purpose of it
is the testimony and witness of Allah mentioned in the former Divine
Books of which the scholars of the People of the Book are well aware.

In the meanwhile, there is no contradiction between these three
commentaries, and all of them may be found in the meaning of the verse.

At the end of the verse, as a warning, the Holy Qur’an says:

***“…and those who believe in the falsehood and disbelieve in Allah,
these, they are the losers.”***

What a loss is greater than this that once one loses all the capitals of
his self for nothing, the same as the polytheists did. They set their
heart and spirit at the disposal of idols and spent their whole bodily
powers, social facilities and personal potentialities in the way of
propagation and putting in circulation the belief of idolatry and wiping
the Name of Allah, while they obtained nothing save that they became
losers.

The Holy Qur’an often refers to this great loss in its verses, and
sometimes it shows this fact by the Arabic word ***/’axsar/ (more
loser)*** and there is no loss greater than this.[^1]

More important than this is that in a bargain, it happens that one loses
his whole capital and he smashes up, but sometimes it goes further than
this and a heavy debt remains for him, which is the worst kind of trade
fallen; and polytheists are just in the same case. They sometimes cause
the failure and aberration of others, too, and they form a chained
failure.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut – Verses 53-54
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَسْتَعْجِلُونَكَ بِالْعَذَابِ وَلَوْلآ أَجَلٌ مُسَمًّي لَجَآءَهُمُ
الْعَذَابُ وَلَيَأْتِيَنَّهُم بَغْتَةً وَهُمْ لاَ يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْتَعْجِلُونَكَ بِالْعَذَابِ وَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ لَمُـحِيطَةٌ
بِالْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. “And they demand of you to hasten the chastisement! And had not a
term been appointed, the chastisement would certainly have come to them;
but it shall certainly come upon them suddenly when they are not
aware.”***  
***54. “They demand of you to hasten the chastisement! And verily Hell
encompasses the unbeliever.”***

The disbelievers, who were threatened to divine punishment because of
disbelief or mockery, or that they frequently asked their prophet for a
sudden punishment, have been referred to in the Qur’an in several
occurrences, and this haste of pagans has been criticized in all
instances.

In the delay of Divine chastisement, of course, there are some bounties,
including:

1- It is an opportunity for repentance.

2- There may come forth some righteous children from deluded fathers.

3- People are examined in religiousness and resistance, (perseverance).

However, the grace or wrath of Allah is wisely, accurate, and has order,
so that it does not change with the haste of this one and that one. But
the fall of man’s thought is so horrible that he agrees to be
annihilated, but not to accept the truth.

In this holy verse, the third kind of their seeking pretext is pointed
out. It implies that they hasten for the punishment and demand it from
the Prophet (S) to fall swiftly.

The verse says:

***“And they demand of you to hasten the chastisement!…”***

They say if the punishment of Allah (s.w.t.) is right and encompasses
the pagans, then why does it not come to them? In reply to their
statement, the Qur’an delivers three answers.

At first, it says:

***“…And had not a term been appointed, the chastisement would certainly
have come to them…”***

This appointed time is for the sake that the essential aim, i.e.,
vigilance, or the argument should be completed to them. Allah never
makes haste in His Affairs when it is against His Wisdom.

The second is that those who say this statement, how much are they
certain that every moment the Divine punishment may seize them?

The verse continues saying:

***“…but it shall certainly come upon them suddenly when they are not
aware.”***

The proper time of coming punishment is, indeed, defined and appointed,
but the expedience is in this that they should not be aware of it and it
comes suddenly. If its time were known, the pagans and sinners would
become rather bold and they might continue their infidelity and
committing sins until the last moment, and when the last moment of the
appointed time of punishment was approaching, they would return toward
the truth.

The educational philosophy of these punishments requires that their time
should be concealed in order that the fear and terror of them in all
moments may become an impedimental factor.

By the way, it becomes clear from what was said that the purpose of the
Qur’anic sentence: ***/wa hum layaš‘urun/ (when they are not aware)***
is not that they do not perceive the principle of the existence of
punishment, else the philosophy of punishment would be vanished, but the
purpose of it is that they do not discriminate the moment of its
occurrence and its preliminaries.

In other words, the punishment suddenly, and like lightning, comes over
them, attacking unawares.

It is well understood from the different verses of the holy Qur’an that
this pretext seeking was not confined to the pagans of Mecca, but many
other nations persisted on the hastening of punishment, too.

The third answer has been stated in the next verse, where the Qur’an
says:

***“They demand of you to hasten the chastisement! And verily Hell
encompasses the unbeliever.”***

The worldly punishment may be postponed, but the punishment of Hereafter
is one hundred percent certain.

It is so certain that the Qur’an mentions it as an existing thing at the
present time, and says:

***“…verily Hell encompasses the unbelievers”.***

As the result of being polluted by infidelity and sin, they burn in the
Hell which they themselves have provided for them i.e. the Hell of war
and blood, the Hell of conflict and discord, the Hell of insecurity, the
Hell of injustice and oppression, and the Hell of evil passions and
ungovernable desires.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 55
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَغْشَاهُمُ الْعَذَابُ مِن فَوْقِهِمْ وَمِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِهِمْ
وَيَقُولُ ذُوقُوا مَا كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “On the Day when the chastisement shall cover them from above
them, and from beneath their feet, and He shall say: ‘Taste now what you
were doing’.”***

The encompassing punishment of Hell is because of the continuation of
our wrong deeds.

This verse says:

***“On the Day when the chastisement shall cover them from above them,
and from beneath their feet, and He shall say: ‘Taste now what you were
doing’.”***

This verse may be an explanation for the punishment of Hell upon
disbelievers on the Day of Hereafter, or it may be considered as an
independent statement for their painful punishment which, as the result
of their deeds, has surrounded them today, and tomorrow it will appear
manifestly.

However, that the verse says:

***“…from above them, and from beneath their feet…”***

but it does not mention other limbs and other sides, it is, in fact,
because of the evidence of the subject and clarity of the discussion.
Moreover, when the flames of Fire come from under their feet and are
poured over their heads from above them, the Fire will envelop the
entire of their body and it will be from all sides to cover them.

Principally, this kind of meaning is used in languages including Persian
and Arabic that they say so and so, from head to feet is covered with,
for example, the pollution of impurity, which means his whole entity is
covered with sin.

Thus, keeping this explanation in mind, the question that some
commentators have faced with saying that why the sides of above and
below have been mentioned and the rest of four sides are not pointed out
is removed.

The sentence that Allah says:

***“Taste now what you were doing”***

not only is a kind of psychological punishment for such persons, but
also declares this fact that the divine punishment is nothing but the
reflection of the man’s own deeds in the growth of Hereafter.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 56
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا إِنَّ أَرْضِي وَاسِعَةٌ فإِِيَّايَ
فَاعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “O’ My servants who believe! Verily My earth is vast, therefore,
Me alone should you worship!”***

### Occasion of Revelation

Many of the commentators believe that this verse has been sent down
about the believers who were under such a so hard pressure of the pagans
in Mecca that they were not able to perform their Islamic duties. So,
they were commanded to migrate from that region.

Since the words in previous holy verses were about the different
reactions of polytheists against Islam and Muslims, now the verses under
discussion refer to the situation of the early Muslims themselves and
their duty and responsibility concerning one of their problems in
connection with the pagans, i.e., the problem of restriction, pressure,
and harm and trouble they were faced with.

This holy verse addresses the Muslim believers who were under the
pressure of the enemy because of fulfilling their religious duties and
implies that Allah’s land is vast and they should migrate to somewhere
else and worship Him alone.

The verse says:

***“O’ My servants who believe! Verily My earth is vast, therefore, Me
alone should you worship!”***

However, Islam has enjoined migration for a group of people. Those who
live in places where infidelity and tyrant govern, who are involved with
cruelty and restrictions and who find their own growth and deliverance
in emigration, they must migrate.

But, for fulfilling this duty, there will be some temptations cast on
man from inside and outside, the answer of which will be given through
later verses. One of these temptations is the danger of death and one
may say: if he migrates death might not come to him, but the next verse
announces that wherever he lives he tastes death.

Another temptation is for detaching one’s heart from his residence,
which is difficult for him, and he may hesitate not to migrate. Verse
No. 58 answers them that instead of the worldly residence, those
believers who migrate will be rewarded with lofty chambers of Paradise;
and verse 59 implies that this temptation must be removed by patience
and relying on the Lord.

Another temptation is for providing provision. He who thinks of
emigration may say that his emigration deprives him from income and
sustenance. Verse No. 60 answers him that how many a moving creature
that does not carry its own provision but Allah sustains it, let alone
those emigrants who work and struggle.

Emigration is the factor of creating sincerity.

Those who do not migrate, when they ought to do, and depend themselves
on an individual, party, region, tribe and possibilities of this and
that one, desirably or undesirably, the regional, racial, and tribal
problems, and insularities raised from jealousies, and negative rivals
from the side of both familiar and foreign persons bring out man from
sincerity.

Thus, emigration to the places wherein these affairs are absent is the
best circumstance for the appearance of sincerity and devotion.

In the explanation of this verse, Imam Baqir (as) says:

*“Do not follow the mischievous governor, and if you fear that they
cause you deviate from your religion, then do migrate.”*[^2]

Of course, we must bear the bitter hardships of emigration by the Divine
friendly call, because Allah (s.w.t.) has a special attention to the
believers when He in this verse says:

***“O’ My servants…”.***

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 57
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ ذَآئِقَةُ الْمَوْتِ ثُمَّ إِلَيْنَا تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. “Every soul tastes death, then unto Us you shall be returned.”***

Perhaps this verse is in connection with the previous one, explaining
the man’s duty if his death approaches when he is in emigration.

This verse announces that do not afraid of death when emigration is
necessary, because death is the certain fate of everybody, but it is not
an end.

The verse says:

***“Every soul tastes death, then unto Us you shall be returned.”***

You will come to Us and We will bestow the reward of the death in the
path of emigration on you; and We will chastise the oppressors who
forced you to migrate, though reaching that reward and retribution
prolongs.

The application of the Arabic word ***/θumma/***, in this verse,
indicates a long length of time.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 58
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ لَنُبَوِّئَنَّهُم مِنَ
الْجَنَّةِ غُرَفاً تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الاَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا
نِعْمَ أَجْرُ الْعَامِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “And those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will certainly
lodge them in lofty chambers of Paradise beneath which rivers flow,
therein dwelling forever; how excellent is the recompense of those who
act (aright).”***

The condition of being admitted to Heaven is Faith and righteous deed.
Allah has promised Paradise unto the believers, so, in this verse, He
says:

***“And those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will certainly
lodge them in lofty chambers of Paradise beneath which rivers flow,
therein dwelling forever…”***

Such believers will surely abide in the castles which are surrounded by
Heavenly trees from every side, and beneath which, according to other
verses of the Qur’an, various rivers, with different special tests and
views, flow.

Be attentive that the Arabic word ***/quraf/*** is the plural form of
/qurfah/ which means a lofty building that is dominant over its sides.

Another privilege of the chambers of Paradise is that they are not like
the houses and castles of this world where after a short time and before
a complete rest of man, the call of movement is heard, but they will
dwell there forever.

Then, at the end of the verse, the Qur’an adds:

***“…how excellent is the recompense of those who act (aright).”***

A simple comparison between what was said about pagans and sinners in
the previous verses, and what is said in this holy verse, makes the
greatness of the believers’ reward clear.

The disbelievers will be in a Fire and punishment which envelops their
whole body from head to feet, and as a scorn they will be told taste
whatever you used to do.

But the believers will be in the midst of bounties of Heaven, and the
mercy of Allah encompasses them from every side. They do not hear any
scorn, but instead they hear some words all of which are the signs of
love and grace of the Gracious Lord.

Yes, they will be told:

***“…how excellent is the recompense of those who act (aright).”***

It is obvious that the objective meaning of the Qur’anic word
***/‘amilin/ (those who act)***, with the frame of reference of the
sentences before it, is those who have faith and do righteous deeds,
though the word /‘amilin/ is absolute.

The holy Prophet (S) in a tradition said:

*“Verily there are some chambers in the Heaven so transparent that their
outwards are seen from their inwards, and their inwards are seen from
their outwards.”  
*  
 Someone asked him:

*“To whom do these chambers belong, O’ Messenger of Allah?”*

He (S) answered:

*“These chambers belong to those who purify their speech, satiate the
hungry (ones), observe the fact frequently, and keep prayer at night
(for the sake of Allah) when people are asleep.”*[^3]

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 59
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَعَلَي رَبّـِهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***59. “Those who are (patiently) steadfast and on their Lord do they
rely.”***

Patience and relying on Allah are two clear examples of righteous deed;
and it is the righteous ones who must remove the spiritual pressures,
barriers and difficulties of life by patience and relying on Allah.

This verse states the most important characteristics of the believers
who act aright.

It says as follows:

***“Those who are (patiently) steadfast and on their Lord do they
rely.”***

When it requires, they separate from their wife, children, friends,
relatives, and houses and they tolerate patience. They taste the
troubles of loneliness, the hardships of being vagrant from home, and
they are patient.

In order to protect their Faith, they usually tolerate the hurts of the
enemies, and receive kinds of difficulties in the path of struggling
against their selves (which is ‘the greater’ warfare), and they are
patient.

Yes, patience and perseverance are the secrets of their triumph, and
they are two great factors for their honour, without which no positive
action is possible in the life.

Moreover, they rely neither on their properties, nor on their friends
and relatives. They rely only on Allah; and they trust only on His Pure
Essence. If thousand of enemies try to destroy them, they stand firm and
do not fear because they know Him as their friend.

If we think properly, we find out that the root of man’s all virtues is
this very patience and relying on Allah. Patience is the cause of
steadfastness in front of barriers and difficulties; and confidence is
the motive of moving in this way which is full of ascent and descent.

For performing righteous deed we must get help from these two ethical
virtues, patience and confidence. Without these two, doing righteous
deed, in a large scale, is impossible.

### Some Traditions On Patience and Confidence

1. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Patience is a treasure out of the treasures of Paradise.”*[^4]

2. Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Verily the patient will enter Paradise without reckoning.”*[^5]

3. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Whoever likes to be the most virtuous of people, he must rely on
Allah.”*[^6]

4. Once Imam Rida (as) was asked what the limit of confidence was. He
answered:

*“That you do not be in owe of other than Allah.”*[^7]

5. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The best people with Allah is the one who trusts on Allah more than
others and surrenders to Him.”*[^8]

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 60
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَأَيّـِن مِن دَآبَةٍ لاَّ تَحْمِلُ رِزْقَهَا اللَّهُ يَرْزُقُهَا
وَإِيَّاكُمْ وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***60. “And how many a moving creature that does not carry its own
provision, (but) Allah sustains it and you! And He is he Hearing, the
knowing.”***

The Arabic word ***/tahmil/*** is derived from /himalah/ in the sense of
‘suretyship’ and ‘to undertake’, and the purpose of ‘carrying provision’
may be used in the sense of: ‘storing up things for the future’.

Emigration was recommended through verse 56, now the abovementioned
verse indicates that the knowledge of Allah provides the sustenance of
all creatures:

***“And how many a moving creature that does not carry its own
provision, (but) Allah sustains it and you!…”***

However, the Qur’an says that you should not be worried about your
sustenance, and do not accept any shame, disgrace, and captivity for it,
because He Who gives sustenance is Allah.

He sustains not only you but also many of the creatures that cannot even
carry their provision, and have no food stored in their nests while
every new day they need a new provision and Allah does not let them be
hungry. He sustains them and you, too.

Among moving creatures, animals, and insects, besides man, there are a
few kinds that, like ants and bees, carry their own foodstuff from
fields and deserts toward their dwelling places and store it up, and
concerning their provision most of them are like sparrow, that is, every
new day they must seek for the provision of that day.

There are millions of millions of them around us, far and near, in
deserts, in the depth of valleys, on the top of mountains, and inside
the seas that are sustained at the table of His endless bounties.

And you, O’ man! who are cleverer and more capable than them for earning
and storing up your provision, why do you clasp the pollute and shameful
life because of the fear of cease of sustenance and admit any injustice,
cruelty, disgrace and abjectness for it?

You, too, can come out from inside of this narrow, limited and dark life
of yours and sit at the stretched table of your Lord and do not care for
sustenance.

On that day when you were prisoner in the womb of mother as a weak and
feeble embryo, and nobody, even your kind parents, had the chance to
reach you, your Lord did not forsake you and whatever you needed He gave
you properly, it is the same today that you are a capable and strong
being.

And in view of the fact that giving provision to the needy is in the
secondary of the awareness of their existence and their need, at the end
of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“…And He is he Hearing, the knowing.”***

He hears the words of you all, and He even knows the mute tongue of you
and all moving creatures. He knows the needs of all of you, and nothing
is hidden from the realm of His infinite knowledge.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 61
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَاَلْتَهُم مَنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضَ وَسَخَّرَ
الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ فَاَنَّي يُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “And if you ask them: ‘Who created the heavens and the earth and
made the sun and the moon subservient?’ They will certainly say:
‘Allah!’ Whence are they then perverted?”***

The Arabic term ***/’ifk/*** means ‘changing something from its real
form’, viz. someone changes a fact into something else consciously.

The purpose of ‘making the sun and the moon subservient’ is their
subservience in the way which is useful for us.[^9]

In this holy verse, as well as the next verses, the Prophet of Islam
(S), and in fact all believers, are addressed and the proofs of Unity
through the way of creation, Lordship, and nature, viz. by three
different ways, have been stated, and they are admonished that their
fate is with Allah Whose effects are found in heavens and souls, not
with idols, since idols have no function in this regard.

At first, it refers to the creation of the heaven and the earth and,
taking help from their intrinsic beliefs, it says:

***“And if you ask them: ‘Who created the heavens and the earth and made
the sun and the moon subservient?’ They will certainly say:
‘Allah!’…”***

Their answer is such, because neither idolaters nor other than them say
that the creator of the heavens and the earth and the subjective factor
of making the sun and the moon subservient is some pieces of stone and
wood which have been manufactured by their own hands.

In other words, even idolaters had no doubt in the ‘Unity of Creator’.
They were polytheists in worship.

They used to say that they worshipped idols for the sake that they would
intercede them before Allah, as Surah Yunus, No. 10, verse 18 announces:

***“…and they say: ‘these are our intercessors with Allah’…”***

They wanted to say that they were not eligible to directly communicate
with Allah and they had to relate to Him by the way of idols.

They used to say:

***“…We do not serve them save that they make us nearer to
Allah…”***[^10]

They were inattentive that there is no gap between the Creator and the
created, and He is nearer to us than our jugular vein.[^11] Moreover, if
man, who is the best creature in the world of existence, cannot
communicate with Allah, what can be his intercessor?

However, after mentioning this clear proof, at the end of the verse the
Qur’an questions that after having these evidences how are they returned
from worshipping Allah to the worship of some idols made of some pieces
of stone and wood?

It says:

***“…Whence are they then perverted?”***

The Qur’anic term ***/yu’fakun/*** is derived from /’ifk/ which means:
‘changing something from its real form’, and in this connection it is
used for falsehood, and also for some apposite winds.

The application of the term ***/yu’fakun/*** in its Arabic passive form,
points to this fact that they have not any ability to make decision, as
if they were unintentionally drawn toward idolatry!

By the way, the purpose of objecting the sun and the moon is the systems
that Allah has arranged for them and by these systems He has sent them
in the way of man’s benefits.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 62
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يُبْسُطُ الرّ‌ِزْقَ لِمَن يَشَآءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَيَقْدِرُ
لَهُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ بِكُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. “Allah enlarges the sustenance for whichever of His servants He
pleases, and He grants him by (strict) measure, (as He pleases); verily
Allah is Well-Cognizant of all things.”***

Increasing and decreasing men’s sustenance is knowingly and wisely done
by Allah (s.w.t.) on the base of seen and unseen criterions.

Some Islamic traditions indicate that the common good of some servants
of Allah is in that they have vast sustenance and if they fall in the
straitened circumstances of life, they become corruptive.

On the contrary, the common good of another group is that they have a
strict measure of sustenance, and if they are granted plenty of it, they
will fall in decadence.

Therefore, in this verse the Qur’an says:

***“Allah enlarges the sustenance for whichever of His servants He
pleases, and He grants him by (strict) measure, (as He pleases)…”***

The key of sustenance is in His hand, not in the hand of men, nor with
idols.

That in the former verses it was said that the true believers rely only
on Him is for this very fact that the authority of all things is with
Him. Then why should they fear to express forth and sometimes think that
their life is in danger from the side of their enemies?

If they believe that Allah is powerful but He is not aware of their
state, they are in a great error, because:

***“…verily Allah is Well-Cognizant of all things.”***

Is it possible that someone is the creator and the administrator of the
affairs and whose favour reaches to the creatures, and in the meantime
He is not aware of their circumstance? This is not imaginable.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 63
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَأَلْتَهُم مَن نَزَّلَ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ مَآءً فَاَحْيَا بِهِ
الاَرْضَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَوْتِهَا لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ قُلِ الْحَمْدُ
لِلَّهِ بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَيَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***63. “And if you ask them: ‘Who sends down water from the heaven and
gives life with it unto the earth after its death?’ They will certainly
say: ‘Allah!’ Say: ‘All praise is due to Allah.’ But most of them do not
ponder.”***

One of the great bounties for which we must be thankful, is the light of
Faith and natural disposition. Knowing of Allah is natural, and if the
dust of sin and deviation is removed from the nature of deviated ones,
their clear and manifest confessions will be found out.

In this verse, where the words are about Unity of Lordship and that the
descent of the main origin of provisions is from the side of Allah, it
says:

***“And if you ask them: ‘Who sends down water from the heaven and gives
life with it unto the earth after its death?’ They will certainly say:
‘Allah!’…”***

This is the inner belief of idolaters that they even did not refuse to
express it by their tongue, because they both knew the Creator as Allah,
and introduced Allah as the Lord and also the administrator of the whole
world.

Then, the verse continues saying:

***“…Say: ‘All praise is due to Allah.’…”***

Praise is for the One from Whose side all bounties come, because when
water, which is the main source of life and by which all living
creatures are alive, is from His side, it is clear that other provisions
are from His side, too.

Therefore praise must also belong to Him alone, and other objects of
worship have no share in it.

We must thank Allah, for our logic is so alive and strong that nobody is
able to nullify it.

And since the polytheists’ sayings, from one side, and their speech and
actions, from other side, contradicted with each other, at the end of
the verse the Qur’an adds:

***“…But most of them do not ponder.”***

Else, how is it possible that a wise and thoughtful person speaks so
much scattered and contrarily? From one side, he knows Allah (s.w.t.) as
the creator, the giver of sustenance, and administrator of the world,
and, on the other side, he falls in prostration before some idols that
have no role in his fate.

From one side, they believe in the Unity of Creator and Unity of
Lordship, but, on the other side, they practically worship other than
Allah.

It is interesting that the Holy Qur’an does not say that they do not
have mind and wisdom, but it says:

***“…(they) do not ponder”,***

which means they have intellect while they do not use it.

[^1]: Suras: Hud, No. 11, verse 22; An-Naml, No. 27, verse 5; and
Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 103

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^3]: The commentary of Qurtabi, following the verse

[^4]: Muhajjat-ul-Bayda’, Vol. 7, P. 107

[^5]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, Vol. 2, P. 5

[^6]: Mishkat-ul-’Abrar, P. 50

[^7]: Ibid, P. 40

[^8]: Majmu‘ah Warram, Vol. 2, P. 123

[^9]: The commentary entitled ‘Rahnama’

[^10]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 3

[^11]: Surah Qaf, No. 50, verse 16


