Section 7: The Sincere Seekers Shall Be Guided Aright
=====================================================

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 64
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هَذِهِ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَآ إِلاَّ لَهْوٌ وَلَعِبٌ وَإِنَّ
الدَّارَ الأَخِرَةَ لَهِيَ الْحَيَوَانُ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***64. “And this life of the world is nothing but a sport and a play and
verily the abode of the hereafter, is certainly the (real) life: did
they but know!”***

The Qur’anic word ***/lahw/*** is used for the amusements which hinder
man from the main aims and fundamental affairs. The Arabic term
***/la‘ib/*** is doing something like play in which there is no
particular aim.[^1]

The creation of the world has been done wisely and for a particular aim,
while being mammonist and neglectful from the Hereafter is done
foolishly.

In order that men can promote their thought higher than the horizon of
this limited life, and that they open the doors of some vaster worlds to
the scope of the vision of their intellect, in this verse the Holy
Qur’an, through a short and very expressive sentence, compares the life
of the present world with the eternal life in another world, where it
says:

***“And this life of the world is nothing but a sport and a play…”***

There is not anything in this world save sport and play, while the life
in another world is the real life. The above verse continues:

***“…and verily the abode of the hereafter, is certainly the (real)
life: did they but know!”***

What an interesting and expressive meaning this Qur’anic phrase ***/la
hiyal hayawan/*** is! Because the Arabic word ***/lahw/*** means ‘sport’
and anything that makes man busy to it and turns him away from the
essential affairs of life, while the word /la‘ib/ (a play) is used for
the acts that have a kind of imaginary order for an imaginary aim,
(play).

In a ‘play’ someone plays as a king and another one as a minister,
another one is the commander of the army, and some others play as a
caravan or as a thief. But after their struggles and conflicts, we see
that all of their deeds have been some imaginary acts.

The Qur’an implies that the life of this world is a kind of sport and
play. In it, there are some people who pursue some imaginary things.
After a few days they scatter and their bodies will be buried under the
ground, and, then everything will be forgotten.

But the real life, which has no declension or destruction, will remain.
There is neither pain, nor toleration, nor distress, nor fear, nor any
trouble in the life of hereafter, but it is with the condition that man
knows it and studies it carefully.

Those who love the life of this world and became happy and beguiled by
its dazzling glare are like some children, though they have lived a long
life.

However, it must be noted that, as some commentators and philologists
believe, the Qur’anic word ***/haywan/*** means ‘life/, It points to
this fact that ‘the abode of hereafter’ is the abode of real life, as if
life gushed from all of it and there were nothing in it but ‘life’.

It is evident that never the Qur’an intends to negate the Divine merits
of this world by this meaning, but it intends to illustrate the value of
this life comparing with that life by an explicit and clear comparison.

Moreover, it wants to warn man that he must not be as captive for these
merits; he must be a commander upon them, and he must never exchange the
noble values of his own self for them.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 65
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا رَكِبُوا فِي الْفُلْكِ دَعَوُا اللَّهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ
الدّ‌ِينَ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاهُمْ إِلَي الْبَرّ‌ِ إِذَا هُمْ يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “So when they ride in the ships, they call upon Allah sincerely
vowing worship (only) unto Him, and when He brings them safe to the
land, they associate others (with Him),”***

Being in awe of Allah removes the dusts of negligence, and awakens the
nature of seeking-Allah in man.

This verse refers to the nature and fate of man and it pays to the
manifestation of the Light of Unity inside the selves of men at the most
severe states, and, through a very expressive example, it says:

***“So when they ride in the ships, they call upon Allah sincerely
vowing worship (only) unto Him, and when He brings them safe to the
land, they associate others (with Him),”***

Yes, the difficulties and calamities are the preparations for the growth
of man’s nature. The Light of Unity is hidden inside the spirit of all
human beings.

Superstitious customs, wrong educations, and evil indoctrinations cast
some curtains over it, but at the time of attack of calamities from
every side and when the pile of difficulties appear in front of man and
he sees he cannot apparently do anything, he involuntarily goes toward
the world of super nature and he wipes out any polytheistic thought from
his heart and, in the furnace of these events, he becomes pure and free
from any impurity.

Shortly speaking, there is always a luminous point inside the man’s
heart which is the nearest mean of his communication with the world of
super nature and the shortest path toward Allah.

Wrong teachings, negligence, and pride, specially at the time of health
and affluence, draw some curtains over it, but the mass of calamities
and terrible events tear these curtains, put the ashes away from it and
that luminous point inside the man’s heart appears.

It was for this very reason that the great leaders of Islam used to
guide those who were seriously doubtful in the subject of theology by
this way.

We have heard the story of the wandering man who was in doubt for the
subject of theology and Imam Sadiq (as) guided him aright through this
very natural and innate way.

The man said:

*“O son of the Messenger of Allah (S)! (Please) guide me to Allah that
who He is, because the tempters have made me bewildered.”*

Then the Imam told him:

*“O’ servant of Allah! Have you ever embarked a ship?”*

The man answered he had.

Then Imam said:

*“Has it happened that your ship was broken where there was no other
ship to save you and you did not know how to swim?”*

The man answered:

*“Yes.”*

He said:

*“In that state, did your heart tend to this matter that there is
something that can save you from that affliction?”*

He answered:

*“Yes.”*

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“This thing is Allah Who is able to save (anyone) where there is no
deliverer and succours and where there is no helper.”*[^2]

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 66
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَكْفُرُوا بِمَآ ءَاتَيْنَاهُمْ وَلِيَتَمَتَّعُوا فَسَوْفَ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***66. “(Thus) let them be ungrateful for what We have given them and
let them enjoy, but they shall soon know.”***

Polytheism is a kind of ungratefulness and ingratitude unto the favours
of Allah.

We must not be happy with those successes which are accompanied with
blasphemy and ungratefulness, because they usually have an evil end.

After mentioning so many reasoning upon Monotheism and theology, this
verse confronts the opponents with a sharp and serious threat when it
says:

***“(Thus) let them be ungrateful for what We have given them and let
them enjoy, but they shall soon know.”***

They will enjoy of the fleeting pleasures, but they shall know very soon
what the end of their disbelief and polytheism will be, and what an evil
fate they will have.

It is true that the appearance of the verse here seems to be a command
to disbelief and denial of the Divine verses, but it is evident that its
purpose is a warning.

It is just like that we tell a criminal person:

***“Perform whatever crime you can, but soon you will taste the bitter
fruit of your deeds in a lump.”***

In such sentences where the form of the verb is imperative the main aim
is a threat against the opposite party, not a state of imperative
nature.

It is interesting that here the Qur’anic sentence ***/fasaufa ta‘lamun/
(they shall soon know)*** has been stated in an absolute form.

It does not say what they know, but it simply says:

***“They shall soon know”.***

This vastness in meaning is for the sake that the mind of hearers might
not be limited in its concept. The fruit of bad deeds is the divine
punishment, disgrace in both worlds, and all kinds of other miseries.

At the end you may note these two verses:

***“And whatever of favour is (bestowed) on you, it is from Allah; then
whenever any calamity afflicts upon you, unto Him you cry (for
assistance).”***

***“Then when He removes the affliction from you, behold! A group of you
associate others with their Lord.”***[^3]

This very meaning is mentioned in Surah Yunus in another form.

It says:

***“And when an affliction touches a man, he calls Us (while reclining),
on his side, or sitting, or standing, but when We remove from him his
affliction, he passes on, as if he never called Us to an affliction that
touched him…”***[^4]

The above meaning has also been stated in Surah Ar-Rum, verse 33, Surah
Az-Zumar, verse 49, and Surah ’Asra’, verses 67-69 in some other phrases
and with some comprehensive words.

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 67
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلَمْ يَرَوْا أَنَّا جَعَلْنَا حَرَماً ءَامِناً وَيُتَخَطَّفُ
النَّاسُ مِنْ حَوْلِهِمْ أَفَبِالْبَاطِلِ يُؤْمِنُونَ وَبِنِعْمَةِ
اللَّهِ يَكْفُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***67. “Have they not seen that We have appointed a sanctuary secure,
while the people are snatched away from all around them? Will they still
believe in the falsehood and disbelieve in bounty of Allah?”***

One of the ways of inviting people to Allah is attracting their
attention unto the divine bounties.

This verse says:

***“Have they not seen that We have appointed a sanctuary secure, while
the people are snatched away from all around them?…”***

Arabs were in insecurity then, but in spite of that insecure
environment, He caused Mecca to be a sanctuary secure, then how can He
not protect them against their enemies? And their enemies were afraid of
these weak people before Allah, the Great, the Mighty.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Will they still believe in the falsehood and disbelieve in bounty
of Allah?”***

Shortly speaking, the Lord Who is able to cause a small piece of land to
be secure inside a vast area of the earth where a group of half wild
people used to live, how can He not protect the faithful people amongst
some pagans and unbelievers?

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 68
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَي عَلَي اللَّهِ كَذِباً أَوْ كَذَّبَ
بِالْحَقّ‌ِ لَمَّا جَآءَهُ أَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْوًي
لِلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***68. “And who is more unjust than one who forges a lie against Allah,
or belies the truth when it has come to him? Is there not a home in Hell
for the disbelievers?”***

The Divine revelation should be accepted completely and without
decreasing anything from it. Adding anything to the religion is
invention and false allegation, and it is the worse injustice.

Therefore, in this verse the Qur’an says:

***“And who is more unjust than one who forges a lie against Allah, or
belies the truth when it has come to him?…”***

Allah has delivered many clear evidences which prove that there is
nothing to be worthy of being worshipped save Allah, but polytheists
forge some lies to Him and associate some partners with Him, too. They
even claim that this is a divine program!

On the other hand, Allah sent down the Qur’an for them, in which the
signs of Truth are clear, but they ignored them and put them at their
back. Can any injustice and oppression be considered more superior than
this? It is certainly injustice against their own selves and against all
humankind, because polytheism and disbelief is a great injustice.

In other word, is injustice, in its vast scope of meaning, anything save
deviation and bringing something out of its proper place? Is there
anything worse than this that one puts some pieces of worthless stone
and wood in a row with the Creator of the heavens and the earth?

Moreover, polytheism is the source of all social corruptions, and in
fact other kinds of injustice originate from it. Sensualism, mammonism,
and worshipping ranks, each one is a kind of polytheism.

But do know that an evil fate is waiting for the polytheists.

The Qur’an questions:

***“…Is there not a home in Hell for the disbelievers?”***

It is noteworthy that in fifteen occurrences of the Qur’an some people
have been introduced as ‘the most unjust ones’, and in all of these
occurrences the Qur’anic sentence is a positive interrogation with a
negative sense and it begins with ***/man ’azlama/***.

A careful study upon these verses shows that all of them return to
polytheism, though there are apparently some different matters mentioned
in them. Therefore, it can be said that there is not any contradiction
in them.[^5]

Surah Al-‘Ankabut - Verse 69
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا وإِنَّ
اللَّهَ لَمَعَ الْمُـحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***69. “And those who strive hard for Us, We will certainly guide them
in Our ways, and verily Allah is with the good-doers.”***

In order to reach the special guidance of Allah, effort and endeavour is
necessary, and it is the man who must take the first step.

Sometimes, a step and a sincere struggle consequences both the Divine
guidance and eternal salvation.

This holy verse, which is, in fact, the last verse of Surah Al-‘Ankabut,
points to an important fact, which is the epitome of the whole Surah and
is consistent with its beginning.

It implies that though there are many difficulties for those who pave
the path of Allah, the Almighty, the difficulty from the point of
recognizing the truth, the difficulty of temptations of the Satans of
man and Jinn; the difficulty of facing with the opposition of the
obstinate and cruel enemies; and the difficulty of probable mistakes.

Here, there is one true thing which strengthens you, supports you, and
gives you power and certainty for these difficulties, as follows:

***“And those who strive hard for Us, We will certainly guide them in
Our ways, and verily Allah is with the good-doers.”***

Upon the purpose of struggle here, the commentators have delivered
numerous probabilities. Is it the struggle against enemies? Is it the
struggle against carnal soul? Or is it the struggle in the path of
knowing Allah by a scientific and logical way?

They have also discussed about the objective meaning of the Arabic term
***/fina/ (in Us)***, applied in this verse, whether it means in the way
of Allah’s pleasure, or in the way of struggle against carnal soul, or
in the path of worship, or in the path of struggle against enemy.

But it makes manifest that the application of both /jihad/ which has a
vast and absolute meaning, and /fina/ are correct.

Therefore, it envelops any kind of struggle and effort which is
performed in the way of Allah and for Him and with the purpose of
gaining the divine aims, whether they are in the way of obtaining
knowledge, or struggle against carnal soul, or struggle against enemy,
or showing patience in obedience, or having patience against temptation
of committing sin, or in the way of helping the weak persons, or doing
any other good action.

Those who strive in these ways for Allah, in any form and any manner,
will be involved in the support and guidance of Allah.

By the way, through what was said, it became clear that the purpose of
the Arabic word ***/subul/ (ways)***, used here, is different ways which
are led to Allah: the way of struggle against carnal soul, the way of
struggling against enemies, and the way of learning knowledge and
culture. In short, struggle in any one of these ways causes one to be
led to a path which ends to Allah.

This is the promise that Allah has strictly and emphatically given to
all of the strivers in His way, and He has strengthened it by kinds of
emphasis, and has considered success, progress, and triumph in the
pledge of two important things: ‘Struggle’ and ‘sincerity of intention’.

Thus, man must strive in this way, but guidance is with Allah; and that
a tradition indicates that knowledge is a light that Allah casts in the
heart of any one whom He desires and knows eligible for it, may also
refer to this very meaning.

### Note to the Following Points

1- It is understood from the abovementioned verse that any kind of
failure and dissatisfaction we are confronted is the effect of one of
these two things: we have neglected the struggle, or there has not been
enough sincerity in our action. If these two exist with together,
according to the promise of Allah, victory and guidance will surely come
forth.

And if we contemplate well, we can find out the origin of difficulties,
and the afflictions of the Islamic societies in this very fact. Why the
Muslims, who once were an advanced nation in the world, are backward and
retarded today?

Why do they beg nearly all their needs, even for their own culture and
laws, from foreigners? Why must they rely on others for protecting
themselves against political storms and martial attacks? Why one day
others were in need of the bounty of knowledge and rich culture of
Muslims, but today these people have to sit at the table of other
nations?

And, finally, why are they captured in the hand of others and their
lands are occupied by the transgressors?

All these questions have only one answer, and it is that either they
have neglected the holy struggle, or their intentions have become
polluted.

Yes, struggle in the fields of science, culture, politics, and army has
been neglected and love of self, mammonism, love of comfort, short
sightedness, and private motives have overcome them so much that the
number of those killed by their own forces is larger than the number of
those killed by their enemy.

The despair of some persons affected by the West or the East, the
treachery of a group of rulers and chiefs, and the hopelessness and the
reclusion of some knowledgeable men and the possessors of reflection
have taken from them both struggle and sincerity.

Whenever a little sincerity appears in us and strivers come in the
scene, victories appear one after another, and the chains of captivity
will be broken.

Then, despairs change into hope and failures into success; disgrace
changes into honour and eminence, and dispersion and hypocrisy changes
into unity and flowing. Thus, how great and inspirational the Qur’an is
that has stated both the pain and its remedy in a short sentence.

Yes, those who struggle in the path of Allah are included in the
guidance of Allah, the Almighty, and it is evident that wherever His
guidance exists, aberration and failure does not have any place.

Some narrations of Ahlul Bayt (as) have rendered this verse into the
Prophet’s progeny (as) and his followers. It is the statement of a
complete extension of it, because they were always pioneers and leaders
in the way of struggle and sincerity, and it is not an evidence upon the
limitation of the concept of the verse at all.

However, every one clearly feels this Qur’anic fact in his effort and
endeavour that when he strives in the path of Allah, the doors will be
opened to him, difficulties become easy, and hardships will be
tolerable.

2- People are divided into three groups: A group of people are some
obstinate deniers for whom no guidance is useful. The second group are
some sincere strivers who reach the Truth. The third group are more
excellent than the second group. They are not far from the truth that
must become near, and are not separate from Him that must join Him,
because they are always with Him.

The previous verse, saying:

***“And who is more unjust than one who forges a lie…”***

is about the first group.

The Qur’anic sentence:

***“And those who strive hard for Us…”***

is about the second group.

And the Qur’anic phrase:

***“…verily Allah is with the good-doers”***

is about the third group.

By the way, this phrase makes it clear that the rank of good-doers is
higher than that of strivers, because besides striving in the path of
their own deliverance, they have the characteristic of donation and
kindness and they strive for others, too.

*O Allah! Give us such a success that in our whole lifetime we do not
stop effort and striving in Your way!*

*O Allah! Bestow us such a sincerity that we do not think about anything
but You and we do not take any step save for You!*

*O Allah! Take us higher than the rank of strivers and endow on us the
rank of kindness and donation of the good-doers, and appoint us under
the cover of Your guidance in our whole lifetime!*

*Amen, O the Lord of the Worlds!*

[^1]: Mufradat by Raqib

[^2]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, Vol. 3 (New edition), P. 41

[^3]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verses 53 and 54

[^4]: Surah Yunus, No. 10, verse 12

[^5]: Some other explanations are mentioned in the commentary of Surah
Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 21


