The Role Of Islamic Scientists In The Advancement Of Science
============================================================

**By** **Martyr Dr. Muhammad Mufatteh**

The movement initiated by the Prophet of Islam which changed the history
of the nations, despite the assumptions of a number of people, wasn't
confined within the framework of a moral movement; it caused a
fundamental scientific metamorphosis in human society as well. Even
moral and social matters are based on logical, scientific reasoning.

Islam breathed new life in to the dying body of society and steered it
in the direction of economic, scientific, and political progress. As a
result, many surprising initiatives and discoveries came in to existence
and, in numerous ways the positive aspects of today's civilizations are
indebted to this Islamic movement.

As we know, before Muhammad's (S.A.W) appointment to the prophethood
ignorance prevailed to such an extent that, as noted by historians, if
among the Arabs a man knew how to read and write a little, he would have
been called " perfect ". Today, we can still find people with this
nickname.

The Christian world was not much better off. They were so imprisoned by
their ignorance that when a man was once appointed Pope who accidentally
had some knowledge and started to spread that knowledge, he was viewed
with suspicion, because it was against their nature to be knowledgeable,
and the Pope was accused of being possessed by the Devil. They declared
that Satan had entered his body and had led him astray from the path of
God and Jesus.

Yes, under such circumstances the holy call of

***Allah will exalt those of you who believe, and those who are given
knowledge, in high degrees (Holy Qur'an, 58: 11)***

echoed throughout the darkness of that age and it did not take long for
a revolution to take place and such renowned scientists as Avecenna,
Farabi, Zakaria Razi, Ibn Rushd and hundreds like them shined among the
Muslims.

In Islamic countries, schools and libraries were established where many
people studied to become scientists while, at the same time, Europe was
ruled by ignorance.

Dr. Gustave Le Bon, a Christian scientist, has stated,

"When Islamic civilization was at its highest peak in Andalusia (Spain)
our scientific centres were castles, our masters and rulers were living
in a semi-barbaric state and they felt pride in not having any system of
writing being illiterate. Among we Christians, the most knowledgeable
one was the ignorant priest, who was extending his utmost effort just to
take out the old Greek and Roman religious books, clean them and write
some ambiguous comments on their pages."

In order to clarify the moral level of the Christians' civilization and
also to prove what has been said, I refer to an interesting event from
the Middle Ages[^1].

In Italy, a man called Istan Mura voiced his doubt that Jesus was alive.
The Committee for Investigation of Ideas detained him and reported his
infidelity to the Pope. The Pope, after due consideration declared the
man to be '' legally dead".

Mr. Mura was then called before the Committee for the Investigation of
Ideas and his forehead was branded by a red-hot iron so that everyone
would see his "dead" status. Afterwards, the miserable man was not
allowed to speak to anyone. His wealth was confiscated, his wife was
married to another man and his children were also taken away from him.
The night that his wife was married again, after much difficulty he met
them and said:" You are my wife: how can you marry someone else?" The
woman did not reply, and the crowd of people nearby laughed. The
condemned man ran through the streets, crying: "Just because I expressed
my opinion on a matter, the followers of Jesus have taken away my wealth
and have taken my wife away!"

Before we discuss further the ways that Muslims have contributed to the
spread of the sciences, it is necessary to outline the factors which
caused this scientific revolution.

1. Campaign Against Illiteracy
------------------------------

The first and foremost factor in the spread of Islam was writing and
reading, because verses of the Qur'an were not written down at first,
and those with the ability to recite the verses taught the Qur'an to
others.

The Prophet of Islam (S.A.W) encouraged people to seek education. After
the Battle of Badr, each prisoner of war was told to each the art of
reading and writing to ten children from Medina, in order to gain
freedom.

This is a clear example of the line of thought of the founder of Islam.

The Prophet of Islam (S.A.W.) even compelled some of his followers to
learn foreign languages. One example is Zayd-ibn-Thabit, who was sent on
a mission to learn Hebrew, as he himself stated:

"I was taken to the Prophet of Islam (S.A.W), and when he was informed
that I knew seventeen verses of the Qur'an by heart, the Prophet was
surprised. I recited them all, and when the Prophet saw that I possessed
this talent, he commanded me to learn Hebrew, the language of the Jews,
and added that ‘I fear that the Jews may change the Book (the Qur'an).’
I applied myself and learned Hebrew in a short time. I was put in charge
of writing the Prophet's letters to the Jews and translating the letters
they sent to us."

Other Muslims also were ordered by the Prophet (S.A.W.) to learn the
Syriac language. When the Arab Muslims expanded their conquests to
neighbouring countries, they had to learn the art of their writing and
reading in order to better govern those countries. This was also another
reason for the increase in the number of literate people. In addition,
foreigners who accepted Islam had to learn and to understand their
religious duties. This was another factor which brought the civilization
of other countries to Islamic centres.

2. Development Of Ideas
-----------------------

Another important factor for this movement was the teachings of Islam.
The Qur'an, by narrating the history of other nations and the histories
of Adam, Abraham, Jonah , Moses, Joseph and other prophets, could move
the icy and stony brains of the people.

The Holy Qur'an, by elaborating on the principles of belief and
explaining the power of Almighty Allah and His unity, also attracted the
attention of thinkers and prompted them to contemplate about the world
in accordance with such verses as:

***Do they not consider the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and
whatever things Allah hos created (Holy Qur'an 7:185),***

***So let man consider of what he Is created: (Holy Qur'an 86:5),***

***and, Most surely in the creations of the heavens and the earth and
the alternation of the night and the day there are signs for men who
understand. Those who remember Allah standing and sitting and lying on
their sides and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth:
Our Lord! Thou hart not created this in vain! Glory be to Thee; save us
then from the chastisement of the fire: (Holy Qur'an 3: 89,190)***

which could stimulate the people's minds and direct them towards the
secrets of nature, the wisdom of the creation of the world and other
matters concerning nature.

3. Emphasis On Scientific Matters
---------------------------------

The most important matter is that, in the early days of Islam , all or
most scientific matters were interrelated. For instance, those who were
authorities in theology also knew philosophy, narration and
interpretation, while those who were authorities in narration and
interpretation were knowledgeable about literature, poems and phrases
explaining the meaning of the Qur'an. Not many people could be found in
those times, who specialised in only one subject, because specialty came
from an orderly discussion in a technical or scientific manner, which
did not exist at that time.

The most popular discussions were about religious matters such as
Qur'anic interpretation, narration and jurisprudence. Discussions were
also often held about history, philosophy, logic, chemistry and
medicine.

Establishing Islamic Primary Schools- Schooling in Mecca
--------------------------------------------------------

After the dawning of Islam, Mecca and Medina became two important
scientific centres. The city of Mecca was the birthplace of Islam and
Islamic legislation.

After the migration of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W), the increased power of
Islam and the conquest of Mecca, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W) appointed
Mu'az to teach Islamic jurisprudence and the Qur'an. Mu'az was one of
the best youths of Ansar[^2] for he possessed knowledge and excellent
morals and participated in most of the Muslims' battles. He was
well-acquainted with Islamic precepts and had collected all of the
verses of the Qur'an which had been revealed to the Prophet (S.A.W).
Mu'az was the best person to be appointed to teach and educate the
inhabitants of Mecca. Unfortunately, it did not take long for the
disease of the plague to claim his life, and he passed into the next
world. Thus, this great man of wisdom and knowledge bid farewell to
earthly life.

Abdullah Ibn Abbas was appointed to succeed Mu'az, and he began teaching
and educating people right away. The fame of this city concerning
learning and science is because of his efforts.

Schooling in Medina
-------------------

Medina was the centre of Islamic propagation and was the second city of
the leader of Muslims. It was the home of many of the Prophet's
followers and, most importantly, many historical and political events
took place in this city.

The majority of the laws of Islam were explained in Medina and then
spread to other regions, therefore, those interested in learning and
understanding Islamic instructions had to travel to Medina in order to
realize their aims.

After the passing away of the Prophet (S.A.W.), Medina became the centre
of the caliphate and Muslim leaders resided there. In each war after,
the victory of the Islamic troops, some of the prisoners of war, by the
Caliph's order, were transferred to the capital city of Medina, and
since among these prisoners of war, in particular those from Rome and
Iran, many were knowledgeable and educated, as a result, Medina became
familiar with the customs, traditions, sciences and other aspects of
other nations' civilizations.

It did not take long for Medina to become an important centre of science
and knowledge and those who were educated there became specialists in
subjects, such as jurisprudence, narration, and history.

For many years, from all corners of the world, students travelled to
this city for education, as stated by Ibn-al-Athir:

" Abdul Aziz Ibn Marwan sent his child to be educated in the educational
centres of Medina. After learning religious studies and expanding his
research, he travelled to other places and continued his advancement of
knowledge with amazing speed."

The way the Muslims were conquering lands was really surprising and
perhaps unprecedented in other nations' histories. Their acquisition of
knowledge was also surprising, as will be discussed in a later chapter.

Compilations, Collections and Codifications
-------------------------------------------

Some historians believe that compilation in Islam began in the second
half of the first Islamic century, but it can be said that the writing
and collecting of articles started from the beginning of the first
century and at the time of the Prophet, because the Prophet appointed
some people to write down the Qur'anic revelations. They wrote it on
paper, bones and flat stones. Several Muslims also collected the
Prophet's (S.A.W) narrations, including Abdullah Ibn Abbas, who wrote
the narrations he himself heard, and Muslims' historical accounts of war
and the Prophet's participation in the Muslims' wars. An example of
these Muslims is: Wahab-ibn-Monabbeh, who throughout the years 110-134
A.H. (after Hijra), wrote about the history of Islamic battles.

Urwat-ibn-Zubayr, who was one of the most famous jurisprudents of Medina
in 23 to 94 A.H. wrote the biography of Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W) and
also about his battles.

Abdur rahman Ibn Mughirah, who was the student of Urwat, wrote and
compiled the Prophet's (S.A.W) way of life.

Ibn-Shahab-al-Zohari, who lived from 51 to 124 A.H., also wrote a book
about the Prophet's battles.

[^1]: The History book of Albert Malleh, the French historian.

[^2]: Ansar were a group of Companions of the Prophet of Islam who
welcomed him at Medina.


