Where Did The Islamic Scientific Movement Begin?
================================================

In the preceding chapter we noted that in every city the Muslims
entered, their first objective was to establish mosques and schools.
Therefore, in all the Islamic cities, schools were established, but in
Islamic history, some schools were mentioned more frequently

and were centres of research in various scientific subjects. The first
and most important of these schools is Baghdad Academy, which is also
known as Baitul-Hikmah (House of Wisdom).

This scientific centre was established by Harun­ al-Rashid, the Abbasid
Caliph, and completed by his successor, Ma'amun, collected literature
and was a centre of attraction to interpreters and researchers from many
countries. The various scientific theories and practices developed in
Baghdad Academy found an atmosphere conducive to scientific research.

Ma'amun greatly developed and assisted in the expansion of the House of
Wisdom and spent three hundred thousand gold coins in translating Greek
books. One of the conditions of the peace convention between Ma'amun and
the Emperor of Rome was that the Roman Emperor ceded the Constantinople
libraries to Ma'amun. Ptolemy's book on astronomy was among these books
which Ma'amun ordered for translation.

The translators of the Baghdad Academy were a group of knowledgeable and
educated men from Iran, Syria, and India and most of them were Syriac,
who were very learned in Greek science and philosophy. Some of the
famous men were from a family called Bukhtishoou, the son of the Syriac
Bukhtishoou, who was Mansoor's physician, and some were Nestorian.

There were also translators from the family of Hanin Ibn Ishagh, Karkhi,
Sabet Harani Sa'ebi. The most famous translators in Persian and Hindi
languages included: Ibn al-Muqaffa, the astrologist family of Nobakht
and Ali-Ibn Ziad Tamimi, (who translated the books of Zeyjol-Shahriar),
Hassan Ibn Sahl and Belazari Ahmad Ibn Yahya (the chief director of
Bararnakah Hospital).

In other parts of the Islamic world, scientific centres similar to the
House of Wisdom were established, particularly after the downfall of the
Caliphate and the resultant independence of small and large countries.
This political separation was an important factor for scientific and
non­scientific competition among different courts in various countries
and each and every one of them tried to establish centres like the one
in Baghdad. As a result of this competition, many centres were
established in cities such as Sarnarghand, Marv, Harat, Tous, Nayshabur,
Rey, Isfahan, Shiraz, Damascus, Quds (Jerusalem), Cairo, Ghirvan, Fez,
Eshpilieh, Gharnateh, and elsewhere.

Hajj As a Scientific Congress For Islamic Schools
-------------------------------------------------

The religious duty of Hajj was an opportunity for great Muslim
scientists from different schools to gather in Mecca and meet each
other. In this way, they became enthusiastic about visiting each other's
schools and educational centres in order to discuss and exchange their
ideas and inform each other of their discoveries. Very often, after
performing their pilgrimage, Muslim scientists stayed in cities like
Andalusia or Maghrib[^1] in Egypt, held discussions with their
colleagues and took notes from the scriptures and books available.
Through this common scientific language, knowledge spread in all four
corners of the Islamic world with tremendous speed. Due to these
relations between educational centres, they progressed towards a
brighter civilization.

Miracles of Muslims
-------------------

As a result of this cultural and educational relation a new scientific
civilization was created for the whole world and it all came into
existence in less than two centuries and spread all over the world.

Researchers and historians viewed this phenomenon with surprise and they
called it the "Muslim Miracle." In other words, they confessed to the
creative power of this movement and admitted it was greater than the
movements which had taken place before the thirteenth Christian century.
In a short time, the Muslims achieved amazing success in different
subjects which we shall briefly mention:

Islamic scientists studied algebra and trigonometry on the basis that
the Indians and the Greeks established and they revealed them and
expanded them. In addition, they also conducted some studies in
astronomy.

They have criticized Ptolemy's delegation, which paved the way for
scientific movements in the sixteenth century. Muslims contributed new
medical observances, founded new methods of chemistry, introduced new
information regarding measurements, weights and atmospherical effects in
physics.

Their research in geography included the whole world at that time, and
they wrote many useful books about civilized countries and also
introduced a new way to analyze the philosophy of history.

[^1]: Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia


