Nizamiyyah University Of Baghdad
================================

The spirit of Islam spread from Mecca and changed darkness into light;
ignorance into knowledge and civilizations like that of the Romans,
Greeks, Indians and Persians which were becoming extinct were revived
and valuable books which had been gathering dust were put into use
again. In this universal scientific movement, universities were once
again established in Islamic lands and scientific works were also
revived.

Palaces and Mosques Become Schools
----------------------------------

Although in the early days of Islam there were no special places for
propagating science and culture and since there were no schools or
universities as was explained in the previous chapter, study groups were
formed in mosques and gradually even in the Caliph's palace, the
minister's house. Work areas and farms were converted into scientific,
cultural or literary centres. Many people became scientists and writers
and young and old, masters and slaves, were all busy learning. Some
slave-owners even taught their slaves poems, narrations, history and
literature and after learning these subjects, they were wonderful gifts.

Zubaidah, the wife of Harun Al-Rashid, had hundreds of female slaves and
all of them knew the Qur'an by heart. In the early mornings they recited
the Qur'an and filled the air with its pleasant sound[^1].

Is Nizamiyyah The First School In Islam?
----------------------------------------

In the next stage of history, Islamic schools, universities and research
centres were established.

Some writers, such as Ibn Khalkan, believed that Nizamiyyah University
in Baghdad was the first college for Muslims, which was established by
Nizamal-Mulk, Shah Malik's Prime Minister. These writers added that the
"House of Wisdom" in Baghdad, which had been opened during the lifetime
of Harun Al-Rashid, was merely an important library.

Nevertheless, many experts and historians believed that prior to
Nizamiyyah, there were many colleges and universities in Islamic lands.
A quotation from a British Encyclopedia states:

"When Ma'mun was a crown prince, he established a university in Khorasan
and for lecturing he invited experienced and educated professors from
different countries."

Chambers Encyclopedia writes that in Ma'mun's time, important
universities were established in Baghdad, Basrah and Kufa.

In the year 400A.H., Hakem, the Fatimi Caliph, established a large
college in Egypt, dedicating many books and he also appointed a group of
jurisprudents and professors for lecturing.

King Mahmud of Ghaznavi dedicated a substantial portion of his wealth to
the establishment of a magnificient university and built a great library
filled with valuable books. He paid for its daily expenses and endowed
many acres of land and villages.

In history it can also be found that while Baghdad was waiting for the
great honour of the inauguration of its university by Nizam al-Mulk in
the city of Nayshabur, great colleges and universities were established,
including Saiedieh College and Bayhaghieh, which Imam Ghazali graduated
from.

From what has been said so far, it can be concluded that before
Nizamiyyah, there were several colleges and universities in existence,
yet the fame of Nizamiyyah was so great that it overshadowed all the
other scientific and educational centres.

How Nizamiyyah Was Established
------------------------------

Nizam al-Mulk at-Tusi, the Minister of Alb Arsalan and Shah Malik, was
determined to spread knowledge among the people. He did a lot towards
fulfilling his aim and built several schools in villages in which he
spent six thousand gold dinars and also endowed a tenth of his wealth
for establishing libraries and colleges and most important of all, was
the establishment of Nizamiyyah in Baghdad.

The foundation of Nizamiyyah was laid in 487 A.H., at a cost of two
hundred thousand golden dinars, and it was completed in the year 489
A.H. It was inaugurated with a magnificient ceremony and if what has
been written in history is true, all the people in Baghdad and the royal
family hastened to attend the ceremony, which illustrated the Muslims'
enthusiasm towards the development of knowledge.

Abu Ishaq, head lecturer, was nominated for rectorship in the
university. He finally accepted after twenty days of insistence. As long
as the Baghdad caliphate was in power, the Nizamiyyah was glorious and
many famous scholars graduated from this university. Sa'adi, the famous
poet, was one of them.

For the scholars and scientists of that time, there was no greater
honour than being a lecturer at Nizamiyyah. For 200 years, no one was
appointed to that position unless he was the most knowledgeable in
related subjects.

Abu Zakaria Tabrizi, a well-known writer of that era, was the director
of the central library of Nizamiyyah.

In 589 A.H., Nasiruddin issued an order to establish another great
library to which he dedicated many rare and valuable books, which were
transferred from the caliph's library. Students were allotted a certain
amount of money as a monthly allowance, which was one of the advantages
of this university. Another advantage was that both poor and rich people
could send their children to study at this university and six thousand
students graduated from it with high qualifications.

[^1]: History of Islamic Civilization, Vol. 3 Georgi Zeydn.


