The Safa Brotherhood
====================

The history of mankind has been witness to countless wars and
revolutions, many of which reveal the exploitative nature of man.

The underlying aim of any revolution or movement can be understood by
the behaviour of its leaders and the results of their achievements. With
the passage of time, the true face of these leaders and their goals can
be determined.

Expanding the almost daily establishment of schools, universities and
libraries and collecting and compiling many books on Islam is clear
proof of the good intentions of this Islamic scientific movement. The
leaders of the Islamic lands following this aim did their best to
present these God-given gifts to scholars and scientists, and the
attention paid to students was in accordance with this policy.

For instance, Sharafuddin Ayubi, the ruler of Damascus, once declared
that anyone who memorised the book of *Al mofassal* written by
Zomokh-Shari would win a prize worth a hundred dinars, and as a result,
many learned that book by heart.

Public opinion was so concerned about the development of science and
knowledge that rulers occasionally were obliged to do something, to show
that they, too, cared.

Mourning Meeting in Baghdad
---------------------------

In order to have a clearer picture of the public's views at that time,
this surprising event of history is sufficient:

When Iraqi scholars were informed of the students financial facilities
at Nizamiyyah, they gathered together and held a mourning meeting,
lamenting the fact that from that time onwards, seeking knowledge was
not purely a matter of knowledge itself, because materialistic matters
were also concerned.

The formation of the Safa brotherhood is one example of the deep effect
of the scientific movement on the people. Those involved in forming this
educational centre abandoned government support and to show their
sincerity towards science they refused to print their names on their
publications and hence rejected fame.

In the fourth century after hijra, a secret society was formed in
Baghdad and Basra; the members of this society were among the great
Islamic scientists and scholars. They called themselves the "Safa
brotherhood" which means the brothers and followers of clarity.

They had much influence in scientific and cultural centres. The scholars
and scientists who belonged to the Brotherhood were learned in most of
the subjects known at that time.

In their meetings, they held detailed discussions about various matters,
such as the social and religious histories of nations. An agreement was
reached to publish their conclusions in a series of articles.

Although the brothers and followers of clarity did not sign their names
to these papers and books, they occupied an elevated position in the
history of science and they performed a valuable and admirable service
to the advancement of science, introducing new initiatives and ideas
concerning different scientific subjects. Even after the passing of
thousands of years, scientists still recognize their contributions. The
level of human thinking after the tenth century was at its zenith.

Ikhwanul Safa were very popular among people and they usually nominated
representative from different classes of society to guide them and tell
them what they had learnt from Ikhwanul Safa.

The Goals And Constitution Of The Brotherhood of Clarity
--------------------------------------------------------

By reading the atticles written by the Brotherhood's members it can be
concluded that they were not motivated by political aims, but were
concerned with scientific and moral matters. A member once wrote:

“We do not have any intention of competing with the kings and our
activities are not directed towards securing positions or gaining
wealth, but we surely seek the positions of angels in the heavens." It
was also stated:

“We harbour no hostility or enmity towards any of the subjects of
religious science and every book by any scientist deserves to be valued
and respected, but our reliance rests mainly on the books of prophets
and matters which are revealed.”

In their constitution, it was written that the religion of Islam had
become mixed with the superstitions and ideas of the people and in order
to purify this great religion from these corruptions, the only way to do
so was by propagating Islamic culture, science and, in particular,
philosophy. People would then become enlightened and Islam would be of
use to them when they realised the truth of this divine religion
purified from any superstition.

They must apply scientific methods and discoveries which have been
discussed in Islam in order to assist and influence the advancement of
Islam until it is accepted by the scientists of other nations.

Other opinions of this group which have been explained in a number of
their articles include the acknowledgement that since philosophical
matters had been translated from one language into another, some of the
translated facts were rendered ambiguous and complicated. Perversions
and deviations have also affected philosophical matters, and therefore
the original meanings of philosophy must be understood directly from the
original texts.

Members Of The Society And Their Contributions
----------------------------------------------

Since the members of this society never printed their names, different
opinions emerged in understanding the mentality of different authors
most of whom were usually determined by guessing. Sometimes an article
was believed to be related to one of the Imams descended from Imam Ali
Ibn Abi Talib (A.S) and some believed differently. Others said that the
writer of the article was from the Mutakallim of Mu'utazilite. But from
what Abu Hayyan Tawhidi told the Minister of Samsam-ud-Dolah, some of
the writers of these articles and members of this society are known.

When Samsam-ud-Dolah asked Abu Hayyan who was one of the professors and
brothers of this society he explained about Zaid Ibn Rafa'ah and said
that the people whom Zaid was close to were Abu Sulayman Muhammad ibn
Ma'ashar al-Basti, who was nicknamed Al-Qudsi, Abul-Hassan Ali Ibn
Harunul Zanjani, Abu-Ahmad Mehrejani, and Abul-Hassan Ali Ibn Raminas
al-Ufi.

The Four Levels of The Safan brotherhood
----------------------------------------

1. Ikhwanul Abrar and Ar-ruhama (after fifteen years),

2. Ikhwanul Akhyar and Al-Fuzala (after thirty years),

3. Ikhwanul Fuzala'ul Kiram (after forty years)

4. The highest level consisted of members who, with the support of the
unseen power, increased their writing ability and this level could be
reached after fifty years. Over fifty articles were written by the
Ikhwanul Safa. The articles dealt with such subjects as natural matters,
divine matters, matters of logic and social matters.


