Islamic Scientists' Methods Of Research
=======================================

The real importance and value of methods of research were only
discovered in Europe after the Middle Ages in the 18th and 19th
centuries when the fundamentals of scientific evolution were being
introduced. Thence forward the Europeans made use of philosophy and
science and paid much attention to Islamic thoughts.

They then replaced the old methods of comparison and intellectual
deductions by a new method of practice and experience. Later on, they
achieved wonderful results and discoveries that we witness today.
Generally speaking, a method is defined as a collection of means and
ways of the feasibility of an aim and scientific method is the one which
makes an exploration achievable.

Descartes has written much about the value and importance of applying
the correct method in his books. For instance, in one of his books
called *Articles About The Correct Use of Our Intellect,* he wrote that,
"In order to solve scientific problems, not only a clear and
intellectual mind is necessary, but, more important, is the application
of correct methods in using the mind."

Descartes also believed that without comprehensive awareness of the
method which we must use, the results of our thoughts are meaningless
and the mind just makes itself tired. Without adopting a procedure, no
one can research into the truth, because it is a fact that unorganized
study and research only cripple our ideas and minds and all efforts will
be in vain.

Descartes places much importance on methods and, like Bacon, believes
that the great differences which- can be seen between intellects is the
result of the various methods that they adopt.

Methods of Thinking
-------------------

Before the new period of science, the methods which were used by
scientists were mostly the methods of comparison and of intellect. They
attempted to solve all matters and problems, whether philosophical,
mathematical, physical or concerning astronomy, within the framework of
reasoning and logic and they believed all these matters could only be
determined in this way.

Method of Experience
--------------------

By using this method scientific theories can be proved or disapproved,
because it includes close observations and repetitive experiments,
therefore a definite result can be achieved. In this way usually an
experiment is repeated several times, under different conditions.

For example, to know whether heat is the main factor in the expansion of
a piece of metal, a scientist can repeat the experiment on different
metals, such as iron or copper, and can prove that the main cause of
expansion in metals is heat.

How The Method of Experiment Was Founded In The 17th Century
------------------------------------------------------------

In the Middle Ages, the Church had tremendous power in Europe.
Scientific research and discussions and in fact reading any reports of
scientists of that era was totally forbidden by Church leaders
throughout Europe.

It was also forbidden to reason and discuss, and they wanted human
beings to forget that they possessed brains and intellects, and wanted
them to convince themselves only by what they could find in the divine
book and what they could comprehend with their external senses. But even
through this restricted way, science made itself known.

The searchers of the truth thought it was better just to observe nature
and its effects. This occupation was not forbidden by the church leaders
and therefore was not dangerous, because in their opinion, it was better
than attacking Ptolemy's theories. They observed how the matters in
nature worked and there was no harm to the church in counting the stars.

### Bacon: The Famous English Philosopher's Methods

A young researcher named Francis Bacon used to think that the methods
which were taught at that time in the universities belonged to the olden
days and that those methods could not convince students. They never
spent any time on experiments or observation. Throughout his lifetime
Bacon, although busy with various jobs, considered the introduction of
new methods of science to be an important duty. In two of his famous
books, one which concerned the progress and value of science and
another, called *New Organ*, Bacon attempted to attract the attention of
people to scientific research by experiment. Bacon's method was to
collect as many facts as possible about a given thing, and then evaluate
and classify them.

In every case, he conducted different experiments and reached the result
in accordance with their qualities and divided them into different
groups in a table called "attendants‚Äù and another one of "absents", and
he called them the graded table. By this grading, classification and
levelling he formed several rules.


