Islamic Scientists' Attention To The Experimental Methods
=========================================================

Europe was proud to have introduced the experimental method and
presented itself as the founder of this method. However, the history of
science has shown that Europe is indebted to Muslim scientists for this
honour. Muslims were the first scientists to develop and apply this
method.

After translating and publishing books on different subjects, the
Muslims realised that experimentation and observation was a much better
method of discovering the facts.

Humble, in his book *The World*, which was translated into several
languages, after explaining that the lightest scientific progress in the
history of man has been due to his personal experience, explained that
experimental methods were first pioneered by Muslims.

Moshiyo Sayid Helu wrote that an important aspect of the teachings of
Baghdad University was the way of reasoning which was generally based on
scientific principles, and correct observations of events and happenings
with reasons confirming the results of experiments. He said this was a
procedure which has led present day scientists to great discoveries and
inventions. For the Muslims in the Middle Ages, the application of this
method was dear.

The proof of what we say is the initiative of the Muslims in chemistry,
physics and so on. For example in chemistry aqua-regia;[^1] alcohol and
sulphur were, discovered. These very Muslims' discoveries which paved
the way for research by scientists like La Voisier, Jabir, the great
Muslim chemist who lived in the latter part of the 8th century, wrote
several articles about chemical mixtures that were not clear before him,
such as aqua-regia which was a very important factor in chemistry.

From what he has written, it can be concluded that Jabir knew the
properties of gases and he explained that when gases combine with other
substances they loose their shape and properties and, in fact, change
from one form to another. He discovered the two forms of chemical
reactions. He realized in a reaction the substances may undergo either a
physical change, which is reversible to the original substances or a
chemical change, which is irreversible to the original substances on
separation.

Muslims And Other Sciences
--------------------------

It was mentioned earlier that Islam brought about a revolution in
different aspects of people's lives by laying the foundation of a great
scientific revolution. This was followed by the establishment of
numerous schools, colleges and universities which attracted many
scientists and researchers, who wrote valuable books and papers.

But as one must work hard in order to reach the top, civilized nations
too, before rising to greatness, passed through different stages. In the
history of civilization, a nation has never been able, or perhaps it is
impossible for a nation, to jump from a primitive way of life to a
progressive one. Each nation which has become powerful in the world was
once the puppet of another nation. For instance, if Greece, with its
magnificence and greatness is known as the centre of science and
philosophy, it should be remembered that Greece had been the student of
Egypt, and that the foundation of its philosophy was, to some extent
taken from the Egyptians.

Romans, too, with all their fame were once scientifically dominated by
the Greeks and they only contributed a little to what they had learned
from them. Therefore it would not be surprising if in the history of
Islamic civilization we saw that at the time of gaining other sciences
and industries the Caliphs of Ummayyad and Abbasid invited Iranian,
Greek or Indian scientists to come to Islamic countries to teach. They
also made efforts to translate books from Pahlavi, Syriac and Greek into
Arabic (the official language of Muslims) in order to improve and have
better insights into other nations' cultures and sciences.

The Advantage of Muslims To Greeks and Romans Sociological surveys in
the history of nations have shown that Muslims held a superior position
in terms of talents and administration. Although the Greeks took the
initiative in philosophy and some sciences, yet they were very weak in
establishing order and legislation. Most of the time they were living in
Feudal systems and spent their forces in civil wars and internal
conflicts.

On the contrary, Romans were very strong in legislation and establishing
government, but they didn't take any initiative in researching sciences
and philosophy and they didn't add anything to what they had already
taken from the Greeks. The strong points of these two nations can be
clearly seen in the Muslims because Muslims, like the Greeks, were very
powerful in science and philosophy. They not only made use of these two
valuable assets of the Greeks but enriched these with logic and the
narrations of Iranians and Indians and established new legislation laws
together with much progress in the study of grammar, syntax, theology,
narration and research in natural sciences. All this gave the Muslims
greater superiority in establishing an even stronger government than the
Romans.

When the Muslims established governments and ruled the countries under
their domination, they legislated laws derived from Islamic revelations
which were spread throughout much of the world.

The Muslims' motivation in studying and learning foreign sciences
originally came from the very emphasis and encouragement that the Holy
Qur'an and the Prophet of Islam had prescribed about sciences. They knew
the Prophet had repeatedly stated that wisdom and knowledge are the
properties that a believer is always in search of wherever he hears a
knowledgeable word he learns and he would not pay attention to where or
whom it is from.

Until the end of the first Islamic century and into the beginning of the
second century, that is, throughout the reigns of the First Caliphs and
the Umayyad Caliphs in different regions of the country, the Muslims
were busy with their conquests and, as a result, they didn't have many
opportunities to pay attention to their jobs, important religious issues
and government. Yet from the time that the Iranians and Iraqi people and
some Asians and other nearby nations established relations and began
mixing with the Muslims, they gradually entered the fields of
administration and social work.

General needs, such as the need to learn about medicine and mathematics,
also prompted the Muslims to pay attention to other nations' sciences.

The First Translated Book
-------------------------

The first translation of foreign science to Arabic was completed by
Khalid Ibn Yazid Ibn Mu'awiyya, who was known as the wise man of
Al-e-Marwan, or "Hakim Al-e- Marwan.''

After the death of his brother, Khalid was thinking was known as the
wise man of Al-e-Marwan, the son of Hakim, defeated him and the
Caliphate of the family of Abu Sofyan was transferred to the family of
Marwan Ibn Hakam.

Disappointed at not becoming caliph, Khalid pursued his education and it
was a pity to realise that the other members of this old family, to be
rulers did not use their talents in other areas, such as sciences, from
the beginning. In any case, at that time, chemistry was a very popular
course in secondary schools. Khalid brought a group of graduates from a
school to Damascus in order to learn about chemistry from them one of
the students was known to be a Syriac or a Roman named either Marianusor
Maryanus, who taught chemistry to Khalid and also wrote a book for him.

When Khalid gained some knowledge of chemistry, he decided to translate
chemistry books. Together with another man called Stephen, they
translated the first translated book in chemistry and called it *Kimiya*
(chemistry or alchemy).

Ibn Nadeem, in a book called Al-Fehrest wrote that the first person
whose books on chemistry , astronomy and medicine were translated by
him, was Khalid Ibn Yazid. Some of the books credited to him include
*Al-Sahifatul Kabira, Al-Sahifatul-Saghira, and
WasitatuÂ­ila-Abnibi-f-San'a*.

Ibn Khalkan has also narrated that, Khalid was a master in chemistry and
had translated books related to chemistry and medicine.

The author of a book called *Kashfal Dhanoon* says that Khalid Ibn Yazid
was the first person among the Muslims to teach chemistry and had
written a book on this subject. However, some researchers, including Ibn
Khaldun and western researchers, have doubts about this matter and
refute these assertions. They even claim that the fast chemistry book
translated from Latin to Arabic in the year 1182, was actually done by
someone called Robert Castansis years before the time of Khalid (who
died in the year 85 after Hijra), and not Maryanus.

If we disregard the fast book which has been attributed to the time of
Khalid Ibn Yazid in chemistry, the first book which was translated from
Greek to Arabic was a book called *Arze Miftahun Nujun*, which concerns
the principles of astronomy, and has been attributed to a man named
Hermes. A review of this book was published in November 1909, and in
this book it was clearly indicated that the translation was done (in the
Arabic month of Zil-Qadah) in the year 125 A.H.

[^1]: A mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acid that dissolves gold or
platinum.


