Muslims' Learning And Research In Medical Field
===============================================

The second and third century A.H. was the period of the Muslims'
familiarization with study of foreign sciences. Scientific books in
Greek, Pahlawi and Hindu were translated into Arabic with great speed by
Muslims who felt great enthusiasm for their work.

Muslims were more interested in medicine than other sciencesand, after a
short period of time, they started their own research and writings and
left behind valuable books about medicine. The reason for this interest,
in addition to their need, was the emphasis of their religious leaders
placed on learning medicine. The Prophet of Islam(S.A.W.) had always
encouraged people to learn the principles of belief, Islamic literature,
knowledge of religion and medicine, and particularly stressed the
importance of medical knowledge.

The Prophet of Islam had always told his Companions that religious and
scientific studies were at the same level of importance and learning
about both were necessary. Medicine was first established among Muslims
by doctors at Jondi Shapur Hospital. Then, with the transferal and
education of a group of doctors from Greece, they gained more knowledge
from the books which were narrated from Greek and Syriac and then
translated into Arabic, they increased their knowledge of this science
by all the available means.

Regarding the methods of the Iranian doctors of Jondi Shapur in the
propagation and distribution of medical books, it was said that Mansur,
the second Abbaside Caliph, once became ill with stomach pains. He had
no appetite and asked all of his doctors to do whatever they could to
cure him. However, they could not find a cure and all their efforts were
in vain.

One day Mansur asked if anyone knew of any skillful doctor who could
help him. He was told that the head of Jondi Shapur hospital, a person
called George Ibn-Bakhtishooa' was a very knowledgeable doctor and no
one knew of anyone more reliable than him. George, a Christian was one
of the most skillful doctors of his time. He had written many books
about medicine and due to his skillfullness and because of his
meritoriousness in medicine, he became the head of Jondi Shapur
Hospital, which was one of the biggest medical schools in the region at
that time.

Mansur dispatched someone to bring Dr. Bukhtishoou to him. After
describing his illness, George agreed to begin treating him and after
sometime Mansur was cured.

The Caliph became so interested in him that he did not want the doctor
to return to Jondi Shapur and asked him to stay in Baghdad.George
remained there and she was fluent in Arabic, Syriac and Persian, he
wrote several books on medicine while in Baghdad, some of which he
translated from Greek into Arabic.

The Research Period
-------------------

After spending some time translating new books and taking selected
information from the non-Islamic sciences, the Muslims entered a new era
of research. They displayed such initiative in the history of science
that they were regarded with amazement. In medicine, in particular, they
produced great physicians. Ibn -Abi -Usaybiah in one of the volumes of
his book *Tabaghatul Atba'* (the classification of physicians)
catagorized and listed the names of all of the Islamic scientists.

A Distinguished Scientist And Doctor In Islam
---------------------------------------------

One of the most famous examples of a Muslim scientist was Muhammad Ibn
Zakariyya Razi, who was also nicknamed *Tabib-al-Muslimin*, (The Doctor
of the Muslims) or Jalinusul Arab, (The Galenus of Arab). Razi was a
respected physician, a famous philosopher and a very skilled
mathematician, but he was best known in the field of medicine. It is
said that he was first a jeweller, but he had a great interest in
chemistry and for that reason, he spent most of his time experimenting
with various chemicals. Due to his hard working and daily contacts with
various gases and chemicals his eyes began to be seriously inflamed.
Razi consulted a doctor for treatment and was charged 500 Ashrafi, which
was the unit of currency at that time. The doctor told him that "It was
the money which was the real alchemy" and not what he was doing. The
doctor's words affected Razi so much that he began thinking of studying
medicine at the age of 40.

Razi's thought was materialised and at the age of forty he displayed
such dedication to medicine and became such a good physician that anyone
suffering from a physical ailment and had heard of Razi came to him.

In the years 289-295A.H,Razi was head of the physicians in Baghdad and
for showing his greatness and the services he had rendered in
medicine,experts in the history of science have said that' “The science
of medicine which was in danger of dying, was revived by Jalinus, and it
was Muhammad Ibn Zakariyya Razi who organized it.”

This science was imperfect, but Ibn Sina perfected it. Razi busy in
medicine at Baghdad for 50 years and as well as applying what he read in
other medical books, he carried out numerous experiments and displayed
great initiative intreating patients. He has outlined and described all
the methods he had adopted in his books.

Some of his ideas, suggestions and initiatives are still of points of
value and are being applied at the present time.

The Role Of Religion In Muslim Physicians
-----------------------------------------

Here we have to notice that, after the transferral of foreign sciences
to Islamic countries and the familiarization of the Muslims with those
sciences, the spirit of science in all civilizations was manifested and
two great forces, spirituality and materialism, were combined.
Nevertheless, for a Muslim physician the doctrine of "Every thing
Belongs to God" had always been the main pivoting criteria and was
always outstanding in their activities. The Muslim scientists who
believed in this principle were humble servants of their society.
Secularists, who based their practice on laws and were primarily
concerned with acquiring the means of their enjoyment, were
categorically different.

Great Islamic scientists have referred to Razi with much respect and
they have confirmed that he acted compassionately towards his patients
and used to treat poor people free of charge.

He spent some of his wealth in order to purchase medicine or food for
his patients and if they didn't have a place in which to be treated, he
used to bring them to his own house. There are many stories about the
life of Razi and all of them illustrate that he possessed high morals
and Great Spirit. One example we would like to mention here is the story
that one day Razi was walking alone in the street, where he saw someone
lying unconscious on the floor.

The passer by, had thought the man was dead. But Razi, after a close
examination, asked people to find pieces of sticks. He told them to beat
the unconscious man's consciousness and opened his eyes. In the view of
everybody who witnessed this, Razi has restored life to a dead body.

When the Caliph asked Razi what this miracleous treatment had been, he
answered that he had never used that treatment previously, but it had
been applied successfully by primitive people, and it was not such an
important matter. "The only thing which I did was to remember what the
Beduins did to a sufferer of this kind; hence the credit should go to
them and not me'', said Razi.


