The Valuable Works Of Razi
==========================

Mankind is indebted to Razi for his valuable contribution and research.
Europe especially has greatly benefitted from his works. Razi has a
special, universal fame. One cannot find many scientists who have
written as many useful books as Razi. Over 250 books have been authored
by Razi, most of which are about medicine. The most important one is the
book called *Al-Hawi* which we will discuss later. Another book is
*Al-Mansuri*, or Mansuri Medicine, which has been compiled for Amir Ibn
Mansur Ibn Ishaq Samani the ruler of Rey. This book is divided into two
sections and is briefer than *Al- Hawi*.

In the Middle Ages, *Al-Mansuri* was translated into Latin and it has
been reprinted numerous times since then. Other books by Razi are
*Borhan*, *Tibbun Nufus* and a book called *Quality of Sight*, another
book which is concerned with the diseases of the joints of the body and
there is a book about avoiding extremes. The Arab Jalinus Razi, has made
a lot of objections and criticisms in the ideas of the famous physician
Galenus in a book *Al-Shakuk*. The book called *Man la Yahdharul Tayb*
is one of the famous works of Razi and Ibn Abi Usaybiah has called it
the medicine of poor people; because in this book he has outlined simple
and inexpensive instructions for treating patients which is very helpful
for the deprived segment of society. In many of his instructions a
doctor's advice is not needed[^1].

The book *Bur'a Sa'a* is anotherof Razi's works describing the treatment
of emergency cases before reaching a doctor.

In a book called *Al Tibbul Muluki* Razi proposed the treatment of all
diseases with food, not medicine. This method of curing was a new method
and since that time, has gained a lot of supporters.

Other books by Razi are too numerous to mention individually. In
addition to books, there are many articles said to be written by Razi in
the Middle Ages which were translated into Latin and, after the
invention of the printing machine, were printed often[^2].

Al-Hawi- A Medical Encyclopedia
-------------------------------

The most important and the biggest work of Razi is a world famous book
called Al-Hawi, which has been called the 'general book on the science
of medicine'. This encyclopedia identified and discussed all or most of
the problems facing medical science at that time. The ideas and methods
of treatment of the ancient Greeks, Iranians and other scientists have
also been collected in this book. European physicians, in particular the
medical society of Italy and the doctors in this land, have gotten much
benefit from the book, and the ancient scientists had a very strong
belief.

in this book. Many historians have mentioned Razi's book with respect.
Aruzue Samarghandi, in a book called Four Articles in the section of
"medical signs" wrote that every doctor should read Jalinus's book,
Al-Rawi, which has been written by Razi and Qanun, written by Ibn Sina,
and derive benefit from these books.

Regarding Al-Rawi, it has been noted that during his lifetime, Razi did
not succeed in collecting and putting the chapters in order; he just
wrote them like notes and after his death, Ibn al-Amid nicknamed Sahib
Ibn Eebad paid a lot of money to Razi's sister to collect all of her
brother's notes. With the assistance of his students, he put them in
order and it was published. Some researchers believe that this book is
thirty volumes. Ibn Nadeem, in a book called *Al-Fihris*, and Ibn
Usaybiah in a book called *Ayunul Anbaa*, said that this book has twelve
sections. The importance the Europeans place on this book, in Razi's
treatments and results of his patients' treatment have all been
reflected in this book, and Razi noted all his observations in the book.

For the first time, the book *Al-Hawi* , was translated to Latin in
Italy and two volumes were published in the 1486 and later this book was
re-published in Venice, Italy, in the year 1509 and 1542.

The manuscript of this book is available in the British Museum, Munich
Library , Oxford and Cambridge Libraries, Excoria Library of Spain, the
Library of Salimaqa in Istanbul, Suliemaniyya Library, Shahid Ali Pasha
Library in Istanbul, Musa Library, Astane Quds Library in Mashad,
Modarres Library in India and Malik Library in Tehran.

Abu Raihan Muhammad lbn Ahmad al-Biruni- Another Muslim Scientist
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Abu Raihan Biruni, one of the great scientists of the fourth hijrah
century, approximately a thousand years ago, was born in the north of
Khorasan province in Iran. He made discoveries in mathematics,
astronomy, history, social sciences, and philosophy and wrote many books
in Persian and Arabic. His scientific contributions include the accurate
determination of the density of eighteen different metals and mineral
stones. He calculated the sine and cosine of angles from zero to 90
degrees and recorded them in a table.

One of his discoveries was the measurement of the radius of the earth
using a new and difficult method. He measured the radius of the earth
twice, once from a mountain peak in the Hindukush mountains in
Afghanistan and the other time from the peak of a high mountain next to
a flat plain when he was travelling to India.

According to the figure in order to measure the radius of the earth
through this method one should climb to the peak of a high mountain
which overlooks a flat plain.

(Mountain is indicated with the height of AH in figure (1) but as we
know the irregularities on the surface of the earth are insignificant in
respect to the largeness of the earth but in order to make the mountain
recognizable in the figure we drew it bigger than its real size.

The horizon should be drawn on top of the mountain (But how?) Abu Raihan
then by using an instrument similar to today's telescope overlooked the
surface of the earth and measured the angle(-\< ) between the horizon
(AH) and the tangent line to the earth's surface (AC) which was a small
angle about 30 minuted (half a degree). By measuring the height of the
mountain's peak (AH) and using the following equations, he measured the
radius of the earth.

In the right triangle of (OAC), the equation could be written as:

Therefore, by measuring the angle (-\<) and the height of the mountain
(h) the radius of the earth could be measured, through Abu Raihan's
method.

Have you ever considered how the height of a mountain could be measured?
Abu Raihan Biruni in his book entitled Ghanoon Masoudi which is an
astronomical book, described the measuring method of a mountain's
height. Figure (2) shows this method which is still used today.

[^1]: Uyan ul Anbaa, Vol. 1, page 314-315.

[^2]: History of Literature, by Dr. Safa


