Foreword
========

We hear talk of acquaintance with Islam in our century more than in any
other. On one side there are the Western Orientalists whose fame and
renown have spread the world over and whose writings and researches are
published in various languages.[^1]

On the other side are their Eastern students who are the bearers of
Western Knowledge in the east; and the Professors of Orientalism in
Universities in Islamic countries. Last of all we have those who are
semi-educated in courses on the Islamic Sciences, whose influence in
religious communities far exceeds that of the other groups.

We are convinced that the first group is deprived of a correct and
precise understanding of Islam, because of lack of veracity, occasional
partial or spiteful behaviour, and lack of conversance in Islamic
Language and Culture.[^2]

As for the second group, even though it is possible that they don't lack
veracity, a lack of scientific expertise and submission to their western
professors deprives them of seeing the eternal manifestation of the
truth. The third groups deprivation requires no reason because a lack of
sufficient research or learning is in itself reason for not being clear
sighted in Islamic matters. Thus, only the well-informed scholar and
religious authority, expert in all of the Islamic Sciences, also
possessing complete scientific independence is the man for this arena.

Considering these conditions, we see how limited the number and range of
those clear-sighted in Islamic learning will be. Only a few will be
included in the narrow gulf of this superior distinction. Certainly if
out of personal interest or religious fervour one intends to
propagandize Islam, they must acquire enough preliminary information, to
be able to arrive at the correct origins of pure, researched Islamic
thought, and speak on that basis and write on that foundation, there
existing no other way at all.

There is no doubt that in an Islamic discussion the most important thing
is the veracity of that being said, all other matters considered after
that as being of secondary importance. The eloquence of speech, the
writings literary style, the subject being epic, an interesting
presentation and so on, are all necessary but not fundamental.

The primary element, impossible to be ignored is the integrity and
authenticity of the subject propounded. This feature may in no way be
forgotten. It must not be upset by the approval of listener and reader,
or the way of thought ruling a period or age. The speaker and writers
responsibility in this matter is very heavy because the God of Islam
will never accept any type of change or reduction in his religion no
matter how small or insignificant, and He will not forgive its agent.
This humble writer believes that this remark contains no room for doubt
or hesitation.

Now, let us see where integrity and authenticity in an Islamic
discussion comes from, and in whose trap this high flying bird becomes
captive. Sometimes an argument may be found which is one hundred percent
anti-Islamic i.e. based on one or many traditions, or someone will claim
support for a remark out of the realm of veracity in Islam by citing
verses from the Quran.[^3] This matter is quite possible and has occured
frequently.

As such, speaking only in the name of Islam does not suffice as a
condition. Relying just on one isolated tradition does not insure the
integrity of ones inquiry or its being Islamic. Actually, study with
complete critical accuracy of the collection of religious texts is
necessary, itself requiring a series of preliminary studies.

We will go over these conditions: A well-informed scholar, by
concentrating on the collection of sources and religious writings, and
with study, discussion and investigation into all Islamic texts attempts
to learn of Islam. Of course this is all necessary and without them
Islam may in no way be understood, but these conditions are not enough
for a complete understanding of Islam. That which sees the caravan of
learning to the end of the line and the destination of truth is the
scholars lack of personal viewpoint, his avoidance of advance judgements
and his lack of relation or inclination to a present or past school of
thought.

According to these premises, an expert on Islam will truly be such when
first of all he becomes familiar with and gains mastery of all religious
documents and sources such as the Quran, Traditions, Commentaries,
History, the Sirah, and Rijal. Second of all with an unprejudiced mind,
a free heart and independent thought he should possess knowledge of
schools of thought other than religious, in order to go after the truth
without a pre-determined opinion or choice, or in other words, advance
judgement.[^4]

\* \* \* \* \*

Islam is based upon a multitude of teachings which have been gathered in
the Holy Quran and Sunnah. Since we are separated by many long centuries
from the time of the revelation of the Holy Quran, the issuance of
Traditions, and the writings containing the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet
(S).[^5] We are undoubtedly in need of scientific mediation to
understand them.

This is so we will be able to close this one thousand four hundred year
gap and understand the Prophets' or Imams' words just as their Arab
contemporaries. What we wish to bring to attention here is that the
first step for a study of the Islamic sciences in all of their aspects
is an experts knowledge of Arabic language, vocabulary and literature.

This is while essential, to expert knowledge of the Arabic language, is
the study and knowledge of the elements of Arabic words, their phrasing
and their abundant metaphorical, symbolical and figurative meanings.
Arabic grammar and literature must also be researched to the point of
technical expertise so the person may understand Islamic writings as
their Arab contemporary world.

We know that during different stages of its development every language
is modified under the influence of various agents or factors. One very
beautiful well-formed word will become obscene in the course of time. A
word will lose its original meaning and will take on a meaning exactly
the opposite of the original. Sometimes the scope of a words meaning
will be restricted, or it will be enlarged etc......

It is therefore necessary for us to become so knowledgeable of Arabic
words, language and grammar that we obtain a complete grasp of these
evolutionary stages, and the ability to traverse time and place is also
bestowed upon us. Thus, the first instrument necessary for our continue
towards understanding Islam, is expert, technical knowledge of Arabic
language and etymology.[^6]

Since, between the time of the Holy Prophets and the Holy Imams and our
time, there exists a multitude of narrators and book writers; an expert
on Islam must be fluent in his knowledge of the Prophet and Holy Imams
companions and the numerous narrators and writers of Islamic writings.

This is so he will be able to confirm the veracity or falsity of
narratives pertaining to history, traditions or the sirah, biographies
of the Holy Prophet (S), his knowledge must be to the extent that he
will be able to separate reports, such as Israelites (false traditions)
which have infiltrated Islamic writings,[^7] from other than those,
and/or recognize infiltrations by foreign cultures in Islamic records.
This will enable them to present untouched writings for the inference of
Islamic truths.[^8]

Here it also becomes clear that for this to be possible, knowledge of
the sources of foreign thoughts, beliefs and philosophies is also
necessary. Until a person does not accurately and deeply understand
these sources he will not be able to achieve awareness as to how they
infiltrated the school of thought he is researching.

These sciences are known as the second preliminary for understanding
Islam and without them it is impossible to come to know of Islam as an
expert. Passing these two sets of preliminary learnings we come to the
primary texts, texts which are studied by the expert after the
preliminary learnings have been grasped from which the main courses of
Islamic thoughts, its finer points and branches may be comprehended.

These texts may be divided into several groups:

1) The first and primary Islamic texts
--------------------------------------

The Holy Quran and the traditions written with regard to it, with regard
to interpretation, its inner meaning and the whys and hows of each
revelation must be studied carefully as the first and most important
Islamic text by the Islamic scholar.

If we realize that in one traditional commentary such as «Al-Borhan»
there exists close to twelve thousand traditions, we will see the
expance of this matter.[^9]

2) Texts of creed
-----------------

On the grounds of creed and argumentation of theological matters we
possess a valuable treasure, of which the likes cannot be found in any
other religion or nations' reserves or heritage. It is also obligatory
for the Islamic scholar to study them all. In one volume of
Al-Usul-ul-Kafi alone there are one thousand four hundred and thirty
seven traditions listed on this subject, being only a minute portion of
our information on this subject.

3) Morality and Ethics
----------------------

The existing writings and texts on Islamic morality and human thought
are quite extensive and without a critical review of them an opinion or
judgement regarding Islam may not be given.

4) Scientific Instructions
--------------------------

Texts containing practical instructions or plans for mans life according
to Islamic thought constitute our most valuable writings. These types of
records and texts will be the primary part used for research by the
Islamic scholar requiring the most strenous, comprehensive research
work. The book Vasael al-Shia ela-Tashil Masael al-Sharia alone contains
35,850 traditions which speak on the environs of Islamic law and its
practical matters.

Traditions on the same subject but which do not appear in Vasael al-Shia
are gathered in the book Mostadrak al-Vasael. The numbers of traditions
found in this book do not vary much from the number listed in the first
book.

5) Prayers
----------

The stockpile we possess on this subject which have been narrated from
the Holy Prophet (S) and the infallible Imams (a.s.) are excellent
example of sublime Islamic teachings. Studying prayer texts clarifies
for us the most superior levels of Islamic teachings on the subjects of
the creator, the here-after, creation, anthropology, ethics and
individual and social responsibilities. The Islamic scholar will in no
way be able to do without a careful study of all of these writings.[^10]

6) History and the Biographies of the Holy Prophet (S)
------------------------------------------------------

The part of Islamic history which pertains to the essence of religion is
the period in which the leaders and guides of Islam lived. Thus, the
historical periods an Islamic scholar must concentrate on are: the age
of ignorance which preceeds the rise of Islam, the life of the Holy
Prophet (S) in Mecca and Medina and after that the period in which the
Holy Imams (a.s.) lived up untill the end of the minor occultation. The
political, economic, moral and intellectual conditions of these periods
require minute research so the reasons for the social and individual
behaviour of these leaders may be discovered.

As such, with a comparison of these findings with the situations during
the age of the leader and his reactions to them, he will arrive at
Islamic lines to thought and actions under various conditions. It is
necessary to say here that the biographies of the Holy Prophet (S) and
the Imams (a.s.) are an undiscovered treasure for the inference of
Islamic social and individual plans, and shows their insight on vital
matters of international law, world and local politics and social
leadership.

The vast spread a researcher must inevitable refer to for perception
into the matters of this section consist of: General Islamic
histories,[^11] the Holy Prophets' biography with its innumerable
sources,[^12] the history of Islamic learning,[^13] heresiography and
the metamorphosis of religions and thoughts in Islamic society,[^14] the
numerous widespread traditions related to the lives of the Holy Imams
(a.s.),[^15] the lives of the companions of the Prophet and Imams and
the history of the official caliphate with all of its highs and
lows.[^16]

This arrangement shows but a small picture of an enormous vista and we
believe and here repeat that only a very few will ever reach the elated
distinction of Islamic expert in its comprehensive, vast sense. These
are the persons who have researched and gained expertise in each of
these subjects.

Of course, there are numerous experts on various Islamic teachings; law,
jurisprudence, speculative theology, history, the traditions and
exegesis etc. However, if these persons are not possessed of all of the
aforementioned teachings they are not Islamic experts and may not and
should not speak on the whole of Islam.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

The series of lectures of which you now have the first volume in hand,
were delivered by Allamah Sayyed Morteza Askary in a class for a group
of religious scholars in a period of more than two years. The subject
for these lectures being a discussion of the principle matters
concerning veracious Islam which until this time had not been studied or
researched as such;[^17] «“An Introduction to the Role of the Holy Imams
(a.s.) in the Revival of Religion”»

We all know that the principle subject of disagreement propounded among
the Shi'ite and Sunni schools of thought[^18] is the subject of
«Leadership and Rule». This point, being of course one of the major
points of difference, has been under inquiry and consideration for many
long years. This is while Shi'ite scholars, based on their sense of
responsibility, have been very precise on the many opinions and
researches regarding this point.[^19]

However, the great deal of attention (paid) to this matter has sometimes
kept persons from many other fundamental matters, and slowly we have
come to the point where most of us think that this is the only
difference between these two schools of thought. As such, if someone
should create difficulty saying that this dispute pertains only to the
first centuries of Islamic history, its time passed having nothing to do
with our day and age, and as such should be forgotten to strive towards
complete unity between the two schools, we are thus disarmed and will
remain without a reply.

However, while strictly restraining ourselves from unscientific and
hate-inspiring attacks and believing only in discussion on the
scientific and deductive level, and having seen these as sufficient
throughout our lifetime, we believe that the differences between the two
schools, are fundamental differences in all of Islam's aspects: from the
matters pertaining to God and His attributes and continuing on the level
of beliefs pertaining to the Prophethood, Imamate and Resurrection.

From this point on, and based on the very beliefs mentioned above it
penetrates all aspects of practical and legal matters to the point that
the question becomes that of true veracious Islam as opposed to an
altered Islam. In the event that the reader is successful, and is able
to carefully study all of these lectures, he will be able to
fundamentally recognize the two principal Islamic school of thought
Shi'ite and Sunni. He will also arrive at the depth and hidden aspects
of the occurances in the first part of Islamic history.

Here it must be reminded that this sort of subject matter since it is
related to many sides and aspects of Islam and Shi'ite belief, brings up
for discussion and study many of Islam's structural, practical and
ethical matters and as such is a sort of “Islamology” in itself with all
of its importance and necessity in our time. In addition, because it
looks at Islam in an analogistic study it puts forth a new aspect and
dimension of Islam that has been very seldom brought to light in the
past.

Since Allamah Askary's[^20] lectures contain all of the characteristics
of a lecture, were re-written after being extracted from cassette-tape
and after the sources and documentation were researched, being checked
by the speaker and once again re-written, it was ready for publication.
Repetitions that occured during the original delivery of the lectures
were to an extent eliminated, but not always because of their frequent
aid in the better understanding of the subject-matter.

The only benefit for the writer of these lines was the hope that as a
result of-it even just one person would be able to take one step closer
to Islam in its pure form, and/or the veil of ignorance and bigotry be
torn away. His hope is also that the Compassionate Lord by His
All-Encompassing Greatness keep all new generations from spiritual and
external errors, and look upon this insignificant writing favourably.

[^1]: One of the most important orientalist writings on Islam, with all
of the lies, mistakes and fictions included in it is the “Encyclopedia
of Islam” and as far as we know it has been published in English,
French, German, Arabic, Turkish, Persian and Urdu.

[^2]: In fact most of the orientalists were the enemies of Islam and
hated it, such as «Lamans» or like «Louis Masinionn were the servants of
Western Imperialism. «Refer to the books by Dr. Muhammad Albahy:
“Al-Fikr-ul-Isla mi-al-hadees wa Sillatuhu bil Iste'maar al-Garbi”, Dr.
Omar Foroukh and Dr. Mustafa Khaledy: “Al-tabsheer wal Iste'maar”, Anvar
al-Jundy: “Al-Islam fi wajhel tafreeb”, Professhor Khorshid Ahmad:
“Islam wa Garb”, Malek ibn Naby: “Entaaj-ul-Mostashreqeen wa asarahu fil
fikr al-Islami-al-hadees”

[^3]: In the Islamic discussions of Orientalists we may find numerous
examples to prove this point (such as “The Encyclopedia of Islam” by A.
B. Lamans and so forth

[^4]: This condition is that which is present in our own traditions;
when they deal with interpretationit is insisted that the interpreter
completely refrain from interpreting the Quran the way he believes it
should be (refer to: Tafseer al-Ayashee 1/12-18 and Tafseer al-Safy
1/21)

[^5]: The Holy Imams' Traditions are taken from the Holy Prophet (S)
(refer to: Usul al-Kafi vol. 1 p.58, tradition 21; vol. 1 p.62,
tradition 10; Basaer ad-darajaat chapter 14 and 15 part 6 p. 299-302)

[^6]: In this course. it becomes necessary to know the grammar,
rhethoric, figures of speech and history of this science.

[^7]: Example of these types of reports may be seen in Tafseer Tabary
and Tafseer al-Durrul Mansoor in events pertaining to the beginning of
creation and matters regarding Mabda (generatrix) and Ma'ad
(resurrection). In future discussions we will run in to similar
traditions.

[^8]: As a result of the hostile plots and deeds of “Manavian”, «certain
intellectuals of the second century after the Hejrat» some of our
historical texts such as Tabary, Ibn Asir, Ibn Kasir and Ibn Khaldoon
have filled with lies meant to drive the people away from Islam.(See the
Book: “One Hundred and Fifty False Companions” and “Abdullah bin Sabah
vol. 1 & 2)

[^9]: In the commentary “Al-Mizan” close to five thousand traditions are
mentioned and researched.

[^10]: The most superb and firmest store of Shi'ite prayers with
reference to documentation and content is “Sahifeh-e-Sajjadieh”, which
is the commentator of the peak of Islamic thought on this matter.
Islamic scholars have written numerous epositions on this book. We may
name several other creditable renowned books on this subject among them:
“Al-Mesbah al-Motajed” by Shaikh Tusi and “Al-Eqbal bes-Saleh al-A'mal”
by Sayyed Ibn Tawoos and “Al-Balad al-Amin wal-dar'ol Haseen” by Shaikh
Kafami.

[^11]: Like the history of Yaqubi, History of Ibn Khayat and Ensab
al-Ashraf Belladhari, Tabary, Ibn Aseer, and Ibn Kaseer etc.

[^12]: Such as: Ibn Hesham, and Ibn Sayed Ainass, and Shaikh Mofids'
Al-Ershad.

[^13]: Such as Oyun al-Anbia fi-tabaqat al-atbiya and Akhbar ul-Hukama
and Al-fehrest and Tabaqat al-Mufsereen. Tadhkerat ul-Hefaz. Tabaqat
al-Atbia and Al-Hukama etc.

[^14]: Al-Melal wan-nahl Shahrestani”, “Wal fasl-fil-Melal”,
“Al-Ahwa-e-wan-nahl”, “Al-Maniyato wal-Melal men ketab
al-Melal-e-wan-nahl”, and Maqalat-ul-Islamiyyeen wal-farqo
bain-al-feraq”

[^15]: You may find a nearly complete series of these types of
traditions in Majlisi's “Behar-ul-Anwar”

[^16]: Such as Suyuti's “History of the Caliphs” [English translation
by: Major H. S. Jarrett] and “Al-Fakhri fil-Adab al-Sultaniyeh”,
“Ad-dowalol Islamiyeh wama-aserol enafeh”, and Morooj az-zahab” and
their like

[^17]: During the Holy Imams lifetime and their immediate students
lifetimes these types of discussion had numerous examples and parallels
but gradually were forgotten after the time of the major occultation.

[^18]: Or by a more accurate, correct interpretation, Islam of Ahlu'l
Bait of Prophet (S) and Islam of the Caliphs.

[^19]: Three prominent examples of these researches are: Allamah Hilli's
“Al-Alfain”, Mir Hamed Husseins, “Abaqat ul-Anwar”, and Allamah Amini's
“Al-Ghadeer”.

[^20]: He in addition to possessing the lofty distinction of a virtuous
religious scholar and unparalleled research and accuracy in assessments
of history and traditions was the founder of Baghdad's College of
Religious Jurisprudence, and was a former professor of this high ranking
establishment for knowledge.


