Chapter 1: Islamic Terminology
==============================

**“In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the all merciful”**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ
النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثاً وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ
مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ أَلاَ لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالأَمْرُ تَبَارَكَ
اللّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in
six periods of time, and He is firm in power; He throws the veil of
night over the day which it pursues incessantly; and (He created) the
sun and the moon and the stars, made subservient by His command; surely
His is the creation and the command; blessed is Allah, the Lord of the
worlds”. (Holy Quran: 7: 54)***

The discussions put forth here are so that we may consider and come to
understand what role the Imams (a.s.) had after the Holy Prophet (S), in
the preservation of Islam's elements and or in other words, what did
they do to turn Islam over and return it to the community, removing the
alterations that had been made therein. How did the Al-Mighty God by way
of the Imams holy war bring a faded Islam back to life? On another
occasion, how did what was altered, concealed or changed return to the
Human society being made available to all?

By the grace of the Al-Mighty God it will be made clear that the Holy
Prophet (S) had (unity in action and aim) with Imam Hujjat ibn-al Hassan
(a.s.) Imam Sadeq (a.s.) and finally with every one of the Imams. It
will become evident that the Holy Prophet (S) with regard to his actions
and their effect on the community was of one class with the Holy Imams
(a.s.), no others belonging to this class.

This discussion, being put forth in this manner in our society for the
first time needs an introduction which will be presented in a few
lectures. Now, as a foundation for that introduction it is necessary for
us to study carefully a few Islamic terms. An understanding of these
terms will also be of help in obtaining a better grasp of all of our
remarks in the following lectures.

Of course there are numerous Islamic terms which must be studied in all
of their aspects and parts for an understanding of their meanings and
thus an accurate complete understanding of Islam. However, because of
our immediate necessities for this discussion we will discuss only a few
of the most important terms, being: “Elah”[^1], “Abd”, “Rab” and “Islam”

The difference between “Elah” and “Allah” is that Allah is the proper
name for “The Exalted God” but “Elah” is not proper name. In fact Allah
is a proper distinguishing noun, while “Elah” is a common general noun.
To clarify this matter it is helpful to pay attention to this example;
Tehran is the capital of Iran. If we say capital it is certain that
other than Tehran, Iran has no other capital. But capital is not the
proper name for this city because many other cities throughout the world
are also called by this name.

With regard to this we repeat that Allah is the name of “The Exalted
God” but « is the word for anything worshipped by mankind.

The Holy Quran quotes the Pharoah as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَئِن اتَّخَذْتَ إلها غيري
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you will take a god besides Me, I will most certainly make you
one of the imprisoned”.(Qur’an 26:29)***

Therefore god is the name for every deity, or in other words any being
that is worshipped; any being man praises or any being man is humble
before or works to gain his satisfaction.

In the Holy Quran we read

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ الهُ هَواهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you then considered him who takes his low desires for his
god”.(Qur’an 45:23)***

Making his desire his god means that he acts for his hearts and souls'
desires. If man works for Allah's satisfaction then they have made Allah
their God (deity), but if for their souls' desire they have made the
soul their god (deity).

Therefore, (Elah) God is the deity that we worship, obey, submit to, and
praise. Such a being becomes (Elah) god and (Ma'bood) worshipped one,
and its obedient is thus “Abd” worshipper[^2]. 1 there is a remark by
Imam Javad (a.s.) on the meaning of “worshipper” which greatly
enlightens and completes our understanding of this term. It explains
when man becomes a worshipper and under what circumstances something
takes the title “Elah” god or deity. The Imam (a.s.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أصغى الى ناطقٍ فقد عبده، فإن كان الناطق عن الله فقد عبد الله و إن
كان الناطق ينطق عن لسان ابليس فقد عبد ابليس
  </p>
</blockquote>

“If someone listens to the words of a speaker, he has worshipped him. In
the event that this speaker speaks from God the listener has worshipped
God. And if he speaks for Satan he has worshipped Satan”.[^3]

In this discussion with reference to one important point, the difference
between the school of Ahlu'l-bait (Shi'ite) and the school of the
Caliphs (Sunni) is clarified. This point being that none of the
Ahlu'l-bait ever said “I say”, rather they would say the Prophet (S)
said or God ordained.[^4] Amir al-Mu'meneen Ali (a.s.) never said: “I
say”[^5] but the second Caliph Omar would say “I say”. It was he who
addressed the Muslims saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
متعتان كانتا على عهد رسول الله (صلّى الله عليه وسلم) انا انهي عنهما و
اعاقب عليهما، متعة النساء، وانا انهي عنهما و اضرب عليهما...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There were two types of temporary marriage lawful during the Prophets
time, but I prohibit them and declare them unlawful, and I will punish
their agents and have them flogged”.[^6]

Imam Sadeq (a.s.) also did not say: I expound thus, I vote thus or my
personal opinion is this. On the contrary he would say: Allah ordained,
or Messenger of Allah (S) said thus. However Abu Hanifa would say: I
expound this or I have this opinion or vote as such.[^7]

During the first century or so our scholars were only narrators who
narrated from the Imam. Todays scholars also don't say: “I say”. They
are canonists, means those who understand the laws of God and the
Prophet, and for the explanation of each law in Islamic religious law
they refer to the Imams remarks, the Holy Prophets traditions and the
Holy Quran. As such, whatever they do is towards understanding the law
of God, and are not application of their own personal opinion, style and
enterprise. Therefore, the person who has followed Imam Sadeq (a.s.) or
obeys the scholars of his school has listened to Gods commands. He is
Gods, servant and he has worshipped God. But on the other hand those who
listen to persons who say: I say, I expound thus, I vote and I create
laws, have not been Gods, servants having made a weak despised person
their deity or god.

2- Lord is the most important Islamic term in this lecture necessary for
us to understand. At this time we will be using this term more
frequently and wish to search regarding it. We repeat the phrase “Praise
be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds” very frequently but for many of us the
exact meaning of this is not clear. What does the term (Lord) mean in
this phrase? We don't know. Certainly until the meaning of Lord is not
clarified God cannot be recognized nor the Holy Prophet (S) or Imam
(a.s.) and neither can the monotheist be separated from the polytheist
nor their differences understood.

First of all lets see what this word means in the Arabic language.
Ragheb Isfahani the famous linguist says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرب في الاصل التربية وهو انشاء الشيء حالا فحالاً الى حد التمام
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lord is originally an infinitive means to train or educate. The person,
who trains a thing, developing and nurturing it from its first stage of
development to its last, is this Lord.[^8] This is one aspect of the
word lord. In addition to training and nurturing it also has the meaning
of ownership.[^9]

As such, we may say that a Lord is the owner, manager and trainer of a
thing. As for someone who has a poultry farm, he takes care of the eggs
until they hatch, gives the chicks water and seed, and immunizes them
from possible sickness until they become full-grown chickens. He who is
the owner and breeder of these chickens is also seen as their Lord.
“Lord of the Worlds” thus means the God and nourisher of all of the
worlds inhabitants. He is both their creator owner, and their trainer
and developer. He was the possessor of their wills from the first stage
of their development and nurtures them to the last stage of completion.

Consequently “The Exalted God” is called Lord. Also another example
would be that the owner of a house who also manages it and is
responsible for all of its internal matters is also called “Lord”.
However the difference between the two is that god may be called Lord in
a general way and without being added to something. According to the
Holy Qurans interpretation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 بَلْدَةٌ طَيِّبَةٌ وَرَبٌّ غَفُورٌ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***A fair land and an indulgent Lord (Quran 34 : 15)***

But in other instances lord is mentioned in addition to something else.
Lord of the chicken meaning raiser and owner of chickens, Lord of the
house means owner and manager of the house, and Lord of the tree meaning
the cultivator and owner of tree.

If we look at the precise meaning of “Lord” we will be able to
comprehend the reason for the prophets battles with the evil or
rebellious persons of their time and know what these conflicts were all
about. The history of divine religions shows that usually those who
stood in the prophets way, did so on the matter of “sovereignty” not
“creator” because the majority accepted “Allah” as being creator of all
beings.

They may not have referred to Him by the name “Allah” for example
calling him “Jehovah”. Such being the Jewish name for God. But our
discussion is not about by what name they called god. We only want to
say that they all agreed that the creator of all beings was “God” but
they differed on the matter of “Lord”.

For the clarification of this comment we will mention a few examples
from the Holy Quran and study a few of the confrontations of the
prophets with their people or the rebellious persons of their time so we
may recognize and understand similar confrontations in the Islamic
community.

The Holy Quran has time and time again told us the story of Moses (a.s.)
and his people and their conflicts with the tyrannical Pharoah and the
evil persons of his time. We may read about a sensitive part of this
story in chapter 79 Al-Naziat” of the Holy Quran where Moses (a.s.)
confronts the Pharoah with a few divine verses and the Pharoah assembles
a vast group of Egyptians proclaiming:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا رَبُّكُمُ الْأَعْلَىٰ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I (Pharoah) am your Lord the Highest!”*** ***(Quran 79 : 21-25)***

Meaning that if a chicken has a Lord, being he who is its owner and
breeder and who enacts laws dealing with the life and growth of the
chicken he breeds I am in that very sense your “Lord”. What being is the
“Lord” of an object, animal or Human Being? It is he who provides the
necessities of that which he is lord of, takes care of his requirements
and determines the laws and rules for his life and growth. It was here
that the Pharoah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَادَىٰ فِرْعَوْنُ فِي قَوْمِهِ قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ أَلَيْسَ لِي مُلْكُ
مِصْرَ وَهَـٰذِهِ الْأَنْهَارُ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِي  أَفَلَا
تُبْصِرُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Pharaoh called out among his people; he said, "O my people, does
not the kingdom of Egypt belong to me, and these rivers flowing beneath
me; then do you not see?*** ***(Quran 43:51)***

Therefore, “Law” which is the second feature of “sovereignty” or
Lordship must be obtained from me. I supply your necessities therefore I
must be your absolute law and Leader.

The Emperor of Egypt, the Pharoah, was the owner of all of Egypt at that
time (from where?) and everyone who worked was seen as his worker and
servant. Therefore, it appears as if he possessed one pre-requisite for
Lordship which was providing food, bread, water and the peoples needs,
claiming that all of this is my property and I give to you.

Thus, I must enact the laws as well and you must live according to my
will and desires. At any rate, I must make laws and I must ascertain the
law and rules for life. I say that the Israelites must be slaves, their
sons killed and their daughters remain, and it certainly must be
accepted. I say that the Israelites must be inferior and the native
Egyptians must be the masters and this certainly must be enacted. I say
that a certain way and is necessary that it becomes so.

The lordship the Pharoah claimed was not in the sense that “I am the
creator of the heavens and earth and I am the creator of man and all
other things”. On the contrary, what he said was that “You must work to
attain my satisfaction and to execute my intentions and act according to
my laws because I am your Lord the Highest!”.

What does Moses say in reply to this logic? What is his message and how
does he confront the Pharoah? God commands Moses and Aaron:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذْهَبَا إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّهُ طَغَىٰ ﴿٤٣﴾ فَقُولَا لَهُ قَوْلًا
لَّيِّنًا لَّعَلَّهُ يَتَذَكَّرُ أَوْ يَخْشَىٰ ﴿٤٤﴾ قَالَا رَبَّنَا
إِنَّنَا نَخَافُ أَن يَفْرُطَ عَلَيْنَا أَوْ أَن يَطْغَىٰ﴿٤٥﴾ قَالَ
لَا تَخَافَا  إِنَّنِي مَعَكُمَا أَسْمَعُ وَأَرَىٰ ﴿٤٦﴾ فَأْتِيَاهُ
فَقُولَا إِنَّا رَسُولَا رَبِّكَ فَأَرْسِلْ مَعَنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ
وَلَا تُعَذِّبْهُمْ  قَدْ جِئْنَاكَ بِآيَةٍ مِّن
رَّبِّكَ  وَالسَّلَامُ عَلَىٰ مَنِ اتَّبَعَ الْهُدَىٰ ﴿٤٧﴾ إِنَّا قَدْ
أُوحِيَ إِلَيْنَا أَنَّ الْعَذَابَ عَلَىٰ مَن كَذَّبَ وَتَوَلَّىٰ ﴿٤٨﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Moses and Aaron! Go to the Pharoah and tell him that you are
messengers of your Lord who has nurtured you and brought you to
maturity! O Pharoah, you who claim being the peoples highest and
greatest Lord are greatly mistaken and have a vain, false claim. We have
with us verses and signs from your Lord (Qur’an 20: 43-48)***

Of course the Pharoah who recognizes no Lord for himself rejects their
statement and asks:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَمَن رَّبُّكُمَا يَا مُوسَىٰ ﴿٤٩﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And who is your lord O' Moses” (Qur’an 20:49)***

You don't accept my Sovereignty and say that it belongs to another and
that law and judgement must be received from him! Who is this other?

Moses replies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ
هَدَىٰ ﴿٥٠﴾قَالَ فَمَا بَالُ الْقُرُونِ الْأُولَىٰ ﴿٥١﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then guided it
(to its goal)” (Qur’an 20:50-51)***

Our Lord is He who created everything and ascertained their way of life
and rules for living, and in other words guided him while every being
must live by the law he made for them

The Pharoah sees Mosess' words as being sound and fears that these ideas
will take root among the people. Thus he proceeds to create doubt so
that erroneous thoughts would come to be. So he says: (What then is the
state of the generations of old? Did they also have a lord? Did this
lord of which you claim also have a commander for them?) Moses replies
and in his reply stresses Gods sovereignty: (My lord knows of their
state and their past. He neither ers nor forgets).

These events continue and again the Pharoah tries another trick to break
Mosess, logic and to rally the peoples sentiments against him. He then
says to him: (You have come with your magic to run us out of our country
and take over our homeland and therefore we will also use magic to
defeat you) The Pharoahs magician came to fight Moses (a.s.) with all of
their might, but “The Lord of the Worlds” power was apparent and all of
their tricks were defeated. The magicians who were better informed of
magic than the other people flung themselves down prostrate in the face
of the lords power saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمنَّا برب هارون و موسى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We believe in the Lord of Haroun and Musa” (Qur’an*** ***20:70)***

Throughout this story the name “Lord” is repeated, and he is mentioned
by both sides. Moses (a.s.) speaks of him. The magicians come to believe
in him. The Pharoah does not accept his existence. As such it becomes
apparent to us that the conflicts between the two sides of Satan and God
the Merciful, Gods friends and His enemies, the prophets and the evil,
rebellious persons were mostly over matters of Lordship or Sovereignty
and from who we must accept law, order, rule and judgement.

During the lifetime of Gods great Prophet Abraham (a.s.), there were
also these same types of conflicts and struggles:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِي حَاجَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ فِي رَبِّهِ أَنْ آتَاهُ
اللَّـهُ الْمُلْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not considered him (Namrud) who disputed with Ibrahim about
his Lord, because Allah had given him the Kingdom?” (Qur’an 2:258)***

His power and absolute authority makes him insolent and he ceases to
believe in Gods' Sovereignty.

Abrahams quarrel with Nimrood is over this very matter. Abraham (a.s.)
says to him:

“The rightful legislator and He who rightfully ascertains and defines
human life is He who brings to life and causes death. Yes, He is
everyone's lord and He is my Lord”.

Nimrood, the rebellious one on that age said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَنَا أُحْيِي وَأُمِيتُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I also bring to life and cause death”. (Qur’an*** ***2:258)***

Bring forth from prison a person sentenced to death and I will free him.
He was considered dead and I brought him to life. Bring another who is
careless and free walking in the streets and execute him. He was alive
and should have remained alive and it was I who caused his death.

As such the attribute you applied to the Lord, I also possess, therefore
I am also the lord. It was here that doubt was caused to arise and it
became possible for an ignorant person to accept his words. Without
hesitation Abraham (a.s.) offers another attestation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 فَإِنَّ اللَّـهَ يَأْتِي بِالشَّمْسِ مِنَ الْمَشْرِقِ فَأْتِ بِهَا
مِنَ الْمَغْرِبِ فَبُهِتَ الَّذِي كَفَرَ ۗوَاللَّـهُ لَا يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“My lord who is Allah causes the sun to rise in the East, if you are
also lord and speak the truth then cause the sun to rise in the West”.
(Qur’an*** ***2:258)***

What could Nimrood say? He had no choice but to remain embarrassed and
powerless.

This was only one scene from the hero of Monotheistic struggle. In
another quarrel he had with those who worshipped the heavenly bodies the
same debate is repeated. Abraham goes to a gathering of these pagans and
begins to argue with them.

Of course this is done with their own words, with what they believe in
and in a way that will allow them to understand his argument and the
veil of ignorance covering their hearts to be torn away. It is night and
Abraham upon seeing a bright star turns to the vast group of star
worshippers saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا جَنَّ عَلَيْهِ اللَّيْلُ رَأَىٰ كَوْكَبًا  قَالَ هَـٰذَا
رَبِّي..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This bright star is my Lord”. (Quran 6: 76)***

After a time the star sets and as that points out its weakness and
deficiency he says:

***“This cannot be my Lord, my Lord must not set and I love not things
that set”. (Quran*** ***6: 76)***

This story continues as such for the sun, and moon and in the end after
the setting of the sun, the brightest most powerful heavenly body,
Abraham says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قَالَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ مِّمَّا تُشْرِكُونَ﴿٧٨﴾ إِنِّي
وَجَّهْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلَّذِي فَطَرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ
حَنِيفًا..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O ye people! Lo, I am free of all you associate with Gods lordship
(sovereignty). I have turned my face towards He who created the heavens
and earth and is my Lord”. (Quran*** ***6: 78-79)***

The people will not leave Abraham alone and the dispute continues. In
the face of their arguments, Abraham declares that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 قَالَ أَتُحَاجُّونِّي فِي اللَّـهِ وَقَدْ هَدَانِ وَلَا أَخَافُ مَا
تُشْرِكُونَ بِهِ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***My Lord Allah has guided me and I fear not the false gods you set
beside him (Qur’an 6: 80)***

It is clear that Abrahams people recognize God but they gave Him
partners and it is this matter Abraham (a.s.) disputes and has proceeded
to argue with them about.

In yet another scene we have Abrahams dispute with the idol worshippers
among his people. When he enters one of their gatherings he proceeds to
oppose them because of his inner sight, insight and natural purity,
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا هَـٰذِهِ التَّمَاثِيلُ الَّتِي أَنتُمْ لَهَا عَاكِفُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘What are these images you bow and prostrate yourselves before?’
(Holy Quran, 21:52)***

They replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا لَهَا عَابِدِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***.."We found our fathers worshippers of them."(Holy Quran, 21:53)***

Abraham says in answer to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 كُنتُمْ أَنتُمْ وَآبَاؤُكُمْ فِي ضَلَالٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘You and your fathers were surely in error’*** ***(Holy Quran,
21:54)***

They then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا أَجِئْتَنَا بِالْحَقِّ أَمْ أَنتَ مِنَ اللَّاعِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘Are you joking or are you speaking to us seriously?’*** ***(Holy
Quran, 21:55)***

He answered:

***"[No], rather, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth 
(Quran 21: 56)***

The people of the cave, brave worshippers of god in ancient times also
have the same to say. They rose up against the rebellious person of
their time and spoke of The Lord of the heavens and earth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَبَطْنَا عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِهِمْ إِذْ قَامُوا فَقَالُوا رَبُّنَا رَبُّ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ لَن نَّدْعُوَ مِن دُونِهِ إِلَـٰهًا  لَّقَدْ
قُلْنَا إِذًا شَطَطًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We made firm their hearts when they stood up and said, "Our Lord
is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. Never will we invoke besides
Him any deity. We would have certainly spoken, then, an excessive
transgression. “(Qur’an 18: 14)***

***“This person who claims lordship saying that mankind must follow my
commands and I must lay down laws for him and give order to his life. No
he is not lord. He is not the lawgiver and organizer of our lives. Our
lord is the lord of the heavens and earth”. “(Qur’an 18: 14)***

These are examples of the history of divine religions which reveal to us
the principle motive for the confrontations of the prophets and evil
persons of their age. It also clarifies the main reason for the battles
between the men of God and Gods party and their opponents.

On one side are the men of God who say that no-one may ascertain
mankinds way of life except God, He alone being the lord of mankind
because only He is the Lord of all earthly beings. On the other side are
the evil persons who themselves claim being the legislators and the
agents of giving order to mans life.

In the ninth year of the Hejrat, Edy the son of Haatam Taaey who was a
Christian came to the Holy Prophet (S) and after some discussion
embraced Islam.[^10] In this meeting Edy wore a golden cross around his
neck.

The Holy Prophet (S) said: «Throw that idol away which you have hung
from your neck» Edy threw the cross away and left the Prophet. During
their second meeting Edy heard that the Prophet had revealed a Quranic
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتَّخَذُوا أَحْبَارَهُمْ وَرُهْبَانَهُمْ أَرْبَابًا مِّن دُونِ
اللَّـهِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Jews and Christians have taken their religious leaders as lord
instead of Allah”. “(Qur’an 9: 31)***

Edy then said:

We did not worship our religious leaders

The Holy Prophet (S) then said:

«Didn't he forbid that which God allowed and allowed that which he
prohibited while you followed him without questions?»[^11] This
situation even exists today amongst the Christians. The Pope has the
right to change Catholic religious law and they accept without
questions. The church claims on the basis of existing Bible verses that
he may be legislator and that which he ratifies on earth will be
accepted in Heaven. This is exactly what the Quran refers to in this
verse.

In the new Testament, Mathew 16:18-19 we read:

“And so I tell you Peter. on this rock foundation I will build my church
and not even death will ever be able to overcome it. I will give you the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven what you prohibit on earth will be
prohibited in Heaven and what you permit on earth will be permitted in
Heaven”.

So the Holy Quran in giving Jewish and Christian scholars and priests
the title lord did so because they legislated and showed partial views
on mans way of life. They prohibited what God made lawful and allowed
what He prohibited.

As such, the prophets battles were so that mankind would accept the
Sovereignty of The One God, and embrace only His command deriving what
is allowed and prohibited from Him. The entire spirit and content of
religion is nothing other than this. If in a certain country I am forced
to accept an order that goes against the command of God at the hand of
some powerful person, I have not made him my lord.

Submitting to someone's lordship is when willingly you accept his law
against Gods will and act upon it. It is here that you have made that
being your lord. For example a Christian priest said not to circumcise
and the Christians accepted refraining from circumcising, and/or said
drink liquour is lawful and religion allows it and they once again
accepted. It is here that the matter of making man ones lord comes to
light.

In the future in our further investigations we will see to what extent
the two schools of thought of Islam, Shi'ite and Sunni, differ from one
another. One school (Shi'ite) relies on nothing but the word of God
while the other school (Sunni) has allowed the opinions and views of men
to infiltrate religion. With insight into the ways and means of these
two schools we will see the true role of the Holy Imams (a.s.) in the
Islamic community, and will comprehend the fact to be mentioned that the
Holy Prophet (S) and Hazrat Mahdi (a.s.) had one aim and means for
accomplishing it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن شاءَ الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Holy Prophet of Islam Muhammad (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلَّى الله عليه و آله: سيأتي زمانٌ على أُمَّتي لا يبقى
من القرآن الا رسمه ولا من الاسلام الا اسمه، يُسَمَّونَ به و هم ابعد
الناس عنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There will arrive a time for my nation when of the Quran only its lore,
meaning its writing or written word, and of Islam only its name will
remain. The people will be called Muslims by this name, but they will be
the furthest from Islam”. [^12]

That which we wish to bring under discussion and assessment - as far as
God bestows upon us success is this sentence from the Prophets
tradition:

“Of Islam only its name will remain”.

The Holy Prophet (S) made a strange prediction. When we read this
forecast certain questions come to mind.

1) What was Islam like during the Prophets time?

2) What happened to his Islam afterwards? In other words how did they
empty it of its original content? What form aid they change it to and
how did they change its realities to reticence?

3) How did the Holy Imams (a.s.) return to the people the true Islam we
now possess, in the same form that existed during the Prophets (S) time?

By finding and understanding the answers to these questions we will
discover what our responsibility is towards Islam in the present day and
age. The above questions are summarized in the following sentence.

What was Islam? What happened to it and what must be done now?

In our previous discussion it was said that we understand from studying
Quranic verses that The Lord is a nurturer that promotes and sustains
the development of the being subject to his tutelage until it reaches
complete perfection or maturity. Providing the necessities of the
creature being nurtured is a requisite of lordship and nurturing. We
also learned that the Prophets conflicts with their nations and the evil
persons of their time were over who possessed lordship or sovereignty.
According to the Holy Quran most of them had no dispute over God being
Creator.

We read in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَأَلْتَهُم مَّنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ
لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّـهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you should ask them; who created the Heavens and the Earth? They
would certainly answer: Allah!” (Quran 31: 25)***

Consequently the conflicts and arguments with the pagans were not for
the most part over the matter of creation but rather mainly over
sovereignty. This is the main center of the prophets wars with the evil
persons and nations buried in ignorance. Victory in this battle is what
makes the prophets successful in the establishment of religion.

We said that the lord is obliged to legislate for the life of the beings
under his tutelage. This is in principle the most prominent
characteristic of lordship. Allah creates and then decrees how his
creatures should live. He gives them the laws for living and specifies
the manner of their life, also equipping them with the means for
reaching maturity guiding them in this direction.

The prophets stood by this very basic, fundamental characteristic
saying: O Mankind! Your lord and Nurturer is the Lord of the Heavens and
Earth. He has made laws for all living creatures. He has given order to
the lives of the heavens and earth and the creatures therein, and he
also created laws for you, ascertaining your way of life.

We said previously that every creatures way of life was ascertained
according to its own structure and nature. In the case of one of them
the Quran speaks of subjugation. The Quran sees inanimate objects
obliged and subjugated in the powerful chain of the law of creation.
They follow the way to their perfection in this way never straying from
it in the least because straying from the way that creation has
ascertained for them is equal to their destruction:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللَّـهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَىٰ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ
النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ
مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ  أَلَا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ  تَبَارَكَ
اللَّـهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! your lord is Allah who created the heavens and the earth in six
days, then mounted He the throne. He covereth the night with the day,
which is in haste to follow it, and hath made the sun and the moon and
the stars subservient by His command. His verily is all creation and
commandment. Blessed be Allah” the Lord of the Worlds!” (Quran 7:54).***

This verse begins with the words “your Lord” and after giving examples
of his lordship such as the earths rotation and the appearance of day
and night, he is praised with the attribute “Lord of the Worlds”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي إِلَىٰ أَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He constraineth the sun and moon to give service, each running on
for an appointed term.....” (Holy Qura, 31:29)***

For another group of creatures Divine guidance is in the form of
inspiration. Animals live under the influence of Gods inspirational
guidance and as thus follow the way towards their maturity, reaching its
absolute bounds. The precise, subtle and sometimes extremely complicated
way of animal life is all led by the inspiration of their “Lord”. From
the first moment of life until the final degree of maturity, and from
then until death animal life continues under the radiation of this form
of guidance.

In the Holy Quran we find an example of animal life as thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْحَىٰ رَبُّكَ إِلَى النَّحْلِ أَنِ اتَّخِذِي مِنَ الْجِبَالِ
بُيُوتًا وَمِنَ الشَّجَرِ وَمِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَ ﴿٦٨﴾ ثُمَّ كُلِي مِن
كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ فَاسْلُكِي سُبُلَ رَبِّكِ ذُلُلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And thy lord inspired the bee, saying: Choose thou habitations in
the hills and in the trees and in that which they thatch. Then eat of
all fruits, and follow the ways of they Lord, made smooth (for thee)”.
(Quran 6:69)***

However in the case of man, the most superior creature in these three
groups, guidance is by revelation. Divine organization goes to work and
from its fountain-head revelations are revealed to the prophets by
esteemed Angels and their like. Mans way of life is therefore
ascertained, giving order to all aspects of his life guiding him towards
the way for achieving happiness in the two worlds.

This order or system and set of laws in Quranic Culture is called
“Islam”, it is a religion for mankind based on his nature and the realm
of his existence, collating exactly with human disposition, coming from
his “Lord”. This is not just the proper name for the religion and
special Divine law of The Last Prophet Muhammad (S). That which all of
the prophets proclaimed; Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, all had the
name of “Islam” This is to the point where the Quran informs us that no
name appeared for it before Noah (a.s.), but from his time onward the
name for all of Gods Divine Laws is “Islam”.

We discussed this before and we saw that according to Quranic logic

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللَّـهِ الْإِسْلَامُ ۗ وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ الَّذِينَ
أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ إِلَّا مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَهُمُ الْعِلْمُ بَغْيًا
بَيْنَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! religion with Allah (is) al-Islam (The Surrender to his will and
guidance) Those who*** ***(formerly) received the scripture differed
only after knowledge came unto them, through transgression among
themselves”. (Quran 3: 19)***

Hence, a description of Islam may be summed up in this form: «The set of
laws that The Lord of Mankind has expounded for him in proportion to his
make-up and corresponding to human nature».

From here on our discussion will be about Islam in order to see what
this Islam was (meaning mans way of life and thought, beliefs and
morality), and what form it took after the Prophets death. We will also
see how it was emptied of its original content and what should be done
now.

The Holy Prophet (S) had announced «nothing will remain of Islam but its
name». What was this “Islam” and how did it become so empty and hollow
that only its name remains? With an accurate analysis of Islam we will
discover it has four types of existence. In other words, Islam in human
society, four types of substances:

A) Nominal Existence

B) Conceptional Existence

C) Practical Existence

D) Islamic Society Existence

Nominal Existence
-----------------

In the collection of personal and social religious commandments and
Islamic ethics and beliefs, we run across a series of terms that have
been shaped by God just as all of the other aspects of this religious
creeds. We have also seen that the last Prophet (S) had announced that
there would come a time when nothing but these terms would remain which
make up Islam's existence in name.

The last Prophet (S) upon his appointment proclaims the commandments for
“Salaat” (Prayer), “Wudhu” (Ablution), and Jehad (Holy War).......etc.
In Arabic the word Salaat literally means praise, “Wudhu” means
cleanliness, and “Jehad” is taken from a sentence meaning ability and
fortitude.

The Holy Prophet (S) recruited these words and organized and appointed
them according to revelation to a series of actions and behaviour. Thus
these words are introduced to the communities in a terminological style,
which possess special meanings in Islam, taking on an Islamic hue and
becoming terms peculiar only to Islam. Lastly, along with all of the
other terms they make up Islams existence in name.

Conceptual Existence
--------------------

The true meanings of Islam in all of its aspects, in other words, the
foundations for religious practice, ethics and belief form the existence
in meaning of Islamic terms. When prophets are appointed they proclaim
these two things together, and they deliver both the term and its
meaning as their divine message. We also know that the first and
foremost duty of all Prophets throughout history is the proclamation of
Gods message.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَلْ عَلَى الرُّسُلِ إِلَّا الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«Are the messengers charged with aught save plain conveyance (of the
message)? (Quran 16: 35)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا عَلَىٰ رَسُولِنَا الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«.....then know that the duty of Our messenger is only plain
conveyance (of the message)? (Qur’an 5: 92.)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن تَوَلَّوْا فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«then, if they turn away, thy duty (O Muhammad) is but plain
conveyance (of the message)»(Qur’an 16: 82)***

In one analysis and assimilation we can say that the Prophets had two
distictive superior characteristics in comman: Firstly they are Muslims,
and they are the very first Muslim of their nation, just as the Quran
states with regard to Muhammad (S).[^13]

Secondly they are a messenger from God. According to both of these
characteristics they possessed certain responsibilities. In relation to
their first characteristic, that of being a Muslim, they must pray,
fast, encourage the people to be free from impurity, keep them from
corruption and vice and go to Holy War (Jehad) and Hajj. In short all of
the responsibilities of one Muslim must be done by them at the best
level. Yet in relation to their second characteristic, that of a
messenger, they are only charged with the proclamation of that message
and nothing more.

These men, being the Prophets of God, must relay Gods message to the
people while in the way of this cause fearing nothing, standing firm
until death, suffer stonings, give into exile and emigration but
continuing to notify his nation of Gods word which is summed up in
Islamic terminology and their correct meanings.

The prophets proclaim Gods message throughout history. They present to
the community both the name and meaning of Islam. Even so, this is only
the beginning of their task, and not the entirety. For example, after
the people of a nation become familiar with the terms “prayer”,
“ablution” and “Holy War” (Jehad) along with their Islamic meanings the
prophets begin a new endeavor. They strive towards bringing this way of
thought, message, and knowledge to the active stage. In other words
creating a people who will “dress” Islamic teachings with the clothing
of practice.

By way of the prophets endeavors the people who lived during the age of
proclamation came to know the existences in name and meaning of Gods
religion, along with each of its practices, beliefs and behaviours,
understanding them well.

They became familiar with the special terms in Islam and also their
hidden meanings. All of the Abudhar, Abu lahabs, Omars and Abu Jahls,
all of the prophets contemporaries, believers and non believers,
understood all of the Islamic terms and their meanings. After this comes
the time for Islams existence in practice and the prophets strived to
apply practically and actual existence. Praying persons should come to
exist and all other Islamic practical laws and ethics should be applied.

Islamic Personality Existence
-----------------------------

It is here that Islams third form of existence or its existence in
practice appears and Islamic personality is born. “Islamic Identity” may
be observed in that person who performs his “ablutions”, prays, fasts,
goes to Holy War (Jehad) and pilgrimage “Hajj” and is bound by Islamic
morality. All of the Prophets endeavors in Mecca after the proclamation
were in the way of building Islamic identities. In this period he
brought such personalities as Ali (a.s.), Khadija, Abudhar, Ammar,
Somayeh, Yaser, Khabbab, Bilal and etc. During the Prophets last year of
residence in Mecca these three stages of Islamic subsistence were
transferred to Medina and took root there in the Prophets absence.

The subject is itself clear that it is impossible that the third stage
of existence of Islam i.e. practical presence or Islamic personality
exists in a place which nominal and conceptional existence does not
exist. Until the Prophet (S) has not explained Islamic terminology and
proclaimed their correct meanings, the third stage which applied Islam
or Islamic personality cannot come into existence, because the first two
stages proceed the third.

Existence of Islamic Society
----------------------------

Now that the third “essence of existence” or Islamic identity was formed
in society and came to be, the Prophet (S) began to establish the fourth
stage of Islamic existence called Islamic society. This was at a time
when Islamic individuals came and swore allegiance to the Holy Prophet
(S) in order to set up an Islamic community, a community where Islamic
social practical laws would be constituated.

Thus Islam broke through the walls of homes entering the economic and
political scene and that of war and peace. From here we understand the
meaning and function of «Allegiance» in Islam, and realize that
allegiance brought about the Islamic community or the highest form of
Islamic existence.

Hence, during the lifetime of our Prophet (S), Islam acquired four types
of subsistence. The terminology was announced, their meanings were
proclaimed and indoctrinated, individuals were trained to bear the
burden of acting according to Islam and eventually the Islamic community
was also founded.

In the prior historical periods of man, during the lifetimes of all of
the prophets (the prophets of mission), these very terms used in the
final Divine religion also existed: prayer (salat), compulsory alms
(zakat), fasting (soum) and Holy War (jehad) etc. existed as terms along
with their meanings. The proceeding prophets propagated these terms and
their meanings in every possible way to them. In addition to this,
Islamic personalities were also trained by them.

Of course, the success of the prophets in this third part varied, some
having more success, some having less. However, some of them were
successful in creating an Islamic society, like Moses, David and Solomon
and others were not.

During the Holy Prophets (S) time, Islam emerged in all of it “essences
of existence” and with all of its aspects and phases in society. But
after that revered prophet what happened? It might be surprising for you
to find out that the Islam subsisting among the majority of Muslims
today is nothing but the name of Islam, its real meaning having
disappeared.

An example of this is seen in relation to prayer. Since prayer has
certain conditions, if these conditions do not exist the true reality of
prayer ceased to exist. The same is true for every other Islamic
commandment such as “fast” and the Holy War (Jehad), if their conditions
and particulars don't accompany them they will not be considered as
Islamic laws.

We now repeat our question: Islams existence in name, meaning, identity
and society came to be during the lifetime of the Last Prophet (S) and
most other prophets, but what happened after the death of these
prophets? About the previous prophets it must be said that after their
deaths Islam was completely erased from their society being altered,
changed and concealed.

Of course this didn't happen all in one day or all at one time but over
a span of time. In time the Islam that Moses proclaimed completely
vanished. The Islam that Jesus son of Mary preached was destroyed after
him not even its literal or terminological existences remained.

Because Islam is the name of a religion which God revealed to all of his
prophets of mission, the name of Moses's religious law was Islam and has
now been changed to Judaism, while the name of Jesus's (a.s.) religion
has been changed to Christianity. These names did not come from God but
were created by nations and came to be at the hands of meddlers.

During previous ages alteration was so advanced that not only did
Islamic societies such as that founded by Moses cease to exist, but the
Islamic identity built by him was also overturned so that even its
meaning and terminology were destroyed. Only this group (the Jews) see
themselves as his followers but did Moses or Jesus proclaim these
practices, beliefs and behaviour which now exist among the Jews and
Christians? Were the drinking of liquor, the refraining from
circumcision, ideas that Jesus is the son of God and that God is made up
of three persons, taught by Jesus (a.s.)? As such it may be said that
Islamic society, identity, meaning and terminology have all ceased to
exist.

Now lets see what form the situation will take with regard to the
religion of the Last Prophet (S). He himself had said: “Only its name
will remain”. Nay of Islam only its name will remain and of the Quran
only its written lines.

We are trying here to understand this remark and penetrate and dig into
its environs, We have said that of the Islam previous prophets
proclaimed, none of the various stages of its existence remain. However
with regard to the Last Prophets (S) religion, according to his own
words, in the ages following him only the name of Islam will remain.

Literally, this tragic event pertains to the first period of the Imamat.
The role of the Holy Imams (a.s.) in the Islamic society was to return
to the dead, meaningless, evicted Islam, and bring to life its active
and conceptual existences. These great men both returned the true
meanings of Islam to the society and then proceeded to nurture Islams
identity.

Alteration and its Dimensions in Past Nations
---------------------------------------------

In a short, analogic, comparatory discussion we will study the ways of
alteration, replacement and concealment in previous nations so that with
greater clarity we will come to know the final Divine law and its fate.
We will consult the only accurate unaltered record in our possession of
the history of divine religions, The Holy Quran to see how previous
divine religions were destroyed:

### 1) On Concealment

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللَّـهُ مِيثَاقَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ
لَتُبَيِّنُنَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ وَلَا تَكْتُمُونَهُ فَنَبَذُوهُ وَرَاءَ
ظُهُورِهِمْ وَاشْتَرَوْا بِهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا ۖ فَبِئْسَ مَا
يَشْتَرُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«And (remember) when Allah laid a charge on those who had received
the Scripture (He said): You are to expound it to mankind and not to
hide it. But they flung it behind their backs and bought thereby a
little gain.» (Qur’an 3: 187)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلْنَا مِنَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ
وَالْهُدَىٰ مِن بَعْدِ مَا بَيَّنَّاهُ لِلنَّاسِ فِي
الْكِتَابِ  أُولَـٰئِكَ يَلْعَنُهُمُ اللَّـهُ وَيَلْعَنُهُمُ
اللَّاعِنُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«Those who hide the proofs and the guidance which We revealed, after
We had made it clear in the Scripture: such are accursed of Allah and
accursed of those who have the power to curse» (Qur’an 2: 159)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْتُمُونَ مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّـهُ مِنَ الْكِتَابِ
وَيَشْتَرُونَ بِهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا أُولَـٰئِكَ مَا يَأْكُلُونَ فِي
بُطُونِهِمْ إِلَّا النَّارَ وَلَا يُكَلِّمُهُمُ اللَّـهُ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ وَلَا يُزَكِّيهِمْ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«o! those who hide aught of the scripture which Allah hath revealed,
and purchase a small gain therewith, they eat into their bellies nothing
but fire. Allah will not speak to them on the day of Resurrection, nor
will Me make them grow. Theres' will be a painful doom.»*** ***(Holy
Quran:*** ***2:174)***

### 2) On mixing the truth with falsities

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لِمَ تَلْبِسُونَ الْحَقَّ بِالْبَاطِلِ
وَتَكْتُمُونَ الْحَقَّ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«O people of the scripture! Why confound ye truth with falsehood and
knowingly conceal the truth»*** ***(Holy Quran*** ***3:71)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَلْبِسُوا الْحَقَّ بِالْبَاطِلِ وَتَكْتُمُوا الْحَقَّ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«Confound not truth with falsehood, nor knowingly conceal the
truth»*** ***(Holy Quran 2*** ***:42)***

### 3) Alteration

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 أَفَتَطْمَعُونَ أَن يُؤْمِنُوا لَكُمْ وَقَدْ كَانَ فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُمْ
يَسْمَعُونَ كَلَامَ اللَّـهِ ثُمَّ يُحَرِّفُونَهُ مِن بَعْدِ مَا
عَقَلُوهُ وَهُمْ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«Have you any hope that they will be true to you when a party of them
used to listen to the word of Allah, then used to change it, after they
had understood it, knowingly?» ” (Qur’an 2: 75)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا  سَمَّاعُونَ لِلْكَذِبِ سَمَّاعُونَ لِقَوْمٍ
آخَرِينَ لَمْ يَأْتُوكَ يُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ مِن بَعْدِ مَوَاضِعِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«....and of the Jews: listeners for the sake of falsehood, listeners
on behalf of other folk who come not unto thee, changing words from
their context....» (Qur’an 5: 41)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِّنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا يُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ عَن مَّوَاضِعِهِ
وَيَقُولُونَ سَمِعْنَا وَعَصَيْنَا وَاسْمَعْ غَيْرَ مُسْمَعٍ
وَرَاعِنَا لَيًّا بِأَلْسِنَتِهِمْ وَطَعْنًا فِي الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***«Some of those who are Jews change words from their context and say:
“We hear and disobey; hear thou as one who heareth not” and “listen to
us” distorting with their tongues and slandering religion.....» “(Qur’an
4: 46)***

From a careful study of the proceeding verses we discover that different
nations used different methods to plunder heavenly truths and divine
religions. A group of them hide or concealed these truths, another mixed
the truth with falsehood creating suspicion and the third group only
changed directions to alter meaning or intention, having nothing to do
with its outer appearance and literality. In short, by using these
methods they would alter the Scriptures or Testaments and progressed to
the point where it became impossible to recognize the truth from
falsehood.

Of course the primary motive for these treacherous acts and plundering
was that Heavenly truths were always and in every place at war and in
conflict with a part of mans' sensual passions and desires. The validity
and value of these types of realities closed the way to the enactment
and practice of sensual desires for the powerful and pleasure seeking.

Both these pleasures and countless conveniences must be refuted; those
realities removed from their valid, recognized position; or changed in
essence and nature. The powerful persons of nearly all nations chose the
third method. This was because they were not willing to accept the first
method which meant forsaking their pleasures and the second method was
not feasible because refuting religious truths in their entirety would
damage their position making life difficult for them.

As such, the best method was to alter and plunder all of its meanings
and realities under the pretense of religion. This was the fate of all
Divine religions and past religious laws, they were altered in this
fashion. The Holy Quran groups these crimes and malicious acts under the
word revolt, injustice. [^14]

Previously we learned that the exigency of Divine Lordship is that his
laws---being the only laws that ring true for mankind---be sent to the
prophets in the form of revelations which are then taught to us by them.
We also learned that because they are messengers, Divine messengers have
no responsibility except that of propagation. In addition to that
however, every prophet before being Gods messenger is also a Muslim.
That which is required of us with regard to our being Muslim is also
required of him.

Being a Muslim he must pray, fast, perform the rites of Hajj, perform
Holy War (Jehad) and establish a just government. All of these are
Islamic responsibilities, not those of prophetic mission. In the sense
that the prophet is a messenger of God and an apostle he has no other
responsibility but that of propagation.

Now, with the preliminary information we have acquired we will proceed
to the main topic of this series of lectures, being the role and
responsibilities of the Holy Imams (a.s.) in Islamic society.

Imamate and Caliphate
---------------------

In Islam there exists two schools of thought and insight: The Imamate
school and the Caliphate schools.

In the Imamate school, the Imam possesses certain particularities, Among
them that he must be infallible of all sin and error (“Masum” =
infallible). Another is that he may only be appointed by God, the
Prophet having no role in his appointment except for the propagation and
proclamation of Gods command. 'The Almighty God” chooses, and the
prophet relays the news of this divine appointment to the people.

Of these Imams, the first being Amirul Mu'meneen Ali (a.s.) and the last
being Hujjat ibn al-Hassan Mahdi (a.s.), that which we know and
recognize in relation to Ali is the same for Hujjat ibn al-Hassan. That
which is proved for Ali; infallibility, divine appointment, divine
inspiration, and knowledge of all the aspects of eternal Islam, exists
for all of the Imams and is proved.

But in the Caliphate school, the people choose the Caliph and he comes
to hold the position of Caliph by the people’s choice. Here, what is
confirmed for Abu Bakr has been confirmed until the end of the Ottoman
Caliphate. The Caliphate is determined by a vote and an oath of
allegiance and this never differs.

This discussion was only a very small introduction. We will now see that
in the Imamate school and based on its views, how Imam Ali (a.s.) is
seen and what the Holy Prophet (S) said on his behalf.

A study of the Prophets life will clearly show that the propagation of
divine law by him was not unrelated to the events of time and place. For
instance, when something happened and the Prophet was consulted
concerning it, Gabriel would reveal the related judgement by way of
revelation. In domestic or social matters, conflicts would arise,
someone would ask a question, or an issue would be brought up by friend
or foe with the Prophet (S). Following these situations a revelation
would be revealed that solved the disagreement or answered the question.

We will refer to a very important event in Islamic history and learn
from it. In the eighth year of the Hejrat, the Prophet conquered Mecca
and returned to Medina.

Now the Muslims possess the mightiest power in Arabia. However other
scattered forces exist in Arabia which have not come under the banner of
Islam, and a group of the pagan Arab tribes still loyal to the customs
of the ignorant Arabs come to Mecca. These pagans circumambulate the
“House of God” in Mecca and perform all of the other rites customary
just as the Muslims.

After Islam gained power and Mecca was conquered, all of these rites
were performed by the Muslims. The Muslim and pagan both performed
Abrahams great rite and each went in his own way having nothing to do
with the other.

The Chapter of Bara'ah in the Holy Quran, was revealed as a strong
command to end the mixing of Muslim and Pagan. In these verses God
explicitly informs the pagans that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَرَاءَةٌ مِّنَ اللَّـهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى الَّذِينَ عَاهَدتُّم مِّنَ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ ﴿١﴾فَسِيحُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُمْ غَيْرُ مُعْجِزِي اللَّـهِ وَأَنَّ اللَّـهَ
مُخْزِي الْكَافِرِينَ ﴿٢﴾ وَأَذَانٌ مِّنَ اللَّـهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى
النَّاسِ يَوْمَ الْحَجِّ الْأَكْبَرِ أَنَّ اللَّـهَ بَرِيءٌ مِّنَ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ  وَرَسُولُهُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(This is a declaration of) immunity by Allah and his Apostle towards
those the idolaters with whom you made an agreement. So go about in the
land for four months and know that you cannot cause failure to Allah and
that Allah will bring disgrace to the unbelievers. And an announcement
from Allah and His Apostle to the people on the day of the greater
pilgrimage that Allah and His Apostle are free from liability to the
idolaters;.... “(Qur’an 9: 1, 2 & 3)***

So it was thus that the proclamation for combat with all of the Arab
polytheists was given. This was Allahs command and judgement and must be
communicated as such to the Arab pagans and polytheists. The Prophet is
the one delegated for the duty of propagation. The initial proclamation
of the Quran and each of Gods laws to its audience is the particular
concern of the (“Masum”) infallible. Those bound by, or the audience
intended for a particular divine law must initially hear it, from one of
the infallible.

The Holy Quran stipulates that; our invisible officers (Angels) look
after those possessed of prophetic mission in all aspects and ways
during the propagation of divine law, so that the message will be given
without encountering the danger of mistakes or errors. As a result
Heavenly truths reach the people in their true entirety.[^15] This is
the very principle we mentioned as the purity of first hand propagation
which consists of this divine practice:

«The initial propagation must be undertaken by an infallible (Masum)»

Here a point is necessary to make because without it this subject will
not be correctly understood. The ideas that must be relayed to the
people may be divided into two parts: first are those of which both the
terminology and their meanings or intent are from God such as the Quran
and other divinely inspired scriptures, second are those whose ideas and
meanings are Heavenly but its terminology coming from the Holy Prophet
(S) and those are the traditions.

The Holy Quran was revealed to the Holy Prophet (S) by God, both the
very terminology, the words and all of their meanings and intent are
from Him. Of course the Quran only contains the major and main topics of
Islamic matters and doesn't usually deal with specific matters. But
there also exists a series of Islamic laws and learnings and other
specifics such as how many “Rakats” (units or sections) make up one
prayer, what is recited in “Rukoo” (genuflection) and “Sujud”
(prostration) during prayer, how do we say the “Tashahud” (testimony) in
the rite of Hajj how many times must we circumambulate the Kaaba, where
is “Meeghat” (a certain place for beginning Hajj rites), how do we put
on the pilgrims clothing, when are alms necessary and all other
secondary details.

These are not in the Holy Quran. The Holy Prophet (S) with reliance on
revelation but with his own terminology and words explained them. In
this series of religious laws the meanings and ideas are from God but
the speech from the Prophet.

That which in word and meaning was from God; the Holy Quran and its
propagation to the duty bound, was finished by the last year of the Holy
Prophets (S) life, and the Prophet proclaimed it to all of the people.
However, the ideas and truths which must be explained in prophetic
traditions are of two types. One type included those which the Muslims
of that time needed and wanted. The Prophet informed everyone of these.

The other type were those which would not be enacted during the Prophets
time and would be enacted in later times, there as such being no urgent
need for their proclamation in the Prophets time. For example; if the
leader of the Muslims is not infallible,(the prophet or Imam the
rightful one) what is the duty of the Muslims, and how should they act
towards him? This verdict was not needed during the Prophets time. Also,
if between two groups of Muslims war should break out, how should the
oppressive side be treated and the property taken from them holds what
verdict in Islamic law?

These laws and their like had no opportunity for enactment during the
Prophets day and age. Later however, during the age of Imam Ali (a.s.)
it became reality and its practical verdict was enacted by the Imam.
Also, if the Muslims should go to war against the rightful leader what
must be done with their captives and how should the spoils of war be
taken possession of? All of these were matters brought up later and
there was no need for their verdicts during the Prophets time so they
weren't explained.

It was all of these events and hundreds and thousands of other events
that had laws, rules, and verdicts, and God related and explained them
to His prophet by way of revelation. In these sorts of maters the
Prophet left their verdicts as a trust with Amirul Mo'meneen Ali
(a.s.),[^16] and it was he who had the responsibility of their
communication after the Prophet (S)!

Another division of the matters necessary to be propagated could be into
those being proclaimed for the first time without an intermediary, and
those proclaimed by an intermediary.

The laws necessary for their duty-bound must initially be proclaimed by
a person completely infallible and free of sin, error and prejudice.
Prayer, the Fast, Zakat and Jehad and every other Divine Law must
initially be taught by a missionary who is infallible (Masum) to the
duty bound. This must be done by one who is appointed by God, and
infallible of errors and mistakes and if not Gods law may become subject
to subtraction and additions, mistakes and forgetfulness. Of course,
after correctly learning religious law every Muslim may and must
proclaim it to others. One Muslim may say to the other: the Prophet (S)
taught me to pray like this, he taught the particulars of a certain law
like this or he performed some particular action like this. An ordinary
Muslim, one who is not infallible (“Masum”) may not say the following
without mentioning an intermediary; God requires you to pray in this
manner. No, in principle the right to say such does not exists for those
other than the infallible. This is the precise, important point here.

According to this principle the Islamic laws which were not proclaimed
during the Prophets lifetime must have been proclaimed by what person?
While we answer this question we will draw closer to the role and deed
of the Holy Imams (a.s.).

49) In creditable Shi'ite Traditions it is said that the Holy Prophet
(S) informed Ali (a.s.) of all of the matters needed by man and he (Ali)
collected and put these down in a book called « **جامعة** =collection»,
which was kept by Ahlu'l bait as a scientific legacy. We have also seen
much of this book in Sunni Traditions. We will discuss this book further
in the future. If God wills.

A Man of Myself
---------------

The verses of Bara'ah were revealed and it addressed the pagans as a
group specially. They were in Mecca far from the Prophets (S) reach and
the Medinites were not subject to the propagation of these verses. These
verses were not meant for them and are remarks and commands for the
pagans exclusively. Previously we learned and will see more clearly in
the future, that according to Islamic thought, propagation of verses to
those they address must be accomplished by an infallible.

Our point is a clear and prominent point in the text of this story. The
Holy Prophet (S) sent for Abu Bakr and giving him the verses told him;
mount and go to Mecca and proclaim these verse to those subject to them,
the pagans.

Here we have a revelation from God, those subject to it not being the
Muslims of Medina so that the Prophet could have delivered it himself,
and the first propagation having been carried out by an infallible
(Masum). If this revelation had been meant for the people of Medina of
course Abu Bakr being one of them could have proclaimed it everywhere
and to everyone as second hand propagation.

We have however seen that this was not so and the word was especially
meant for the pagans and carried the announcement of Islams position
regarding its encounters with them in the future. Hence, the delivery of
these verses in Mecca was only correct if done by the Prophet (S).

Abu Bakr mounts and starts out towards Mecca. Gabriel appears and brings
to the Prophet (S) this categorical divine command: “That is the
propagation of Gods verdict, first hand propagation at that. Either you
must see to it yourself or someone who is of you”.

This was the basis of this incident.

Now we will take a look at the related traditions. Here we will refer to
the point that all of the traditions we will read are from authorative
Sunni writings and we have not used Shi'ite sources. In principle it was
not necessary for us to do so because the authorative Sunni narratives
cover almost all aspects of this incident.

Tirmidhi in “As-Sahih”, Nasa'i in “al-Khasa'is” and Ahmad bin Hanbal in
“Masnad” and many other famous narrators have narrated it and we will
report it literally from Tirmidhi's “Sahih”. Anas ibn Malik had reported
that the Prophet (S) sent the Bara'ah verses with Abu Bakr to Mecca but
called him back from the road saying:

“Its not suitable and these verses must not be read to the people except
by a man of my family” [^17]

Who are those of the Prophets family? They are those included in and
covered by this noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّـهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah's wish is but to remove uncleanness far from you O' folk of
the Household, and cleanse you with a thorough cleansing”. '(Qur’an 33:
33)***

And they are far from any uncleanness they possess the condition for
first hand propagation or in other words they possess infallibility and
divine immunity. Therefore, now that the Prophet (S) himself cannot
deliver these verses to those they are addressed to, someone must see to
this important task who possesses the special conditions for first hand
propagation. For this reason the Prophet (S) sent for Ali (a.s.) and
gave the verses to him so that he would undertake this duty.

Several traditions of Imam Ali (a.s.) exist on this matter. In one of
them, Zayd ibn Yasee relates as such from the Imam:

“The Holy Prophet (S) dispatched Abu Bakr to the people of Mecca with
the Surah of Bara'ah. After Abu Bakrs departure he sent Ali after him
saying, “Get the letter (containing the verses) from him and take it to
Mecca”.

The Imam went after Abu Bakr, retrieved the letter and took off for
Mecca to perform his duty. Abu Bakr returned to Medina in distress. He
was upset and feared that something had been revealed from Heaven about
him to the Prophet (S). When he arrived in Medina he went to see the
Holy Prophet (S) asking: “Has something been revealed about me?”

The Holy Prophet replied: “No! nothing has been revealed about you on
this matter. It is only that I was given the duty to either deliver
these verses myself or send a person of my family for this purpose”
[^18]

In another tradition the Imam himself relates:

“I told the Holy Prophet (S): O' Prophet of God! I am not eloquent nor
an orator! The Prophet replied: There is no other way or solution and is
inevitable that either I take these verses or you deliver them. I then
said: Now that I have no alternative and there is no other solution,
then I will take them. The Prophet then said: Go without a doubt the
Exalted Lord will keep your tongue on the truth, and truth and will
guide your heart”.

The Holy Prophet (S) said this and then placed his blessed hand on Ali's
mouth. [^19]

Another existing tradition related by the Imam (a.s.) reads like this:

“The verses of the Surah of Bara'ah were revealed to the Holy Prophet
and he called for Abu Bakr and gave the verses to him to take to Mecca
and proclaim them to its inhabitants. But after a short period he
summoned me and said: Go after Abu Bakr and wherever you reach him
retrieve the letter from him, take the verses to Mecca and proclaim them
to the inhabitants there. I met Abu Bakr in “Johfeh” and retrieved the
letter from him. Abu Bakr then returned to the Holy Prophet (S) saying:
O' Apostle of Allah, has something been revealed concerning me. The
Prophet replied: No, But Gabriel came to me and said: “Other than you or
a man of you no one may pronounce the prophetic message on your
behalf”.[^20] There is another tradition from Sa'ad Waqqas. This
companion of the Prophet (S) says:

“The Prophet (S) sent Abu Bakr with the verses of Bara' ah towards
Mecca. He was still on the way when the Prophet sent Ali after him (to
get the verses from him and go himself to perform the duty of
Proclamation). Ali (a.s.) got the verses and went with them to Mecca.
Abu Bakr returned to the Holy Prophet (S) in much distress and sadness
and complained to him. The Prophet saying:[^21]

Once again according to this tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) makes the
propagation restricted to himself or a man of himself saying: “Myself or
a man from me must perform the duty of propagation and the communication
of this divine Mission.”

Ibn Abbas spoke in more detail. He reports that the Prophet sent Abu
Bakr and Omar together to Mecca placing the letter in Abu Bakrs hands.
These two started out and progressed a distance. Away along the road
they saw a man on a camel coming towards them and they called out:

“Who are you?”

The man astride the camel replied:

“It is I, Ali! Abu Bakr give me the letter! (the letter containing the
verses of Bara'ah)”

Abu Bakr asked him:

“Has something happened?”

Amir-ul-Mo'meneen Ali (a.s.) replied:

“Its alright, its nothing bad with regard to you”.

Then Ali (a.s.) took the letter from him and started out towards Mecca
in order to announce it to the pagans. Omar and Abu Bakr upon their
return to Medina asked the Prophet:

“What's new regarding us, and what has happened?” The Prophet replied:

“Its alright, however; [^22]

“I have been told and the order has been given, that no one shall
deliver the divine message except myself or a man who is from me”.

The last tradition will be quoted from Abu Bakr himself. Zayd ibn Yasee
quotes from Abu Bakr that the Prophet sent him to Mecca with the verses
of Bara’ah and this message:

“Form this year onwards pagans may not perform the Hajj, while no longer
may naked persons circumambulate the Kaaba such as was the custom in
ignorant times, and no one except the Muslims will enter Heaven. Those
who have treaties with the Holy Prophet their treaties are valid and
standing for their lawful term, and Allah and his prophet like not the
idolaters.”

Abu Bakr, with this message and the Quranic verses goes off to fulfill
his duty, but in his absence the Holy Prophet (S) sent for Ali directing
him:  
 “Go toward Mecca and try to catch up Abu Bakr, sent him back to me and
you go on to proclaim the Quranic verses and my command.”

Ali completed the Prophets orders Abu Bakr also returned to Medina when
he went to the prophet, in tears he said:

“O’ Apostle of God! Has something happened concerning me?”

The Prophet replied:

“No, All is well, but[^23] I have been ordered by god that no one but I
or a man from me must propagate.”

The afore mentioned events and the Prophets comments about Imam Ali
(a.s.) have been recorded in the writings of other narrators, of which
we all refain from conveying here. Those who wish for a greater detailed
account may refer to the writings of traditions and exegesis.

This event was related to the Propagation and message of the Surah of
Bara’ah. The Prophet was here commanded that only himself or a man like
himself may rise to its proclamation. We have also seen that at this
time and among all of the supporters and family of the Prophet it was
only Ali (a.s.) who was introduced as possessing this distinction. The
conclusion here is that “only Ali is a man such as the Apostle of God.”

This is another event in Islamic history which brings across this very
meaning and reality, bringing greater clarity to the sentence (a man of
myself) It also removes the inadmissible probabilities that declared the
depth of these words as being nothing.

It was during the ‘Battle of Uhud’ with all of its difficulties and
unpleasantness. The Muslims, upon hearing the diabolic shout “Muhammad
has been killed!”, decided to flee rather than remain. The Holy Prophet
(S) remained, injured and alone. Only a few of the Muslims remained with
him and according to the narratives of some historians they were Ali
(a.s.) and two others. In this battle the Imam had killed the pagan
standard bearers one after the other. Now that the Muslims had fled and
the Prophet had remained alone, he was rushing back and forth in every
direction fighting off the numerous enemy soldiers and the pagan ranks
who were attacking the Holy Prophet (S) each time the Prophet would
repeat this sentence:

O’ Ali, ward these (solders) off!

The Imam and his sword alone would attack them, breaking off their
rushing attack, placing his own life in danger to protect that of the
Prophet (S) Gabriel, who was present here at the prophets side on this
battlefield said:

“O Messenger of Allah, this is an example of Ali’s devotion and
selflessness, his fellowship is with you!”

The Prophet replied:

“Ali’s sacrifices in my way are not surprising; because he is of me and
I am of him.”  
 Gabriel then said:

“I am also of you both”[^24]

In this historical event, all of the speech surrounds the words ‘Mennie’
and ‘Menkoma’. The Prophet (S) says Ali is of me and I am also of Ali.
Gabriel says: I am also of you. The Prophet does not refute his remark.
What do these words mean? What could be the meaning behind these three
being of one another? How are they alike? What is the common aspect
between them? Which meanings does the word ‘Min’ relay here?

Gabriel was not a human being and was not the paternal cousin or close  
 relative of the Prophet, and therefore we cannot see the words “I am of
you” as being in this manner. The only relation he had to Prophet was in
their partnership delivering the divine message. He received revelation
from God and delivered it to the Prophet (S) The Prophet also received
divine commands. Sometimes delivering them himself and sometimes Ali
delivering them to the Muslims.

So, the sentence انا منكم- انه مني و أنا منه all say that we are similar
and equal in the distinction of propagation (of divine law), to such an
extent that these three are as parts of one another’s being.

Remarks of the Holy prophet (S) which sows Ali (a.s.) as having such a
similarity and affinity to the Prophet in the duty of propagation (that
he is as a part of his being), are not restricted to the event of the
propagation of the surah of Bara’ah. For example, in the farewell
pilgrimage when he delivered a great number of his most important
messages and commandments to this fact. He explains this unparalleled
similarity and closeness with complete clarity, and also it’s result in
the cooperation and partnership in the primary process of the Prophetic
Mission (the propagation).

The Prophets companion Habashy Ibn Jonadeh said:

During the farewell pilgrimage the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“Ali is of me, and I am of Ali, and no one may deliver the prophetic
message on my behalf other than myself or Ali.”[^25]

In another famous tradition we read: The Prophet sent Imam Amirul
Mo’meneen (a.s.) to Yemen bestowing upon him military command Khaled had
gone for this purpose he gave the command of the first division to
Khaled and the second to Ali (a.s.) then saying:

“If the two divisions should meet and merge, then the command of both
will be in Ali’s hands.”[^26]

The Imam went to this battle and returned the victor. A small group of
the army instigated by Khaled, upon their return to Medina, brought
complaints against Ali (a.s.) to the Holy Prophet (S). The Prophet was
so enraged by their actions that anger was immediately seen in his
face.  
 Then he said:

“What do you want of Ali? What do you want of Ali? What do you want of
Ali? Ali is of me and I of Ali and he is the master and leader of every
believer after me.”[^27]

In another tradition where Hassan (a.s.) and Hussain (a.s.) are present
the same remark is made. This tradition is found in the book
‘Al-Riazal-Nazarath’ The Holy Prophet (S) said to Ali (a.s.):

“Three blessings have been bestowed upon you and on no one else, not
even myself; you have the distinction of being my son in law and I do
not possess this virtue. Toy have a wife such as ‘Sediqeh’ my daughter,
while I have had no such wife and two children have bestowed upon you
such as Hassan and Hussain (a.s.), while from my loins no such children
have come to be. But you are not separate from me, you and Hassan and
Hussain are of me and I am of you.”[^28]

In reference to the Imams of Ahlu’l bait (a.s.) this remark exists in
various forms. According to a tradition by one of the Prophets
companions Maqdaam bin Ma’di Karb, the lap saying[^29]

“This is of me”. In reference to Imam Hossain (a.s.) he also said:  
 (Hussain is of me and I am also of Hussain)[^30]

Regarding the last member of Ahlu’l-bait, the last Imam of this
household, Imam Mahdi (a.s.) he also said:

(Mahdi is of me)[^31] and /or: (Mahdi is of our household)[^32]

All of these remarks show that this entire group had the responsibility
of propagation. The Holy Prophet (S) holds the responsibility for the
propagation of the Divine Message. The Holy Imams (a.s.) were also
charged with this duty. The difference between the two is that Ali
(a.s.) and the other Imams received the Divine Message from the Holy
Prophet (S) and the Prophet received it from God. The conclusion here is
that; our Imams, up until the last one Hujjat ibn al Hassan (a.s.), all
being of Ahlu’l-bait are all responsible for the propagation as their
first and foremost duty and responsibility that could never be
abandoned. These great men, placing no worth on their own life,
sacrificed everything for the fulfillment of their duty. However, the
other duties of Holy Imams are as affairs of their concern. Holing
public prayer is of his concerns. Establishing and enforcing Islamic law
is one of their concerns and the creation of an Islamic community and a
just government is also the same. This means that if no one followed
them and they acquired to assistance it’s possible the just government
wouldn’t come into practice. But with or without the help of others,
propagation could not be unconditional. But, all other no concerns, even
though they are mandatory they are also conditional.

Now, how these great men performed their main duties and how they
proclaimed it, and what they propagated, are matters and question that
must be clarified in the following discussion that must be clarified in
the following discussions. They were the bearers of religious laws; the
property performed the duties of the preservation and propagation of
Islam. In future lessons we will study these subjects of discourse.

The religious creed of the Final Prophet (S) - just like in previous
nations - cased to be and as Amir-ul-Mo’meneen (a.s.) said; took the
from of a reversed cloak or a bowl turned over[^33]. The efforts of the
powerful with the aid of a few traitorous, fake scholars proceeded to
alter Gods religion, destroying it in the process. In this nation, Islam
fell victim to this very fate; to the point that of Islam fell victim to
this very fate; to the point that of Islam only a name remained.

The exhausting efforts and self-sacrifices of the Holy Imams (a.s.) gave
new life the final religious creed, and returned it to the community
where it came to practical in various aspects of time and place. God had
appointed these great men for the guardianship and protection of Islam.
First of all they were the bearers of all Islamic truths and learning,
and secondly they had been charged with the duty of propagation the
banishment of alterations and the campaign against change.

Here I repeat; the Holy Imams special responsibility was the same as
that of the Prophet, and exclusive in one word, and that being
(propagation) in this nation, that which man required and the Prophets
era needed was proclaimed by the Prophet (S) himself, and that which was
not then needed was handed over to Ali (a.s.); so that he and his eleven
descendents would then be the guardians and deliverers of Islamic views
in all ages.

> إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللّهِ الإِسْلاَمُ وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ الَّذِينَ
> أُوْتُواْ الْكِتَابَ إِلاَّ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءهُمُ الْعِلْمُ بَغْياً
> بَيْنَهُمْ وَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ فَإِنَّ اللّهِ سَرِيعُ
> الْحِسَابِ{19} فَإنْ حَآجُّوكَ فَقُلْ أَسْلَمْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلّهِ
> وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَنِ وَقُل لِّلَّذِينَ أُوْتُواْ الْكِتَابَ
> وَالأُمِّيِّينَ أَأَسْلَمْتُمْ فَإِنْ أَسْلَمُواْ فَقَدِ اهْتَدَواْ
> وَّإِن تَوَلَّوْاْ فَإِنَّمَا عَلَيْكَ الْبَلاَغُ وَاللّهُ بَصِيرٌ
> بِالْعِبَادِ{20{

***“Lo! Religion with Allah (is) the surrender (to his will guidance)
those who (formerly) received the Scripture differed only after
knowledge came unto them, through transgression among themselves whose
disbelieveth the revelations of Allah (will find that). Lo! Allah is
swift in reckoning.” “And if they argue with thee, (O Muhammad), say: I
have surrendered my purpose to Allah and (so have) those who follow me.
And say unto those read not: Have ye(too) surrendered? If they
surrender, then truly they are rightly guided, and if they turn away,
then it is, thy duty only to convey the message (unto them). Allah is
seer of (his) bondmen.” (Holy Quran: “The Family of Imran”, 3:
19-20.)***

In our preliminary discussions we had a few important Islamic terms to
consider: ‘Elah’, ‘Abd’, ‘Rab’ and ‘Islam’. After research into the
first three terms we arrived at a discussion on the environs of the term
‘Islam’ and in the interim we brought up the famous tradition of the
Holy Prophet (S). Previously we placed the very important term under
detailed evaluation, therefore we will skirt it here briefly[^34].

In previously discussion we cited contained the remark that:

“A day will come for the people when there will remain nothing of the
Quran but its format meaning its written word. And also of Islam, except
for its name nothing else will remain. The people will be called by this
name but they will be the furthest persons from Islam...”

And we spoke of this part it, which says:

“Nothing else of Islam will remain except for its name”,

And we wanted to know that from Islam had during the Holy Prophets time
and afterwards what from it took.

We saw that the God of creation, based on his lordship must train his
creatures and give them growth until the point of maturity. True
lordship requires that the best needs of His creatures be known
precisely and provided in the necessary amount far from waste and
dissipation. The exchangeless divine laws throughout world all bubble up
from the spring of God’s lordship and are the way towards anatomical,
evolutionary perfection throughout creation.

We have observed that the ordinary battles and conflicts of the Prophets
with the evil forces of their era or their nations were over the
acceptance of God’s Lordship. The prophets strived to have mankind
accept the world comprising divine order and give order to their lives
in accordance with His widespread commands. They would tell him (man)
that; your lord and the organizer of your life is that same organizer
and perfector of the Heavens and Earth, sun, moon and stars and these
creatures will in no way escape from under the weight of divine order.

We know that divine order in mans life is called Islam and this was not
the particular name for only the religious creed of the Final Prophet
(S). In the Quran we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللّهِ الإِسْلاَمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Gods religion is Islam" (Holy Quran: 3: 19)***

and the differences that the Jews and Christians have introduced into
it, each going in a different direction, were only because of oppression
and tyranny.

***“He hath ordained for you that religion which We inspire in the
(Muhammad), and that which We commended unto Abraham and Moses and
Jesus...” (‘Counsel’: 13)***

This Islam appeared in four stages in the society and has come to be in
four “essences of existence”:

### 1) Nominal Existence

In the past we saw that the Holy Prophet (S) had remarked that of Islam
nothing will remain except this from of its appearance and existence.

### 2) Conceptional Existence

Those meanings that the Prophet explained in relation to legal words and
words and expressions. The Holy Prophet (S) used series of terms and
words that were generally[^35] but he explained new meanings for these
literal forms, which of course are not unrelated to their literal
meanings. Up to this point the active stage has not come to be and the
Prophet strives to his utmost to circulate these words with their new
meanings among the people and cause them to be propagated. We have also
seen that the primary output of the first prophets was this very
propagation and nothing else.

### 3) Practical Existence

Then the prophet strives to be these Islamic meanings to the stage of
practice and earn its active existence. When a Muslim performed his
ablutions, prayed, gave zakat, went to Jehad and called people to
goodness (Amr bil Maroof) he has found Islams’ in practice. Up until the
second stage, or in other words the terminological existence both the
Muslims and all others during the Prophets time understood. Abu Lahab,
Abu Jahl, and Abu Sufyan on the opposing side, and Ammar, Abu Dhar and
Khabbab on the agreeing side heard the words ‘Salat’ and ‘Zakat’ and
understood their meanings.

They recognized the principle terms of Islam such as ‘Rab’ and ‘Elah’
with their correct meanings. In this aspect during the Prophets era the
Muslim and non-Muslim were equal in their understanding of the
pronunciation and meanings of all these terms. It is from this stage
onward that Muslims and non-Muslim are separated. After the proclamation
the Holy Prophet (S) goes to Jehad striving to make these terms and
meanings find their active existence. Here it was that Islamic identity
appeared.

It is impossible to present applied Islam in a place without existing
the nominal and conceptual existence. Therefore no Muslim exists without
knowing Islam. Propagation is meaningless unless until Holy Prophet (S)
does not convey the Islamic Terminology.

### 4) Islamic Society

Now that in Mecca and Medina the third essence of existence was
established, the Prophet begins to establish tits fourth “essence of
existence” taking the name Islamic society. This Islamic society became
established when Islamic individuals made an allegiance to the Prophet
(S) to build a one hundred percent Islamic community.

The previous prophets who were given the duty of the propagation of Gods
religion, Islam, also placed all of their efforts on this very ideal and
aspiration. A group of them such as: Moses, Solomen, and David were also
successful in the establishment and completion of Islams four essences
of existence. During the last Prophets (S) time they were also
established by him and they were able to emerge.

One inevitable practice existed thought out the history of mankind. This
practice existed may be interpreted into a world wide general rule. It
summed up in these sentences: Every true statement, and every just way
and rule that conflicts with carnal desires and hinders extravagance in
the exploitation of human and natural resources, restricting wealth for
certain persons will create for itself a strong group of enemies who
will stop at no from of sabotage regarding it. However, since the
religion of God especially that of the last Prophet (S) enjoyed heavenly
assistance[^36] and its victory in first stage held a divine
guarantee[^37].

These alert, powerful enemies had no choice but to hide under the mask
of hypocrisy. Of course with the death of the Prophets and the
disappearance of heavenly assistance this group came out of hiding
causing the hatred they had stored in their hearts to appear.

From this very central point and by this very group, the truth and
religion of God was being altered and turned over, and to the point that
very were successful they changed and adjusted heavenly and religious
truth. Of course they kept the other appearances of religion, and in its
name they exploited Gods servants by forcing upon them their own
opinions and choices.

With regard to all of these preliminaries it might still appear strange
and astonishing that we believe, the prayer, fasting, Zakat, and the
beliefs and thoughts that were propagated by the Prophet (S) do not
exist amongst an enormous group of today’s Muslims. Of course its
existence in name remained. What has disappeared is its correct meaning
and intent. For example, the law of divorce thrice, which is one of the
laws of true Islamic creed, possesses certain conditions and if they are
fulfilled this divorce as such also ceases to be and becomes
non-existent. What has remained is the name of this Islamic law.

In previous centuries, in the era of the preceeding prophets and also in
the period following him, Islam would be completely annihilated. The
Islam that Moses son of Emran (a.s.) proclaimed and circulated was
completely destroyed and annihilated. Thus a prophet possessed of divine
law, like Jesus (a.s.) was appointed to once again restore Islam. After
him the Islam he proclaimed was eventually forgotten and another
prophetic mission became necessary.

Isn’t it true that the name of the religion, which God revealed to all
of His great prophets, was Islam? Isn’t it also true that the
alterations of past ages didn’t even stop at this name, also changing
it? Wasn’t the name of Moses’s religious law Islam from which it was
changed to Judaism? As such its existence in name was destroyed. Wasn’t
the name of religion revealed to Jesus (a.s.) Islam, while afterwards
alterations and changes went to such an extent that even that name was
changed becoming Christianity? We know all of the answers to these
questions are positive.

Christians see themselves as being the followers of Jesus, son of Mary
but did he bring these beliefs and practices to be? Did he introduce
wine -drinking as a religious rite?[^38] Did he command not to
circumcise?[^39] Last of all, did he introduce God to the people as
being made up of the Trinity, ‘Thee father’, ‘the son’, and ‘the Holy
Spirit’?[^40] Certainly not!

Of Jesus’s religious creed nothing has remained, the name has gone and
the meaning has been destroyed. The Islamic individuals trained by that
he or any other prophets in other ways established not a truce remains.
Therefore, (of the Islam that previous prophets proclaimed not even it’s
name has remained) But with regard to the religion of the Last Prophet
(S) he himself had said: There will when Islam will become a name
without content, and nothing will remain of it but its name, Yes, such a
time arrived according to the Prophets prediction and it came very
quickly. In a few years all of Islam’s meanings were plundered and only
its name remained.

The alteration of the last Prophets religion began at his death, the
culmination of this being during the long period of Mu’awwiyahs rule. He
and his hirelings, of whom some also bore the title of the Prophets
companions, went to work in earnest at ransacking all of the aspects and
facets of ‘Pure Islam’. The official Islam that is believed in by most
of the worlds Muslims was established during this age.

Now we will think about and see what a momentous task and want great
pains were placed on the shoulders and in the hearts of the Holy Imams
(a.s.) for the campaign against this altered Islam. What an enormous
burden of pain and suffering they carry on their shoulders, on the one
hand because of their fundamental knowledge of Islam and on the other
hand because they see with their own eye the Prophets legacy in the
Islamic community being plundered. Here we realize what an enormous and
serious task the Holy Imams (a.s.) have. We believe, and with Gods help
will prove that it was they who community.

Nations Alterations
-------------------

In previous discourses, by citing the Holy Quran we studied the reasons
and means for the alteration, change and destruction for divine
religious creed. Now as an introduction to our next discussion we will
briefly repeat it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللَّـهُ مِيثَاقَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ
لَتُبَيِّنُنَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ وَلَا تَكْتُمُونَهُ فَنَبَذُوهُ وَرَاءَ
ظُهُورِهِمْ وَاشْتَرَوْا بِهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا  فَبِئْسَ مَا
يَشْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (remember) when Allah laid a charge on those who had received
the Scripture (he said): Ye are to expound it to mankind and not to hide
it. But they flung it behind their backs and bought thereby a little
gain.” ((Qur’an 3: 187)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ قَالُوا إِنَّا نَصَارَىٰ أَخَذْنَا مِيثَاقَهُمْ
فَنَسُوا حَظًّا مِّمَّا ذُكِّرُوا بِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And with those who say: “Lo! We are Christians, We made a covenant,
but they forgot that whereof they were admonished.” (Qur’an 5: 14)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِّنَ الَّذِينَ هَادُوا يُحَرِّفُونَ الْكَلِمَ عَن مَّوَاضِعِهِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Some of the Jews change words from their context”. (Qur’an 4: 46)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ لِمَ تَلْبِسُونَ الْحَقَّ بِالْبَاطِلِ
وَتَكْتُمُونَ الْحَقَّ وَأَنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O People of the Scripture! Why confound ye truth with falsehood and
knowingly conceal the truth ”. (Qur’an 3: 71)***

In these verses there are references to several of their deeds. They
concealed, placing falsehoods on the truth like clothing. They made the
truth suspicious by mixing these two together. They knew they were doing
this and it wasn't out of ignorance.

From these verses and the numerous other verses on this subject we learn
that after the death of their prophets, past nations over the years
forgot some of the truth, concealed some and sometimes mixed the truth
with falsities creating doubtful subject matter. Sometimes they would
create some remarks delivering them to the people as the words of God.
They changed their divine books by these means, altering and plundering
them.

The Last Nation
---------------

In numerous traditions recorded in creditable Shi'ite and Sunni books,
the Holy Prophet (S) is seen to have remarked:

«This nation will do just as the previous nations and will follow them
minutely»

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) quotes from his fathers as narrating that the Holy
Prophet said:

“That which occured in past nations will also occur in this nation. Just
like one arrow is like another arrow, and a pair of horse-shoes are like
each other, that nation is like other nations.[^41]

In another tradition, Imam Sadiq (a.s.) also quotes from his fathers as
saying the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“I swear by He who sent me as a Prophet and harbinger of good news that
my nation will travel the same route past nations travelled to the point
that if a snake of Bani Israel entered a hole, of this nation a snake
will also enter that hole”. [^42]

Creditable Sunnite books narrate from Abu Sa'id Khudri that the Holy
Prophet (S) said:

“You, my nation! You follow the practices of the ancients and you will
go inch by inch and cubit by cubit the ways the ancients travelled; if
they went one inch you will also go one inch, and if they went one cubit
you will also go one cubit, to the point where if one of them had
entered a lizards hole one of you will also enter a lizards hole.”[^43]

The followers questioned: Do you mean the Jews and the Christians when
you mention the ancients? Will we be like the Jews and Christians? Will
we do as they? The Holy Prophet (S) replied: Then who do I speak of?”

Based on another tradition of these books it is quoted from Abu Hurayrah
that the Holy Prophet said:

“The resurrection day will not come unless my nation follows the way and
method of past nations, and follows them minutely and to the letter!”
They asked him:

“O Messenger of Allah, like the Persians and Romans? He replied: “Are
there people other than these?” [^44]

Traditions are numerous but we didn't set out to give a complete account
of all of them. Those who wish may refer to a more detailed book.[^45]
In Conclusion, we saw that according to Quranic verses past nations
concealed heavenly truths and therefore in this nation there must also
be concealment of the truth. We saw that in previous nations there was
alteration, and truths were changed, so in this nation change and
alteration must also exist. Among the followers of previous prophets
truth and falsehoods had been mixed, so in this nation this must also be
so.

The study of how the above events took place, how truth and falsehood
were mixed, how realities were concealed, how beliefs were changed and
altered, how far these changes and alterations went and their effect on
pure Islam are all subjects that will be enlightened in the future If
Almighty Allah wills.

\* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \* \*

Previously, we were repeately reminded that after its prophet, every
religion was altered and this alteration went so far that it made it
impossible to gain access to its truths and realities. From that time
God would appoint another prophet to once again revive and bring to life
that lost religion. This rule existed in relation to Abraham (a.s.) and
Noah (a.s.), it also occured in relation to Moses (a.s.) and Jesus
(a.s.). When the religion of Jesus (a.s.) was lost and no matter how
hard they tried they could not find it again, the last Prophet (S) was
appointed, revived Islam, and delivered it to mankind in its entirety.
Now eternal wisdom sees it appropriate that this religion remains until
resurrection day because this was His last word and most complete
leadership for mankind. 80

The Holy Prophet (S) was responsible for the propagation of Islam,
proclaiming, protecting, circulating and promoting its laws and
learnings and was charged with the explanation of Islamic terms and
meanings, while he must also establish Islamic identity and the the
Muslim society.

As such, after his death God left certain persons among the nation to
take over the Prophets' responsibilities. This is the serious duty that
makes up the essential output of each of the Holy Imams (a.s.) and they
performed this duty up until the time of Hujjat ibn al-Hassan. Their
strivings, their peace, uprising, suppressions, their being poisoned and
their living were all for this very cause.

After their prophet this nation did as previous nations did. They
altered Islamic truths and creed, they changed it and concealed it until
during the time of Mu’awwiyah; «Nothing remained of Islam but its name
and of the Quran but its writing» Imam Husseins uprising and his bloody
Ashura became an unpenetrable dam before alteration.

From this time onward fundamental alteration did not take place. The
revival of Islam, and Islam of which only the terminology remained, was
begun in the time of Imam Baqir (a.s.). The continuous strivings and
struggles of the Imams of this nation returned the correct meanings and
concepts to the community. Once again Islamic individuals were trained,
an Islamic community was founded and in short Islam in all of its
dimensions returned amidst the people.[^46] God willing we will study
all of these subjects in our following discussion.

80) With regard to the Holy Prophets identity we read in the Holy Quran

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَا أَحَدٍ مِّن رِّجَالِكُمْ وَلَـٰكِن رَّسُولَ
اللَّـهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is the
Messenger of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets....” (Qur’an 33:40)***

Also regarding His book

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ تِبْيَانًا لِّكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We reveal the Scripture unto thee as an exposition of all
things”. (Qur’an 16: 89)***

Also

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ صِدْقًا وَعَدْلًا  لَّا مُبَدِّلَ
لِكَلِمَاتِهِ  وَهُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Perfected is the Word of thy Lord in truth and Justice. There is
naught that can change His words. He is the Hearer, and Knower”. (Qur’an
6:115)***

And

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِن بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ
خَلْفِهِ ۖتَنزِيلٌ مِّنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ . لَّا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ
مِن بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ تَنزِيلٌ مِّنْ حَكِيمٍ
حَمِيدٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… It is an unassailable Scripture. Falsehood cannot come at it from
before it or behind it”. (Qur’an 41:41-42)***

81) Proof of this statement is the undertaking of future discussion-If
God will.

[^1]: “Elah” is derived (rooted) from “Elaha” accorded with “Kataba”
taken as “Abada” i.e. he worshipped and “Elaha” as worshipped one
accorded with “Ketab” means “written”

[^2]: 'عبد' as to its literal meanings we may read:اطاعة: عبادة عبد
meaning: took orders. 'العبادة' I or worship means: obeying with
humility, worship your God: means obey your God, worship the devil
means: to obey his temptations and enticements. «Lesan al-arab-Taj
al-aroos- the word.

[^3]: “Tohful Oqul /336 published in Najaf. Also pay attention to this
tradition: (Usul al-Kafi 2/398)

[^4]: From Husham bin Salim and Hamad bein Eisa and other related a
certain tradition (Usul al-Kafi 1/53)

[^5]: For example refer to the “Shoora” incidents (abdullah ibn Saba
1/214-215 in Arabic, kand in Persian 1/265-280)

[^6]: “Badiyatul Mojtahed” 2/141, and “Zad al-Ma'adel ibn Qayyem” 2/205
and “Al-Mogni-le-ibn Ghodameh” 7/527 and “Al-Mohli-le-ibn Hazam” 7/107.
“Ahkam al-Quran lel-Hesas” 1/279 and “Al-Mohli” 7/107.

[^7]: The introduction to “Meratul Uqul” 23/17-67 chapter
Totoor -e-Ejtahad

[^8]: “Mofradat”, article on Rab, p.182 published in Tehran 1373. and
Rabbo Zaiato Esleha wa A'temmaha wa rabbo folan waladahu ay-robah
(Al-Sehah 17130)

[^9]: Lord of all things, owner (Al-Sehah, article On Rab 17130) Rabbo
Kolla Shai'in Malekohu wa Mostaheqqohu aw Sahebohu (Al-Qamoos 1773)
Al-Malek = Al-Rab(=Lord: owner) (Kashef 1753) Also, sometimes the word
lord in a section is used to mean owner or manager. In Arabic any name
which is composed of two parts, may be used alone in either of those
parts, like (Maedah) which originally used to say a (table with food)
may be used to mean a table without food or food without a table.

[^10]: Ibn Heshaam 4/578-581 published by: Mostafa as-Seqaa and others
1375, Egypt.

[^11]: Majma-ul-Bayaan 5/23-24 and Tafseer al-Borhaan 21/121 and
Ad-Durrul Mansoor 3/330-331.

[^12]: “Savab al-amal” by Shaikh Saduq 301; “Behar al-anwar” 52/190; and
“Montakhab al-athar”, 427

[^13]: “Cattle”, Surah n.6, verse 163.

[^14]: “The Cow”, 213 and “The Family of Imran”, 19 and “Counsel”, 14
and “Crouching, 17.

[^15]: See chapter 'The Jinn” verses 27 & 28.

[^16]: In creditable Shi'ite Traditions it is said that the Holy Prophet
(S) informed Ali (a.s.) of all of the matters needed by man and he (Ali)
collected and put these down in a book called « جامعة =collection»,
which was kept by Ahlu'l bait as a scientific legacy.. We have also seen
much of this book in Sunni Traditions. We will discuss this book further
in the future. If God wills.

[^17]: Tirmidi “As-Sahih”, 5/275; Tafsir al-Quran tradition \# 3090;
Al-Musnad 3/283-old printing; Al-Khasaes 20, 21, Egypt.

[^18]: Al-Khasaes, 20, Egypt, and Tafsir al-Tabary, 10/46.

[^19]: Al-Musnad 1/150, old-print, 2/319, 1286 A.H. Research by Ahmad
Muhammad Shaker and “Al-durrul Mansoor” 7/29 and Tafsir Ibn Kaseer
2/333.

[^20]: Al-Musnad 2/322 1296 A.H; Majma'az-zawaed 7/29 and Durrul Mansoor
3/209.

[^21]: Al-Khases, Al-Nesai, 20, Egypt and exists in a mention of Sa'ads
tradition in Al-Dorrul Mansoor 3/209.

[^22]: Mostadrak al-Sahihain 3/51, Riyadh.

[^23]: ‘Musnad’ Ahmad ibn Hanbal 1/156, tradition \#4, Research of Ahmad
Muhammad Shaker, Egypt 1368, old printing volume 1, p. 3.

[^24]: (Tabari ‘Tarikh-e-Rosol wal Molook’ 2/514, printed by Dar
al-Kutub, and “Sharhe Nahj’ 10/182, printed by: Muhammad Abufazl
Ebrahim, Egypt 1386, etc.)

[^25]: Tirmidhi, as-Sahih 5,636, tradition 3719 and Sunan-e-ibn-Majeh
1/44 tradition 119 and al-Musnad 4/164 and History of the Caliphs, 169.

[^26]: Ibn Hesham 4/641/ and Tabakatul Kubra 2/169, Uyunal-athar 2/271,
Beirut 1974, and Al-Bedayeh wan-Nehayeh 7/344.

[^27]: Tirmidhi 5,632, Tradition \#3712, Al-Mustadrak 3/110-111,
AlBedayeh wan-Nehayeh 67/345, and Al-Musnad 5/356.

[^28]: Al-Riyazul Nazarath 2/268 1372, Cairo.

[^29]: Al-Musnad 4/136 old print, also see Kanzul a’mal.

[^30]: Tirmidhi 5/59-658 tradition 3775 and Ibn Majeh 1/15, tradition
144 and Al-Musnad 4/172.

[^31]: Sunan-e-ibn-e-Dawood 4/107 tradition 2475.

[^32]: Al-Musnad 1/74.

[^33]: Nahjul Balaghe, sermon 107, also ‘Sobhe Saleh’ 158): and also;
‘Nahjul Balaghe, sermon 103.

[^34]: We are hopeful that Gods assistance we will be able to arrange
these lectures and publish them.

[^35]: In Arabic, ‘Salat’ means prayer, ‘Soum’ means thrift, ‘Hajj’
means intention and ‘Zakat’ means growth, or cleanliness.

[^36]: The Family of Imran: 123-123.

[^37]: ‘The Believer’: 51.

[^38]: The sanctification of bread and wine called ‘The Lords’ supper’
is performed in remembrance of the Israelis flight from Egypt or
(Passover). This is one of the most important Christian rites. They
believe that during this rite the priest performs the miracle of
changing the bread and wine into the blood and fliesh of Jesus. (Mathew,
chapter 26, verses: 266, 27, and 28, Luke, ch.22, verses; 19.

[^39]: -Circumcision is a definite law of the Torah (you and your
descendant must all agree to circumcise every male among you) Genesis
17:10, 11 and (From now on you must circumcise every baby boy when he is
eight years old). But among the Christians it was abolished on the order
of the Apotle Paul and his like and other words the religious creed was
altered. (Galatians 2:7-10, Acts 15)

[^40]: In the summer of 325 AD, nearly three hundred Bishops of Eastern
cities gathered in the city of Nicaea near constantinople and after
lengthy discussions adopted a formal statement of the tenets of
Christian faith, establishing the primary principles of Christian
thought, chiefly the doctrine of the trinity. (See V. M. Miller: The
History of Civilization 9/345, and John Nass: History of Religious
Communities. 425)

[^41]: Saduq: Kamaluddin 576, Tehran 1390, Behar al-anwar 873, also
Majma-ul Bayan 10/462, also Tafseer al-Borhan 4/444 and Tafseer al-Safyy
2/802.

[^42]: Saduq: Kamaluddin 576, Tehran 1390, Behar al-anwar 8/3, also
Majma-ul Bayan 10/462, also Tafseer al-Borhan 4/444 and Tafseer al-Safyy
2/802.

[^43]: “Musnad al-Telyasi” tradition 2178 and “Musnad Ahmad” 3/94,84 and
“Sahih Muslim” sharhe Nowawi 16/219, Ketab al-a'mal and “Sahih Bokhari”
Ketab al-Anbiya 2/171 and “Kanzul A'mal” 11/123.

[^44]: “Sahih Bokhari” Sharhe fath al-Bari 17/63 and “Sonan ibn Majeh”
tradition 3994, “Masnad Ahmad” 2/327, 369,450, 511, 527 and “Kanzul
a'mal” 11/123.

[^45]: For example see “Khamsoon wa me'ata sahabi Mokhtalef” 2/45-52.

[^46]: Proof of this statement is the undertaking of future
discussion-If God will.


