The Marriage of Fatimah with Imam Ali
=====================================

When Fatimah (s.a.) grew youth, the great companions hurried to the
Prophet (S) one after the other so that he might honor them by marrying
his pure daughter to them but the Prophet (S) responded to none of them.
From those who had asked the Prophet (S) for his daughter’s hand was Abu
Bakr whom the Prophet (S) refused his request and said to him, ‘I am
waiting, regarding her, for the Fate (of Allah).’ After him came Umar
and the Prophet (S) replied to him as he had replied to his former
companion.[^1]

The Prophet (S) announced that the marriage of Fatimah (s.a.) was in the
hand of Allah and he himself had nothing to do concerning the matter.
When Muslims knew that, they refrained from asking the Prophet (S) for
his daughter’s hand any more.

Sometime later, some companions met Imam Ali (a.s.) and mentioned to him
his close kinship to the Prophet (S), his great jihad for Islam, and his
support to the Prophet (S) in all his battles and situations. They asked
him to propose to Fatimah (s.a.) and win the honor of the Prophet’s
affinity. Imam Ali (a.s.) went to the Prophet (S) hesitatingly because
of shyness. He came to the Prophet (S) lowering his sight to the ground.
The Prophet (S) asked him,

‘What do you want, my brother?’

Imam Ali (a.s.) was silent for a while out of shyness and then said, ‘O
messenger of Allah, I remembered Fatimah.’

The Prophet (S) answered smilingly while delight appeared on his face,
‘Welcome! Allah has ordered to marry my daughter to you.’[^2]

Imam Ali’s heart was filled with delight for the honor that Allah
granted him. He was the Prophet’s cousin and then he was going to be his
son-in-law. It has been mentioned in some tafsirs that this verse,

***“And He it is Who has created man from the water, then He has made
for him blood relationship and marriage relationship, and your Lord is
powerful.” 25:54***

concerned Imam Ali (a.s.).[^3]

The Prophet (S) told his companions that Allah had ordered him to marry
his daughter to Imam Ali (a.s.). He said to them, ‘An angel came and
said to me: O messenger of Allah, Allah sends you greeting and says to
you: I have married Fatimah to Ali in the high Heaven, so you marry her
to him in the earth.’[^4]

Then, the Prophet (S) went to Fatimah (s.a.) and said to her, ‘I marry
you to the best one of my umma. He is the most knowledgeable, the most
prudent and the first Muslim.’[^5]

On another occasion, he said to her, ‘O Fatimah, do you not know that
Allah observed the people of the earth, and then He chose your father
from among them and sent him a messenger, and once another He observed
and then He chose your husband and revealed to me so that I married him
(to my daughter) and took him my guardian?’[^6]

On a third occasion he said to her, ‘He (Imam Ali) is the first of my
companions in being Muslim, the most of them in knowledge, and the
greatest of them in prudence.’[^7]

All high qualities, ideals and values were available in Imam Ali (a.s.)
and therefore, Allah had chosen him a husband for the daughter of the
Prophet (S). In traditions it is mentioned that: “If Ali was not
created, there would be no equal for Fatimah.’[^8]

The Dowry of Fatimah
--------------------

The dowry of Fatimah (s.a.) was very simple. The Prophet (S) had
assigned it so to be an example for all the women of his nation so that
no man and no woman might remain unmarried because of high dowries.

The Prophet (S) said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘O Ali, do you have something
(to pay as dowry)?’

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘I have a sword, an armor, and a horse.’

The Prophet (S) said to him, ‘As for your horse, you need it, and as for
your sword, you cannot do without it, but as for your armor, you can
sell it.’[^9]

Imam Ali (a.s.) went to the market and sold his armor for four hundred
and eighty dirhams and came back with the amount knotted in the end of
his shirt,[^10] and put it before the Prophet (S). It was a very simple
dowry and it was less than what the poor might pay for their wives.

Her Furniture
-------------

The Prophet (S) took a handful of dirhams and gave them to Bilal to buy
with them some perfumes for Fatimah (s.a.), and other handfuls to Salman
and Umm Salamah to buy some furniture. It was no long until all
requirements of the wedding were prepared. The furniture of Fatimah
(s.a.) and Ali (a.s.) was the following:

1. A sheepskin to sleep on
2. A pillow of leather stuffed with palm-tree fibers
3. A bed made of palm-tree branches
4. A quern
5. A water skin
6. Two jars
7. Some pottery vessels

This furniture was very simple and cheap in people’s consideration, but
it was too valuable in Islam’s view. It was more precious than jewels
and expensive things that kings and wealthy people give to their wives.

The furniture was put before the Prophet (S). He looked at the pottery
and said, ‘Blessed are the people of a house whose most vessels are of
pottery.’

Allama al-Fartoosi described this house of Imam Ali and Fatimah in the
following poem by saying, “And your house that is too simple with what
its four corners contained. In a corner a mat beside it a jar was put,
and in another a bed of palm-tree branches there was, and clay vessels
that were the cups which were made by their owners hands, and a quern
was there that blistered the hand that milled barley, as if humbleness
with what it contained was a sign that everything worshipped.”[^11]

Lomnice concluded from the simplicity of Fatimah’s wedding that the
Prophet (S) hated Fatimah because he married her to a poor man and that
the furniture of her house was too simple. The ignorance of Lomnice
regarding Islam led him to this conclusion. His mind was built by the
Western life that did not understand Islam. Islam hates excessive
dowries so that to make marriage easy for all. The Prophet (S) said,
‘The best women of my community are those of less dowries.’[^12]

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) said, ‘A man, during the time of the messenger of
Allah, got married to a woman for a sura from the Qur’an,[^13] a dirham,
or some wheat.’[^14]

Once, the Prophet (S) married some man from his companions who possessed
nothing to a woman for a dowry of that he should teach his wife one sura
from the Qur’an.[^15] That dowry was called “the dowry of the sura”.

The Islamic Sharia encourages marriage with little dowries and cancels
superiority between spouses. It makes a Muslim man equal to a Muslim
woman, but these values were ignored by Lomnice who looked at things
only from the material angle.

The Sermon of Marriage
----------------------

On concluding the agreement of marriage, the Prophet (S) made this
speech before a crowd of his companions. He said,

“Praise be to Allah Who is praised for His blessing, worshipped by His
power, obeyed by His sovereignty, Who it is feared from His torment and
affliction, Whose command is executed in His heaven and in His earth,
Who has created the creation (people) by His power, distinguished them
with His commandments, glorified them by His religion, and honored them
by His prophet Muhammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and on his progeny.

Allah, Whose name has been blessed and Whose greatness has been exalted,
has made affinity (through marriage) as subsequent kinship and imposed
matter that He interlaces relatives and binds people by it. Allah the
Almighty says,

***“And He it is Who has created man from water, then He has made for
him blood relationship and marriage relationship, and your Lord is
powerful.” 25:54***

The command of Allah comes to His judgment and His judgment comes to His
fate. Every judgment has a fate, and every fate has a term, and every
term has a prescription.

***“Allah makes to pass away what He wills and establishes what He
wills, and with Him is the basis of the Book.” 13:39***

Allah the Almighty has ordered me to marry Fatimah to Ali. Now, I make
you witness that I marry Fatimah to Ali for four hundred weights of
silver (as dowry), if he agrees, due to the authentic Sunna and the
obligatory duty. May Allah gather them together, bless them, make their
offspring good, and make their progeny the keys to mercy, the source of
wisdom, and safety to the nation. I say this and ask Allah to forgive me
and forgive you.”

Imam Ali (a.s.) was not present when the Prophet (S) was delivering the
sermon of marriage for he was away to carry out something for the
Prophet (S). After the end of the sermon, he came. When the Prophet (S)
saw him, he smiled and said,

“O Ali, Allah has ordered me to marry Fatimah to you, and I have done
for four hundred weights of silver.”[^16]

Then, the Prophet (S) asked Imam Ali (a.s.) to speak, and Imam Ali
(a.s.) said,

“Praise be to Allah Who has been near to His praisers, approached His
askers, promised the Paradise for whoever fears Him, and warned with
Fire whoever disobeys Him. We praise Him for His eternal favor, ask Him
for assistance and to guide us, believe in Him, ask Him to suffice all
our needs, and bear witness that there is no god but Allah alone with no
partner with Him a witness that fits and pleases Him, and that Muhammad
is His servant and messenger, may Allah send blessings on him a blessing
that takes him closer to Allah, favors, exalt, and chooses him. Marriage
is from that which Allah has ordered and from that which pleases Him.
This is the messenger of Allah. He has married his daughter Fatimah to
me for a dowry of five hundred dirhams, and I have agreed. Ask him and
witness on that.”

Then the Prophet said, “I marry my daughter to you as the Beneficent One
has willed for you. I have accepted what Allah has accepted for her. The
best son-in-law, and the best companion you are, and Allah’s pleasure
with you suffices you.”[^17]

Then Imam Ali (a.s.) prostrated himself before Allah as gratefulness for
this great blessing that Allah had endowed him with. After that, the
Prophet (S) prayed to Allah for Imam Ali (a.s.) and Fatimah (s.a.)
saying, “May Allah bless you, prosper you, unite between you and produce
much good from you.”[^18]

The conclusion of marriage was held in the mosque of the Prophet
(S).[^19] The Prophet (S) ordered a vessel of unripe dates to be offered
to the attendants to eat from it.

The Banquet of Marriage
-----------------------

On the night of wedding, the Prophet said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘O Ali,
there must be a banquet for the bride.’[^20]

Imam Ali (a.s.) had nothing in order to prepare the banquet. Sa’d bin
Ubadah offered a sheep and some men from the Ansar offered some corn.
Food was prepared and Muslims were invited for dinner. The Prophet (S)
gave some dirhams to Imam Ali (a.s.) and asked him to buy some oil,
dates and cheese. When Imam Ali (a.s.) bought those things, the Prophet
(S) uncovered his arms and began splitting the dates and mixing them
with the oil and cheese and so he made “heiss”[^21] and offered it to
the invitees.[^22] After having dinner, the invitees congratulated Imam
Ali (a.s.) and prayed to Allah to bless his marriage.

The Prophet (S) said to his daughter Fatimah (s.a.), “Do you know Ali’s
position to me? He supported me while he was twelve years old, stroke
with the sword before me when he was sixteen, killed heroes when he was
nineteen, relieved my grieves when he was twenty and plucked up the gate
of Khaybar when he was twenty-two years old.”[^23]

The House
---------

The house in which Imam Ali and Fatimah (peace be on them) had got
married was one of Haritha bin an-Nu’man’s houses. First, the Prophet
(S) was shy to take the house, but when Harithah understood that, he
hurried to the Prophet (S) saying, ‘O messenger of Allah, I and my
properties are for Allah and for His messenger. By Allah, nothing is
more beloved to me than what you take from me, and what you take (from
me) is more beloved to me than what you leave (to me).’ The Prophet (S)
thanked and prayed Allah for him. Then Fatimah (s.a.) moved to live in
this house.[^24]

The Wedding
-----------

The Prophet asked his wife Umm Salamah to take his daughter Fatimah
(s.a.) to the house of Imam Ali (a.s.) that was next to the mosque of
the Prophet (S). So Umm Salamah and some women from the Muhajireen and
the Ansar carried Fatimah (s.a.) home in a procession while chanting
some songs and poetry. After having offered the Isha’ Prayer, the
Prophet (S) went to Imam Ali’s house and Umm Ayman received him there.
He asked her, ‘Is my brother here?’

She said, ‘O messenger of Allah, may my father and mother die for you!
Who is your brother?’

He said, ‘Ali bin Abi Talib.’

How is he your brother whereas you have married your daughter to him?’

He said, ‘It is so, Umm Aymen.’

The Prophet (S) came in and the two spouses got up out of respect and
reverence. The Prophet (S) asked Fatimah (s.a.) to bring him some water
and she did. He drank a sip and then ejected it back into the cup. He
asked Fatimah (s.a.) to get up and he sprinkled some of that water on
her chest and head. Then, he raised his head towards the heaven saying,
‘O Allah, I ask You to protect her and her progeny from cursed Satan.’

Then the Prophet (S) asked Imam Ali (a.s.) to bring another cup of water
and he did. The Prophet drank a sip and ejected it back into the cup.
Then he poured some of the water of the cup on Imam Ali’s head and
prayed Allah for him saying, ‘O Allah, I ask You to protect him and his
progeny from cursed Satan.’ He asked him to turn back and when Imam Ali
(a.s.) turned back, the Prophet poured the rest of the water, prayed for
Imam Ali (a.s.) and asked him to go in to his wife.[^25]

By getting married to Fatimah (s.a.), Imam Ali (a.s.) got further honor
and importance before people. It has been mentioned in traditions that,
“Ali had a high rank before people during the life of Fatimah
(s.a.).”[^26]

Once, the Prophet said to Fatimah (s.a.), “I have married you to a
master in this life and a master in the afterlife. No one hates him
except a polytheist.”[^27]

On the night of her wedding, Fatimah (s.a.) took off her wedding dress
and gave it to a poor young woman. The following day, the Prophet (S)
visited her and found that she was not wearing her wedding dress. He
asked why and she said, ‘O father, a poor young woman knocked the door
asking for a dress. I wanted to give her my old dress but then I
remembered this saying of Allah,

***“You will not attain unto piety until you spend of that which you
love.” 3:92***

Therefore, I gave her my new dress that I loved.’[^28]

This blessed house (of Imam Ali and Fatimah) was established in the
second year of Hijra.[^29] And it was said other than this. It was said
that Fatimah (s.a.) was ten years old when she got married[^30] while
Imam Ali (a.s.) was twenty-one years and five months.[^31]

The House that Fatimah Lived In
-------------------------------

The Prophet (S) built his daughter a house adjacent to the Great Mosque
and made a door in it that was opened to the mosque. When the Prophet
(S) ordered all the doors that were opened to the mosque to be closed,
he excluded the door of Fatimah (and Ali)’s house as a kind of honoring
and glorifying.[^32]

Ibn Umar considered the Prophet’s (S) closing all the doors of the
companions’ houses that were opened to the mosque except the door of
Imam Ali (a.s.) as one of the merits that Imam Ali (a.s.) had got.[^33]

The House Affairs
-----------------

Fatimah bint Asad, Imam Ali’s mother, lived with the Imam in the same
house. So he divided the house affairs between his mother and his wife
Fatimah bint Muhammad (S). The internal house affairs such as serving
food and the like were his wife’s duty whereas the external affairs were
his mother’s.[^34]

Fatimah, the Prophet’s daughter, served food for her husband and
children. She milled mostly barley in the quern and sometimes wheat.
Then she kneaded and baked it. Fatimah (s.a.) lived as the prophets and
their guardians lived. She was ascetic and very simple in all sides of
her life.

She swept and cleaned the house with her bare hands. She wove clothes
for her husband and children. The shirt that Imam Ali (a.s.) put on in
wars had been woven by her.[^35]

Imam Ali (a.s.) often helped Fatimah (s.a.) in the house affairs. He
said, “Once, the messenger of Allah (S) visited us while Fatimah was
near the cooking pot and I was picking out lentils. He said, ‘O Abul
Hasan, listen to what I say, and I do not say except from my Lord. Every
man, who helps his wife in her house, Allah will write for him as much
as the hairs on his body (the reward of) worship of a year; fasting in
the day and worshipping all the night, and Allah will give him like the
reward of the patient and the righteous.’”[^36]

In some sources, it has been mentioned that the Prophet (S) had
determined for Fatimah (s.a.) the work inside the house and for Imam Ali
(a.s.) the work outside the house.[^37]

The life of Imam Ali (a.s.) and Fatimah (s.a.) was full of love and
friendliness. About that Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘By Allah, I did never
anger her or force her to do something (unwillingly) until Allah took
her to the better world. She also did never anger me nor did she disobey
me in anything at all. When I looked at her, my griefs and sorrows were
relieved.’[^38]

Besides the tire and hardship she faced in milling the food for her
family, she milled food for her weak and old neighbors just for the sake
of Allah.

Salman al-Farisi narrated, “One day, I passed by Fatimah’s house and
heard al-Hasan and al-Husayn, who were young children, crying. I pitied
them and said to Fatimah from behind the door, ‘I want to carry al-Hasan
and al-Husayn.’

She said to me, ‘O Salman, I have no veil on my head.’

I threw my aba to her. She veiled herself with it and went to al-Hasan
and al-Husayn. I sat near the quern that she was milling with it and I
began running it. I found some blood on the shaft of the quern and
became astonished. I asked Fatimah about it and she said that she milled
barley and wheat for the poor people of Medina who had no querns. She
received them kindly and milled their food for them.’[^39]

One day, the Prophet came to her and found her milling while wearing a
garment of camel hair. He cried and said to her, ‘Be patient with the
bitterness of this life for the sake of the bliss of the afterlife
tomorrow.’[^40]

While she was milling she was reciting this saying of Allah, (and
whatever is with Allah is better and more lasting. 28:60).

The Prophet (S) recommended Fatimah (s.a.) not to insist on Imam Ali
(a.s.) to buy her anything from the pleasures of the worldly life. She
said to Imam Ali (a.s.), “The messenger of Allah (S) had forbidden me
from asking you for anything. He said to me, ‘Do not ask your cousin for
anything. If he himself brings you something (accept it); otherwise, do
not ask him for anything.’”

Fatimah (s.a.) often carried water for her weak neighbors. She filled
the skin from wells and carried it to them until her back was
affected.[^41]

Fatimah’s Children are the Prophet’s Children
---------------------------------------------

Many true traditions have been transmitted from the Prophet (S) showing
that he had considered Fatimah’s children as his. All the Prophet’s
children died in their early childhood, and so the polytheists rejoiced
at that and said that the Prophet had no offspring; therefore, Allah
revealed to the Prophet these verses,

***“Surely We have given you (al-Kawthar) the Fount (of abundance).
Therefore pray to your Lord and make a sacrifice. Surely your enemy is
the one who shall be without posterity.” 108:1-3***

Exegetes say that al-Kawthar was Fatimah (s.a.), the principal of all
the women of the world and that the Prophet’s posterity was from her.
The Prophet (S) loved his grandchildren from the deep of his heart and
he saw that they would be the continuity of his life. Once in their
early childhood, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (peace be on them) were walking
and stumbled. The Prophet (S) descended from the minbar, carried them,
and said, ‘Allah the Great is true when He says,

***“…your possessions and children are but a trial. 8:28”.’***

When he heard one of them crying, he said to his daughter Fatimah
(s.a.), ‘Why are they crying? Do you not know that their crying
distresses me?’

The Prophet (S) himself took care of them and managed their affairs. One
night, he heard that al-Hasan (a.s.) wanted some water. He brought some
water. Al-Husayn (a.s.) wanted to drink water but the Prophet (S) gave
water to al-Hasan (a.s.) first. Fatimah (s.a.) said to her father, ‘As
if al-Hasan is more beloved to you!.’

The Prophet said, ‘No! But al-Hasan asked for water first.’ Then he
wrapped them with one wrap and said to them, ‘I and you will be in one
place on the Day of Resurrection.’[^42]

The following are some traditions declaring that Fatimah’s children were
the Prophet’s offspring.

1. Fatimah bint Imam al-Husayn narrated from her grandmother Fatimah
az-Zahra’ (a.s.) that the Prophet had said, ‘All the children of Adam
belong to their agnation except Fatimah’s children that I am their
father and I am their agnation.’[^43]

2. The Prophet (S) said, ‘For all children of a father there is an
agnation that they belong to except Fatimah’s children that I am their
guardian and I am their agnation. They have been created from my clay.
Woe unto whoever denies their preference. Whoever loves them Allah loves
him, and whoever hates them Allah hates him.’[^44]

3. The Prophet (S) said, ‘The agnation of every children belongs to
their father except Fatimah’s children. I am their father and I am their
agnation.’[^45]

4. The Prophet (S) said, ‘Every children of a mother belong to an
agnation, except Fatimah’s children that I am their guardian and I am
their agnation.’[^46]

Nevertheless, the Umayyads denied the Prophet’s fatherhood to Fatimah’s
children and claimed that one’s daughter’s child was not considered as
one’s child. Their poet said, “Our children are the children of our
sons, but as for our daughters, their children are the children of
strange men.”

Islam has refuted this notion of the pre-Islamic age and not
differentiated between one’s daughter’s children and son’s children.

It is worth mentioning that we mention this story here. Aamir ash-Sha’bi
narrated,

“One day, I was with al-Hajjaj.[^47] It was the day of Eid ul-Adha. He
turned towards me and said, ‘O Aamir, by what do people approach Allah
on this day?’

I said, ‘People approach Allah through sacrifices.’

Al-Hajjaj said, ‘How about you if I shall sacrifice a man from the
adherents of al-Hasan and al-Husayn?’

Al-Hajjaj ordered his men to bring that man, and they did before no
long. He was an old man tied with heavy ties. Al-Hajjaj shouted at this
old man who was Yahya bin Ya’mur, ‘Are you still in your deviation from
the truth?’

The old man asked why and al-Hajjaj said to him, ‘You claim that
al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the children of the messenger of Allah (S).’

Yahya confirmed that al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them, were the
Prophet’s children and he gave proofs on that. He recited this verse,

***“Say: Come let us call our sons and your sons, and our women and your
women, and ourselves and yourselves.” 3:61***

and said that it was al-Hasan and al-Husayn who were meant by (our
sons).

Al-Hajjaj cried out harshly, ‘Do you have other than this verse or
otherwise I shall behead you?’

Yahya recited this other verse,

***“…and of his descendants, Dawood and Sulaiman and Ayyub… and Isa
(Jesus)…” 6:84-85***

and said that the Holy Qur’an declared that Jesus (a.s.) was from the
posterity of Prophet Abraham (a.s.) though Prophet Jesus (a.s.) had been
born with no father.

Al-Hajjaj said, ‘Jesus was from Abraham’s children because of his mother
Mary.’

Yahya asked how long it was between Mary and Abraham and al-Hajjaj said
it was some generations.

Then Yahya said, ‘Between al-Hasan and al-Husayn and the messenger of
Allah (S) there was no one save Fatimah. So are they not the Prophet’s
children?’

Al-Hajjaj looked at the ground and pondered for a while after being
refuted by Yahya. Then, he said to his men, ‘Untie his ties and chains
and give him ten thousand dinars in spite of me.’

I (Aamir) followed after Yahya to see what he would do with the ten
thousand dinars. I saw him standing in a square called Rahbat al-Kufa
while distributing the money among the poor and saying, ‘This is from
the blessings of al-Hasan and al-Husayn.’[^48]

The Abbasids were not better than the Umayyads in this concern. In fact,
they were much worse. They hated the Alawids bitterly, chased them
everywhere, threw many of them into dark prisons, and killed too many
others. The Abbasid kings donated great gifts to the poets who
dispraised the Alawids in their presence. Anyhow, we do not want to
mention their shameful conducts in this concern in order not to
expatiate.

[^1]: Tabaqat ibn Sa’d, vol.8 p.11, Tareekh al-Khamees, vol.1 p.407,
Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.29.

[^2]: Noor Al-Absar, p.42, Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.318, Mustadrak
al-Hakim, vol.3

[^3]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol.9 p.175.

[^4]: Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.32.

[^5]: Jam’ al-Jawami’, vol.6 p.398.

[^6]: Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.32.

[^7]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.153.

[^8]: Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.5 p.36, Majma’ az-Zawa’id, 6
p.101, Ar-Riyadh an-Nadhirah, vol.2 p.194.

[^9]: Kifayat at-Talib, p.166, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.120.

[^10]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.7 p.14.

[^11]: Malhamat (epic of) Ahlul Bayt by al-Fartoosi, vol.1 p.35.

[^12]: Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqeeh, vol.3 p.243.

[^13]: To teach his wife a sura from the Qur’an as her dowry.

[^14]: Tahthib al-Ahkam, vol.7 p.366.

[^15]: Sahih Muslim, vol.1 p.545.

[^16]: Kashful Ghummah, p.358-359, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.132.

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 43 p.132.

[^18]: Noor al-Absar, p.42, ar-Riyadh an-Nadhirah, vol.2 p.183,
Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.29.

[^19]: Khashf al-Ghummah, vol.358.

[^20]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.7 p.14.

[^21]: The name of such food.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.132

[^23]: Amali as-Saduq, p.483.

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.40 p.6.

[^25]: The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol.1 p.52-53.

[^26]: Ghareeb al-Hadith by ibn al-Jawzi, vol.2 p.455, an-Nihayah fee
Ghareeb al-Hadith, 5 p.158.

[^27]: Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.43.

[^28]: Know that I am Fatimah, vol.2 p.665.

[^29]: Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.2 p.187.

[^30]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.10 p.4.

[^31]: Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.2 p.187.

[^32]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.2 p.26, al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer, vol.2
p.246.

[^33]: An-Nafahaat al-Qudsiyyah fee al-Anwar al-Fatimiyyah, p.135 quoted
from Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.2 p.26, Usd al-Ghabah, vol.3 p.214,
Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.319.

[^34]: Al-Istee’ab (printed on the margins of al-Isabah), vol.4 p.363,
Tahthib al-Kamal, vol.3 p.248.

[^35]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.39 p.54.

[^36]: Ibid., vol.101 p.132.

[^37]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.6 p.104.

[^38]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.133 quoted from Amali at-Toosi.

[^39]: Know that I am Fatimah, vol.4 p.547.

[^40]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.295.

[^41]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.82.

[^42]: Fatimah az-Zahra’ and the Fatimids, p.43.

[^43]: Tareekh Baghdad, vol.11 p.285.

[^44]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.216.

[^45]: Thakha'ir al-Uqba, p.221.

[^46]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.220.

[^47]: Al-Hajjaj bin Yousuf ath-Thaqafi was the cruelest wali of the
Umayyads.

[^48]: Know that I am Fatimah, vol.3 p.193-195, and mentioned briefer in
Tafsir al-Qurtubi, vol.7 p.31 and al-Mustadrak ala as-Sahihayn, vol.3
p.180.


