Electing Imam Ali for the Islamic Caliphate
===========================================

Fatimah (s.a.) witnessed all the events that took place after the
conquest of Mecca. She saw people, groups by groups embrace Islam which
prevailed over the Arabic East and other areas in the world. However,
the most wonderful thing that she saw was the entering of the people of
Quraysh into Islam unwillingly and submissively. They were low and mean
then whereas they had tried their best to put out the light of Islam and
do away with the messenger of Allah. They left no way of terror and
violence against the Prophet (S). They led great armies and parties to
fight him until Allah made him defeat them all and afflict them with
lowness and meanness. Then, the Prophet (S) purified the House of Allah
(the Kaaba) from the idols and then the call of “Allahu Akbar” rose high
in all sides of the Inviolable Mosque and the rule of the Qur'an
prevailed in the land that was a stage for the superstitions and bad
traditions of the era of ignorance.

This period was the most important one in Fatimah’s life where she saw
her father after his great victory caring for something very important
concerning the welfare of his nation that would save the nation from
deviation and going astray. This thing was the appointment of the leader
after him.

The caliphate after the Prophet (S) was the most important position in
Islam because it was the continuity of the Prophet’s rule and the
continuity of his Sharia. Because the Prophet (S) paid great attention
to the matter of caliphate, he said, ‘He, who dies while he does not
know the imam of his time, will die as an unbeliever.’

The Prophet (S) was very careful of his nation’s affairs. He was very
kind and loving to his people. Therefore, he suffered disasters and
calamities in order to reform his nation and make it the first in
civilization and progress. Was it reasonable that he would leave his
nation as a victim for his enemies or to be tossed about by the waves?

It was not true at all that the Prophet (S) had ignored the matter of
caliphate and given vent to anarchy after him. This contradicted the
goal of his mission which was to spread Islam and its high ideals and
great morals among all peoples.

If the Prophet (S) ignored the matter of the rule after him, this would
lead to the destruction of the social pillars which Islam had built and
the destruction of the general life of Muslims. The crises and
misfortunes that the nation faced throughout its ages were, undoubtedly,
the result of keeping the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) away from the caliphate. It
was the political avidities and the greediness of authority that
prevented from fulfilling the Prophet’s recommendations and wills
concerning his family.

Anyhow, the nation suffered and is still suffering much because of
separating the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) from the rule. Muhammad al-Keilani
says, ‘The people disputed on the position of caliphate in a way that
was unequalled in other nations. They committed for the sake of that
what we ourselves refrain from nowadays. And consequently, many souls
were ruined, towns were destroyed, villages were torn down, houses were
burnt, women were made widows, children were made orphans and great
masses of Muslims were killed.’[^1]

Allah had sent the Prophet (S) as mercy for mankind. Hence, would he
leave his nation in anarchy after him without choosing a leader to lead
it after his death? Let us see who that leader was!

The Prophet Nominates Ali
-------------------------

The caliphate was not to be determined due to desires and fancies
because it was from the fatal matters of the nation and on it all the
nation’s goals and affairs depended.

The certain thing due to the scientific studies and the serious
pondering on the Prophet’s conducts and the sources of the Islamic
history make it clear that the Prophet (S) had nominated Imam Ali (a.s.)
for the caliphate and made him the imam of Muslims after him. Many true
mutawatir[^2] traditions confirmed this fact. The Prophet (S), on many
occasions, praised Imam Ali (a.s.) and showed his high position. Once he
said that Imam Ali (a.s.) was the gate of his town of knowledge, another
once he said that Imam Ali (a.s.) was with the truth and the truth was
with him; third, Ali was with the Qur'an and the Qur'an was with Ali,
and that he was to the Prophet (S) as Aaron was to Moses. All these
facts were proved on the day of al-Ghadeer when the Prophet (S) gathered
the Muslims and announced the caliphate, emirate and guardianship of
Imam Ali (a.s.) over the Muslims, and then the Prophet’s companions and
his wives paid homage to the Imam. Umar bin al-Khattab congratulated him
saying, ‘Congratulations O son of Abi Talib! You have become my guardian
and the guardian of every believing man and believing woman.’ The homage
to Imam Ali (a.s.) on the day of al-Ghadeer was a part of the mission of
Islam and whoever denied it was not reasonable.

### Why the Prophet Nominated Ali

Many people ask why the Prophet (S) had nominated Imam Ali (a.s.) for
the caliphate and preferred him to all his cousins and companions. We
give the answer by the following points:

1. Allah the Almighty had ordered his messenger to appoint Imam Ali
(a.s.) a caliph after him and take the homage of Muslims to him on the
day of Ghadeer Khum. Allah had revealed to his messenger this verse,

***“O Messenger, deliver what bas been revealed to you from your Lord;
and if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people.” 5:67***

After this warning, the Prophet (S) gathered the hajjis, who were coming
back from the hajj, in the desert of Ghadeer Khum and declared to them
what Allah had ordered him to do. He announced to them that Imam Ali
(a.s.) would be, according to Allah’s decree, the general leader over
the Muslim community, and so all Muslims paid allegiance to him as we
have mentioned before.

2. The Prophet (S) had compared the prophethood to the caliphate when he
invited his family to faith and to believe in his mission saying to
them, ‘Which of you supports me to be the caliph after me?’ No one
responded to him except Imam Ali (a.s.) who was too young then. The
Prophet (S) put his hand on Ali’s neck and addressed his family saying,
‘This is my brother and caliph (successor). You have to listen to and
obey him.’ The Prophet’s care for the caliphate did not come at the last
days of his life, but it was since the beginning of his mission.

3. The Prophet (S) looked thoughtfully at his family and companions and
he did not find anyone who was worthy of this position after him except
Imam Ali (a.s.) who believed the Prophet (S), believed in his mission,
and understood his values and goals. The Prophet (S) himself had
educated Imam Ali (a.s.) and fed him with the deep faith in Allah, the
ideals of Islam, and the noble values. It is completely untrue to say
that the Prophet (S) had chosen Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) for the
position of caliphate just because he was the closest one to him and the
father of his two grandsons, because the matter of prophethood is too
far above that.

The Prophet (S) had chosen Imam Ali (a.s.) as the general leader over
his nation because Imam Ali (a.s.) had qualifications and abilities that
no one else ever had.

A. Imam Ali (a.s.) was the most knowledgeable among all the Prophet’s
companions and the most aware of the rulings and the affairs of the
religion especially in judgment. The Prophet (S) said, ‘Ali is the best
judge of you all.’ Umar said, ‘Were it not for Ali’s existence, Umar
would perish.’ There was no one at all equal to him in judgment. We have
mentioned some examples of his judgments in “the Encyclopedia of Ameerul
Mo'minin” under the title of “The Imam’s judgment (is) from the
treasures of the Islamic intellect”.

As the Imam was the most aware of all Muslims in the rulings of
judgment, he was also the most aware in the political and administrative
affairs besides the systems of government. Imam Ali’s document of
instructions to Malik al-Ashtar was a clear proof on that. This
political document is a full constitution that no other constitution
whether in Islam or other than Islam is like it in its
comprehensiveness. In this document, Imam Ali (a.s.) deals with the
government’s duties towards the subjects and its responsibility for
protecting them from poverty, oppression and persecution. He also
determines the duties of rulers, statesmen and officials, and the
qualifications that they must have such as fitness, loyalty and
awareness of the affairs that they would undertake, besides that they
should have high morals and manners and be pious and bound by their
religion especially toward the wealth of the state. This document has
many other important points showing the depth of Imam Ali’s policy.

Moreover, his letters to his governors and officials are a source of
intelligent policies and they show that he was too expert in the
political affairs. As Imam Ali (a.s.) was the most expert in the
political affairs, he was also the most aware of all Muslims in the
other branches of knowledge such as theology, philosophy, mathematics,
astronomy, jurisprudence, linguistics and others.

Prof. Abbas Mahmud al-Aqqad says, ‘He (Imam Ali) opened many doors in
knowledge that were more than thirty sciences. With these huge treasures
of knowledge that the Imam had, how would the Prophet (S) not choose him
for the position of caliphate which was the most sensitive position in
the Muslim society and which the dignity, independence and safety of his
nation depended on?’

The infinite scientific powers that the imam had, make reason determine
with no doubt that he was to be nominated for the caliphate other than
anyone else. Allah says,

***“Say: Are those who know and those who do not know alike?” 39:9***

It is nonsense to say that it is possible to prefer the good one to the
better one as some people believe, because it contradicts the Islamic
values which make it obligatory to prefer the knowledgeable people to
others and regard their high position and rank. Of course, keeping
knowledgeable people away from their real position is aggression against
knowledge and full destruction to the values of the nation.

B. Imam Ali (a.s.) was the bravest and the most courageous one at all.
His unique courage had astonished all. He had said, ‘If all the Arabs
gathered together to fight me, I would not run away from them.’ Islam
had succeeded by his sword and based on his jihad. He was the man of the
memorable situations and famous days; the battles of Badr, Hunayn and
al-Ahzab when he harvested the heads of the polytheists, destroyed their
notables and filled the houses of the tribes of Quraysh, that declared
war against Allah and His messenger, with sorrow and mourning.

Every sedition ever rose against Islam was put out by Imam Ali (a.s.).
The Prophet (S) preferred him to all his companions and family, and
entrusted him with the general leadership of his armies. He entered no
war unless he was the victor. It was he who subjugated the Jews and
conquered their firm forts.

Courage is from the fundamental characteristics that a leader of a
nation must have. It is natural that if a leader is weak and coward, the
nation will face many crises that a weak leader cannot stand against.
Courage existed, physically and morally, in Imam Ali (a.s.), and this
was one of the reasons that made the Prophet (S) choose no other than
him for the leadership of the nation. Imam Ali (a.s.), due to his
unequaled courage and his other unique virtues, had been chosen (by
Allah) for the leadership of the nation even if (supposedly) there was
no text from the Prophet (S) on choosing him for this position.

C. One of the most important and most distinguished features that a
leader of a nation must have is self-denial and altruism. A leader must
prefer the interest of the nation to everything else and must preserve
its wealth. This feature was the most prominent one in Imam Ali’s
personality. When he assumed the leadership of the nation, he was
ascetic towards all pleasures of life and he denied all enjoyments. All
historians agreed on that he spared neither for himself nor for his
family any of the worldly pleasures. He was very careful in the state
wealth. He did spend nothing from that wealth on himself or his family.
He ruled the people with utmost justice and equity, and regarded all the
citizens equal in rights and duties.

Definitely, the Arabic East and elsewhere had never known a just ruler
like Imam Ali (a.s.) in his self denial, altruism, and not using the
authority for personal interests and political purposes.

D. And from the prominent features in Imam Ali’s personality was his
perfect piety and devotedness to Allah. He was the head of monotheists
and the imam of the pious. He said, ‘By Allah, if I am given the seven
continents with all what there is under their horizons in order to
disobey Allah in an ant that I plunder from it a crust of barley, I will
never do.’

Due to the consensus of the nation, Imam Ali (a.s.) was the greatest
propagandist to Allah after his brother and cousin Prophet Muhammad (S).
When Umar bin al-Khattab was killed, Abdurrahman bin Ouf insisted on
Imam Ali (a.s.) to accept the caliphate on condition that he would rule
the nation according to the policy of Umar and Abu Bakr, but Imam Ali
(a.s.) refused and insisted on that he would rule according to the Book
of Allah, the Sunna of His prophet and his own opinion. If he was eager
to gain authority, he definitely would have accepted this position and
then he would rule as he liked, and if Abdurrahman objected to him, he
could imprison or exile him.

Humanity, in all its history, did not see a ruler like Imam Ali (a.s.)
in piety, truthfulness and fairness away from all kinds of favoritism.
He spared no effort in applying pure justice among all people and not to
hear the moan of any wronged, deprived or poor one.

After all that, would the Prophet (S) nominate other than the imam for
the caliphate and guardianship after him? And if we accept the principle
of kinship which the Muhajireen adopted in the conference of al-Saqeefa,
then Imam Ali (a.s.) was worthier of the Prophet (S) than anyone else
because he was his cousin, son-in-law and the father of his two
grandsons.

(Sedeo) says, ‘If the principle of heredity was acknowledged, it would
be for the benefit of Ali since the beginning, and the keeping to it
would prevent the crises and disputes that sank Islam into blood. The
husband of Fatimah had the right of heredity as a legal heir of the
Prophet (S) and had the right of election.[^3]

Impartial pondering determines with no doubt that the Prophet (S) had
declared the imamate of Imam Ali (a.s.) and appointed him as the leader
for his nation not according to the principle of heredity, kinship, or
any other consideration, but because of Ali’s high personality,
perfection, and unequalled virtues. It is not true to say that the
Prophet (S) had ignored the matter of caliphate and left it
undetermined. This was too far from the Prophet (S) who was very careful
for the happiness and development of his nation and to keep it safe from
deviation and declination.

[^1]: The Influence of Shiism in the Arabic Literature, p. 15.

[^2]: Mutawatir is a tradition that comes successively and is ensured by
many chains of transmission.

[^3]: Rooh (spirit of) al-Islam, p.292.


