Immortal Tragedy
================

Sorrows and distresses attacked Fatimah (s.a.) when she knew that her
father, who was the dearest one to her at all, would leave for the
better world, and this world would be empty of this great personality.

The Prophet’s Last Illness
--------------------------

When the Prophet (S) came back from Mecca to Medina, his health was
indisposed and became worse day after another. He suffered a very bad
fever that when his wives or visitors put their hands on his garment,
they felt the heat. Beside him there was a vessel of water where he put
his hand into it and rubbed his holy face to lower the fever. He said,
‘I am still feeling the pain of the food that I have eaten in Khaybar. I
feel that my back has been broken because of that poison.’[^1]

Muslims, who were distressed and astonished, hurried to visit him. His
room was crowded with his companions. He announced to them his soon
death and recommended them of what would assure for them happiness and
success. He said to them, ‘O people, I am about to die and taken away. I
say to you to be excused before you. I have left among you the Book of
Allah the Almighty and my progeny…’

Then he took Imam Ali’s (a.s.) hand and said, ‘Here is Ali. He is with
the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali. They will not separate until they
will come to me at the pond (in the Paradise).’[^2]

The Prophet (S) was certain that he was going to die. He saw that he
would farewell the graveyards of Muslims and pray to Allah to forgive
the dead. In the night, he sent for Abu Muwayhibah and said to him, ‘I
was ordered to ask for forgiveness for the people of al-Baqee’[^3] and
so I sent for you to come with me.’

When the Prophet (S) arrived in al-Baqee’ Graveyard, he said, ‘Peace be
on you O people of the graves. Let you be delighted with what you have
been in, which is better than what (living) people are in. Seditions
have come like pieces of dark night one after the other. The last is
worse than the first.’

The Prophet (S) saw in which conditions some of his companions were and
what they would do later on, and so he congratulated the dead in the
graves for they would not witness the seditions that came and would come
after. The Prophet (S) said to Abu Muwayhibah, ‘O Abu Muwayhibah, I have
been given the keys of the treasuries of this world and the eternity in
it and then the Paradise. I have been asked to choose between this and
the meeting of my Lord and the Paradise.’

Abu Muwayhibah said astonishingly, ‘May my father and mother die for
you! Take the keys of the treasuries of this world and the eternity in
it and then the Paradise.’

The Prophet (S) replied, ‘O Abu Muwayhibah, no by Allah! I have chosen
the meeting of my Lord and the Paradise.’

Then the Prophet (S) prayed to Allah to forgive the dead of al-Baqee’
Graveyard and he went back home.[^4]

### The Army of Usama

The Prophet (S) saw factionalism among his companions and he became
certain that they would fulfill their plans to take the caliphate away
from his guardian and successor Imam Ali (a.s.). Hence, he thought to
rescue the situation by sending all his companions in an army to fight
the Romans so that his capital would be empty of them and thus Imam Ali
(a.s.) would assume the caliphate after his (the Prophet) death easily
and with no obstacles.

The Prophet (S) ordered all the notables of the Muhajireen and the Ansar
to join the army of Usama who was a young man. Among those men there
were Abu Bakr, Umar, Abu Ubayda bin al-Jarrah and Basheer bin Sa’d.[^5]
The Prophet (S) said to Usama, the leader of the army, ‘March to the
place where your father was killed and make the horsemen defeat them
(the Romans). I have entrusted you with the leadership of this army. In
the morning, attack the people of Ubna (in Syria) and meet them with
fire. Hurry up to precede the news. If Allah grants you victory over
them, do not remain there too long. Take guides with you, and make spies
and pioneers in the front.’

On the twenty-ninth of Safar, the army mutinied and no one of the
notable companions joined his battalion. The Prophet (S) was very angry
at that. He went out of his house in spite of his illness. He encouraged
his companions to join the army. He gave the banner to Usama and said to
him, ‘March by the name of Allah and for the sake of Allah. Fight those
who disbelieve in Allah.’

Usama marched with his army and camped in al-Jurf.[^6] The famous
companions slackened in joining the camp. They criticized and disparaged
the leader, young Usama. Umar said to him, ‘The messenger of Allah dies
while you are an emir over me?!’

This saying was conveyed to the Prophet (S) while he was badly ill
suffering bad fever and headache. He became very angry and distressed.
He went out of his house wrapped with a velvet garment and his head was
folded. He ascended the minbar and showed the people his anger about not
carrying out his orders. He said, ‘O people, what for is the saying of
someone of you that criticizes my appointing Usama as the emir? You have
criticized my appointing his father as emir before. By Allah, he was
worthy of the emirate and his son after him is worthy of it…’

He descended the minbar and went into his house.[^7] Then, he
recommended people to join the army of Usama by saying, ‘Prepare the
army of Usama!’, ‘March the army of Usama!’, ‘May Allah curse whoever
does not join the army of Usama!’

These firm orders and insistence of the Prophet (S) at his last hours of
life did not move the people’s determination. They slackened in joining
the army and justified their doing with different excuses, though the
Prophet (S) did not accept their excuses. Rather, he showed them his
anger and discontent.

Pondering on this grave event, one can conclude the following points:

1. In not joining the army and the criticizing of the appointing of
Usama as the emir, the companions wanted to seize the authority and
grasp the rule. Of course, if they went to the war and left the capital
of the Prophet (S), certainly they would lose the caliphate, and then
they would have no chance to oppose or resist.

2. The reason behind not entrusting the leadership of the army to anyone
of the notable companions was that they would take it as a means to
claim their worthiness of the caliphate. The Prophet (S) closed this
door, and if it was opened to them, they would cling to it with all
their power.

3. Islam seriously had cancelled the matter of agedness and it entrusted
the important positions in the state and the army to the well-qualified
and expert persons who would regard the interests of the nation above
all other considerations.[^8]

### Asking People’s Pardon

The Prophet’s health became worse and he began suffering severe pains.
He was certain that he was living his last hours. He sent for al-Fadhl
bin al-Abbas and asked him to support him to the mosque. Al-Fadhl led
the Prophet (S) to the mosque and helped him sit on the minbar. The
Prophet (S) asked al-Fadhl to call out that the prayer was to be
congregational. When people gathered, the Prophet (S) made a speech
saying, ‘O people, death is about to take me away from among you and you
shall not see me again in this situation…whoever I had whipped his back
here is my back, let him retaliate! Whoever I had taken some money from
him here is my money, let him take from it…Let no one of you say: I fear
enmity from the messenger of Allah. Surely, enmity is not from my deeds
or morals. The most beloved one of you to me is he who takes a right
which is on me to him, or absolves me from it so that I shall meet my
Lord while no one has a complaint against me…’

Some man said, ‘O messenger of Allah, you owe me three dirhams.’ The
Prophet (S) said, ‘As for me, I do not consider a talker a liar, nor do
I ask him to take an oath. How is that?’ The man said, ‘O messenger of
Allah, do you not remember that one day a beggar asked you (for help)
and you asked me to give him three dirhams and I did?’ The Prophet (S)
ordered the dirhams to be given to him, and then he kept on his speech.
He said, ‘O people, whoever had peculated something let him pay it
back…’

Some man got up and said, ‘O messenger of Allah, I have three dirhams
that I had peculated them…’ The Prophet (S) asked the man why he had
peculated them and he replied that he had been in need of them. The
Prophet (S) ordered al-Fadhl to take back the three dirhams from the
man, and he did. Then, the Prophet (S) said, ‘O people, whoever feels
something inside him let him get up so that I will pray Allah for him…’

Some man got up and said, ‘O messenger of Allah, I am hypocrite, liar,
and ill-omened.’ Umar shouted at the man, ‘Woe unto you! Allah has
covered you. Would that you had covered yourself!’ The Prophet (S) said
to Umar, ‘Keep silent O ibn al-Khattab! The disclosure of this world is
better than that of the afterworld.’ Then the Prophet (S) prayed Allah
for the man saying, ‘O Allah, grant him with truthfulness and faith, and
take evil omen away from him!’[^9]

Then a man called Sawadah bin Qays got up and said, ‘O messenger of
Allah, you had whipped me on my abdomen, and now I want to retaliate.’
The Prophet (S) ordered Bilal to bring the whip for the man to retaliate
on the Prophet (S). Bilal was astonished and he cried out, ‘O people,
make people retaliate on you in this world! This is the messenger of
Allah. He makes people retaliate on him.’ Bilal gave the whip to Sawadah
who took it and came toward the Prophet (S) who was too ill. Sawadah
said, ‘O messenger of Allah, uncover your abdomen to me!’ The Prophet
(S) uncovered his abdomen while silence, crying, and fear prevailed the
corners of the mosque. Sawadah silently and sadly said to the Prophet
(S), ‘O messenger of Allah, would you permit me to put my mouth on your
abdomen?’ The Prophet (S) permitted him, and he began kissing the
Prophet’s abdomen while his (Sawadah) eyes were shedding tears over his
face. Then he said, ‘I seek protection by the messenger of Allah’s place
of retaliation from the Fire on the day of Fire. The Prophet (S) asked
him, ‘O Sawadah, would you pardon or retaliate?’ The man said, ‘I
pardon, O messenger of Allah.’ The Prophet (S) raised his hands towards
the Heaven praying to Allah by saying, ‘O Allah, pardon Sawadah as he
pardoned Your Prophet!’[^10]

Distress and sorrow prevailed over Muslims who became certain that it
was the last days of their prophet who was loyal and kind to them, and
who had taken them out of the life of deviation in the desert and
established to them the state of guidance and bliss.

### The Prophet gives as Charity all what he Possesses

Before his last illness, the Prophet (S) had six or seven dinars. He
feared that Allah might make him die while this money was still with
him. He ordered his family to bring this money which he put in his hand
and said, ‘What does Muhammad think of his Lord if he meets Him while
this is still with him?’ Then, he gave this money as charity and kept
nothing of the worldly vanities with him.[^11]

From his asceticism was that he left this world while he was not
satiated with barley bread.[^12] He died while his armor was yet
mortgaged to a Jew man for thirty Saa’s (weights) of barley.[^13] His
pillow was of leather filled with fibers of palm-tree.[^14] He was too
ascetic in the worldly life. He turned away from all its pleasures and
enjoyments until Allah took him to His neighborhood.

### The Calamity of Thursday

The political tendencies and opportunistic trends which the famous
companions adopted to turn the caliphate away from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
appeared clearly before the Prophet (S). Therefore, he saw, in the last
hours of his life, that he should save his nation from deviation and
assure to it happiness and prosperity. He said to his companions, ‘Bring
me a piece of paper and an inkpot to write you a book by which you shall
not go astray at all…’[^15]

It was the greatest blessing that the Prophet (S) wanted to write a book
for the nation by which it would not go astray forever. It was a very
expensive opportunity, but unfortunately, those companions lost it
easily. And unfortunately, some of the Prophet’s companions understood
that the Prophet (S) intended to write down in that book the caliphate
to Imam Ali (a.s.) and that would make their greed go in vain; therefore
one of them said, ‘The book of Allah is enough for us…’

Undoubtedly, if this sayer knew that the Prophet (S) wanted to recommend
of anything else in that book, he would not reply so impudently, but he
understood well that the Prophet (S) wanted to announce the caliph after
him.

Anyhow disputes and disagreements increased among the attendants that
some of them wanted to carry out the Prophet’s wish and some others
insisted on objection. The women from behind the curtain denied that
impudent situation towards the Prophet (S), who was living his last
moments, and cried out addressing the Prophet’s companions, ‘Do you not
hear what the messenger of Allah is saying?’

Umar harshly replied to them, ‘You are the friends of Yousuf (Prophet
Josef). If he became ill, you would press your eyes (to shed tears), and
if he recovered, you would ride on his neck.’

The Prophet (S) looked at him angrily and said, ‘Let them alone! They
are better than you.’

A terrible dispute broke out between the men. The party that wanted to
carry out the Prophet’s order was about to win, but someone (Umar) shot
a bad arrow against the Prophet’s order by saying harshly and
impudently, ‘The Prophet is raving’![^16]

These events must be studied thoughtfully and exactly because they
concern the essence of our Islamic life. They have a clear criticism
against the messenger of Allah, who was accused of raving whereas Allah
has said about him,

***“Your companion does not err, nor does he go astray, nor does he
speak out of desire. It is naught but revelation that is revealed. The
Lord of Mighty Power has taught him.” 53:2-5***

***“Most surely it is the word of an honored messenger, the processor of
strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of the Dominion, One
(to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust. And your companion is not gone
mad.” 81:19-22***

Accusing the Prophet (S) of raving is defaming to his personality,
disparaging his position, and ignoring his favors that he has done to
all human kind and especially the Arabs whom he saved from the life of
ignorance and deviation in the desert and established to them a state
and civilization, and made them masters of the nations. Was his reward
for all that to be accused of raving? We are from Allah, and to Him we
shall return!

The political tendencies and the greed to authority led those men to
face the messenger of Allah with these severe words that hurt every
Muslim. When Ibn Abbas remembered this painful event, he cried and his
tears covered his cheeks. He often said, “Thursday, and what is
Thursday! The messenger of Allah (S) said, ‘Bring me a piece of paper
and an inkpot to write you a book by which you shall not go astray after
me at all’ and they said, ‘The messenger of Allah is raving.’”[^17]

Really, it was the greatest calamity that Muslims have never been
afflicted with like it. It had been intervened between them and their
happiness and prosperity in all fields of life.

### Fatimah’s Distress

Sorrow and distress filled Fatimah’s heart and pain hurt her too much
when she became certain that her father was going to leave her for the
other world. She sat beside and stared at him. She heard him saying,
‘Ah, my anguish!’

She was distressed and said, ‘Ah, my anguish for your anguish father!’

The loving father said kindly to his darling daughter, ‘No anguish for
your father after this day!’[^18]

She was very affected by these words because she became completely
certain that her father would leave her. When the Prophet (S) saw her
very sad and distressed, he wanted to delight her. He asked her to come
closer to him. He whispered to her something and her eyes were filled
with tears, and then he whispered to her another thing and she began
smiling. Aa’isha (the Prophet’s wife) was astonished at seeing that and
she said, ‘I have not seen delight that is nearer to sadness like
today.’

Aa’isha asked Fatimah (s.a.) about what her (Fatimah) father whispered
to her but she did not answer her. When days passed, she told her
saying, “He said to me: ‘Gabriel reviewed the (whole) Qur’an to me once
a year, but this year, he reviewed it to me twice. I do not think except
that my death has come.’

This was the cause of her pain and crying. As for the cause of her
delight, she said, “He said to me: ‘You are the first one of my family
that shall join me (die). I am the best ancestor to you. Are you not
pleased to be the principal of the women of this nation?’”[^19]

The Prophet (S) comforted Fatimah (s.a.) saying, “O my daughter, do not
cry! When I die, you say: ‘we are Allah’s and to Him we shall return’ It
has recompense for any dead one.”

She said, ‘And for you O messenger of Allah?!’

He said, ‘Yes, and for me.’[^20]

When the Prophet (S) began suffering more pain, Fatimah (s.a.) began
crying and she said to him, ‘By Allah, you are like what some sayer has
said:

“A white one by whose face it is prayed that clouds may rain;
The resort of orphans, the guard of widows.”’

The Prophet (S) said to her, ‘It is the saying of your uncle Abu Talib.’
Then he recited this Qur’anic verse:

***“And Muhammad is but a messenger; the messengers have already passed
away before him. If then he dies or is killed, will you turn back upon
your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels, he will by no means
do harm to Allah in the least and Allah will reward the grateful.
(3:144).”*** [^21]

### The Prophet Recommends of his Family

Anas bin Malik narrated, ‘Fatimah, with al-Hasan and al-Husayn, came to
the Prophet (S) in his last illness. She embraced him and stuck her
chest to his while crying bitterly. The Prophet (S) ordered her not to
cry out of fearing for her. He said while tears were falling down over
his cheeks, ‘O Allah, these are my family. I have entrusted them to
every believer…’ He repeated that three times.[^22] He said that because
he knew well that his family would face all kinds of calamities.

### The Prophet’s Inheritance for his Two Grandsons

Fatimah (s.a.) came with her two sons asking her father to bequeath them
some of his morals and nobilities. She said to him, ‘O Father, these are
your two sons. Please bequeath something from you to them.’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘As for al-Hasan, he shall have my gravity and
glory, and as for al-Husayn, he shall have my courage and
generosity.’[^23]

The Prophet (S) recommended Imam Ali (a.s.) to care much for his two
grandsons. Three days before his death, the Prophet (S) said to Imam Ali
(a.s.), ‘O father of the two darlings, I recommend you of my two darling
grandsons in all this life. How soon your two supports will be
undermined! May Allah be my guardian over you…’

When the Prophet (S) died, Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘This is one of my two
supports that the messenger of Allah talked about’, and when Fatimah
(s.a.) died, he said, ‘This is the second support that the messenger of
Allah told me about.’[^24]

### To the High Paradise

It was time for the Prophet (S) to leave this world and join his
brothers, of the great prophets near the Lord. The Angel of Death came
down to him asking permission. Fatimah (s.a.) said to him (the angel),
‘He (the Prophet) is busy with himself.’ The Angel of Death left and
came back later asking permission. The Prophet (S) woke up and said to
his daughter, ‘Do you know him?’ She said, ‘No, O messenger of Allah.’
The Prophet (S) said, ‘He is the establisher of graves, destroyer of
houses and separator of gatherings.’

Fatimah (s.a.) was shocked and sorrows attacked her. She said sadly, ‘O
Father! To the death of the last of prophets (he has come)? Alas! To the
death of the best of the pious and to the end of the master of choices?
Alas! To the cease of the revelation from the Heaven? After today, I
shall be prevented from talking with you.’

The Prophet (S) pitied his darling daughter and said to her, ‘Do not
weep! You will be the first one to join me…’[^25]

Then the Prophet (S) permitted the Angel of Death to come to him. When
he came in, he said, ‘O messenger of Allah, Allah has sent me to you and
ordered me to obey you in whatever you order me to do. If you order me
to take your soul, I shall do, and if you order me to leave it, I shall
do.’

The Prophet (S) was astonished at the angel’s courtesy. He said, ‘O
Angel of Death, would you do that?’

The Angel said, ‘I have been ordered to obey you in whatever you order
me to do.’

No one of Allah’s prophets and messengers had ever got such preference
as Prophet Muhammad (S) had. Allah had ordered the Angel of Death to ask
permission before coming to him and to obey him in everything.

Then Gabriel came down saying to the Prophet (S), ‘O Ahmed, Allah is
longing for you.’[^26]

The Prophet (S) chose to be near his Lord. He permitted the Angel of
Death to take his soul. The two grandsons were terrified and they threw
themselves on their grandfather while crying and shedding tears. The
Prophet (S) began kissing them and seeing them off.

Imam Ali (a.s.) wanted to take them away from the Prophet (S) who
refused and said to the Imam, ‘Let them enjoy me and let me enjoy them,
for they will suffer calamities after me.’

Then he turned to his visitors and said, ‘I have left among you the Book
of Allah and my progeny, my household. One who loses the Book of Allah,
is like one who loses my Sunna, and one, who loses my Sunna, is like one
who loses my progeny. They (the Book of Allah and the progeny) will not
separate until they shall come to me at the pond (in the
Paradise).’[^27]

Then he said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘Put my head on your lap, for the
decree of Allah has come. When my soul comes out, take it and rub your
face with it, and then direct me towards the qibla, prepare me, offer
the prayer on me, and do not leave me until you burry me in my grave.
Seek help from Allah the Almighty.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) put the Prophet’s head on his lap and put his (imam Ali)
hand under his (the Prophet) chin. When the Angel of Death began taking
the Prophet (S) soul, the Prophet (S) recited some Qur’anic verses until
his holy soul left his pure body. Imam Ali rubbed his face with it.[^28]

Mankind was afflicted with a great calamity; the leader, teacher and
educator died, and that light, which lit the world with the divine
teachings, high morals and noble manners, went out.

Muslims were shocked by the disaster and they lost their minds. The
Prophet’s wives began beating their chests. The women of the Ansar beat
their faces and their throats were harmed because of crying.[^29]

As for Fatimah (s.a.), she fell over the pure body of her father saying,
‘O father! O messenger of Allah! Of prophet of mercy! Now the revelation
does not come. Now Gabriel ceases coming to us. O Allah, let my soul
join his (the Prophet) soul, and have mercy on me by looking at his
face, and do not prevent me from his reward and intercession on the Day
of Resurrection.’[^30]

Then she mourned for him saying, ‘O Father, to Gabriel I mourn you! O
father, the Paradise is your abode! O father, you responded to the Lord
Who has invited you!’[^31]

### Preparing the Holy Corpse for Burial

Imam Ali (a.s.) alone, washed (ritually) and prepared the Prophet’s
corpse for burial. No one participated with him in that. While washing
the Prophet’s body, he sorrowfully said, ‘May my father and mother be
sacrificed for you O messenger of Allah! By your death, something has
ceased that it has not ceased by the death of any other than you;
prophethood, revelation and the news of the Heaven. You have been
particular until you sufficed away from anyone other than you, and you
have been popular until people were the same in you. If you had not
ordered of patience and forbidden from impatience, we would have
exhausted our tears for you, and disease would have lasted long and
distress would have endured forever.”[^32]

Al-Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle and Usama gave Imam Ali (a.s.) water from
behind a curtain.[^33] Good scent came out of the Prophet’s body. Imam
Ali (a.s.) said, ‘May my father and mother be sacrificed for you O
messenger of Allah! You are good scented alive and dead.’[^34] The
water, which the Prophet’s corpse was washed with, was from a well
called al-Ghars that the Prophet (S) drank from.[^35] Finishing the
ritual washing, Imam Ali (a.s.) enshrouded the holy corpse and put it on
a bed.

### The Prayer over the Holy Corpse

The first who offered the prayer on the great corpse was Allah, then
Gabriel, Israfel and then the angels groups by groups.[^36] Then Imam
Ali (a.s.) offered the prayer on him. When Muslims came to offer the
prayer on the Prophet’s corpse, Imam Ali (a.s.) said to them, ‘No one of
you is to be an imam (in the prayer). He (the Prophet) is your imam
alive and when dead.’

So Muslims came group by group to offer the prayer of the dead in lines
with no imam. Imam Ali (a.s.) was standing beside the Prophet’s corpse
and saying, ‘Peace be on you, O prophet, and Allah’s mercy and
blessings. O Allah, we bear witness that he has informed of what has
been revealed to him, been loyal to his nation and struggled in the way
of Allah until Allah glorified His religion and perfected His word. O
Allah, make us from those who follow what has been revealed to him, and
fix us (on that) after him, and gather between us and him.’ People said,
‘Amen.’[^37]

The masses of Muslims passed by the Prophet’s pure body while overcome
by sorrow and distress for their savior, liberator and teacher, who had
established to them a great civilization and state and lit to them the
life after their ignorance and deviation, died.

### The Burial

After the rituals of prayer on the holy corpse, Imam Ali (a.s.), under
the darkness of night, buried the sacred body in the last abode. He
stood beside the tomb and said, ‘Patience is nice except for you, and
impatience is ugly except for you. The calamity of your death is so
great, and it is so great before and after you.’[^38]

The pure progeny were so terrified after the Prophet’s death. They
feared that the Arabs, and especially the tribe of Quraysh, might revolt
to avenge on the Prophet’s family, because the Prophet (S) had killed
their men for the sake of Islam. The tendency of avenging was
deep-rooted in the Arabs, and it was Imam Ali (a.s.) who had killed
their men and heroes, and so they were eager to avenge. Imam as-Sadiq
(a.s.) said, ‘When the messenger of Allah (S) died, the family of
Muhammad spent the longest night and they thought that there would be no
sky to shade and no earth to carry them, because the messenger of Allah
had afflicted the near and the far for the sake of Allah.’[^39]

Anyhow, the Prophet’s death was the greatest of calamities that the
Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.) faced. It was the beginning of the terrible calamities
that they suffered later on. We shall talk about that in the following
chapters.

As for Fatimah (s.a.), she was very sad for the great loss of her
father. She elegized him with very moving poems. She often sat by the
tomb and expressed her passions for her father. What pained her more was
that people did not regard her as she deserved, and did not consider her
kinship and position to the messenger of Allah.

[^1]: Al-Bidayah wen-Nihayah, vol. 5 p. 246.

[^2]: As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, vol. 2002 p. 361.

[^3]: The dead in al-Baqee’ Graveyard.

[^4]: Al-Bidayah wen-Nihayah, vol. 5 p.243, Seera of ibn Hisham, vol. 3
p. 93, Tareekh at-Tabari, vol. 3 p. 190.

[^5]: Kanzol Ummal, vol. 5 p.312, Tabaqat ibn Sa’d, vol. 4 p. 46,
Tareekh al-Khamees, vol. 2 p. 46.

[^6]: Three miles from Medina towards Sham.

[^7]: As-Seera al-Halabiyyah, vol. 3 p. 34.

[^8]: We have explained that in details in our book “the System of Rule
and Administration in Islam”.

[^9]: Al-Bidayah wen-Nihayah, vol. 5 p. 231.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 22 p. 509.

[^11]: Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 6 p. 104.

[^12]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 6 p. 204.

[^13]: Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 4 p. 105.

[^14]: Sahih of Muslim, vol. 6 p. 145.

[^15]: Al-Awsat by at-Tabarani, vol. 5 p. 288, Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 4
p.31, Sahih Muslim, vol. 5 p. 76, and others.

[^16]: All historians and narrators have mentioned this painful event.
Al-Bukhari mentioned it many times in his Sahih vol. 4 p. 68-69, vol. 6
p. 8, but he concealed the sayer’s name. It has been mentioned in
Ghareeb al-Hadith, vol. 4 p. 130, Sharh Nahjol Balagha by ibn Abil
Hadeed, vol. 3 p. 114, and the author here mentioned the sayer’s name
openly.

[^17]: Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 1 p. 355, and others.

[^18]: The Life of Imam al-Hasan bin Ali, vol. 1 p. 112.

[^19]: The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol. 1 p.215.

[^20]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1 p. 133.

[^21]: The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol. 1 p. 216.

[^22]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1 p. 133.

[^23]: Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol. 2 p. 465.

[^24]: Amali of Sheikh as-Saduq, p. 119.

[^25]: Durratul Nassihin, p. 66.

[^26]: Tabaqat ibn Sa’d, vol. 2 p. 48.

[^27]: Maqtal al-Husayn by al-Khawarizmi, vol. 1 p. 114.

[^28]: Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol. 1 p. 29. Many historians have
mentioned that when the Prophet (S) died, his head was in Imam Ali’s
lap. It was mentioned in At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 2 p. 51, Majma’
az-Zawa’id, vol. 1 p. 293, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 4 p. 55, Thakha’ir
al-Uqba, p. 94, ar-Riyadh an-Nadhira, vol. 2 p. 219.

[^29]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1 p.574.

[^30]: Tareekh al-Khamees, vol. 2 p. 192.

[^31]: Siyer A’lam an-Nubala’, 2 p. 88, Sunan ibn Maja, vol. 1 p. 511.

[^32]: Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p. 255.

[^33]: Wafa’ul Wafa’, vol. 1 p. 227, al-Bidayeh wen Nihayeh, vol. 5 p.
263.

[^34]: At-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 2 p. 63.

[^35]: Al-Bidayeh wen Nihayeh, vol. 5 p. 261.

[^36]: Hilyatul Awliya’, vol. 4 p. 77.

[^37]: Kanzol Ummal, vol. 4 p. 54.

[^38]: Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p. 224.

[^39]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 22 p. 537, Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1 p. 445.


