The Great Trial
===============

No writer, whatever skilled he is in describing the minutes of history
and in analyzing the events, can describe accurately and deeply the
disasters and seditions that attacked the Muslim nation after the
departure of the Prophet (S) as the Qur'an had described in this verse,

***“And Muhammad is no more than a messenger; the messengers have
already passed away before him, if then he dies or is killed will you
turn back upon your heels? And whoever turns back upon his heels he will
by no means do harm to Allah in the least and Allah will reward the
grateful.” 3:144***

Since the very moment when the Prophet (S) died, and he was still not
buried yet, serious disagreements took place between Muslims that
resulted from the different trends of the parties that had been founded
before the death of the Prophet (S). The following are those parties:

### 1. The Alawids

They were the family of the Prophet (S) under the command of Imam Ali
(a.s.) the chief of the pure progeny, the gate of the Prophet’s town of
knowledge, and the father of his two grandsons. He was Ameerul Mo'minin
for whom the Prophet (S) had taken homage on the Day of Ghadeer Khum to
be the caliph after him. The best of the Prophet’s companions like Ammar
bin Yassir, Abu Tharr, Salman al-Farisi and many other trustworthy,
religious people followed Imam Ali (a.s.).

### 2. The Party of Quraysh

It included famous companions like Abu Bakr, Umar, Abu Ubaydah bin
al-Jarrah and Khalid bin al-Waleed. This party represented the opinions
of the people of Quraysh in Mecca. Some ones from the Ansar such as
Basheer bin Sa’d bin Tha’labah al-Khazraji and others joined this party.
They saw that the caliphate was their right because the Prophet (S) was
from them (from the tribe of Quraysh). These people did not attend the
funerals of the Prophet (S) and participated neither in the prayer for
him nor in his burial because they were busy in the conference of
as-Saqeefa.[^1]

### 3. The Party of the Ansar

The Ansar[^2] were the pillar of the armed forces in Islam which was
built on their jihad and sacrifices. They were from two wings; al-Awss
and al-Khazraj.

There were enmities, spites and bloodsheds between these two tribes
before the immigration of the Prophet (S) to them. The last war between
them was the war of Bughath six years before the Prophet’s immigration
to them. When the Prophet (S) immigrated to them, he tried his best to
spread love and peace between them, but nevertheless, spites were hidden
in their inners and they appeared barefacedly on the day of Saqeefa.
Khudhayr bin Usayd, the chief of the Awss was full of grudge against
Sa’d bin Ubadah when the Ansar nominated him for the caliphate. He said
to his people, “If you give it (the caliphate) to Sa’d one time, the
preference shall be for them by it forever and they will not give you a
share in it at all. Get up and pay homage to Abu Bakr…”[^3]

Anyhow, these parties were effective after the death of the Prophet (S).
We shall talk about the events that led to the great trial that brought
Muslims every evil throughout their history.

The Conference of Al-Saqeefa
----------------------------

In the history of Islam, there was no event more dangerous and harmful
to Islam and Muslims than the conference of al-Saqeefa. It was the
cornerstone of the deterioration of the nation and the disasters and
calamities that Muslims suffered and are still suffering. Political
fancies and the fanatic spirit of party-ness were widespread where
personal interests were preferred to the interests of the nation.

The conference of al-Saqeefa was the beginning to the disasters that
afflicted the nation. The caliphate was turned away from its legal,
deserving, well-qualified people to the Umayyads who were enemies to
Islam. And from among the painful events that resulted from the meeting
of al-Saqeefa was the disaster of Kerbala where the pure progeny of the
Prophet (S) had been killed in an unbearable, savage way.

The Ansar held their conference in the Saqeefa (shed) of bani Sa’idah
immediately after the death of the Prophet (S). They did not even wait
until the Prophet (S) would be put into his last abode. As we think, the
reasons behind that were the following:

First, they saw the political activity of the Muhajireen[^4] to turn the
caliphate away from the Prophet’s family. The Muhajireen refused to join
the army of Usama because they knew the purpose of the Prophet (S) by
marching this army. It was to make Medina empty of the companions after
the Prophet’s death so that Imam Ali (a.s.) would assume the caliphate
easily and without troubles. Therefore, they refused to join Usama whom
the Prophet (S) had appointed a leader over an army to march towards
Sham. Umar said to Usama, ‘Do the messenger of Allah die while you are
the emir over me?!’

The Muhajireen denied the homage that the Prophet (S) had taken for Imam
Ali (a.s.) in Ghadeer Khum to be the caliph after him. They said,
‘Muhammad thought that this matter (the caliphate) had already been
fulfilled for his cousin. How far! It shall not be fulfilled.’[^5]

They revealed that in their meetings and so their news reached the
Ansar. They also denied that prophethood and the caliphate would gather
in one family. When the Prophet (S) died, Umar announced before people,
‘Prophethood and the caliphate should not gather in one house (family).’

They denied the gathering of prophethood and the caliphate in one house
which was the center of the revelation, wisdom and faith. And it was so
as they wanted. The caliphate was extorted from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
and turned to be in the hands of the opponents of Islam; the Umayyads
and the Abbasids who ruled unlike what Allah willed, and whose palaces
were stages for debauchery, drinking, singing, dancing and all sins,
whereas the Ahlul-Bayt (a.s.), who were the compare of the Qur'an, were
treated cruelly and their heads were raised on the tips of spears, and
their women became captives taken from one country to another. It was
this that Quraysh wanted in order to take revenge on the Prophet (S)
through his progeny.

Second, the Ansar were certain that if the Muhajireen seized power, they
would subjugate and oppress the Ansar as revenge. Al-Hubab bin
al-Munthir, who was one of the chiefs of the Ansar, declared that by
saying, ‘…but we fear that those, whom we had killed their sons, fathers
and brothers, may assume it (the caliphate).’[^6]

Actually, the prediction of al-Hubab came true. As soon as the short
rule of the four caliphs came to an end, the caliphate was seized by the
Umayyads who exaggerated in subjugating and oppressing the Ansar and
depriving them of everything to leave them in poverty and wretchedness.
Mo’awiya was excessive in revenging on them, and when his son Yazid
assumed the caliphate, he spared no effort to offend them. He violated
their properties, bloods, and honors in the battle of al-Harrah that
history has seldom seen a terrible, cruel event like it.

### The Speech of Sa’d

When the Ansar met in the Saqeefa, Sa’d bin Ubadah the chief of (the
tribe of) al-Khazraj opened the conference by making this speech:

“O people of the Ansar, you have had a favor in religion and a merit in
Islam that no one of the Arabs has had. Muhammad (blessings of Allah be
on him and on his progeny) stayed among his people more than ten years
inviting them to worship the Beneficent One and reject idols but just a
few people believed in him. They could not defend him or strengthen his
religion or ward off a wrong. But when Allah wanted to favor you, He
sent honor to you, endowed you with blessing, and conferred on you the
faith in Him and in His messenger, defending him (the Prophet) and his
companions, supporting him and his religion, and fighting against his
enemies. You were the most striving against his enemies until the Arabs
submitted to the command of Allah willingly and unwillingly, and the far
gave in subserviently to His messenger by your swords. Allah made him
(the Prophet) die while he was pleasant with you and delighted for
you…you should cling to this matter (the caliphate) because it is yours
and not theirs…’[^7]

This speech shows the great struggle and jihad of the Ansar in
supporting Islam and defending it against its enemies. They were the
skeleton of the Islamic army by which Allah had endowed Muslims with
victory, and so they were worthier of the Prophet’s succession than
others.

This speech also dispraised the people of Quraysh for fighting Islam and
trying to put out its light until the Prophet (S) was obliged to
emigrate to Medina. The Islamic state that the Prophet (S) had
established was built by the Ansar’s hands, efforts and jihad, and
therefore they were worthier of the Prophet (S) and his position.

Sa’d was blamed that he totally ignored the disaster that afflicted
Muslims by the great loss of the Prophet (S). He paid no attention to
that whereas he would better comfort the Ansar and the rest of Muslims
for this calamity, and before all he had to console the Prophet’s family
who too painfully suffered this great loss.

Sa’d was also blamed for that he ignored, concerning the matter of the
caliphate, the pure progeny who were the match of the Qur’an as the
Prophet (S) often declared. Sa’d did not refer to the Prophet’s
guardian, the gate of the town of his knowledge, and the father of his
two grandsons, Ameerul Mo'minin Imam Ali (a.s.) who was the best of all
Muslims after the Prophet (S) at all. And since the conference of
Saqeefa, the Prophet’s progeny began suffering all kinds of misfortunes
and calamities.

Sa’d was too wrong and to a very far extent in his ignoring of the right
of Imam Ali (a.s.) that we could not find any excuse for that.
Therefore, he received the reward to his bad deed that as soon as Abu
Bakr assumed the rule, he began chasing and imposing severe watch on him
until he was obliged to emigrate from Medina to Sham. Nevertheless,
Khalid bin al-Waleed, with one of his companions, followed after, lay in
wait for, stabbed him with daggers to death, and threw his body into a
well. Then they claimed that the jinn had killed him. It is too odd that
politicians at those ages made use of the jinn to achieve their
political purposes, and unfortunately the naïve and simple people
believed what those men claimed that the jinn did.

While the Ansar were in the saqeefa discussing the matter of the
caliphate and the nomination of Sa’d as the caliph, Uwaym bin Sa’idah
al-Awsi and Ma’n bin Adiy left the saqeefa without being noticed by
anyone. They both were from the followers of Abu Bakr and from his
party, and they were spiteful against Sa’d. They went and told Abu Bakr
and Umar about what was happening in the saqeefa. Abu Bakr and Umar
accompanied by Abu Ubayda bin al-Jarrah, Salim the adherent of Abu
Huthayfah, and a group from the Muhajireen hurried to the conference and
surprised the Ansar in their Saqeefa. The Ansar were astonished, and
Sa’d changed color for he feared that he and his party the Ansar would
lose the matter (the caliphate) because he knew the weakness and the
disunity of the Ansar. And really it was so. All the plans of Sa’d
collapsed and his hopes came to nothing.

### The Speech of Abu Bakr

After the Muhajireen had broken into the conference of the Ansar, Umar
wanted to open the talks with them but Abu Bakr asked him not to do
because he knew Umar’s severity that would not fit in such a situation
that was full of different fancies. Leniency and smooth talks had to be
used in order to win the situation; therefore, Abu Bakr addressed the
Ansar smilingly saying,

“We the Muhajireen, are the first in being Muslims, the highest in
lineages… and the nearest to the messenger of Allah (S), and you are our
brethren in Islam and our participants in religion. You have supported
and comforted us, may Allah reward you with good. We are the emirs and
you are the viziers. The Arabs do not submit except to his folk of
Quraysh, so do not envy your brothers of the Muhajireen what Allah has
preferred them with. I have accepted to you (as caliph) one of these two
men (meaning Umar bin al-Khattab and Abu Ubaydah).’[^8]

This man also did not care for the disaster that afflicted the Muslim
nation by the death of the great Prophet. It would be better for him to
console the Muslims and the family of the Prophet (S) on this great
loss, but rather he ignored it totally as Sa’d had ignored it in his
speech. And they would better have delayed the conference until after
the burial of the Prophet (S), and then the conference should have been
held publicly so that all classes of the nation would participate to
choose the caliph in general, democratic elections. Nothing of that
happened, and instead, Abu Bakr, in his speech, asked the Ansar to give
up the caliphate and deliver it to the Muhajireen because they were the
nearest to the Prophet (S) as he claimed.

Anyhow, when Abu Bakr became the caliph, he did not fulfill his promise
to the Ansar to make them viziers in his government. Rather, they were
exiled from all positions and posts of the rule.

Abu Bakr also ignored the right of the Prophet’s progeny who were the
match of the Holy Qur’an and who were like the Ark of Noah that whoever
embarked on it would be saved, and whoever lagged behind it would be
drowned as the Prophet (S) had said about them. The Muhajireen and the
Ansar would better have deferred a little in determining the matter of
the caliphate until they would take the opinions of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) in consideration to give the caliphate a legal nature and not to
be described as a “slip” as Umar had described it when he said, ‘The
homage of Abu Bakr was a slip that Allah has protected Muslims from its
evil.’

Sayyid Sharafuddeen al-Musawi al-Aamili says, “If it has been supposed
that there was no clear tradition showing that the caliphate was to be
for one of the Prophet’s family and if it has been supposed that no one
of them had good ancestry, rank, morals, knowledge, favors, jihad,
faith, sincerity, or excellent virtue, but they were just like the rest
of the Prophet’s companions, then was there any legal, rational, or
traditional excuse that prevented the companions from putting off their
homage until the funerals of the Prophet (s) would finish??? Even if
they would have ordered the army to control the situation temporarily
until the matter of the caliphate would be settled???

Would it be not better for them to be somehow kind to the Prophet’s
family, who were distressed with the great loss, if they had waited a
little? The Prophet’s family was his deposit and his leftover among the
Muslims. Allah has said:

***“Certainly a Messenger has come to you from among yourselves;
grievous to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous
respecting you; to the believers (he is) compassionate.” 9:128***

Had this Prophet, who became so grievous when his umma fell in distress,
who strove for its prosperity and who was so kind to his people, not had
a right on them that his family would not be constrained or surprised
with what it had faced while the wound was not yet healed and the
Prophet (s) was not yet buried?!”[^9]

There is something very important in the speech of Abu Bakr. He claimed
that the Muhajireen had the right in the caliphate because they were the
nearest in kinship to the Prophet (S) and he ignored the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) who were the real kin of the Prophet (S) and who were from his
blood and flesh. How this saying of Imam Ali was, “They argued on the
tree and lost the fruit!”

Imam Ali addressed Abu Bakr by saying,

“If you had the rule over them by the Shura,[^10] how was that while the
consultants were absent? And if you by kinship argued with their
opponent, then, other than you is worthier of the Prophet and nearer.”

In one of his other speeches, Imam Ali (a.s.) said, “By Allah, I am his
brother (the Prophet’s brother), guardian, cousin and the heir of his
knowledge, and so who is worthier of him than me?”

The clear fact is that the Muhajireen and the Ansar knew Imam Ali (a.s.)
well and were certain about his right in the caliphate, but the
political greed and the desire for authority made them ignore that.

### The Homage to Abu Bakr

Abu Bakr won the situation by praising the Ansar and using tender words
with them. Besides, he made them desire for the participation in the
rule. He claimed that he would entrust the vizierate to them, and by
that he removed from their minds the thought that the Muhajireen would
domineer the matter of the rule. He made them understand that he had
preferred the Muhajireen to them because the Arabs did not submit except
to them. In this way, he convinced them and made some of them follow
him.

After Abu Bakr had finished his speech, Umar made a speech where he
confirmed his friend Abu Bakr’s situation. Umar said, ‘How far! No two
participate in a horn! By Allah, the Arabs do not accept to make you the
emirs over them whereas their Prophet is not from you. But the Arabs do
not refrain from submitting to those among whom the prophethood is. We
have in this the clear proof against whoever resists. Who can dispute
with us on the authority and the rule of Muhammad while we are his
fellows and tribe? (No one does that) except one who delivers falsehood,
deviates in sin or involves in perishment…’

There was nothing new in Umar’s speech except that he confirmed Abu
Bakr’s saying that the Muhajireen were worthier of the Prophet (S)
because they were from his tribe. If this justification was the evidence
on which the Muhajireen depended to prove their right of the caliphate,
then Imam Ali (a.s.) was to be the caliph because he was the closest one
to the Prophet (S).

The logic of Abu Bakr and Umar in their speeches was the look to the
position of the caliphate and nothing else, whereas what Islam wanted by
the caliphate was to apply the best, just systems of rule on the real
stage of life. They both paid no attention to that nor to its importance
for the Prophet (S). They just cared for the authority.

Anyhow, the principle of kinship, which Abu Bakr and Umar relied on, was
best found in Imam Ali (a.s.). Muhammad al-Kilani says, ‘He (Umar)
argued against them (the Ansar) by the kinship of the Muhajireen to the
Prophet (S); nevertheless, the duty of justice determines that the
caliphate should be for Ali bin Abi Talib as long as this kinship was a
proof to get the Prophet’s inheritance. Al-Abbas was the closest of
people to the Prophet (S) and he was worthier of the caliphate, but he
ceded his right to Ali (a.s.). Hence, Ali was the only one who had the
right of the caliphate.’[^11]

### Al-Habbab’s Speech

Al-Habbab bin al-Munthir, who was from the chiefs and leaders of the
Ansar, replied to Umar addressing the Ansar, ‘O people of the Ansar, be
determined and do not listen to the sayings of this man and his
companions that they may extort your share in this matter (the
caliphate). If they refuse to give you what you ask them for, then you
exile them from the country and assume these affairs over them. By
Allah, you are worthier of this matter than them, because it is by your
swords that people submitted to this religion…if you want, we shall set
it (war) off by Allah! No one denies what I say, or I will break his
nose with the sword!’

This speech was revolutionary and full of threatening and determination.
If the Ansar responded to their chief, they would not suffer all the
crises and disasters that their Medina faced in the event of al-Harrah
and other events during the Umayyad and the Abbasid reigns. The Umayyads
called Medina as “al-Khabeethah; the malicious city” after the Prophet
(S) had called it as “at-Tayyibah; the good city’. Anyhow, Umar, who was
the champion of the situation on that day, shouted at al-Habbab, ‘May
Allah kill you!’ Al-Habbab replied to Umar, ‘But may He kill you!’

Abu Bakr feared that the situation might be complicated, and so he said
to the Ansar in a diplomatic way, ‘Choose Umar or Abu Ubaydah!’ Umar
said to Abu Bakr plottingly, ‘Could this be while you are alive? No one
can take you away from your position which the messenger of Allah had
put you in.’

Some writer says commenting on this saying of Umar, ‘We do not know when
the messenger of Allah (S) had put Abu Bakr in the position of
caliphate. Was that after he (the Prophet) had deposed him (Abu Bakr)
from reciting the Sura of Bara’a (9) in Mecca (before the public) while
he was yet in the middle of the way (to Mecca) and he ordered Ali to
recite it instead of him? The heaven did not choose him to recite this
Sura as the many true traditions say. Or after he (the Prophet) made him
in the army of Usama like any other soldier and made Usama, who was a
young man, the leader over him? When did the Prophet (S) appoint him as
a chief and an authority for the nation?!’

The party of Quraysh hastened to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr fearing that
the situation might be complicated and they might lose the opportunity.
Umar paid homage to Abu Bakr, and then Basheer, Usayd bin Khudhayr,
Uwaym bin Sa’ida, Mi’an bin Adiy, Abu Ubayda bin al-Jarrah, Salim the
mawla of Abu Huthayfa, Khalid bin al-Waleed and others. These men tried
their best to force people to pay homage. Umar’s stick played a good
role in the field. Al-Ansar were heard saying, ‘You have killed Sa’d.’
Umar said, ‘Kill him! May Allah kill him. He is a man of sedition.’[^12]

Umar’s companions were about to kill Sa’d. He was harmed too much, and
then he was carried to his house while he was very angry, for his hopes
were lost and his wishes scattered. When the homage to Abu Bakr was paid
so promptly, his party carried him to the mosque in a procession as a
bride was carried home.[^13]

All this was done while the messenger of Allah (S) was still laid in the
bed of death and not buried yet. Imam Ali (a.s.) was busy preparing him
for burial, and when he knew about the homage to Abu Bakr, he recited
this verse of poetry:

“Some people said as they liked and transgressed when Zayd was afflicted
by his calamities.’[^14]

The opinion of the pure Prophet’s progeny was completely ignored in the
homage of Abu Bakr, and since that day they faced all kinds of disasters
and misfortunes. All the distresses they faced were the result of the
Day of al-Saqeefa.

The tribes of Quraysh were delighted with the homage of Abu Bakr. They
considered that a great victory that would fulfill all their hopes and
wishes. In fact, Quraysh did not deserve any position in the state
because they fought the Prophet (S) since the first day of his mission,
exiled him from Mecca, and were determined to kill him. Thus, Quraysh
had no right in the Prophet’s position and succession. If there was no
clear text from the Prophet (S) on Imam Ali’s caliphate, the Ansar would
be worthier of the Prophet (S) than others.

Joys and delights spread among all the tribes of Quraysh. Historians say
that when the people of Mecca knew about the Prophet’s death, they
wanted to announce apostasy of Islam, but when they knew that Abu Bakr
had become the caliph, they submitted and announced their pleasure and
delight.

### Abu Sufyan’s Situation

Abu Sufyan, as historians say, opposed the caliphate of Abu Bakr. He
went to Imam Ali (a.s.) inciting him to revolt against Abu Bakr and
promising him of support saying, ‘I see a clamor that is not put out
except by blood O family of Abd Manaf. How does Abu Bakr extort your
rights? Where are the two deemed-weak ones? Where are the two oppressed
ones? Where are Ali and al-Abbas? Why has this matter (the caliphate)
come to the lowest family of Quraysh?’

Then he said to Imam Ali, ‘Stretch your hand so that I pledge allegiance
to you. By Allah, if you want, I will fill it against him (Abu Bakr)
with horsemen and infantry.’ Then he recited this poetry as
exemplification:

“Nothing will keep to lowness, except the two subjugated things; the
camels and the tent-peg.
This is tied with its rope, and this is split but no one cries for it!”

Abu Sufyan wanted to exploit the situation to destroy the actual rule
and then he would carry out his tendencies, but Imam Ali (a.s.) knew
that well. Therefore he did not respond to Abu Sufyan; rather, he
scolded him saying, ‘By Allah, you do not want by that except sedition.
By Allah, how often you plotted against Islam. We are in no need of your
advice.’[^15]

Abu Sufyan kept on provoking sedition and asking Imam Ali (a.s.) to
dispute with Abu Bakr. Definitely, Abu Sufyan’s opposition to Abu Bakr
was not real but pretended by which he wanted to plot against Islam and
deceive Imam Ali (a.s.). Therefore, Imam Ali (a.s.) turned away from him
and paid no attention to his false support.

The relation between Abu Bakr and Abu Sufyan was too firm. Al-Bukhari
mentioned that once Abu Sufyan passed by some Muslims among whom there
were Abu Bakr, Salman, Suhayb and Bilal. One of them said, ‘Would that
the swords of Allah have taken its right from this enemy of Allah!’

Abu Bakr was angry and said, ‘Do you say this about the chief and master
of Quraysh?’ Abu Bakr went to the Prophet (S) and told him what those
men said. The Prophet (S) said to him, ‘O Abu Bakr, you might displease
them. If you displeased them, you would displease Allah…’[^16]

This event shows that the relation between Abu Bakr and Abu Sufyan was
intimate. During his caliphate, Abu Bakr tried his best to attract Abu
Sufyan and gain his sentiment. He appointed him a governor on the area
between Hijaz and Najran.[^17] He as well, appointed his son Yazeed a
leader over some military battalions and escorted him walking on foot
while Yazeed was riding on a mount. Abu Bakr made all that in order to
take off the garment of lowness which the Prophet (S) had dressed Abu
Sufyan with. Since that day, the Umayyads got important and their
influence increased.

By the government of Abu Bakr, the position of the Ansar abated little
by little and all their hopes were disappointed. They faced more lowness
during the reigns of the caliphs and then it was clear to them their
great mistake in ignoring the right of Ameerul Mo'minin Imam Ali (a.s.)
and that they had thrown themselves into abysses of rashness.

### Imam Ali Refrains from Pledging Allegiance

Imam Ali (a.s.) announced his denial to Abu Bakr’s allegiance and
considered it as a clear aggression against him. He was the first
mujahid in Islam, the Prophet’s brother, and the gate of the town of his
knowledge. He was to the Prophet (S) as was Aaron to Moses. Abu Bakr
knew well Imam Ali’s position to the caliphate, and it was not thought
that people would take it away from him.

Since the first, Al-Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle, came to Imam Ali (a.s.)
and said to him, ‘O my nephew, give me your hand to pledge allegiance to
you, and thus people will say: the uncle of the messenger of Allah has
pledged allegiance to the cousin of the messenger of Allah, and then no
two will disagree on you.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) said to him, ‘Who seeks this matter (the caliphate)
other than us…?’[^18]

Dr. Taha Husayn commented on this situation saying, “Al-Abbas thought of
the matter and saw that his nephew was worthier of inheriting the
authority because he was brought up by the Prophet (S), was the first in
being a Muslim, had done well for Islam, excellent in all battles and
situations, and the Prophet (S) called him “brother”, until one day Umm
Aymen said to him (the Prophet) jokingly: ‘You call him brother and you
marry your daughter to him?!’ And because the Prophet (S) said to him,
‘You are to me as was Aaron to Moses except that there will be no
prophet after me’, and said to Muslims another day, ‘Whoever I am his
guardian Ali is to be his guardian’. Because of that, al-Abbas came,
after the Prophet’s death, to his nephew and said to him: stretch your
hand so that I pay homage to you.’”[^19]

### Forcing the Imam to Pay Homage

The Party of Quraysh agreed on forcing Imam Ali (a.s.) to pay homage to
Abu Bakr. They sent after him a group of policemen who surrounded and
brought him to Abu Bakr unwillingly and in a low manner. They shouted at
him, ‘Pay homage to Abu Bakr!’

Imam Ali (a.s.) replied, ‘I am worthier of this matter than you. I do
not pay homage to you. Rather, you are required to pay homage to me. You
have taken this matter from the Ansar and argued with them by the
kinship to the Prophet (S) and you take it from us the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
by force. Did you not claim to the Ansar that you were worthier of this
matter because Muhammad was from you and so they gave you the leadership
and delivered to you the emirate? I argue against you by the very thing
which you argued by against the Ansar. We are worthier of the messenger
of Allah alive and dead. Be fair to us if you are believers; otherwise,
incur oppression on yourselves while you know.’[^20]

Umar bin al-Khattab followed the way of violence towards the Imam for he
had no evidence to reply with. He said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘You shall
not be let alone until you pay homage.’

Imam Ali (a.s.) said to him, ‘Milk some milk that you shall have half of
it, and support him (Abu Bakr) today to recompense you tomorrow!’

Imam Ali (a.s.) exposed the secret that made Umar so zealous for the
homage of Abu Bakr. Umar took that strict situation towards Imam Ali
(a.s.) so that the caliphate would come to him after the death of his
friend.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said to Umar, ‘I neither accept your saying nor do I pay
homage to him…’

Abu Bakr feared that the situation might be complicated, and so he said
to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘If you do not pay homage, I shall not force you to
do.’

Abu Ubayda bin al-Jarrah said to the imam deceitfully, ‘O cousin, you
are young and these are the old men of your people. You have no
experience and awareness of the affairs like theirs. I do not see except
that Abu Bakr is more potent than you in this matter and more tolerant
and expert in it. Give this matter to Abu Bakr, and if you remain alive,
you will be fit for this matter in your virtue, religiousness,
knowledge, understanding, favor, lineage and being son-in-law (to the
Prophet).’

This deceit moved the latent pain inside the imam who said to the
Muhajireen, “O people of the Muhajireen, do not take the authority of
Muhammad in the Arabs away from his house to your houses, and do not
keep his family away from his position and right among people. By Allah
O the people of the Muhajireen, we are the worthiest among all people of
him (the Prophet) because we are the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) (his household).
We are worthiest of this matter (the caliphate) than you for from among
us there is the reciter of the Book of Allah, the aware of the religion
of Allah, the knower of the Sunna of the messenger of Allah, the
undertaker of the affairs of the subjects, the defender of them against
misfortunes, the equally divider among them. By Allah, he is from among
us. Therefore, do not follow fancy that you may deviate from the way of
Allah and be more away from the truth…”[^21]

However, the people turned a deaf ear to Imam Ali’s speech and they
panted after the rule and authority. Their previous ignorance
(jahiliyyah) came back to them, as Prof. Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsud says,
and they committed against the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) all what Allah had
prohibited.

#### The Attack on Imam Ali’s House

Most of historians and narrators have mentioned the companions’ attack
on Imam Ali (a.s.) and Fatimah’s (s.a.) house which was sacred to the
Prophet (S) who stopped everyday for six months at its door and recited
this Qur’anic verse,

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanliness from you, O people
of the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.” 33:33***

Umar and some other companions attacked Fatimah and Ali’s (peace be upon
them) house and threatened of setting fire to it. The following are the
narrations of the historians who have mentioned this fact:

##### Al-Balathiri

Al-Balathiri mentioned that Abu Bakr sent for Imam Ali to pay homage to
him but Imam Ali (a.s.) refused to pay homage. Therefore Umar came with
a wick. Fatimah (s.a.) met him at the door and said to him, ‘Shall you
set fire to my door?’

He said, ‘Yes, and this is stronger than what your father had
brought.’[^22]

#### At-Tabari

He mentioned: “Umar came to Ali’s house wherein there were Talha,
az-Zubayr and some men from the Muhajireen, and said to them, ‘By Allah,
I will burn (the house) over you or you come out to the homage.’
Az-Zubayr went out drawing his sword, but he stumbled and fell to the
ground and the sword fell from his hand. They (Umar and his fellows)
jumped on and took him.”[^23]

#### Ibn Abd Rabbih

He said: “Those who did not pay homage to Abu Bakr were Ali, al-Abbas,
az-Zubayr and Sa’d bin Ubada. As for Ali, al-Abbas and az-Zabayr, they
remained in Fatimah’s house until Abu Bakr sent to them Umar bin
al-Khattab to make them get out of Fatimah’s house. He said to him, ‘If
they refuse, you should fight them.’ Umar came with a torch intending to
set fire to the house. Fatimah (s.a.) met him and said, ‘O ibn
al-Khattab, have you come to burn our house?’ He said, ‘Yes, or you
enter into what the nation has entered into.’[^24]

#### Ibn Abil Hadeed

He said, ‘Umar came to Fatimah’s house with some men from the Ansar and
a few from the Muhajireen and said, ‘I swear by Whom in Whose hand
Umar’s soul is, either you come out for the homage or I will burn the
house over you.’[^25]

#### Ash-Shahristani

Ash-Shahristani mentioned from an-Nidham that Umar was shouting: ‘Set
fire to her (Fatimah) house with all those in it.’ There were none but
Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn inside the house.[^26]

#### Kahhala

Umar Redha Kahhala said, “Abu Bakr found that some men had defaulted his
homage like al-Abbas, az-Zubayr and Sa’d bin Ubada. They were with Ali
bin Abi Talib in Fatimah’s house. Abu Bakr sent to them Umar bin
al-Khattab who called out to them while they were inside Fatimah’s
house. They refused to come out. Umar ordered firewood to be brought. He
said, ‘I swear by Whom in Whose hand Umar’s soul is, either you come out
(for the homage) or I will set fire to it (the house) over all those in
it.’

It was said to him, ‘O Abu Hafs,[^27] Fatimah is there.’

He said, ‘Even though!’”[^28]

#### Al-Mas’oodi

He mentioned that al-Abbas went to Ameerul Mo'minin (Imam Ali) when the
messenger of Allah (S) died. Ameerul Mo'minin and some men of his
followers remained in his house with what the messenger of Allah had
entrusted him. People (Abu Bakr’s men) attacked his house, set fire to
the door and took him out by force. They pressed the Principal of Women
behind the door.[^29]

The fact of their determination to set fire to Imam Ali and Fatimah’s
(peace be upon them) house is certain and has no way for doubt.

Hafidh Ibrahim, the Poet of the Nile, says,

“And a saying to Ali that Umar said;
How noble its hearer is and how great its sayer is:
‘I burn your house and leave you alive not in it,
If you do not pay homage, though the daughter of al-Mustafa is
therein.’
None but Abu Hafs was its sayer before the Knight of Adnan and its
Guard.”[^30]

Abu Bakr’s party acted very severely and violently just to firm the rule
for themselves. They ignored the sacredness of the house which they
attacked. It was the house of the revelation and prophethood. It was the
house wherefrom the Word of Monotheism was raised. They paid attention
to nothing of that. They announced their mottos against the prophetic
family since the first moment after the Prophet’s death. Umar said,
‘Prophethood and caliphate should not gather in the same house.’

They tried to burn the house of the daughter of the messenger of Allah
(S) for the sake of rule and authority. This fact was proved by the very
lovers of the rule and authority who trod on everything in the way of
fulfilling their desires.

Abu Bakr regretted too much what he committed against the house of
Fatimah, the Principal of all Women of the Worlds. He said in his last
illness, ‘I do not regret anything in this world except three things I
have done that I wished I had not done…I wished I had not exposed
anything in Fatimah’s house…’[^31]

Once another, he said, ‘I regret nothing except three things that I
wished I had not done; I wished I had not exposed Fatimah’s house and
left it alone even if it was closed on war.’[^32]

The attack on Fatimah’s house made Abu Bakr upset and uneasy feeling
regret and sorrow at the last moment of his life.

#### The Aggression Against Fatimah (s.a.)

Another certain fact is that Abu Bakr’s men aggressed against Fatimah
(s.a.) because she stood firmly against them. She tried her best to
refute their plots and take the right back to its people. She had self
immunity for she was the daughter of the messenger of Allah (S) and the
principal of the women of the world. However, those men did pay no
attention to all that and they insisted on carrying out their policy
whatever the cost might be. They turned their backs to the truth.

In consequence of that flagrant aggression against the daughter of the
messenger of Allah (S), she miscarried her child that the Prophet (S)
had named al-Muhsin. Here, we quote some historic texts without
commenting on them:

##### Ash-Shahristani

Ash-Shahristani narrated from Ibrahim bin Sayyar that Umar beat Fatimah
until she aborted her fetus. He was shouting, ‘Set fire to her house
with whomever in it!’[^33]

##### Ibn Hajar

Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani said in the biography of Ahmed bin Muhammad bin
as-Sariy bin Yahya bin Darim Abu Bakr al-Kufi, ‘Muhammad bin Ahmed
al-Kufi was reliable most of his life. Once I visited him while there
was a man narrating to him: ‘Umar kicked Fatimah until she aborted (her
fetus) Muhsin.’[^34]

##### Al-Mas’oodi

He said, ‘They pressed the principal of women against the door until she
miscarried Muhsin.’[^35]

##### Ath-Thahabi

He mentioned a tradition narrated from Muhammad bin Ahmed bin Hammad
al-Kufi…that he said, ‘One day, I visited him while there was some man
narrating to him that Umar kicked Fatimah until she miscarried
Muhsin.’[^36]

##### Ibn Qutayba

Ibn Qutayba said, ‘Muhsin was aborted after the pressure of Qunfudh
al-Adawi.’[^37]

##### As-Safadi

He said that Umar beat Fatimah’s abdomen on the day of the homage until
she miscarried al-Muhsin.[^38]

##### At-Tabari

He said, ‘The cause of her (Fatimah) death was that Qunfudh, the mawla
of the man (Abu Bakr), thrust her with the iron part of the sheath of
his sword by his (Umar) order and she miscarried Muhsin, and because of
that she became badly ill.’[^39]

##### At-Tabrisi

He mentioned the protest of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) against a group of the
enemies of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) among whom there was al-Mugheera bin
Shu’ba to whom Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) said, ‘As for you O Mugheera, you
are an enemy to Allah, a deserter to His Book, and unbelieving in His
prophet. You are an adulterer and you must be stoned. It is you who hit
Fatimah the daughter of the messenger of Allah (S) and made her bleed
and she miscarried what there was in her abdomen out of your belittling
the messenger of Allah, opposing his orders, and violating his honor.
The messenger of Allah (S) had said to her, ‘O Fatimah, you are the
principal of the women of the Paradise.” [^40]

##### Al-Majlisi

Sheikh al-Majlisi quoted from Irshad al-Qulub that Fatimah (s.a.) said,
‘Umar took the whip from Qunfudh’s hand and stroke with it my upper arm
and the whip wound on my arm and it was like a ring. Then he kicked the
door with his foot against me and I was pregnant. I fell on my face to
the ground. He hit me with his hand and my earring scattered. And then,
I miscarried Muhsin that was killed with no guilt.’[^41]

These were some of the sources that have mentioned the event of the
aggression against Fatimah (s.a.). All the Shia believe in this fact as
true, and there are many traditions transmitted from the Infallible
Imams (a.s.) about this event. However, these events show that those
people were ready to commit anything for the sake of rule and authority.

#### Abrogating the Khums

One of the oppressive procedures that Abu Bakr took against the
Prophet’s progeny was that he abrogated the khums[^42] which had been
determined by Allah for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) as mentioned in the Holy
Qur’an,

***“And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah
and for the Messenger and for the near of kin and the orphans and the
needy and the wayfarer, if you believe in Allah.” 8:41***

Muslims have agreed on that the Prophet (S) took a share from the khums
for himself and gave another share to his relatives. He kept on doing so
until he left to the better world. When Abu Bakr assumed the caliphate,
he abrogated the Prophet’s share and the share of his relatives. He
prevented the Hashemites from khums and treated them like others.[^43]

Fatimah (s.a.) sent to Abu Bakr asking him to pay her what had remained
from the khums of Khaybar, but he refused to pay her anything.[^44]

Poverty attacked the house of the Hashemites after they had been
prevented from their rights that Allah had determined for them. The
reason behind that was to make Imam Ali (a.s.) weak and unable to stand
against Abu Bakr. This was a kind of blockade that nowadays some
countries impose on their opponents.

#### Confiscation of Fadak

And from the severe procedures that Abu Bakr followed against Fatimah
(s.a.) was his confiscating of Fadak to the public treasury.

Fadak was a village in Hijaz about two or three days (of travel) from
Medina.[^45] It belonged to the Jews and was near to Khaybar.[^46]

As for its boundaries to the Infallible Imams, Fadak comprehended all
the regions of the Muslim world. Historians have mentioned that once
Harun ar-Rasheed (the Abbasid caliph) said to Imam Musa bin Ja’far
al-Kadhim (a.s.), ‘I like to give Fadak back to you.’

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.) said, ‘I do not take it except with all its
limits.’

The caliph said, ‘What are its limits?’

The Imam said, ‘If I define it, you may not give it back.’

The caliph said, ‘I adjure you by your grandfather to do.’

The Imam said, ‘Its first limit is Aden.’ The caliph changed color.

The Imam added, ‘The second limit is Samarqand.’ The caliph was
astonished.

The Imam added, ‘The third limit is Africa, and the fourth is after the
islands and Armenia.’

Harun ar-Rasheed lost his mind and he said, ‘He did not leave anything
for us.’[^47]

The Muslim state that had covered most of the world was for the imams of
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) but it was taken from them by force and the
Umayyad and the Abbasid kings overcame it with no right.

Fadak was not conquered by the Muslim armies, but it was from that which
Allah had granted to His prophet by peacemaking in the seventh year of
hijra; therefore, it was completely the Prophet’s property.

When the Muslims conquered the forts of Khaybar, Allah threw fear and
terror into the Jews’ hearts and they hurried to make peace with the
messenger of Allah on condition that they would give him the half of
their lands. Thus Fadak became the Prophet’s property.

When Fadak was in the Prophet’s possession, this verse was revealed to
him,

***“And give to the near of kin his due.” 17:26***

Many recurrent, true traditions were transmitted confirming that the
Prophet (S) had sent for Fatimah (s.a.) and donated her with Fadak and
al-Awali saying to her, ‘This is a share that Allah has determined for
you and for your progeny.’[^48]

Fatimah (s.a.) acted in Fadak as an owner to her property. The Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) had no source of income except Fadak as Ameerul Mo'minin
said, ‘Only Fadak was in our hands from all what the sky shaded.’ After
the Prophet’s death, Abu Bakr confiscated Fadak to the public treasury.
The reason behind that was to weaken Imam Ali (a.s.) economically and
paralyze the oppositionist movement against Abu Bakr.

Ibn Abil Hadeed says, ‘One day, I asked Ali bin al-Fariqi, the teacher
of the western school in Baghdad: Was Fatimah true?

He said: Yes.

I said: Then why did he (Abu Bakr) not give her Fadak whereas she was
true near to him?

He smiled and said some pleasant words: If he gave her Fadak today just
for her claim, she would come to him tomorrow claiming the caliphate for
her husband and would move him from his place and he could not apologize
or agree about anything because he would confirm that she was true in
whatever she claimed without a need for evidences or witnesses”.[^49]

Anyhow, the governments that followed Abu Bakr and Umar did with Fadak
due to their fancies. Uthman bin Affan donated Fadak to Marwan bin
al-Hakam and that was one of the reasons of the revolt against Uthman as
historians say.[^50] After Marwan’s death, his descendants inherited it
one from the other until Umar bin Abdul Aziz assumed the rule and he
took it from them and returned it as charity.[^51]

#### Fatimah Asks for Fadak

After Abu Bakr had confiscated Fadak, Fatimah (s.a.) asked him to give
it back to her. Historians say that Abu Bakr asked Fatimah (s.a.) to
bring him witnesses that the Prophet (S) had donated Fadak to her and
she did. The witnesses were Imam Ali (a.s.) and Umm Aymen about whom the
Prophet (S) said she was from the people of the Paradise. Abu Bakr wrote
a book to give Fadak back to Fatimah (s.a.), but Umar took the book,
spat on it and tore it into pieces.[^52]

It was mentioned that Abu Bakr regarded neither the witness of Imam Ali
(a.s.) nor Umm Aymen’s. He said: ‘Ali pulls the fire toward his loaf,
and Umm Aymen is a non-Arab woman that she does not speak good Arabic.’

Anyhow, the Shia theologians commented on this event with many points
which we mention some of here:

1. Abu Bakr asked Fatimah (s.a.) to prove that the Prophet had donated
Fadak to her though Fadak was in her possession, while the one who
should have a proof was the claimer (Abu Bakr), and as he had no proof
he had to take an oath on his claim according to the famous rule
“evidence is required from a claimer and oath from a denier”.

2. Abu Bakr ignored the position of the daughter of the messenger of
Allah who was the principal of the women of the nation and the worlds
and that Allah would be pleased for her pleasure and displeased for her
displeasure as the Prophet (S) often said. She was one of those whom
Allah had imposed the love to them on the nation when saying,

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.” 42:23***

And she was one of those whom Allah had purified and kept uncleanliness
away from them when saying,

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanliness from you, O people
of the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.” 33:33***

And she was one of those whom the Prophet (S) disputed by them with the
Christians of Najran where Allah had said,

***“But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves, then let us be
earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the liars.”
3:61***

And she was from the righteous whom Allah had said about,

***“Surely the righteous shall drink of a cup the admixture of which is
camphor.” 76:5***

All that required Abu Bakr to definitely believe Fatimah’s claim.

However, Abu Bakr seized Fadak and joined it to the properties of the
state which made Fatimah (s.a.) lose the only source of living for her
and her children. We are Allah’s and to Him we shall return!

Imam Ali (a.s.) asked the (Prophet’s) companions to support him and to
take his right back to him. Historians say that Imam Ali (a.s.) took
Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (peace be on them) on a mount and went
to the companions asking them for help. Fatimah (s.a.) asked the
companions to support her husband, but they apologized and said, ‘We
have already paid homage to Abu Bakr, and if your cousin (Imam Ali) came
to us before him, we would not pay homage to other than him.’[^53]

How flimsy justification it was! They were certainly responsible for
that because Imam Ali (a.s.) was busy preparing the Prophet (S) for
burial. He could not leave the Prophet (S) laid on the bed of death and
go to people who seized the opportunity to appropriate the rule.

[^1]: Saqeefa means a shed. Most of the Prophet’s companions had
gathered in the shed of Bani Sa’ida on that day to choose a caliph after
the Prophet (s) although the Prophet (S) had appointed Imam Ali (a.s.)
for this position and announced that before Muslims on many occasions.

[^2]: The Ansar (helpers) were the people of Medina who received,
believed, and assisted the Prophet (S) and his companions after the
immigration from Mecca.

[^3]: Tareekh ibnul Atheer, vol.2 p.224.

[^4]: The Muhajireen (immigrants) were the first Muslims who had
emigrated from Mecca to Medina.

[^5]: The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali (a.s.), vol.1 p.235.

[^6]: Ibid., p.236.

[^7]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.3 p.307, al-Kamil fit-Tareekh, vol.2 p.222.

[^8]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol.3 p.62.

[^9]: An-Nass wel Ijtihad, p.7.

[^10]: Shura means “consultation”.

[^11]: The Influence of Shiism in the Arabic Literature, p. 5.

[^12]: Al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol. 3 p. 62.

[^13]: Sharh Nahjol Balagha by ibn Abil Hadeed, vol. 6 p. 19.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 14.

[^15]: Al-Kamil fit-Tareekh, vol. 2 p. 220.

[^16]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 2 p.362.

[^17]: The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol. 1 p. 253.

[^18]: Al-Imamah wes-Siyasah, vol. 1 p. 4.

[^19]: Ali and his Sons, p. 19.

[^20]: The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol. 1 p.256.

[^21]: Al-Imama wes-Siyasa, vol. 1 p. 11-12.

[^22]: Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 1 p. 586.

[^23]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol. 3 p. 198.

[^24]: Al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol. 5 p.12.

[^25]: Sharh Nahjol Balagha by Ibn Abil Hadeed, vol. 1 p. 124.

[^26]: Al-Milal wen-Nihal, vol. 1 p. 56.

[^27]: Umar’s surname.

[^28]: A’lam an-Nisa’, vol. 4 p. 114.

[^29]: Ithbat al-Wasiyya, p.123.

[^30]: Divan of Hafidh Ibrahim, vol. 1 p. 75.

[^31]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol. 2 p. 619, Mizan al-I’tidal, vol. 2 p.
215, Kanzol Irfan, vol. 5 p. 631.

[^32]: Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 4 p. 189.

[^33]: Al-Milal wen-Nihal, vol. 1 p. 57.

[^34]: Lisan al-Mizan, vol. 1 p. 268.

[^35]: Ithbat al-Wasiyya, p. 143.

[^36]: Mizan al-I’tidal, vol. 1 p. 139.

[^37]: Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol. 3 p. 133.

[^38]: Al-Wafi bil-Wafiyyaat, vol. 5 p. 347.

[^39]: Dala’il al-Imama, p. 134, and quoted in Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 43
p. 170.

[^40]: Al-Ihtijaj, vol. 1 p. 401.

[^41]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 30 p. 348-34-9.

[^42]: Khums is one fifth of one’s gains and income that must be given
to the imam or his deputy.

[^43]: Tafsir al-Kashshaf, vol. 2 p. 221 in interpreting the verse of
khums.

[^44]: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 3 p. 36, Sahih Muslim, vol. 2 p. 72.

[^45]: Mu’jam al-Buldan, vol. 4 p.238.

[^46]: Majma’ al-Bahrain, vol. 5 p. 283.

[^47]: Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol. 4 p. 320.

[^48]: Shawahid at-Tanzil, vol. 1 p. 441, ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2 p.
151, Kanzol Ummal, vol. 2 p. 158, Rooh al-Ma’ani, vol. 5 p.58.

[^49]: Sharh Nahjol Balagha by Ibn Abil Hadeed, vol. 1 p. 198.

[^50]: Al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol. 4 p. 283.

[^51]: Tareekh Abul Fida’, vol. 1 p. 168.

[^52]: Al-Ihtijaj, vol. 1 p. 122, as-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol. 3 p. 362.

[^53]: Al-Imama wes-Siyasa, vol. 1 p. 16.


