Fatimah’s Birth and Upbringing
==============================

The Prophet (S) eagerly received the birth of Pure Fatimah (a.s.). He
perceived from behind the unseen that his newborn daughter would have a
very high position in the earth and in the heaven, that she would be
unequaled in purity, chastity, faith and behavior from among all the
women of the earth, and that his pure progeny would be from her. He was
very delighted for the coming of this pure child, and was sincere in his
love to her since her birth until his last breath.

When the Prophet (S) was informed that Khadijah (may Allah be pleased
with her) gave birth to Fatimah (s.a.), he went home quickly. He took
his newborn daughter, kissed her, recited the azan in her right ear, and
recited the eqama in her left ear.

The first voice Fatimah (s.a.) heard was the voice of her father, the
messenger of Allah, and the first words she heard were “Allah is
greatest” and “there is no God but Allah”. Gabriel came down to the
Prophet (S) bringing the greetings of Allah the Almighty to him and to
his blessed newborn child.[^1]

Historians say that Fatimah (s.a.) had been created from the fruits of
the Paradise. On the night of the Prophet’s ascension to the Heavens,
Allah had fed Prophet Muhammad (S) with the fruits of the Paradise and
Fatimah (s.a.) was originated from those fruits.[^2]

Date of her Birth
-----------------

Historians were different about the date of Fatimah’s birth. Here are
some of their sayings:

1. She was born five years after the prophethood of her father and three
years after his ascension to the heaven on the twentieth of Jumada
al-Aakhirah,[^3] and it was Friday.[^4]

2. She was born one year after the prophethood of her father.[^5]

3. She was born five years before the prophethood. This saying is odd
and ignored.[^6]

4. Some books of history mentioned that Fatimah (s.a.) had been born
before the prophethood of her father but without mentioning the year and
the month of her birth.[^7]

There are other sayings about her birth, but the true saying is the
first one mentioned above that determines her age to be eighteen years.

Place of her Birth
------------------

Fatimah (s.a.) was born in Mecca in the house of Khadijah (s.a.). The
house was near the Lane of Perfumers, and now it is a mosque.

Her Name
--------

The Prophet (S) named his newborn daughter as Fatimah. It was like the
name of Imam Ali’s mother. It is related to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) that
once Imam Ali (a.s.) asked the Prophet (S), ‘O messenger of Allah, why
did you name Fatimah[^8] so?’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘Because she and her followers are weaned from
Fire.’[^9]

Her Epithets
------------

Fatimah the principal of the women of the worlds was attributed with
many epithets expressing the high qualities she had. The following are
some of those epithets:

### As-Siddiqah

It means the truthful woman. She was the most truthful woman in the
world of Islam and other than Islam.

### Al-Mubarakah

It means the blessed woman. Allah had blessed her and all her progeny in
the earth.

### At-Tahirah

It means the pure woman. She was the purest one among all the women of
the world. Allah had endowed her with this favor by saying,

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.” (33:33)***

All commentators say this verse had been revealed about the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.).

### Az-Zakiyyah

It means the chaste, innocent woman.

### Ar-Radhiyah

It means the satisfied woman. She was satisfied with the simple life of
asceticism Allah had willed for her in the worldly life.

It was narrated from Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) his saying, ‘Once, the
messenger of Allah (S) came to Fatimah (s.a.) and found her wearing a
garment of camel-hair while milling with her hands and suckling her
child. The Prophet’s eyes shed tears when he saw her in that case. He
said to her, ‘O my daughter, suffer the bitterness of this life for the
sake of the sweetness of the afterlife; for Allah has revealed to me,

***“And soon will your Lord give you so that you shall be well pleased.”
(93:5)***

She said, ‘O messenger of Allah, praise be to Allah for His gifts, and
thanks be to Him for His blessings.’[^10]

### Al-Muhaddathah

The talked to; because the angels talked with her as they talked with
Virgin Mary. Allah says,

***“When the angels said: O Maryam, surely Allah gives you good news
with a Word from Him.” (3:45)***

### Al-Batool

She was called so, because she was devoted to Allah and because she had
no equal in her virtues among all women. Once, Ahmed bin Yahya was asked
about the reason why Fatimah (s.a.) was called al-Batool and he said,
‘because she was incomparable in her chastity, virtues, religiousness,
and lineage. It was also said that she was called so because she had
devoted herself to Allah the Almighty and turned her back to the worldly
life.’[^11]

### Az-Zahra’

Shining; she was called so because her great faith and high morals were
shining. Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) was asked why she was called so and he
said, ‘When she stood in her mihrab (for worshipping), her light shone
for the inhabitants of the Heaven as stars shone for the inhabitants of
the earth.’[^12]

Al-Jami’ al-Azhar in Cairo was built by the Fatimids and called so by
them after the name of Fatimah az-Zahra’ to be blessed and honored.

Her Surnames
------------

Fatimah (s.a.) had several surnames. Here are some of them:

### Umm38 Abeeha

The mother of her father: she was called so (by her father) because she
was too kind and loving to her father the messenger of Allah (S).[^13]

From the examples of her kindness and great love to her father was that
once, he came back to Medina from one of the battles, and came to
Fatimah’s house first before his wives as usual. Fatimah (s.a.) received
him, and began kissing him on the face and the eyes, and crying. The
Prophet (S) asked her, ‘Why are you crying?’

She said, ‘I see that you have turned pale.’

The Prophet (S) calmed her down and said, ‘O Fatimah, Allah the Almighty
has delegated your father with a mission that no house on the face of
the earth remains until it is entered into it with glory or with
meanness. It will reach wherever night reaches.’[^14]

“With glory” is for those who believe in him, and “with meanness” is for
those who deny his mission and fight him.

She highly revered her father. She addressed him by say ing “O messenger
of Allah” especially after the revelation of this verse.

***“Make not the calling of the messenger among you as your calling one
another.” (24:63)***

That was difficult for the Prophet (S) who said to her, ‘O Fatimah, it
(the verse) was not revealed about you, nor your family, nor your
progeny. You are from me and I am from you. It was revealed about the
harsh and rude people of Quraysh; the people of lavishness and
haughtiness. You say: O father! It is more refreshing to the heart, and
more satisfactory to the Lord.’[^15]

Fatimah (s.a.) was the most beloved one to her father from among all his
family, and she was the kindest to him. When he left to the better
world, she was terribly affected and after a short time she joined him
in the Paradise.

### Umm al-Hasanayn

The mother of al-Hasan and al-Husayn (peace be upon them), the Prophet’s
two grandsons and the masters of the youth of the Paradise.

### Umm al-Hasan

Al-Hasan (a.s.) was her eldest son.

### Umm al-Husayn

Al-Husayn (a.s.) was her second son, the reviver of Islam, the savior of
Muslims, and the head of the free in the world.

Her Upbringing
--------------

Fatimah (s.a.) was brought up by her father, the master of all creation.
He fed her with his talents and mentality. He taught her the Qur'an and
all things about the verses of verdicts, the causes of the revelation of
verses, and other things concerning the Qur'an. He educated her, the
rulings of the Sharia, the nobilities of character, and high morals and
principles. He upbrought her on the sincere faith in Allah, the Creator
of the universe, and Giver of life.

### From the Prophet’s educational programs to Fatimah

From the programs of the Islamic education that the Prophet (S) offered
to his Fatimah (s.a.), the principal of the women of the worlds, was
that he recommended her of the following:

“He, whose neighbor is not safe from his harms, is not from the
believers.

He, who believes in Allah and in the afterlife, should not harm his
neighbor.

He, who believes in Allah and in the afterlife, should say good or
otherwise, keep silent.

Allah loves a good, patient, abstinent one, and hates an indecent,
stingy, importunate one.

Coyness is from faith, and faith is in the Paradise. Indecency is from
obscenity, and obscenity is in the Fire…”[^16]

In this way, the Prophet (S) fed his daughter Fatimah (s.a.) with the
high ideals and values.

Asma’ bint Umays said, ‘Once, I was with Fatimah when the messenger of
Allah (S) came to her and saw a gold necklace on her neck that Imam Ali
(a.s.) had bought for her from his own money. The messenger of Allah (S)
said to her, ‘Let people not deceive you by saying: the daughter of
Muhammad, while you put on wears of tyrants!’

Fatimah (s.a.) took off the necklace soon. She sold it and bought with
its price a slave, and then she freed the slave. The Prophet (S) was
pleased with that and he thanked her daughter for her doing.’[^17]

Prophet Muhammad (S) had educated his daughter to be ascetic in this
life and not to care for its pleasures.

Once another, the Prophet (S) visited Fatimah (s.a.) and saw a necklace
on her neck. He turned his face away from her. She soon took the
necklace off and gave it to him. He said to her, ‘And you are from me
Fatimah.’

A beggar knocked the door, and the Prophet (S) gave him the necklace and
then said, ‘The wrath of Allah is great on whoever sheds my blood and
harms me by harming my progeny.’[^18]

### Some Du’as from the Prophet (S) to Fatimah (s.a.)

In educating his dear daughter, the Prophet (S) taught Fatimah (s.a.)
some du’as that would serve her in the worldly life and in the afterlife
and take her closer to Allah. Here are some of those du’as:

“O Allah, the Most Glorious, Mentioned One, and the Most Olden in glory
and might,
O Allah, the Merciful to everyone asking for mercy, and the Shelter of
everyone resorting to You,
O Allah, the Merciful to every sad one complaining of his grief and
sorrow to You,
O Allah, the best of those who are asked for favor, and the Most
Secretive in giving,
O Allah, Whom the angels, who are flaming with light, are afraid of,

I ask You by the attributes by which the carriers of Your Throne call
upon You, and those around Your Throne by Your Light glorify You for
fear of Your punishment, and by the attributes by which Gabriel,
Michael, and Israfel call upon You to respond to me, relieve my grief,
and cover my sins.

O You Who orders by the cry His creation and they soon will be
resurrected on the Land of Resurrection, I ask You by that attribute by
which You give life to the bones when they are rotten to give life to my
heart, expand my bosom, and set aright my affairs.

O You Who have singled only Yourself for everlasting, and created for
Your creation death and life, O You Whose doing is just by a saying, and
Whose saying is a command, and Whose command is applied to whatever You
will, I ask You by the attribute by which Your friend (Abraham) asked
You when he was thrown into fire and You responded to him and said,

***“O fire, be coolness and peace for Abraham!” 21:69***

and by the attribute by which Moses prayed to You from the blessed side
of the mountain and You responded to his prayer,

and by the attribute by which You removed the distress from Ayyoob
(Job), and accepted the repentance of Dawud (David), and subjugated for
Solomon the wind blowing by his order and the devils, and taught him the
language of birds,

and by the attribute by which You granted to Zachariah, Yahya (John),
and created Jesus from the Holy Spirit with no father,
and by the attribute by which You created the Throne and Sovereignty,
and by the attribute by which You created the angels,
and by the attribute by which You created man and the jinn,
and by the attribute by which You created all the creation and
everything You willed,
and by the attribute by which You had power over everything,
I ask You by these attributes to fulfill my request and satisfy my
needs.”[^19]

From the other du’as that the Prophet (S) taught to Fatimah (s.a.) is
this one:

“O You, the Knower of the unseen and the hidden secrets, the Obeyed, the
Knower, O Allah, O Allah, O Allah, the Defeater of the parties for
Muhammad, the Planner against the Pharaoh for Moses, the Savior of Jesus
from the hands of the unjust, the Rescuer of Noah’s people from
drowning, the Merciful to Your servant Ya’qub (Jacob), the Reliever of
Ayyoob’s distress, the Saver of Thinnoon (Jonah) from the darkness, the
Doer of every good, the Guide to every good, the Leader to every good,
the Enjoiner to every good, the Creator of good, the Qualified for good,
You are Allah; I have come to You for what You have known and You are
the Knower of the unseen, I ask You to have blessing on Muhammad and the
progeny of Muhammad.”[^20]

Imam Ali (a.s.) said that one day Fatimah (s.a.) complained to the
messenger of Allah (S) of insomnia and he asked her to pray to Allah by
saying,“O You the Satisfier of hungry stomachs, the Clothing of naked
bodies, the Calmer of beating veins, the putting to sleep the sleepless
eyes, calm my beating veins and permit to my eye a soon sleep.”[^21]

He also taught her a du’a that is recited when coming in a mosque:

“O Allah, forgive me my sins and open to me the doors of Your mercy!”

A du’a that is recited when coming out of a mosque:

“O Allah, forgive me my sins and open to me the doors of Your
favor!”[^22]

### Her Similarity to the Prophet (S)

Fatimah (s.a.) was similar to her father in figure, morals, high
personality and other qualities. Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansary said,
‘Whenever I saw Fatimah walk, I remembered the messenger of Allah (S).
She inclined to the right one time and to the left another.’[^23]

Aa'isha said, ‘I have not seen anyone more similar to the messenger of
Allah (S) in straightness, guidance, and talking in his sitting and
standing than Fatimah, his daughter. When she came to the messenger of
Allah (S), he got up, kissed her, and seated her in his place. When the
messenger of Allah (S) came to her, she got up, kissed him, and seated
him in her place.’[^24]

She was like her father not only in his figure and expressions but in
all his features by which he was distinguished from all prophets. Some
poet says about Fatimah (s.a.), ‘She is a second Ahmed and the Ahmed of
her time ,she is the element of monotheism, she is the niche of the
light of Allah the Almighty, she is an olive-tree whose blessings
include all mankind.’[^25]

### Fatimah, the Principal of Women

Once, Fatimah (s.a.) was ill. The Prophet (S) and Imran bin Hussayn came
to visit her. At the door, the Prophet (S) greeted her and said, ‘May I
come in and the one who is with me?’

She said, ‘Yes, you and the one with you…O father, by Allah I have
nothing on except an aba.’

The Prophet (S) asked her to cover herself with the aba and he gave her
a wrap to veil her head. Then he came in and asked her, ‘How do you feel
my daughter?’

She said, ‘I feel ill, and what increases my pain is that I have nothing
to eat.’

The Prophet (S) said to her, ‘Are you not satisfied that you are the
principal of the women of the worlds?’

She said, ‘O father, what about Mary?’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘She is the principal of the women of her world,
and you are the principal of the women of your world.’[^26]

Once another, Fatimah (s.a.) was ill. The Prophet (S) and some of his
companions came to visit her. At Fatimah’s door, the Prophet (S) ordered
her to veil herself. She said, ‘I have nothing on but an aba.’

p.361, Sunan of Abu Dawud, vol.2 p.522, Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.4 p.272,
al-Adab al-Mufrad, p.136. (*this is here randomly and is not linked with
any footnote*?)

The Prophet (S) threw his garment to her to cover herself with. Then the
Prophet (S) and his companions came in, asked her about her condition,
and she said she was going to be well. They left while being astonished
at the simple life Fatimah (s.a.) lived and the simple furniture she had
in her house. They said, ‘O God! The daughter of our prophet lives such
a life!’

The Prophet (S) said to them, ‘She is the principal of women on the Day
of Resurrection.’[^27]

Fatimah (s.a.) was so ascetic in the worldly life. She had turned away
from all pleasure of this life, and turned devotedly to Allah the
Almighty. The Prophet (S) loved her too much to an extent that he said
to her, ‘May my father and mother be sacrificed for you.’[^28]

[^1]: Mizan al-I’tidal, vol.4 p.72, Lisan al-Mizan, vol.3 p.367, where
it is mentioned that ibn Abbas had said, ‘When Fatimahh was born, the
Prophet (S) named her as al-Mansurah. Gabriel came to the Prophet (S)
and said to him, ‘Allah sends you His greeting and sends your newborn
daughter His greeting.’

[^2]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.1 p.156, Tareekh Baghdad, vol.5 p.87,
Mizan al-I’tidal, vol.27 p.97.

[^3]: A’lam al-Wara, p.148, Jami’ al-Usool, vol.12 p.9-10, Nisa’
an-Nabiy wa Awladuh (wives and children of the Prophet), p.89, Ma’sat
(tragedy of) az-Zahra’ by Sayyid Ja’far Murtadha al-Aamily, vol.1 p.37,
Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.6, Usool al-Kafi, vol.1 p.458, Safwat
as-Safwah, vol.1 p.148.

[^4]: Al-Kawthar fee Ahwal Fatimahh, vol.1 p.309.

[^5]: Nisa’ an-Nabiy wa Awladuh, p.90.

[^6]: Ma’sat az-Zahra’, vol.1 p.36.

[^7]: Al-Isabah, vol.8 p.54.

[^8]: Fatimahh means “a weaned child”.

[^9]: Nisa’ an-Nabiy wa Awladuh, p.91. In Thakha’ir al-Uqba,p.26, it is
mentioned that Imam Ali Asked, ‘O messenger of Allah, why did you name
Fatimahh so?’ The Prophet (S) said, ‘Allah the Almighty will wean her
and her progeny from Fire on the Day of Resurrection.’ The same has been
mentioned in Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.219 and Faydh al-Qadeer, vol.1 p.168.

[^10]: Az-Zahra’ Sayyidaton Nisa’, vol.1 p.30.

[^11]: Lisan al-Arab, vol.16 p.43, an-Nihayah fee Gharib al-Hadith, vol.
1 p.94.

[^12]: Nisa’ an-Nabiy wa Awladuh, p.92.

[^13]: Al-Istee’ab, vol.2 p.752, Usd al-Ghabah, vol.5 p.520.

[^14]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.2 p.30, and somehow like it in Kanzol
Ummal, vol.1 p.77, and Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.8 p.262.

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.33.

[^16]: Dala’il al-Imamah, p.66

[^17]: Know that I am Fatimah, vol 9 p.557.

[^18]: Kashful Ghummah, vol.1 p.471.

[^19]: Muhaj ad-Da’awaat, p. 207

[^20]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 88 p. 370.

[^21]: Falah as-Sa’il, p. 384.

[^22]: Know that I am Fatimah, vol.9 p.594.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.43 p.7.

[^24]: Thakha’ir al-Uqba, p.40, al-Istee’ab, vol.4 p.450, Sunan of
at-Tarmithi, vol.5

[^25]: Another name of Prophet Muhammad (S).

[^26]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.2 p.42, Mushkil al-Aathar, vol.1 p.50,
Thakha’ir al-Uqba, p.43.

[^27]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.2 p.42.

[^28]: Mustadrak as-Sahihayn, vol.3 p.156.


