Fatimah in the Qur’an and the Sunna
===================================

Fatimah (s.a.) had been extolled and praised in the Book of Allah and in
the Sunna of His prophet. She was one of the shining suns that undertook
the mission of Allah and took on the values, principles and aims of
Islam. She struggled for the sake of Allah and in the way of Islam until
the last breath.

Her Position in the Qur'an
--------------------------

Many verses had been revealed in the Holy Qur'an praising the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) at the head of whom Fatimah (s.a.) was. The following are some of
those verses:

### The Verse of Mawaddah

Allah has said,

***“Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I do not ask of you any reward for
it but love for my near relatives; and whoever earns good, We give him
more of good therein; surely Allah is Forgiving, Grateful.” 42:23.***

In the Qur'an, Allah has imposed the love to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) on
all Muslims. Narrators said that the “near relatives” mentioned in the
verse referred to Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn.

1. Ibn Abbas said, ‘When this verse was revealed, the messenger of Allah
was asked, ‘Who are your relatives that you have ordered us to love?’

He said, ‘Ali, Fatimah, and their two sons.’[^1]

2. Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansari said, ‘One day, a nomad came to the
Prophet (S) and said, ‘O Muhammad, offer Islam to me!’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘You should bear witness that there is no god but
Allah, Who is One and Only with no partner, and that Muhammad is His
slave and messenger.’

The nomad asked, ‘Do you ask me for a recompense for it?’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘No, except love to the relatives.’

The nomad asked, ‘My relatives or your relatives?’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘My relatives.’

The nomad said to the Prophet (S), ‘Give me your hand to pay homage to
you. On whoever does not love you and not love your relatives the curse
of Allah be!’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘Amen!’[^2]

3. Ibn Abbas said, ‘When this verse was revealed, some people, in whose
hearts there was a disease, said, ‘He (the Prophet) does not want except
to make us submit to his relatives after him.’

Gabriel told the Prophet (S) that some people had accused him and so
Allah revealed the following verse about them,

***“Or do they say: He has forged a lie against Allah?” 42:24.***

Then, those people said, ‘O messenger of Allah, you are truthful.’[^3]

4. The Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) confirmed that the verse had been revealed
about them.

Imam Ali (a.s.) said, ‘The “Ha Mim”[^4] is about us. It is the verse
that no one keeps our love except the believers.’ Then he recited the
verse,

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.”42:23***[^5]

Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) said in one of his sermons, ‘I am from the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) whom Allah has imposed their love on every Muslim when He
said, (Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I do not ask of you any reward
for it but love for my near relatives; and whoever earns good, We give
him more of good therein). The earning of good is the love to us the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).’[^6]

When Imam Zaynol Aabidin (as-Sajjad) (a.s.) was brought captive to Yazid
bin Mo’awiya in Damascus, an ignorant man came and said to him (Imam
as-Sajjad), ‘Praise be to Allah Who killed and uproot you, and cut off
the cause of sedition.’

Imam Zaynol Aabidin (a.s.) said kindly to him, ‘Have you read the
Qur'an?’

The man said, ‘Yes, I have.’

The Imam said, ‘Have you read the “Ha Mim”?’

The man said, ‘I have read the Qur'an but I have not read the “Ha Mim”.’

The Imam said, ‘Have you not read, (Say: I do not ask of you any reward
for it but love for my near relatives)?’

The man was astonished and said to the imam, ‘Are they you?’

Imam Zaynol Aabidin (a.s.) said, ‘Yes.’[^7]

The man left feeling too regretful for the bad word he said to the Imam.

Al-Fakhr ar-Razi said, ‘If this is proved (that this verse concerns the
Ahlul Bayt), then they must be glorified and highly revered…there are
many proofs leading to this:

The first is the saying of Allah (but love to the near relatives...).
Definitely, the relation between the Prophet (S) and Fatimah, Ali,
al-Hasan, and al-Husayn was the strongest, and this shows that they were
his near relatives.

The second is that there is no doubt that the Prophet (S) loved Fatimah
(s.a.) when he said, ‘Fatimah is a part from me. Whoever harms her harms
me.’ It is also proved by recurrent traditions transmitted from Prophet
Muhammad (S) that he loved Ali, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn. Since this is
proved, therefore all the nation must do as the Prophet (S) did, for
Allah has said,

***“…and follow him (the Prophet) that haply you may be led aright.”
7:158***

and

***“…therefore let those beware who go against his order lest a trial
afflict them or there befall them a painful chastisement.” 24:63***

and

***“Say: If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you and
forgive you your faults.” 3:31***

and

***“Certainly you have in the Messenger of Allah an excellent exemplar.”
33:21.***

The third is that the prayer for the Aal (near relatives of the Prophet)
is of a great rank, therefore, Allah has made it obligatory at the end
of tashahhud[^8], that is to say: O Allah, have blessing on Muhammad and
the progeny of Muhammad.’[^9]

### The Verse of Abrar

Allah has said,

***“Surely the righteous shall drink of a cup the admixture of which is
camphor. A fountain from which the servants of Allah shall drink; they
make it to flow a (goodly) flowing forth. They fulfill vows and fear a
day the evil of which shall be spreading far and wide. And they give
food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan and the captive. We
only feed you for Allah's sake; we desire from you neither reward nor
thanks.” 76:5-9***

Commentators say that the Sura of “hal ata” was revealed about the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.).[^10]

The cause of the revelation of this verse was that one day Imam al-Hasan
and Imam al-Husayn (when children yet) became ill. The Prophet (S), with
some of his companions, visited them and asked Imam Ali (a.s.) to vow a
fasting for Allah. He vowed to fast for three days when his two sons
would recover. Fatimah (s.a.) and her servant Fiddha vowed to do the
same. When Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) restored to health,
the all fasted. Imam Ali (a.s.) had no money to buy food for their
iftar.[^11] He borrowed some barley. Fatimah (s.a.) milled and baked
some of that barley for the iftar of the first day of their fasting.
When it was time for iftar, a poor man knocked the door asking for some
food. All members of the family gave their shares to the poor man and
spent their night with no food. On the second day and at the time of
iftar, an orphan knocked the door asking for some food. They all gave
him their shares of food and spent the second night having nothing save
water. On the third day, Fatimah (s.a.) milled and baked the rest of
barley. At the time of iftar, a captive knocked the door asking for some
food, and they did the same as they did on the two previous days. On the
fourth day, the Prophet (S) came to them and saw them very weak and
suffering hunger. He said painfully, ‘O my Lord! The people of the house
of Muhammad are starving.’

At those moments, Gabriel came down to the Prophet (S) carrying with him
these verses as reward from the Generous Giver for these great people.

***“Therefore Allah will guard them from the evil of that day and cause
them to meet with ease and happiness. And reward them, because they were
patient, with garden and silk. Reclining therein on raised couches, they
shall find therein neither (the severe heat of) the sun nor bitter
cold.” 76:11-13***

### The Verse of Tat’hir

From the Qur’anic verses that have been revealed about the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) is the verse of Tat’hir (purification). Allah has said,

***“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.” 33:33***

All commentators say that this verse was revealed about the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) who were the five persons of the kisa’ (garment)[^12]. They said
it was revealed about the messenger of Allah, Imam Ali, Fatimah,
al-Hasan, and al-Husayn (peace be on them) only, and no anyone of the
Prophet’s wives or companions other than these five persons.

Umm Salama, the Prophet’s wife said, “This verse was revealed in my
house when there were in the house Fatimah, Ali, al-Hasan, and
al-Husayn. The messenger of Allah (S) covered them with a garment that
was on him and said, ‘O Allah, these are the people of my house. Keep
uncleanness away from them and purify them a thorough purification!’

I said, ‘Am I with you, O messenger of Allah?’ I lifted the garment to
enter with them, but the messenger of Allah kindly drew the garment and
said to me, ‘You are too good.”[^13]

Ibn Abbas said, “I saw the messenger of Allah (S) everyday for seven
months come to the door (house) of Ali bin Abi Talib at the time of
prayer saying, ‘Peace, mercy, and blessings of Allah be on you, the
people of the house. Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness
from you, O people of the House, and to purify you a (thorough)
purifying. Prayer! May Allah have mercy on You.’ He did that five times
every day.”[^14]

Anas bin Malik said, “The Prophet (S) came to the door (house) of
Fatimah (everyday) for six months when he went to offer the Fajr (dawn)
Prayer (in the mosque) saying, ‘Prayer, O people of the house! Allah
only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the
House, and to purify you a (thorough) purifying.”[^15]

Abu Barza said, “I offered prayers with the messenger of Allah for seven
months. Whenever he went out of his house, he came to the door of
Fatimah and said, ‘Peace be on you. Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleanness from you, O people of the House, and to purify you a
(thorough) purifying.”[^16]

Imam al-Hasan, in one of his sermons, said, ‘I am from the people of the
house whom Gabriel came down to and came up from, and I am from the
people of the house whom Allah has kept uncleanness away from and
purified a thorough purification.’[^17]

There are many traditions transmitted from the pure progeny of the
Prophet (S) showing that the verse concerned them only and no anyone
other than them. We have mentioned some important studies on the verse
in the first chapter of our book “the Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali”.

### The Verse of Mubahalah

One of the verses that Allah had revealed about the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
was the verse of mubahalah which recites:

***“But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and ourselves*** ***and yourselves, then let us
be earnest in prayer, and invoke the curse of Allah on the liars.”
3:61***

All commentators and narrators of Hadith say that this verse was
revealed about the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).[^18] What is meant by (our sons)
is Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (a.s.), (our women) is Fatimah
(s.a.), and (ourselves) is Imam Ali (a.s.).

The verse was revealed on a very important historical event that took
place between the Prophet (S) and the Christian clergymen. Once, a
delegation of the chiefs of the Christians came to the Prophet (S) to
argue with him on Islam. After a long argument, they agreed to pray
Allah earnestly and invoke His curse to be on those who lie. They
assigned a time for mubahala (mutual imprecation) and when the time
came, the Prophet (S) chose for mubahala the best ones of all the
creatures of Allah. They were his family; his dear daughter Fatimah
(s.a.), his cousin and son-in-law Ali (a.s.), and his two grandsons
al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a.s.).

The Prophet (S) with his family came to the place of mubahala, and the
delegation of the Christians, headed by as-Sayyid and al-Aaqib and
accompanied with horsemen from bani al-Harth, came in a wonderful
procession. Masses of people crowded in the place waiting for the
important event.

When the Christians saw the Prophet (S) with his family who were highly
glorified and revered by all people, their hearts were filled with fear
and horror. The Prophet (S) knelt submissively before Allah the Almighty
getting ready for the mubahala. As-Sayyid and al-Aaqib approached him
saying, ‘O Abul Qassim, by whom do you imprecate us?’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘I imprecate you by the best ones of the people of
the earth and the most preferred by Allah.’ He pointed to Imam Ali, his
wife Fatimah, and his two sons al-Hasan and al-Husayn (peace be on
them).

They said to him, ‘Why do you not imprecate us by the notable and
important people who have believed and followed you?’

The Prophet (S) confirmed to them that his family members were the best
ones of all, saying, ‘Yes, I imprecate you by these ones who are the
best of the people of the earth and the most preferred to all
creatures.’

Horror and fear occupied the Christians’ hearts and they hastened
towards their chief the bishop who said to them, ‘I see faces that if
someone asks Allah by them to remove a mountain from its place, He will
do.’

The bishop feared for the Christians from perishment if the Prophet (S)
would imprecate them. He said to his two fellows, ‘Do you not see
Muhammad raising his hands waiting for what you shall do? By Jesus, if
his mouth utters a word, we shall never go back to family or property!’

Then he said to his people, ‘Do you not see that the sun has changed,
dark clouds are coming in the horizon, black and red winds have begun
blowing, and smoke is coming up from these mountains? Torment has come
to us. Look at the birds how they spew their craws, the trees how their
leaves fall down, and the ground how it shakes under our feet!’

The bishop was certain that his people would perish and therefore, he
prevented them from that mubahala. The Christian delegation asked the
Prophet (S), ‘O Abul Qassim, exempt us, may Allah exempt you!’

The Prophet (S) addressed the Christians and the Muslims saying, ‘By Him
in Whose hand my soul is, torment was about to afflict the people of
Najran[^19], and if they did not give up, they would be metamorphosed
into monkeys and pigs, and the valley would be burnt with fire on them,
and Allah would remove Najran and its people and even birds on trees,
and the new year would not come to all Christians.’[^20]

They submitted to the conditions of the Prophet (S) and they went back
to their country while their hearts were full of respect and reverence
to the Prophet (S) and to his family for the high position they had near
Allah.

Anyhow, this event showed the importance of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and
that they had no equal at all in the Muslim society which was full of
sincere believers who struggled devotedly for the sake of Islam. If the
Prophet (S) found ones like or better than his family, he would not
prefer his family to them. Besides, he did not invite anyone from his
close relatives such as his uncle al-Abbas or anyone from the
Hashimites, nor did he invite any of his wives, nor his aunt Safiyya to
join them with his daughter Fatimah (s.a.), nor anyone else at all.

Of course, no one of Muslim men and Muslim women was equal to the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s.) whom Allah had honored and preferred to all of His creation.

In the Sunna
------------

In the Prophetic Sunna there are many traditions the Prophet (S) had
said about the virtue and the high position of Fatimah (s.a.) the
principal of all women of the worlds where he mentioned her either by
the name or implicitly for she is from the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and all the
traditions about the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) include her.

The following are some of those traditions:

1. Imam Ali (a.s.) said that the messenger of Allah (S) said to Fatimah
(s.a.), ‘Allah is displeased for your displeasure and pleased for your
pleasure.’[^21]

2. Imam Ali (a.s.) narrated that the messenger of Allah (S) said to
Fatimah (s.a.), ‘The Lord is displeased for your displeasure and pleased
for your pleasure.’[^22]

3. Musawwir bin Makhramah narrated that the Prophet (S) said to Fatimah
(s.a.), ‘Fatimah is a part from me. Whoever displeases her displeases
me.’[^23]

4. Musawwir bin Makhramah narrated that the Prophet (S) said, ‘Fatimah
is a part from me. Whatever troubles her troubles me and whatever harms
her harms me.’[^24]

5. Musawwir bin Makhramah narrated that the Prophet (S) said, ‘Fatimah
is but a branch from me. Whatever delights her delights me, and whatever
depresses her depresses me.’[^25]

6. Abdullah bin az-Zubayr narrated that the Prophet (S) said, ‘Verily
Fatimah is a part from me. Whatever harms her harms me, and whatever
irritates her irritates me.’[^26]

These traditions show the same meaning. It is that Fatimah (s.a.) had
occupied her father’s feelings until he compared her pleasure to his
pleasure and her displeasure to his. It is a great position that no
woman has ever got.

7. Abu Hurayra narrated that the Prophet (S) said, ‘The first person,
who shall enter Paradise, is Fatimah (peace be on her).’[^27]

8. Imam Ali (a.s.) narrated that the Prophet (S) said, ‘On the Day of
Resurrection, my daughter Fatimah will be resurrected while wearing the
garment of honor that will have been kneaded with the water of life.
Creatures will look at her and will be astonished. Then, she will be
clothed with a garment from the garments of Paradise. On one thousand
garments there will be written: “Take the daughter of Muhammad into
Paradise in the best way, most perfect reverence, fullest honor and the
best luck.’[^28]

9. Once, the Prophet (S) held Fatimah’s hand and said before Muslims,
‘He, who has known Fatimah has known her, and he, who has not (let him
know her); she is Fatimah bint Muhammad. She is a part from me and she
is my heart and my soul that is between my two sides. Whoever harms her
harms me, and whoever harms me harms Allah.’[^29]

10. Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad that the Prophet (S) had
said to his daughter Fatimah (s.a.), ‘May your father be sacrificed for
you!’ He repeated that three times.[^30]

11. Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) narrated that the Prophet (S) said, ‘Fatimah
is the delight of my heart, her two sons are the fruit of my soul, her
husband is the light of my sight, and the imams of her progeny are the
guardians of my Lord and His rope that is extended between Him and His
people. Whoever keeps to it will be safe, and whoever lags behind it
will perish.’[^31]

12. He also narrated that the Prophet (S) said, ‘Fatimah is a branch
from me. Whatever distresses her distresses me, and whatever pleases her
pleases me.’[^32]

13. The Prophet (S) said to Imam Ali (a.s.), ‘You will be with me in my
place in the Paradise with my daughter Fatimah. You are my brother and
companion.’ Then he recited this verse,

***“…as brethren, on raised couches, face to face.” 15:47*** [^33]

Traditions About the Pure progeny
---------------------------------

Many traditions have been transmitted from the Prophet (S) talking about
the preference and high position of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and the
obligation of following them. The following are some of them:

### 1. The Tradition of ath-Thaqalayn

It is a true tradition that has been mentioned in all books of Hadith
and it is famous among all Muslims.

Zayd bin Arqam narrated that the Prophet (S) said, “I will leave for you
the two weighty things that if you keep to them, you shall not go astray
after me at all. One of them is greater than the other; the Book of
Allah that is a cord extended from the Heaven to the earth, and my
progeny. They will not separate until they will come to me at the Pond
(in Paradise). So see how you will obey me in dealing with them.”[^34]

Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansari said, ‘I saw the messenger of Allah (S) on
the day of Arafa during offering the hajj, preaching from on his
she-camel and saying, “O people, I have left for you what if you follow,
you shall never go astray; the Book of Allah and my progeny.”[^35]

Zayd bin Arqam said, “The messenger of Allah (S) stayed at al-Juhfa, and
then he came to people, praised Allah and said, ‘I have not found for
any prophet except the half of the age of the one who was before him.
And I am about to be called upon (to die). So what do you say?’

People said, ‘You have been sincere to us.’

Then he said, ‘Do you not bear witness that there is no god but Allah
and that Muhammad is His servant and messenger, and that Paradise is
true and Fire is true?’

They all said, ‘We bear witness.’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘I will precede you to the pond (in Paradise), and
you will come to me at the pond whose wide is as between Sana’a and
Busra,[^36] and it has silver cups as much as the number of stars. See
how you will be loyal to me in dealing with the two weighty things!’

Someone asked, ‘O messenger of Allah, what are the two weighty things?’

The Prophet (S) said, ‘The Book of Allah; one side is in the hand of
Allah and the other side is in your hands so keep to it, and the other
(weighty) thing is my family. The kind, the wise (Gabriel) has told me
that they (the Qur’an and my family) will not separate until they will
come to me at the pond (in Paradise), and I have asked my Lord to grant
me that. Do not precede them lest you perish and do not lag behind them,
and do not teach them because they are more knowledgeable than you…’

Then he took Imam Ali’s hand and said, ‘Whoever I am worthier of him
than himself, let Ali be his guardian. O Allah, be a guardian to whoever
follows him and an enemy to whoever opposes him!’[^37]

Once again when being in the deathbed, the Prophet (S) said to his
companions, ‘O people, I am about to die soon and taken. I had advised
you to be excused before you. I have left to you the Book of my Lord the
Almighty and my progeny the people of my house.’

Then he took Imam Ali’s hand and said, ‘Ali is with the Qur'an and the
Qur'an is with Ali. They will never separate until they will come to me
at the pond (in the Paradise).’[^38]

This tradition is one of the truest traditions in its sanad[^39].
Al-Manawi quoted from as-Samhudi saying, ‘…in this subject there is more
than twenty companions that all of them have narrated this
tradition.’[^40]

Ibn Hajar said, ‘This tradition has been narrated in many ways from more
than twenty companions.’[^41]

The tradition proves the infallibility of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) from any
sin or deviation because the Prophet (S) had compared them to the Holy
Book of Allah, and of course, every deviation in the conducts of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is considered as a separation from the Book of Allah,
whereas the Prophet (S) had announced that they (the Book of Allah and
the Ahlul Bayt) would never separate until they would come to him at the
Pond in the Paradise.

### 2. The Tradition of as-Safeenah (the Ark)

Abu Sa’eed al-Khidri said, “I heard the Prophet (S) saying, ‘Verily, the
example of my family among you is like the example of the Ark of Noah.
Whoever rode on it was saved and whoever lagged behind it drowned and
perished. Verily, the example of my family among you is like the Gate of
Hitta (repentance) of the Israelites. Whoever entered through it was
forgiven.’[^42]

This tradition announces the great importance of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
and by keeping to them the nation is saved from drowning in the abysses
of life.

Sayyid Sharafuddeen al-Aamily says, “You know that likening them with
the Ark of Noah implies that whoever resorts to them in matters related
to the creed, deriving the branches and basics of religion from their
virtuous Imams, will certainly be saved from the fire of hell, and
whoever lags behind them is like one who seeks shelter during the flood
with a mountain so that it may save him from Allah's destiny, but he
will eventually be drowned in water while the first will be hurled in
the hellfire, may Allah protect us from it.

The reason why they, peace be upon them, are compared to the Gate of
Salvation is that Allah has made that Gate a symbol of humility before
His Greatness and submission to His Judgment; therefore, it becomes a
reason for forgiveness. This is the reason for the similitude. Ibn
Hajar, after quoting these and other similar traditions, says, “The
reason for their similitude to the Ark is that whoever loves and highly
respects them as means of thanking the One Who gave them honors,
following the guidance of their learned men, will be saved from the
darkness of dissension, and whoever lags behind them is drowned in the
sea of ingratitude and will perish in the paths of tyranny.” Then he
adds the following: “As to the Gate of Salvation (meaning their
similitude to the Gate of Salvation), Allah has made entering that gate,
which probably was the gate of Jericho or of Jerusalem, in humility,
seeking forgiveness, a reason for salvation, and He (likewise) has made
the love to the Ahlul Bayt a reason for this nation’s salvation.”[^43]

### 3. The Tradition of Amaan

The Prophet (S) said, “Stars are security (amaan) for the inhabitants of
the earth against drowning, and my family (the Ahlul Bayt) are security
for my nation against dissension (in religious matters). If a tribe
among the Arabs differs (regarding religion) from them, they will all
then differ and become the party of Iblis.”[^44]

4. The Prophet (S) said to Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (peace
be on them), “I declare war against whoever fights you, and peace unto
whoever is peaceful to you.’[^45]

Abu Bakr said, “Once, I saw the messenger of Allah leaning on an Arabic
bow and inside the tent there were Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn.
He said, ‘O folks of Muslims, I declare peace unto whoever is peaceful
to the people of this tent and a war against whoever fights them, and I
am a guardian to whoever follow them. No one loves them except a lucky
one, and no one hates them except an unfortunate one of bad
birth.’”[^46]

5. Once, the Prophet (S) held al-Hasan and al-Husayn’s hands and said,
‘Whoever loves me, loves these two ones, and their father and mother
will be with me in my rank on the Day of Resurrection.’[^47]

6. The Prophet (S) said, ‘Knowing the family of Muhammad gives one
salvation from Fire, loving the family of Muhammad makes one pass across
the Sirat[^48], and following the family of Muhammad makes one safe from
torment.’[^49]

7. The Prophet (S) said, ‘The two feet of one will not move (on the Day
of Resurrection) before he will be asked about four things; about his
age how he has spent it, his body how he has worn it out, his wealth on
what he has spent it and where from he has gained it, and about our
love, we the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).’[^50]

8. The Prophet (S) said, ‘Make my family among you as the head to the
body, and as the two eyes to the head, for the head cannot be guided
except by the two eyes.’[^51]

9. The Prophet (S) said, ‘Whoever dies because of his love for the
progeny of Muhammad dies a martyr. Whoever dies because of his love for
the progeny of Muhammad dies after being forgiven. Whoever dies because
of the love for the progeny of Muhammad dies as repentant. Whoever dies
because of the love for the progeny of Muhammad dies as a believer of a
perfect faith. Whoever dies for loving the progeny of Muhammad will be
given the glad tiding of entering the Paradise by the angel of death,
and then by Munkar and Nakeer. Whoever dies for loving the progeny of
Muhammad will be taken to the Paradise like a bride taken to her groom’s
house. Whoever dies for loving the progeny of Muhammad will have two
doors in his grave overlooking the Paradise. Whoever dies for the love
of the progeny of Muhammad Allah will make his grave a visiting place
for the angels of the Merciful One. Whoever dies for loving the progeny
of Muhammad dies adhering to the Sunna and the consensus. Whoever dies
hating the progeny of Muhammad will come on the Day of Resurrection
written between his eyes: “He should despair of Allah’s mercy.’[^52]

The mentioned above are just some of the traditions transmitted from the
Prophet (S) and mentioned in the books of Hadith that talk about the
virtue and high rank of the Prophet’s progeny including his daughter
Fatimah (s.a.).

[^1]: Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol. 7 p.103, Thakha’ir al-Uqba, p.25, Noor
al-Absar, p.101.

[^2]: Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.3 p.201.

[^3]: As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, p.102.

[^4]: It is the first verse in the Sura that contains the “verse of
Mawaddah”.

[^5]: The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol.1 p.68, quoted from Kanzol
Ummal, vol.1 p.218.

[^6]: The Life of Imam al-Husayn bin Ali, vol.1 p.67.

[^7]: Tafsir of at-Tabari, vol.25 p.16.

[^8]: Tashahhud is the saying “I bear witness that there is no god but
Allah, and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave and messenger”
after the second and the last rak’as of prayers.

[^9]: Tafsir of ar-Razi, vol.7 p.391.

[^10]: Tafsir of ar-Razi, vol.10 p.243, Asbab an-Nuzool by al-Wahidi,
p.133, Rawdhat al-Wa’idhin by an-Naysaburi, p.163, Rooh al-Bayan, vol.6
p.546, ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol.6 p.299, Yanabee’ al-Mawaddah, vol.1
p.93, Imta’ al-Asma’, p.502.

[^11]: Iftar is the meal that is taken at sunset to break fasting.

[^12]: Tafsir of ar-Razi, vol.6 p.783, Rawdhat al-Wa’idhin by
an-Naysaburi, p.157, al-Khasa’iss al-Kubra, vol.3 p.264, ar-Riyadh
an-Nadhirah, vol.2 p.188, Tafsir of ibn Jarir, vol.22 p.334, Musnad of
Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.4 p.107, Sunan of al-Bayhaqi, vol.2 p.150, Mushkil
al-Athaar, vol.1 p.334, ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol.5 p.198, Jami’ al-Bayan,
vol.12 p.9-12.

[^13]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.2 p.416, Usd al-Ghabah, vol.5 p.521.

[^14]: Ad-Durr al-Manthur, vol.5 p.199.

[^15]: Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.9 p.169, Ansab al-Ashraf, vol.1 p.157.

[^16]: Thakha’ir al-Uqba, p.24.

[^17]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.3 p.172.

[^18]: Tafsir of ar-Razi, vol.2 p.699, Tafsir of al-Baydhawi, p.76,
Tafsir al-Kashshaf, vol.1 p.49, Tafsir Rooh al-Bayan, vol.1 p.457,
Tafsir al-Jalalayn, vol.1 p.35, Sahih of Muslim, vol.2 p.47, Musnad of
Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.1 p.185, Masabeeh as-Sunna, vol.2 p.201, Siyer
A’lam an-Nubala’, vol.3 p.193, Sunan of at-Tarmithi, vol.2 p.166, Sunan
al-Bayhaqi, vol.7 p.63.

[^19]: Najran was the place where the Christians lived.

[^20]: Noor al-Absar, p.100.

[^21]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.3 p.153, Usd al-Ghabah, vol.5 p.522,
al-Isabah, vol.8 p.159, Tahthib at-Tahthib, vol.12 p.441, Kanzol Ummal,
vol.6 p.219, Fadha’il al-Khamsah min as-Sihah as-Sittah, vol.3 p.156,
Mizan al-I’tidal, vol.1 p.525.

[^22]: Mizan al-I’tidal, vol.2 p.72, and in Tahthib at-Tahthib, vol.1
p.442 it is mentioned, ‘Allah is pleased for your pleasure and
displeased for your displeasure.’

[^23]: Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.4 p.210, 219, Kanzol Ummal, vol.12
p.112, Faydh al-Qadeer, vol.4 p.554.

[^24]: Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.4 p.328, Hilyat al-Awliya’, vol.2
p.40, Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.6 p.158.

[^25]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.12 p.111, Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.3 p.154.

[^26]: Sahih of at-Tarmithi, vol.2 p.19, Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal,
vol.4 p.5.

[^27]: Mizan al-I'tidal, vol.2 p.131.

[^28]: Thakha’ir al-Uqba, p.48.

[^29]: Noor al-Absar, p.41.

[^30]: As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, p.109.

[^31]: Fara’id as-Simtayn, vol.2 p.66.

[^32]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol.74 p.95.

[^33]: Ar-Riyadh an-Nadhirah, vol.2 p.209.

[^34]: Sahih of at-Tarmithi, vol.2 p.308.

[^35]: Kanzol Ummal, vol.1 p.84, Sahih of at-Tarmithi, vol.2 p.308.

[^36]: Sana’a is the capital of Yemen and Busra is a town in Syria.

[^37]: Majma’ al-Haythami, vol.9 p.163.

[^38]: As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, p.75.

[^39]: Sanad is the chain of authorities (narrators) which is the
essential part in the transmission of a tradition.

[^40]: Faydh al-Qadeer, vol. 3 p.14.

[^41]: As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, p.36.

[^42]: Majma’ az-Zawa’id, vol.9 p.168, Mustadrak al-Hakim, vol.2 p.43,
Tareekh Baghdad, vol.2 p.119, Hilyatul Awliya’, vol.4 p.306, Thakha’ir
al-Uqba, p.o20.

[^43]: Al-Muraja’at, p.77.

[^44]: Ar-Riyadh an-Nadhirah, vol.2 p.52, and like it in Sahih of
al-Bukhari, vol.2 p.319 and Sunan ibn Majah, vol.1 p.52.

[^45]: Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.1 p.77, Sahih at-Tarmithi, vol.2
p.301, Tahthib at-Tahthib, vol.10 p.43.

[^46]: Mawsoo’at Imam Ameerul Mo'minin, vol.1 p.190, Fara’id as-Simtayn,
vol.2 p.40, Sharh al-Akhbar, vol.3 p.515.

[^47]: Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol.1 p.77, Sahih at-Tarmithi, vol.2
p.301.

[^48]: Sirat is the bridge that dominates Hell.

[^49]: Al-Muraja’at, p.54, the Life of Imam Ameerul Mo'minin, vol.1
p.123.

[^50]: Al-Muraja’at, p.58.

[^51]: Mawsoo'at al-Imam Ameerul Mo'minin, vol.1 p.191, al-Muraja'at,
p.58 quoted from ash-Sharaf al-Mu’abbad.

[^52]: Al-Muraja'at, p.59, quoted from ath-Tha’labi when interpreting
the Verse of Mawaddah in his at-Tafsir al-Kabeer.


