Chapter 1
=========

Introduction
------------

The Qur'an has been without doubt the most influential book in the
history of mankind, in the same way as the great Prophet to whom it was
revealed has been the most influential of men. Together they have
heralded a new and ultimate era in the history of mankind. This
influence is bound to increase with the development of man's awareness
of the higher dimensions of human existence and with the removal of the
obstacles that bar humanity from its Godward journey. Neither prose nor
poetry, it surpasses all human composition with the celestial music of
its rhythms, the profundity of its meanings, its universality of appeal,
its wonderful clarity, eloquence, sublime rhetoric, and above all its
deep and passionate concern for the good of all human beings, which
permeates all its chapters and verses. The beauty and sublimity of the
Qur'anic discourse is something which has to be discovered directly by
everyone to the extent of his capacity and effort, for the richness of
the Qur'an is inexhaustible.

Unlike other masterpieces of world literature and scriptures, whose
interest and appeal is limited to an audience with a particular literary
taste or some religious creed, the Qur'an is the book of the ordinary
human being, and meant for each and every human being. It addresses
every human individual qua human being and creature of God.

Since the first century of Hijrah, continuous efforts have been made by
Muslims to make the meanings of the Qur'an accessible to nonp-Arab
communities. There have also been several unfortunate attempts to
translate the Qur'an with a hostile intent or deviant purpose. In such
cases, the great healer, the Qur'an, has only aggravated the sickness of
those who approached it with a malicious motive, and this great spring
of spiritual life has had the effect of the deadliest of poisons.

Despite the enormous amount of effort that has been made during the past
centuries and notwithstanding the numerous translations that have
appeared in many languages of the world and the new ones that continue
to appear almost every year, an error free translation of the Qur'an in
any language p- including Persian and Urdu which have been closest to
the Qur'anic culturep-still remains an unfulfilled dream. Apart from
matters pertaining to literary expertise in classical Arabic and the
target language, familiarity with the vast field of Qur'anic sciences
and especially with the hermeneutic tradition of the past 14 centuries
and the works of major exegetes is essential for the translator of the
Qur'an.

The Qur'an is the book of life meant to last until the Day of Judgment.
Its meanings and concerns are perennial and everlasting. Its roots are
firm, and its branches are in heaven; it gives its produce every season
by the leave of its Lord (14:25). It is an exhaustible source of
meaning, meeting the needs of changing times, though its words and
diction remain fixed and unchangeable. Thus the human effort to extract
its meanings is an unending task of interpreting and understanding the
Qur'an, an understanding that links the eternal to the temporal, the
terrestrial to the celestial, the mundane to the transcendent, and the
relative to the Absolute.

Hence in every era efforts have to be made to translate the Book in the
language of the day and to interpret it in the light of accumulated
human knowledge and Qur'anic scholarship. In view of this perpetual
necessity, there is the need to develop a sound and systematic
methodology for translating and interpreting the Qur'an in different
languages of humankind, for to translate the Qur'an is to interpret it.

For the purposes of such a project it might be essential to undertake a
study of the existing translations and to evaluate them from the
viewpoint of literary strength, loyalty to the meanings of the original,
propriety and precision of the words and expressions used in the
translation, and, above all, the translator's degree of familiarity with
the exegetical tradition and the corpus of hadith narrated from the
Prophet (S) and the Imam's of the Prophetic Household (a).

They are the interpreters of the Qur'an par excellence, for it is they
who are the first addressees of the Qur'an, and to them one must refer
for settling questions relating to Qur'anic hermeneutics as well as for
authoritative interpretation in cases of disagreement in interpreting
Qur'anic verses al1d determining the Qur'anic viewpoint concerning
various issues.

That which could be very useful in this regard is some kind of a manual
that might offer almost a verse to verse guidance to the translator,
especially if the translation is being done from existing translations
and the relavant works are not accessible to the translator.


