Chapter 2
=========

The Centre for the Translation or the Qur'an
--------------------------------------------

This centre which has been established in recent years by the Awqaf and
Charities Organization of the Islamic Republic of Iran in the city of
Qum is in the process of preparing a comprehensive study of the problems
involved in the translation of the Qur'an and the frequent errors of
translation and interpretation made by translators. Its longp-term goal
is to publish reliable translations of the Holy Qur'an in various
languages of the world beginning with some of the major modern
languages.

Presently it is engaged in collecting all the existing translations of
the Qur'an in various languages. Until now it has collected more than
200 translations and editions in nearly 50 languages. It has issued a
call for the cooperation and assistance in this project of all
interested scholars and institutions throughout the world so that a
unique world collection of the translations of the Qur'an, complete and
partial, accessible to scholars and researchers throughout the world,
could be established.

It has also plans to make the translations available on computer
diskettes so as to make them available to researchers and scholars for
future work.

The Centre has also called upon Qur'anic scholars and experts throughout
the world to assist it in the task of precise evaluation of the existing
translations in different languages.

The Awqaf Organization has also established a major publishing house in
the city of Qum with considerable printing facilities, with an annual
capacity of printing about 3 million copies, for the purpose of making
the Qur'an and its translations available to Muslim communities
throughout the world.

The field of Qur'anic studies is a vast discipline that is constantly
expanding. Every year there appear numerous works dealing with diverse
aspects of the Qur'an and some of the earlier works become available for
the first time in print. Apart from scores of articles in various
journals and theses that are written (see the Qur'anic bibliography of
'Abd alp- Jabbar alp-Rafa'i, Mu'jam alp- dirasat alp-Qur'aniyyah [Qum:
Markazp-e Farhang wa Ma'arifp-e Qur'an 1372 H. Sh./1993J which has 4150
classified entries on 72 topics, there are now several scholarly
journals devoted exclusively to Qur'anic studies such as:

Bayyinat, a quarterly journal in Persian published by Mu'assesehp-ye
Ma'arifp-e Islamip-ye Imamp-e Rida (a), based in Qum (P.0.Box
37185p-167, Qum). Payamp-e Qur'an, a Persian quarterly published by Dar
alp-Qur'an alp-Karim, also based in Qum (P. 0. Box 37185p-151) which
also publishes Risalat alp-Qur'an, an Arabic journal.

Mubin, also in Persian, published by Danishgahp-e Azadp-e Islami (Free
Islamic University), Arak (P. 0. Box 38135p-1489, Arak,Iran).

Shishmahip-ye 'Ulum alp-Qur'an, a sixp-monthly journal published by
Idarehp-ye 'Ulum alp-Qur'an, based in Aligarh (P. 0. Box 99, Sir Sayyid
Nagar, Aligarh, 202 002, India). AIp-Tawhid, Vol. XII, No.215

The first bibliography, published by IRCICA, lists editions of complete
printed translations of the Qur'an in 65 languages as well as editions
of

selections and partial translations published until 1980, Translations
appearing after 1980 (in Ieranon, Zulu, Tegalog, Fulani and Wolof
languages) have been left for a future edition. Some commentaries are
also included as they also often include a translation of the Qur'an.

Included in this vast survey, unprecedented in its scope, are listed
about 551 complete translations and 883 selections and partial
translations in 65 languages. The complete translations, so far as the
survey has recorded their different editions, were printed 829 times and
the selections and partial works 409 times. The total numbers of
editions listed is 2072.

A total of 135 library catalogues, national bibliographies, indices,
papers, articles, as well as library collections in different centuries
were researched.

Prof. Ihsanoglu has written a preface and an introduction (whose Arabic
version appears at the end), entitled "Introduction to the History of
Translating the Meanings of the Holy Qur'an." The introduction is
followed by a mention of the rules adopted in the arrangement of the
entries and the sources of reference. A name, title, and a chronological
index are placed at the end.

In the introduction the author gives an outline of the views of Muslim
scholars and jurists concerning the translation of the Qur'an in general
and its use as a substitute for the Arabic original in prayer. The
general opinion of the Islamic schools of law considers the translation
of the Qur'an as legitimate or even necessary, but disapproves of its
use as a substitute for Arabic in prayer.

The editions under every language are listed alphabetically according to
the names of the translators and under each name, mostly, in a
chronological order. The available particulars pertaining to an edition,
including the title, number of volumes, number of the edition, place and
year of publication, and names of publisher and printer are given. The
sizes of the published work, the number of pages pertaining to every
volume as well as the script of the translation are mentioned under
every entry with the sources of reference.

Occasionally, there are additional remarks about the nature of the work,
and the background of the translator, Translations whose authors are
unknown as well as those undertaken by teams of scholars are mentioned
under entries marked "Anonymous" and placed at the end of the list
pertaining to a given language. Whereas the general rule followed is to
list the names of the translators according to their last or family
names, the rule followed elsewhere, such as in the case of Urdu, is to
list them in the order of the first name.

Accordingly Shah Wali Allah's name appears under "Qutb alp-Din Ahmad b.
'Abd alp-Rahim" (p. 356p-464), Another similar instance is that of
Husayn wa'iz Kashifi, mentioned under "Kamal alp-Din," Admittedly, it is
difficult to follow a general rule when listing names of Muslim authors,
especially the names of those belonging to the Indian subcontinent which
often do not follow a fixed pattern, but it seems best to list famous
authors by the names by which they are wellp- known.

As most of the bibliographical details were gleaned from the sources and
the authors did not have direct access to most of the works, some errors
in

determining the exact nature and content of some works and their
ascription to authors and translators were inevitable. For instance, a
translation in Esperanto by Italo Chiussi is mentioned among Spanish
translations (also mentioned under Esperanto).

This is particularly true of languages in which there is a large number
of works, such as Urdu and Persian. Due to problems of access some of
the information given is incorrect. For instance, Abu alp-Fath
alp-Jurjani's Tafsirp-e Shahi (p. 344) is not a translation of the
Qur'an but a work on ayat alp-ahkam in Persian. The Fath alp-'Aziz, or
Tafsirp-e .Azizi (apparently an incomplete commentary by Shah 'Abd
alp-'Aziz in Persian, whose Urdu translation is known as Bustan
alp-tafasir) is ascribed to Shah Rafi' alp-Din.

The IRCICA plans to update and revise this valuable bibliography every
ten years if conditions permit. As promised by Prof. Ihsanoglu, the
Director General of the lRCICA, in his preface, the project in its next
stage will cover translations in manuscript form as well as oral
translations. The list of translations given here, except for those in
Urdu, is based mainly on this bibliography.

The list of Urdu translations is based mainly on the bibliography of
Urdu translations by Dr. Ahmad Khan, which is more upp-top- date. It has
1011 entries of editions of complete and partial translations, of which
442 pertain to complete and 569 to partial works. Of these, according to
the author's estimate, there are about 164 complete translations.


