Chapter 5: The Reasons for Imam Musa al-Kazim’s (‘a) Martyrdom
==============================================================

“You are the main means of approach and the right way, you are the
martyrs in this mortal world and the Day of Judgement will make equal
what was unequal before.”[^1]

All of the infallible Imams, except for the holy being of the Imam of
the Time who is still alive, died as martyrs. None of them died a
natural death or as a result of an illness. This was one of their big
glories. Firstly, because they always wished for martyrdom in the path
of Allah and we can see the inner sense for this in the supplications
they used to read which they have taught us. ‘Ali said, “I would hate to
die in bed. I would prefer be killed with one thousand sword strikes
than dying peacefully in bed.”

The supplications and *ziyarat* we read during pilgrimage to their
resting places remind us of their virtues and that they are among the
martyrs. The sentence I referred to at the beginning of speech was from
the Jami‘ah *al-Kabirah* supplication in which we read, “You are the
straight path and the main means of approach, you are the martyrs in
this world and the intercessors of the next world.”

The term “*shahid*” (martyr) is the title for the holy being of Imam
al-Husaynwho is usually referred to as *Shahid*, “Al-Husaynal-Shahid”
(the Martyred Husayn); just as we call Imam al-Sadiq “Ja‘far al-Sadiq”
(the Truthful Ja‘far); and Imam ibn Ja‘far, “Musa al-Kazim” (the one who
is dominant over his anger). This, however, does not mean that Imam
al-Husaynis the only martyred Imam among the infallible Imams. Just as
calling Musa ibn Ja‘far, al-Kazim, would not mean the rest of the Imams
were not al-Kazim (dominant over their anger); addressing Imam al-Rida,
as al-Ridadoes not mean that this is not applicable to the rest of Imams
or if we say Imam al-Sadiq it does not mean that the rest of the Imams
were not [God-forbid] truthful.

The influence of time on the type of combat
-------------------------------------------

Now the question put forward is: why did the rest of the infallible
Imams become martyrs? Even those Imams whose history does not confirm
them to uprise against tyrant rulers of their time, or the ones whose
apparent conduct demonstrated that their methods differed to those of
Imam al-Husayn)?

All right! Imam al-Husaynwas martyred; however, why is it claimed that
Imam al-Hassan*,* Imam al-Sajjad*,* Imam al-Kazim*,* Imam al-Sadiq (as
well as all the other Imams) should have also been martyrs? The answer
to this is as follows: it is incorrect for us to assume that the methods
and objectives of the rest of the Imams were different to Imam
al-Husaynin this regard. Some have this presumption and claim: among the
Imams, Imam al-Husayn’sdecision was to fight against the tyrannical
system of his time.

However, the rest of the Imams did not fight. If this is our assumption,
then we are mistaken. History informs us of the opposite and all the
evidence and explanations are contrary to such a conclusion. If we look
at this issue from a different point of view, with correct understanding
of the evidence, then we will find that it is impossible for a true
Muslim to actually come into terms with a tyrant and oppressive systems
of his time, let alone someone in the holy position of an *imam*. On the
contrary, he would fight them, the only difference being the forms of
their combat.

At one time, the fight may be visible, declaring a war and fighting with
weapons. This is one form of combat. At other times, there is fighting,
by means of condemnation of the other side, as well as discouraging
people from his side, revoking the other side and inclining the society
against him but not in the form of drawing weapons.

This is how time requirements can influence the form of combat. Time
requirement can never be effective in a situation where in one case
agreeing to peace with oppressors is permissible in one situation and
forbidden in another situation. No, coming to terms with oppressors is
never permitted at any time or place. The form of combat, however, may
vary. It can be overt or covert.

The history of the infallible Imams generally demonstrates their
constant battle against oppression. If they speak of fighting while in
dissimulation [*taqiyyah*], it does not mean stagnancy and idleness. The
root of *taqiyyah* is from *waqy*, just like *taqwa*, the root of which
is from *waqy*. This is what *taqiyyah* means: defending oneself
undercover or metaphorically speaking, using a shield to defend oneself
during battle to get hit less but in no way withdrawing. This is why we
see that all the infallible Imams have the honor—yes the honor—of not
coming to terms with any tyrant caliph and were continuously hostile
with them.

Today, after one thousand and three hundred years (more for some Imams
and slightly less for some others) you see caliphs like ‘Abd al-Malik
ibn Marwan (from before his time and during his time; the children of
‘Abd al-Malik, the cousins of ‘Abd al-Malik, Bani al-‘Abbas, Mansur
Dawaniqi, Abu al-‘Abbas al-Saffah, Harun al-Rashid, Ma’mun, and
Mutawakkil) are among the most ill-reputed people in history.

Among us and even among the Sunnis, it is clear that they were
bespattered. Who bespattered them? If it were not for the resistence of
the infallible Imams who revealed their depravities and debaucheries and
other people like them, we would consider Harun and especially Ma’mun on
the same rank as saints. If the infallible Imams had not revealed
Ma’mun’s inner intentions and had not fully introduced him, he would
have definitely been regarded as one of the greatest heroes in religion
and science in this world.

Our topic of discussion is about the martyrdom of Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far.
Why did they martyr him? First of all, the fact that Imam Musa ibn
Ja‘far was martyred has been made certain and no one can deny it.
According to the most famous and most valid narrations, Musa ibn Ja‘far
spent four years in the corner of prison dungeons and passed away there.
There are historical texts about the time the Imam spent in prison;
suggestions were constantly forwarded to the Imam demanding for apology
or even a verbal confession from him, but the Imam never agreed.

The Imam in Basrah Prison
-------------------------

The Imam served time not only in one prison, but in several prisons.
They kept on transferring him from one prison to another and this was
done, interestingly, because any prison they took the Imam to, it would
not take long for the prisoners there to become devoted to him. At first
the Imam was taken to Basrah Prison. The Imam was handed over to the
governor of Basrah, who at that time was ‘Isa ibn Ja‘far ibn Abi Ja‘far
Mansur, the grandchild of Mansur Dawaniqi. ‘Isa ibn Ja‘far ibn Abi
Ja‘far Mansur was a violent man who did not take intrest in moral
issues. As one of his relative says, “They took this pious and holy man
to a place where he heard things, he never had heard before.”

The Imam was taken to Basrah Prison in the Arabic month of Dhu
al-Hijjah, of the year 178 AH, which was supposed to be a time of
celebration and happiness due to *‘Id al-Duha*.

The Imam spent a period of time in Basrah Prison after which even this
very ‘Isa had gradually become fond of the Imam. He too, at first, truly
imagined the Imam to be what the government had broadcasted of him,
which was a rebellious man whose only skill was ‘to claim to be the
rightful successor’. In other words, the desire to become a leader had
made him crazy. Upon his personal aquaintence with the Imam, he realized
that the Imam was a spiritual man, whose only purpose of raising the
issue of successoral was to address its spiritual aspects. The situation
then changed. He ordered a very good room to be put at the Imam’s
disposal and entertained the Imam publicly.

Harun sent a secret message, in which he ordered ‘Isa to get rid of him.
‘Isa responded, “I will not do such a thing.” Finally, ‘Isa wrote a
letter to the Caliph,

“Order them to come and take him back; otherwise, I will set him free
myself. I cannot keep such a man as a prisoner.”

Since he was the Caliph’s cousin and the grandchild of Mansur, his words
were, of course, observed.

The Imam in various prisons
---------------------------

They took the Imam to Baghdad and handed him over to Fadl ibn Rabi‘.
Fadl ibn Rabi‘ was the son of Rabi‘, the chamberlain.[^2] Harun vested
Imam to him.

After a while, he also became fond of the Imam, changed the Imam’s
conditions and placed the Imam in a better prison. The spies informed
Harun that the Imam was not having a difficult time in Fadl ibn Rabi‘’s
prison. They informed him that the Imam was not actually a prisoner but
actually a guest. Harun took the Imam away from him and handed him over
to Fadl ibn Yahya Barmaki.

After a while, Fadl also started treating the Imam that way which this
really frustrated Harun. He sent his spies to investigate. They found
out that the story was true. He finally took the Imam away and Fadl was
disfavoured by Harun. In one of Harun’s gathering, Fadl’s father (an
Iranian minister who was hostile towards the Shi‘ahs), to stop his child
from being lowered in esteem by Harun, said in Harun’s ear,

“If my son has done something wrong, I am prepared to follow any orders
you may have. My son has repented, my son this and my son that…”

Afterwards, he came to Baghdad and took the Imam away from his son and
handed him over to someone else called Sindi ibn Shahik who they say was
not a Muslim. The Imam went through a lot of difficulties in his prison;
that is to say the Imam was not left in peace in his prison.

Harun’s request from the Imam
-----------------------------

During the last few days of the Imam’s imprisonment, which was not more
than one week before his martyrdom, Harun sent this very Yahya Barmaki
to the Imam and through him, in nice and soft tone, he told the Imam,

“Send my regards to my cousin and tell him it has been proven to us you
have committed no sin and are blameless. However, I have unfortunately
made an oath and cannot break my word. I have made an oath not to free
you before you have confessed to sinning and asked me for forgiveness.
No one needs to know. It is enough if you confess in the presence of
Yahya. I do not need to be there either; the presence of others is not
also needed. I do not want to break my oath. You only need to confess in
Yahya’s presence and say I am sorry that I have breached and I want the
Caliph to forgive me. I will then set you free. Then, you can come to me
and etc.”

Now look at his resistive spirit! Why are they referred to as the
intercessors of the transient realm [*barzakh*]? Why did they become
martyrs? They become martyrs in the way of their true faith and belief.
They wanted to show that true faith does not allow taking steps with the
oppressor. The Imam’s response to Yahya Baramaki was, “Tell Harun that
there is not much left of my life and that is it.” And, after a week,
the Imam was poisoned.

The reasons for the Imam’s arrest
---------------------------------

Now why did Harun order for the Imam’s arrest? Because he was jealous of
the Imam’s position and felt threatened by it even though the Imam was
not revolting against him, nor has he taken the smallest steps to form a
revolution (a discernible revolution). Harun, however, had realized that
they had started a spiritual revolution of beliefs. When Harun decided
to consolidate his son Amin for the position of crown prince, followed
by Ma’mun who would subsequently be followed by his son Mu‘tamid, he
invites the scholars and the prominent figures of all the cities to come
to Mecca that year. He organizes a massive convention and takes oaths of
allegiance from everyone.

Who in his opinion could have been a potential obstacle for this task?
Who is the one in whose presence looks would be directed upon him and
would cause others to think that he would be the one worthy of the
position of the caliphate? Musa ibn Ja‘far.

When Harun comes to Medina, he orders for the Imam’s arrest. This very
Yahya Barmaki is reported to have said, “During today or tomorrow, I
think the Caliph will order the arrest of Musa ibn Ja‘far.” They asked
him, “How come?” He replied, “I accompanied him in his pilgrimage of the
Prophet in Masjid al-Nabi.[^3] When he wanted to say salutation to the
Prophet, I saw him say, ‘Peace is upon you, O son of my uncle! O the
Messenger of Allah’!” Then, he said, “I am very sorry that I have to
arrest your son Musa ibn Ja‘far (as if he can lie to the Prophet) this
is what is deemed advisable. If I do not do this, there will be upheaval
in the land. To stop this and, for the interest of this land, I have to
do such a thing. O the Messenger of Allah, I am apologizing.”

Yahya told his friend, “I imagine, today or tomorrow, he is going to
order the Imam’s arrest.”

Harun ordered his men to go after the Imam. It just so happened that the
Imam was not at home. Where was he? He was at the Prophet’s Mosque. The
Imam was praying when they entered. They did not permit him to finish
his prayers and dragged him out of the Prophet’s Mosque. The Imam looked
at the Prophet’s grave and said, “Do you see how your nation is treating
your children?”

Why does Harun do this? This was because he wants to take oaths of
allegiance for his children as future crown princes. But, the Imam had
not rioted. He had not rioted but his situation was basically a
different one. His situation is explained by the fact that Harun and his
children were trying to usurp the caliphate.

Ma’mun’s saying
---------------

Ma’mun’s actions caused some historian to consider him a Shi‘ah. In my
opinion, there is nothing holding someone back from believing in
something but acting against it. He was a Shi‘ah and he was one of the
Shi‘ah scholars. This man had some debates with Sunni scholars that have
been recorded in historical texts.

A couple of years ago, a Turkish Sunni judge wrote a book which was
translated into Farsi and it was called, “*Descriptions and Trials about
Muhammad’s Family*”. Ma’mun’s discussion about ‘Ali’s immediate
caliphate is quoted in the above-mentioned book. This discussion is so
interesting and scholarly, the form of which is rarely seen to have
taken place by any Shi‘ah scholar.

It has been written that once Ma’mun himself said, “Can any of you
imagine who taught me Shi‘ism?” They said, “Who?” He said, “My father.”
They replied, “But your father was the worse enemy of Shi‘ism and the
Shi‘ah Imams.” He said, “This is the story. We were on a pilgrimage to
*Hajj* with my father. I was very young. Everybody, especially the
elders and noblemen, came to visit. He had everyone introduce
themselves: say his name, his father’s name and his ancestor up to his
great ancestors. This was so that the Caliph could get to know him and
see whether he was from Quraysh or not and if he was from the Helpers
[*ansar*] of the Prophet, whether he was a Khazraji or an Awsi. Whoever
came, the chamberlain would come and say to Harun, ‘This certain person
with this name and this father’s name and etc… had come.’ One day the
chamberlain came and said, ‘The one who is here to visit the Caliph
said, ‘Tell him Musa ibn Ja‘far ibn Muhammadibn ‘Ali ibn al-Husaynibn
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib is here’.’ As soon as he said this, my father got up
and said, ‘Tell him to come in.’ He then said, ‘Tell him to come in on
horseback and not get off.’ He ordered us to go and welcome him. We went
and saw a man on whose face traces of piety and worship were clearly
visible. He appeared to be from among the first class worshippers and a
person of great piety. My father shouted from a distance, ‘Please come
in mounted for so and so’s sake.’ Then, he very politely seated him
higher than himself and started to ask him questions, ‘How many are your
dependents?’ ‘It was discovered that he had lots of dependents.’ ‘How
are your living conditions?’ ‘My life’s situation is so and so.’ ‘What
is your income?’ ‘My income is this much.’ He then left. When he was
leaving, my father told us to go, accompany him and see him off. To
Harun’s command, we escorted him to the door. That was when he quietly
told me, ‘You will become the caliph. I will give you only one advice
that is not to treat my children badly.’

We did not know who he was. We returned. I was the most inquisitive from
amongst the rest of my siblings so when the place got empty, I asked my
father who the man was to whom he paid so much respect. He smiled and
said, ‘Frankly, this seat that we are sitting on belongs to them.’ I
asked, ‘Do you really believe this?’ He said, ‘I do.’ I said, ‘Why then
don’t you give it to them?’ He replied, ‘Do you not know that kingdom is
sterile? If I come to know that even you, my son, ever had the idea of
becoming my adversary, I will take off your body that which carries your
eyes.’

This passed. Harun was giving recompense. He would send exorbitant
amounts of money to this and that person’s house. This ranged from four
thousand red gold *dinar*s to five thousand and so on. We thought the
sum he would send the man he paid so much respect to would probably be
very high. It was, however, the least; two hundred *dinar*s. Again, I
went and asked my father about this, he replied, ‘Do you not know that
they are our rivals? Politics demands that they always be in need of
financial aid and short of money. This is because if their economical
facilities ever improve, it is possible that one thousand swords will
rise against your father’.”

The Imam’s spiritual influence
------------------------------

You can imagine how much spiritual influence the Shi‘ah Imams had. They
neither had swords nor propagandized, but they had hearts. There were
the Shi‘ahs present among Harun’s closest allies in his government.

Truth and reality has a kind of attraction that one cannot neglect.
Tonight you read in the papers that Malik al-Husaynsaid, “I found out
that even my driver was with the partisans.”

My chef was also one of them. ‘Ali ibn Yaqtin is Harun’s minister. He
is the second person is the land but a Shi‘ah and undercover. He is
aiding Musa ibn Ja‘far’s aims but his guise is for Harun. He reported to
the Imam two or three times but Musa ibn Ja‘far, who because of his
special perception realized the dangers he could be facing, gave him
instructions which saved his life. There were some people among Harun’s
system who were very fond of the Imam and were limitlessly enamoured by
him but never dared to contact the Imam.

One of the Ahwazi Iranian Shi‘ahs has said, “I had become subject to
some very heavy taxes which were put down for me. If I wanted to pay
those taxes they had made up for me, my life would crash down. By chance
the governor of Ahwaz was deposed and a new governor replaced him. I was
really worried that he would ask me for those taxes.

A friend, however, advised me to discuss the issue with him because both
the governor and I were Shi‘ahs but I never dared to go to him and say
that I am a Shi‘ah because I could not believe it myself. I said to
myself that it would be better if I went to Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far in
Medina. If he confirmed that the governor is Shi‘ah, then I will ask him
for advice. I went to the Imam and he wrote a letter which was not
longer than three or four sentences; three to four imperious sentences,
the type an *imam* would write to his follower. They were about helping
to resolve the problems of a Muslim believer who was in need, and
something about the position a believer holds with God and that was it.

I secretly brought the letter with me to Ahwaz. I realized that I should
give this letter to the governor confidentially. One night, I went to
his door. His door-keeper came and I said, ‘Tell him someone has come
from Musa ibn Ja‘far and has a letter for you.’ I saw him coming; he
greeted me and said, ‘What are you saying?’ I said, ‘I have come from
Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far and have brought a letter.’ He took the letter from
me.

He recognized the letter and kissed it. He then kissed my face and my
eyes. He immediately took me inside the house and sat in front of me
like a child and said, ‘You went to the Imam?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ He said,
‘What is the problem that you are facing?’ I replied, ‘They have put
down very heavy taxes for me. If I pay them, my life will be in ruins.’
He ordered for the book to be brought on the same night and corrected
it.’ Because the Imam had written, ‘If any one makes a faithful person
happy, such and such…,’ he said, ‘Will you let me do you another
service?’ I replied, ‘Yes.’ He said, ‘I want to halve whatever I own
with you tonight. I will halve all the money I have with you and will
ask the price of whatever goods I own. Accept this from me.’ The Ahwazi
says, ‘I came out in that condition and in a trip I later had to Medina
I told the story to the Imam.’ The Imam smiled and was contented.”

What was Harun afraid of? He was afraid of the attraction towards the
truth. “Language is not the only tool for propagation.”[^4] Language has
little influence on propagation. True propaganda is through actions.
Whoever confronted Musa ibn Ja‘far, his generous father or his pure
children and spent time with them, he would basically see the reality
within them. He would see that they know Allah deeply and truly fear
Him. They truthfully love Allah and whatever they did was truly for Him.

Two common customs among the Imams
----------------------------------

Two customs were visible among the Imams. One was worship, fear of Allah
and their monotheism. There is a very amazing monotheism in their being.
They are weeping and shivering in fear of Allah as if they can see
Allah, the Resurrection Day, Hell and Paradise. We read about Musa ibn
Ja‘far, “The allied party of long prostrations and effervescence tears!
One will not cry before he has a disturbed fiery inside.”[^5]

The second custom observed among the children of ‘Ali (the infallible
Imams) was their sympathy for and intimacy with the weak, oppressed,
dispossessed and needy. Man basically values these differently. By
studying the history of Imam al-Hassan, Imam al-Husayn, Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, Imam al-Baqir, Imam al-Sadiq, Imam al-Kazim and other
subsequent Imams, we see that being attentive to the condition of the
needy was basically part of their routine. It was in the form of
personal tending and not only ordering for it to be done. They never
passed this sort of responsibility to someone else. It is obvious that
people perceived these issues.

The plot of Harun’s system
--------------------------

During the time the Imam spent in prison, Harun’s system plotted to
maybe lower the Imam’s reputation. They assigned a very beautiful young
woman to become the so-called slave girl of the Imam in prison. In
prison, someone obviously has to bring food and if the prisoner is in
need of something, he can ask that person. They assigned a very
beautiful young slave girl for this task and said, “No matter what kind
of a man he is, he has been in prison for a long time, he may at least
look at her which makes it possible to accuse him and a group of
prattlers can say, ‘How could this be possible, a man and a young woman
alone in an empty room’?”

They were suddenly informed that a dramatic change had occurred in this
young slave girl and that even she had started worshipping. They saw
that this slave girl had become another follower of the Imam.[^6] They
saw her completely disturbed. She was in a different mental state. She
kept looking at the sky and at the earth. They said to her, “What is the
matter?” She replied, “When I saw this man, I understood what I am and
realized that I have committed a lot of sins in my life. I have
committed many faults. I think, I should now only stay in a state of
repentance.” She did not change her mind until she died.

Bishr Hafi and Imam al-Kazim (‘a)
---------------------------------

You have heard the story of Bishr Hafi.[^7] One day the Imam was passing
through the alleys of Baghdad and sounds of howl, tar and tambourine
could be heard from a house. They were playing and dancing and one could
hear the sound of gambling.

Incidentally, one of the servants of the house came out to empty the
trash for them to be taken by the rubbish men. The Imam told him, “Does
this house belong to a freeman or a slave?” This was a strange question.
The servant said, “Can you not realize for yourself from the luxurious
state of the house? This is Bishr’s house, one of the authorities, one
of the aristocrats; of course, he is free.” The Imam replied, “Yes,[^8]
it must belong to a freeman. If he was enslaved, all these noises would
not be coming out of his house.”

Now whatever else was said is not written. They have only written that
other comments were exchanged between them when Bishr realized that the
slave who went to empty the rubbish outside had taken longer than he
needed to. He came after him and said, “What took you so long?” The
slave replied, “A man was talking to me. He asked a very strange
question.” Bishr said, “What did he ask?” He said, “He asked me whether
the owner of this house was free or enslaved?” I replied, “Of course, he
is free.” He then said, “Yes, he is free, if he was a slave, such noises
would not have come out.” Bishr said, “What did he look like?” When the
servant described him, he realized that it was Musa ibn Ja‘far. He
asked, “Where did he go?” He said, “He went this way.” Bishr was
bare-footed and did not take the time to put his shoes on in fear that
he may not find the Imam. He ran out barefoot. He ran and threw himself
on the Imam’s lap and asked, “What did you say?” The Imam replied, “This
is what I said.” He said, “Sir! From this very hour, I want to be
Allah’s slave;” and he meant it. From that moment onwards, he was
Allah’s slave.

This news reached Harun. This was why he felt threatened and said, “They
just should not be. Basically, your presence (Imam al-Kazim) is a sin in
my view.” The Imam asked, “What have I done? What uprising have I
caused? What actions have I performed?” These questions had no reply but
were saying in an adequate expression, “Basically, your presence is a
sin.” At the same time, the Imams never failed to enlighten their
followers and other people. They told and conveyed the story to them and
they understood what what happening.

Safwan Jammal and Harun
-----------------------

You have probably also heard the story of Safwan Jammal. Safwan owned
what the today call, ‘transportation rental services’ which was an
agency that rented out camels in those days. He was very reputable and
his services were so abundant that the government would frequently ask
him for transportation services.

One day, Harun wanted to go on a trip to Mecca and requested his
services. He signed a contract with him for renting the transportation.
Safwan, however, was one of the followers and companions of Imam
al-Kazim.

One day he came to visit the Imam and said (or the Imam may have been
informed previously): I have done such a thing. The Imam said, “Why did
you offer your camels to such a tyrant man?” He replied, “I did not
offer them out for a sinful trip! His trip was a pilgrimage to *Hajj*
and a trip of obedience; that is why I loaned them; otherwise, I would
not have.” The Imam asked, “Have you received your money yet? Or at
least, is there any rent to be paid still?” He replied, “Yes, there is.”
The Imam said, “Refer to you heart, now that you rented your camels out
to Harun, do you not wish, deep down in your heart, that Harun stays
alive at least until he comes back and pays the rest of your rent?” He
said, “Yes.” The Imam said, “It is enough that you are contented with
the survival of the oppressor and this itself is a sin.”

Safwan came out. Harun’s men were suddenly informed that Safwan had sold
out all his camels. He basically left this job. When he sold them, he
went to the other party of the contract and said, “We shall terminate
this contract because I no longer want this job,” and tried to bring
some excuses. Harun was informed and said, “Bring him here.” When they
brought him, Harun asked, “What is going on?” He replied, “I have grown
old. I can no longer do this job. I thought even if I want to work, it
can be something else.” Harun realized and said, “Tell me the truth! Why
did you sell your camels?” Safwan replied, “That was the truth.” Harun
said, “No, I know what the story is. Musa ibn Ja‘far was informed you
loaned your camels to me and he told you that this transgressed the law.
Do not deny it. I swear to God, had it not been for the long years of
acquaintance we have had with your family, I would have ordered your
execution right here.”

So, these are what caused the martyrdom of Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far.
Firstly, his presence was, in a way, what caused the caliphs to feel
threatened. Secondly, they were publicizing against the caliphs and
telling the stories of their oppression. They, however, dissimulated,
which means they acted in a way that no evidence was left available for
their opposition.

The conditions of their time demanded for them to do their jobs
undercover and try not to leave any evidence behind for the other party
or at least the least possible. Thirdly, they had an amazingly resistive
spirit. As I said before, when they say, “Sir! You just become a little
apologetic in the presence of Yahya,” and he replies, “My life is
ending.” In another time, Haruns sent somebody to prison and wanted him
to get the Imam’s confession, and repeated the same things, “We are very
fond of you; we are devoted to you. It is to the best interest that you
do not go to Medina; otherwise, we do not intend to keep you imprisoned.

We have ordered them to keep you in a safe place near my self. I sent
you my special chef, as you may not be used to our foods, to prepare for
you whatever you desire.” Who was this agent? It was Fadl ibn Rabi‘ in
whose prison the Imam once was and he was one of Harun’s high ranking
officers. He went to see the Imam in prison while he was wearing his
official uniform and he was armed. The Imam realized that Fadl ibn Rabi‘
had come (now observe the soul power): Fadl is standing waiting for the
Imam to finish his prayer so he could communicate the Caliph’s messege.

As soon as the Imam said the prayer salutations [*salam*s] and he said,
*assalamu ‘alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh*, he gave no chance and
said *Allah-u Akbar* and stood up to pray. Again *Fadhl* waited. The
*Imam*’s prayer finished again and as soon as he said, *assalamu
‘alaykum*, the Imam again gave him no chance to begin and said,
“*Allah-u Akbar*.” This was repeated a couple of times. Fadl realized
that this was being done deliberately. He thought at first the Imam has
some prayers in which he has to read four, six, eight *rak‘ah*’s one
after the other.

Afterwards, he found out that this was being done because the Imam had
no desire to pay any attention to him. He did not want to accept him. He
eventually figured out that he has to fulfil his mission and if he stays
for long, Harun would become suspicious of him. This time he started
talking before the Imam began to say his *salam*s. He may have said
*salam* first.

He said whatever Harun had said. Harun had also told him, “Don’t go
there and say this is what Commander of the Faithful [Amir al-Mu’minin]
has said; don’t use the term, ‘Amir al-Mu’minin’. Say this is what your
cousin has said.” He said in the utmost courtesy and politeness, “Your
cousin has said that it is proven for us that you have committed no
faults and sins but it is to the best interest you stay in this place
and not go to Medina. I have ordered a special chef for the time being
to come, order whatever food you desire so he prepares it for you.” They
have written that the Imam’s response to this was, [*Allahu Akbar*],

“My own wealth is not here. If I want to spend, I will spend from my own
licit wealth. The chef is coming so I give orders? I am not a kind of
person to ask, ‘How much my ratio is or give my portion for this month.’
I am not also a man who begs.” As soon as he finished speaking, he said
*Allahu Akbar* and stood for prayers.

This is how the caliphs realized that they can in no way force them to
surrender and become obedient followers. Otherwise, the caliphs
themselves knew how costly martyring the Imams would be for them. Their
tyrannical policies, however, did not allow them to avoid this. They
considered this the easiest way.

The manner of the Imam’s martyrdom
----------------------------------

As I said before, the last prison the Imam was kept in was the Prison of
Sindi bin Shahik who, I have read, was basically a non-Muslim man. He
was one of those people who would vehemently put into action whatever
was commanded to him. They placed the Imam in a dungeon and then tried
to publicize to everyone that the Imam had died a natural death. They
have written that, “In order to exonerate his son Fadl, this very Yahya
Barmaki promised Harun to carry out the duties others did not carry
out.” He saw Sindi and said, “You do this job (the job of martyring the
Imam).” When he accepted Yahya prepared a very dangerous poison and
handed it over to Sindi. In there they had prepared poisonous dates
which were fed to the Imam and then they immediately summoned witnesses.

They invited the city scholars and Judges (they have written that they
invited the faithful men who were considered as honorable, pious and
trusted by people). In that meeting they called the Imam as well as
Harun and said, “O people! Have you heard what rumours these Shi‘ahs are
spreading about Musa ibn Ja‘far? They say: ‘He is not comfortable in
prison and Musa ibn Ja‘far this and that…’ See for yourselves that he is
completely healthy.”

As soon as he finished, the Imam said, “He is lying! Right now I have
been poisoned and not more than two or three days is left of my life.”

This time they missed their target. Then after the Imam’s martyrdom,
they took his body next to Baghdad’s bridge and kept taking people there
and saying, “See, the master is unharmed, none of his bones are broken,
his head is not cut either, his throat is not black. We did not kill the
Imam, he died a natural death.” They kept the Imam’s body next to
Baghdad’d bridge for three days to make people believe that the Imam
died of natural causes. The Imam, of course, had many devotees, but the
group who reacted like wild rue seeds on fire were the Shi‘ahs.

There is a very touching story which has been written, “Once a group of
the Imam’s followers came from Iran with a lot of hardship, they were
used to these difficult journeys during those days. When they succeeded
to come to Baghdad, they really wished, at least, to visit this
prisoner. Visiting a prisoner should not be considered a crime but they
were given no permission whatsoever to visit him. They said to
themselves, ‘We will beg them, they may accept.’ They came and begged.
As it happened, they accepted and said, ‘All right! We will arrange it
today. You wait here.’ These desperate people were assured that they
will visit their Master and then return to their city and say, ‘We had
the good fortune of visiting the Master. We visited him and asked so and
so questions from him and this is how he answered it.’ While they were
waiting outside the prison to see when they will be given the permission
to visit, they suddenly saw four porters carrying a body out on their
shoulders. The officer said, ‘This is your Imam’.” 

[^1]: Ziyarat Jami‘ah al-Kabirah.

[^2]: The ‘Abbasid caliphs had a chamberlain called Rabi‘, who was the
chamberlain for Mansur first. After Mansur, he stayed in their system
and his son was in Harun’s system. They were the special people in the
imperial court of the so-called ‘Abbasid caliphs and were extremely
trustworthy.

[^3]: 1. These shamefuls truly believed in their heart. Do not think
that these people had not beliefs. If they had no beliefs, they would
not have been as wretched as they were with beliefs like the assassin
group of Imam al-Husayn. When the Imam Asked, “How are the people of
Kufah?” Farazdaq and a couple of others said, “Their hearts are with
you. In their hearts, they believe in you, but at the same time, they
fight against their heart, they have risen against their faith and
belief and that has caused them to draw their swords on you. Woe the
state of man when materialistic goals and ambition force him to fight
against his belief. If they truly did not believe in Islam, if they did
had no belief in the Prophet and no belief in Musa ibn Ja‘far and had
some other beliefs, they would not have been scolded as much and were
not as wretched and under suffer by Allah, but they had beliefs and
acted against their beliefs.”

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi, Section on the Truth [bab al-sidq] and Section on
Scrupulousness [bab al-wara‘]

[^5]: Muntahi al-Amal, vol. 2, p. 222.

[^6]: Because the Imam was in prison and had nothing to do, the only
thing he could do over there was to worship. Such unendurable worship
that is not possible for man to carry out unless he has an extreme love.

[^7]: The pure Imams implement power as such, that is to say it happened
naturally and it was not as if they wanted to act.

[^8]: Meaning if he was the servant of Allah.


