Chapter 6: The Issue of Imam al-Rida (‘a) as the Crown Prince (Session 1)
=========================================================================

Our discussion today, is a historical debate and of the secondary issues
related to Imamate (the leadership of *Ahl al-Bayt*) and caliphate. This
issue is better known as Imam al-Rida“as the crown prince”.

Ma’mun brought Imam al-Ridafrom Medina to Khorasan (Marv) of that time
and appointed him as his crown prince. Even the words “heir” or “crown
prince” which are both used for the same meaning, are definitions not
only relative today but also linked to that time.

A couple of years back, I was trying to find out when these words
appeared. These words were not used at the beginning of Islam and such
issues were basically not raised; therefore, such words were not
required.

The act of introducing a successor by the Caliph during his time and
taking oath of allegiance from his successor was first carried out
during the time of Mu‘awiyah for Yazid. It, however, did not carry the
name “giving oath of allegiance to Yazid as the crown prince”. Even
though I focused on this issue, I do not remember seeing this definition
in the period after him. But here we see this word is used and is also
continuously repeated. Therefore, we shall use this definition because
it has been stated in history and we should inevitably use it.

As in the case of Imam al-Hassan’s peace, there are also suspicions in
this issue even though the appearance of the affair resembles these two
issues as opposite and contradictory. This is because Imam al-Hassan
abandoned the caliphate or as history or even the Imam himself defines
it: he submitted the affairs. Here, it is the opposite.

The issue was not leaving the job but the opposite—taking it. The
following question can cross ones mind: what are the Imams supposed to
do then? When they leave the job they get criticism and if others want
to hand over the job to them and they accept, they will still be
criticized? What therefore must be done?

However, the critics have one issue in common; they all agree that in
both cases, of handing over leadership and acquiring it, there is a kind
of agreement. Handing over was a form of coming to terms with the
present Caliph who had, for sure, taken over the caliphate unjustly and
the acceptance of the position of successor was also ultimately a form
of agreement.

Those who criticize say: Imam al-Hassan should not have handed over the
affairs and come to term in the situation. He should have fought until
he was killed. And in the case of Imam al-Rida, he should not have
accepted. He should have resisted and fought as until he got killed,
even if he was forced to accept it.

We shall now analyze the isse of successoral, which is a very important
historical issue, so that the matter is made clear. The peace of Imam
al-Hassan was to an extent discussed previously.

We must first investigate the historical view point irrespective of the
issue why and how Imam al-Ridaaccepted this offer, to see what the story
was.

The ‘Abbasid attitude towards the ‘Alawis
-----------------------------------------

Ma’mun is the heir to the ‘Abbasid caliphate. Since the first day the
‘Abbasids came to power, their plan was to fight the ‘Alawis and kill
them. The crime the Abbasids committed towards the ‘Alawis when they
were in power was not little and even worse in some aspects.

However, because of the tragedy of Karbala (where Imam al-Husaynis the
one they dealt with) takes place in the time of the Umayyads, the course
of events really gets heated. Otherwise, apart from the tragedy of Imam
al-Husayn, the disasters they created for the ‘Alawis was nothing less
than the tragedy of Karbala and it was at time even worse.

What did Mansur, the second ‘Abbasid Caliph, do with the ‘Alawis, with
Imam al-Hassan’s children to whom he gave oath of allegiance? He killed
many of them and took them to really hideous prisons. That was where he
took a large group of these poor *sayyid*s (the children of the Prophet)
to a prison where he gave them no water, no bread and even no permission
to go out and go to toilet. This was a form of gradual torture. When he
wanted to kill them, he would say: go and destroy the roof on their
heads.

Anyone, who came after Mansur, did the same thing. During Ma’mun’s time,
five of the Imam’s children rebelled, whose names are mentioned in
“*Murawwij al-Dhahab*” by Mas‘udi and “*Kamil*” by ibn Athir. During the
time of Harun and Ma’mun, seven to eight of the ‘Alawis rebelled.
Therefore, hatred and enmity between the ‘Alawis and ‘Abbasids is not a
small issue.

The ‘Abbasids did not refrain from any action for gaining power over the
caliphate. Even if someone from their own dynasty became their rival,
they would not hesitate and immediately killed him. This was true in the
case of Abu Muslim, who had served them so much, but who was killed as
soon as they felt the slightest bit of threat from him. All the service
the Barmakis gave to Harun and all the cordiality these two had towards
each other (the cordiality between Harun and Barmak had became a
historical proverb)[^1] did not do any good for the Barmakis. Suddenly,
Harun got rid of them for a very little political issue and scorched
their family. Even His Excellency Ma’mun got into a fight with his
brother Amin. These two brothers fought each other and Ma’mun won and
his bother got killed in a terrible manner.

Now, the question is how Ma’mun, who had such a personality, prepare to
call up on Imam al-Ridafrom Medina and order for Imam al-Ridato be
brought to him?

When they brought Imam al-Rida, he suggested to the Imam to accept the
caliphate from him.[^2] What was his motivation for this? What was going
on? It is not easy to analyze this event historically.

Jurji Zaydan in the fourth volume of his book, entitled “*Tarikh-e
Tamaddun*” (the History of Civilizations), discusses this issue with a
special perception which I will talk about later. But he confesses to a
matter that the ‘Abbasids used to keep their policies a secret even from
their very close people and their policies are still unknown.

The issue of Imam al-Rida’s successoral and historical citations
----------------------------------------------------------------

The secrets, however, will ultimately not stay hidden as they should. In
our (Shi‘ah) view, the secrets of this story are up to a large extent
very clear. In our reports and narrations, that is the historical quotes
that have reached us through Shi‘ah scholars and not the narration that
have been narrated by the Imams, like what Shaykh Mufid has quoted in
the book “*Al-Irshad*” or what Shaykh Saduq has quoted in the book,
“*‘Uyun al-Akhbar al-Rida*”. There are many points about the successoral
of Imam al-Ridaespecially in the book “*‘Uyun al-Akhbar al-Rida*”.
Before I refer to these Shi‘ah historical resources, I will firstly name
a book as evidence from Sunni references which is called “*Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin*” by Abu al-Faraj Isfahani. He is originally an Umawi and
from the Umayyad generation and this is a fact. He lived in the age of
“Al-e Buyeh” and because he was residing in Isfahan he became famous as
Abu al-Faraj Isfahani.

This man was not a Shi‘ah so we could claim he has written his books
based on Shi‘ah emotions. He is definitely a Sunni. He also was not a
very pious person either so that we could claim that he was influenced
by the reality of events. He is the author of the book called,
“*Al-Aghani*”. *Aghani* is plural for *Ughniyyah* and *Ughniyyah* means
songs.

He has explained the history of music in the Muslim World and in
proportion to that, a lot of other histories in this book which is
apparently about eighteen thousand big volumes. They say Sahib ibn
‘Ubbad who was contemporaneous with him, used to take two or three loads
of books wherever he went. But when he had Abu al-Faraj’s book he would
say: I am no longer in need of a library. This book is so comprehensive
that even though its writer is Abu al-Faraj and it is about music and
musicians, a group of traditionalist such as the late ‘Allamah Majlisi
and the late Shaykh ‘Abbas Qummi continuously quoted from the book of
Aghani by Abu al-Faraj.

We said that Abu al-Faraj has a book that is considered as a valid
Islamic history book and is called, “*Maqatil al-Talibiyyin*”. It is the
history of the killings of the sons of Abu Talib. In this book, which is
still now available, he has gathered the history of ‘Alawi rebellions
and the murder and martyrdom of the children of Abu Talib, who were, of
course, mostly ‘Alawi. He has exclusively attributed about ten pages of
this book to Imam al-Ridaand has said the story of Imam al-Rida’s
successoral.

When we study this book, we see that it is in accordance with the
history quoted by the Shi‘ah scholars. I paid exceptional attention when
comparing “*Maqatil al-Talibiyyin*” with what has been mentioned in
“Al-Irshad” by Shaykh Mufid. They were very similar, as if they were
both the result of a merger of the same historical evidence into one
source which they have been written from. Therefore, our comments in
this regard have been taken from not only Shi‘ah sources.

Now let’s investigate Ma’mun’s motivation to figure out what really
forced him to raise this issue. Was Ma’mun really thinking of handing
the job over to Imam al-Ridathat in case of his death or murder, the
caliphate would be transferred to the ‘Alawi family and to Imam al-Rida?
If he really had this belief, did it remain with him till the end? In
that case, we must not then accept that Ma’mun poisoned Imam al-Rida

We should accept the words of those who claim that Imam al-Ridadied a
natural death. They thought that Ma’mun had good intentions from the
beginning and that his good intentions stayed with him until the end is
not acceptable by Shi‘ah scholars. Most westerners have such beliefs.
They believe that Ma’mun was truly a Shi‘ah and truly fond of ‘Ali’s
family.

Ma’mun and the Shi‘ism
----------------------

Ma’mun was the most knowledgeable of the caliphs and perhaps the most
knowledgeable of kings in the world. It may not be possible to find a
king from among those in the world who is more erudite and knowledge
loving.[^3] Again, there is no question of Ma’mun’s intellectual and
spiritual inclinations towards the Shi‘ism.

He repeatedly took part in meetings where Imam al-Ridaspoke about the
Shi‘ism or the meetings where other Sunnis were present. One famous
Sunni scholar by the name of Ibn ‘Abd al-Birr has quoted a story, which
has also been mentioned in Shi‘ah books, in his famous book which goes
as follows:

Once, early in the morning Ma’mun summoned forty of the greatest Sunni
scholars to come to him. He told them that he wanted to discuss the
issue of caliphate with you. Some of this discussion has been quoted by
Mr. [MuhammadTaqi] Shari‘ati in his book called, “*Khilafat wa Wilayat*”
(Caliphate and Leadership). I have definetly seen very few scholars of
religion to have argued the issue of the caliphate as well Ma’mun has.
He discussed the issue of ‘Ali’s caliphate with all of them and overcame
them all.

It has been narrated in Shi‘ah books and the late Aqa Shaykh ‘Abbas
Qummi has also quoted in the book titled, “*Muntaha al-Amal*”:Once
somebody asked Ma’mun, “Who did you learn Shi‘ism from?” He said, “From
my father Harun.” He then told a detailed story about his father’s
inclinations towards the Shi‘ism. He had this kind of reverence towards
Musa ibn Ja‘far.

This was how fond of him he was. But at the same time he treated Musa
ibn Ja‘far in the worse possible manner. Once I asked my father, “If you
have so much regard for this man why are you treating him like this?” He
said, “Kingdom is sterile (an Arabic proverb) which means that a kingdom
does not take into account his own child, let alone other things.” He
then said, “My little boy! Even if you, my child, fight with me over the
caliphate, I will take of your body whatever carries your eyes, meaning
I will separate your head from you body.”

Thus, there is no doubt that Ma’mun was fond of the Shi‘ism, however, he
was famous for being “an *imam*-killing Shi‘ah”. Was it not true that
the people of Kufah had Shi‘ah inclinations yet they took part in
killing Imam al-Husayn? There is no doubt that Ma’mun was an erudite and
knowledge-loving man and this is the reason why westerners believe that
he had plans to transfer the caliphate to Imam al-Ridaout of sincerity,
belief and good intentions. They believe that events in Imam al-Rida’s
life stopped him and that he died a natural death. This, in their
belief, was how the issue was terminated.

But, of course, Shi‘ah scholars believe that this is not acceptable. The
evidences are also contrary to this belief. If the matter was this
serious, Imam al-Rida’s reaction towards accepting the caliphate would
not have been the way they were. We see that Imam al-Ridadid not regard
this matter as a serious one.

The views of Shaykh Mufid and Shaykh Saduq
------------------------------------------

Other assumptions which are also not improbable, since people like
Shaykh Mufid and Shaykh Saduq have accepted it, are that in the
beginning Ma’mun had sincere intentions but he later changed his mind.

It has also been mentioned in history (quoted by Abu al-Faraj and in
more detail by Shaykh Saduq and Shaykh Mufid) when Ma’mun gave this
suggestion, he said, “Once my brother, Amin, summoned me (Amin was the
Caliph even though part of the kingdom had been handed over to Ma’mun,
who was also crown prince). I did not go.” He then sends an army after
me to take me with my hands tied. Upheaval had taken over parts of
Khorasan and I sent an army there that was later defeated. I noticed
that the leader of my army had a weak spirit which gave me certainty
that I would not have the power to resist my brother and that I would be
captured and handed over to him handcuffed only to face an ominous
future.

One day I repented. He shows a room to the one he was talking to and
says, “In this very room, I ordered for some water to be brought to me.
First I washed my body, purified myself (I am not sure whether it is
ironical to *ghusul* or the just washing). I then ordered for clean
white clothes and in this very place I read the parts of the Qur’an
which I had memorized. I prayed four *rak‘ah*s of prayer and made a vow
to Allah to return the caliphate to its rightful owners if he were to
keep me safe and sound and make me victorious over my brother, I did
this with pure sincerity. From there onwards, I felt the
disentanglements in my affairs open. After that, I was never defeated. I
had sent a group to the front in Sistan and I received news of their
glory. I then sent Tahir ibn al-Husaynto my brother. He also became
victorious; one victory after another. Because my prayers were granted
by Allah, I wanted to fulfil my promise.”

Shaykh Saduq and others have approved of this story. The only motivation
driving Ma’mun was the oath he had made to Allah. This is one
probability.

The second probability
----------------------

Ma’mun basically had no power over this event. The initiative was not
Ma’muns. The initiative was from al-Fadl ibn Sahl Dhu al-Riyasatyan
(Ma’mun’s Minister)[^4] who came and said, “Your father treated ‘Ali’s
family very badly. They did such and such, now it would be proper for
you to bring the best of ‘Ali’s family and make him your crown prince.”
Ma’mun was reluctant to do this but he saw no other options because Fadl
had requested this of him.

Therefore, if we again assume this to be Fadl’s initiative, then why
would he do it? Was Fadl a Shi‘ah? Did he do this because of the belief
he had in Imam al-Rida? If so, then why did he still accept his
Zoroastrian beliefs? Where his intentions only to transform the
caliphate even though he was not a Shi‘ah of Imam al-Ridaand he was bad?
And, therefore, if his plans worked, the danger would mostly be towards
Ma’mun’s government, because Ma’mun was ultimately a Muslim caliph.
However, maybe they wanted to separate Iran from the Muslim World and
take it towards Zoroastrianism.

Everything I am saying are all questions, I do not want to imply that
history has given definite answer to these questions.

Jurji Zaydan’s view
-------------------

Jurji Zaydan is one of the people who believe this transferral plan was
initiated by Fadl ibn Sahl*.* He also believes that Fadl ibn Sahl was a
Shi‘ah and did this because of his beliefs. This statement, however, is
neither true nor correct because it is not consistent with history. If
Fadl was as sincere and truly wanted for the Shi‘ism to prevail over the
Sunnis, Imam al-Rida’s reaction towards the transfer of caliphate would
not have been the way it was. On the contrary, it has been mentioned in
Shi‘ah history and narrations that Imam al-Ridastrongly opposed Fadl
even more than he opposed Ma’mun. He was against Fadl ibn Sahl and
considered him a danger. He would sometimes say to Ma’mun, “Fear him! He
and his brother are dangerous.”

It has also been mentioned that Fadl ibn Sahl constantly vilified Imam
al-Rida.

We have so far pointed out two probabilities. One is that Ma’mun
initiated for this transfer to take place in sincerity because of the
oath he had made but was led astray, which is acceptable by Shaykh Saduq
and others. Or that he kept his sincerity until the end which is what
the orientalists believe.

The second probability is that the initiative was basically not Ma’mun’s
but that Fadl ibn Sahl initiated it. Some have said that Fadl was a
Shi‘ah and was sincere, others agree that he had dangerous intentions.

The third probability
---------------------

A) To attract the attention of Iranians:

The other probability is that the initiative was Ma’mun’s and that he
had no sincerity from the beginning, considering this issue a ‘kingdom
policy’. What was that policy? Some have said that it was aimed at
attracting the attention of the Iranians because the Iranians generally
preferred the Shi‘ism and ‘Ali’s family and had risen against the
‘Abbasids from the beginning under the title “Al-Rida” or “Al-Radi” from
Muhammad’s family. Therefore, based on history and not traditions, the
title al-Ridawas given to Imam al-Ridaby Ma’mun, meaning the day he
appointed Imam al-Ridaas the crown prince, he said, “From now on, we
call him by the title ‘al-Rida’.” He wanted to show the Iranians that he
had satisfied their ninety-year-old request they had when they rose
under the title “al-Ridafrom Muhammad’s family” or “al-Radi from
Muhammad’s family”. He thought to himself, “We will please them and deal
with Imam al-Ridalater.”

There was also the issue of the difference between their ages, Ma’mun
was a young man of less than thirty years whereas Imam al-Ridawas about
fifty years old (as Saduq and others have suggested that the Imam had
forty seven years of age which is probably more correct). Ma’mun thinks
to himself, “On the surface, this individual’s leadership can not pose a
threat to me. He is at least twenty years my senior. Even if he does
continue to live for another few years, he will still die before me.”

There is, therefore, another view that the transfer of caliphate to Imam
al-Ridawas Ma’mun’s policy. It was initiated by Ma’mun political
intentions to calm the Iranian nation down and attract their attention.

B) To destabilize rebellions by the ‘Alawis:

Some have suggested another reason for Ma’mun’s initiative. They believe
that the reason behind it was to destabilize the uprising of the
‘Alawis. The ‘Alawis had become an issue themselves. Every few years or
sometimes every year there would have been an uprising in one corner of
the land which was most likely led by an ‘Alawi.

Ma’mun came up with this initiative in order to please the ‘Alawis and
keep them quiet or at least to disarm them in front of the people. When
he brings the leader of the ‘Alawis into his system, they would
definitely think that they too have a share of the government. Ma’mun
forgave most of them even though, in his opinion, they had committed
enormous crimes. This included Zayd al-Nar, Imam al-Rida’s brother, who
was pardoned by Ma’mun. Ma’mun thought to himself, “I will eventually
please them and stop their uprising.” He, in fact, wanted to give them a
share of the government so they would calm down and the people around
them disintegrate. He wanted to disarm the ‘Alawis so wherever they go
to assemble an uprising against the Caliph, people tell them, “You also
have a share in the government. Imam al-Ridais now the crown prince. Do
you want to rise against Imam al-Rida?”

C) Imam al-Rida’s disarmament

The other probability in relation to Ma’mun’s initiative was the policy
to disarm Imam al-Ridahimself. It is in our narrations that one day Imam
al-Ridatold Ma’mun, “This is what you intend.” You know, one way to
disarm people who criticize a system is to give them a post in that
system. Then, whatever the situation, if people were still unhappy,
their dissatisfaction could no longer be put to use. On the contrary,
the dissatisfied people will get provoked against them (i.e. if Imam
al-Ridahad a post in the government, those people who claimed that the
caliphate rightfully belonged to ‘Ali’s family, or that the world would
be a garden if they became Caliphs, or that justice would be
established, etc., they would turn against him). Ma’mun wanted to select
Imam al-Ridaas the Crown Prince so that people would say afterwards,
“No, the situation did not change. Nothing happened.” Or maybe he wanted
to accuse ‘Ali’s family and say, “They say so and so when they have no
access to anything, but when they gain access, they become silent and do
not act.”

It is very difficult for one to reach a definite conclusion from
Ma’mun’s point of view using historical stand points. Was this Ma’mun’s
initiative? Or was it Fadl ibn Sahl’s initiative? If it was Fadl’s
initiative, what was it based on? And if it was Ma’mun’s initiative,
were his intentions sincere or not? If he had sincerity, did he revert
from it at the end or not? And if he did not have sincerity, what was
his policy? From historical points of view, these matters are uncertain.

Most of these, of course, have a reason but not ones that we could say
are one hundred percent definite. Maybe what Shaykh Saduq and others
believe is correct even though it may not seem palpable to the Shi‘ahs
to say that Ma’mun had pure intentions from the beginning but later he
changed his mind. Just as people make decisions by reverting to the
truth when they are faced with difficult situations but forget about
their initial intentions when they are freed from those difficulties.

**‏*****“And when they mount upon the ship, they pray to Allah, making
their faith pure for Him only, but when he bringeth them safe to land,
behold! They ascribe partners (on to Him).”***[^5]

The Qur’an says when people get entrapped in the four sea waves, they
become very pure and devoted but once they are out, they gradually
forget. Ma’mun was also stuck in these four sea waves. He made this oath
at first and decided to fulfil it. But, gradually he forgot and reverted
from it completely.

It is better to analyze the matter through Imam al-Rida’s own words. In
my opinion, if we analyze the situation from his point of view,
especially by taking into consideration the historical facts, then a lot
of questions, even those related to Ma’mun, will be answered.

The historical facts
--------------------

1) Summoning Imam al-Ridafrom Medina to Marw

Summoning Imam al-Ridato Marw from Medina was decided without previous
consultation with him. No single person has written about any previous
negotiation or correspondence with Imam al-Ridain Medina about the
reasons why they needed him there.

Ma’mun summoned the Imam without clarifying the issue at stake. He
ordered for not only the Imam but a large group of ‘Ali’s relatives to
be brought from Medina, under surveillance and despite of their free
will. Even the route they chose to take Imam al-Ridathrough was one
specifically chosen so that the Imam would not pass through Shi‘ah
neighbourhoods. He ordered them not to take the Imam through Kufah but
through Basrah and Khuzistan towards Neyshabur. He had defined the route
for journey.

Those chosen to complete this mission were hand-picked from among people
who had extreme hatred towards the Imam and who were the strongest of
all. The general appointed for this task was a man called “Jaludi” or
“Juludi” (apparently an Arab) who was very loyal to Ma’mun and opposed
Imam al-Ridato such an extent that when Ma’mun informed him of his plans
in Marw he said, “I disagree.” However much Ma’mun told him to shut up
he still said, “I do not agree.” Because of this, he along with two
other people was put in prison and was later killed for the sake of this
matter. This was done one day when Ma’mun had summoned them along with
Imam al-Ridaand a group including Fadl ibn Salh Dhu al-Riyasatayn. He
again asked them for their opinions on this matter. They disagreed with
utmost bluntness and gave a very sharp response. He decapitated the
first one. He asked the second one who insisted on his response. Ma’mun
decapitated him as well. He then turned to Jaludi.[^6] Imam al-Ridawas
sitting next to Ma’mun, he whispered to Ma’mun, “Skip this one.” Jaludi
said, “Oh the Commander of the Faithful! I have a request from you. For
God’s sake do not accept this man’s word about me.” Ma’mun said, “Your
oath is practicable that I will never take this man’s word about you.”
(He (Jaludi) did not know that the Imam was interceding for him). He was
beheaded right there.

In any case, they brought the Imam to Marw in that state. They placed
everyone from ‘Ali’s family in one place and Imam al-Ridain a special
place, under surveillance and under arrest. It was there that Ma’mun
discussed the matter with the Imam*.* This is among the historical
facts.

Imam al-Rida’s refusal
----------------------

Apart from not discussing this issue with Imam al-Ridabeforehand in
Medina, when it was brought up in Marw, the Imam strongly rejected it.
Abu al-Faraj has written in *Maqatil al-Talibiyyin*, “Ma’mun sent Fadl
ibn Sahl and al-Hassan ibn Salh to Imam al-RidaThese two raised the
issue. The Imam rejected and was not intending to accept. At the end,
they said, ‘What are you saying? This is not optional. We have the order
to behead you if you refuse (this has repeatedly been quoted by Shi‘ah
scholars).’ Faraj then says that the Imam still refused to accept. They
went to Ma’mun. Ma’mun negotiated with the Imam again and threatened to
murder him. Once he said, ‘Why do you not accept?[^7] Was it not your
grand father, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib who participated in that council’?”

He was trying to say that the matter did not violate the Imam’s family
customs, since it was similar to the time when ‘Ali participated in the
council which had congregated to choose a caliph. It meant that he had
temporarily withdrawn from the right, which he considered was bestowed
upon him by Allah and surrendered to the situation so that he could see
what the situation was and how the conditions were from the people’s
point of view.

Will the job be handed over to him or not? ‘So if the council had given
the caliphate to your father he would have accepted it. You should
accept it, too.’ The Imam finally agreed because his life was
threatened; that is, if he had not accepted it, he would have been
killed. Of course, the question whether or not Imam al-Rida’s refusal to
accept the position of ‘crown prince’ was worth the cost of his life
will remain for you to decide. Is this similar to the oath of allegiance
Yazid wanted from Imam al-Husayn? We shall discuss all these questions
later.

Imam al-Rida’s condition
------------------------

Another historical fact is that Imam al-Ridamade a condition and secured
its approval that was, ‘I will accept under the condition that I do not
interfere in anything and not take the responsibility for anything.’

He actually did not want to take responsibility for Ma’mun’s actions and
as they say today continue his opposition, insisting on the fact that
‘We (us and them) do not go together and can not cooperate.’ Of course,
Ma’mun accepted this condition. The Imam was not even participating in
the *‘Id* Prayers. Until that famous event, when Ma’mun requested that
Imam al-Ridaperform an *‘Id* prayer. The Imam said, “This is against my
condition and promise.” He said, “Your not accepting any
responsibilities have made people say things behind us. You have to
accept.” The Imam replied, “All right! I will accept this prayer.” He
accepted it in a way that made Ma’mun and Fadl regretful and they said,
“If he reaches the place, a revolution will take place there.” They came
and stopped the Imam and returned him and did not let him go out of the
city.

The Imam’s attitude after the issue of acceptance
-------------------------------------------------

The other issue which is again a historical fact and quoted by the
Sunnis as well as the Shi‘ahs (quoted by Abu al-Faraj as well as
citations in our books) is the Imam’s attitude after the issue of
acceptance of the position of ‘Crown Prince’. The speech the Imam gave
in Ma’mun’s meeting (the acceptance of heir-apparency meeting) was
especially amazing and interesting.

In my opinion, the Imam clarified his position in this one and half
sentence speech. He read a sermon and in that sermon he made no mention
of Ma’mun and did not thank him one single bit. The norms are to mention
his name and, at least, thank him a little.

Abu al-Faraj Says, “They finally set a day and said, ‘On this day,
people can come and give oath of allegiance to Imam al-Rida.’ People
came. Ma’mun made a seat for the Imam and sat him next to himself. The
first person he ordered to come and give oath of allegiance was his son,
‘Abbas ibn Ma’mun. The second person was one of the ‘Alawi *sayyid*s.
Then, on the same pattern, he called one ‘Abbasi and one ‘Alawi to come
and give oath of allegiance to the Imam and gave them lots of prizes and
they left. When they were coming to give oath of allegiance, the Imam
was holding his hand in a certain way towards people. Ma’mum said,
‘Extend your arm so they can come and give oath of allegiance.’ The Imam
said. ‘No, this is how my grandfather, the Prophet, used to take oath of
allegiance and held his hand this way when people place their hand on
his.’

Then, poets and rhetoricians, who are subject to situation and condition
changes, came and started to read sermons, read poems, speak in praise
of Imam al-Rida, speak in praise of Ma’mun and eulogize these two
people. Ma’mun then told Imam al-Rida, ‘Stand up and give a speech
yourself to the people.’ Ma’mun definitely expected the Imam to endorse
him and his government. It is written, ‘He first praised Allah
and…’[^8]” 

[^1]: I, of course, do not want to defend the Barmakis just like many of
the so-called Iranian worshippers, only because they were Iranian. They
were on the same level as the ‘Abbasids. Barmak did not have the
slightest amount of difference (spiritually or by nature) with caliphs
like Harun.

[^2]: This, however, is not certain according to all the historians but
it is as such in writing of most of the historians.

[^3]: This does not mean the encourager of scholars.

[^4]: Ma’mun has a vizier called Fadl ibn Sahl. They (the Sahls) are two
brothers: al-Hasan ibn Sahl and Fadl ibn Sahl. They both are pure
Iranians and originally Zoroastrians. During the Barmak Period (who the
generation before) Fadl ibn Sahl who was clever, intelligent and
educated and especially had some information about the science of
astrology, entered the Barmak system and became a Muslim by them (some
say their father became a Muslim and some others say, no, they were
Zoroastrians and became Muslims there and then). Later on, his job
flourished and he reached a level where he became Ma’mun’s vizier and
occupied two positions are the same time. First of all, he was the
vizier (the vizier in those days was like the prime minister today,
meaning he was the boss because in those days there were no council of
ministers, one person was the vizier who was in power and authority
after the Caliph), in addition to this he was as it is so called today
the head and commander in chief of the army. This was the reason they
called him Zoroastrian because he was in the ministry position and the
commander in chief position. Ma’mun’s army are all Iranians (there are
very little Arabs among them) because Ma’mun was in Khorasan; the war
between Amin and Ma’mun also was a war between Arab and Iranian. The
Arabs supported Amin and the Iranians especially the Khorasanis (as
Khorasan was the centre) supported Ma’mun. Ma’mun is Iranian from his
mother’s side. Mas‘udi has written in both Murawwij al-Dhahab and
Al-Tanbih wa al-Ashraf (others have also written) that Ma’mun’s mother
was a Badqisi woman. This went as far as Fadl ibn Sahl’s dominance over
everything and turned Ma’mun into a tool without will power.

[^5]: Surat al-‘Ankabut 29:65.

[^6]: Jaludi had a bad record after an uprising by one of the ‘Alawis
who was later defeated, Harun had apparently ordered this very Jaludi to
seize all the belongings of the Abi Talibfalmily, ‘Do not even leave any
jewlleries for their women, and take all their clothes except for one
set out of their homes.’ He came to Imam al-Rida’s house; the Imam
blocked his way and said, ‘I will not let you in.’ He said, ‘I have a
mission, I must go and take off the women’s clothes myself and not leave
other than one set of cloth for them.’ The Imam said, ‘I will do
whatever you are saying but I will not let you enter.’ No matter how
much he insisted the Imam did not let him in. Afterwards, the Imam
himself went and told the women, ‘Give everything you have to him so he
leaves.’ He then collected their clothes and even their earrings and
bangles then left.

[^7]: They knew very well what their intentions were and why Imam
al-Rida was not accepting. Imam al-Rida refused to accept, because later
he himself told Ma’mun, ‘Whose property are you giving away?’ Imam
al-Rida questioned whose property Ma’mun was giving away? And accepting
this position from him meant approving of him. If Imam al-Rida
considered the caliphate a right bestowed upon him by Allah, he tells
Ma’mun, ‘You have no right to make me the crown prince. You must hand
over the leadership and agree that you had no rights until now.’ This
was our right and if choosing the Caliph was the people’s
responsibility, again what business was this to him?

[^8]: [Unfortunately the last few minutes of this speech were not
recorded on the tape].


