Chapter 1: ‘Ali’s (‘a) Struggles
================================

“Leave me and seek someone else. We are facing a matter that has
(several) sides and colors, which neither hearts can bear nor
intelligence fathom. Clouds are hovering over the sky and a clear path
is not apparent. You should know that if I respond to you, I can lead
you as I know how.”1

We know that ‘Ali never used to refrain from mentioning that
successorship [*khilafah* ]2 was his lawful right during the time of
caliphate of the caliphs. What’s more, we see that after the bloody
revolution against ‘Uthman3 , which resulted in his murder, people
poured into ‘Ali’s house, insisting on swearing allegiance to him, if he
were to take the reins of power. But he was reluctant to accept the
caliphate.

The above statements are mentioned in*Nahj al-Balaghah* .4 He says,
“Leave me and seek someone else.” Later, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a* ) himself
explains the reason for his refusal so that, God forbid, no one would
assume that Imam ‘Ali (*‘a* ) did not think himself worthy for caliphate
after the Prophet (*s* ). He described the situation as extremely
chaotic and that an even more chaotic situation was to be expected. This
is the clause, “We are facing a matter that has (several) faces and
colors (it is an enigmatic matter).” We do not have a clear future ahead
of us. In the following sentence the Imam refers to several issues,
“Clouds are hovering in the sky (and the horizons are blocked with
fog).” Just like when fog in the air blocks man’s vision rendering him
unable to see his path. “A clear path is not discernible (the way is
unrecognizable to people).” But then he gives what seems to be an
ultimatum. He says, “You should know that If I respond to you, I will as
I know how (not how you want me to).” Finally he said, “Leave me be. At
present, I would rather stay a minister than to become a chief [*amir*
].”

These statements reveal that ‘Ali had envisaged many problems during his
caliphate; these same problems appeared and later revealed their facets.
What were those problems? I cannot describe all those problems in one
session for you; therefore, I shall discuss with you ‘Ali’s biggest
problem with clarification. I will enlighten you of the rest of ‘Ali’s
problems in a brief summary leading up to ‘Ali’s most serious problem
and the biggest complication that entrapped him.

‘Uthman’s assassination (the problem of hypocrisy)
--------------------------------------------------

The first difficulty that presented itself was the assassination of
‘Uthman, of which ‘Ali used to say: “We have a vague future ahead of
us.” ‘Ali had inherited a caliphate, of which the previous caliph had
been murdered in a revolution, the rebels of which would not permit his
burial and who had many complaints. And now this revolutionary group has
joined ‘Ali. What did other people think? Not all people had the same
views as that of the revolutionaries’.

Also, ‘Ali’s thoughts did not match those of the revolutionaries or of
the rest of the people. On one side was ‘Uthman and his associates,
together with all the inequality, injustice and cruelty, all the
advantages given out to relatives and bonuses bestowed upon friends, and
on the other side were the angered groups who had gathered from
different cities (Madinah5 , Hijaz6 , Basrah7 , Kufah8 , Egypt9 ), who
were constantly protesting and criticizing.

But ‘Uthman would not surrender himself. ‘Ali is an ambassador between
the revolutionaries and ‘Uthman, which in itself is another peculiar
story. Although ‘Ali disagrees with ‘Uthman’s tactics, he also opposes
‘opening doors’ to Caliph killing.

He does not want them to kill the Caliph as it would lead to rioting
amongst Muslims, which itself has a long story.10 He is critical towards
‘Uthman and tries to dissuade him from the path he has taken trying to
lead him towards the right path, so that this might extinguish the fire
within the revolutionaries and to stop the rioting. Neither did ‘Uthman
nor did his associates agree to change their way, nor did the
revolutionaries stop the upheaval which, consequently, resulted in
‘Uthman’s assassination.

‘Ali knew that ‘Uthman’s murder would become an issue that caused
mutiny. This is especially interesting in view of the strange fact that
has been discovered by sociologists, historians and researchers who have
studied Islamic history that some of ‘Uthman’s associates and followers
played a part in his assassination (the*Nahj al-Balaghah* also explains
this issue). They wanted ‘Uthman to be killed, for conflicts to be
triggered in the Muslim World, so that they may use this to their
advantage (these are present in the texts of the*Nahj al-Balaghah* ).

Mu‘awiyah*,* in particular, played an important role in ‘Uthman’s
murder. Covertly, he was trying to escalate the rioting, so that it may
result in the killing of ‘Uthman, thus enabling him to use this murder
to his own advantage. This is another problem which I cannot discuss any
further.

‘Ali’s opponents differed from the Prophet’s opponents in that the
Prophet’s opponents were mainly groups of non-believers and
idol-worshippers who rejected Allah’s existence openly, and who fought
the Prophet under the motto, “Long Live Hubal”11 The Prophet ( *s* )
also had an explicit motto, “Allah is the greatest of all.” However,
‘Ali was facing an intelligent, non-religious group, who, although
pretending to follow Islam, were not true Muslims. Their slogans were
Islamic but their aims were against Islam. Mu‘awiyah’s father, Abu
Sufyan *,* had fought the Prophet ( *s* ) under the slogan of “Long Live
Hubal”, therefore making the Prophet’s task of fighting him much easier.
His son, however, Mu‘awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan, who has the same soul and
shares the same goals as his forefathers, fought against ‘Ali using the
following verse from the Qur’an as his slogan,

***“And whosoever is killed unjustly (wrongfully), we have indeed given
his next of kin [his heir] an authority.”*** 12

The slogan is a good one. However, is there anyone who can ask Mu‘awiyah
who ‘Uthman’s legal guardian is, who can ask for ‘Uthman’s blood? Of
what business is it to you to ask for ‘Uthman’s blood when you are a
very distant relative? ‘Uthman has a son and other closer relatives and
what’s more, what did ‘Uthman’s death do with ‘Ali? Nevertheless, a man
as manipulative as Mu‘awiyah does not care about these questions; he
only wants to use this to his advantage.

Mu‘awiyah had ordered his spies beforehand to send ‘Uthman’s
blood-spattered shirt to him in Syria as soon as ‘Uthman was killed.
Therefore, as soon as ‘Uthman was assassinated, without even waiting for
the blood to dry, they sent the blood-spattered shirt, together with
‘Uthman’s wife’s13

fingers, to Mu‘awiyah. He got very excited then and ordered for
‘Uthman’s wife’s fingers to be hung from his podium. Then, he said “O
people!! The world is surrounded by oppression, Islam is lost! These are
the fingers of the Caliph’s wife!” Then, he ordered for ‘Uthman’s shirt
to be hung on a stick and taken to a mosque or somewhere else. He went
there himself and started crying for the innocent Caliph. For a while he
read sermons about ‘Uthman and prepared the people to avenge ‘Uthman’s
blood; whom do we seek vengeance from? We should seek it from ‘Ali! ‘Ali
cooperated with the revolutionaries who had sworn allegiance to him. If
they had not cooperated with him, then why are they in his army?” This
was a big problem which resulted in the two battles of Jamal 14 and
Siffin 15 , caused by the spiteful people.

Inflexibility in the enforcement of justice
-------------------------------------------

‘Ali (peace be upon him) faced other problems, on the one hand, were
related to his tactics and, on the other, were the changes Muslims had
undergone. ‘Ali was an inflexible man. For years after the Prophet’s
death the society had become accustomed to allocating special subsidies
to influential people, but ‘Ali was rigorously opposed to this action.
He would say, “I am not somebody who will divert even slightly from the
path of justice.” Even his followers would come to him and say, “Sir!
Please show some flexibility”, he would reply, “Are you asking me to
gain victory and success in politics at the price of oppression and
destroying the rights of powerless people?! I swear upon the All-mighty,
as long as there is day and night in this world, I will not do such a
thing. As long as a star moves in the sky, such a thing is not
practical.”

Bluntness and honesty in politics
---------------------------------

The third problem with his caliphate was his bluntness and honesty in
politics, which again some of his friends did not favor. They would say,
“Politics does not require bluntness and truthfulness, some dishonesty
and deception is necessary. Deceit is the zest in politics.”

(Everything I mention here is present in*Nahj al-Balaghah* ). Some would
even say, “‘Ali has no diplomacy. Look at how tactful Mu‘awiyah is!”

‘Ali would say, “I swear upon Allah, the All-mighty that you are wrong.
Mu‘awiyah is not more cunning than I am. He is deceitful. He is lewd. I
do not want to be deceitful. I do not want to astray from the path of
truth. I do not want to commit debauchery and wickedness. If Allah, the
Honorable and Almighty did not consider deception as his enemy, then you
would have seen that ‘Ali would have been the most cunning of all
people. This kind of deceitfulness is immoral, evil and wicked. It is
blasphemous. I know that on the Day of Judgement every deceitful person
is resurrected holding a banner (apparently the point is that the ones
deceived are under the banner of deceit).” 16 This was another one of
‘Ali’s problems.

Kharijites [khawarij], ‘Ali’s fundamental problem
-------------------------------------------------

**Kharijites [khawarij]17 , ‘Ali’s fundamental problem**

All that has been said so far serves as an introduction to the
fundamental issue pertaining to ‘Ali’s caliphate on which I intend to
touch on here.

During the Prophet’s time, the group that was created by the Prophet was
not one formed as a result of a revolution which simply gathers the
masses under one flag. He trained a group, united them, brought them
forward step by step and gradually penetrated Islamic morals and
teachings into their souls.

The Prophet (*s* ) was in Mecca18 for thirteen years. He suffered all
kinds of torture, agony and pain from the people of Quraysh19 , but
continuously called for patience whenever his companions would say, “O
Messenger of Allah! Please give us permission to defend ourselves, how
long should we suffer? How many should they torture or kill from among
us? How many times must they lay us on the heated grounds of Hijaz and
place large stones on our chests? How many more times must they lash
us?”

However, the Prophet (*s* ) would never grant permission for a holy war
and defence. Finally he only consented to emigration after which some
groups emigrated to Habashah (Ethiopia) 20 , which was beneficial.
However, what was the Prophet doing during these thirteen years? He
trained and taught. In other words, he was creating the core of Islam.
The group, who at the time of migration might have been around 1,000
people, were all familiar with the essence of Islam and the majority had
Islamic training.

The main prerequisite of a movement is the presence of a teaching and
training group which have already become familiar with the principles
and goals as well as the tactical ideology of that movement. These
groups can, therefore, form the focal point to which others can later
join and be trained by in order to learn to adapt themselves to their
teachers. This was the secret behind the success of Islam.

Therefore, the difference between ‘Ali’s situation and that of the
Prophet was, firstly, that the people with whom the Prophet (*s* ) dealt
were predominantly non-believers. This means he was confronting explicit
paganism. He was dealing with a blasphemy that spoke for itself.
However, ‘Ali was dealing with covert paganism, i.e. hypocrisy. He was
tackling a nation that was pursuing the objectives of the non-believers,
but hid under an Islamic cover of sanctity and piety, bearing a Qur’anic
appearance.

The other difference apparent in the era of caliphate, especially during
‘Uthman’s, was that the Prophet’s (*s* ) methods of teaching and
training were not explored and practised as much as was expected and
instead other triumphs and many conquests were pursued. Conquests alone
do not achieve much in the long run. Throughout the thirteen years that
the Prophet remained in Mecca, he did not even allow Muslims to defend
themselves. This was because the people were not yet capable of this
sort of defence or *jihad* 21 .

If war and conquest is to take place, it must be simultaneous to the
spread of Islamic culture and ethos which must be built up. People who
become attracted to and those who convert to Islam must also learn and
understand its objectives and principles, its ‘core and crust’. However,
as a result of the negligence that took place during the time of the
caliphs, an important social phenomenon took place in the Islamic world:
formation of a new group in the Islamic community.

Although this group was fond of Islam and believed in Islam, it was only
acquainted with Islam’s ‘crust’, its appearance. It did not know the
essence of Islam. This was a group that concentrated on, for example,
the act of praying with little knowledge and appreciation of the Islamic
objectives behind it. A priggish and dogmatic group formed of people who
had formed calluses on their foreheads, palms and knees as a result of
their excessive and long prostrations.

These prostrations would sometimes last from an hour or two to five
hours even on bare sandy grounds. When ‘Ali had sent Ibn ‘Abbas22 to
them when they rioted and rebelled against him, Ibn ‘Abbas came back
saying, “Their foreheads are wounded because of excessive prostrations;
they have hands that have calluses like the knee of a camel. They have
old, ascetic looking clothes. Most manifest are their resolute and
indomitable faces…”23

An ignorant and puritanical faction oblivious in worship had come into
existence in the Muslim World; a faction with no knowledge whatsoever of
Islam yet very keen to be part of it. It was not familiar with the
‘core’ of Islam but was glued to its ‘crust’.

‘Ali describes this group of people thus,

“They are a people who are rough, remorseless, tough, hard-hearted,
rude, but with inferior, slavish characters and spirits. Their souls are
not magnanimous. You cannot find nobility in their souls. They are a
hooligan type of people. It is not clear which corner they have appeared
from. One is from this corner, another is from the other. A group of
lowborn and lowbred people, whose origin and background is unclear; a
crowd who should come and sit in the first year of Islam and learn
Islamic lessons. They are illiterate and have no knowledge. They do not
know what the Qur’an is. They do not understand the meaning of the
Qur’an. They do not know the traditions of the Prophet (*s* ). They must
be taught and trained. They have not gathered Islamic education and
training. They are not part of the Emigrants [*muhajirin* ] and Helpers
[*anṣar* ] who were trained by the Prophet (*s* ). They are a group of
people who have no Islamic demeanour.”

‘Ali became caliph at a time when this group of people existed among
Muslims. They permeated every area, even his army. You have probably
heard many times the story of the Battle of Siffin and the con that
Mu‘awiyah and ‘Amr ibn al-‘As24 used. When they finally realized that
they were losing, they plotted to use this group of people to their
advantage. They ordered for Qur’ans to be raised on spears: “O people!
We all believe in the Qur’an. We are all people of the same*Qiblah* .
Why are you fighting? If you want to fight then take aim at these
Qur’ans.”

Immediately, this group stopped fighting, claiming, “We shall not fight
the Qur’an.” They came to ‘Ali and said, “All matters have now been
resolved. The Qur’an has been set forth. Now that the Qur’an is brought
forward, there is no reason for war.” ‘Ali said, “Do you not know that
from day one I tried to convince them to pass judgment and ruling about
who is right based on the Qur’an? They are lying. They have not brought
forward the Qur’an itself but its papers and cover so that they can rise
up again against this very Qur’an. Do not pay attention. I am
your*imam.* I am your ‘speaking Qur’an’. Go and progress forward.” They
said, “What! What

nonsense is this?! Up until now we considered you a good person and were
of the belief that you are a decent person. Now it is clear that you
have your own ambitions. You mean we should go and fight against the
Qur’an? No, we will not fight.” To which ‘Ali replied thus, “All right.
Do not fight.”

Malik al-Ashtar25 was progressing forward. They said, “Send an immediate
order to Malik to return. Fighting the Qur’an is no longer tolerable.”
They placed great pressure on ‘Ali, who then sent a message to Malik
requesting that he return. Malik did not return, saying, “Sir! Please
give me permission. In only two hours they will be defeated.” The
messenger came back informing them that Malik would not return, to which
they replied, “Either Malik returns or we shall cut you into pieces with
our swords [they were about 20,000 in number]. You are fighting the
Qur’an?!” ‘Ali ( *‘a* ) sent another message, “Malik, if you want to see
‘Ali alive, come back.” Then, the issue of arbitration was put forward.
They said, “Well now! Let us choose an arbitrator, now that the Qur’an
has been set forth.” The other side chose the evil ‘Amr ibn al-‘As. ‘Ali
chose the clever and honorable scholar ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas. They said,
“No, we should choose somebody who is not related to you.” ‘Ali then
said, “Malik al-Ashtar.” They said, “No, we do not approve of him.” Some
thers also objected to this. They said, “We only approve of Abu Musa
al-Ash‘ari 26 .” Who was Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari?! Was he a member of ‘Ali’s
army? No, he was a former governor of Kufah who was ousted by ‘Ali. He
was in his heart an enemy of ‘Ali. They brought Abu Musa *.*

He was tricked by ‘Amr ibn al-‘As in a con that was more similar to a
game than any serious issue you may have heard of. When they realized
they had been deceived, they said, “We made a mistake.” Now, from saying
they have made a mistake, they mean to confess to another mistake. They
did not say, ‘We made a mistake when we stopped fighting Mu‘awiyah and
we should have continued the fight. This was not a battle against the
Qur’an.

This was a battle for the Qur’an.’ They said, No, that was correct. They
also did not say, ‘We made a mistake for choosing Abu Musa. We should
have accepted Ibn ‘Abbas or Malik al-Ashtar.’ Instead, they said*,*
“Principally, the fact that we accepted two people to judge the religion
was blasphemous. In the Qur’an it states,*“The judgment (command)
belongs to none but Allah.”* 27 Because in the Qur’an it says judgment
(command) exclusively belongs to Allah, then no human has the right to
make a judgment. Therefore, choosing arbitrators was fundamentally
blasphemous and, in fact, a form of polytheism. We are now repenting, ‘I
ask Allah’s forgiveness and turn towards Him’.”

They then went after ‘Ali*,* “‘Ali! You have become a non-believer like
us. You must also repent. (Now, do you see the problem? Is Mu‘awiyah
‘Ali’s problem or these puritans? Is ‘Amr ibn al-‘As, ‘Ali’s problem or
these puritans?)” He replied, “You are wrong! Arbitration is no
blasphemy. You do not understand the meaning of the verse. It refers to
the fact that the law must be set by Allah alone or somebody who is
permitted to do so by Him. We did not want somebody to come and set us
law. We said, ‘Qur’anic law’; let two people come and judge according to
the Qur’an.” They said, “This is it.” ‘Ali said, “I shall never confess
to a sin I have never committed.

I shall never say that something is against the religious law when it is
not. How can I falsify something to Allah, the Honorable and Exalted,
and the Prophet ( *s* )? You want me to say arbitration and choosing
arbitrators in the time of disagreement is against the religious law and
is blasphemous? No, it is not blasphemous. You can do whatever you
wish.”

‘Ali’s (‘a) demeanour towards the Kharijites
--------------------------------------------

They parted ways with ‘Ali and formed a faction known as the Kharijites,
meaning the rebels against ‘Ali. They began causing great suffering to
‘Ali, who tolerated them until they started an armed riot. Thus, he
endured them to the greatest degree possible; never stopping their share
of the government treasury or limiting their freedom. They would
disrespect him explicitly and yet ‘Ali would be patient. When ‘Ali gave
sermons upon the podium, they would often heckle his speeches. On one
occasion, when ‘Ali was upon the podium, somebody asked a question. ‘Ali
gave an excellent reply without any hesitation, which caused great
astonishment among the people causing them to all glorify Allah, the
Glorified and Exalted [*takbir* ].28 However, one of the Kharijites, who
was present in the congregation, said, “May Allah kill him. How
knowledgeable he is.”29 The companions of ‘Ali poured onto him wanting
to kill him, when ‘Ali said, “Leave him be. He cursed me. The most you
can do to him is to curse him. Leave him alone.”

‘Ali was busy praying. He was praying in congregation at a time when he
was the ruler of the Muslims. (What kind of forbearance is this by
‘Ali?) They never followed him in prayer, instead they claimed, “‘Ali is
not a Muslim. He is a non-believer and a polytheist.” When ‘Ali was
reciting *al-Fatihah* 30 and the *Surat* 31 of his prayer, someone by
the name Ibn al-Kawwab 32 entered and recited this verse,

***“And indeed, it has been revealed to you and to those [who have been]
before you: ‘Surely if you associate (other deities with Allah), your
deeds will certainly come to naught.’”*** 33

This verse is directed at the Prophet (*s* ), “O Prophet! We have sent
divine revelations to you just like the prophets before you. If you
become polytheist, all your deeds will go to waste, or if those prophets
had become polytheists, their deeds would have gone to waste.” By
reading this verse he was implying: ‘‘Ali! We agree that you are the
first Muslim; this is what your records and services to Islam show. But
because you have become a polytheist and considered a partner for Allah,
the Glorified and Exalted, you have no more rewards left with Allah, the
Glorified and Exalted.’ How was ‘Ali supposed to react? ‘Ali acted by
considering the verse that says,

***“And when the Qur’an is recited, listen to it, and keep silent, that
you would possibly be granted mercy.”*** 34

This indicates that when you hear somebody reciting the Qur’an, pay
attention and listen to it, and so ‘Ali kept silent and listened. When
Ibn al- Kawwab finished, he continued his prayer. As soon as the Imam
proceeded, the person repeated the verse. ‘Ali again kept silent and
when Ibn al-Kawwab had finished, continued with his prayer. For the
third or fourth time when he repeated the verse, ‘Ali paid no more
attention and read this verse,

***“So have patience; verily, the promise of Allah is true; and those
who have no certitude, never induce you to levity (make you unstable and
divert you from your path).”35***

And he continued to pray.

The principles of the Kharijites sect
-------------------------------------

Were Kharijites satisfied with this? If they had been, they would not
have been a major problem for ‘Ali. They slowly gathered and formed a
party which later became a religious sect. They formed an Islamic sect
(by Islamic I do not mean them being truly a part of the Muslims, we
consider them as non-believers) and a new religion within the Muslim
World.

They also set their own religious dogmas and laws.36 They said, “Whoever
is with us should firstly believe that ‘Uthman, ‘Ali and Mu‘awiyah*,* as
well as those who agreed to arbitration, are non-believers. We also
became non-believers, but we repented. And only those who repented are
Muslims.” They continued to say, “Enjoining what is good and forbidding
what is evil [*al-amr bi’l-ma‘ruf wa nahy ‘an al-munkar* ] have no
conditions. One should rise up against any unlawful*imam* or any cruel
leader even if they are convinced that this rising is of no use.” This
gave them a strange and violent face.

The other principle they set for their sect, which was also another
indication of their greed and ignorance, was that action is
fundamentally a part of faith. ‘We have no faith separated from action.
A Muslim is not a Muslim by just declaring*shahadatayn* .37 If a Muslim
prays, fasts, does not drink, gamble, commit adultery, lie, or commit
any other major sin, it is just the beginning of his Islam. If he lies,
he is a non-believer; he is impure [*najis* ]38 and becomes a
non-Muslim. If he backbites once or drinks, he has left Islam.’ The
perpetrator of a major sin was considered to have left Islam. The result
was that these puritans considered only themselves as Muslims. It was as
if they were saying, ‘There are no Muslims in the world other than
ourselves’, and produced a series of principles for themselves.

Since the Kharijites considered ‘Ali a non-believer and part of their
doctrine was that ‘enjoining what is good and forbidding what is evil’
is obligatory [*wajib* ]39 and unconditional, one must therefore rise up
against an unlawful*imam* . There was no other choice but to rise up
against ‘Ali, they claimed. They all camped outside the city and began
rioting officially.

They followed a set of rigid and rough principles during their riots and
claimed, “All others are non-Muslim and because they are not Muslim we
cannot marry from them; that their meat slaughtered is forbidden [
*haram* ] 40 ; that one must not buy meat from their butchers.” Worst of
all, they considered the killing of women and children from those other
than themselves as permissible. Since they considered the killing of
others as permissible, they went out of the city and began robbing and
killing. A bizarre situation had come about.

One of the Prophet’s companions was passing by their location with his
pregnant wife. They stopped him and asked him to disown ‘Ali. He
refused. They killed him and ripped his wife’s stomach with a spear.
“You are non-believers,” they said.

Once they were passing a palm garden (the garden belonged to somebody
whose wealth could not be intruded upon, because he was highly respected
by all). One of them picked a date and placed it in his mouth. They
shouted at him loudly, “Are you intruding on your Muslim brother’s
wealth?”

‘Ali’s attitude towards Kharijites
----------------------------------

Their actions caused ‘Ali to camp in front of them. It was no longer
possible to let them be free. He sent Ibn ‘Abbas to talk to them. This
is when Ibn ‘Abbas returned and said, “I saw calloused foreheads because
of excessive prostration. The palms of their hands were like the knees
of camels. They wore old and ascetic looking clothes. Most manifest are
their resolute and indomitable faces.” Ibn ‘Abbas did not manage to do
anything. ‘Ali himself went to talk to them. His words were effective
and from the group of 12,000; 8,000 of them rued their actions. ‘Ali
raised a protection banner; whoever came under it would be safe. The
8,000 went under it. The remaining 4,000 said it was impossible and
abstained. The necks of these calloused foreheaded puritans went under
‘Ali’s sword. Only 10 survived, one of whom was ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
Muljam41 .

‘Ali has a saying in the*Nahj al-Balaghah* (‘Ali is a remarkable being,
his greatness appears here substantially). He says, “It was I and I
alone who removed the eye of this revolt. No one save me could have
stopped them with his sword.”42 ‘Ali declares that only he could have
pulled out the eye of this mutiny (i.e. the mutiny of the puritans).
Besides ‘Ali, no Muslim dared to draw their sword against the neck of
the Kharijites, because this so-called religious group could only be
killed by two other groups. One group comprises of people who do not
believe in Allah and Islam, for example the companions of Yazid who
killed Imam al-Husayn.

The other group comprises those who are themselves Muslims; however, to
be Muslim and have the courage to speak against, let alone act against,
the Kharijites was not in any man’s capacity. Doing this required great
courage. It needed the insight that ‘Ali had to realize the danger for
the Muslim World (later on I will tell you how ‘Ali felt according to
his own sayings). On one side, there were they praising Allah and
reciting the Qur’an, and on the other side there was ‘Ali drawing his
sword to eradicate them. The insight required was something that could
only be found in ‘Ali. He said, “No one except me advanced towards it.”
No other Muslim, not even from amongst the Prophet’s companions had the
courage to draw his sword on them. ‘But I did and I am proud that I did,
after a time when the waves of darkness had taken their toll in this
murky sea43 “and its madness was intense”.

This sentence is remarkable. Their disease (rabies) was
spreading.*Kalab* means rabies. When a dog catches rabies, it is
commonly known that the dog becomes wild. When this disease appears in
the animal, it can no longer differentiate its owner from a stranger. It
will bite whoever approaches it, bites them transferring the virus into
the victim’s blood causing him to contract rabies. ‘Ali says, “These
puritans had turned into dogs with rabies and just like such dogs,
whoever they had contact with would turn into someone like them.

Just like when people give themselves the right to execute a dog with
rabies so it could no longer bite and spread its disease, I saw no
option but to eradicate them, otherwise it would not have been long
before they had passed their disease to the Muslim World and sunk the
society into an image of rigidity, petrifaction, idiocy and ignorance. I
envisaged their danger to Islam. It was I who pulled out the eye of the
mutiny. When the waves of their darkness, dubiousness and scepticism had
raised and their rabies had progressed and was penetrating to others, no
one save me had the courage for such a task.”

Characteristics of the Kharijites
---------------------------------

The Kharijites had a number of distinguishing characteristics such as
tremendous bravery and devotion. Because they worked on the foundations
of their belief, they remained extraordinarily devoted. There are
amazing stories about their devotions. However, other characteristic
that we can name include their dogmatism and excessive worshipping.
Their excessive prayers were the cause of other people’s scepticism
about them. This was also the reason why ‘Ali had said that no one but
him would have had the courage to kill them.

The third characteristic which can be mentioned here is their ignorance
and lack of knowledge. I seek refuge in Allah from that which has been
done to Islam by ignorance and lack of knowledge!

*Nahj al-Balaghah* is an amazing book. It is amazing from every aspect
including its monotheism, advice, prayers and worships, its analysis of
the history of its time, etc. When ‘Ali analyzes, he analyzes Mu‘awiyah,
‘Uthman, the Kharijites and the other events astonishingly. For example,
referring to the Kharijites, ‘Ali says, “You are the worst of people.”44
Why does ‘Ali claim that these puritans were the worst of all people? If
it were us, we would ask, “O sir! At the end of the day, they are
harmless people. They are good people.” We call such people good people.
In our view they are good people. But then why does ‘Ali say, “You are
the worst of people?” In his next sentence he continues to say, “You are
the worst of people because you are spears in the hands of the devil
(Satan). Satan places you in his bow instead of his arrows and crushes
his targets with you. You are definite tools in the hands of Satan.”

You must also pay attention to the fact that during ‘Ali’s time a group
of hypocrites had appeared consisting of the likes of Mu‘awiyah and ‘Amr
ibn al-‘As. They were very wise and well informed of the facts, and by
God they knew ‘Ali better than others. History bears witness to the high
regard Mu‘awiyah had for ‘Ali; nevertheless he would go to war against
him (lets not forget the power of materialism and greed or other
complexities of that matter). The reason for this is that after ‘Ali’s
martyrdom when any of ‘Ali’s close companions went to Mu‘awiyah, he
would ask them, “Describe ‘Ali to me!” When they began describing, his
tears would pour down; he would sigh and say, “Alas! Time can never
again bring a person like ‘Ali.”

Therefore, there were people like Mu‘awiyah and ‘Amr ibn al-‘As who
acknowledged ‘Ali and his regime and were aware of his objectives, but
greed did not give a chance to the belief in their hearts. These
hypocritical groups always used puritanical factions to reach their
goals. This big

problem of ‘Ali will always carry on in the world. There will always be
hypocrites. Even today, we can find the likes of Mu‘awiyah and ‘Amr ibn
al-‘As in various guises. There will always be puritans like Ibn Muljam
and other instruments in the hands of Satan, who are always ready to be
deceived and accuse the likes of ‘Ali of being a non-believer and a
polytheist.

Someone once claimed that Ibn Sina (Avicenna)45 had become a non
believer. 46 Ibn Sina then dedicated the following quatrain in response
to this claim,

*Being a non-believer is not easy for someone like me,*

*No belief in religion is firmer than my own.*

*One of my kind in the world and a non-believer?*

*If so, there is not a Muslim to be found anywhere in the world!* 47

These puritans have claimed that almost every great scholar that Islam
has had till now was either non-Muslim or a non-believer. I will recount
an event to illustrate this point. Muslims! Be alert. Do not be like the
Nahrawan48 Kharijites. Do not become arrows in the hands of Satan.

Once, a friend called me, “Sir! I am shocked. I have heard something
strange. This Iqbal49 of Pakistan you have held a celebration for has
insulted and cursed Imam al-Sadiq in his book!” I said, “What is this
nonsense?” He asked me to take a look at a certain page in a certain
book to see for myself. I said, “Have you looked at it yourself?” He
said that he had not but a much esteemed gentleman had told him. I was
staggered. I was shocked to hear how friends, like Mr Sa‘idi, who have
read the books of Iqbal from the beginning to the end failed to spot
such a thing! I said, “Firstly, there was nothing said about a
remembrance or a tribute. It was about objective placement. The one we
did not pay tribute to was Iqbal. We placed Iqbal as an objective for a
sequence of Islamic objectives. If you were not present you can see it
in the book once it is published.”

I immediately phoned Mr. Sayyid Ghulam Rida Sa‘idi to ask him about
this. He was also astonished on hearing this. He said, “No Sir! I have
read the book. No such thing is possible.” I said, “But such a big lie
cannot be possible.”

An hour or two later when he remembered he came to me and said, “I know
what this is about. This is the story: there were two people in India by
the names of Ja‘far and Sadiq50 . When the English took over India, the
Muslims rose up against them. These two people, however, made peace with
the English, stabbing the Islamic movement in the back and destroying
it. Iqbal has reproached them in his book. I assume this is where the
mistake was made.” I said, “We shall see.” When I got the book, this was
what was in the pages those gentlemen were referring to, “Whenever there
is destruction in the world, either a Sadiq or Ja‘fari is present
there.” In the two previous pages, it says,

Ja‘far51 from Bengal 52 , Sadiq 53 from Deccan. 54

Disgrace to religion, disgrace to the world, and disgrace to the
homeland.

He is referring to Ja‘far Bengali and Sadiq from Deccan. But was Imam
Ja‘far al-Sadiq from Bengal or from Deccan? We then conducted a
historical research. After the English took over India, two Shi‘ah
Muslim

commanders by the names of Siraj al-Din55 and Tipu Sultan56 (Siraj
al-Din was apparently from Southern India and Tipu Sultan from Northern
India) bravely rose (And Iqbal greatly praises these two Shi‘ah heroes).

The English found Ja‘far in Siraj al-Din’s state and allied with him. He
(Ja‘far) was partner with the thieves and a friend of the caravan. In
Tipu Sultan’s system, they allied with Sadiq. He (Sadiq) also became the
partner of the thieves and the friend of the caravan. They both betrayed
their people and the outcome was three hundred years of British
colonization by the English.

This led the Shi‘ah to have high regard for Siraj al-Din and Tipu
Sultan, as they were both heroes and Shi‘ahs. They are also respected by
the*Ahl al-Sunnah* because they were Islamic heroes. Hindus also respect
them, as they were also native heroes. But the other two (Sadiq and
Ja‘far) are considered as traitors among the Shi‘ah, Sunni and Hindus of
India and Pakistan. They are also known for being indecent, hateful and
symbols of treachery.

Now that three months have passed since that event, I have rarely been
confronted with the question, “Sir! Why has the person, whose poems in
praise of Imam al-Husaynyou read, cursed Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq?” And the
other issue that has become the laughing stock of most non-Islamic
circles and is tormenting me is the reflection of this story: the
Pakistani Iqbal has implicated the Bengali Ja‘far and the Deccani Sadiq
but wherever Muslims go they say Iqbal has cursed Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq!
Take a look at the mind of these Muslims! We feel embarrassed (in these
non-Islamic meetings) about the low level of thought among our people!

When ‘Ali’s messenger was in Damascus, Mu‘awiyah ordered that the
announcement for Friday Prayer is made, even though it was only
Wednesday. They announced “Friday Prayer” and he led “Friday Prayer” on
a Wednesday. No single person objected to this. He summoned ‘Ali’s (*‘a*
) representative in private and said, “Tell ‘Ali that I will come after
him with one hundred thousand men who cannot tell a Wednesday from a
Friday.

Tell ‘Ali to gauge the situation and act accordingly.” And now the
Husayniyyah-ye Irshad has become guilty because one day they discussed
Palestinians and said: “People! Help the Palestinians. A group of Jews
(with the Israelis spies abundant in this country and unfortunately most
of them are our own Muslims) are holding a grudge against the Irshad
Trust and there is not a day that goes by when a rumour is not spread
about them.”57

I do not want anything from you but to open your eyes! Investigate! Be
aware. Jewish agents are plentiful in all Islamic states. Their hands,
spies and money are continuously active. Do not be one of the Nahrawan
Kharijites. How long will we continue to draw swords against Islam in
the name of Islam? If we do not want to learn from these experiences,
where do we want to take advice from? Why do we gather every year and
hold ceremonies in the name of ‘Ali? It is because ‘Ali’s life is
instructive, informative and educational.

Some educational aspects of ‘Ali’s life include his struggles with the
Kharijites, his battle against puritanism, disunity and ignorance. ‘Ali
does not want ignorant Shi‘ahs. ‘Ali despises Shi‘ahs who transmit false
information like electricity, or for example when imposters and Jews
spread

the rumour that ‘a Pakistani Iqbal has cursed your Imam Ja‘far
al-Sadiq’, he spreads the rumour that a Pakistani Iqbal was, God forbid,
sacrilegious (about a man who was devoted to the household of the
Prophet (peace be upon him) without a shred of thought. He would not
even open Iqbal’s book or at least ask about the history behind it from
the Pakistani embassy or other resources.

Open your eyes! Open your ears! Do not believe whatever you hear
immediately. Do not be hasty to declare that, ‘they say such and such’.
The end of ‘they say such and such’ is said to be rooted in something
dangerous. Investigate! Investigate (between yourselves and Allah), then
say whatever you want, but do not say anything before you have done your
research.

‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljam killed ‘Ali. You should observe how they (the
Kharijites) praised him. A Kharijites has a quatrain, the first verse of
which reads,

*Hail the strike of this pious man who*

*Did not consider anything but satisfaction of Allah* 58

Later he says, “If the deeds of all people were placed in the divine
balance as well as the strike of Ibn Muljam, you will see that no one
has done anything greater than what Ibn Muljam has done.”

This is what ignorance does to Islam and Muslims.

‘Ali’s (‘a) martydom
--------------------

Ibn Muljam is one of the nine ascetic puritans who went to Mecca and
made the famous vow saying all the riots in the Muslim World were caused
by three people: ‘Ali, Mu‘awiyah and ‘Amr ibn al-‘As.” Ibn Muljam was
chosen to kill ‘Ali. What date was set for this? The date set was the
night before the 19th of Ramadan. Why did they choose this night? Ibn
Abi al-Hadid says, “Do you see the ignorance! They arranged for the
night before the 19th of Ramadan because they were convinced that this
is an act of great worship so they agreed to commit it on the night
of*Qadr* so that they would get more rewards for it.”

Ibn Muljam came to Kufah and waited for the promised day. During this
time he met and fell in love with a girl am who was also a Kharijites
and a fellow believer. He may \* t \* called Qut have, up to an extent,
tried to fight thoughts of her. When he approached and discussed this
matter with her, she responded thus, “I am willing, but my dowry [
*mihr* ] is very heavy.” He was so captivated by her that he agreed
without preconditions. She required three thousand *dirham* s from him.
He told her that it was not a problem. She asked for a slave boy. He
agreed. “And a slave girl,” “Not a problem”, he replied. She ended her
requests with, “And fourth, the killing of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib.” He was
shocked because his thoughts of killing ‘Ali had headed in a different
direction at that point. He replied, “We want to get married and live
happily, killing ‘Ali will not leave a chance for our marriage and life
together.” She replied, “This is it. If you seek union with me, you must
kill ‘Ali. If you live, you will gain what you seek, and if you die,
then nothing.” He struggled with his thoughts for a while. He has a
poem, two verses of which are as follows,

*She required these things from me as her dowry.* 59

*The world has never seen a dowry so high.*

Later he goes on to say,

*Any dowry in the world, no matter how high, is not on the same level as
‘Ali. My wife’s dowry is the blood of ‘Ali.*

*There has not been an assassination and there will never be another one
until the Day of Judgment unless it’s smaller than the one committed by
Ibn Muljam.* 60

And he was right. Let’s take a look at what ‘Ali’s (*‘a* ) will. On his
deathbed, ‘Ali ( *‘a* ) is witnessing and leaving behind two occurences
in the *ummah* . One is the presence of Mu‘awiyah and his followers (the
hypocrites, the deviators, [ *in* *\** *qasit* ]). The other is the
issue of the puritans. These two are in contradiction to one another.
How will ‘Ali’s companions handle these issues after him? ‘Ali says,
“After me, do not kill them anymore.” Even though they killed me, do not
kill them after me as this will be a favour to Mu‘awiyah and not to
truth and justice. The danger of ‘Mu‘awiyah’ is different. He said,
“After me, do not kill the Kharijites anymore, because whoever seeks
truth and commits a mistake is not the same as the one who seeks
falsehood from the beginning and has reached it.”

‘Ali does not hold grudges against anyone. He always speaks logically.
As soon as they captured Ibn Muljam, they brought him to ‘Ali. In a
frail voice (as a result of the sword strike) the Imam spoke to him and
asked him, “Why did you do such a thing? Was I a bad Imam for you?” (I
am not sure how many times this was asked but whatever I have said has
been taken from writings). Apparently, at one time he was influenced by
‘Ali’s spirituality and said,

***“Can you then rescue him who is in the Fire?”*** 61

“Can you then rescue an atrocious person who has been damned to hell? I
was abject for committing such an act!” They have also written that when
‘Ali spoke to him, he replied in an angry voice and said, “‘Ali! When I
bought that sword I made a vow to Allah to kill the worst of his
creatures with this sword and I have always prayed and asked to kill the
worst of his creatures with this sword.” ‘Ali (*‘a* ) responded, “It
just so happens that this prayer of yours has been granted because you
are going to be killed with this very sword.”

‘Ali passed away. He was in the big city of Kufah. Apart from the
Nahrawan Kharijites, the rest of the people wished they could
participate in his funeral, to cry and weep for him. It was the night of
the 21st of Ramadan. People were still not aware of what was happening
to ‘Ali. ‘Ali left the world at midnight. As soon as he passed away, his
children, Imam al-Hassan and Imam al-Husayn, Muhammadibn Hanifah, Abu
al-Fadl al-‘Abbas, and an exclusive group of the Shi‘ahs (who did not
exceed six or seven) washed ‘Ali’s body in private, put the grave shroud
on him and buried him in the darkness of the night, in a spot that had
apparently been previously decided by ‘Ali himself (nobody knew where
his holy burial took place and according to various traditions, some of
the dignified prophets are buried in the same land).

His followers kept the location of his burial a secret. The next day,
people found out that ‘Ali had been buried on the previous night. Where

was ‘Ali’s burial place? There was no need for anybody to know. It has
even been reported that that Imam al-Hassan (*‘a* ) sent a semblance of
the Imam’s body to Madinah, so people would think that ‘Ali had been
taken to Madinah to be buried. Why? Because of the Kharijites; if they
knew Imam ‘Ali’s burial place, they would have disrespected it. They
would have disinterred the grave and exhumed ‘Ali’s body out of his
grave. Indeed, ‘Ali’s place of burial remained a secret to everyone
other than ‘Ali’s children and the children of their children (the
Infallible Imams), for as long as the Kharijites were in power.

One hundred years later, when the Kharijites no longer existed and the
Umayyad dynasty were overthrown by the ‘Abbasids (who were not a great
threat to this issue), Imam al-Sadiq, for the first time, revealed
‘Ali’s burial place. The famous Safwan who has been named in*Ziyarat-e
‘Ashura* , says, “I was visiting Imam al-Sadiq in Kufah, he took us to
‘Ali’s grave and said, ‘This is the grave of ‘Ali’, and ordered us
(apparently for the first time) to set up a shade for the grave. Since
then ‘Ali’s grave was made public’.”

Therefore, ‘Ali’s big problem was not exclusive to his time. His grave
was kept a secret for one hundred years after his death, only out of
fear of this group. “Allah’s blessings be upon you, O father of
al-Hassan! May Allah’s blessings be up you, O the Commander of the
Faithful!” How oppressed were you and your children! I cannot say
whether Amir al-Mu’minin (*‘a* ) was more oppressed or his noble son Abu
‘Abd Allah al-Husayn.

In the same manner that ‘Ali’s (*‘a* ) body was not in peace from his
evil enemies, the body of his beloved child was also not in peace from
his enemies. Maybe this is the reason why he said, “There is no day like
the day of my son, al-Husayn.”

Imam al-Hassan (*‘a* ) hid Imam ‘Ali’s body. Why? So that ‘Ali’s body
would not be disrespected. But the situation in Karbala was different.
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin could not gather the strength to immediately hide
Imam al-Husayn’sbody. The outcome was that which I do not want to
recall.

That person said,

*What need is there for ragged clothing after attacks,*

*Which left not even a flesh on his battered body?* 62 ?

References
----------

[^1]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 91.

[^2]: Al-Khilafah or caliphate means viceregency, successorship,
representing the original position of a real president or head, the
adjective form of it is khalifah which means viceregent, successor,
deputy and representative. In English the word is caliph. Khalifah means
the common leadership of all Muslims in the world.

[^3]: ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan (574-656), the Third Caliph.

[^4]: The Nahj al-Balaghah (Peak of Eloquence) is the most famous
collection of speeches (sermons) and letters attributed to Imam‘Ali
(‘a).

[^5]: Holy City of al-Madinah al-Munawwarah is a city in the region of
Saudi Arabia.

[^6]: Hijaz or Hidjaz is a region in the northwest of present Saudi
Arabia.

[^7]: Al-Baṣrah is the second largest city of Iraq.

[^8]: Al-Kufah is a city in modern Iraq about 170 km south of Baghdad.

[^9]: Egypt or Misr is an Arab country in North Africa.

[^10]: ‘Ali (‘a) has discussed the issue of ‘Uthman’s killing in 14
parts of the Nahj al-Balaghah.

[^11]: The famous Idol of Bani Quraysh (the dominant tribe of Mecca. It
was also the tribe to which the Prophet belonged).

[^12]: Surat al-Isra’ 17:33.

[^13]: When the revolutionaries poured into ‘Uthman’s house looking for
him, ‘Uthman’s wife threw herself over ‘Uthman’s body so as to protect
him from the sword that was directed at him. The sword which was
directed at ‘Uthman slashed his wife’s hand cutting off her fingers.

[^14]: The Battle of Jamal (or the Battle of the Camel) was a battle
that took place at Basrah, Iraq, in 656 between forces allied to Imam
‘Ali ibn Abi Taliband the superior forces of rebel Arabs allied to
‘A’ishah (a wife of the Prophet) who opposed ‘Ali’s status as caliph.

[^15]: The Battle of Siffin (657 CE) occurred during the Second Muslim
Civil War. It was fought between Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Taliband Mu‘awiyah I,
on the banks of the Euphrates River, in what is now Syria.

[^16]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 199.

[^17]: The rebels.

[^18]: Holy City of Mecca or Makkah al-Mukarramah is the holiest site of
Islam, and pilgrimage to it is required of all Muslims who are able and
can afford to go, at least once in their lifetime.

[^19]: Banu Quraysh, the dominant tribe of Mecca, was the tribe to which
the Prophet (s) belonged.

[^20]: Ethiopia is a country situated in Africa. It is the second most
populous nation in Africa.

[^21]: Jihad is a war operated on the command of an infallible [ma‘sum]
leader or his representative, which usually takes place to defend Islam
and Muslims. The Qur’an calls those Muslims who die in this way (jihad),
martyrs [shahids].

[^22]: ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas was one of the cousins of the Prophet (s).

[^23]: Ibn ‘Abd Rabbihi al-Andalusi (d. 940), Al-‘Iqd al-Farid, (Beirut,
1983), vol. 2, p. 389.

[^24]: ‘Amr ibn al-‘As (c. 583-664 CE): at the time of Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, he was military commander. He was famous for being crafty and
cunning. In the Battle of Siffin, he helped Mu‘awiyah in exchange for
the governance of Egypt. He killed Muhammadibn Abu Bakr, the governor of
Egypt, and finally became the governor of Egypt.

[^25]: Malik ibn al-Harith al-Ashtar was one of the companians of Imam
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. He became Governor of Egypt in 658 (38 AH) when
assigned by Imam ‘Ali, after the Battle of Siffin had ended.

[^26]: Abu Musa ‘Abd Allah ibn Qays al-Ash‘ari (d. ca. 662 or 672) was
made the governor of Basrah and Kufah during the caliphates of ‘Umar and
‘Uthman. In the event of Battle of Jamal, he urged people not to join
any side of the battlefield. After the Battle of Siffin was put on hold,
Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talibwas forced to choose him as his arbitrator by the
Kharijites.

[^27]: Surat al-An‘am 6:57.

[^28]: The takbir is an Arabic name for the phrase Allah-u Akbar, a
common Arabic expression, which can be translated as “God is Greater” or
“God is the greatest”.

[^29]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar (Beirut, 1983), vol. 73, p. 436.

[^30]: Al-Fatiḥah or al-Ḥamd is an Arabic name for the first chapter
[surat] of the Holy Qur’an and means: “the Chapter of the Opening”.

[^31]: Surat is an Arabic term. It means a “chapter of the Qur’an”.

[^32]: One of the Kharijites.

[^33]: Surat al-Zumar 39:65.

[^34]: Surat al-A‘raf 7:204.

[^35]: Surat al-Rum 30:60.

[^36]: Islamic jurisprudence [fiqh] is made up of the rulings of Islamic
jurists to direct the lives of Muslims. A component of Islamic studies,
fiqh, expounds the methodology by which the Islamic law is derived from
primary and secondary sources.

[^37]: Shahadatayn in Arabic means the declaration of belief in the
oneness of Allah, the Glorified and Exalted, and in Prophet Muhammadas
his last messenger. The shahadah means “to testify” or “to bear
witness”.

[^38]: In the Islamic law, najis are things or persons regarded as
ritually unclean. There are two kinds of najis. The essential najis
which can not be cleaned and unessential najis which becomes najis in
contact with another najis and one of them are wet.

[^39]: Wajib (also fard or faridah means obligation or duty) is an
Islamic Arabic term which denotes a religious duty.

[^40]: Haram is an Arabic word used in Islam to refer to anything that
is prohibited by the faith. Its antonym is halal.

[^41]: ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Muljam was the Khawarij assassin of Imam ‘Ali
(‘a).

[^42]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 92.

[^43]: That is to say, this was essentially after the situation had
become skeptical and ambivalent. Even when Ibn ‘Abbas went to see them,
he too became hesitant. The atmosphere was foggy. He said, “The horizons
are covered in fog.” The situation was not one that would make a Muslim
soldier certain to fight and work for the benefit of Islam. When he
faced a group more religious and ascetic than himself, a group who
commited less sins, prayed more and the effect of worship was more
apparent in their faces than him, he would become baffled. When he
raised his sword, his hands would shiver, his heart would tremble, “How
can I raise my sword on them?” If it was not for ‘Ali and his followers
and the trust his followers had in him, it would have been impossible to
raise his sword on them. The situation was extremely doubtful and
rightfully so. If you and I were there too, we would also not have been
able to raise a hand on them to the other side.

[^44]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 126.

[^45]: Abu ‘Ali al-Husayn ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Sina or Avicenna (980-1037
CE) was a Persian physician, philosopher, and scientist, born in
Afshanah near Bukhara in Persia. He wrote 450 books on a wide range of
subjects including philosophy and medicine. Some of his Books were the
standard medical text in European universities for 7 centuries.

[^46]: When an ignorant person confronts a wise and knowlegable person
they are awed by the respect society has for them, consequently, they
become confused. If they say that the knowledgeable know nothing, the
signs of the scholar’s knowledge would become apparent. If they say that
the knowledgeable have no skills, their skills would be observed. If
they say that the knowledgeable are unwise, their wisdom is evident.
What else can they say? At the end, they claim that the knowledgeable
have no religion, and that they are non-believers.

[^47]: کفر چو منی گزاف و آسان نبود محکمتر از ایمان من ایمان نبود

<p dir="rtl">
در دهر یکی چون من و آن هم کافر؟ پس در همه دهر یک مسلمان نبود
</p>

See M. Baqir Khwansari, Rawdat al-Jannat (Beirut), vol. 3, p. [^179]:

[^48]: Battle of Nahrawan was a battle between Imam ‘Ali and the
Kharijites. Nahrawan is a place twelve miles from Baghdad.

[^49]: MuhammadIqbal (1877-1938), known as Iqbal Lahuri (Iqbal of
Lahore) in Iran and Afghanistan. He was an Indian Muslim poet,
philosopher and politician, who has poetry in Farsi and Urdu. He is
credited with first proposing the idea of an independent state for
Indian Muslims, which would inspire the creation of Pakistan.

[^50]: Mir Ja‘far from Bengal and Mir Sadiq from the Deccan were
instrumental in the defeat and the murder of Nawwab Siraj al-Dawlah of
Bengal and Tipu Sultan of Mysore, respectively, by betraying them for
the benefit of the British. Thus, they delivered their country to the
shackles of slavery.

[^51]: Mir Ja‘far ‘Ali Khan (1691-1765) was a monarchical ruler (nawwab)
of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. He succeeded Siraj al-Dawlah. His rule is
widely (though somewhat inaccurately) considered the start of British
rule in India.

[^52]: Bengal, known as Bangladesh is a region in the northeast of South
Asia. Today it is mainly divided between the independent nation of
Bangladesh (East Bengal), and the Indian federal republics constitutive
state of West Bengal.

[^53]: He was the Muslim prime minister of Tipu Sultan. Tipu Sultan was
defeated by the betrayal of Mir Sadiq and was killed by one of Tipu
Sultan’s soldiers, whose name was Ahmad Khan, a short period before Tipu
Sultan’s fall.

[^54]: The Deccan Plateau is an elevated area making up the whole of the
southern India and extenting over eight states.

[^55]: Apparently his correct name is Mirza MuhammadSiraj al-Dawlah,
more popularly known as Siraj al-Dawlah (1733-1757) was the last
independent Nawwab of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa.

[^56]: Tippu Sultan, also known as the Tiger of Mysore (1750-1799),
ruled the Kingdom of Mysore from the time of his father’s death in 1782
until his own demise in 1799. He was a Muslim Shi‘ah commander.

[^57]: Apparently, this lecture was read before the resignation of the
Professor from the management team of this institution.

[^58]: يَا ضَربَةً مِن تَقِيٍّ مَا أرَادَ بِهَا إلا لِيَبلُغَ مِن ذِي
العَرشِ رِضوَاناً.

[^59]: ثَلاثَةُ آلافٍ وَعَبدٌ وَقَينَةٌ وَقَتلُ عَلِيٍّ بالحُسَامِ
المُسَمَّمِ

See M. Baqir Khwansari, Rawdat al-Jannat (Beirut), vol. 3, p. [^179]:

[^60]: وَلا مَهرَ أعلَى مِن عَلِيٍّ وَإن عَلا وَلَا فَتكَ إلّا دُونَ
فَتكِ ابنِ مُلجَمِ

[^61]: Surat al-Zumar 39:19.

[^62]: Sayyid ibn Tusi, among others, has narrated that on the day of
‘Ashura, Imam al-Husayn orders his aids to bring him clothes that were
worthless and no man wanted, so that he could wear them under his own
clothes. Therefore, when he was killed, the Imam continued, no one would
want to take them off of his dead body. It has been reported that after
his martyrdom even those worthless pieces of clothing were taken off of
the Imam’s precious body.
