Chapter 2: Imam al-Hassan’s (‘a) Pacifism (Session 1)
=====================================================

The issue of Imam al-Hassan’s pacifism was questioned in the past and
continues to be so.[^1] This issue remains under question especially
during our time. Why did Imam al-Hassan make peace with Mu‘awiyah? This
topic of Imam al-Hassan’s peace with Mu‘awiyah is particularly
highlighted when it is compared to Imam al-Husayn’sbattle against and
his refusal to surrender to Yazid and Ibn Ziyad. These two approaches
seem contradictory to those who do not pay attention to the depth of the
issue; therefore, some claim that Imam al-Hassan and Imam al-Husaynwere
two fundamentally different characters: Imam al-Hassan was more of a
peace-seeker by nature, whereas Imam al-Husaynwas a rebellious and
warrior-like.

Our point is this: would it have been possible for war not to take place
if Imam al-Hassan had been instead of Imam al-Husayn? Would the issue
have been resolved differently? Or are these outcomes related to the
circumstances of the time? Did Imam al-Hassan’s time require a different
approach from Imam al-Husayn’stime and circumstance? In order to discuss
these different situations, we need to raise a certain subject, which is
usually raised by those who have discussed the differences between Imam
al-Hassan and Imam al-Husayn’ssituation. Imam al-Husayn’sprudence was
truly a necessity for his time as Imam al-Hassan’s prudence was. Of
course, we accept this issue and will later discuss it, but before that
we need a basic discussion on Islamic commandments in relation to
*jihad* (holy war), as they both, in fact, revert to *jihad*. Imam
al-Hassan ceased and made peace but Imam al-Husayndid not cease and
fought. We shall thus convey the essentials of Islam in the subject of
*jihad*. We have not seen among those who have discussed Imam
al-Hassan’s reconciliation to have included such aspects. Therefore, we
shall touch on this question: what were Imam al-Hassan’s reconciliation
and Imam al-Husayn’sbattle based on?

The Holy Prophet (s) and peace
------------------------------

We shall see later that the issue of pacifism was not exclusive to Imam
al-Hassan. The Prophet (peace be upon him) had also adopted conciliatory
methods during the first few years of the prophetic mission [*bi‘thah*]
until the end of his time in Mecca, and even during the second year
after entering Medina. No matter how much the Muslims were tortured by
the non-believers [*mushrikin*], even when countless Muslims were killed
under torture, other Muslims asked to go to war against those causing
this and said: there is nothing worse. What could be worse than what we
are going through? The Prophet still did not grant them permission. At
most, he let them migrate from Hijaz to Habashah. However, when the
Prophet migrated from Mecca to Medina the following *ayah* was revealed,

***“Permission (to fight) is given to those upon whom war is made
because they are oppressed, and most surely Allah is well able to assist
them.”***[^2]

Finally, permission was granted to those who were oppressed and tortured
to go to battle. Is Islam a religion of peace or a religion of
hostility? If it is a peaceful religion, then they must have abided by
the claim that fighting was, in essence, not a religious act. Religion
only invites. Wherever it goes and wherever it does not. If, on the
other hand, Islam is a hostile religion, then why was it, that during
those thirteen years in Mecca, the Muslims were not given permission to
protect themselves? We must conclude that Islam is both a religion of
peace and a religion of war.[^3]

In some circumstances, fighting is not necessary and in other cases it
is. Again, as an example, we can consider the actions of the Prophet who
during his time in Medina would sometimes fight the *mushrikin* or the
Jews or the Christians, yet at other times decided to sign a peace
treaty with them. The same thing happened in Hudaybiyyah where against
the will of nearly all his companions, he signs a peace treaty with the
non-believers in Mecca who were among his worst enemies. Again, we see
in Medina that the Prophet signs a no-violation treaty with the Jews.
What can this mean?

‘Ali and peace
--------------

We also see ‘Ali waging war at one stage and refraining from it at
another. After the Prophet’s death, when the issue of successorship
[*khilafah*] was raised and ultimately seized by others, ‘Ali refrains
from fighting. He did not touch his sword and says that he has been
ordered not to fight and must not fight. He exhibited great moderation
no matter how aggressive they were towards him. His moderation at one
point nearly triggered even al-Zahra’s objection,

Oh son of Abu Talib! Why have you withdrawn your hands and legs and
constantly sit in a corner like a foetus in its mother’s womb? Like a
person who is guilty and embarrassed to go out of his house, preferring
to sit at home?[^4] You are the same man from whom in the battlefield
even the bravest would run away. Now these cowards have taken over you?
Why?

It was then that he explained: that was my duty then. My duty now is
this.

During the next twenty five years, ‘Ali continued to remain, what could
be called a peace-seeking and conciliatory man. When people began to
riot against ‘Uthman (the same riot which led to ‘Uthman’s
assassination), ‘Ali was not among the rebels. He acted as a mediator
between the rebels and ‘Uthman. He endeavored to reach a settlement
according to which, from one side the rebels’ request (which was a fair
request regarding a complaint about one of ‘Uthman’s governors who was
being oppressive towards them) would be taken care of, and from the
other side ‘Uthman would not be killed. This is reviewed in the *Nahj
al-Balaghah* and has surly been mentioned in history. ‘Ali (*‘a*) says
to ‘Uthman, “I fear that you will become the murdered leader of these
people. If you are killed, murder will continue to be an option for
these people. A rebellion will emerge among Muslims that shall never be
suppressed.” Therefore, even during the final stages of ‘Uthman’s
caliphate, which were, in fact, the most turbulent and chaotic years of
his successorship, ‘Ali becomes the intermediary between ‘Uthman and the
rebels. At the start of ‘Uthman’s succession to the caliphate, as a
result of the deceit commited by ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn ‘Awf[^5] only two
people, from the initial six, remained as candidates: ‘Ali and ‘Uthman.
The story behind this was that ‘Umar[^6] formed a council consisting of
6 people responsible for choosing his successor. three people stepped
aside, one in favor of ‘Ali who was Zubayr[^7], one in favor of ‘Uthman
who was Talhah[^8] and one in favor of ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn ‘Awf who was
Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas[^9]. Three people were left. ‘Abd al-Rahman said, “I
am not volunteering.” This left only two people and the voting was left
to ‘Abd al-Rahman. Whoever ‘Abd al-Rahman votes for will have four votes
(because he himself had two votes and each of the two volunteers had one
vote) and according to that council, he will be chosen as the Caliph.
‘Abd al-Rahman came to ‘Ali first and said, “I am willing to give you my
oath of allegiance on the condition that you follow the Book of Allah
and the conduct of the Prophet (*s*) and the methods of the two previous
caliphs.” He replied, “I give oath of allegiance on the condition of
following Allah’s Book and the conduct of the Prophet and whatever I
perceive.” ‘Abd al-Rahman then went to ‘Uthman, “I will give you my oath
of allegiance on the condition that you follow the Book of Allah, the
conduct of the Prophet and the way of the previous two caliphs.” ‘Uthman
accepted. However, ‘Uthman diverted from the methods of the previous
caliphs. Then, they came and objected to ‘Ali (*‘a*), “Why did this
happen? What will you do now that they have done such a thing?” He
replied,

*“*As long as this oppression is aimed towards me but the affairs of
Muslims rotate on their axis and orbit and the person, who is in my
place, albeit unjustly, runs the affairs provisionally, I submit and
have no objection.*”*

After ‘Uthman and during Mu‘awiyah’s time, people would swear allegiance
to ‘Ali. Then, ‘Ali decided to wage war against the outlaws, who were
known as the Violators [*nakithin*], the Deviators [*qasitin*] and
those who misunderstood the truth of religion [*mariqin*], as well as
the people of Jamal, Siffin and the people of Nahrawan.

After the Battle of Siffin a division was caused in ‘Ali’s army due to
the riots of the Kharijites and the deceit by ‘Amr ibn al-‘As and
Mu‘awiyah, who raised the Qur’an on spear heads saying: lets allow the
Qur’an judge between us, with which some agreed, and so there was no
place left for ‘Ali. Reluctant, ‘Ali accepted their offer to resort to
arbitration.

This in itself is an example of ‘peace’. He agreed for arbitrators to
decide based on the Qur’an and Islamic commandments. However, ‘Amr ibn
al-‘As twisted the story in such a way that its outcome was useless,
even for Mu‘awiyah himself. He ended it by way of deceit. He deceived
Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari but his deceit did not remove ‘Ali from the picture
or give way to Mu‘awiyah. Everyone realized that the two arbitrators had
not reached an agreement and that one had deceived the other. One would
say that he would overthrow both, whereas the other claimed that he was
lying. They started to fight and disgraced one another, accusing each
other of deceit. And so the story turned out fruitless.

In any case, the arbitration story falls into the same category. Why did
‘Ali agree to arbitration and did not continue the battle, even though
he was forced by the Kharijites to do so? Ultimately, he would have been
killed just like his son Imam al-Husayn. Likewise, we ask: why didn’t
the Prophet wage war from the beginning? Ultimately, he would have been
killed just like Imam al-Husayn. Why did he make peace in Hudaybiyyah?
Ultimately, he would have been killed just like Imam al-Husayn. Let us
consider this situation: why did not Amir al-Mu’minin wage war from the
beginning?

Again, he would have ultimately been killed like Imam al-Husayn. Also,
why did he surrender to arbitration? He would have ultimately been
killed like Imam al-Husayn. Are these statements true or not? We then
reach Imam al-Hassan’s time and the issue of his pacifism. The
subsequent Imams lived in situations similar to that of Imam al-Hassan.
Therefore, the issue is not only about Imam al-Hassan’s peace or Imam
al-Husayn’swar. It is a much broader issue and must be discussed
accordingly. I will read you some excerpts from the book of *Jihad* so
we can get a general picture of the topic and enter the details later.

The cases for jihad in the Shi‘ah jurisprudence
-----------------------------------------------

We know that *jihad* is a part of the religion of Islam. There are a few
cases for *jihad*:

The first is the antecedent *jihad*, which means the permission given by
Islam to Muslims to attack those who are non-Muslims, especially when
confronting polytheists to destroy polytheism, even though there may not
have been any tracked record of hostility and aversion between them. The
condition for this *jihad* is that it can be fought by adult, wise and
free male soldiers. This *jihad* is compulsory, exclusively, for men and
not women. For this *jihad*, the permission of an *imam* or his
representative is required. From the point of view of the Shi‘ah
jurisprudence, this type of *jihad* is only feasible during the presence
of an *imam* or one who has personally been appointed by an *imam*, that
is to say in the Shi‘ah jurisprudence, even a spiritual (religious)
leader is not permitted to start an antecedent war.

The second case for *jihad* is when an Islamic territory is under attack
by an external enemy. This would mean that there is a defence aspect
involved, whether in the sense that the enemy is either planning to take
over the Islamic land and occupy all or parts of it, or it may even be
the case that they are not planning to occupy it. They may be planning
to dominate the people and so are attacking in order to capture a group
of Muslims, or they may want to rob the Muslims’ assets either in the
form of a raid or the form that are usual these days. Or perhaps their
intentions are to violate territories and sanctuaries of Muslims and
assault their women and children.

Finally, if the lives, property or any such aspects, which are venerated
by Muslims, are violated by the enemy, it becomes compulsory upon the
Muslim population, whether man or woman, free or not free to participate
in this *jihad*.[^10] The permission of the *imam* or his representative
is not required for this type of *jihad*. This is the exact opinion of
Islamic jurist consults (legal theorists) such as Muhaqqiq and Shahid
Thani. I am reciting for you the translation of these opinions.

Muhaqqiq has a book called “*Sharayi‘*”, which is one of the
incontrovertible scripts taken from sources of the Islamic
jurisprudence. Shahid Thani has expounded this book by the name
“*Masalik al-Afham*”, which is an excellent description. Shahid Thani is
one of the most important and unsurpassed Shi‘ah legal theorists.

In this case, they say that an *imam*’s permission is not a requirement.
This case is very nealy similar to the present situation that Israel has
created by occupying the Muslim country. In this case, it is compulsory
for all Muslims, whether man or woman, free or not free, near or far to
participate in this *jihad*, which is a war for defence and, therefore,
does not require the permission of an *imam*. When we say “whether near
or far”, it is meant that this *jihad* is not exclusive to those Muslims
who have been attacked.

An uprising will become compulsory on anyone who becomes informed of the
situation, unless he is certain that they (the people under attack) are
adequate in number and have the power to defend themselves.[^11] This
means that the enemy is weaker and does not have enough power; while, on
the other hand, the Muslims are more powerful and thus are not in need
of help. Otherwise, should he find out that his presence is needed;
*jihad* would become compulsory upon him. The closer they are situated
(geographically), the stronger the obligation. In other words, in such a
case, their obligation becomes definite.

The third case is similar to *jihad*, but it is not the general *jihad*.
It is a particular *jihad*. Its rules are different to those of the
general *jihad*. General *jihad* has specific rulings, one of which is
that if anyone is killed during this *jihad*, he is considered to be a
martyr [*shahid*]. Consequently, his dead body does not need to be
washed [*ghusl*] before it is put into the grave (i.e. his body has
already been purified) and is buried with the same clothing he died in.

*The blood of a* *martyr* *is superior to water,*

*This sin is superior to one hundred* *rewards.* [^12]

The third type is also colloquially known as *jihad*, but it is one
*jihad* that does not have all the rules of the general *jihad*. Its
reward is the same as the reward for the normal *jihad*. Its figure is
considered as a *shahid*. It can be explained as follows: if an
individual is not in an Islamic land, but rather in a territory that
belongs to non-believers, who are attacked by another group of
non-believers, and there is a danger of mortality for him who is living
among them (e.g. a Muslim is living in France when a war breaks out
between Germany and France). What is the responsibility of a Muslim in
such a situation: someone who is not one of them? His responsibility
would be to save his life by any means even if he deems it necessary to
take part in the war in order to save his life, then he must do so. It
is not his responsibility to take part in the war to express his
sympathy with what is taking place in his surrounding. In such a case,
if he is killed, his reward will be the same as a martyr.

We have other such cases in Islam, whose participants also merit the
title of *shahid* although the same rulings of burial, as in the case of
general *jihad* are not applied to them. For example, other *shahid*s
may be buried with the clothes they died in and do not need to be washed
before burial. These rules, as well as some others, do not apply to such
cases. Another example of such a case is someone who is attacked by an
enemy, as a result of which his life, family and property are put at
stake, even if the enemy happens to be Muslim.

For example, someone is sleeping in his house. A thief (even a thief who
is a Muslim, who is possibly one of those thieves, who, as Haji Kalbasi
used to say, does his night prayers[^13] but is a thief) comes and
attacks this house and wants to take the property of the owner. Can one
defend his wealth in such a case? Yes, there are chances of being
killed, you say? Even if there is a ten percent chance of dying, efforts
to save one’s life, even by a ten percent chance, are compulsory.

Although, since in this case the situation involves saving one’s
property, the person can continue to resist until there is a fifty
percent chance of survival. However, if there are dangers other than the
loss of property, such as a threat to one’s life or the life of his
relatives, even if there is a one hundred percent chance of getting
killed, it is obligatory for him to rise up to defend himself and fight.
He must not say that he has intended to kill me, what can I do? No, if
he has intended to kill you, it becomes obligatory upon you to kill him
first. You must show resistance and not say: he wants to kill me! Why
should I do anything at all? Why should I get involved?

Fighting rebels
---------------

We have already mentioned three cases of *jihad*. We have two other
cases that must be considered, one of which is colloquially known as
“Fighting Rebels”. The basis for such a *jihad* can be explained as
follows: if a civil war occurs among Muslims and one tribe wants to
dominate over another, the main responsibility of the other Muslims is
to endeavor to make peace between them, in an effort to settle
reconciliation between them. Should they see that one side is resisting
and is not, under any circumstances, willing to make peace, it would
become compulsory upon them to fight against the rebellious group, in
favor of the oppressed. The context of the Qur’anic verse is as follows,

***“If two groups of the faithful quarrel, make peace between them. But
if one of them acts wrongfully towards the other, fight the one which
acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah’s*** ***ordinance. Then, if it
returns, make peace between them with justice and act equitably. Surely,
Allah loves those who act equitably.”***[^14]

Inevitably, one of the applications of this type of *jihad* is when a
group of people revolt against the just *imam* of their time. Because he
(the *imam*) is just and truthful but they (the mutineers) have risen
against him, it is presumed that the *imam* is right and not the
mutineer. Thus, in this case, one must enter battle in favor of the
*imam* and fight against the mutineer.

Another case (which has caused some difference of opinion among
scholars) is the issue of bloody uprisals for the sake of ‘enjoining
what is good and forbidding what is evil [*al-amr bi’l-ma‘ruf wa nahy
‘an al-munkar*]. That is in itself another stage with its own levels.

Peace in the Shi‘ah jurisprudence
---------------------------------

Another issue which is also mentioned in the book of *jihad* is the
issue of peace, which is referred to by the scholar as “armistice” or
“truce”. Truce means reconciliation and armistice means peace. What does
peace mean? It is the ‘no offence’ agreement, ‘no fighting’ treaty and
what is today known as the so-called “peaceful coexistence” agreement. I
will quote for you a passage from Muhaqqiq’s book ‘*Shara’i‘ al-Islam*’:

It is an agreement to ceasefire and to abstain from fighting for a
certain period of time. It is permissible only when it includes
(insures) advantages for Muslims, either due to the smallness of their
number, where they would be unable to resist the enemy or to obtain help
from others to become stronger [*istidhar*], which may be gained from
this peace, or that this ceasefire may cause the non-Muslims to embrace
the religion of Islam. But when this truce does not grant any advantages
for Muslims and the Muslims have enough strength and power to overcome
the enemy, truce is not permissible.[^15]

Here he states that a truce or peace comprises of an agreement not to
fight, but to live in peace together. However, this truce can only be
established on the condition that a specific time frame has been set for
the agreement. This issue is raised in jurisprudence if an opposing
party can be fought off instinctively. That is to say, if the opposing
party consist of polytheists, it is permissible to sign a treaty with
them. However, this agreement must not be signed for an indefinite
period of time. It should not be “for the time being”. No, “for the time
being” is not correct. The period must be definite and specified. For
example, for a period of six months, one year, ten years or more, just
as the Prophet (*s*) signed the treaty in Hudaybiyyah for a period of
ten years.

He says, “It is permissible only when it includes (insures) advantages
for Muslims.”[^16] Therefore, peace is allowed if it is in the best
interests of the Muslims.[^17] If a Muslim deems it advisable to make
peace for the time being, then it is permitted and not forbidden. But as
we said before, in the case of an obligatory war, for example, in the
case when if a Muslim country is under enemy attack, it is obligatory to
defend and free the country under any circumstances. Now, if it is in
the best interest of the Muslims to sign a peace-treaty with the same
invading enemy, must they sign the treaty or not? Muhaqqiq states that
if it is in their interests, then it is permissible to continue.
However, peace should not be contracted for an indefinite period of
time, rather a definite time span should be stipulated in the agreement,
since invasion and occupation of a country by the enemy for an unknown
period of time cannot be in the interests of the Muslims. If this
agreement should be made, then it would mean the end of hostility for a
set period of time. So now, when would a peace treaty be in the interest
of Muslims?

Muhaqqiq says, “Either due to smallness of their number, in which case
they are unable to resist the enemy.[^18] (Or because) the fact that
they are less in number means that they have less power.”[^19]

So when they do not have the strength needed and their battle follows a
particular objective, then it is advisable to wait for the time being
until they have gathered the required power.

Or to the *istidhar* (obtaining help from others to be stronger) which
may be obtained from it.[^20]

Therefore, it is advised to cease hostilities in order to gather the
required power during this time. This plan ensures reinforcements. Or,
to look forward to non-Muslims embrace Islam by discontinuing war and
waiting.[^21]

Also, a peace treaty is permitted, if as a result of it there are hopes
that the opposing party will convert to Islam. This assumption is only
valid when the opposing party are non-believers. So, in other words,
peace is being made with the conviction that during this set period, the
enemy shall be defeated from a spiritual point of view. This was
certainly the case with the Hudaybiyyah peace treaty, which we shall
soon discuss.

But when there are no advantages for Muslims (in truce) and the Muslims
have enough strength, power and ability to overcome the enemy, a truce
will not be permissible.[^22]

However, if these stated aspects are absent from the situation, then it
is not permissible to continue with a peace treaty. This was a
discussion about the issue of peace or so-called “truce”. We, therefore,
understand that from the Islamic jurisprudencial point of view, peace is
not permitted under certain circumstances whether peace refers to
signing a treaty or ceasing hostility. Even for this, there are two
types of peace which must be considered. Firstly, when the peace we are
referring to involves the signing of a peace agreement. This is done
when there are two opposing factions and they resolve to sign a treaty,
just as was done by the Prophet (*s*) or even by Imam al-Hassan.

Secondly, when the term ‘peace’ is used, it has the implication of
peacefulness and freedom from strife. Of this, scholars have said that
it is permissible if the Muslims are unable to show resistance or, in
short, there is no avail in fighting. This was the case in the early
days of Islam, when Muslims were few in number and scarce. Had they
fought, then they would have been eradicated and no remnants of them
would have been left.

And so scholars state that it is better for Muslims to gather
reinforcements and supporters during this time (of peace). However, it
would be more advantageous for them to attract the enemy spiritually.

Here I must describe the Prophet’s treaty of Hudaybiyyah, which may be
considered as the origin and basis for the peace treaty which was later
initiated by Imam al-Hassan*.*

Hudaybiyyah Peace
-----------------

The Prophet (*s*) signed a peace treaty during his lifetime, which
caused astonishment and perhaps even irritation among his companions.
However, after a year or two, they acknowledged that this act had been
the right decision.

In the sixth year after Hijrah, after the Battle of Badr had taken
place, severe resentment was triggered towards the Prophet (*s*) from
among the Quraysh clan. After that, the Battle of Uhud took place, as a
result of which the Quraysh clan, having taken revenge from the Prophet,
also earned the resentment of the Muslims. Thus, from the point of view
of the Quraysh clan, their worst enemy was the Prophet and from the
point of view of the Muslims, the Quraysh clan was their worst. It was
the month of Dhu al-Qa‘dah[^23], which is considered as a sacred month.

In a sacred month, the tradition during the period of ignorance was to
put aside their weapons and to abstain from any fights. Even if the
bitterest enemies were in a state of war, they would desist from all
action as a sign of respect for this month, although they would have
butchered each other, had it have been any other month. The Prophet
wished to use this tradition of the Ignorance Age [*‘asr-e Jahiliyyah*]
in order to go to Mecca to perform the pilgrimage and return. He had no
intentions other than this.

Having announced this, he left for Mecca with seven hundred of his
companions (a thousand and four hundred according to other reports).
Their pilgrimage was a “common pilgrimage” a sacrificial animal [*sawq
al-hady*] would walk ahead of them, which meant that it was intended for
sacrifice. A sign would be put on the shoulder of the animal, for
example they would place a shoe on the animal’s shoulder (which was a
custom from ancient times) so that whoever saw the animal would realize
that this animal was for sacrifice.

The Prophet ordered his companions, who were approximately seven hundred
in number, to lead seventy camels ahead of the caravan, so that if
anyone saw them from afar, they realized that these were pilgrims and
not warriors; therefore, not causing for concern. Their clothes and
general appearance gave the impression of those on pilgrimage.
Therefore, because of the overt nature of this pilgrimage, the news
quickly reached the Quraysh clan.

Near Mecca, the Prophet was informed that the Quraysh*,* including women
and men, young and old, had come out of Mecca and proclaimed, “By God,
we will never let Muhammadenter Mecca.” They threatened to fight against
the Muslims, even though month was considered to be sacred. These
actions opposed even the customs of the Age of Ignorance. The Prophet
went near the camps of the Quraysh and ordered the Muslims to dismount
there. Messengers and couriers were exchanged between the two parties
constantly. At first, several messengers arrived, one after the other,
demanding to know why the Muslims had come.

The Prophet only replied, “I am a pilgrim and have come here for
pilgrimage. I have no other business here. I will perform my pilgrimage
and return.” Every messenger who was sent, witnessing the state of the
Muslims, would return and inform the Quraysh that the Prophet had no
intention of fighting.

However, they did not accept this and so the Muslims, including the
Prophet himself, decided to enter Mecca, knowing that it might lead to
conflict. The Muslims asserted that they did not wish to fight, but if
they were attacked, then they would fight back. Bay‘at al-Ridwan took
place there and then. They again gave an oath of allegiance for this
purpose, until a representative from the Quraysh came and said that they
were willing to sign a peace treaty with the Muslims. The Prophet
replied that he was prepared for this. Messages sent by the Prophet were
those of peace. To a couple of the messenger, he would say,

“Woe to the state of the Quraysh! War has finished them. What do they
want from me? Leave me be with the rest of the people. I will either be
destroyed, in which case what they want will be fulfiled by others, or I
will prevail, which is again to their advantage, since I am one of the
Quraysh. This would be an honor for them.”

However, this was not beneficial. They insisted on contracting a peace
agreement, and thus sent a man named Suhayl ibn ‘Amr to conclude an
agreement, according to which the Prophet would return back to Medina
for the year, yet he would have the right to come back during the
following year and stay for three days in Mecca, perform his *‘umrah*
and return.

The other clauses which had been included in the peace treaty were not
advantageous for the Muslims. According to one clause of the peace
treaty, should one member of the Quraysh clan join the Muslims, they
(the Quraysh) will maintain the right to retrieve him. However, should
one of the Muslims flee to join the Quraysh, they (the Muslims) would
hold no such right and so forth (this clause contained other ponderous
conditions). In return Muslims would obtain freedom in Mecca and would
no longer be under pressure.

All the efforts of the Prophet were concentrated upon those final words,
for that reason he accepted every ponderous condition in the treaty in
order to reach this objective alone. The treaty was signed. Many of the
Muslims, however, became irritated and said, “O Messenger of Allah! This
is a disgrace for us. We have come all the way to Mecca, yet now we must
return? Is this correct? No we must definitely go (to Mecca).” The
Prophet (*s*), however, replied, “No, this is the treaty and we have
signed it.” The Prophet then ordered for the sacrifices to be made right
there and then. He then said, “Come and shave my head,” as a symbol of
exiting *ihram*. At first, the Muslims were reluctant to go through with
this, but later they accepted, albeit with some exasperation.

The one who expressed his irritation more than others was ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab. He came to Abu Bakr and said, “Is he not a prophet?” He
responded, “Yes.” Then He asked, “Are we not Muslims? Are they not
non-believers?” Abu Bakr replied, “Yes.” He asked again, “Then what is
this situation? The Prophet had seen in his dream that he had entered
Mecca with the Muslims and had conquered it. He had narrated this dream
for the Muslims.

Thus, they went to the Prophet and said, “Had you not seen in your dream
that we will enter Mecca?” He said, “Yes.” They then said, “What
happened then? Why did your dream not come true?” The Prophet (*s*)
replied, “I did not see in my dream and never told you that we would
enter Mecca this year. I have dreamt and my dream is true. We will enter
Mecca.” They said, “What kind of treaty is this that if one of their
members should come to us they would have the right to take him back,
yet should one of our members join them, we are not permitted to go and
retrieve him?” He replied, “If one of us wishes to join them, then he
will be a Muslim who has become an apostate and thus is of no use to us.

If a Muslim who has become an apostate leaves, we will never go after
him and if one of them becomes a Muslim and wants to join us, we shall
tell him to go back, at the moment you Muslims are in the state of being
oppressed, Allah shall open a way for you.” The Prophet gave into some
extremely bizarre conditions. Suhayl ibn ‘Amr had a son, who had become
a Muslim and was among the Muslim army.

When this agreement was signed, another one of his sons ran away from
the Quraysh to join the Muslims. As soon as he arrived, Suhayl said,
“Now that the treaty has been signed, he must be returned to me.” Thus,
the Prophet said to him (Suhayl’s son) whose name was Abu Jundal, “Go!
Allah will open a way for you oppressed people as well.” The poor
fellow, being very distressed, cried out, “Muslims! Do not let them take
me among the non-believers and turn me away from my religion.” The
Muslims became very troubled and said, “Oh Messenger of God! Please give
us permission not to let them take this one.” The Prophet replied, “No,
he must be returned as well.” Interestingly, when the peace treaty was
concluded, Muslims found freedom and were able to preach Islam freely,
in a period of less than one year; the number that had converted to
Islam from among the Quraysh was by many times greater than those who
had not converted to Islam in the past twenty years.

Therefore, the situation changed to the benefit of the Muslims.
Afterwards, the terms of the agreement were destroyed by the Quraysh
unprompted and an enthusiasm for practicality and spirituality appeared
in Mecca.

A pleasant story has been narrated from one of the Muslims, about a man
by the name Abu Basir who lived in Mecca. He was a very brave and strong
man. He fled from Mecca to Medina. In accordance with the agreement, the
Quraysh sent two people to take him back. When they arrived and demanded
for him the Prophet agreed to give him back.

No matter how much this man begged the Prophet to prevent them from
taking him, insisting that they will turn him away from his religion if
he goes back, the Prophet still said, “No, we have made an agreement. It
is not part of our religion to go against the agreement. Allah will open
a path for you as well.” He was escorted back unarmed, by guards, who
carried weapons themselves. They reached Dhu al-Hulayfah near Masjid
al-Haram where they became engaged in the sacred pilgrimage [*muhrim*].
This place is situated seven kilometres from Medina.

Here, they stopped to rest under a shade. One of them was holding his
sword in his hand, when a man (named Abu-Basir) commented that the
guard’s sword seemed to be of very good quality and asked if he may be
allowed to inspect it. The guard offered him the sword. As soon as Abu
Basir took hold of the sword, he killed the guard.

While the first guard was dying, the other fled like the wind back to
Medina. When the other guard reached Medina, the Prophet said, “There
seems to be some fresh news!” He said, “Yes, your friend killed my
friend.” Shortly after, Abu Basir returned, “O Messenger of Allah! You
have kept your side of the agreement. Your agreement stated that if one
of their people escaped, you will return him and so you did. Now you
have fulfilled your terms, please leave me be.” He then went to the Red
Sea and found a spot which he located as a centre.

As soon as the Muslims, who were suffering under torture in Mecca, found
out the Prophet does not provide shelter to those who escape and Abu
Basir had escaped to the Red Sea and established a centre there, they
left to join him one by one. Gradually, the people of this community
grew up to seventy people and were able to form their own defence force.
The Quraysh could no longer regulate them in anyway.

Therefore, they were obliged to write to the Prophet saying, “We no
longer wish for them to be returned to us. We request you to inform them
that we have not desire for them to come back. Please write to them and
tell them to come to Medina and not cause us any more trouble. We will
disregard this term from our agreement.” And so, they abdicated.

In any case, this peace agreement was for the purpose of preparing the
mentality of the people for what was to come. Subsequently, this is what
followed. As was mentioned before, the Muslims started receiving more
freedom in Mecca and gradually the people started to accept Islam in
groups, until finally, the prohibitions were removed entirely.

Now let’s study the circumstances at the time of Imam al-Hassan and Imam
al-Husaynto determine whether or not their situations truly differed to
such an extent that had Imam al-Hassan been in Imam
al-Husayn’sposition*,* he would have acted in the same manner and
likewise, had Imam al-Husaynbeen in Imam al-Hassan’s position, he too
would have agreed to go through with the peace Imam al-Hassan agreed to.
Undoubtedly, this would have been the case.

I would just like to point out our response to the question, should
someone ask whether Islam is a religion of peace or a religion of war,
we shall refer to the Qur’an for this purpose. In the Qur’an, we have
instructions on both war and peace. Numerous verses [*ayah*] are related
to the issue of war with the non-believers,

***“Fight in the way of Allah against those who fight you, but do not
transgress. Indeed Allah does not like transgressors.”***[^24]

And likewise, about the subject of peace, the Qur’an states,

***“And if they incline toward peace, then you (too) incline toward it
and trust in Allah. Indeed He is the Hearing, the All-knowing.”***[^25]

One verse of the Qur’an reads,

***“And reconciliation is better.”***[^26]

Therefore, which is the religion of Islam? Islam does not accept peace
as a stagnant principle, claiming that peace must prevail in all
situations and that hostility is not an option. It also does not accept
war in every situation. Peace and war, in any case, depend upon the
circumstances, which mean that they depend upon the causes that they
take effect from.

Muslims, whether during the time of the Prophet (*s*) Imam ‘Ali, Imam
al-Hassan and Imam al-Husayn, or during the time of the other Imams or
during our time, must maintain Islam and the rights of Muslims as their
main objective. They must determine whether the overall circumstances
call for fighting or abandonment of hostilities. Therefore, the issue of
labelling Islam as a religion of peace or war is not correct. Each is
relative in its own circumstance.

Question and answer
-------------------

Question: Referring to the Shi‘ah jurisprudence to ascertain whether
Imam al-Hassan’s method of conciliation was permitted or not is not
right. This is because the foundation of Shi‘ah jurisprudence is
essentially based on the conduct of the infallible Imams (*‘a*). In any
subject, certain things are always set as principles and then
propositions are established based on those principles. Is
jurisprudence, according to Muhaqqiq and other Shi‘ah scholars,
essentially based on the conducts of the infallible Imams (*‘a*)?

Answer: This was a useful and suitable reminder. It is correct. But we
were not intending to say that Imam al-Hassan (*‘a*) abided by the
Shi‘ah jurisprudence here. What we meant, however, was merely to enquire
whether jurisprudence, as a whole, is in harmony with logic or not? For
this issue that I brought up, firstly, regardless of any other
controversies, we shall put forward the Shi‘ah jurisprudence as a whole
and then try to see whether or not it is essentially in harmony with
logic (because when one reviews an issue in its entirety, he finds it
easier to solve a specific case). Otherwise, we did not want to refer to
slavish issues.

In our opinion, everything we see in the Shi‘ah jurisprudence is
logical, including the issues which are entirely based on the methods of
the infallible Imams (*‘a*) or other resources. This helps to see
whether there is any criticism as to why *jihad* is permitted in the
cases where *jihad* is considered permitted. Also, is the case where
*jihad* is legitimate, logical or not? Both in the cases where they
considered *jihad* to be legitimate or where they considered peace to be
legitimate, their decisions are considered legitimate by us.

When we accepted this from a logical point of view, then we go to see
whether Imam al-Hassan was supposed to fight when he made peace? Or if
Imam al-Husaynwas expected to make peace and he fought (this is because
both pillars exist in Islam: *jihad* and peace)? Imam al-Hassan made
peace when he was supposed to make peace and Imam al-Husaynchose *jihad*
when he deemed it necessary? This is the same for Imam ‘Ali and the
Prophet where their cases are definite. The case of the Prophet
specially requires no more discussion because the Prophet made peace in
one place and fought in another.

Question: Are there disagreements between the jurisprudence of our Sunni
brothers and the Shi‘ah jurisprudence in the case of *jihad*? If so,
what are these disagreements? The other question is on the topic of
conditions for *jihad.* You mentioned that *jihad* was necessary when
dominance over self or property was being sought. What about the case of
dominance over intellect? Can there be such a cause for *jihad*? If so,
what form of *jihad* will that be?

Answer: I have to study this issue in the Sunni jurisprudence. I shall
have a look and let you know. I know this much in brief that their
conditions are not much different to ours and if there are any
differences, it is on our part. This is because we have certain
limitations that they do not. This is in the case when the presence of
an infallible *imam* or his specified representative is necessary for
certain cases. They do not have such a condition.

The second issue you raised in your question was not mentioned in
ancient jurisprudence, because it essentially is a new phenomenon. We
must pause on this to see what the general principles of command for
this phenomena are and thus from a regulatory point of view, this matter
must be endeavored other than this, such an issue was never raised in
the olden times. 

[^1]: Some made objections during Imam al-Hasan’s time and this issue
was also under question by the subsequent Imams.

[^2]: Surat al-Hajj 22:39.

[^3]: Peace in its general meaning; abandoning war.

[^4]: Al-Ihtijaj, al-Tabarsi, vol. 1, p. 107.

[^5]: ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn ‘Awf was born with the name ‘Abd ‘Amr ibn ‘Awf
into the tribe of Banu Zuhrah. He married ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan’s
half-sister. Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas was his first cousin. The Sunnis regard
him as one of the Ten Promised Paradise.

[^6]: ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab was from the Banu Adi clan of the Quraysh
tribe. He became the second Caliph (634-644) following the death of Abu
Bakr, the first Caliph.

[^7]: Zubayr ibn al-‘Awwam from Banu Asad, the son of Saffiyah bint ‘Abd
al-Muttalib, his wife was Asma bint Abu Bakr, sister of ‘A’ishah.
Their son was ‘Abd Allah ibn Zubayr. He went to war with ‘A’ishah and
Talhah against Imam ‘Ali (‘a) in the Battle of Jamal in 656 CE and got
killed in this battle. The Sunnis regard him as one of the Ten Promised
Paradise.

[^8]: Talhah ibn ‘Ubayd Allah was a cousin of Abu Bakr. He was from the
Banu Taym clan. He was also extremely rich. He went to war with ‘A’ishah
and Zubayr against Imam ‘Ali (‘a) in the Battle of Jamal in 656 CE.
During the battle, he got injured and died later of his wound.

[^9]: Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas was from the Banu Zuhrah clan of the Quraysh
tribe. He had a son named ‘Umar ibn Sa‘d, the leader of the forces that
killed Imam al-Husayn (‘a) at the Battle of Karbala. ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
‘Awf was his first cousin.

[^10]: It may even be permissible on the minor to participate in this
jihad, too.

[^11]: Masalik al-Afham, vol. 1, p. 116.

[^12]: خون شهيدان را زآب اولاتر است اين گنه از صد ثواب اولاتر است

[^13]: This is referring to the story in which they told Haji Kalbasi:
that a certain house had been robbed in the middle of the night and he
said: when did that thief read his night prayers then?

[^14]: Surat al-Hujurat 49:9.

[^15]: Shara’i‘ al-Islam, al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli, translated by Hasan M.
Najafi (Qum/Iran, 2002), p. 288.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: It is not as if war is always obligatory and peace is always
forbidden. No, peace is also permissible, rather the “Shahid” tries to
say: when they say ‘permissible’ this does not mean that if you did not
do it, then it is permitted and not forbidden which becomes obligatory
in some cases.

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: In the olden days, power was counted on the basis of quantity.
But today power is not counted on the basis of quantity but it is based
on other things.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Dhu al-Qa‘dah is the eleventh month in the Islamic calendar. It
can also be known as the al-Qa‘dah.

[^24]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:190.

[^25]: Surat al-Anfal 8:61.

[^26]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:128.


