Verdict of History
==================

Unbiased historians, both Muslims and Chri- stians, are agreed that the
number of marriages.

contracted by the Prophet of Islam was not as a result of lust or to
satisfy the sexual desires.

If this had been the case, he would not have married the twice-widowed
Khadijah, 46 years old, at the youthful age of 25 when one is full of
emotion and sexual urge Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) lived together with
his first (and, at that time, only) wife, Khadi- jah, happily for 26
years with great mutual affec tion,

despite the fact that young and beautiful girls of Arabia were easily
available to him and were keen to be married to the Prophet.

Not even once, during that period, did the Prophet take another wife.

Undoubtedly he would have at least considered another younger wife
simultaneously with Khadijah if he ever suffered from lust and fondness
of young women, particularly when the country's customs wholly approved
unlimited mar- riages.


**Critics Dumbfounded**

Let us look at the life history of the Prophet of Islam. During the
prime of his life, he remains satisfied with an aged and twice-widowed
wife, and does not even think of another.

Then during the last ten years of his life, after passing the age of
fifty, in his old age, when he is surrounded by various difficult
problems of the newly-borne Isla- mic State, he starts marrying a number
of wives.

Ask these Christian writers why this pheno- menon?

What logical answer can these critics give to this amazing question?

Was it not a difficult exercise and heavy bur- den to marry widows and
support their orphans?

Was it easy for a perfectly dignified man in the person of Mubammad
(s.a.w.) to marry women of different outlook, characters and tribes,
including some of much younger age who were still un- aware of the full
responsibilities of life?

Let us ponder over the reply to these ques- tions as given by a famous
western historian, Thomas Carlyle in his book "Heroes and Heroes'
Worship".

He says in effect that contrary to what his enemies accuse him,
Muhammad was never lusty and sexualist and that it was a slander only
out of prejudice against him and this indeed is a great injustice.

John Devenport says, "and it may then be asked, is it likely that a
very sensual man, of a country where polygamy was a common practice,
should be contented for five-and-twenty years with one wife, she being
fifteen years older than himself".


