Human Rights And Asian Values (With emphasis on Eastern Asia)
=============================================================

**Dr Bihzad Shahandah**

From the viewpoint of Asian people, the fall of the Union Soviet
Republics reinforced the American claim that a universal culture should
be instituted. This viewpoint sprang from two celebrated works by Samuel
P. Huntington and Francis Fukuyama.

Fukuyama claimed that history would end with the fall of communism. The
implication was not that no event would take place but that the clashes,
struggles and oppositions (thoughts and movements) would eventually end
in the supremacy of Technocratic Secular Liberalism[^1] and that no
other powerful rival would exist to vie this supremacy.

Huntington observed that the struggles would pivot on the axis of
culture and civilization with the fall of communism and considered the
struggles between Islamic civilizations and Confucianism with the
Western culture the main axis of the new struggles.[^2]

Fukuyama and Huntington present opposite views as to the idea that the
clashes between civilizations would not exist if according to Fukuyama,
there remained only one culture. However, we can detect a synthesis or
conformity between them by carefully studying those works. Fukuyama
maintains that religion and nationalism will replace liberalism but will
not defy it. Huntington reinforces the notion that those who remain
outside the realm of Western culture try to weaken its pillars and
oppose it one way or another.

Probing the aforementioned essays and books, Chen Yangu states that the
difference between them is actually misleading because the clashes
between civilizations hinge upon the end of history. From Huntington and
Fukuyama’s views, one can gather that the ideological attempt for
Western domination is accompanied by a certain interpretation of human
rights.[^3]

Confucian Concept
-----------------

The Asian countries have suggested that the emphasis on Asian culture or
Asian Values serve as an attempt to fight the hegemonic policies of the
West. They hold that the stress on a public culture and extending it to
the entire globe shows Western domination and suggests an attempt to
create uni-dimensional world.

The Asian countries lay stress on a collective outlook on Asian values
as opposed to Western individualism. Likewise, the Confucian Concept is
introduced as opposed to Western thought. Confucianism lays stress on
the mutual relations of individuals. Confucius believes that men
constantly live in mutual relation to each other. In other words, the
society is not a convention among strange individuals but rather, it is
congruent to man’s nature and that man discloses his nature in relation
to others. As a rule, the dominant relation within each society follows
a hierarchical order; the inherent relation between father and mother
and their children or the relations fabricated as a result of social
convention.[^4]

According to the Confucian Concept, the proper behavior or function (the
term *Li*[^5] meaning ritual) is based on the relations we conduct with
others. We should honor those who are inferior to us and respect those
who are superior to us. The implication is not that we should act like
slaves to the ruling power or accept unsound judgement but that we
should obey the rues, respect the social relations, consider ourselves
as its subjects and express our views in the ways previously determined.

In Western view, the notion of human rights lays stress on individual
rights. You may have heard this many times that, “You cannot do this. I
have certain rights.” On the contrary, Confucianism claims that one is
indebted to others. According to the great Chinese philosopher, one
should not care whether others respect him or fulfil their duties to
him, as they should. What a man should care about is whether he respects
others as he should. At this
Point, we come up with the idea of mutual respect. If I respect others
the way I should, others will respect me in like manner.[^6]

The Confucian Concept enjoins its followers not to concern themselves
with what others are indebted to them. Confucius places stress on the
superior dignity of man in relation to other beings, considering man as
a moral being who lays the foundation of his faith on mutual respect,
living in harmony with others and respecting fraternity and the
hierarchical order. Ethics takes root in some relations and becomes
universalized. Children will bear love to their elders. Parental love
thus induced is generalized to the entire humane society because if
someone loves his elders, he will expect others to love their own elders
and those of others.

According to Muslim values, we should do as we expect to be done by.
Eminence is a great trait in Islam, in the Confucian Concept and in
other religions. Confucius states that a weak and narrow-minded person
does not stand responsible for what he does whereas a person of high
caliber stands responsible for his actions and scolds himself.

Abstract Rights
---------------

Abstract rights are the reflections of people’s boundless dignity. Han
Zhen, the Chinese theoretician, reinforces the notion that justice is
not a matter of abstract rights but rather it has a social context. As
people find themselves in particular social intercourse, there is no
public status, which can be generalized to all. John Rawls[^7] affirms
that there are no absolute rights. Abstract rights cannot be regarded as
the model for justice.[^8]

Also, the Confucian Concept stresses the inherent equality of men. At
all events, equality in dignity is not the intended meaning in the
Confucian Concept. Xungzi[^9], one of the disciples of Confucius,
maintained that any socio-political system obligates each individual to
obey hierarchically social order and rules (as a rule, human beings are
egoistic; hence they see no point in preferring anyone’s will to their
own.)

Mencius[^10] had an opposite view on this case, believing that goodness
is an innate trait in man and he is capable of attaining the apex of
humanity and ultimately saintliness. Man’s goodness and perfection lie
in his co-operating with others and following *Li* (ritual). At all
events, according to eastern doctrine, equality does not mean that all
human beings are equal. As to this point, Confucius states that a great
moral individual values harmony, not equality. On the contrary, a low
person stresses equality, not harmony.[^11]

Eastern people believe that an excess of emphasis on individual whether
pessimistic or optimistic is the root of all evil. Confucian disciples
have emphasized the Private Desires and keeping aloof from Heavenly
Principles. Human nature and the aforementioned description do not refer
to man’s personality. Man’s egoistic desires and aspirations are not
particular to his nature, but rather they are a deviation from nature,
for man’s limited desires triumph over the general desires.[^12] For
example, it is not selfishness that man wishes to eat good food.
However, gluttony is both unnatural and egoistic.

Concerning what was mentioned, it must be admitted that the discourse of
Asian values is part of the reaction directed against Western domination
after the Cold War and the collapse of the USSR. From the time of
imperialists to the flourish of theories of reconstruction, the clashes
between civilizations and the end of history, it has been generally
believed that the developed West is the arena in which modernism is
manifested and will surely overcome those who oppose it. Hence, the
American blade of human rights is aimed on those who do not follow this
way, trying to pull them in own rank.

Eastern people believe that human rights are abstract and within the
certain social context of interrelated communities. Besides, they are
the cause of the agonies and sufferings inflicted on some Western
communities today. The dominant milieu in the West that is, nihilism,
and Western predicaments originate from them. (Self-alienation, lack of
wholesome social intercourse, absolute individualism, asocial and
unnatural selfishness, lack of hierarchical order, and respect.)

Eastern countries hold that the emphasis on human rights in the hope of
reaching a certain concept is illogical and impractical, believing that
it is a washed up culture and the exercise of human rights is an
interference in their internal affairs.

In Asia, it is believed that the West proposes the notion of human
rights in order that they may fortify their stance as a dominant power.
The democracy engineered in the West is not the best form of democracy
but an interpretation of democracy, which exactly accords the concept of
Asian values. In general, Asia (with the exception of Japan and the
Philippines, for
these two Asian countries do not agree on the concept of
democracy)[^13] holds that liberty is sublime but should be achieved
with a sense of responsibility towards the other subjects of community:
otherwise, absolute freedom is not but the freedom particular to jungle.

How is it that everyone (including the Westem countries) stresses the
sociability of man but regards individualism as absolute? Two hundred
years ago, the Americans stated that there would be no taxation without
representation: now, the Asian countries relying on their rich human
resources insist that there will be no freedom allowed without a sense
of responsibility.

For the Asians (Muslims, Buddhists, Confucian disciples, Shintoists and
Hindus,) the society is at the top of everything else. The individuals
and minorities should enjoy certain rights but not at the price of
sacrificing the rights of the majorities. The individuals and minorities
should correspond with the social ethics and norms. A little deviation
is allowed: however, the unleashing of unlimited freedom which
jeopardizes peace and quiet and threatens the society is not what the
Asians expect of democracy.

On a moral basis, democracy is a right idea but it is good when it
results in goodness. At this point, a statement by Mahatir Muhammad, the
Malaysian premier seems to clarify the point noted above. He stated:

Ten years ago, a televised report affirmed the massacre of Palestinian
refugees in the United Nations camps by Israel. The American reporter
commenting on this newsreel expressed his aversion to this act so
cruelly perpetrated (human aspect): however, at the end of the report,
he said, “The United States should support Israel because it is the only
democratic state in the region.” Apparently, mass murder is allowed in
the name of democracy.[^14]

Exploiting by democrats does not inflict less pain than the exploitation
by the dictators. Both of them are to be condemned. Asia cannot accept
Western culture altogether, particularly when the selfsame culture has
failed in its own home. Asia is well aware of the fact that it should
accept those principles, which conform to the Asian community. (All the
countries because each one of the Asian countries is different from the
other).
According to Mao Zedong, the former leader of New China, one has to
treat each phenomenon as food: one has to taste it first: if it delights
the palate, one has to chew it: hence, the process of digestion starts;
the body absorbs and assimilates the suitable substance and eliminates
the residues.

Swallowing is the only thing some Asians and Africans have done which
has been of no use to them.

The discourse of democracy is true as to the issue of human rights.
Asian human rights should not be an imitation of Western human rights.
Individuals and the minorities should enjoy reasonable freedom: however,
this freedom should not deny the majorities of their rights. In the
West, they believe that their beliefs have the quality of universality
and that the non­native proponents of human rights (concerning us
Asians) encourage the advocacy of exploitation, dictatorship and
non-civilized conduct.[^15]

As in other regions, we in Asia are bound to values which are universal.
We are all fathers or mothers. We live in a human society so we should
believe in certain principles. However, we have different values from
the West. Those who believe in a dominant culture, and propagate it with
all their might, are like those who are purblind and see only gray
shadows and they are unable to see the rainbow. So, they say there is no
other color except the one they see.

Can we affirm the point that there was no difference between the
American way and some of the ways and values of the Old World in Europe?
Indeed, for a million of people who fled the Old World, was it not for
this that they wished to escape old values and ways?

At present, there are values towards which the Americans have an
affective regard but the same values are abhorred by the French. Even
Britain, the devoted cohort of America in Europe, criticizes some of the
values institutionalized in America. In fact, many people regard the
European culture as exemplary and universal, and the cradle for all
Western values. The US culture is by no means the unique outcome of
International community conditions and experiences to have a unique
model or to deserve universalization. As a multinational country with
diverse cultures emerging from different races and religions, America
does not have a definite culture to universalize.

Asia: Power and Values
----------------------

The problem that we encountered in the past or rather have in the
present, is that we have long been exploited; sadly, most of us thought
that our values and beliefs were secondhand. However, with the passage
of time and the strengthening of Asia, especially in the last quarter of
the present century, and the advent of the newly industrialized
countries, the Asian tigers and the Asian tiger cubs and so on and so
forth. Asia has secured its veritable dignity, and plunged fear in the
hearts of the Western countries. Nowadays , they are worried about Asian
power seekers.

We should note that in regard to the administration of affairs, treating
cultures the traditional values of Asia and the achievement of success,
there is a close bond among nations, which has brought up the game of
human rights. At the end of Peloponnesian wars Thucydides, the ancient
Greek historian, stated that the authorities acted on a personal will
basis in administering state’s affairs and that the weak ones should do
as they were dictated.

The Asian countries (mainly including thriving eastern Asian countries
and Iran, India ...) will no longer yield to blind obedience because
Asia is not materialistically or spiritually weak. A great portion of
Asia will strive against New Imperialism initiated within the context of
human rights . Asia will struggle, not merely because it has succeeded
in casting the chains of material and spiritual servitude but because it
should pursue its course victoriously: it is the course which internal
and external forces seek to thwart. Time will belong to us Asians when
we are capable of resurrecting our past potentials: The past is the way
of Asian future.

It must be born in mind that Asia is a continent comprising innumerable
cultures, but in my opinion, the Asian features (stress on family and
society as the first principle in social relations) have priority in
Asia. Eastern Asia is the main concern of this article. David Hitchcock,
the ex-president of East Asian and Pacific Affairs Department of the
United States Information Agency, has performed a slight comparison
between American and east Asian values which may be useful to us in our
discussion of human rights.

In 1994, Hitchcock inquired the Americans and Eastern Asians (the
Japanese, Thais, Koreans, Malaysians, Singaporeans, Indonesians and
Filipinos) to choose six societal values and five personal values as the
cornerstone of their society. The results of his research were presented
under the title *Asian Values and the United States: How Much
Conflict*.[^16]

The six societal values which the Eastern Asians emphasized more than
others included (1) disciplined society, (2) social integrity, (3)
accountability of legal states for people,[^17] (4) flexibility to
accept new thoughts and ideas, (5) freedom of expression and (6) respect
for power (government, State, organization). The Eastern Asians
emphasized that a stable and disciplined society lay at the top of all
other affairs in which individual rights preceded the social rights
through reasonable respect.

The most important values stated by the Americans in order of priority
were as follows: (1) freedom of expression, (2) personal freedom, (3)
individual freedom, (4) free discussion, (5) thinking for oneself, (none
of them appealed to the Asians) (6) accountability of legal states. The
point, which manifests the sentience of the Asians, is the emphasis the
Eastern Asian people laid on the importance of new thoughts and state’s
accountability.

Despite the discovery of common points between the Eastern Asians and
the Americans, Hichcock’s study disclosed not only interesting
differences in societal values but it also differences of opinions
touching personal values.

The five important personal values the Eastern Asians stressed were (1)
hardworking, (2) respect for education[^18] (3) rightfulness, (4)
self-sufficiency and (5) personal discipline. The Americans stressed (1)
self-reliance, (2) personal success, (3) industriousness, and (4)
achieving success in life and (5) aiding others.

In evaluating the results stated above, one comes up with these
important points: fulfilling one’s duties to others is emphasized by 39
percent of the Eastern Asian people as the social cornerstone whereas
merely 19 percent of American people laid stressed on it. On the other
hand, 59 percent of American people stressed the achievement of success
in life while the rate fell to half among Asian people. Whereas 59
percent of American people stressed personal success, only 39 percent of
Asian people stressed it.[^19]

More interestingly, 69 percent of the Eastern Asian people laid stress
on education but only 15 percent of American people emphasized it.
Whereas 48 percent of East Asian people laid stress on personal
discipline, only 22 percent of American people emphasized it. The writer
of this article leaves the judgement to the readers on this score.

The outlook of the Eastern Asian peoples in particular and the Asian
people in general on the West (particularly the U.S.A.) and the emphasis
on Asian values should be discussed within the framework of the
aforementioned societies. Western Model 2 (American one) does not avail
Asia, not only because of its alienation to Asian climate but because as
stated earlier, it has met failure ( In general, cultural liberalism and
emphasis on individual as the axis of the society) in its home, that is,
in the West.

Despite our knowledge that human rights is used as a weapon against the
States, which do not tend to belong to the so-called New World, we have
avoided purely political discussions. Basically, Asia holds that
morality is deteriorating in Western societies, sense of responsibility
is diminishing, and socialism is greatly threatened; hence, those
societies are falling apart.

The tradition of intellectual liberalism developed after World War II
averred that man had attained a superior social system (man’s desirable
condition); everyone could have enjoyed the condition if laissez faire
was generalized, and if everyone had the license to act as they wished;
the system proved a total failure and we in Asia strongly believe that
it will never succeed because some human principles (fundamental
principles) are immutable. Man needs to know what is right or wrong. In
human societies, there is an entity called devil, which may not be
imputed to evil deeds in the society: in other words, evil deeds do not
arise from being sacrificed . Man is a fallible being within whose soul
lurks a devil, which should be checked as to the improvement of the
society. Man’s diabolical power should be constantly checked.

In the West, they have forsaken the abovementioned principle altogether,
believing that all problems may be solved via benevolent states.
However, there is no such belief in Asia. There is practically no Asian
model. Yet, it may be firmly stated that the Asian outlook on the
collective rights is different from that of the West.
The main difference between the concepts of society, State and
government in the East Asia and those in Western countries lies in the
point that the eastern countries do not acknowledge the individual being
but within the framework of the family unit. The individual is not
isolated or alienated from the family unit and only within the framework
of family he finds recognition. The State does not strive to provide
what can be found best in family for the individual.[^20]

In the West, particularly after World War II, the states gradually
turned into organizations which carried out the responsibilities ,
commonly done in less developed countries by the family, the natural and
fundamental group unit of society. This policy caused the disintegration
of families: for instance, the widowed mothers for whom the State
assumed responsibility. In Eastern Asia, the preservation of social
norms is of great importance and the States do not tend to carry out the
responsibilities placed upon the family because they believe this
attitude may cause deeply social crises, discoordination and tensions.

There is a Chinese maxim that goes “*Xiushen Qijia zhinguo
pingtianxia*.” The word *xiushen* means self-preservation, or the
attempt to achieve self-making. *Qijia* means the protection of one’s
family. *Zhinguo* means the protection of one’s country. *Pingtianxia*
means peace in sheltering heaven. The Eastern Asian people have used
this maxim as the model for their life. The maxim is the basis of
eastern civilization. States will come. States will go; however this
maxim will remain for all the time to come.

In East Asia, self-sufficiency is the basis. In the West. it is just the
exact opposite. In the West, the state says, “Vote for me: I will solve
your problems.[^21] No one believes that the State can solve all the
problems. In the time of natural calamities such as earthquake, storm
and so on, it is always the human relation which is effectual. Family
and human relations are structural and ultimately, help assure the
endurance of the society members.[^22]

In criticizing the disciplined culture of Eastern Asia, the Western
countries claim that the Asian people are not initiative because there
is not enough liberty for new ideas to emerge. However, in these very
countries; Eastern Asia has gained the highest rate of progress and
product. Despite the extreme exercise of order (as a tradition respected
by people), respect for instructors, absolute abeyance of the teachers
and the refrain of disputing the teachers, serious learning (not of
liberalistic nature) has been in fashion and countries like Japan, are
far more advanced in technology and initiation than the West which
claims free climate for initiation.

The changes in the ruling system of Eastern Asia are inevitable:
however, these changes will not be an emulation of the West. Eastern
Asia seeks a State with which people find themselves related, the State
which is not separate from people; the State in which people find peace;
the state which is not despotic; the State which multiplies peoples’
opportunities.

Now it makes no difference whether an individual has one vote or not. As
to the field researches the writer of this article did in Malaysia,
Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines, it seems that a vote in
Eastern Asia stands for one individual but in fact, an individual over
40 can have two votes, one for himself and another for his children,
because he can use it more wisely. Regarding the research done in China,
(in southern parts where education is higher), they believe that
individuals over 60 should have one vote (the ages between 40 and 60 is
ideal for active participation in all spheres of people’s
endeavors.)[^23]

Conclusion
----------

The traditional culture in Eastern Asia places emphasis on sociability
of man, the preference of society to the individual, responsibility
together with freedom, order, the individual within the social context,
the family which is the main source of solving social problems, the
prevention of the government from changing into organizations which
carry out the responsibilities particular to family which is the main
pillar in the east.

Considering the points mentioned above, Eastern Asia insisted on Asian
values, resisted human rights and consideres absolute individualism as
the great calamity of the West. Besides, the Asians give political
nature to Western countries on generalizing human rights, consider it a
failure and regard it as the root of all problems in the West today .

In fact, the success of Eastern Asia is a stress on the dynamic and rich
nature of traditions and their sufficiency for striving against cultural
assault. Countries such as Malaysia, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan,
Singapore and Thailand have succeeded in treating modernism by
preserving their deep­seated traditions. Nowadays, the great success of
Eastern Asia lies in modernization without Westernization. Today, Japan
is more Japanese than Western. Today, South Korea, though having a
traditional society is dynamic and technologically advanced. (In South
Korea they say if there is a power cut in Japan just for 24 hours, South
Korean industry will surpass it.) Yes, anything conceived is possible.

By creating multi-media Super Corridor, Malaysia has resurrected Islam,
believing that Islam is not an impediment to progress: on the contrary
it facilitates it. American human rights are without values for two main
reasons: firstly, it is self-alienated and secondly, the east offers
more constant and richer evaluation of anything that the West wishes to.
Self-alienation, which has penetrated to the core of American society,
has no place in Eastern Asia. The eastern people have started a serious
struggle against corruption. They have the license and the power to
encounter it. Malaysia is a sucessful country in fighting corruption and
Western society; hence, it is a successful model of economic and trading
success. (Over 150 million dollars of export, 7 percent growth, the high
rate of education, the low rate of divorce, fighting narcotics, the high
rate of fund)[^24] the models of South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and
Thailand in particular are interesting.[^25]

[^1]: Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Man, (New York: Free
Press, 1992)

[^2]: Fukuyama, op. cit, pp. 1-10.

[^3]: Chen Yangu, Cultural leadership, Power and Socialism, Liawang no.
19 (1995) in Xin Hua Wenzhai (September 1995) pp. 20-21

[^4]: Confucius Analects, Lib 1:16 (Confucian Analects)

[^5]: The Confucian term Li or ritual

[^6]: The Confucian Analects, 1:18

[^7]: John Rawls quoted in Michael Walzer, Spheres of justice: A Defense
of Pluralism and Equality (New York: Basic Books 1983) p. 175

[^8]: Han Zhen, Another contemporary Westem Theory of Justice,
Philosophical trends, No.4, 1995).

[^9]: Xungzi (C. 298-238 BC)

[^10]: Mencius (C. 371-289 BC)

[^11]: Donald. J. Munro, The Concept of Man in Early China, (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1969) p. 192

[^12]: Frank Dikotter, The Discourse of Race in Modern China (London: C.
Hurst, 1992) p. 23

[^13]: In 1993, in the Conference of Asian Countries, in Bangkok which
was held exactly before the Geneva Conference on Human Rights, all the
Asian countries criticized the Western human rights and emphasised that
human rights were abstract and closely associated with the social
culture, and history of other countries.

[^14]: Mahathir Muhammad in an interview with Bernama (October, 1985).

[^15]: “Mahatir Muhammad on Western Media”, Nihon Keizei Conference on
The Future of Asia, Tokyo, Japan, 17 May, 1996 (Malaysia’s Prime
Minister’s Office Publication (Limited circulation)

[^16]: USIA, op. cit

[^17]: Accountability is an important principle in democratic systems

[^18]: It must be noted that most East Asian countries allocate 20 to 30
perccnt of gross domestic product to education which is per se a
guarantee for the Asian miracle to preserve its dynamic procedure.

[^19]: High Differentials in Western and Eastern Values, Bangkok Post,
p. 3, March 1997.

[^20]: The Straits Times Editorial (Singapore: March 15, 1997) Entitled
The State Not a Substitute for Family.

[^21]: Farid Zakaria, A conversation with Lee Yew, Foreign Affairs,
(March/April 1994) p. 113

[^22]: David Johnson, The Cultural Superiority of the East, (New
York:Peaeger Publishers, 1996)

[^23]: Bihzad Shahandah, Field Researches in East Asia, (in print)

[^24]: Behzad Shahandah, Reconciling Deep-seated Traditions to
Modernism, (Malaysia), International Higher Cultural Studies, 1996.

[^25]: Behzad Shahandah, State and Politics in South East Asia, (Tehran,
SAMT 1995). The chapters relevant to South East Asia after World War II.


