Primary Principles Of Law In Islam
==================================

**Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahhari**

Prologue
--------

The following article is the text of a speech delivered under the title
“*Primary Principles of Law in Islam*” and published under the same
title in “*Twenty* *Speeches*” by Ayatullah Murtaza Mutahhari, the
outstanding Muslim authority. In view of the importance of his opinions,
the staff of the conference deemed it necessary to reflect his views on
the discussions of the conference and include them in the present book.
Some opening parts of the original speech have been removed from the
present article for they were appropriate to the time the speech was
delivered. It is hoped that the views of this outstanding savant may add
to the scholarly calibre of the conference.

Justice is one of the principles of Islam. This principle has deep roots
in the history of Islam. Although divine justice was in vogue, it
stretched to social justice as well; it has reached the point where
Islam has ordered that people’s relations should be based on justice and
preservation of rights and the restraint to violate each other’s rights
and that no one has the right to violate the rights of others. Does such
justice essentially hold any truth? Do people, regardless of the laws
prescribed by Islam have any real rights? Does Islam really explain
their real rights? Does justice really involve the observance of others’
rights? In point of fact and regardless of the laws prescribed by
religion, are truth and justice begotten by religious laws? Whatever
religion holds just and right is right and just and whatever it holds
unjust and cruel is duly unjust and cruel.

There once emerged a group among Muslims who refuted the principle of
Justice. They announced the Divine rule to be above justice, both in
creation and evolution and in law-making, claiming that the act of God
follows no laws. There is one rule. Whatever God does is just and right,
not meaning that God does what is just and right but that whatever
ordered by God in religion is just and right, not meaning that what
religion orders is right and just. It is concluded that in the world
today, it would be all right if an obedient person is punished in the
Hereafter despite his obedience and virtues and if a sinner is taken to
Paradise despite his vices and sins and there is no harm in that Islam
orders some people to enjoy worldly pleasures and to deny others of
them. As justice and injustice are not real and rational but religious
and subject to religion, this order is per se justice. The view that
religion is not subordinate to reason has caused a major change in the
Muslim World.

Essential Issue of Justice
--------------------------

Based on the first view which sees Islamic rules subordinate to real
vice and virtue, believing that right and justice are real and that
Islam has recognized their reality, we can have an Islamic social
philosophy and a set of Islamic laws. We can study the legal principles
of Islam and see what is the basis for being rightful and on what base
it has established rules. What are its fundamentals? Then we can use
them as our guide in many cases. However, according to the second view,
Islam has no social philosophy or legal principles and that it rejects
any legal principle.

Principle of Justice in Shi’ism
-------------------------------

For the Shi’ahs, there is no need to prove justice, since it is one of
the primary principles and a requirement of the Shiism. As the old
saying goes, “Justice and monotheism are the principles of Alawis and
monotheism and assimilation the attributes of Umayyads.”

Justice is our main concern here and by monotheism we mean beholding God
free from attributes and eliminating discrepancy between the nature and
the attributes, but monotheism means lack of freedom and free will.
Determinism involves the notion than man has no power of choice. One of
the subordinate consequences of justice is free will. Determinism is a
way to reject justice. By assimilation we mean assimilating God to the
created beings and attributing their attributes to Him.

Primary Fundamentals of Islamic Law
-----------------------------------

Islam has a set of legal principles and established laws based on those
principles. As justice is but giving rights to the ones who deserve
them, we should realize what the primary principles of Islamic law are
as derived from the Holy Qur’an and the instructions of religious
leaders. How is it that some liking develops between man and an object
which is called right? If somebody takes that thing away, he is said to
have been deprived of his right. What is the origin of this liking?

What is the cause of this liking? The Creator is the cause and the
creation the effect. The world system is a system of cause and effect.
The Cause or Creator of reason is of two kinds: it is either subjective
or final. In other words, whatever causes somthing is either a doer and
an agent, e.g. when man speaks, he is the cause and the agent of his
speech; if there is no such agent, there will be no action, i.e. speech
or a final destination of the action and that action is an introduction
to and a means of creating that final destination.

When somebody speaks, he seeks a goal. He intends to persuade his
listener and make him do something or he wants to inform him of
something or ask him something. If there were no such destination and
goal and if such speech was not a means to that destination, the act of
speaking would never happen. Therefore any speech has a relation to the
one who delivers it, that is to its agent and a relation to its
destination.

This relation is the means and introduction to destination and final
end. In the absence of either of these two causes, it would not have
been actualized. Therefore, each of them is the cause and creator.
Regarding right and right owner, when we say a special liking develops
between man and the creatures and that man maintains some rights, we
should see where this liking springs from and what the relation between
those two is. Is it from the same type of liking between the means and
the end or the type of liking between the act and the agent?

The Relation between Law and Ideology
-------------------------------------

It cannot be disputed that religious ideas in regard to man and the
world, life and existence, influence the relation between man and other
beings. Therefore, it is absurd to say that in materialistic
philosophies the final aim is between man and the blessings. The goal
liking requires to say that the wealth has been created for man and this
per se makes us accept that there is a kind of overwhelming rationale
governing the world and that overwhelming reason creates something for
something else and for the sake of something else; if there were no such
other thing and if it were not for the sake of that other thing, this
thing would have not come into existence.

As we say tooth has been created in the mouth enabling one to chew, so
that food may go through a digestion process in the mouth by chewing and
to be assimilated into the body under the effect of the secretions of
glands under the tongue. But in materialistic philosophies, there is no
final liking among things. One can never say something is created for
the sake of something else, nothing is the goal and the means to
something else. If a being uses another being, it is not because one has
been created for the other one, but that it has accidentally been useful
for this one. Presently, we have nothing to do with general ideas of
other methods.

The Final Relation of Right and Right Owner
-------------------------------------------

According to the general beliefs and Islamic ideology in respect to man,
the world, life and universe, there is a final relation between man and
the blessings. In other words, there is a relation between man and the
blessings in the nature of creation and in the general plan of creation.
So if man were not part of this plan, the plan would have quite a
different destiny.

In the Holy Qur’an, it is repeatedly stated that all the world’s riches
and blessings are created for man by virtue of the principle of
creation. Therefore, according to the Holy Qur’an, before man can embark
upon something and before the religious laws are announced to man, there
is a relation between man and the blessings. All these blessings belong
to man. For example, the Holy Qur’an states,

***“God created whatever on the land for you and for the sake of
you,”***

or

***“We·made you settle down in the earth and placed many blessings for
you to be the source of your life and welfare. But you know the value of
this very little and appreciate it not as deserved.” (Surah al-A’raf,
7:10)***

Appreciation and gratitude for each blessing means using it in the
manner for which it is created. Most of the Qur’anic verses state this
fact.

Regardless of the explicit view of the Holy Qur’an, if we contemplate on
the system of the universe, we understand that there is a final relation
between inanimate objects, plants, animal and mankind. On the earth,
various food and animals are so created that they can only survive
interdependently.

If the balance is disturbed, they cannot survive. Now can anyone claim
that there is no liking or relation between the foodstuff and the
nutrition system of man or other animals in the general system of the
universe and that all this conformity is just accidental? Biologists
believe the principle of goal-oriented cause may not be denied at all as
far as living beings are concerned. Such a relation exists when we say
that food is made appropriate with these needs or the nutrition system
is made so as to be able to use the existing foodstuff. At any rate,
there is a final interest and these two conform to each other.

What difference does it make if we say, “If men or animals could not do
without these, the foodstuff would have not come to existence or if
various foodstuff did not have the characteristic they have, the
structure of mankind would have been different. At any rate, the
creation system shows that they are created for one another.

Therefore, this right has been recognized by the law of creation which
has priority over the law of religion and as both laws originate from
one common source, i.e. God, He has made religious laws conform to the
laws of nature and the creation. He has not established them separately.

This conformity is clearly stated in a Qur’anic verse,

***“Keep your face constantly toward this religion. Indeed it has a
strong foundation and that is the nature of people as created by God and
the law of creation is not changeable.” (Surah ar-Rum, 30:30)***

Therefore, in addition to the statement of the Qur’an, the system of
creation itself is a sincere witness to the fact that the creation
system has created man and all these blessings for one another. Think of
a new born babe. What are the conditions of this baby? What can it do
for itself? What food can it eat? What food can its stomach digest? You
see God has provided it with nutrition in its mother’s womb. As the time
of childbirth approaches, the best food suitable for the baby’s
digestive system is gradually produced in the mother’s mammary glands in
a surprising manner and the baby can use the food thus provided as soon
as it is born.

Can we say that there is no relation between the baby and its needs and
the surprising structure of mammary glands and milk and even between
nipples and the baby’s little lips? Does not this milk belong to the
baby? Who has fixed this right? The Law of Creation. What is the liking
and the relation between the baby and the milk? The Final relation. In
other words, the milk and the milk production have been all created for
the sake of the baby. Therefore, creation itself has maintained that
milk as the right of the child. The secretion of the mammary glands is
but for the baby, not created aimlessly.

The philosophers divide the creatures into three groups: seven fathers,
four mothers and three children. By seven fathers they mean seven skies
as believed by the ancient people, four mothers are the initial elements
believed by the ancient scientists to be water, soil, air and fire and
by three children, composite beings are meant, divided into three groups
of inanimate beings, plants and animal. Man is also an animal. The
reason for calling them father, mother and child was their belief that
the composite beings (inanimate beings, plants and animals) are created
under the effect of heavenly factors as subjects and the four elements
as object. Therefore, the composite beings are in fact the children of
heavenly entities and the four elements.

At any rate, the composite beings are the offsprings of this land and
this water and this air, this light and this heat. Man is the superior
child of these parents. Naturally, children have some rights. As in the
womb of the mother, measures have been taken for the embryonic stage and
for the infancy period; such preparations have also been made in this
great mother who is called the world and all these have been created
with great care.

For example, as the time of birth approaches, the mammary glands start
their activity, the glands secrete and all these are just for the sake
of the baby. This is also true about the four seasons and the movement
of cloud, the rainfall, and spring. These rains are the same secretions
of the mother-earth for its children. The Holy Qur’an states,

***“It is He who irrigates your land from up there and you drink this
water, He grows trees for you and you use the leaves of those trees. He
grows plantations and farms and trees, from olive and palm and grapes
and bestows you different kinds of fruits and all these are signs for
those who contemplate.”***

There are numerous verses in the Qur’an implying the existence of a
relation and coordination between the general things on land and the
human needs.

It is related from Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) who said, “Any living being has food
and grain or seed.” He means that there is a pre-determined relation in
nature between the eater and the thing to eat. Their existence in nature
is related to each other. This is one type of relation which exists
between right and right owner in view of the general principles and the
ideology of Islam.

Subjective Relation between Right and Right Owner
-------------------------------------------------

Another type of relation, is the subjective relation. That is the right
owner himself has created the subject of right for himself. He is the
agent and the creator himself. For example somebody plants a tree and
takes care of it, irrigates it until it gives fruit. The relation
between this person and that fruit is the relation of the act and the
agent, i.e. his activity has given birth to this fruit. Had he not
worked, this fruit would not have come into existence. This relation
itself causes some rights.

Goal-oriented Relation Causes Potential Right
---------------------------------------------

The first relation that is the goal-oriented relation between man and
the blessings is a general relation. In this case, no one has private
rights. All people, as they are created by God, have rights toward
everything and as all have potential rights no one can prevent others
from fulfilling their rights and from allocating all rights to them. But
how to take his right is the second stage. In this stage, right and duty
become annexed to one another and rights are realized due to the
fulfillment of the task and duty and everybody reaches his specific
right. There a verse from the Holy Qur’an in this regard. Sura of Hud
states,

***“It is He Who created you from earth and asked you to cultivate the
earth. So return from sin and repent.”***

It does not say, “God does not say” He created you on the earth, but it
says, “Created you from earth” brought you out of the earth. It
apparently indicates the same meaning that the earth is your second
mother. Secondly it says, “God wants you to cultivate the land.” Being
the child of the earth is not enough for our right to be actualized and
for you to obtain right. For the recognition of right, something else is
required and that is your action and your efforts in cultivating the
land. As long as this task is not fulfilled, the right shall not be
realized and will not become evident and specific. Why? Because man has
been given reason and free will and authority. And it is his reason and
freedom which leads to the growth of his range of action and practice.

The Role of Reason and Free will in Causing two Stages for the Right of Man
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The life-system of mankind is different from that of other beings. They
live by their instincts. Being a child of the earth is enough to prove
their rights. However, man is endowed with reason and will and should
work with his mind and reason. Therefore, as far as he does not do his
task, he cannot enjoy his natural rights. As far as man is in the stage
of instinct and there is no task for him, his right is evident.

A baby has rights toward his mother’s breast without any obligation and
the breast milk is his true right. But when man intends to feed on the
breast of the earth, it is not as easy as that. He should prepare this
milk through his own efforts. Therefore in lieu of his right in the
mother-earth, he has a responsibility toward it as well. In other words,
this mother-earth has a right toward him which is cultivating and
developing the earth.

Right of the Earth on Man
-------------------------

In his early days of caliphate, Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) told the people, “You
are responsible even for the animals and the land.” Not only are you
responsible before God and people but before animals and the earth as
well. Do not think this animal of yours has no rights. As it is your
property you can do whatever you wish. You can treat it as you may
desire, load it even above his power and ability, and feed it whenever
you wish. Keep it hungry, thirst, or wounded and think you are not
responsible for its needs. No, it is never so. You are responsible for
these lands. You should not ruin it: you are obliged to cultivate it.
God the Almighty has ordered you to develop the land.

Again, in his well-known conunandment to Malik Ashtar, ‘Ali. (A.S.)
gives this title to his letter, ‘This is what Allah’s servant ‘Ali Amir
al­ Mu’minin, has ordered Malik Ibn Harith known as Ashtar in his
appointment for him when he made him governor of Egypt for collection of
its revenues, fighting its enemies, seeking good of its people and
rendering its cities prosperous.”

Inseparability of Right and Task
--------------------------------

With respect to duties and rights he states, “There is no right for
anybody unless accompanied by a task and there is no task unless with a
right. Task and right are not separate from one another. Why did the
holy Prophet say, “He who imposes himself on others is far from the
Grace of God?”

Right of the Weak People
------------------------

Islam considers rights for the poor and the disabled. The Holy Qur’an
states,

***“Give the share of the relatives and the poor and the needy.”***

And

***“There is a certain right for the beggars and the poor in the
properties of the faithful.”***

The weak and disabled people who are not able to work and their work is
not enough to satify their needs are not obliged to work and take share
on themselves and their responsibilities should not exceed their
abilities.

It is true that they are unproductive and unable to help development,
however, they cannot be deprived of all rights because they are entitled
to them by virtue of the primary principles and the goal-oriented
relation between them and the blessings. This cloth has been spread for
them as well. “God created the earth for all (not for some).” If they
were able and did not do their job, they would be fined by being
deprived of this cloth but being unable, their primary right is
preserved. Indeed the poor and the needy have the right to the assets of
the rich.

An Essential Difference
-----------------------

One of the differences between the Islamic social philosophy and legal
principles may be explain here, According to Islamic divine law, the
poor have real rights: But in the secular judicial systems right is
caused only by work, production and activity. One of Imam ‘Ali’s
followers asked something from the booty which the Muslim soldiers had
gained with sacrifice. In his reply, the Imam said, “This belongs to
those who have fought. If you have been with them and have suffered with
them, then you can have a share. Otherwise it is the fruit of their
efforts and for their own mouth, not for the mouth of others.”
Naturally, whoever labors and acquires something in a legitimate way, it
shall belong to him. It is illogical to expect you to work and gain
something and put it into somebody else’s mouth.

Social Rights
-------------

Right is respected in Islam. The rights of people are extremely
important. Justice is sacred. Betrayal of rights specially public rights
is regarded the worst kind of betrayal in Islamic ideology. ‘Ali (A.S.)
said, “The gravest betrayal is betraying the people and the worst fraud
is deceiving the Muslim leaders.”

Islam became a universal religion in a very short time and found
followers all around the world. Why? Was it only for a set of simple
moral instructions? Had Islam not endeavored for social reforms, it
would have been impossible to gain any success in its moral
instructions. Islam called for justice, rights, freedom, equality and
the elimination of any kind of discrimination. These factors caused a
new world. Whatever harms and damages Islam suffered were due to the
transformation and disregard of these major principles.

Yes, rights are respected in Islam. Justice which protects these rights
is sacred. The respect for rights and justice in Islam, has always been
the most important factor in developing Islam. In Islam, rights have
been predicted and regulations established based on such rights which
show the ultimate grace, favor and scrutiny of this religion .

Right of Companion
------------------

During his caliphate, Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) went out of Kufa, the center of
the Caliphate one day on a mission. As was his wont he did not take on
any guard; he traveled alone. Upon his return he encountered a kitabi
(follower of a Divine religion) i.e. a Christian or Jew or Zoroastrian.
The man did not know Imam ‘Ali. They asked each other their destinations
and they found out that a large portion of their way was the same. They
agreed to travel together. They came along talking together until they
got to the junction where their paths diverged. That man went on his
way, and Ali left the Kufa road and followed him. The man said, “You
said you wre going to Kufa, didn't you?”

Ali answered, “Yes.”

“Then why don't you go that way?”

Ali said, “Our prophet has instructed us that when two persons travel
together and enjoy each other’s company, they find a right toward one
another. As I enjoyed your company on this trip you have proved a right
and I want to follow you for a while in token of gratitude and
appreciation. The man fell into deep thought. He raised his head and
said, “The reason for the rapid development of Islam has been the
benevolence and greatness of your Prophet.” He did not know ‘Ali at that
time until one day he came to Kufa and saw ‘Ali in the position of the
Caliph and found out that his companion on that trip was nobody but ‘Ali
Ibn Abi Talib, the Caliph of the time. He immediately converted to Islam
and became an apostle of Imam ‘Ali.

The Name ‘Ali is ldentified with Justice
----------------------------------------

The name ‘Ali, was later identified with justice. His tradition and
manner of government was always an example with which people reprimanded
other Caliphs. One year, when Mu’awiyah was in Mecca for Hajj, he
searched for a woman known for her devotion to ‘Ali and her enmity to
Mu’awiyah. He sent for her and asked her, “Do you know why I summoned
you? I called you to ask why you like Ali and hate me.” She answered,
“It is better not to talk of this subject. Mu’awiyah insisted on his
demand. The woman said, “Because he was an upholder of justice and
equality and you fought him without any reason. I like ‘Ali because he
loved the poor and I am an enemy of you because you shed blood and
separated the Muslims and are unjust and prejudiced in judgment and
follow your desires.” Mu’awiyah got angry. However, he overcame his
anger and as was his habit, he showed kindness and asked, “Have you ever
seen ‘Ali in person?” She said, “Yes, I have.” Mu’awiyah asked, “How did
you find him?” She said, “By God, I saw him in a state not possessed by
crown and government as you are.”
“Have you heard his voice?”
“Yes, I have. It lightens the heart and purges sorrow as the olive oil
removes rust.”
“Do you wish anything?”
“Will you give whatever I ask?”
“Yes.”
“Then give me one hundred red camels.”
“If I give you what you want, will I find the same position as ‘Ali in
your heart?”
“Never.”

Mu’awiyah ordered to give her one hundred camels and said, “By God. if
‘Ali were alive, he would not give you even one of these camels.”

The woman answered, “By God, he would not give me even one single hair
of them, because they belong to all Muslims.”

‘Adi Ibn Hatam Ta’i was one of the great disciples of the holy Prophet
and a lover of Imam ‘Ali. This man converted to Islam in the last years
of the holy Prophet’s life and became a faithful Muslim. When Imam ‘Ali
was the caliph, he was at his disposal and three of his sons called
Turaif, Turfah and Tarif were killed in Siffin, fighting for ‘Ali (A.S.)
After the martyrdom of Imam ‘Ali and the stabilization of the caliphate
for Mu‘awiyah, they happened to encounter.

In order to make him say something about Imam ‘Ali as he wished, he
tried to remind him of the martyrdom of his three children.

Therefore he asked, “What happened to your sons, Turfah, Turaif and
Tarif?” ‘Adi said serenely, “They were killed in Siffin in front of
‘Ali.” He added the words “in front of ‘Ali” to show his satisfaction
and honor. Mu’awiyah said, “‘Ali did not treat you justly to dispatch
your sons to the battlefield and leave his own sons back to survive.”
‘Adi said, “In fact I did not behave justly toward ‘Ali as he was killed
and I survived.” Mu’awiyah saw that his plan proved futile. Changing his
tone, he said, “Describe ‘Ali to me.” ‘Adi asked to be excused.
Mu’awiyah said, “Impossible. You have to." Thus ‘Adi said, “I swear by
God that ‘Ali was strong and judicious. He talked with justice and
settled disputes with certainty. He was versed in knowledge and science.
He hated the luxury of the world and liked the night and the nocturnal
solitude. He cried much and thought plenty. In his solitude he
questioned himself and repented the past. A simple life he conducted and
simple clothes he wore. When he was among us, he was none of us. If we
asked him something, he would comply. If we went to visit him, he
treated us warmly and affably. Although he had no chains or jails, he
had such great eminence that we did not dare to talk in his presence; he
was so august that we did not raise our heads to look at him. When he
smiled, his teeth glowed like pearls. He respected the faithful and was
kind to the poor. By God I saw him one night with my own eyes standing
in the altar worshipping the Almighty while darkness fell on everything.
His tears rolled down his beard. He twisted about as one stung by snake
and cried like mourners. It is as if I heard him say, “ You are
bothering me and showing your face to me. Go and deceive somebody else.
Your time has not come. I divorced you three times, irrevocably, and
there shall be no return. Your joys are trivial and you value little.
Oh, Oh some little provision, a long trip and few companions.”

When ‘Adi got to this point, Mu’awiyah started crying, wiped his tears
by his sleeve and said, “May Allah have mercy on ‘Ali. He was true as
you said. Now tell me how you feel in his absence.” ‘Adi said, “Like a
woman who has embraced a child and whom you are about to behead.”
Mu’awiyah asked, “Do you ever forget him?” ‘Adi answered, “Does time
permit me to forget him?”

In Irshad, Shaykh Mufid states, “The term of ‘Ali’s Imamate, the
Commander of the Faithful, was 30 years after the Prophet and he ruled
for only five and a half years and this short period was spent in
combating the hypocrites. He goes on to say that his death occurred on
Friday night, 21st of Ramazan near dawn; he was struck by a poisonous
sword by Ibn Muljam Muradi and died two days later.

Kafi states, “Then, Imam ‘Ali said: there is no God but Allah until his
exalted soul soared to Heaven.” May God glorify him and his sacred
family.


