International Rules For Women's Rights: A Challenge Of Values
=============================================================

**Dr Nasrin Musaffa**

Introduction
------------

One of the most important social characteristics of the present century
may be the efforts carried out at national and international levels to
ameliorate women’s conditions and to obliterate sex inequalities. While
the constructive role of women and governmental measures cannot be
denied, the United Nations Organisation played no small part in earning
international support for women’s rights which can be evaluated.

Fifty years after signing the United Nations Charter as the first
international agreement which considered sex equality as the fundamental
principle of human rights,[^1] the UN has created a collection of
historical heritage including conventions, strategies, standards,
practical programs and international conferences for women’s
advancement.[^2] The United Nations Charter approved the equal rights of
men and women and provided that the activity of the Organisation should
be done without discrimination of any kind due to sex, language, race
and religion.

However, this, in practice, has never been sufficient. Therefore,
decades of fighting to mobilise the words of the Charter in respect to
women’s rights and to achieve a proper status were required, so that the
issue of women together with poverty, unemployment, population growth,
violation of human rights, and the destruction of the environment gained
universal attention and the role of the United Nations Organisation
became significant with respect to this issue.[^3]

Among the international documents presented for the betterment of
women’s status, Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women (referred to as the Convention herein) is the most
important document which constitutes the basis for the ideas of the
United Nations in this regard. This Convention is the outcome of the
thirty-year efforts of the Commission on Status of Women approved by the
General Assembly in 1979 and which has become binding since 1981. This
Convention has 154 members at present and has the second place after
Convention on Rights of Children in respect to number of Member States
among the international treaties on human rights.[^4]

The ideal of the Convention is to achieve a society throughout the world
in which men and women have equal rights, a society in which traditions,
habits, beliefs and value systems of the past and the present are
questioned and new forms of egalitarianism are established based on the
new thought. The exercise of its principles requires the following of
the policies, programs and legislations at national level. To what
degree this idea is *per se* practical deserves due contemplation.

While the United Nations Organisation believes that this Convention is
the most important binding document for elimination of discrimination
against women, the large number of reservations of the Member States are
also very important. Although many discussions are brought up on the
validity of such reservations, the conditional acceptance of
approximately 49 Member States, some of which have objected to major
basic principles of the Convention[^5], has challenged its complete
execution. While different countries, even the western countries have
adopted various reservations, the reservations of Islamic countries have
gained more attention and have become an important issue both for the
United Nations and for the Islamic States as well.

Reservations of Islamic countries toward this Convention which have
mainly conditioned their execution to their conformity based upon
Islamic rules (*Shari’ah*) have led to this belief that Islamic
principles are an obstacle in eliminating discrimination against women
and therefore terms such as Islamic Tradition and Islamic Restrictions
are brought up without offering a clear definition or a proper
understanding of them. They examine the status of Muslim women in the
light of Western values, claiming that Muslim women are under
suppression and slavery.

Also by statistical analyses and through comparing the results with
their own data and without any consideration due to the differences in
cultural environments and legal institutions relating to women such as
marriage, and inheritance, they claim that women’s legal system does not
exist only in Islam. Based on the same data, they refer to the
advancement of Western women and the backwardness of Muslim women and
prescribe Western patterns for the amelioration of their condition.

The purpose of this article is to study the challenge between the
international standards of women’s rights and the beliefs and values of
the Islamic societies. This challenge reveals itself in conformity with
the provision of the Convention. Besides, this basic question remains:
can women’s rights be universal? To what degree are the internationally
known standards of the convention binding for societies with different
traditions and value systems? What is the cultural legitimacy of the
international means of women’s rights? Of course, these questions can be
discussed within the broader topic of universality or relativity of
human rights values, which demands a lengthy discussion.

In order to study the cases noted above, a brief glance will be cast at
the Convention. Then, in the second part, the term reservation is
generally defined and reservations of Islamic countries discussed. The
fundamental challenge between Islamic views and the international
standards of women’s rights shall be the next issue discussed and at the
end, the cultural legitimacy of woman’s rights is analysed. The article
ends with a conclusion.

Women’s Convention: Characteristics
-----------------------------------

As discussed earlier, the United Nations has played an important role in
developing international means for human rights. Without intending to
evaluate the nature and outcome of such means, we can consider the
following characteristics for the attention of the United Nations
Charter to the human rights:[^6]

1) Commitment to all human beings (at international level)

2) Equality or indiscrimination (without discrimination of any kind due
to race, sex or religion)

3) Importance of international co-operation system in elevating human
rights (Entering into treaties)

Women’s Convention can be considered a means to achieve the point noted
above. This Convention consists of thirty articles. The core of the
convention is to condemn discrimination as the main root of sex
inequality, which demands equal rights, equal standards and equal
treatment of women in the societies.

According to Article 1, discrimination against women applies to any
discrimination, exclusion (deprivation) or restriction due to sex, the
result or purpose of which is to impair or destroy the recognition,
enjoyment or exercise of human rights and essential freedoms in
political, economical, social, cultural, civil matters concerning women
regardless of their marital status and based on equal rights of men and
women.[^7]

Condemning it in Article 2, it demands for the practical steps of
governments in eliminating discrimination. Such steps include adopting
policies for eliminating discrimination, incorporating the principle of
equality of men and women in the constitutions or other relative laws of
each country practical realisation of this principle, ratifying
appropriate laws and or other steps such as predicting punishments, if
required, to prohibit discrimination against women, legal support for
women’s rights based on equality with men, preventing any discriminatory
act, adopting all proper means for eliminating discrimination against
women by any individual or organisation and adopting appropriate
policies such as annulling laws for the purpose of amending or
nullifying laws, customary regulations or existing manners which might
be discriminative against women and abrogating all national penal
regulations which cause discrimination against women.

As we see, the Convention looks for *De Facto* rules rather than merely
*De Jure* laws and seeks to eliminate discrimination. Article 3 of the
Convention also indicates the appropriate steps of Member States to
guarantee the advancement and complete development of women based on
equal opportunities with men. The members allocate article 4 to adopting
special temporary steps in order to accelerate the realisation of equal
rights of men and women.[^8]

In two paragraphs, Article 5 stresses the modification of social and
cultural behavioural patterns of men and women in order to eliminate
prejudices and all traditional customs, etc. demanding for common
responsibility of men and women in proper upbringing of their
children.[^9] In the next articles, this Convention deals with all
fields relating to women’s rights including political participation,
nationality, education, employment, healthcare, economical and social
life, women in rural areas, equal rights of men and women before the
law, as well as affairs relating to marriage, divorce and family
relations. (Articles 7-16).[^10] Then in Articles 17 through 30, the
Convention discusses the executive mechanism of the Convention. Also,
the formation of the committee for Elimination of all forms of
discrimination against women as the core of the Convention and reporting
system as a mechanism for supervising the exercise of the provisions of
the convention are considered.

As it can be seen, the Convention defines women’s rights in family and
private life as well as in the society. In general, we can categorise
the characteristics of the Convention under three topics:

A) Condemning discrimination as the root of sex inequality

B) Specifying the vast areas of discrimination against women

C) Moving towards practical steps for condemning and eliminating
discrimination through various mechanisms.

One of its important features is that it deals with such issues as
family relations and rural women who were not formerly subject to
international law. The convention was accepted by governments more
rapidly than the other international instruments for human rights and
became binding earlier than any other international treaty on human
rights.[^11] Now that we intend to study the various reservations toward
the Conventions especially by Islamic countries, we shall try to
elucidate them.

Women’s Convention and Reservation: Position of Islamic Countries
-----------------------------------------------------------------

One of the major issues in International Law of Treaties is the concept
of Reservation. According to Article 2 of Vienna Convention on Law of
Treaties, reservation is the unilateral declaration of a country at the
time of signing, approving, joining or accepting a treaty by virtue of
which the concerned country asks for exception or modification of the
legal effects of specific regulations of that given treaty in respect to
the above-said country.[^12] This rule is internationally accepted and
we can find evidence for it in the manner which countries join different
conventions.[^13]

As for the concerned convention, up to 41 countries from the total 154
members have declared reservations to one or more of its articles.[^14]
Of course, it should be mentioned that some of these reservations are
necessarily executive procedures and relate to Article 29 (1) of the
Convention which recognises the competence of International Justice
Tribunal for solving disputes resulting from its execution. Reservation
toward paragraph 1 of this Article has been recognised to be valid by
virtue of paragraph 2 of the same Article.[^15]

Of course, the effects of the reservations on the relations of states,
which have joined the treaty, have been a matter of dispute regardless
of the considerable number of reservations. In one point of view,
treaties on human rights are different from other international treaties
in the fields of commerce, trade and transportation, which are usually
bilateral and embody mutual privileges for the Member States. In this
type of treaty, the governments can adopt reservations concerning
sovereignty of the government and restrictions of this sovereignty.

However, human rights multilateral treaties do not have universal legal
effects in International Law and their obligations are *Orga
Omnes*.[^16] These treaties show the obligations of governments before
their citizens. The fact is that many countries have approved human
rights treaties with reservation. Two covenants on Civil and Political
Rights and Economical, Social and Cultural Rights, Women’s Convention
and Convention on Children’s Rights are among them.

Acceptance of these reservations has also been a matter of conflict.
Some insist on the totality of the convention and on refusing any
reservation, believing that reservation reduces the universality and
efficiency of such conventions. While others believe that increase in
the number of the Member States of each treaty adds to its universal
validity and governments should be encouraged to join it even with
reservation.[^17]

In general, three types of reservations can be identified in respect to
treaties which apply to Women’s Convention as well:[^18]

A) General reservation

B) Reservation toward main articles

C) Reservation toward substantial articles

In general reservation, special articles of the treaty are not usually
taken into account and only a general reservation and exclusion of
specific cases are requested. General reservation is usually based on
the religion or the legal system of a country. Reservation toward main
articles includes conditions indicating the articles, which are
important and required for the implementation of the other parts of the
treaty. Reservation toward substantial articles alludes to those
reservations, which express performance of specific duties, regulations
and different methods for achieving the goal.

Concerning women’s Convention, we should say that different countries
have demanded different reservations based on their policies. For
example, Libya established a general reservation and accepted the
convention if its measures is not contradictory to Islamic religion. Of
course, after investigating the first national report and related
discussion , this country modified a number of reservations to specific
cases.[^19] A certain number of reservations include the main articles
of the Convention. The main articles of this Convention are articles 1
through 5. The commentators have empasised that the execution of the
first five articles is crucial for achieving the goals of the Convention
but still many countries have adopted reservations in respect to these
articles.[^20]

The most important of these reservations is stated by Islamic Countries
due to their contradiction with Islamic standards. The commentators see
such reservations unfounded and against the spirit of the Convention and
the demands of the Convention from the governments. In cases where these
reservations are not accompanied with a special reason, their legal and
executive state becomes more complicated.

The general recommendation of the Committee for Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination Against Women (referred to as the Committee herein
after) has asked the Member States as well as the States which have not
yet joined the Convention but intend to approve it with reservation, to
express their reservations lucidly and specifically so that the assumed
obligations of the Member States be specified.[^21]

A number of states have also adopted reservation toward the main
articles of the Convention. Concerning the relatively large number of
paragraphs relating to the main articles, the reservations are
innumerable. In general, articles 9, 15 and 16 have allocated most of
the reservations to themselves. Of course, Article 28 of the Convention,
approving reservation in the first paragraph, say, “Those reservations
which do not conform with the objective and purpose of the ·convention
shall not be accepted.” Nevertheless, it fails to introduce any
institution to accept the validity of the presented reservations and
this is *per se* one of the problems to the Convention’s
reservations.[^22]

Due to the importance of the reservations in respect to human rights
treaties, the International Human Rights Commission has prepared a
resolution on the normal reservations of human rights multilateral
treaties supposed to be discussed in the 1997 meeting of the Commission.
Based on this resolution, the Commission sees the measures predicted in
Vienna Convention 1969 in relation to reservations of human rights
treaties quite applicable. It also states, “While human rights treaties
do not discuss the competence of the basic principles of the treaties
for recognising the validity of the reservation, their foundations
necessarily have such competence.

Therefore, there is a developing approach toward the active role of the
basic principles of human rights treaties for recognising the validity
of the reservations and identifying those reservations, which are
against the objectives and principles of the treaties.”[^23]

Ms. Rosaline Higgens, former expert on Human Rights Committee and the
only female judge of International Court of Justice says, “A balance
should be established between the legitimate role of governments in
support of their national interests and the legitimate role of the basic
principles of treaties for improving the effective guarantee of human
rights.”[^24]

With regard to the experiences of the Committee in modifying some of the
reservations, the present ruling view is that approving the Convention
even with reservations which might be against the spirit of the
Convention, should be tolerated and that such reservations should be
eliminated by different mechanisms. Now, we shall study the reservations
of the Islamic countries as the main purpose of this article.[^25]

The Position of the Muslim Countries
------------------------------------

Thirty-three countries, which are members of Organisation of the Islamic
Conference have already joined the Convention the majority of which are
African countries. Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Jordan, Turkey,
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Iraq, Malaysia, Indonesia, Sudan, Morocco, and
Kuwait are among them.[^26] Of course, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
not yet joined this Convention.[^27] Apart from Iran, Saudi Arabia,
Afghanistan and United Arab Emirates have not approved the Convention.
All the countries mentioned above have approved the Convention with
reservations. Their reservations mainly concerned Article 9 that is the
issue of nationality and Article 15, complete equality before law and
Article 16, different paragraphs relating to family relations, marriage,
divorce and common responsibilities of married life. The majority of
these countries have raised the common reason of contradiction with
Islamic laws. In order to define the case better, let us look at the
following table.[^28]

Article 2: Bangladesh (paragraph 2), Iraq, Jordan (paragraph 2), Libya,
Morocco (declaration), and Egypt (paragraph 2)

Article 7: Malaysia

Article 9: Bangladesh (paragraph 2), Iraq, Jordan (paragraph 2), Egypt
(paragraph 2), Libya, Morocco (paragraph 2), Tunisia (paragraph 2)
Turkey (paragraph 1)

Article 15: Jordan (paragraph 4), Morocco (paragraph 4), Tunisia
(paragraph 4), and Turkey (paragraph 2 & 4).

Article 16: Bangladesh l ,c, p- Egypt (for divorce rules), Iraq (the
whole article). Jordan (Article 16 and c, d, y), Morocco (Article 6:
rights and obligations of the spouses) Tunisia (Article 16. c. d, p, y,
h) Turkey (Article 16, g, f, d, c,)

Pakistan has also submitted a declaration for execution of the
provisions of the Convention in case they comply with the Constitution
of Pakistan, which is inspired by Islam. Tunisia also states through
general declaration that this country undertakes no organisational
measure and statutory rule against the provision of the First Chapter of
the Tunisian Constitution.[^29]

Morocco has also claimed to stick to Islamic standards in respect to
rules relating to women while Turkey, which is deeply secular, and
claims politics to be independent of religion, has adopted reservations
more or less the same as other Muslim countries. Of course, it is worth
reminding that it is not just the Islamic countries which have announced
reservations. Countries such as United Kingdom, Germany, Spain, Belgium,
Luxembourg, Australia, ...[^30] have also placed restricted
reservations. The collection of various reservations of the countries
toward this Convention has led to many discussions in the Committee,
raising objections toward validity of the reservations specially
reservations of Islamic nations. Finland, Norway,the Netherlands and
Mexico were among them.[^31]

The problem of the reservation toward the Convention became a political
problem inside the Committee and it was stated that movement against
reservations is anti-Islamic.

In the years 1986 and 1987, numerous discussions were made in the
Committee for Elimination of Discrimination. In 1987, after examining a
large number of reports from Islamic countries, the Committee asked the
United Nations to investigate into the status of women in Islamic Law
and also the Islamic traditions and customs. This request of the
Committee raised severe enmity in the Economic-Social Council of the
United Nations and
was refused.[^32]

Of course upon the increase of the number of Islamic states who joined
the Convention and their reservations and the actual confrontation of
the Committee with the issue, the Committee insisted on its request
again and recommended that a review of the case would be very useful,
but due to differences of opinions, no agreement was concluded.[^33]

Of course, the General Assembly of the UN passed a resolution in 1988
and without mentioning the word reservation, asked the governments to
fulfil their obligations toward the Convention. Because of repeated
discussions and upon receipt of periodical reports, a number of
countries modified the number and nature of their reservation. As an
example, we can name Libya, which was earlier explained.[^34]

Conflict of Ideas
-----------------

Conflict between internal laws and international treaties is always of
great importance. As pointed out earlier, the proper solution is to take
advantage of reservation. Nevertheless, as to human rights treaties it
is different. Of course it was said that reservations of governments in
respect to these treaties are valid but the point is that the
governments sometimes commit to conventions under international
pressures and even internal pressures for fulfilment of which the
governing value system shall be challenged. Evidently, there is a
discrepancy between international standards of human rights and the
principles of Islamic *Shari’ah*.

Women’s convention is placed in the same category. While there are
different interpretations of Islam, some principles and traditions are
equal in all Islamic sects. Their principles and traditions, which have
a substantial origin in Islam, have a fundamental difference with the
Western view.

Many of the behavioural patterns specially women’s behaviour in Islamic
countries are not equal to the equality pattern in the Convention and
the basic hypothesis of dissimilarity of man and woman and their
complementary function which is a basis in Islamic approach cannot
conform to the Western pattern. Universal standards of human rights
which are mostly the work of Western countries, as any other value
system, are based on the cultural and philosophical ideas of its own
base.

Human rights today as proposed and supported by the Western countries
are historically and ideologically their own property and their main
principles emanate from values of the Enlightenment Age and the
Individualism.[^35] The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and others
including Women’s Convention are inspired by these values. There have
sometimes been discussions between the Western states and the
representatives of the third world countries. Western mentality is
dominant and it is natural that they try to implement it as a means for
part of their universal domination.

Now, let us consider the main differences between the two outlooks: The
conflict between Islamic values and the international standards and
reservations of Islamic Countries toward the Convention are not a result
of discriminatory approach of Islam towards women. It is clear to
everybody that the Holy Qur’an revived women’s rights. The changes
brought by Prophet Muhammad’s Religion in the life of the women of his
age are not comparable with any other changes. Everybody acknowledges
that the Qur’an has elevated women’s status and has taken radical
measures for human values and women’s gain.[^36]

In order to provide a better picture of women’s status role in Islam,
two things should be differentiated: Islam as a religion and Islam as a
culture.[^37] Islam as a religion, which embodies spiritual beliefs and
rules, does not maintain that there is any difference between men and
women. Men and women are equal in dignity. The reasons for this are
numerous verses in the Holy Qur’an.[^38]

The criterion for human value is virtue and piety is the sign of man’s
superiority to others, without regard for sex, colour, race, etc. The
only point of differentiation is piety and virtue. But in Islam as a
culture, that is the Islamic *Shari’ah* in the whole collection of norms
of social, economic and legal standards which adjust and regulate the
private and public relations, women are different from men, and although
they are different, their rights and duties are equal.

Due to their nature, they are not the same in many respects and this
requires their difference in respect to rights, duties and punishments.
In Islam, this dissimilarity does not mean superiority of one over
another but merely reveals itself in performing different duties. This
dissimilarity is defined by virtue of a number of verses in the Holy
Qur’an[^39] and the tradition of the Holy Prophet. This issue embodies
one of the most fundamental concepts in Islam, equality.

There is no doubt that the requirement for common human dignity of man
and women and their equality in respect to humanity, is equality of
their human rights. In other words, as in Islam, men and women are not
created identical, the principle of similar rights does not intervene
but equality exists based on justice.[^40]

Therefore, in Islam, political, social and particularly economic rights
of women are of great importance. The history of the beginning of Islam
is indicative of the political roles of women. The example of “Bay’at
al­Razvan”[^41] is one of the most evident ones. As the other teachings
of Islam were not practised in the real sense, women’s rights were also
interpreted differently, the dissimilarities increased in practice, and
the constructive role of women in Muslim societies gradually fell into
oblivion. Many of the restrictions imposed on women in Islamic countries
are not rooted in the Qur’an but originate from ethnic traditions.

The existence of different Islamic sects, ethnic customs and habits has
penetrated into the behaviour of the people in Islamic societies, thus
making it very difficult to differentiate between them and the true
spirit of Islam. It is evident that the original sources of Islamic Law
can be used in the direction of equality of women in social, political
and economic fields and in using social facilities such as education,
health and employment but the practical realisation of this is faced
with problems due to varying reasons.

Despite the rights fixed for women in Islam, lack of accurate
understanding of the *Shari'ah* in a number of Islamic societies and
interference of ethnic rituals and traditions has caused women’s rights
to be disregarded. The most important challenge between international
and Islamic standards relates to family relations and adjustment of
private life between husband and wife. As indicated earlier, Article 16
of the Convention has elicited some reservations. In fact, non-Islamic
countries have also made reservations toward this Article[^42] but the
greatest number of reservations belongs to Islamic countries.

Most of the countries have offered no special explanation, but some
others such as Iraq have explained that the Islamic Shari’ah has
adjusted the private relations of husbands and wives based on justice.
The idea of Islamic justice for securing women’s rights is crucially
important, stating that the collection of Muslim laws deserves due
attention. Personal incorrect interpretations and patriarchal
justifications have worked to the detriment of Islamic justice. Polygamy
and unjustified divorce are among them. Therefore, inappropriate use of
traditional laws on divorce changed radically in approximately all
Islamic States in the direction of national interests in the twentieth
century.[^43] These reforms usually followed two important purposes:

A) Preventing the husband from misusing his power for divorcing the wife

B) Strengthening women’s rights specially when unilateral divorce by the
husband has seriously harmed her.

One of the major cases in Article 16 to which most of the Islamic States
have made reservations (paragraph 1), are equal rights and
responsibilities during the married life and at divorce. Based on the
Islamic law, paying for life expenses (alimony) is the responsibility of
the husband and therefore the division of duties has not taken place
based on discrimination but on natural conditions of man and woman and
on the prevalent tradition which requires different tasks and
responsibilities. Paragraph 2, Article 6 of Islamic Human Rights
Declaration also provides that man is responsible to provide for family
expenses.[^44]

Some researchers wonder whether such a task division established in
Islam and probably in the Holy Qur’an is fixed and unchangeable or
changeable as to the well being of the people and consideration of
existing conditions if the concept of well being or the existing
conditions changes. In other words, if the society goes towards
conditions in which women also participate in earning income and
supporting the family, can such a task division be revised or not? Is
the revision conforming to the basic idea of Islam?[^45]

As Martyr Mutahhari says: “The conditions in our age requires a
re­evaluation of many issues and the former values are not sufficient
anymore. Family rights and obligations systems are among them.[^46]
Therefore, relying on the spirit of Islam, which is justice, we can say
changes are inevitable. It is natural that this revision should be
within the domain of the basic principles governing Islamic thought as
to time and place requirements. Islam has religious and social
principles and heritage, which can be used in the best manner possible.

The world of Islam requires great efforts and programming to elevate and
promote the conditions and rights of women. Justice, logic and
well-being of all Islamic societies require that the healthy and proper
way for realisation of women’s rights which are often surrounded by
superstitions and ethnic traditions be paved and social justice between
man and woman in different aspects be established.

However, the problem which remains is whether such changes and revisions
should be carried out within the framework of social experiences based
on their own culture, or commitment to international standards should
give rise to such reforms. It is not true to see all the international
efforts to promote women’s rights and the matter of equality as
resulting from evil intentions of the Western governments. However, one
thing is evident: international efforts are usually pioneered by Western
governments and it is natural that they are within the framework of
Western value system. Some of the facilities of the Western societies in
the increase of creativity and social work of women might be notable but
there are problems beside that which can be justified only in the same
value systems.

A solution for the problems of women should be found within the general
framework of Islamic system. Thus, the capability of the Islamic society
in co-ordinating principles, objectives and spiritual values and the
needs of today’s life can be shown. Therefore, we can see that
reservations by Islamic states, which have different political systems,
should not be considered as a factor for discriminatory view of Islam
toward women.

Besides this problem should be defined whether the serious belief of the
majority of Muslim women in the execution of the Islamic *Shari’ah*
based on the same existing standards and lack of the feeling of
discrimination in them is to be called discrimination. Should not the
application of the state of discrimination be carried out concerning its
subjects? Therefore, while some of the great Muslim thinkers discuss the
need to revision based on present needs and with regard to practical
realities of the contemporary world, should the compilers of
international instruments themselves not pay attention to the
requirement of revision in these deeds and create a balance between
international standards and social values? Should they not require
overthrowing the traditions and customs of the societies for promoting
the status of women and refuse to recommend unique strategies for this?

For example, legal discussions are irrelevant in many African societies.
There are a number of social and economic problems, which prevent
accurate execution of the law. In many African societies, poverty is so
harsh that ownership finds no meaning. Therefore, law enforcement
differs from one society to another and in special conditions such as
economic or social pressures or ethnic conflicts, an instrument
different from law is demanded for improvement of women’s conditions.

Another example is the example of South Asian countries where legal
institutions are generally regarded as emblems of colonial powers, which
have substituted native culture and tradition and religion. That is why
any effort in taking advantage of international standards should
consider the manner of supporting women within the domain of their own
culture and traditions.[^47]

There are superstitious traditions and Islam has suffered from them more
than anything else. There are also traditions deep in the history and
proper use of them can help the national identity and improvement of
women’s status. There are traditions embodying the customs of the
ancestors and are very dependent on religion. So, believing in a given
religion requires following them.

Even the words of the international instruments are sometimes
self­contradictory. For example, the contradiction between obligations
included the Women’s Convention and the Principle of Religious Freedom
which is amongst the substantial freedoms of mankind as Charter and in
the Declaration of Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination,
inequality based on religion has been specifically supported. Likewise,
the free acceptance of a religion which brings restrictions for women
who are its followers will be considered discriminations based on sex if
the principle of religious freedom is not taken into account.[^48]

One point should be considered and that is the fact that the
international rules of human rights and specially women’s rights have
not yet been effectively implemented. Special instruments have faced
double problems due to special cultural and historical reasons. In
addition to general causes for not executing the international rules,
the following reasons can also be considered:

1) Lack of understanding of the nature of women’s subservience due to
various reasons

2) Lack of attention to discrimination against women as breach of human
rights

3) Lack of governmental measures in condemning the discrimination
against women

4) Lack of attention of the traditional advocates of human rights to the
breach of women’s rights as breach of human rights

5) Lack of universal recognition of the international means of human
rights for women

In general, international rules of human rights and legal instruments
evolved substantially in a world of interpretations made by men. In
order to improve the conditions, the following measures can be
considered:

1) Studying the manner of women’s rights and its improvement in
different cultures based on their own culture and tradition

2) Specifying the challenges between international rules and domestic
laws

3) Establishing executive guarantee systems for the improvement of
women’s rights

4) Establishing support structures for execution of law including
political, economic and social structures.

Low level of economic and social development and its consequent outcomes
affect the support of the women’s rights enforcement. While at
international level, there is pressure for implementation of
international rules for women’s rights, there is no international
support to accomplish this task. Bangladesh, one of the members of the
Women’s Convention asked for financial aid after drawing its first
national report to prepare the second report because in a country like
Bangladesh, it is difficult to spend money for such a project, but the
Committee said in response that there was no possibility of financial
aids.[^49]

At any rate, different means are required for improvement of the status
of women who experience the oldest type of historical exploitation.
Therefore, we cannot always wait for international measures and methods.
International mechanisms can never substitute national mechanisms.

Conclusion
----------

As discussed earlier, there is a developing process in passing and
executing international laws for human rights in whose approval,
although pioneered by the West; representatives of the third world
countries also participate through international negotiations.

Of course, representatives of governments are not always the people’s
representatives but after approval, these are the nations that are
influenced by the approved instruments. There is generally a challenge
between the international rues of human rights and the value system of
any society especially in developing countries.

There has always been a question in this writer’s mind. Aside from the
intention of those who draw up the human rights instruments, what is the
real application of such means for women? Has the status of women really
improved since the approval of the Convention for Elimination of
Discrimination and the governments joining it? Can this Convention be
used as an international force for inducing the governments to accord
more attention to the status of women and to the creating of a balance
between their standards and the domestic needs?

Of course, the role of women can be effective in this regard. Legal
requirements and necessity of unity for solving the existing problems
generally reveals itself in the normal course of life of any society. If
women define their demands based on their experiences of social
inequalities, it will affect the development and enforcement of rules
relating to them. The reply to this question depends on the future fate
of women especially in the third world countries.

It is natural that those for whom such rules are to be implemented,
should understand the standards and regard them not as imposed concepts
but as measures rising from their own world and values, otherwise, such
measures shall not be accepted and are not legitimate in their view. In
addition, if they were imposed, would it not be the violation of human
rights itself?

[^1]: Paragraph 3, Article l, the International Bill of Human Rights.

[^2]: In the following you will find part of this heritage: The
Convention on the Political Rights of Women, (1952) The Convention on
the Nationality of Married Women, (1957) The Convention on Desire, Age,
and Record of Marriage, (1962) The Declaration of Elimination of
Discrimination Against Women, (1967) The Convention on the Elimination
of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, (1979) The Final
Declarations of the Conferences of Mexico City, Copenhagen, Nairobi and
Peking Nairobi Strategy

[^3]: The United Nations and Advancement of Women, 1945-1995, Blue Books
Series, Vol. VI, New York, D. P. I 1995, p. 7.

[^4]: CEDAW/C/1997/4, 12 November, 1996.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: The Data on Human Rights for Six International Documents, New
York, 1997, p. 17.

[^7]: Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women DPI/1993, February, p. 3.

[^8]: Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, ibid, p. 5.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Rebecca J. Cook, Reservations to the Convention on the
Elimination of all forms of Discrimination againt Women, Virginia
Journal of International Law, 1990, Vol. 30, p. 643.

[^12]: Convention on Law of Treaties

[^13]: A glance at the treaties trusted to the Secretary General
testifies to this claim. The Covenants on Political, Civil, Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, The Convention on Children’s Rights, The
Third Convention on the Rights of Seas; Multilateral Treaties trusted to
Secretary of United Nations, 1995, UN, New York.

[^14]: CEDAW/C/1997/4, 12 November, 1996, p. 1.

[^15]: Rebecca J. Cook, op. cit, p. 645.

[^16]: Byrnes, The Other Human Rights Body; Work of The Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Vol. 14, 1989/p. 6.

[^17]: CEDAN/C/1997/4, 12 November 1997, p. 4

[^18]: Ways and Means of Expediting the Work of the Committees, Report
by the Secretariat (CEDAW/C. 1995/9) p. 8.

[^19]: CEDAW/C/1997/4), 12 November, 1996, p. 6.

[^20]: Bangladesh, Britain, Egypt, Iraq, Malawi and Tunisia gave
reservation to this article.

[^21]: CEDAW/C/1997/4, 12 November 1996.

[^22]: Byrnes, The Other Human Rights Body, The Work of the Committee on
Elimination of Discrimination against Women, op.cit. p. 8.

[^23]: CEDAW/C/ 1997/4, 12 November, 1996, p. 78.

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Byrnes, CEDAWS’S 10th Session, the Netherlands Quarterly of Human
Rights, Vol. 3, 1991, p. 339.

[^26]: CEDAW/C/1997/12, 8 February, 1997.

[^27]: The idea of Iran’s joining to the Convention, has been discussed
by different authorities including Bureau of Women's Affairs, Cultural
Council of Women, and the Bureau for Women’s Affairs in Executive Power
and the Commission on Islamic Human Rights. Even before the Peking
Conference, it was deemed an urgent act in foreign affairs. There are
different views on Iran’s joining to the Convention. Some propose it
with the general reservation. In addition, some others are against
joining the Convention. In their opinion, this shall give an excuse to
the adversaries to accuse Iran of violating international conventions in
case of not obeying it in Iran. Some consider it with certain
reservations for joining it.

[^28]: Katarina Tomasevski, Women and Human Rights, London, Zed Book
Ltd., 1993, p. 118.

[^29]: CEDAW/C/1997/4, p. 1.

[^30]: Katarina , Tomasevski , op.cit. p. 117.

[^31]: Byrnes, Andrew, The Other Human Rights Body, op. cit, p. 51

[^32]: Byrnes, Other Human Rights Body, op. cit. p.51

[^33]: Ibid.

[^34]: Tomasevski, op. cit. p.119

[^35]: Human Rights, Edited by Robert Blackburn and James Busutltil,
London, Pinter, 1997, p.10

[^36]: Murtaza Mutahhari, Women’s Rights in Islam, Tehran: Sadra, p.25

[^37]: Oxford Encyclopedia for Modern Islamic Thought, Oxford. 1996, p.
141.

[^38]: Sura al-Hujurat (49:13): “O mankind! We have created you male and
female, and appointed you races and tribes, That you may know one
another. Surely the noblest among you in the sight of God is the most
godfearing of you.” Sura al-Mudaththir (74:38): “Every soul shall be
pledged for what it has earned.” Sura an-Nahl, (16:97): “And whosoever
does a righteous deed, be it male or female, believing, We shall
assuredly give him to live a goodly life.”

[^39]: Sura an-Nisa, (4:34): “Men are the managers of the affairs of
women for that God has preferred in bounty one of them over another.”

[^40]: Nasrin Musaffa, Political Participation of Women, Tehran: Bureau
for International and Political Studies, 1996.

[^41]: Ali Davani, The History of Islam from beginning to Hegira, ‘Ilmi
Publications, 1985, pp.195-196.

[^42]: Katarina Tomasevski, op. cit. p.118

[^43]: Hisham Kamali, Divorce and Women’s Rights: Some Muslim
Interpretation, of s.2.228, Muslim World, July-October 1964, p.85

[^44]: Muhammad ‘Ali Taskhiri, Islam and Human Rights, Siyasat-i
Kharijah Magazine, tenth year, 1996, p.223

[^45]: Husayn Mihrpur, Islam and Human Rights, Siyasat-i Khariji
Magazine, no. 1, tenth year, 1996, p.13

[^46]: Murtaza Mutahhari, ibid., p.13

[^47]: Human Rights of Women, National and International Perspectives,
edited by Rebecca J. Cook, Philadelphia University Press, 1994, p. 514.

[^48]: Faridah Shaygan, System of UN and Human Rights, Siyasat-i Khariji
Magazine, no.4, seventh year, 1993, p.877

[^49]: Katarina Tomasevski, op. cit. p.119


