Independence And Economic Rights Of Women
=========================================

**Zahra Davar**

Property is the most inclusive right an individual may have in relation
to the entities in the material world. In other words, man has the right
to property so he may live peacefully and easefully and develop his
character.[^1]

In legal terms, property is a permanent right by virtue of which an
individual can possess something within the confines of law and benefit
from it altogether.[^2] Hence, each individual as a member of the human
society has the right to use his entire faculty and his relation to
others in order that he can appropriate something. This, in fact, is one
of the most basic social rights particular to individuals.

Women as members of the human society are no exceptions to this case.
After all, women have not been granted rights equal to men from the
outset. The history of women’s rights for attaining legal personality,
social and economic rights, can be categorized in three phases:[^3]

1) The age of barbarism and idolatry in which women were not even
considered human beings. They served as asset objects to be owned, equal
to slaves and beasts of burden without dignity and power of choice.
Women were used to gratify men’s needs and desires. In other words, they
were treated as bodies rather than spirits.

2) The age of Greek, Egyptian, Roman and Iranian civilization: the
religions and sublime thoughts of the social refomers gave birth to the
advent of civilization; the advent of humane feelngs mingled with
science and logic caused women to have material rights as human beings;
yet, spiritually and socially they lacked legal personality; they were
under complete domination of men in all aspects of life. Since, they had
no legal personality, they could not manifest their potentials from a
viewpoint of economic and social rights.

History tells us that only in Persia, *shahzan* (the woman who shared
her husband’s life and was considered his main wife) had independent
legal personality, shared her husband’s properties and at his death,
took over the family in absence of a son. From this, one may conclude
that women were weak creatures worthy of pity and protection.

The age of Islam: women attained legal personality and opinions changed.
They gained rights equal to men, and shared their husbands’ properties.
Their not interfering in men’s affairs was not owing to having an
inferior personality but owing to the law of distributing duties (such
as pregnancy, childbirth and ...). This change was so radical that women
gained rights equal to men and all forms of discrimination were
eliminated.

Thus, women could ultimately play a puissant role in the social arena,
enjoy freedoms and rights as everyone else in the society, have economic
rights, appropriate assets of their own and claim property.

On the same basis, when talking about freedoms and rights the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights[^4], and the International Covenant on
Civil, Political, Economic and Social rights use *everyone* or *every
human person*, meaning men and women on the same level.

Study of Backgrounds of the Realization of Women’s Right to Property
--------------------------------------------------------------------

As to the introduction stated above, we can say that women can have the
right to objects and properties in two ways:

1) Kinship

2) Occupation

Here, we shall address the two topics.

1) Kinship: kinship, by definition, is the family relation recognized in
one of the three ways below:

a) Consanguineous kinship: the relationship characterized by the sharing
of common ancestors.

b) Affinal kinship: the relationship established by marriage.

c) Fictive kinship: the relationship established by being breast fed by
someone other than one’s mother which is equal to relative kinship.

In each one of the consanguineous or affinal kinships, there are
occasions when women have the right to own property;

**Consanguineous Kinship:**

By reason of consanguineous kinship, women can gain properties in two
ways through the medium of their families. These two ways are marriage
portion and inheritance.

1.1) Dowry: it is the property that a wife or a wife’s family gives
to her husband upon marriage. This custom is not only common in Iranian
or Islamic culture but also prevails in most countries. The philosophy
and administration of marriage portion varies from country to country
until 1262. In Scandinavian countries (Sweden, Norway, Denmark), girls
were not granted inheritance and only at marriage, they obtained a small
marriage portion from the one whose consent determined their destiny. A
few decades before in Japan, the poor families let their daughters for a
certain period in order that they could provide their marriage portion.
The let might be done to a certain person or to brothels. At all events,
after the fixed time expired and they provided a decent marriage
portion, they could easily get married and this smut did not have the
least effect on their social position nor did it ruin their chance of
getting married.[^5] Or in countries like India, violence against women
has been intense in the recent years. Indian brides are savagely
slaughtered by the groom’s parents for lack of a suitable marriage
portion. It seems that in this country a marriage portion is a levy,
which the bride’s family must pay to the groom.

It might be asserted that the philosophy of a marriage portion is
manifold:

It helped a new husband discharge the responsibilities that go with
marriage; it made possible for the bride to have economic independence:
it made up the girl’s meager share in succession or the inheritance of
her parents’ landed property (the girls’ share is half of the boys’) and
most importantly, it consolidated friendship and created a spirit of
cooperation between the two families.[^6]

A marriage portion either belongs to the bride or it is given to her by
her family. Though the woman may entrust her marriage portion to her
husband or to her future mutual children, the husband does not have the
right to apportion them but rather he has the right to use them in a
reasonable fashion, for legally speaking, a marriage portion is a wife’s
private property.

The bride’s family tries to enhance the desirability of their daughter
for marriage by providing her with a suitable marriage portion in
proportion to their economic power although no article exists in law
which necessitates the provision of a marriage portion.

Although the women are the owners of their property and that the
husbands have no right to them, the women, in principle, entrust their
property to their family and never make any mention of them. Assuredly,
while the mutual life proceeds on the basis of love, friendship and
morality, there is hardly any mention of these assets. However, when the
foundation of family is shaken, the first problem is how to distribute
the assets.

The time when one comes to ask what women’s rights are and what assets
belong to them, one has to prove women’s claim to property.

In some countries, they usually make a list of the assets, and have the
groom and his family sign it. However, such an act may be considered an
insult to the groom, and an indication of misrust. Sufficed it to say
that such an indication of mistrust at the beginning of a married life
particularly when the two parties have not yet known each other can
exercise a negative impression on them. As a last resort, the Iranian
legislators have promulgated that while there is no proof for the
women’s right to assets, the things that are most useful to them belong
to them.[^7]

1.2) The inheritance: the transfer of property to an heir or heirs
upon the death of its owner.[^8] A brief study of the history of women’s
rights shows that the inheritance of women becomes effective when they
develop social personality.

As inheritance is either on sanguineous or affinal[^9] basis, women as
daughters, sisters, aunts, or nieces can obtain the share determined by
law. Here are some examples for the further information of the readers.

#### Girls

Although in most countries today, boys and girls have equal share in
inheritance, at least until the eighteenth century in most countries
like France, Japan, China and so on, the landed properties went to boys:
girls did not have any share or even if they had, it was in the form of
a marriage portion.

However, Islam gave women social personality fourteen centuries ago,
granting them a share in inheritance. The share of girls is as follows:

1. The girl is one of the heirs. If girls and boys are the heirs of the
deceased, the share of the girls is half of the boys’. If girls are the
heirs of the deceased, two-thirds of the landed property goes to them;
and the rest goes to them if there are no other heirs.[^10]

2. The girl is the sole heir. She receives half of the inheritance by
precept and the other half by refutation.[^11]

3. If the heir is the sole sister of the deceased, she is the sole heir;
so, she receives half of the property by precept and the other half by
refutation. If there are two sisters, two-third of the property goes to
them.[^12]

4. If the brother and the sister are the heirs, the share of the boys is
two times bigger than that of the girls.

5. If the woman is the mother of the deceased and the sole heir, her
share is one-fourth of the property. If the deceased has children; the
mother’s share is one-sixth of the property.[^13]

The reason that girls receive one half less than boys, is thus
justified:[^14]

1. The men are responsible for the provision of things in the family; in
other words, men are the economic center and women have no
responsibilities whatsoever.

2. It is incumbent upon men to pay their spouses marriage portion, and
they have no way to bar them from it even if they agree on it.

3. In executive laws, in paying blood money, women have no
responsibility.

At the end of this discussion, I have to remark what goes to women as
inheritance, is part of their property. Hence, as owners they can use it
any way they desire because *people are the masters of their
properties*.

Article 24 of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam[^15]
stresses that: A) Everyone shall have the right to own property acquired
in a legitimate way, and shall be entitled to the rights of ownership,
without prejudice to oneself, others or to society in general.
Expropriation is not permissible except for the requirements of public
interest and upon payment of immediate and fair compensation. B)
Confiscation and seizure of property is prohibited except for a
necessity dictated by law.

### Affinal Kinship

**Affinal Kinship**[^16]

When two people get married, they are obligated by certain rights and
duties. Concerning these rights and duties which serve as a background
for the right of women to property, the following four phases can be
discussed:

Marriage portion is, by definition, the property a man gives his wife
upon marriage. History shows us that in performing Greek ritual marriage
or Roman patrimonial rights, the father could transmit these rights and
duties to the groom for gift or money or even for free, because women
served as mere objects to be owned and to be enjoyed. For the same
reason, some believe that marriage portion is the price for woman.

In Islam, men are obligated to give some property to women as gift.

***“And give the women their dowries as a gift spontaneous.” (Surah
an-Nisa, 4:4)***

The Holy Qur’an gives the beautiful metaphor of the gift. With regard to
the changes Islam creates and the status the Holy Qur’an gives to women,
one can never agree that this is a price for women, because they have
their social personality; they are not objects to be bought or sold. In
other words, marriage portion is not a price for which women give in to
intercourse. It is a commitment that law assigns to men, for it is not
the subject of any contract in modern law.[^17]

There should be marriage portion at marriage and this is a canon, which
neither of the parties can violate, for private contracts and agreements
cannot overshadow canons. Hence even if marriage portion is not fixed at
a marriage, the woman is given suitable marriage portion[^18] and this
refutes the claim of those who state that the suitable marriage portion
is the price for women, for if the contract is based on selling and
buying, and the price is not fixed, it nullifies the deal,[^19] whereas
marriage without fixed marriage portion is correct.[^20]

Most jurisprudents believe that there are no limitations on the amount
of marriage portion; the only condition is that marriage portion should
be a transmissible property.[^21]

Some others believe that the amount of the marriage portion should not
exceed the one fixed by the holy Prophet.[^22] It seems that such a
basis should be respected, for it shall prevent the fixing of heavy
marriage portions which cause the increasing of expectations and the
deviations from cultural and social moral codes and problems of this
sort.

Some people believe that marriage portion as the financial security for
women in married life and an opportunity for their being independent of
their husbands especially when the right to divorce is exclusive to men.

And if we regard marriage portion as gift, it is man’s respect for
women.

At any rate, no matter wat the philosophy of marriage portion is, when
the marriage contract is signed, marriage portion is transmitted to
women.[^23]

From the points mentioned above, it becomes obvious that Islam and the
Iranian law seek to protect women’s rights and provide their financial
independence; however, socially speaking, marriage portion has gained a
ceremonial quality only mentioned in the marriage certificate. Although
it is ‘*Ind al-Mutalibah’*, meaning that man is obligated to pay it any
time the woman demands it, in practice, as long as they live under one
roof, there is never any mention of it. And only when the family pillars
are shaken, the right to marriage portion is mentioned. And when the
marriage portion exceeds the financial power of man, the marriage
portion loses its protective quality.

#### Subsistence

Subsistence, by definition, is whatever is incumbent on man to provide
for his spouse such as food, clothing, housing and the likes.[^24] In
other words, the responsibility of providing for the woman when she
still stays with her family is on her father but when she is united in
marriage and organizes a mutual life, the responsibility is shifted onto
her spouse. Likewise, the responsibility is shifted onto her elder son
if she is a mother without a husband.

At all events, a woman is provided for by her consanguineous or affinal
kin when she is a girl, a mother or a wife. Hence, she does not have
anything to worry about on that score because under Islamic law and
jurisprudence, the man is the head and the economic pivot of the family,
so he is responsible to provide for her family.

According to Islamic jurisprudence, the Iranian Civil Law determines the
limits of subsistence;

Article 1107: Subsistence includes housing, clothing, food, and
furniture appropriate to the situation of the woman and a maid if she is
used to having one or if she happens to be sick, or handicapped.[^25]

Some Muslim jurisprudents[^26] believe that subsistence must not be
speci(ied by certain objects and that one should refer to common sense
for determining subsistence, because subsistence differs at different
times and places. Therefore, subsistence must not be limited to certain
things. This seems natural because what matters in married life is the
relation based upon mutual understanding and good conduct and the man’s
obligation to satisfy her material needs and provide her with solace.

There is a long-standing controversy over the philosophy of subsistence.
Some commentators argue that if we believe in women’s right to
participate in all spheres of social and political activities, why
should we reduce them to the degree of an object by considering
subsistence for them? On the other hand, equal rights for men and women
are accepted and women have the right to property. So, why should the
law compel man to pay subsistence to woman?

Although Islam does not forbid women from participating in social
activities and regards effective respect for their rights, it accords
considerable attention to women’s physical condition in fulfilling their
maternal and wifely duties. Although attempts have been made to provide
equal opportunities of employment for men and women particularly over
the recent decades, and the States move onto this track due to their
internal policies and the recommendations of International
assemblies,[^27] these opportunities, in practice, are more given to men
than to women. Therefore, women have a lesser chance to play their part
in providing for themselves. Therefore, opportunities should be devised
to provide for them.

In this regard, one can refer to paragraph 2, article 23 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and paragraph one, article 25 of
the same declaration and paragraph B, article 7 of the Cairo Declaration
of Human Rights in Islam[^28] because in these articles, it is mentioned
that man should provide for his wife and children and this does no
contradict the equal rights of men and women. The other question, which
comes up here, is if the woman is the owner of her subsistence or if she
is just entitled to use it temporarily.

In this regard, the lawyers and jurisprudents hold that the objects in
question should be categorized and divided. For example, the cosumable
goods (such as foods), belong to women, but in other cases (such as
housing, ...) the women have the right to use them but should attempt to
look after them.

Another question, which emerges here, is this: do women have the right
to receive subsistence if they happen to work and earn money?

At any rate, man is obliged to pay for his wife’s expenses. The
legislators emphasize that subsistence is a rule to be obeyed and the
women or other parties cannot cancel it. Even if women work and earn
money, their husbands cannot oblige them to cover some of the expenses
of their mutual life. However, women are instrumental in covering some
of the expenses because they are more than ever before given the
opportunity to work.

With a brief glance at Iran today, one can realize that women assist
their husbands in covering every day expenses although men are obligated
to pay for their subsistence. If they are employed, they expend their
income in better administering the family; if they are homemakers, they
cut down on expenses and if they are villagers, they do farming, carpet
weaving and harvesting.

At any rate, this legal protection of women seems necessary although we
witness women working and helping their husbands in most of the social
activities.

In addition, the legislators have promulgated a law, entitling women to
sue their husbands if they do not pay for their subsistence. Although
this law can prove very effective in punishing men, it should not be
ignored that what dominates the family is ethical practice and the law
exercises its force when this ethical practice is violated.

#### Payment

The Islamic law regards effective respect for women’s personality and
dignity; so, they are not obligated to do the house chores and the
husbands do not have the right to oblige them to such chores as cooking,
cleaning, tailoring and so on. Despite some prevailing beliefs,
subsistence is not at all a payment for women’s housekeeping. Women do
not do all these acts out of their own volition. That is why Islam
entitles women to get payment for what they do at home, for in Islam,
anyone is to be respected and deserves to be rewarded for their work. ·

The prevailing Islamic law regards divorce as a right particular to men.
By virtue of this right, men can put an end to mutual life by paying
alimony and marriage portion. After divorce, women need financial
protection. Therefore, the legislators promulgated a law, which compels
men to pay for the pains their spouses have taken during their married
life. In other words, the spouses receive their share of the life, which
they helped take shape, but now it has fallen apart. Some people believe
that this act[^29] is a manifest insult to the elevated status of women,
relegating them to the degree of a house cleaner: However, it seems that
if this law is viewed like marriage portion and subsistence from a
materialistic point of view, such views can be proposed.

The fact is that if we view women as creatures endowed with dignity and
personality with social and economic rights from an Islamic standpoint,
we realize that the aim is to protect women’s rights and pave the way
for their economic independence but not set a price for them or insult
their dignity, as article 1 of the Cairo Declaration of Human rights in
Islam[^30] states, “Dignity is a right guaranteed for the entire human
race and all people are equal in dignity granted by God and the inherent
responsibilities and women have the same human dignity as men.[^31]

#### Inheritance

While women have certain rights during mutual life, they have other
rights aswell when their husbands die, namely that they receive a share
from their property just as the husbands inherit their spouses’ property
in the event of their death.

The share of inheritance of each spouse is different and this is one of
the inequalities between men and women. Men inherit from whatever their
wives possess: yet, women do not inherit from real property. In general,
the women’s share of their husband’s property can be discussed in two
ways.

##### Amount of inheritance

If the husband dies and his wife does not have any children, she
inherits one-fourth of the property.[^32] If she has children, she will
receive one eighth of the property.

In case one of the spouses happens to be to the sole beneficiary, in
case of man’s death, the woman receives one-fourth of the property and
the rest goes to the common wealth.[^33]

##### The properties from which women inherit

According to Civil Law inspired by jurisdiction, the wife’s share is
half of her husband’s: furthermore, she is deprived of certain
properties inherited. These properties include lands, trees, and
buildings. The land whether built or not is not given to women as
inheritance. Therefore, women do not receive a share from building and
trees.[^34]

The philosophy of this may lie in the historical aspects of the tribes,
lack of women’s property after their husbands death, and the
transferring of them to the tribe.

At any rate, women enjoy their deceased husbands property. The laws of
inheritance contradict the equal rights between men and women from the
perspective of international documents. For example, in the convention
of all forms of discrimination against women, paragraph E of article 16
recognizes equal rights for both spouses in all cases: equal rights for
the spouses as to property, acquisition, administration, custody, and
the transferring of properties whether free from or with charge.

#### Employment

Of the most obvious individual rights in any society is the right to
employment. The right to employment is the logical resu1t of freedom of
employment, namely that there is employment for those who seek it.[^35]

In other words, every individual has the right to choose his desired
employment and use it as a means to earn his living and the state is
obliged to provide this right for everyone.

In general, the goal of any employment, on the one hand, is to earn
one’s living and on the other, to improve the economic condition of the
nation. At any rate, there are certain points, which must be born in
mind in this regard:

1. Everyone has the right to work.

2. Everyone has the right to the choice of his profession

3. Everyone has equal rights as to profession.

4. The workers have the right to protective rules.

5. The government is obligated to provide suitable profession.

With a glance at the international covenants, it becomes obvious that
the right to employment is recognized for everyone without limitation of
any kind due to sex, color, race etc.

Paragraph 1 of article 23 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
suggests, “Every one has the right to work, to free choice of
employment, to just and favorable conditions of work and to protection
against unemployment.”

Article 6 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and
Cultural rights states: “The State parties to the present covenant
recognize the right to work, which includes the right of everyone to the
opportunity to gain his living by work which he freely chooses or
accepts, and will take appropriate steps to safeguard this right.”

And the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam in article 21: “Work
is a right guaranteed by the State and Society for each person able to
work.”

According to the Islamic Constitution, the right to employment is
regarded as the inalienable right of each individual and according to
paragraph 12 of article 3, the state is responsible to set up a correct
and just economic foundation according to Islamic principles in order to
bring about welfare, eradicate poverty and eliminate all deprivation in
all areas of food, housing, work, health and providing social insurance.

Also paragraph 2 of article 43 states “The State is responsible to
provide the possibilities and opportunities of work for everyone towards
achieving full employment for all and provide the means of work for all
who are able to work but lack the means.”

And the rule of employment of the Expediency Council states: “All
people, men and women, are equally protected by the law and everyone has
the right to choose any occupation provided that it does not contradict
Islam, the general good and the rights of others.”

From the points noted above, it becomes manifest that there is no
difference between men and women as to the choice of employment; both
are free to choose and the only thing that limits their freedom is that
the occupation chosen should not contradict Islam, and the public good.
In the case of women’s employment, the following two points are
noteworthy:

1. Women ate not capable of equal work with men due to their physical
condition such as their delicacy, pregnancy, and maternal duties: so,
they might encounter discrimination as to the choice of employment, lose
their jobs, and get lower salaries. Hence, due to these reasons, they
should be protected by the state and the state should take appropriate
measures to safeguard their rights.

2. Women’s occupations are limited due to legal limitations. For
example, the legislators have forbidden hard, dangerous work by
women.[^36]

Therefore, even if we believe in the equal rights of men and women, we
should persuade the States to take protective measures even if they are
to men’s loss and to women’s gain.

The right to leave for childbirth, pregnancy and feeding is officially
recognized as a way to respect and protect mother and child. The job
security of women is ensured under certain special circumstances and the
government puts services in priority.[^37]

Besides, there are two limitations as to the choice of profession on the
part of women; the limitation imposed by the society for women’s jobs;
in political affairs, (leadership, presidency, executive power
presidency ...) and in official jobs (Judgment, military positions,) are
among the activities in which women cannot actively participate: of
course politicians and jurisprudents have different and sometimes
contradictory views in this regard.

Secondly, limitation on the part of the spouse namely that the women
should try to choose an occupation which in no case contradicts the
family welfare or dignity, for the Civil Law entitles men to deprive
their wives of choosing such occupations when they contradict the
aforementioned issues.[^38]

At this point, it seems necessary to point out that the recognition of
such an issue is made by common sense and the legislator only seeks to
solidify the family pillars. If we take it for granted that men are
responsible for providing for the family and women for administering the
house chores, man is capable to stop his wife’s activities if they hurt
the family relationship, or impede her doing her maternal or wifely
duties.

In this case, when women encounter limitations in choosing a profession,
they are consciously or unconsciously bound to choose their desired
profession or when men provide such comfort that women relinquish their
right altogether.[^39]

Although the jurisprndents and the legislators believe that women must
obey their husbands, and the fact that men are the heads of the family
and that women are obliged to obey them and need their pem1ission to do
their activities, some great Shi’ite scholars propose new ideas on this
score because of the special time such as:

Q: What is the duty of women if their husbands are against their going
to university or to office?

Ayatullah Sani’i answered, “It is incumbent upon women to obey their
husbands unless something contrary is stipulated at their marriage.
Their preventive attitude may be to the point here it does not prove
hard and intolerable to women.[^40]

It seems that this state of hardship is both individual and social. From
a social point of view, one can justify that when the society provides
for an individual’s education, he, as an expert, has a role in
contributing to the social and economic conditions of his country. One
cannot say that just because men have the privilege to be the heads of
the family, they cannot deprive their wives of the social services they
can render to the society.

In the end, we should admit that the international covenants and forums
have kept encouraging the governments to distribute equal rights of men
and women for work, and they have succeeded in eliminating
discrimination in the field of employment. The opportunities of women in
obtaining jobs are practically less than those of men.[^41] In case of
women, most of the part-time seasonal jobs are considered as
self-employment. Women are abused in working and there has been scant
protection of them.

So, even if we believe in the equal rights of men and women in work, we
should require the States to take protective measures, though they are
to men’s loss and to women’s gain, in order that we may reach a real
balance.[^42]

Conclusion
----------

Throughout the past decades, the issue of Women’s rights has undergone
positive and considerable changes to the point where they have been
promoted from the degree of chattel to the degree of acquiring legal
personality and the finding personality as a human being and having
passed that stage, they have brought up the notion of equality of men
and women during the recent years.

By the same virtue, some of the International documents and civil laws
of countries have betrayed a tendency to recognise women’s rights and
some principles are issued in this regard. In international documents,
the possibility of anyone’s any man’s or anybody’s enjoying social and
individual rights has been emphasised and the use of these words shows
the equality of men and women in using these rights and freedoms for
woman is a human person.

Also, by studying the grounds for the realisation of women’s property
and discussing its offshoots it became manifest that in consanguineous
kinship, dowry, inheritance and in Affinal kinship, marriage portion and
alimony and inheritance provide the ground for woman’s right to
property.

As to occupation, the right to work and earning income which create the
right to ownership were discussed in detailed as viewed by International
and internal documents of law, and it was stated that although there are
limitations concerning women’s working from a legal and practical
perspective, women’s working creates the right to ownership.

To sum up, it must be asked whether women have full authority over their
rights or her right to ownership should take place under the supervision
of some second party like her husband? Or from a legal perspective, have
women full authority or are they to have a guardian?

The reason for proposing this question is that in the past laws of some
countries, including France, the spouse did not have direct interference
in her financial matters and had to ask her husband’s permission in
doing financial matters.[^43] In answer, it may be said that in the
communities which by joining International conventions have accepted
equality of men and women, women have financial independence and every
interference in her properties. In Islam, resorting to the verse 32 of
sura of Women,

***“Men shall have of what they earn: and for women shall have of what
they earn” (Surah an-Nisa 4:32)***

women have the right to property, profession and earning money, and her
right to property is esteemed in Islam and by the same virtue, they can
have any kind of interference in their property.

The civil law of Iran, following the tenets of Islam as to the right to
property and financial independence has elucidated this the basis for
this independence in the two following principles:

Article 30: “every owner has any kind of interference in the his/her
properties unless as otherwise prescribed by law”

(The word *every* includes men and women.)

Article 1118: “women can independently interfere in their properties” in
fact, men and women have equal financial independence.

Sources:
--------

### Reference Books

Farhangi Larus, Jor, Khalil, translated by Hamid Tabibiyan, Vol. 2, Amir
Kabir, p. 1365

The Holy Qur’an

### Farsi Books

Imami, Hasan, Huquq-i Madani (Civil Rights), Vol. 3, Islamiyyah Press,
Second Edition, 1986.

Sadr, Hasan, Huquq-i Zan dar Islam va Urupa (Women’s Rights in Islam and
in Europe), Amir Kabir Press, Tehran, Fourth Edition, 1979.

Safa’I, Husayn & Dama'i Asadullah, Huquq-i Khanivadah (Family Rights),
Vol. 1, Tehran University Press, Second edition, 1995.

Tabatabaii Mu’tamini, Manuchihr, Azadiha-yi 'Umumi va Huquq-i Bashar
(Collective Freedoms and Human Rights), Vol. 1, Rahnama Press, Second
Edition, 1996,

Iraqi, Izzatullah, Aya Midanid Huquq-i zan dar Izdivaj Chist? (Do you
know the rights of women in marriage?) Vol. 1, Rahnama Press, Second
Edition, 1990.

Katuziyan, Nasir, Huquq-i Madani, Amvil va Malikiyyat (Civil Rights,
Properties and Possession). Vol. 1, Yalda Press, First Edition, 1995.

Katuziyan, Nasir, Huquq-i Madani-yi Khanivadah (Family Civil Rights),
Vol. 1. Intishar Press, Third Edition, 1992.

Muhaqqiq Damad, Mustafa, Barrasi-yi Fiqhi-yi lf Huquq-i Khanivadah (A
Jurisprudential research on Family), Vol. 1, Nashr-i 'Ulum-i Islami,
Second Edition, 1988.

Mutahhari, Murtaza, Nizam-i Huquq-i Zan dar Islam (Women’s Rights in
Islam), Intisharat-i Islami.

### Arabic Books

Musavi Khumaini, Ruhullah, Tahrir al-Wasilah, Vol. 2, Najaf, 1970.

Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh-i Sharayi al­Islam,
1901

### International Documents

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights

The Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam

Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women

The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

The essays of International Organisation of Labour

### Law

Constitution

Labour Law

Civil Law

[^1]: Manuchihr Tabataba’i Mu’tamini, Azadiha-yi Umumi va Huquq-i Bashar
(Collective Freedoms and Human Rights), (Tehran: Tehran University
Press, 1996), p. 147.

[^2]: Nasir Katuziyan, Huquq-i Madani, Amval va Malikiyyat (Civil
Rights, Property and Possession), (Tehran: Yalda Publications, 1995),
p.104

[^3]: Hasan Sadr, Huquq-i Zan dar al-Islam wa Urupa (Women’s Rights in
Islam and in Europe), (Tehran: Amir Kabir Publications, 1969), pp.42-50,
107

[^4]: The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 17, paragraph
1: Everyone has the right to own property alone or in association with
others. Paragraph 2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his
property.

[^5]: Hasan Sadr, ibid, pp. 24-35 & 99

[^6]: Nasir Katuziyan, Huquq-i Madani-yi Khanivadah (Family Civil
Rights), Vol 1, p.200; Izzatullah ‘Iraqi, Aya Midanid Huquq-i Zan dar
Dawran-I Izdivaj Chist? (Do you know what women’s rights are at
marriage?), pp.81-82; Husayn Safa’i and Asadullah Imami, Huquq-i
Khanivadah (Family Rights), Vol. 1, p.175

[^7]: Article 79 in official documents; Article 63 in civil principles.
It is noteworthy that in Iran, the Islamic rules are dependent on
Islamic principles interpreted by the Muslim jurisprudents.

[^8]: Article 140 of the Civil law stipulates: “Ownership is obtained
through 1. The renewal of dead lands and occupancy 2. Contracts and
commitments 3. Occupation by preemption 4. Inheritance

[^9]: Article 861, Civil Law

[^10]: Article 902, ibid.

[^11]: Article 908, ibid.

[^12]: Article 902, ibid.

[^13]: Article 908, 909, ibid.

[^14]: Murtaza Mutahhari, Nizam-i Huquq-i Zan dar Islam (Woman’s Rights
in Islam), Islamic Publications Office, p.224

[^15]: Muhammad Taqi Ja’fari, International Human Rights in Islam and
the West, (Tehran, Bureau for International Rights, 1991 ).

[^16]: I have used the following sources in writing this article: Hasan
Sadr, Huquq-i Zan dar Islam va Urupa (Women’s Rights in Islam and
Europe), pp. 24-30; Murtaza Mutahhari, Nizam-i Huquq-i Zan dar Islam
(Women’s Rights in Islam), p.179; Nasir Katuziyan, Huquq-i Madan-yi
Khanivadah (Family Civil Rights), Vol. 1, p.143 onwards; Mustafa
Muhaqqiq Damad, Huquq-i Khanivadeh, Nikah va Inhigal-i An (Family
Rights, Marriage and its Dissolution), p.224; Hasan Imami, Huquq-i
Madani (Civil Rights), Vol. 3; Husayn Safa’i & Asadullah Imami, Huquq-i
Khanivadah (The Family Rights), Vol. 1, p.192-193; ‘Ezzatullah ‘Iraqi,
Aya Midanid Huquq-i zan dar Dawran-i Iztivaj Chist? (Do you Know What
the Rights of Women are in Marriage?), pp. 63-73; Ruhullah Musavi
Khumaini, Tahrir al-Wasilah, Vol. 1, p.297, Issue 1.

[^17]: 2 Nasir Katuziyan, Huquq-i Madan-yi Khanivadeh (Civil Rights of
Family), (Tehran: Shirkat-i Intishar, 1993), Vol. 3, p. 143.

[^18]: Article 1087, Civil Law, “If permanent marriage portion is not
fixed at marriage, or no marriage portion, the marriage is correct and
the parties can fix the marriage portion after marriage. And if they
have intercourse before fixing marriage portion, the spouse shall
deserve a suitable marriage portion.”

[^19]: Article 1079, Civil Law, “Dowry should be fixed between the two
parties to remove invalidity.”

[^20]: Article 1087, Civil Law.

[^21]: Ruhullah Musavi Khumaini, Tahrir al-Wasilah, Vol. 2, p. 297,
Issue 1.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Article 1082, Civil Law

[^24]: Khalil Jor, Larus Dictionary, translated by Hamid Tabibiyan, Vol.
2, Amir Kabir Publications, 1986, p. 2068.

[^25]: Article 1107, Civil Law.

[^26]: Muhammad Hasan Najafi, Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh-i Sharayi
al-Islam, 1901, Tehran, p.257

[^27]: In thc Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women, the States have been invited to accept equal payment for
men and women, to eliminate the discrimination among men and women under
special circumstances such as marriage, pregnancy and motherly duties as
much as possible, and to formulate protective rules for women. In
addition, in the international arena, paragraph 2 of article 43 of the
Constitution obligates the State to provide suitable working conditions
for all and sundry.

[^28]: ARTICLE 23: 1. Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of
employment, to just and fovourable conditions of work and to protection
against unemployment. 2. Everyone, without any discrimination, has the
right to equal pay for equal work. 3. Everyone who works has the right
to just and favourable remuneration ensuring for himself and his family
an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by
other means of social protection. 4. Everyone has the right to form and
to join trade unions for the protection of his interests. ARTICLE 29: 1.
Everyone has the right to a standard or living adequate for the health
and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing,
housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to
security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood ,
old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.
2. Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance.
All children, whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy the same
social protection. ARTICLE 7 of the Cairo Declaration of Human Right in
Islam: A) Woman is equal to man in human dignity, and has rights to
enjoy as well as duties to perform; she has her own civil entity and
financial independence, and the right to retain her name and lineage. B)
The husband is responsible for the support and welfare of the family.

[^29]: For further information see Zahra Davar, A Study of Divorce in
Jurisprudence and Law, Majalla-yi Siyasat Khariji, Peking Conference,
1995, note no. 60: in the course of divorce, in case the spouse demands
payment for the things nor religious incumbent upon her, the court takes
measure by way of compromise; if no compromise is achieved, steps are
taken based on any financial conditions stated prior to marriage;
otherwise, if the divorce is not demanded by the spouse, and if the
divorce does not arise from any error on the part of woman, or any
perversion, steps are taken as follows: If the spouse has performed the
duties prescribed by religion or marital bond, and if this is proved to
the court, the court shall calculate the payment for those duties and
issues the decree for the payment. Apart from what was stated earlier,
the court determines a certain payment according to the period of the
married life and according to the financial prowess of the husband.

[^30]: Muhammad Taqi Ja’fari, ibid.

[^31]: Articles 6 & 7 of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam

[^32]: Article 900 of Civil Law, “The precept of the two heirs is one
quarter of the estate: 1.The husband in case of the demise of his spouse
and having children 2. The spouse or the spouses in case of the demise
of the husband without children.”

[^33]: Article 949 of the Civil law states, “In the absence of any
heirs, other than the spouse or the spouses, the husband inherits the
wealth of his deceased spouse; however, the spouse only inherits her own
share and the rest of his wealth shall be considered wealth without heir
and will be act upon as prescribed by article 866.”

[^34]: Article 946 of Civil Law, The husband inherits from all the
wealth of the spouse but the spouse inherits from A) transmitted
property B) Domicile and trees. Article 947 of the Civil Law states:
“The spouse inherits from the price of the domicile and trees, not from
their likes and the manner is such that the price of the domicile shall
be calculated in terms of the current money.”

[^35]: Manuchihr Tabataba’i Mu’tamani, Azadiha-yi Umumi va Huquq-i
Bashar (Collective Rights and Human Rights), Tehran University Press,
Vol. 2, 1996, p. 161.

[^36]: Articles 75 & 77 of the Labor Law of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.

[^37]: Articles· 75-78, Labor Law, the law of propagating breastfeeding
by mothers and the protection of women during breastfeeding.

[^38]: Article 1117, Civil Law.

[^39]: In article 18 the Law of Protection of Family, Approved 1974,
women are given authority to complain to the court if her husband’s
profession is contradictory to family welfare or their dignity: and the
court gives a positive response to this demand if it does not mar the
family foundations. Although there is no harm in this law as viewed by
some jurisprudents, the acceptance of such a claim seams far-fetched.

[^40]: 1951, Quoted from Majma al-Masa’il Istifta’at, Hazrat Ayatullah
Sani’i

[^41]: As to the equality of wages of men and women for equal work in
letter no. 100, the International Organization of Labor is considered as
the basis and most of the countries have joined it but in practice this
action has been less exercised.

[^42]: In two futurist documents of Nairobi and Peking, which have dealt
with Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against women., have
treated this issue in detail.

[^43]: Hasan Sadr, Huquq-i Zan dar al-Islam va Urupa (Women’s Rights in
Islam and Europe), Vol. 4, p.178.


