Reproductive Health And Rights
==============================

**Susan Pasgar**

Over the recent years, reproductive health and rights have been the
subject of conferences and assemblies relevant to population,
development and rights of women at national and international level.
Although women have been taken into consideration due to their
physiological structure in reproduction, their needs and desires have
been accorded little or no attention.

Women’s spiritual and physical health and social welfare play an
essential role in reproduction. The neglect of women's reproductive
health and rights and lack of suitable healthcare possibilities have
resulted in the diseases of women and children and their sudden deaths.
The current statistics suggest that at least 500,000 women lose their
lives every year due to the diseases resulting from pregnancy and 99
percent of these victims are living in the developing countries.[^1]

In developing countries, the rate of death of the women who have had a
healthy life during childhood increases as they approach the
reproductive age. The danger of the death of women is reported to be 80
to 800 times bigger than a similar case in developed countries.[^2]

In most societies, sterility is looked upon with contempt; even when
sterility is on the part of men, the idea of sterility is most cruelly
directed towards women. In the world today, the right to life, which is
among the most fundamental human rights, should not be violated because
of the incurable diseases or sudden deaths. The calamities resulting
from sterility can be reduced to minimum with proper knowledge and
recognition and suitable healthcare possibilities.

Not only are the reproductive health and rights a new issue but they are
also a controversial issue in national and international conferences due
to the fact that they are closely associated with the most personal
aspects of human life and the status of women in different spheres of
family and social activities. This article is an attempt to investigate
the concept of reproductive health and rights as a component of women’s
rights, the perfection of this concept and the different aspects of this
concept from an Islamic viewpoint.

The article grows out of the writer’s interest in women’s rights
especially in developing countries. Attempts have been made to come to a
desirable conclusion regarding the recognition of the social needs, and
necessities.

The Genesis of Reproductive Health and Rights
---------------------------------------------

Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights lays stress on
the founding of family. The recognition of this right is dependent on
the marital bond and the founding of family.[^3]

Twenty years later, the Declaration of Tehran Conference (1968) on Human
Rights declared the right of parents in free decision-making and the
recognition of their rights in relation to the number of their
children.[^4] Although the documents involved do not necessitate
legality in international arena, they have gained great international
protection.

As to the rights of covenants, the International Bill of Human Rights,
the recognition of reproductive health and rights within the framework
of family, guarantees some of the legal obligations as to the protection
of rights included therein (article 23 of the Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and articles 10 and 12 of the Covenant on Cultural,
Economic and Social Rights 1966).[^5]

The status of married women constitutes the constant subject of
International Bill of Human Rights. Article 12 of the Covenant on
Cultural, Social and Economic Rights lays stress on the individuals
rights for the better enjoyment of mental and physical healthcare.
However, a fundamental agreement on the concept of women’s rights was
not concluded at international plane at the moment of approving the
bill, and the aforesaid covenants lack sufficient sensitivity towards
women’s healthcare and rights. The idea that women can enjoy certain
rights is nipped in the bud in international dialogues. The sad truth is
that the Bill of Human Rights has sought to drive women into the margin
from the issue of human rights and only over the last fifteen years,
human rights have considered the truth of women’s life in the
society.[^6]

At any rate, regarding the neglect of the fundamental women’s rights at
international level, what has become of particular interest since the
sixties has been the issue of family planning. Considering the
increasing population growth at international plane and its effects on
the provision of food, the acquisition of resources and development, a
great number of developing countries took effective measures in
modifying reproduction and in increasing access to the services relevant
to family planning. Thus, family planning became the focus of
demographic and healthcare plans in these countries.

Family planning, now extensively exercised in most countries, has
started as controlling population plans since the 1960s and 1970s which
itself was a significance of the destructive nature of population growth
as a bomb, which might explode any moment and devastate the world. In
this demographic model, the rights of individuals and women are paid
scant attention to as to deciding on their reproduction and
intercourse,[^7] while family planning is paid ample attention at the
very early stage.

Since 1970, medical-biological model was developed in relation to family
planning. The recent model places stress on health care advantages for
women as to the reproductive distance and the limitation of children so
that childbirth may be brought back to individual level. The plans of
the United Nations were centered on elevating and improving mothers’
healthcare conditions and children’s survival. The idea is that the main
shortcoming of the previously mentioned plans lies in ignoring the
women’s experiences, rejecting the necessity of self-empowerment and
stressing the protection of their free choice.[^8]

As gradually as the international movements on healthcare introduced the
humanitarian outlook in improving population and healthcare policies,
there appeared a change in the demographic models. The horizon of the
new outlook was not only limited to family planning but included many
diverse issues including the reproductive health, educational plans, the
empowering of women , and equal rights for women.[^9]

Surely, the access to healthcare is an issue, which influences the
position of women, men and children in all regions of the world.
However, due to unequal and vulnerable situations, women encounter many
problems.

In 1975, the first women’s conference in Mexico was the turning point of
women’s healthcare issues based on human rights. Article 12 of the
Convention Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women
(1979) expressing the equal rights of women and men as to access to
healthcare points to the issue of family planning. The right to equal
access to healthcare requires the removal of any social and legal
impediments which might exist in this regard especially as to the women
who are deprived of such services due to poverty, illiteracy and false
beliefs.

Article 16 of the aforementioned convention addresses the discrimination
against women in private life especially in the realm of the family
which is based the long-term cultural processes. Paragraph 2 of the
recent article in one word or another lays stress on the concept of the
reproductive right based on free decision­making by understanding the
reproductive distance and the number of births and the right to access
to information.

It was only after 1985, namely after the outbreak of HIV and AIDS that
the policymakers, the workers of the general medical care, the
scientists and the advocates of women’s rights began to recognize and
approve the mutual relation between healthcare and human rights.[^10] It
must be noted that in the Convention on Elimination of all kind of
Discrimination noted above, the reproductive right has not been
officially recognized.

In 1993, the Universal Conference on Human Rights was held in Vienna.
Although the declaration of the aforesaid convention explicitly
recognized the women’s right to the highest standards of physical and
spiritual healthcare, suitable medical care, access to family planning
services and education in all stages, it did not elucidate the concept
of reproductive health. This essential affair was entrusted to the
Intemational Conference of Population and Development in September 1994
in Cairo.

The Cairo Conference was the third intergovernmental conference which
dealt with the issue of population. The first conference was held in
1974 in Bucharest and the second conference in 1984 in Mexico. In
Bucharest Conference, the differences of north and south prevailed.

The representatives of the countries discussed the ways to fight the
effects arising from the rapid growth of population and the ways to
ameliorate the economic development, reconstruction and the revision of
international economic system. In the second conference, the developing
countries expressed more protection for family planning. However, they
opposed some of their executive ways such as abortion as a way to birth
control.[^11]

The topics discussed in the preliminary sessions of Cairo Conference
(The Third Conference on Population) and also the independent gatherings
of non-state organizations centered on moral views, and values relating
to human right, poverty, decline in values, women’s healthcare, abortion
etc. The discussions under the influence of the issues are encountered
by the international community during the last decade including the
outbreak of AIDS, the irreparable destruction of environment, the
increasing population growth etc.

However, the main discussion of the conference was formed as the result
of the coalition of States active in human rights and women’s healthcare
related to the traditional approach to population and family planning.

Some people held that population growth was not the main factor for
development. Some others argued that population policies were usually
cruel and unfair to women. Still, some others believed that the
approaches focused on family planning were very limited and did not
reflect the realities of women’s life.

Considering the aforementioned differences, the advocates of women’s
healthcare regarded a new approach as necessary. The viewpoints
expressed by the Catholic Church, Muslim and population experts were not
accepted. The result of the above-mentioned discussions expresses a
balanced compromise between different views.[^12] Thus, the final
document of Cairo Conference approves the authority of states and
guarantees the principles relating to human rights. The first paragraph
of the preamble to chapter two, which was the result of the attempts of
Muslim countries and some Latin American countries states:

It is the right of every State to harmonize the exercise of the
recommendations with its developmental rules and priorities, and put
them into effect with complete respect for religions, moral values and
cultural backgrounds of people based on the international human rights
rules accepted by everyone.[^13]

The final document of Cairo Conference indicates the executive plan
relating to population and development in the next twenty years. This
document shows the strategy in which emphasis is placed on the affairs
between population issue and sustainable development , and on the full
realization of women’s and men’s needs as individuals and not as the
goals of demography.

The key to this new outlook is empowering the women, providing more
opportunities for them through access to medical, educational and
occupational services. The executive plan refers to everyone’s access to
family planning until 2015 or earlier as part of a comprehensive outlook
towards the rights and childbirth rights.

The Conceptual Development of Reproductive Health and Rights
------------------------------------------------------------

In 1990s, some international conferences expressed a common belief in
the social development through providing the basic human needs, the
cooperation of the individuals, families and society in development.
Undoubtedly, the real development requires independence and freedom of
action.[^14] The president of the Central Committee of Cairo Conference
states, “The reproductive health and rights are the main factors for
development. Hence, the services relating to reproductive health should
be treated as one of the most appropriate answers to individuals’
needs.”[^15]

As expressed earlier, the concept of reproductive rights as the basic
human rights, takes root in some international documents. The executive
plan of Cairo conference states that it does not seek to create any new
human rights but it stresses and verifies the use of the standards of
human rights accepted by everyone.[^16]

The concept of reproductive rights was discussed in chapter seven of the
executive plan of Cairo Conference and in the Fourth Conference of
Women’s Rights (1995). It guarantees some parts of human rights
recognized by national rules and international documents relating to
human rights and other agreements relating to the United Nations. It
includes the right to free decision-making of all spouses and everyone
as to the number of their children, the time of their birth without any
kind of discrimination, pressure and violence, the right to the
enjoyment of proper information and instruments for the exercise of
human rights and gaining the highest standards of reproductive rights.

Considering the points noted above, the international concept of these
rights seeks to recognize the reproductive rights for everyone. Hence,
reproductive rights have assumed greater dimensions since the inception
of the Cairo Conference.

Although the recognition of this right outside the family unit
contradicts many rules and values of countries including the Muslim
countries, the problem has somehow been subdued as a result of the
exercise of the authoritarian right of states and reconciliation of the
recommendations of the conference with national rules and moral and
religious values in the introductory of the plan.

Generally, reproductive rights have three dimensions:

1. The rights of individuals to become parents who are allowed to have
any number of children they wish. This right requires the right to the
enjoyment of medical and educational possibilities, access to
information and low-expense healthcare strategies for birth control.

2. Human rights require that the spouses and individuals can satisfy
their reproductive needs without any impediments.

3. Human rights require guaranteeing that family planning, especially
those areas relating to motivational activities, should be exercised
fairly and softly in relation to individuals, family planning and
everyone concerned in order that no inequality might emerge among social
groups.[^17]

After the Cairo Conference, reproductive rights suffered conflicts
relating to national and international rights just like most of human
rights generally expressed in abstract with a view to achieving a
certain definition which implies the vastness, exact distinction and the
rules on its violation.

The rules for determining the content, the elements of the rights, the
issues and effects of these rights relating to the new technology of
reproduction including laboratory reproduction, and choice of sex of the
baby are among the fundamental problems in giving a definition for the
aforementioned rights. Although it seems farfetched that these issues
can be settled at international level between the States, it is
advisable that the international community help the other countries by
presenting political and moral guidelines.[^18]

Despite the conceptual deficiency, the document of Cairo Conference
became a turning point in recognizing the reproductive health and rights
as part of human rights, rights that shall not be achieved without
granting equality and empowering women.

The impediments to achieve the goals of reproductive health and rights
were described in a report by the then Secretary General of the United
Nations: there are many impediments to achieve the goals of reproductive
rights due to the importance of the issue and due to its controversial
nature and struggles have gone on for ameliorating these rights. The
important problem is the conceptual nature of the issue.

In many countries, human rights and reproductive health and rights
differently expressed in other international documents are not very
familiar. Besides, due to formulation and expression human rights and
reproductive health and rights might be abstract rights alien to the
outlooks, traditions and local experiences.

There are few experts on the previously mentioned rights and in many
cases, they have no knowledge of the case. Under such circumstances,
women are more limited than men. Therefore, without access to
information and relevant knowledge, the achievement and exercise of such
rights do not seem farfetched.[^19]

Due to these impediments, achieving the reproductive health and rights
has limited domain. To overcome the impediments, we can strengthen and
apply international pacts and monitoring bodies. Another way would be to
increase relevant information and education, attempts to promote
awareness of millions of people who have little or limited knowledge
about healthcare issues.[^20]

Perhaps the best ways to give a proper definition for the concept of
reproductive health and rights at national and local level are to adopt
the legal language with practical needs. “For example, in order that
such concepts as reproductive health and rights should be materialized
at national level. it is necessary that they be mingled with social,
political and religious structures.”[^21]

Reproductive health
-------------------

Reproductive health is not a new concept but the product of a process,
which made a change in the stance towards the issue of public healthcare
and family planning. The reproductive health is the first and the most
important element of the reproductive health and rights and is
conditioned by the level of social and economic development, life style,
the women’s status in the society and their access to medical services.
Article eight of the first chapter of Cairo Conference deals with a new
impression of the reproductive health:

The world has undergone changes, which have brought about new important
opportunities for development and population. Among the most striking of
these opportunities is the fundamental change in the outlook of the
people and their leaders concerning the reproductive health, family
planning and population growth which includes a new widespread mentality
to the reproductive health as defined in these programs.[^22]

Reproductive health as recognized at international plane is dependent on
a definition, which the World Health Organization has given of public
healthcare. The reproductive health is the situation in which complete
physical and mental health, the social welfare of the individuals in all
aspects of system of childbirth, and the functions are safeguarded and
does not refer only to lack of sickness, and weakness.

The reproductive health means that human beings may enjoy healthy
marital life and can decide on the time of childbirth and the number of
children. The awareness and access to the best sure methods of family
planning which does not contradict the laws and the access to medical
services enabling women to pass their pregnancy time are among the
rights of men and women.

The healthcare issues are associated with the situation and conditions
of different social groups. However, the important thing is the outlook
towards these methods and the steps taken for changing the unpleasant
conditions and solving the relevant problems. In the new outlook, the
reproductive health finds vaster dimension and gets associated with the
healthcare and the environment of the individuals. Hence, in the system
of childbirth, health is a comparative concept influenced by varying
factors, which operate in mutual relation to one another. Mental peace
and the access to the healthcare require the creating of an atmosphere
in which the process of childbirth takes place in physical, mental and
social conditions.

The new outlook is based on the presupposition that the individuals’
healthcare and health is influenced by their medical backgrounds and
health. The reproductive health not only reflects their situation and
instructions in childhood but their healthcare situation influences it
in childhood, and adolescence.[^23]

Family Planning
---------------

One of the most important aspects of the reproductive health and rights
is the access to methods for family planning as there has been hitherto
no method is considered as complete without family planning.

Due to the traditional aspects of the reproductive health, medical
aspects of childbirth were discussed in relation to the general outlook
of the healthcare of mother and child. However, changes taken place in
socio­demographic matters during the recent decades reveal that the
outlook is very limited and shall fail to answer the women’s healthcare
needs. Therefore, family planning is chosen not only as one of the basic
features of reproductive health and rights but also as a method for
living through fewer pregnancies.[^24]

Although reproduction is regarded as the main mechanism of man’s
physical life, its planning is a determining factor for the mental and
physical welfare and health of the individuals, the family and the
society. Thus, “planning as to the time and number of births is one of
the least costly methods of improving life and surely it is a grave
mistake ignoring it.”[^25]

Reproduction is conditioned by the complicated economic, social and
cultural structure. “The study of history shows that the unequal
position of men and women in different historical periods and societies
has been instrumental in decisions concerning reproduction although the
process of women’s socialization has verified the inequalities and women
have been the main reason for these inequalities.”[^26]

The fact is that these are the women who become pregnant and nature has
not given them power of choice in this regard. Therefore, in order to
control their biological situation, they should consciously think of a
way. The woman who is not capable of controlling her own pregnancy and
directing it in her own favor lacks mental and physical health and
cannot enjoy the pleasure of a self-willed pregnancy and avoid the
depression resulting from unwanted pregnancy. The potential effect of
family planning is that women become able to plan for their pregnancy
and give birth in the most suitable time due to their physical or mental
situation and economic sources of family.

Meanwhile they should seize suitable opportunities to further their
education and to actively participate in all aspects of social endeavors
and consequently enjoy a prosperous life in wide dimensions.

Throughout the world, especially in developing countries, the prevention
of unwilled pregnancy has an important effect on mothers’ health. The
differences as to the deaths of mothers in developing countries and
developed countries are numerous. In 1988, in less developed countries,
the deaths of mothers due to pregnancy effects were 700 out of 100,000
whereas in developed countries, in the same year, the rate was 26 out of
100,000.

According to the report of the World Health Organization, during a
woman’s lifetime, the probability of death due to pregnancy effects in
developing countries is one to twenty whereas in some developed
countries, it is less than one to 10,000.[^27]

The Secretary General thus describes the relation between the rate of
pregnancy and development:

The rate of birth and death demands social concepts apart from
population. For instance, decrease in reproduction means small families,
and allocating less time to reproduction and bringing up children. These
changes enable many women to further their education and work outside.
The low rate of reproduction and death results in the decline of
population, the fact that has important effects on the work force,
commitment, services, social well-being and healthcare system.[^28]

The executive plan of the Cairo Conference demands the long-termed
success of family planning to observe the conscious choice with freedom
of action. As an attempt to satisfy the frustrated needs, all countries
are demanded to remove all the obstacles to the use of family planning
service in order that one may be sure that each child is consciously
brought into this world.

Abortion
--------

An induced abortion is one of the oldest methods of birth control widely
performed throughout the world in the highly industrialized countries or
in developing countries. The places in which abortion is legal, the
method is a little threat to the health of women whereas in places in
which it is illegal, (for it is often performed in unhealthy conditions)
it might bring on infertility and cause unwanted abortions. According to
the report of World Health Organization, 70,000 women die annually as
the result of the effects arising from abortion.[^29]

From among the 45 million abortions annually reported, about 20 million
are reported to be unhealthy which might amount up to 20 million
today.[^30]

The fact is that the prohibition of abortion has never been an effective
method for preventing it. Hidden abortions are repeatedly performed and
surely the ill effects of such abortions shall be directed to low income
classes of the society.

Based on the existing information about 193 countries, a great majority
of countries (98 percent) has allowed abortion to preserve the well
being of the mother. Abortions for preserving the physical well-being of
the mother are legal in 119 countries (62 percent); abortions for
preserving the mental ,well­being of the mother are legal in 95
countries (50 percent); abortions for preventing the completion of a
pregnancy resulting from rape or incest are allowed in 81 countries (42
percent): abortions for preventing the birth of a child with serious
deformity, mental deficiency or genetic abnornmality are allowed in 78
countries (40 percent): abortions for social and economic reasons are
allowed in 55 countries and are allowed in 41 countries (21
percent).[^31]

The issue of abortion is so extensive, which can be discussed from
different, medical, social, moral and philosophical perspectives. The
extent of induced abortions throughout the world has turned it into a
universal problem. In the Cairo Conference on Population and Growth,
abortion was one of the most debated issues. Finally, the
representatives agreed on the following points:

In no case, abortion should be encouraged as a method of family
planning. All States and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations are demanded to accord more attention to their commitment
concerning the women’s healthcare, regard the unhealthy effects of
abortion as an important issue, and decrease abortions through extensive
and optimal family planning services. Any change in abortion in the
medical system at national or local level must take place according to
national laws. In circumstances where abortion is not illegal, such
operations must be performed safely.[^32]

Education-Information-Communications
------------------------------------

The right to have access to information and communications is another
constituent of the concept of reproductive health and rights. The
importance of the aforementioned issues arises from the knowledge that
they are important instruments to create changes in conducts and
attitudes. Without access to information, decision-making shall not be
possible.

Regarding the socio-cultural background, the States should take
necessary steps in presenting information and instruction, which is the
necessary condition of the reproductive health and rights. The Cairo
program of action offers a harmonious approach to education, information
and communication and provides that it should mingle with the goals and
policies of development and population at national level and the
reproductive health.

In general, in some cases, the cultural, political and social conditions
limit the access to the reproductive health. In this regard, one can
mention ignorance, superstitions and some cultural taboos. The
strengthening of the interrelation of family planning and the activities
relating to the aforementioned issues cause them to protect each other
and enable the national programs to achieve the full realization of the
frustrated wishes through transmitting healthcare to reproduction to the
highest degree of quality.

Education is one of the social variables, which can exert the deepest
effect on the concept of the reproductive health and rights. In the
present age, education especially for girls and women is an essential
factor for achieving sustainable development and is confirmed in
international conferences. The fact is that in many countries, women’s
status is inferior to men’s. Women’s participation in home, social
activities and employment are often ignored. Their situation has been
viewed from the perspective of childbirth and child caring even though
they gain little support in these cases.

In most of the developing countries, the long-termed historical
negligence of women’s education has conduced to increase illiteracy
among rustic and old women. The illiteracy of women plays a big part in
putting them beyond the margin of work and social life. Despite the
endeavors exerted in developing countries to fill the educational void
of men and women, it was reported in 1994 that 75% of the illiterate are
to be found among the women.[^33] It is universally acknowledged that
girls play a small part in production and for them, education is for
fun. Hence, in some developing countries, scant attention is accorded to
women’s education.

Even in societies in which access to women’s education is increasing,
they are generally encouraged to pursue women’s activities, thus
strengthening their traditional role in the society. National and
non-national studies show that the relation between education and
reproduction is more than what was conceived in the past, for this is
closely associated with the rate of development, social structure and
cultural milieu.[^34]

The attention to the internal relation of women’s education and the
conduct of pregnancy plays an important role in policy-makings.
Education elevates women’s understanding of their healthcare needs and
views, increases their power of decision making in relation to the
issues of the reproductive health and family planning, enables them to
make proper decisions in their attitude towards the aforementioned
issues proportionate to their family interests.

Educated women get married at a later age, give birth at a later age,
and have fewer births. Demands for children decrease among the educated
women. This is not only due to the decrease of death of children
resulting from unhealthy conditions but due to the fact that it focuses
women’s attention on new interests, decreases their inclination towards
greater number of children, and provides them with more opportunities
for the workforce.

During this process, the recognition and knowledge of women increases,
their talents are revealed and they acquire an identity beyond
childbirth as the result of which true independence and freedom of
action are provided for them, guaranteeing true development. Today, the
need for the furthering of education as the means to develop and
decrease pregnancy in the world is supported.

The executive plan of the Cairo Conference suggests that there is a
mutual relation between the population changes and social changes,
regarding the amelioration of women’s education as a factor for
empowering them, for delaying the marriage age, for decreasing number of
families.

Reproductive Health and Rights in Islam
---------------------------------------

In the general evaluation, the attempts on the formation of the concept
of reproductive health and rights considering the different cultures of
regional and relative tendencies on the general and universal concepts
in different societies, it becomes obvious that the reactions of
identical conditions are different in different areas. The general
outlook on the concepts of human rights disregards the varying value
systems of different societies and presents a unified outlook of the
impression of different cultures towards human rights.

Considering that the international community does not have a unified
structure, the access to a universal agreement is difficult at
intemational level towards certain definitions in different areas of
human rights including the reproductive rights without considering the
different cultural characteristics especially the Islamic values.

As discussed in the first part, the reproductive rights are closely
associated with the status of women in different societies. These rights
as described in international documents are dependent on the absolute
equality of different sexes although the absolute equality of men and
women is an ideal prescribed by international documents.

In the final documents of the conferences recently held on the status of
women, development and population and certain strategies are considered
for them. The ideal concept has not yet been materialized in any country
especially where it is ardently protected. Besides, as the partiality of
legal regulations in conditions where sex discriminations reign in
social relations, it is per se a factor for strengthening the dominant
equality, the equality of rules and regulations do not often correspond
with the facts.

Equality is a comparative concept, which can be substantively and
formally discussed. Most of the superficial equalities guarantee real
inequalities. Hence, the achievement of superficial equality might
result in the violations of real equalities.

With this view on the concept of equality, the abstract generality of
human rights is modified and new views more associated with women’s
lives emerge. Under these conditions, the human values of different
cultures especially Islam stress the universality of the general
principles of human rights. “The Islamic human rights indicate the
natural states which man needs in relation to himself and his nature in
order to develop his natural perfection.”[^35]

The women’s status in Islam has been misinterpreted due to different
reasons. In this regard, we should not ignore the underdevelopment in
some Muslim countries. Undoubtedly, the phenomenon of underdevelopment
has placed women in the margin in Islamic and non-Islamic
countries.[^36]

In Islam, men and women are equal based on their virtue. The Holy Qur’an
states,

***“The noblest among you in the sight of God is the most godfcaring of
you.” (Surah al-Hujurat, 49:13)***

In the Qur’anic verses, men and women are addressed under one unified
title (believers) and their equality has constantly been stressed.[^37]

Paragraph B of article one of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in
Islam states, “All creatures are the servants of Allah and the most
beloved of them is the one who is most helpful to his fellow human
beings and no one is superior to anyone else.”

In Islam, the family is the foundation of the society and considered as
the only bed for the emergence of the new generation. Hence, the
reproductive rights are recognized within the framework of family.[^38]

Article five of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam states,
“The family is the pillar of the society and marriage is its basis.”
Thus, despite the international documents which refer to the
reproductive rights for couples and individuals, the province of these
rights is limited to couples in Islam.

Although men and women have equal rights in performing socio­cultural
activities and religious duties, there are certain regulations as to the
family unit which cause the priority of men’s rights over women’s and
sometimes the other way around.

If we accept that this inequality is not based on the value differences
of men and women but on the basis of the distribution of
responsibilities in proportion to their nature, the question may be
brought up whether this distribution of responsibilities described in
Islam may be revised as to the welfare and the changes in conditions if
such a thing does not contradict Islamic view. It is understood that
this matter should be determined by the Muslim ’Ulama.[^39]

The important thing in the founding of family is the consent of both
parties. Obviously, when there is no consent on both parties, the
reproductive rights are annulled. Regarding the conventional nature of
marriage, both parties can include any conditions in their marriage. For
example, women can include certain rights in their favor so that those
rights may be observed more than others. Surely, the use of such rights
is closely associated with women’s status, their recognition of their
own rights. It must be noted that the literature on marriage in the last
few years indicates the granting of many rights for women.

In Islam, the conventional nature of marriage and some of women’s rights
in the family unit including the preservation of name, the enjoyment of
financial independence and the recognition of their nationality in
administering affairs and the possession of properties and the alimony
which consists of medical and healthcare expenses are among the factors,
which can be effective in empowering women and the exercise of the
reproductive rights.

Undoubtedly, Islam is the school of order and welfare. Many Qur’anic
verses indicate the existence of order in the world, which demands man
to ponder upon the existing order.[^40]

The birth control, planning, and family planning are not exceptions to
this rule. Besides, concerning the principle of *Isalat al-Ibahah*,
meaning that any time we suspect the legality or illegality of
something, it is not unlawful,[^41] or in other words, any time there is
no reason for suspecting something, the use of that object is allowed
for that person. Some scholars believe that so far there has been no
order from the lawgiver for the prohibition of birth control, hence,
family planning is necessary.[^42]

It is also manifest that if reproduction places women in dangerous and
intolerable situation or inflicts mortal agonies on them, or if it is
medically ascertained beyond question that an abnormal child may be
born, abortion is not only allowed but also compulsory according to
*‘Usr va Haraj* which is a well-known law in Islamic jurisprudence.

In addition to the previously mentioned points, the lack of birth
control causes extensive population growth and the limitations of the
resources and energy deficiency in the world which have in turn caused
poverty, illiteracy, illness and unemployment. The repetition of this
process has caused a vicious cycle, which has destructive effects on
life and the environment especially in developing countries, which
constitute a large part of the world.

In Islamic Iran, over the years after the victory of the Islamic
Revolution (1979) and the period of the imposed war (1980-1988), the
issue of family planning was ignored and the population growth has
caused the highest rate of childbirth in the country.[^43] After the
imposed war the issue of population and the social-economic straits
formed the core of the discussions relating to socio-economic
development.

The modification of population within the framework of the general
policies of the first socio-economic plan (1989- l993) was taken into
consideration and in 1993, family planning law was ratified, annulling
the advantages expected for the fourth child. Hence, population growth
had an upward trend. In the second five-year plan, family planning was
taken into consideration within the framework of populaion issues. In
this program, there is extensive birth control especially in deprived
areas and allocating part of the activities of the hospitals, clinics,
and medical centers to the provision of birth control and annulling all
advantages relating to large fumilies.

From an Islamic perspective, education is equally recommended for men
and women. The holy prophet states, “seeking knowledge is incumbent upon
every Muslim man and woman.”

Article nine of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam states,
“Every human being has the right to receive both religious and worldly
education from the various institutions of education and guidance
including the family, the school, the university, the media, etc, and in
such an integrated and balanced manner as to develop his personality,
strengthen his faith in God and promote his respect for and defence of
both rights and obligations.”

The regulation of the second development plan stresses the education and
the increase of women’s knowledge in the age levels of pregnancy and the
advantages of birth control, acquisition of knowledge and doing studies
for using and developing the new methods in pregnancy prevention. It
suggests the performing of scientific researches with a view to
acquiring knowledge, insight, function and family problems in family
planning and the applied studies to increase awareness, outlook,
function of family and access to methods and suitable technology.
Firiydun Rahmani states:

In investigating the effective factors on women’s childbirth in Iran,
two factors of literacy and occupation for women have been discussed.
The results show that the more the rate of women’s literacy and women is
especially the females over 15-49, the less the rate of births becomes.
Besides, there is a reverse relation between the rate of women’s
occupation in industry and childbirth and the rate of women at education
at higher level and childbirth. Thus, the effects of these factors on
reproduction in Iran are determined and considering the decrease of
women’s occupation in industry in between 1976-1986 on the one hand and
the decrease of the rate of women at higher education, the petty
increase of women’s literacy and the existence of the great number of
illiterate women and the deep gulf of urban and rural spaces, the
necessity of increase of literacy and education of women especially in
rural areas and their occupation outside the family are
determined.”[^44]

Considering that 34 percent of the fifteen year old Iranian population
are illiterate and there are 150 illiterate women compared to 100
illiterate men[^45] and the decrease of women’s presence in the work
force, the necessity of steps for ameliorating educational level and
women’s occupation as the effective factor in controlling birth and the
exercise of the reproductive rights becomes all the more apparent.

Abortion in Islam
-----------------

Abortion is not only a medical and social issue but also a philosophical
one where the legality of induced abortion is different. The moral
characteristics of such abortions lie in protecting the defenseless life
of man or what is potentially accepted as life and the philosophical
aspects of it are determining the progressive process of fetus which is
the beginning of man’s life.

According to a certain decree, the killing of children is forbidden in
the Qur’an and the children refer to fetus and the like.

***“Those who killed their children out of ignorance are in loss.”
(Surah al-An’am, 6:140)***

Today, the science of genetics shows that human life begins at the time
when ovum is formed or at least when it is shaped in the womb and is not
stopped after those physiological changes continue until death. In other
words, the determining of a moment in the development of the fetus as
the moment when human life begins is impossible.[^46]

There is a difference between the medical and the jurisprudential
definition of fetus. According to the Holy Qur’an,

***“We have created man of an extract of clay, then We made him a small
seed in a firm resting-place, then We made the seed a clot, then We made
the clot a lump of flesh, then We made the lump of flesh bones, then We
clothed the bones with flesh, then We caused it to grow into another
creation, so blessed be Allah, the best of the creators.” (Surah
al-Mu’minun, 23:14)***

They interpret another creation as the infusing of the spirit of God,
regarding a human life for the fetus. With this reasoning, most of the
jurisprudents regard the aborting of the fetus as killing.[^47]

To interpret the above mentioned verse they refer to a Hadith by prophet
Muhammad that states, “Each one of you remains in the womb for forty
days, and as a clot for the same period of time, and then as flesh for
the same period of time and then God sends an angel to infuse within it
of His spirit.”

This hadith states that from the ovum to the infusing of spirit, 120
days pass. In other words after 120 days, the fetus assumes a human
form.[^48]

Although the fetus, within which the spirit of God has not been infused
according to Islam, is not a human being, it is valuable and if the
fetus is dropped before the spirit is infused within it, the act shall
incur punishment. There are different ideas in this regard.

In the Iranian legal system, which is based on jurisprudential and
Islamic rules, abortion is a crime. Although access to reliable
information for determining the number of induced abortions is
difficult, the formal statistics shows almost zero in this regard.[^49]
However, the fact shows the great number of induced abortions.

In the study after the revolution in five governmental hospitals, this
result emerged that in the five hospitals, 295 people confessed to
induced abortions. Another study in another Tehran hospital during
1990-1991 shows the hospitalization of 7% of the whole people who
committed abortion.[^50]

The Islamic penal system determines the types of blood money for
abortion and besides this chapter, the operation of people in this act
is predicted in book five through articles 622-624. It is obvious that
the illegality of aborting does not include medical abortions.

Conclusion
----------

One may gather these results from the discussion:

1. The concept of the reproductive health and rights has been recognized
as the manifestation of universal human rights.

2. This concept is based on the fundamental documents on human rights,
the final documents of the conferences of population and development,
women’s rights and the internal affairs of states.

3. Due to the incongruity of the different population cultures, there
has been no certain definition for these rights.

4. The reproductive rights as described in the international documents
of the last decade includes: the rights of spouses and individuals for
free decision-making and the responsibility of determining the number of
children and their period and the right to enjoy proper instrument,
information and instruction for the exercise of the aforementioned
rights which include the reproductive rights and birth control.

5. In Islam, the reproductive rights are recognized only within the
framework of the family.

6. From the things expressed on the reproductive rights, it seems that
women should decide on the time of their childbirth due to their
physical and mental state so that they may give birth to healthy
children. In addition, the couples shall have financial commitment to
their children and should determine the time of childbirth.

7. In the end, expressing views on the content of the reproductive
rights should correspond with Islamic values and can only be determined
by the jurisprudents and the experts in this field.

Bibliography
------------

Whitty, Noel. *The Mind, the Body and Reproductive Health Information*.
Book Review Human Right Quarterly, vol. 18. No. 1, Feb, 1996.

Crane, Barbara B. and Stephen L. Isaacs. *The Cairo Programme of Action:
A New* *Framework for International Cooperation on Population and
Development issue*. International Law Journal, vol. 36, no. 2, 1995.

Abu’l Hasan Muhammadi. *The Principle of Understanding Islamic Laws*.
Tehran: University of Tehran, 1979.

Vastani Ahmadi, ‘Abd al-Ghani. *Collective order in Private Law*.

Muhammad Riza Bandarchi, *Study of Legal and Jurisprudential Aspects of
Population Control*. Abstracts of articles relating to the conference of
Population in the University of Isfahan.

Jan Vojcic, *Mute Consent*, translated by Nasir Baligh. Articles on the
conduct of medicine. The Center for Medical Researches and Morality.

Husayn Quli Hasani Nizhad. *Protection of the Rights of Pregnancy in
American and Iranian Rights.* Kanun-i Vukala Magazine. Nos. 8-9.
1993-1994.

[^1]: Report of the International Conference on Population and
development A/CONF. 171/13, 18 October 1994, p. 60.

[^2]: Family Planning Health and Family Well-Being United Nations, (N.
Y. 1996), p. 316.

[^3]: Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states: 1.
Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race,
nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family.
They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at
its dissolution. 2. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free
and full consent of the intending spouses. 3. The family is the natural
and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by
society and the State.

[^4]: Article 16 of Tehran Conterence states: “The international
community contantly considers the protection of family and children.
Parents have the right to freely determine the number of their children
and the age distance between them.”

[^5]: Article 23 of Civil and Political Rights states: 1. Family is the
basic group unit of society and is entitled to protection of the society
and the State. 2. The right of men and women of marriageable age to
marry and to found a family shall be recognized. 3. No marriage shall be
entered into without the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
4. State Parties to the present Covenant shall take appropriate steps to
ensure equality of rights and responsibilities of spouses as to
marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. Article ten of the
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights states: The State
Parties to the Present Covenant recognize that 1. The widest possible
protection and assistance should be accorded to the family, which is the
natural and fundamental group unit of society. 2. Special protection
should be accorded to mothers during a reasonable period before and
after childbirth. Article 12 of the same Covenant states: 1. The States
Parties to the present covenant recognize the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health. 2. The steps taken by the state parties to the present covenant
to achieve the full realization of this right shall include those
necessary for: a) the provision for the reduction of the stillbirth-rate
and of infant mortality and for the healthy development of the child b)
the improvement of all aspects of environmental and industrial
healthcare c) the prevention, treatment and control of epidemic,
endemic, occupational and other diseases. d) The creation of conditions
which would assure to all medical service and medical attention in the
event of sickness.

[^6]: Noel Whitty, The Mind, the Body and Reproductive Health
Information, Book Review, Human Right Quarterly, Vol. l8, No. 1,
(February 1996), p. 227.

[^7]: Ibid., p.228

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Ibid., p.226

[^10]: Noel Whitty, op. cit., p.20

[^11]: Barbara B. Crane and Stephen L. Isaacs, The Cairo Program of
Actions: A New Framework for International Co-operation on Population
and development Issues, International Law Journal, 1995, Vol. 36, No. 2
(1995) p. 299.

[^12]: Ibid., p.300

[^13]: A/EDNF, 171/13, p. 14.

[^14]: Report of UNF PA, 1996.

[^15]: Barbara B. Crane and Stephen L. Isaacs, op.cit. p. 196.

[^16]: A/Conf. 171/13, p. 13.

[^17]: Family Planning, ibid., p. 33.

[^18]: Barbara Crane and ..., op.cit. p. 304.

[^19]: Report of the Secretary General: E/CN, 9/1996/2, 15 January 1996,
p. 24.

[^20]: Ibid.,p.25

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Family Planning Health and Family Well-being, Ibid.

[^25]: Ibid.,p.210

[^26]: A/CONF, 171/13, p.60

[^27]: A/CONF, 171/13, p.60

[^28]: E/CN. G/1996/2., p.11

[^29]: Ibid., p.13

[^30]: Ibid.

[^31]: Ibid., p.15

[^32]: A/CONF, 171/13, p.60

[^33]: Ibid., p.79

[^34]: Review and Appraisal of the World Populationn of Action U.N.,
1994, p.24

[^35]: Ayatullah Muhammmad Ali Taskhiri, The Development of human
Rights, Siyasat Khariji Magazine, no. 1, (1996), p. 155.

[^36]: Abdel Rahim Omran, Family Planning in the Legacy of Islam, United
Nations Population Fund, (UNFPA),1997, p. 40.

[^37]: For further information see Surah at-Tawbah (9:72); Surah
al-Ahzab (33:35-36).

[^38]: For more information see Surah an-Nisa (4:21).

[^39]: Husayn Mihrpur, Islam and Human Rights, Siyasat Khariji, no. 1,
(1996), p.223

[^40]: Surah Ya Sin, (36:40), Surah al-Qamar (54:49).

[^41]: Abu’l-Hasan Muhammadi, The Principles of Understanding Islamic
Laws, Tehran, (University of Tehran, 1979), p.337

[^42]: Muhammad Riza Bandarchi, Study of Legal and Jurisprudential
Aspects of Population Control, Abstracts of articles relating to the
conference of Population in the University of Isfahan

[^43]: Firivdun Rahmani, The Effects of Woman’s Occupation on
Childbirth, Ibid.

[^44]: Ibid.

[^45]: UNESCO researches on illiteracy in Iran, 1994.

[^46]: Jan Vojcic, Mute Consent, translated by Nasir Baligh, Articles on
the conduct of medicine, The Center for Medical Researches and Morality,
p. 77

[^47]: Husayn Quli Husani Nizhad, Protection of the Rights of Pregnancy
in American and Iranian Rights, Kanun-i Vukala Magazine, Nos. 8-9
(1993-1994) p. 77.

[^48]: Ibid.,p.79

[^49]: Sayyid Mustafa Muhaqqeq Damad, Study of Abortion, effects, and
the Issues concerning it, Articles on Medical Conduct, The Center for
Medical Researches and Morality,Vol. 5, p. 139

[^50]: Ibid.


