International Human Rights Regime: A Theoretical Approach To Regime Formation And Persistence
=============================================================================================

**Dr. Abumuhammad ‘Asgarkhani**

It is of man that I have to speak: and the question that I am
investigating shows me that it is to men that I must address myself: for
questions of this sort are not asked by those who are afraid to honour
the truth ... I conceive that there are two kinds of inequity among the
human species: one, which I call natural or physical because it is
established by nature and consists in a difference of age, health,
bodily strength and the qualities of the mind or of the soul: and
another which may be called moral or political inequality, because it
depends on a kind of convention and is established or at least
authorised by the consent of men. This latter consists of the different
privileges, which some men enjoy to the prejudices of others. Such as
that of being more rich, more honoured, more powerful, or even in a
position to exact obedience.[^1]

**Jean-Jacque Rousseau**

Introduction
------------

Inequality among the human species arises from unequal distribution of
power. Power is primarily in service of particular interests. Secondly,
it is in service of the common good. Two categories of variables can
account for the development of any regime. A first category involves
general laws of cause and effect that can be categorised as principle
factors. A second group of variables concerns subsidiary elements, which
can be classified as peripheral or supplementary factors. The former
consists of the actors’ economic interests/incentives, sources of power,
norms/principles and diffuse values, the latter comprising practice or
usage, custom, and knowledge. The theoretical approach adopted here is a
confluence of three clusters of theories: modified structuralism,
neo-liberal institutionalism and the theory of cosmopolitanism.

At the outset, I shall give a brief study of the main streams of thought
on regime theories. Then, I shall survey the theory of hegemonic
stability. The reason for this is this that first there is almost a
consensus among the scholars that international relations in the post
Second World War period were dominated by American hegemony and that
this hegemony established several international regimes that were either
*benevolent* or *coercive*[^2] basically supporting the hegemony’s
interests. If coercive, the public utilitarian consideration was of
secondary concern. Game theory and cosmopolitanism will be subsequently
followed by my discussion on the principles, norms and rules of the
human rights regime. In the end, I shall discuss the process of the
international human rights regime formation. My conclusion will dwell
upon both the contribution and limits of human rights in international
politics.

Regime Theories
---------------

Elsewhere I have argued that the literature on international relations
does not revolve round a single theory.[^3] The literature centred on
regime analysis­regimes are defined as sets of implicit or explicit
principles, norms, rules and decision-making procedures around which
actor’s expectations converge in a given issue area[^4] - does not
present a coherent whole either. Yet, it is quite safe to argue that the
regime literature focuses on economic behaviour, departing from
traditional concerns with military security.

Through the works of such scholars as Ernst Haas, regime analysis
emerged out of an earlier concern with functionalism and
integration.[^5] However, the chief point of departure has been
recognised as Keohane and Nye’s *Power and Interdependence*.[^6] Under
conditions of interdependence, they argued that sovereignty had not yet
withered away.

However, states could no longer exercise absolute control over
international economic movements. Non-state actors, entities and
institutions whether transnational, transgovernmental or
intergovernmental were incorporated in regime literature. In 1983,
Krasner and his co-authors tried to synthesise a theoretical framework
on regime analysis. Krasner himself identified three perspectives:
structuralism, Grotian and modified structuralism.[^7]

According to Waltz, of the three dimensions in structuralism that is,
the distribution of capabilities, the ordering principles and the
function of the units, only the distribution of capabilities actually
matters. In analysing international-political structure, Waltz argues
that:

We do not ask whether states are revolutionary or legitimate,
authoritarian or democratic, ideological or pragmatic. We abstract from
every attribute of states except their capabilities ... We ask what
range of expectations arises merely from looking at the type of order
that prevails among them and at the distribution of capabilities within
that order... what emerges is a positional picture, a general
description of the ordered overall arrangement of a society written in
terms of the placement of units rather than in terms of their
qualities.[^8]

Therefore, according to structuralism, regimes depend on the
distribution of power within the system. It is the states that *set the
scene and stage their dramas or carry on their humdrum affairs*.[^9]
This approach leaves no room for regimes because only state power sets
*the term of the intercourse, whether by passively permitting informal
rules to develop or actively intervening to change rules that no longer
suit them*.[^10] International institutions are ineffective in a
self-help system and co-operation is fragile. It is fragile both because
of cheating ad because of states’ preference for relative over absolute
gain.

In a state of anarchy, Waltz posits *that relative* *gain is more
important than absolute gain*.[^11] In the word of Grieco, reflecting
Waltz, states are positional, not autistic in character and in
uncooperative interactions they are not only concerned about cheating
but also worry that their partners might gain more from co-operation
than they do.[^12] Therefore, in a condition of anarchy, cheating and
the search for absolute or relative gain impedes co-operation.

The Groatian approach, unlike structuralism, regards regimes as
independent variables. Regimes are social institutions governing the
actions of those interested in specifiable activities.[^13] Under this
approach, regimes are omnipresent. For instance, Puchala opines that for
every political system, be it the United Nations, the United States, New
York city or the American Political Science Association, there is a
corresponding regime.[^14] This generalisation ignores international
anarchy and egoism. Unlike structuralism that sees regimes as outcomes,
the Grotian perspective regards regimes as causal factors.

Modified structuralism views regimes as intervening variables between
power and outcomes. This school encompasses two major intellectual
streams: theory of hegemonic stability and bargaining theory. The
prominent feature of modified structuralism is its adherence to the
basic tenets of structuralism, which depicts an international system of
functionally symmetrical, power-maximising states interacting in an
anarchic environment. Yet, it postulates that under certain conditions
when individual actors fail to secure Pareto-optimal outcomes, regimes
play an important role even in an anarchic situation.

The Theory of Hegemonic Stability
---------------------------------

The proponents of hegemonic stability theory argue that an open liberal
world economy requires a hegemonic or dominant power.[^15] Hegemony is
essential because hegemonic structure of power, dominated by a single
country is most conducive to the development of strong international
regimes whose rules are relatively precise and well obeyed. Domination
of the world by a single country as Keohane suggests is an integral part
of the theory.[^16] Kindleberger puts it more clearly: “For the world to
be stabilized, there has to be a stabiliser, one stabiliser.”[^17]

By virtue of power, the hegemony should sustain the stability of the
system such that a liberal world economy provides collective goods.
Therefore, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the Most
Favoured Nation clause of the GATT, form some examples of such
collective goods.[^18] The hegemony uses its influence to create
international regimes, whose establishment in turn primarily purports to
serve the hegemony’s national interest.[^19]

The hegemony’s protection of its international interest is the main
logic behind the notion of systematic stability. The implication is that
regimes could be either benevolent or coercive. Duncan Snidal has argued
that the question of when hegemony - whether by a single state or by a
condominium of states-will be benevolent, coercive but still beneficial
or simply exploitative outs across subfield boundaries.[^20]

Keohane and Gilpin argue that regimes prescribe legitimate and proscribe
illegitimate behaviour to limit conflict, ensure justice or facilitate
agreement,[^21] (emphasis mine). If a liberal world economy is to
survive the hegemony, it must be able and willing to respond quickly to
threats to the system.[^22] Under this argument, systematic stability is
a variable depending on power and most importantly on its maximisation.
“A concentration of power would tend to lead to systematic stability
whereas fragmentation of power and influence would lead to systematic
instability.[^23]

From this line of reasoning one can infer that co-operation is also a
variable depending on power because it is the hegemony that creates
international regimes that ease co-operation; however, co­operation can
be extended by itself even after hegemony.”[^24]

My critique of hegemonic stability theory does not accord that of Susan
Strange. Strange calls regimes *fads* and puts emphasis on traditional
issue areas while I believe that regimes are still worth studying. It
is, however, worth commenting on what Strange and Grunberg call the myth
of hegemony.[^25] It is also the theory of mythic content that downplays
the coercive side of regimes while exaggerating the benevolent aspects.

Even the most positive writers on regimes such as Oran Young have
acknowledged that some regimes are imposed.[^26] Puchala and Hopkins
admit: “All regimes are biased. They establish hierarchies of values,
emphasising some and discounting others. They also distribute rewards to
the advantage of some and the disadvantage of others and in so doing
they buttress, legitimate and sometimes institutionalise international
patterns of dominance, subordination, accumulation, and
exploitation.”[^27] Ironically, such *imposed* and *biased* regimes
*ensure* *equity*.[^28] Regime writers analyses resemble a medium of
whether in which coercion withers away in a twinkle. The core of the
orthodox hegemonic stability theory is to justify force by all means
including illegal economic sanctions: “A pattern of behaviour initially
established by economic coercion or force may come to be regarded as
legitimate by those on whom it has been imposed.”[^29]

As Keohane posits, international relations should start from
realism.[^30] Accordingly, what I am concerned with here is the role of
power at the early stage of co-operation and the conditions under which
such co-operation has evolved in the past years.

A second critique is that the orthodox theory of hegemonic stability
does not take into account the role of other state actors. The
hegemonies - the United Kingdom before World War II and the United
States after World War II - tended to be viewed as the sole supplier of
regimes and public goods. All other members of the international society
are considered free riders or at least irrelevant to the production of
public goods. As Haggard and Simmons put it, “The benign view of
hegemony turns realism on its head... rather than the strong exploiting
the weak, it is the weak who exploit the strong.”[^31] This had led
American writers on IPE (International Political Economy) to ignore
smaller states’ contribution to the process of regime formation and
their function.

I would not attempt to move to the other extreme as Tooze, Murphy and
co-authors do when they call for a non-counter-hegemonic international
political economy and set an agenda for a research on hegemony from
below simply because structural force lays the foundation of any given
regime. However, they are right in suggesting that the *practice of
international relations, driven by notions of consensus-induced
co-operation rather than the bias of American universalism*[^32] can
better serve the interests of smaller states. The problem with the
traditional hegemonic stability theory is that it does not provide clear
theorems and implications because its variables are not readily
practical in world politics. As Martin Rochester has asked, “What
advice, for example, does the theory of hegemonic stability offer policy
makers concerned about the requirements of world order should they allow
a single state to become and remain a hegemony”?[^33] Therefore,· it
seems necessary to allow the roles of other actors.

Cosmopolitanism
---------------

The sons of Adam are limbs of each other
Having been creaied of one essence
When the calamity of time afflicts one limb
The other limbs cannot remain at rest

If thou hast no sympathy for the troubles of others
Thou are unworthy to be called by the name of a man.

**Sa’di, the Persian Poet, 1193-1291**

The problem of justice and inequality is not a new thing in human life.
In Greek mythology, we hear Heraclitus saying, “The Sun will not
overstep his measures. If he does, the Erinyes, the handmaids of justice
will find out.[^34] Talking about the harmony of a life shared in common
by all its members, the Greek philosophers began to expound on the
institutions of city-state. The growth of Athenian government brought
changes in its institutions and the concept of justice became dependent
on the changes in these institutions. Greek philosophers laid the
foundation of a belief in common life that continued with some
modification from the fifth century to the eighteenth century and came
to be identified as idealism or cosmopolitanism.[^35]

From the nineteenth century onward, its proponents have cast their eyes
to a time when in the name of humanity nation states and national
interests would be transformed.[^36] The ideas of such writers range
widely from environmental issues to the issues of ethics and hunger.
However, one common theme among the proponents of this school of thought
is their concern for inequality and injustice one aspect of which is
human rights.

The Holy Qur’an states:

***“We sent Our messengers with clear signs and We sent down with them
the Book and the Balance so that men might uphold Justice.” (Surah
al-Hadid, 57:25)***

Justice holds a special place in the constitution of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Article 154 stipulates that *the Islamic Republic of
Iran strives for the happiness of human beings within the community of
mankind and recognises independence, freedom and the rule of the justice
as universal rights to be enjoyed by all peoples of the world. Hence,
while withholding from all interference in domestic affairs of nations,
the Islamic Republic shall bolster any legitimate struggle of oppressed
peoples against the oppressive classes anywhere on the face of the
earth.*[^37]

One can argue that the behaviour of the Islamic Republic of Iran does
not at all accord with the theories of imperialism. Neither can it be
explained by dependency perspectives. Different versions of the theories
of imperialism­ ranging from classical theorists (Hobson 1902;
Hilferding 1910; Luxemburg 1913 and 1915; Bulkharin 1915 and 1924; and
Lenin 1916)[^38] to more recent writers such as Baran[^39] and
Warren[^40] and the dependency school whether the underdevelopment,[^41]
the world system,[^42] articulation of the mode of production[^43] or to
some extent associated development[^44] theories are all variants of
economic determinism while the core of Iran’s cosmopolitanism lies in
its ideology and culture.

In the works of the sevnteenth century philosopher John Locke and in the
Declaration of Independence written by his American disciples, all men
are endowed by nature or God with certain basic rights. These appeared
as the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in the French Revolution,
proclaiming the liberty and equality of all persons regardless of
economic classes or social status. Later such rights were realised on a
universal scale under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Thomas Jefferson’s emphasis on endowed and unalienable rights was
reflecting a long tradition in natural rights philosophy with roots
dating back to the natural law and cosmopolitanism of the Greek Stoics,
its reevaluation by St. Thomas Aquinas who developed the Church’s
doctrine that the rulers of states were subject to a higher law.

Game Theory
-----------

Two men suspected of committing a crime together are arrested and placed
in separate cells by the police. Each suspect may either confess or
remain silent and each one knows the possibie consequences of this
action. These are: (1) If one suspect confesses and his partner does
not, the one who confessed turns state’s evidence and goes free and the
other one goes to jail for twenty years. (2) If both suspects confess,
they both go to jail for five years. (3) If both suspects remain silent,
they go to jail for a year for carrying concealed weapons-a lesser
charge. We will suppose that there is no honour among thieves and each
suspect’s sole concern is his own self­ interest. Under these conditions
what should the criminals do?[^45]

The foregoing, a clear description of the Prisoners’ Dilemma explains
what it is for an actor to make a rational decision and why co-operative
action for mutual benefit is impossible.

The central point of the game theory of the Prisoners’ dilemma is that
rational actors cannot ultimately reach a Pareto-optimal solution even
if a certain degree of mutual interest exists between them. The
underlying cause of discord is that each actor might benefit from double
crossing the other one, that is to say. From defection as it is
illustrated by the stag-hunt context.

In the prisoners’ dilemma, each prisoner is expected to confess and
thereby defect solely on self-interest grounds. They both could avoid
prison sentences if they chose not to confess. If one prisoner confesses
(defects) and the other one chooses not to confess (co-operate) the
defector gets the benefit. Since none of them is sure the other would
co-operate both would ultimately defect.

As we can see, the notion of uncertainty plays a critical role. The
outcome could be different should a line of communication be established
between them. Applied to states, therefore, one pitfall of the theory is
that it ignores the possibility of communication among states. Just like
individuals, states cannot fail to communicate in a world woven into
complex interrelated issues. Actors have many occasions to meet one
another in international affairs. They have a stake in the future
interaction and always worry about any damage to their reputation.

Axelrod has shown that co-operation can take place even under
*unconditional* *defection*. It cannot happen if the interaction
involves scattered individuals who have little chance to meet each
other. The evolution of co-operation stems from a smaller number of
partners who interact on a *reciprocity* basis. However, any strategy
based on reciprocity is tried in a world where many other strategies are
involved. Once co-operation based on reciprocity is established, it
cannot *protect itself from invasion by less co-operative
strategies*.[^46]

A second pitfall of the theory is that actors’ decisions in
international politics, just like those of prisoners are assumed to be
voluntary. They have the choice either to choose or to pass the
alternatives whereas in world politics alternatives are fixed in terms
of (a) the distribution of capabilities ranging from military to
economic power (b) forces involving *issue­ structure*.[^47]

Hobbes holds that the agreements of men in the state of nature are
covenant only. And covenants without the sword are but words.[^48]
*Duress* to which lawyers refer as a condition where one is induced by
wrongful act or threat of another to make contract under circumstances
which deprive him of exercise of his free will[^49] is binding and
lawful in the state of nature because:

Covenants entered into by fear in the condition of mere Nature are
obligatory: For example if I covenant to pay a ransom, or service for my
life to an enemy I am bound by it… and if a weaker prince makes a
disadvantageous peace with a stronger, for fear he is bound to keep it
... and even in common wealth if I be forced to redeem myself from a
thief by promising him money I am bound to pay it.[^50]

In other words, promises made under duress are obligatory because *with
a gun at my head ... I have rationally chosen to make such pledges
rather than to be shot.*[^51]

Some scholars have put emphasis on the bargaining position of the weaker
states. Haas has maintained that the *expectation that the stronger will
not use violence in economic relations has given the weaker the courage
to assert themselves in many international forums*.[^52] Wagner has
summarised the writings on asymmetrical interdependence and has found
that there were two ways in which the weak could demonstrate their
bargaining power: one is the *willingness to suffer* and the other is
that the *cost to the target state* *of agreeing to the demands made of
it may be greater than the cost of the sanctions*.[^53] Keohane warns
that:

In applying rational choice theory to the formation and maintenance of
international regimes, we have to be continually sensitive to the
structural context within which agreements are made. Voluntary choice
does not imply equality of situation; in explaining outcomes, prior to
constraints may be more important than the process of choice
itself.[^54]

In the context of human rights, I must mention that as Axelrod puts it,
states will have to meet each other repeatedly. Therefore, defection
will not be allowed for a number of reasons. Firstly, states tend to
observe human rights regime because of reputation considerations.
Secondly, with the broad interpretation on chapter VII of the UN Charter
after the Cold War, the Security Council takes action in two areas:
humanitarian assistance and protected zones.

The Security Council’s intervention under the rubric of collective
security regime will operate as a deterring force against state
behaviour. As a result, continued violation of the norms will work
against the violator’s self-interest. Thirdly, both on international and
domestic scale, public opinion and mass media will largely constrain the
states.

General Aspects of Human Rights Regime
--------------------------------------

### Dimensions

The dimensions of human rights regime are primarily its structural
components. Just as arms control constitutes a more or less hierarchical
area within which various individual regimes can exist human rights
regime is not uni-dimensional. Human rights are clearly an established
issue-area of world politics. What was once a matter of domestic
jurisdiction has now been internationalised .

### Principles

I define principles as the general objectives under each dimension of
human rights regime, while norms are more specific provisions intended
to establish codes of conduct. Under the United Nations Charter, the
most important principle of human rights regime is Article 55, which
stipulates:

With a view to the creation of condition of stability and well-being
which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples, the United Nations shall promote: a.
higher standards of living, full employment, and conditions of economic
and social progress and development; b. solutions of international
economic, social, health, and related problems; and international
cultural and educational co­operation; and c. universal respect for, and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion.

Some newly constructed regimes are founded upon regimes that already
exist. Some are constructed following a crisis. Functionalism and its
regime­related consequences will help revive, in the end, the spirit of
former regimes. That is the line along which we may expect future
developments to take place. In the case of the previously mentioned
principles, I must note that the principle takes its roots from the
League of Nations, which encompassed primarily minority rights, Labour
rights and the rights of individuals in mandated territories.

As for minority rights, it was war that produced concern. After World
War I, there was a belief that unhappy minorities in central Europe had
contributed to the outbreak of war in 1914. Minority treaties were
attached to the Versailles peace treaty of 1919 in which an important
principle lay behind these treaties: peace, order, and justice - in
addition to human dignity - mandate that a national majority shows
tolerance towards minorities.

Attempts to protect labour rights fared much better and led to the
creation of the International Labour Organisation (ILG) which
subsequently developed a series of treaties to protect the rights of
labour. The rights of individuals in mandated territories were
theoretically protected under the League Mandates Commission. The
Commission consisted partially of the colonial powers and the
individuals from Mandated Territories could not appear directly before
the Commission. Yet, it was accepted that the League of Nations should
guarantee the rights of peoples in these territories to achieve national
independence and well-being.

### Norms

Norms are the general legal provisions that help define codes of conduct
for the actors in the system for each dimension of the human right
regimes. The provisions are contained in international treaties or
agreements and can originate from various sources. However, most of the
norms for the current human rights regime stem from basic rules encoded
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Some norms may also be
found in other international agreements or regional arrangements.
However, such agreements are normally aimed essentially at strengthening
the norms and principles set forth in the Universal Declaration. In
consequence, the Declaration remains the primary source for norms of
regime, forming a kind of tool chest of basic codes establishing not
only the general norms and principles of the regime but also its
operating provisions. Like most regimes, the norms of the current human
rights regime tend to merge with the principles and objectives in the
declaration.

### Rules

Rules are the means incorporated into fundamental arrangements, which
make the norms and principles of the regime operational. The rules must
comply with established norms and principles and may either be legal and
forrmal (such as resolutions of the Security Council or the United
Nations General Assembly) or informal (established behaviours that have
been elevated to the status of rules through repeated use). Rules may be
established at either the global or the regional level.

### Usage And Custom

According to Krasner, custom practice and usage are sets of causal
variables that affect regime development. Usage refers to regular
patterns of behaviour based on actual practice of actors: custom to
longstanding practice. According to the position taken by Hopkins and
Puchala, practices that begin as ad hoc private arrangements later
become the basis for official regimes.

### Knowledge

Ernst Haas defines knowledge as *the sum of technical information and of
theories about that information which commands sufficient consensus at a
given time among interested actors to serve as a guide to public policy
designed to achieve some social goal*. In pinpointing the potentialities
inherent in a stance of cognitive *evolutionism*, he argues that
knowledge creates a basis for co-operation by illuminating complex
interconnections that were not previously understood. Knowledge cannot
only enhance the prospect for convergent state behaviour: it can also
transcend *prevailing lines of ideological cleavage*. It can provide a
common ground for both mechanical approaches (most conventional social
science theories) and organic approaches (egalitarianism and various
environmentally oriented arguments).

### Implementation Procedures

Procedures-or the actions that implement norms and rule-can be divided
according to the bodies that carry out the prescriptive features of the
regime-to three levels of national, regional and global.

At the national level, rules are implemented under national sovereignty.
We do not propose to detail how rules and procedures are implemented at
the national level. Suffice it to say that the implementation of rules
will be increasingly constrained as states pass national legislation to
support the efforts made under the regime. This can be seen, for
instance, in the declarations of willingness by some countries to keep
military contingents available for the United Nations on permanent
basis.

Implementation procedures are created within multilateral organisations
themselves. These arrangements include formal legal arrangements, tacit
conventions and informal arrangements often established on a
case-by-case basis. To understand this complex aspect of the human
rights regime, it is useful to draw a distinction between global and
regional levels.

### Monitoring Regime Consequences

Most international organisations have established surveillance and
control mechanisms to monitor implementation of prevailing rules and
procedures. The Congruence of the regime can be determined by using
these mechanisms to determine compliance with established norms or rules
and procedures.

International human rights regime constitutes an ideology: it seeks to
directly cotrol behaviour through commands and finally it seeks to
indirectly control behaviour via political socialisation. The
international monitoring agencies act for indirect protection over time,
trying to urge states to directly protect human rights. Although both
the public and the private sector are monitoring the human rights
protection, such efforts do not exist in a political vacuum.

Historical Antecedents to Human Rights Regime
---------------------------------------------

War and the conditions for peace and security is the core of both
international relations and international law. Spencer believes that war
is the cause of all such developments. The beginnings of international
attention to human rights can be traced either to slavery or to war.

### The Charter Of Cyrus

The ancestor of the documents recognising the rights of man was
promulgated in Persia by Cyrus the Great about twenty five hundred years
ago. Christian Daubie has recounted the magnanimity and clemency of
Cyrus to subject peoples - in marked contrast to the practice of earlier
conquerors-and particularly his respect for their religion; from the
Charter of Cyrus one induces the recognition and protection of what we
now call the rights to liberty and security, freedom of movement, the
right of property and even certain economic and social rights.[^55]

### The Four Tribunals

**The Four Tribunals**[^56]

International wars and conflicts have produced four tribunals dating
from the start of the twentieth century to the eve of the development of
the human rights regime at the end of Word War II. The four tribunals
have radically different characters.

In sequence, the opinions are those of the United States Supreme Court
[sitting as a court of prize] of an international arbitrate tribunal
formed under a U.S.-Mexican convention of the Permanent Court of
International Justice formed under the League of Nations [the
predecessor to the present International Court of Justice formed under
the United Nations Charter] and of the International Military Tribunal
formed by the allied powers after World war II for the Nuremberg trials
of war criminals.

The selection of the four tribunals’ opinions to present some background
to the human rights regime might suggest to the reader that tribunals
have played a major role in resolving disputes over international human
rights and in simultaneously developing that body of law.

The *Paquete Habana* deals with an earlier period in the development of
laws of war, here navel warfare, and with a theme that became central in
the later treaty development of this field­ the protection of
non-combatant civilians and their property [here, civilian fishing
vessels] against the ravages of war.

Within the framework of the laws of war, this case-involves *jus in
bello*, the ways in which war ought to be waged, rather than the related
but distinct *jus ad bellum*, the determination of those conditions [if
any] in which a just or justified war can be waged in which war is
legal.

In its analysis of the question before it, the U. S. Supreme Court here
illustrate a classical understanding of international customary law. The
*Paquete Habana* has the aura of a humane world in which if war occurs
the fighting should be as compassionate in spirit as possible. It rests
the rule of exemption of coastal fishing vessels on considerations of
humanity to a poor and industrious order of men and [on] the mutual
convenience of fishing vessels.[^57]

The intricate body of international law considered by the Supreme Court
grew out of centuries of primarily customary law although custom was
supplemented and informed centuries ago by selective bilateral treaties.
Custom remains essential to argument about the laws of war to this day.
However, this field is increasingly dominated by multilateral treaties
that have both codified customary standards and rules and developed new
ones in numerous international conferences.

Multilateral declarations and treaties started to achieve prominence in
the second half on the nineteenth century. The treaties now include the
Hague Conventions concluded around the turn of the century the four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 (as well as two significant protocols of 1977
to those conventions) and several discrete treaties since World War II
on matters like bans on particular weapons and cultural property.

The basic Geneva Conventions (185 states parties as of January 1995) and
the two Protocols (Protocols No. 1 , 136 parties; Protocol No. 2, 126
parties) cover a vast range of problems stemming from land, air or naval
warfare, including the protection of wounded combatants and prisoners of
war, of civilian populations and civilian objects affected by military
operations or present in occupied territories and of medical and
religious personnel and buildings. As suggested by this list, the
provision of the four Conventions and two Protocols constitute the
principal regulation of *jus in bello*.

This entire corpus of custom and treaties came to be known as the
*international humanitarian law of war*, the broad purpose being-in the
words of the landmark St. Petersburg Declaration of 1960- alleviating as
much as possible the scourges of war. Here lies the tension, even
contradiction within the body of law.

Putting aside the question of a war’s legality (an issue central to the
judgement of the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg and today
governed by the UN Charter) a war fought in compliance with the
standards and rules of the law of war permits massive international
killing or wounding and other massive destructions that except at war,
would violate fundamental human rights norms.

Hence all these standards and rules at some perilous and problematic
division between brutality and destruction are (i) permitted or
privileged or (ii) illegal or subject to sanction. Principles like
proportionality in choosing military means or the avoidance of
inflicting *unnecessary suffering* to the civilian population are
employed to help mitigate war, thus countered by the goals of the state
parties to a war- indeed in the eyes of the states, the paramount goal
is gaining military objectives and victory as much as possible and
directing the losses to one’s own armed forces.

The generous mood of the *Paquete Habana* toward the civilian population
and its food-gathering needs was reflected in the various Hague
Conventions regulating land and naval warfare that were adopted during
the ensuing decade. Note Article 3 of the Hague Convention of 1907 on
certain restrictions concerning the Exercise of the Right to Capture in
Naval War, 36 Stat. 2396. and TS. 544. which proclaimed in 1910:
“Vessels used exclusively for fishing along the coast ... are exempt
from capture.”

The Chattin case was decided under a 1923 General Claims Convention
between the United States and Mexico, 43 Stat. 1730, T.S. No. 679. That
treaty provided that designated claims of Mexico against U.S.A. citizens
(and vice versa) for losses or damages suffered by persons or by their
properties that (in the case of the U.S. government for interposition to
a Commission consisting of three members for decision in accordance with
the principles of international law, justice and equity. Each state was
to appoint one member and the presiding third commissioner was to be
selected by mutual agreement (and by stipulated procedures failing
agreement.)

These arbitrations grew out of and further developed the law of state
responsibility for injuries to aliens, a branch of international law
that was among the important predecessors to contemporary human rights
law. That body of law addressed only certain kinds of conflicts -not
including, for example, conflicts originating in the first instance in a
dispute between a claimant state (X) and a respondent state (Y). Thus it
did not cover a dispute based on a claim by X that Y had violated
international law by its invasion of x’s territory or by its
imprisonment of x’s ambassador.

Rather, the claims between states that were addressed by the law of
state responsibility for injuries to aliens grew out of disputes arising
in the first instance between a citizen-national of X and the government
of Y, for example, respondent state Y allegedly imprisoned a citizen of
claimant state X-allegations which, if true, could show violations of
international law.

The Minority Schools in Albania opinion illustrates treaties as a source
and major expression of international law and -introduces another field
of the human rights movement. This comment provides some background to
the opinion.

Treaties and other special regimes to protect minorities have a long
history in international law dating from the emergence in the
seventeenth century of modern form of political state, sovereign within
its own territorial boundaries. Within Europe, religious issues became a
strong concern since states often included more than one religious
denomination, and abuse by a state of a religious minority could lead to
intervention by other states where that religion was dominant. Hence,
peace treaties sometimes included provisions on religious minorities. In
the later centuries, the precarious situation of Christian minorities
within the Ottoman Empire and of religious minorities in newly
independent East European or Balkan states led to the outbreaks of
violence and to sporadic treaty regulation.

World War I ushered in an era of heightened attention to problems of
racial, religious or linguistic minorities. The collapse of the great
Austro­Hungarian and Ottoman multinational empires, and the chaos as the
Russian Empire of the Romanoffs was succeeded by the Soviet Union, led
to much redrawing of maps and the creation of new states.

President Wilson’s Fourteen Points, however compromised they became in
the Versailles Treaty and later arrangements, nonetheless exerted
influence on the post-war settlements. In it and other messages, Wilson
stressed the ideals of the freeing of minorities and the related
self-determination of people’s and nationalities. That concept of
self-determination, so politically powerful and open to such diverse
interpretations, continues to this day to be much disputed and to have
profound consequences. It not only appears in the U.S. Charter but it is
given a position of high prominence in the two principal human rights
covenants.

The trial at Nuremberg in 1945-56 of major war criminals among the Axis
powers, dominantly Nazi party leaders and military officials gave the
nascent human rights regime a powerful impulse. The UN Charter that
became effective in 1945 included a few broad human rights provisions.
However, they were more programmatic than operational, more a program to
be realised by states over time than legal rules to be applied
immediately to states.

Nuremberg, on the other hand, was concrete and applied, prosecutions,
convictions, and punishment. The prosecution and the judgement of the
International Military Tribunals were based on concepts and norms, some
of which were deeply rooted in international law and some of which
represented a significant development of that law that underlay the
later formulation of major human rights norms.

The striking aspect of Nuremberg was that the trial and judgement
applied international law doctrines and concepts to impose criminal
punishment on individuals for their commission of any of the three types
of crimes under international law that are described below. The notion
of crimes against the law of nations for which the violators bore an
individual criminal responsibility was itself an old one, but it had
operated in a restricted field.

As customary international law developed from the time of Grotius,
certain conducts came to be considered a violation of the law of
nations-in effect, a universal crime. Piracy on the high seas was long
the classic eample of this limited category of crimes. Given the common
interest of all nations in protecting navigation against interference on
the high seas outside the territory of any state, it was considered
appropriate for the state apprehending a pirate to prosecute in its own
courts. Since there was no international criminal tribunal, prosecution
in a state court sought to apply the customary international law
defining the crime of piracy, either directly or as it had become
absorbed into national legislation, the choice of forum became less
significant, for state courts everywhere, at least in theory, were
applying the same law.

As World War II came to an end, the Allied Powers held several
conferences to determine what policies they should follow towards the
Germans responsible for the war and the massive, systematic barbarity
and destruction of the period. These conferences culminated in the
(U.S., USSR, Britain and France) London Agreement of August 8, 1945, 59
Stat. 1544, E.A.S. No. 472, in which the parties determined to
constitute an International Military Tribunal for the trial of war
criminals. The Charter annexed to the agreement provided for the
composition and basic procedures of the Tribunal and stated in its three
critical articles.

#### Article 6

The Tribunal established by the agreement referred to in Article 1
hereof for the trial and punishment of the major war criminals of the
European Axis countries shall have the power to try and punish persons
who, acting in the interests of the European Axis countries, whether as
individuals or as members of organisations, committed any of the
following crimes.

a) Crimes Against Peace: namely, planning, preparation, initiation or
waging of a war of aggression, or a war in violation of international
treaties, agreements, assurances, or participation in a common plan or
conspiracy for the accomplishment of any of the foregoing;

b) War Crimes: namely, the violations of the laws or customs of war.
Such violations shall include, but not be limited to, murder,
ill­treatment or deportation to slave labour or for any other purpose of
civilian population of or in war or persons on the seas, killing of
hostages, plunder of public or private property, wanton destruction of
cities, towns or villages, or devastation not justified by military
necessity;

c) Crimes Against Humanity: namely, murder, extermination, enslavement,
deportation and other inhuman acts committed against any civilian
population, before or during the war, or persecutions on political,
racial or religious grounds in execution of or in connection with any
crime within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, whether or not in
violation of the domestic law of the country where perpetrated.

The core of the universal system consists of the United Nations Charter
and related instruments. Three such instruments, comprising the
so-called International Bill of Rights, stand out in significance: the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1959 and the two principal
covenants on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCCR). As of
September 1995, the JCCPR had 131 state parties, the ICESCR 132 parties.

There are three regional human rights systems-regional in that they are
based on treaties whose membership is restricted to states in a
particular region: the European Convention for the Protection of Human
rights and Fundamental freedoms (known as the European Convention on
Human Rights) (30 states parties as of September 1950), the American
Convention on Human Rights (25 parties) and the African Charter on Human
Rights and People’s Rights (49 parties).

The Charter builds on the precedents to which the Nuremberg Judgement
refers and states the UN’s basic purpose of securing and maintaining
peace. It does so by providing in Article 2 (4) that the UN members
shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any
state, a rule qualified by Article 51’s provision that nothing in the
Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a member.

The Charter has little to say directly about human rights. Its
references to human rights are scattered, terse, and even cryptic. The
term human rights appears infrequently, although in vital contexts. Note
its occurrence in the following provisions: second paragraph of the
Preamble Article 1 (3), Article 13( 1 )(b), Articles 55 and 56, Article
62(2) and Article 69.

### The UN And The Universal Declaration

Despite the proposals to the contrary, the Charter stopped shy of
incorporating a bill of rights. Instead, there were proposals for
developing one through the work of a special commission that would give
separate attention to the issue. That commission was contemplated by
Charter Article 69, which provides that one of the UN organs, the
Economic, and Social Council (ECOSOC), shall set up commissions in
economic and social fields and for promotion of human rights... in 1946.
ECOSOC established the Commission on Human Rights, which has evolved
over decades to become the world’s single most important human rights
organ.

### Custom And The UN Resolutions

As components of argument about international human rights, custom and
general principles retain great importance. Few issues of international
law theory have aroused as much controversy as that engendered by
resolutions and declarations of the General assembly, which appear to
express principle and rules of law. Their adoption by large majorities
through voting or consensus procedures has been seen by many as attempts
to impose obligatory norms on dissenting minorities and to change
radically the way in which the international law is made.

The arguments advanced in support of a finding that rights are a part of
the customary law rely on different kinds of evidence-the incorporation
of human rights provisions in many national constitutions and laws;
frequent references in the United Nations resolutions and declarations
to the duty of all States to observe faithfully the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

### Regional Regimes In Europe, The Americas And Africa

The remarkable feature of the European system is its productive and
effective court; the materials illustrate the work of the Court through
several revealing decisions. In the Inter-America system, the commission
has been a very significant organ. The African system is the least
developed institutionally; the materials concentrate on a distinctive
aspect of its norms, a stress on duties as well as rights.

In addition to the three major systems, there is a largely dormant Arab
system and a proposal for the creation of an Asian regional system. It
is necessary to consider the broader European institutional context
within which the Convention is situated. The Covenant is the creation of
the Council of Europe, which is only one of the three major regional
mechanisms dealing with human rights within Europe. The other two are
the European Union and the organisation (formerly termed Conference) for
Security and Co-operation in Europe. None of the three is concerned
exclusively with human rights. The Council of Europe has the longest and
most significant record of accomplishment in this field. Here I shall
confine myself to the European regional arrangements.

#### The Council of Europe

The Council was established in 1949 by a group of ten states, primarily
to promote democracy the rule of law, and greater unity among the
nations of Western Europe. It represented both a principled commitments
of its members to these values and an ideological stance against
Communism. Over the years, its activities have included the promotion of
co-operation in relation to social, cultural, sporting and a range of
other matters. Until 1990, the Council’s membership was essentially
confined to Western European countries. Since then, post-cold War
developments have made a major impact upon the Council.

#### The European Union

Despite the absence of a bill of rights, the European Court of Justice
(the judicial organ of the European Union) began in 1969 to evolve a
specific doctrine of human rights, the original motivation for which
probably owed more to a desire to protect the competencies of the
European Community than to any concern to provide extended protection to
individuals.

Over the years during which the human rights doctrine has evolved, the
Court has identified several different normative underpinnings for it.
They include certain provisions of the treaty of Rome. The
constitutional traditions of the member states and the international
treaties accepted by member states. For the most part, the European
Court of Justice has applied this concept of human rights to the actions
of the Community itself, but not to the actions of the member states.

#### The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)

The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) opened in
1973 and concluded in August 1975 with the signing of the Final act of
Helsinki. In 1995, the CSCE was officially transformed into the
Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). It has many
official organs like the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs. One
issue, which the OSCE’s evolution has made more pressing, is its
relationship with the Council of Europe’s human rights regime.

### Women’s Rights

The subject of women’s rights as international human rights regime
offers distinctive perspectives on the human rights movement as a whole.
The basic treaty in this filled-the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination against women (CEDAN, effective 1991, 144
ramifications as of September 1995) has exceptional reach. At the same
time, the problems that it addresses have exceptional depth and
complexity.

The cases and materials in the literature, including but not restricted
to those of Woman Refugee Regime, suggest the complexity interwoven
socio­economic, legal, political and cultural strands to the problem of
women’s subordination and women’s rights. Indeed, it is difficult to
know where to behind inquiry and analysis. Each starting point
implicates others and by itself stems patently insufficient for yielding
an adequate understanding of the problem, let alone solutions. When one
focuses specifically on what appears to be women’s issues, links between
those issues and other aspects of social order (disorder) appear
pervasive. All is interrelated. The problem is truly systematic.

### Self-Determination And Autonomy Regimes

Theoretically rooted in disintegration and fragmentation,
self­determination and autonomy stress the charter and significance of
autonomy regime-political systems or subsystems organised within a state
for the purposes of fostering political participation and
self-government by ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples. Together
with several other human rights norms, the notion of self-determination
continues to exert a strong influence on the debate over and possible
forms of realisation of these autonomy regimes. Wilson addressed the
question of self-determination directly:

National aspirations must be respected: people may now be dominated and
governed only by their consent. Self-determination is not a mere phrase.
It is an imperative principle of action which statesmen will henceforth
ignore at their peril. [^58]

### International Criminal Regimes

Among other considerations before the Security Council, the massive
brutality in the former Yugoslavia and related public pressure
contributed toward persuading it to establish an ad hoc international
criminal tribunal, the first such tribunal since the post World War II
tribunals constituted by the victorious powers in Nuremberg and Tokyo.
The United States as a hegemon took the lead in drafting a plan for
prosecuting these men. That plan, which led to the establishment of the
International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg was presented to America’s
allies in San Francisco at the same time that the UN Charter was signed.

Within a year, a similar plan was adopted for the prosecution of top
Japanese war criminals. The international community’s knowledge about
the atrocities in Bosnia, Croatia, and Rwanda - and its response to
them-is reminiscent of the Allies response to the Nazi atrocities during
World War II. Some countries have employed certain mechanisms to address
widespread human rights abuses with strictly domestic remedies.

Argentina and Chile are examples of the societies where a mixture of
truth-finding, public accountability and amnesty has paved the way for a
return to a relatively civil and human life. In Honduras, a civilian
court has charged military officers with committing human rights
violations during the 1990s.

Such domestic remedies usually involve regional consequences. There is a
growing trend to explore international remedies instead. American
hegemony behind the United Nations is the primary source of such
responses. A secondary source is the will of the international community
that the United Nations embodies. Issues of sovereignty remain
problematic. In fact, there is a contradiction in the Charter of the
United Nations, Article 2 (7) of the Charter speaks more specifically
about non-interference in matters, which are essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of any state. At the same time, it outlines more
broadly the overriding exception to that rule for any enforcement
measures under Charter VII.

According to Oran Young, certain international regimes harbour
international contradictions that eventually lead to serious failures
and mounting pressure for major alterations.[^59] International
contradictions may culminate in a developmental character, deepening due
to normal operations.

The clearest manifestations of an emerging trend toward international
judicial intervention are the two *ad hoc* criminal tribunals
established by the Security Council-one in early 1993 for the former
Yugoslavia and the other in late 1994 for Rwanda. The United States, as
hegemony seeking to stabilise the system after the collapse of
bipolarity was the forefront in creating both tribunals. The Clinton
administration has launched an investigation into the genocide by Iraqi
government during the Persian Gulf War. However, both the United States
and the international community ignored Saddam Husayn’s gross violations
of human rights during Iran-Iraq war.

The Iraqi atrocity against the Iranians and subsequently the U.S.
silence (or its de facto support of the Iraqi regime during the war) on
such crimes buttresses the public tenet of Hegemonic Stability Theory
that hegemonies create international regimes primarily for their own
benefit and not for the benefit of international community. In any case,
the ultimate weapon of those ad hoc tribunals would lead to an
international judicial intervention that will create a permanent
International Criminal Court (ICC).

### Development Regime

Ever since the first UN World Conference on Human Rights held in Tehran
in 1960, the relationship between human rights and development has
occupied a prominent place in the international discourse of rights.
Since 1977, the debate has been pursued with the increasing vigour under
the rubric of the right to development. That debate brings together
several important themes. They include the legal foundations of the
classical human rights and the basis for the recognition of new rights,
the priority to be accorded to the different sets of rights, the links
between human rights and democratic governance, the extent to which
international community bears some responsibility for assisting states
whose resources are inadequate to ensure the human rights of their own
citizens, and the relationship between individual and collective rights
(including peoples’ rights). In addition, an examination of the concept
of the right to development and its implications in the 1990s cannot
avoid consideration of the effects of the globalisation of the economy
and the consequences of the near-universal embrace of the market
economy.

The list of internationally recognised human rights is by no mean
immutable. Just as the British sociologist T.H. Marshall characterised
the eighteenth century as the century of civil rights, the nineteenth
century as that of political rights and the twentieth as that of social
rights, so too have some commentators over the past two decades put
forward claims for the recognition of the new rights, in particular a
category known as the third generation of solidarity rights. By analogy
with the slogan of the French Revolution these rights have been said to
correspond to the theme of fraternite, while the first generation of
civil and political rights correspond with liberte and the second
generation of economic and social rights with egalite. Karel Vasak’s
list of solidarity rights includes the right to freedom, the right to
peace, the right to environment, the right to the ownership of the
common heritage of mankind, and the right to communication.

Far more significant has been the impact of the right to development.
First recognised by the UN Commission on Human Rights in 1977, it was
enshrined by the General Assembly in the 1986 Declaration on the right
to Development. It has never ceased to be controversial among the
governments as well as among academic and other commentators. Efforts to
secure its recognition raised the question of the process by which new
human rights should be recognised. Some commentators emphasised the need
for the catalogue of the rights to keep pace with new developments and
to be responsive to new challenges. Others argued that the third
generation approach of rights of peoples was a flawed way of seeking to
meet such needs.

### Conclusion

Some regime analysts offer four models for regime change. Power
structure, diffusion of technology, issue structure and the function of
international organisations serves as a basis for regime change.[^60]
Others suggest, *inter* *alia*, the notion of internal contradiction.
All of them can affect the pattern of international human rights regime,
leading ultimately to the proliferation of rights. Alston has listed a
large number of rights ranging from the right to sleep and the right to
social transparency to the right to coexistence and the right to
tourism.[^61]

Stephen Marks has warned against the abandoned proliferation of rights.
He posits that not only is proliferation of rights regarded to be
dangerous but also the employment of the term generation implies that
the rights belonging to earlier generations are outdated and that the
rights of the new generation are too vague to be justifiable and are no
more than slogans.[^62]

Issues covered by the recent writers on human rights-such as Gay and
Lesbian Rights leads the literature to a scientifically unknown,
culturally inadmissible, legally challengeable domain. The first openly
homosexual person who spoke in a UN human rights forum on August 1992
noted that lesbian women and gay men should be represented in UN
work.[^63]

In recent US foreign policy from about 1973, Nixon, Carter, Reagan, Bush
and Clinton all used the rhetoric of rights. Each of them meant
something different. Mention can be made of several cases in which the
United States was seeking its own egoistic interests. Suffice it to
mention that in Greece, the United States supported the Greek Junta
1967-74. It sponsored and organised the Shah’s SAVAK (secret police) in
Iran. This brings to mind the idea of cultural relativism.

The most fundamental and pertinent reason for the anthropologists’
restricted involvement with human rights issues can be traced directly
back to the theory of cultural relativism. This is exemplified by the
American Anthropological Association (AAA) statement’s rejection of the
idea of universal human rights, its emphasis on different peoples’
different rights concepts and its criticism of a universal legal
framework as ethnocentrically Western.

While this position is generally seen as a major burden contribution to
the exclusion of anthropologists from human rights research, this is not
the only impact of cultural relativism. For quite some time now, the
theory has, in fact, been nurturing a seemingly never-ending debate
among human rights researchers on the question of universalism or
relativism of human rights. The classical conflict is well-known:
cultural relativists see the Universal Declaration on Human Rights as
enumerating rights and freedoms which are culturally, ideologically and
politically non-universal. They argue that the current human rights
norms possess a distinctively Western or Judeo-Christian bias, and
hence, are an ethno-centric construct with limited applicability.[^64]

There are also unresolved systematic factors. For instance, human rights
regime must also be seen from the perspective of economic interactions
between the developing and the developed countries. The evolving nature
of the international system also would indicate a need for new research
into human rights and multi-national corporations (MNCs). As the globe
become more interdependent, multi-nationals move to centre stage in the
international arena.

In Donaldson’s philosophical treatment of the corporations and morality,
post-modern trends toward MNC dominance are highlighted in his claim
that from a moral point of view, the central issue is that of economic
justice. In the confrontation between the developed and underdeveloped
nations, do multi-nationals aggravate or help solve social and economic
problems?[^65]

Two schools of thought are readily identifiable when it comes to
theories of MNCs, development, and rights in the third world. One view
is generally pro-MNC. The pro-MNC view holds that multi-nationals
operating in the third world promote economic and social rights and
indirectly support civil and political rights.[^66] A second view holds
that MNCs directly contribute to the violations of human rights in
developing countries. The most carefully elaborated theoretical support
for this position can be found in the work of economist Stephen
Hymer.[^67] Viewed from this perspective, the issue of human rights
seems to be as controversial as the problem of expropriation under
international law, which deals, among other things, with the role of
such transnational corporations in the third world.

Against this myth, there is also a reality. There is an emerging tension
between the principle of sovereignty, which is the constitutive
principle of political system and other principles such as the principle
of property rights, which is the constitutive principle of the economic
system. Tensions are growing between the rights of the individuals, the
rights of peoples and the rights of states. Such rights are derived from
the conceptions of human nature: that is, covering the basic needs of
the human body and mind (e.g. the right to life, liberty and security)
and ought not to be denied by other humans.

However, owing to the unequal distribution of capabilities,
international human rights regime has stemmed from the heart of modified
structuralism. Within the framework of a modified structural analysis,
there need not always be congruity between power distributions and
related behaviour or outcomes. A change in power does not always suggest
a change in outcomes because regimes may operate as intervening
variables. Regimes will continue to exist after hegemony. International
human rights regime will have its own life within a nation-state system,
but this nation-state system will also have a society of states as
illustrated by Charles Beitz. The society of states will be concerned
with the moral relations of members of a universal community... There
are no reasons of basic principle for exempting the internal affairs of
states from external moral scrutiny and it is possible that members of
some states might have obligations of justice with respect to persons
elsewhere.[^68] Elites will have to search for compromises, balances,
and practical forward steps that will maximise the possibilities for
international human rights regime.

[^1]: Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract and Discourses, Dent:
London and Melbourne everyman’s library, last reprinted 1933, p.44.

[^2]: Echbert Gilpin, The Political Economy of International Relations,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1927; Robert Keohane:, After
Hegemony, op. cit. Chapter 8.

[^3]: ‘Asgarkhani, Abumuhammad, Hegemony, Challenge and Compromise: the
Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunes as an International Regime in Conflict
Resolution, January 1981-January 1993 (1995), Ph.D. Dissertation,
Queen’s University, Ontario, Canada.

[^4]: Krasner, op. cit., p.2

[^5]: Ernst E. Haas, The Uniting of Europe, Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1958, and Beyond the Nations/States, Stanford
University Press, 1964.

[^6]: Roberto O. Keohane and Josef Nye Jr., Power and Interdependence:
World Politics in Transition, Boston: Little, Brown, 1977.

[^7]: Stephen D. Krasner , op. cit. pp. 6-8.

[^8]: Kenneth D. Waltz, Theory of Intemational Politics, New York:
Random House, 1973, p. 99.

[^9]: Ibid, p. 94.

[^10]: Ibid, p. 94.

[^11]: K. Waltz, Man, the State and War, 1959, op. cit., p. 198 also
quoted in Keohane, 1990, op. cit. Theory of International Politics, op.
cit. p. 94.

[^12]: Joseph M. Grieco, “Anarchy and the Limits of Co-operation: a
realistic critique of the Newest Liberal Institutionalism”, in:
International Organisation, 42-43, summer 1933.

[^13]: Donald J. Puchala and Raymond F. Hopkins, “International Regimes:
lessons from inductive analysis”, in: Krasner, op. cit.

[^14]: Puchala, op. cit, p. 62.

[^15]: Charles F. Kindleberger, The World in Depression 1929-1939,
Berkley: University of California Press, 1973: Gilpin, Supra.

[^16]: Robert O. Keohane, 1980. “The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and
Change in International Economic Regimes, 1967-1977.” In Ole Holsti et
al., Change in the International System, Boulder: Westview Press, p.
132.

[^17]: Kindleberger, op. cit., p. 305.

[^18]: See for example, Robert Jervis, '”Security Regimes”, 1927, in:
Krasner, ibid. pp. 173-94. Gilpin ibid. Michael K. Hawes, '”Structural
Changes and Hegemonic Decline: implications for national Governments”,
in: David Haglund G. Michael K. Hewes, World Politics: Power,
Intersependence and Dependence, Toronto: HEJ, 1939, pp. 197-223.

[^19]: Keohane, After Hegemony, op. cit. See for example p. 63.

[^20]: Duncan Snidal, “The Limits of Hegemonic Stability Theory”, in:
International Organisation, 39, 4, Autumn 1935, p. 614.

[^21]: See for example Keohane, 1982, '”The Demand For International
Regimes", in: International Organisation, Vol. 36, no. 2 (Spring), p.
354; Gilpin, Supra, p. 75.

[^22]: See Gilpin. op. cit., p. 79.

[^23]: Hewes, op. cit., pp.200-201.

[^24]: Keohane, After Hegemony, op. cit., chapter 6.

[^25]: See Isabelle Grunberg, “Exploring the Myth of Hegemonic
Stability”, in: International Organisation, 44, 4, Autumn 1990. See also
Susan Strange: “The Persistent Myth of Lost Hegemony”, in: International
Organisation, 41 , 4, Autumn 1987.

[^26]: See for instance Oran Young, “Regime Dynamics: The Rise and Fall
of International Regimes”, in: Krasner, op. cit. p. 100.

[^27]: See Puchala and Hopkins. op. cit., p. 66.

[^28]: See Keohane, The Demand for International Regimes, op. cit. p.
354. See also Gilpin, ibid. p. 75.

[^29]: Stephen D. Krasner, International Regimes, op. cit. p.19.

[^30]: Robert O. Keohane, Realism and its Critic, New York: Columbia
University Press, 1986.

[^31]: Stephen Haggard and Beth A. Simmons, “Theories of International
Regimes”, in: International Organisation, 41 , 3, summer 1987 pp. 502-3.

[^32]: Richard Higgott I Craig F. Murphy and Roger Tooze, The New
International Political Economy, Boulder: Lynne Eienner Publishers, 1991
, pp. 101-126.

[^33]: J. Martin Rochester, “The Rise and Fall of International
Organisation as a Field of Study”, in: International Organisation, 40,
4, Autumn 1986 p. 309.

[^34]: Quoted in George H. Gabine and Thomas L. Thorson, A History of
Political Theory, Hinsdale: Dryden Press, 1973, p. 39.

[^35]: For a bibliography of history of justice, see Morris D. Forcosch,
in Dictionary of the History of Ideas, Study of Selected Pivotal Ideas,
New York: Charles Scrihner’s Sons, 1973, Volume II, pp. 652b-9b. For
Utopianism see Eoger L. Emerson op. cit. vol. IV, pp. 453b-65b.

[^36]: Charles Fentland Interrogation. “Interdependence and
Institutions: Approaches to International Order”, in: Haglund and Hawes,
op. cit., p. 174.

[^37]: Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Tehran: Ministry of
Islamic Guidance translated by Dr Husayn Muhy al-Din Qumshi’i, 1985,
p.33.

[^38]: E. Brenner, “The Social Basis of Economic Development”, in: John
Rohner, ed. Analytical Marxism, Cambridge University Press, 1986, pp.
40-5. See also Jorge Larrain, Theories of Development, Cambridge: Polity
Press, 1989, pp. 62-77.

[^39]: Paul Baran, The Political Economy of Growth, Harmonworth: Penguin
1973.

[^40]: Bill Warren, Imperialism, Pioneer of Capitalism, London: Verso,
1980.

[^41]: Andre G. Frank, Capitalism and Underdevelopment in Latin America,
New York: Monthly Review Press, 1969.

[^42]: I. Wallerstein, The Modern World System, New York: Academic
Press, 1974. See also A. Emmanuel, Unequal Exchange, London : New Left
Books, 1972.

[^43]: P. P. Rey, Les Alliances de Classes, Paris: Naspero, 1972.

[^44]: F. H. Cardoso and K. Faletto, Dependency and Development in Latin
America, Berkley: University of California Press, 1979.

[^45]: American Philosophical Quaterly, 14, No. 4, October 1977: 319-27.
Quoted in Campbell Richmond , Paradoxes of Rationality and Co-operation.

[^46]: Robert Axelrod, op. cit., pp. 20-21.

[^47]: For an analysis of issue-structure, see J. Fye and E. Keohane,
Supra .

[^48]: See Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, London: Penguin Classics, 1985, p.
223.

[^49]: Hyde V. Lewis, 25III. APP. 3d 495, 323N. K. 2d533, 537, cited in
Black’s Law Dictionary, fifth edition, p. 452.

[^50]: Hobbes, Supra, p.193

[^51]: Keohane, After Hegemony, Supra, p.71

[^52]: Ernst Ha11s, Why Collaborate? Issue-linkage and International
Regimes in World Politics, April 1980, p. 358.

[^53]: E. Harrison Wagner, “Economic Interdependence, Bargaining Power
and Political Influence” in; International Organisation, 42, 3. Summer
1988, pp. 476-7.

[^54]: Robert O. Keohane, After the Hegemony, op. cit., p. 72.

[^55]: Quoted in A. H. Robertson, Human Rights in the World, 1979, p. 3.

[^56]: This review is based on International Human Rights in Conte,
Henry J. Steiner and Philip Alston, New York: Oxford University Press,
1966.

[^57]: See Bishop, International Law Cases and Materials, Little Browns.

[^58]: Quoted in Hurst Hannun, Re-thinking Self-determination, and 34
V0. 3. Intl. Et 3 (1993)

[^59]: Oran Young, Regime Dynamics: The Rise and Fall of International
Regimes.

[^60]: Joseph Nye & Robert Keohane, Power and Interdependence.

[^61]: Phillip Alston, Conjuring Up New Human Rights: A Proposal for
Quality Control, 73, An. J. Int. 603 (1934).

[^62]: Stephen Marks, Emerging Human rights: A New Generation for the
1930s, Eutqers Law Rev. 435 (1931).

[^63]: See for example Douglas Senders, “Getting Lesbian and Gay Issues
on the Human Rights Agenda”, in: Human Rights Quarterly, Vol. 13, no. 1,
February 1996.

[^64]: See Ann Belinde S. Freis, “Human Rights as a Cultural Practice:
An Anthropological Critique”, in: Human Rights Quarterly, Vol. 134. No.
2 May 1996.

[^65]: Thomas Donaldson, Corporations and Morality (1932).

[^66]: Kathleen Pritchard, “Human Rights and Development: Theory and
Data”, in: David Forsythe, Human Rights and Development, 1989.

[^67]: Stephen Hymer, “The Multinational Corporation and the Law of
Uneven Development,” in: George Modelski, Transitional Corporation and
World Order, 1979.

[^68]: Charles E. Beitz, Political Theory and International Relations,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979, pp. 131-132.


