The Impact Of The Changes Of International System On The Concept Of Human Rights
================================================================================

**Dr. Ahmad Naqibzadah**

Introduction
------------

At first glance, it might not seem very logical to set up a causal or
even mutual relation between international system and the concept of
human rights: for the international system is a political and
international issue whereas human rights are regarded legal and
sometimes internal. However, the issue of human rights has become a
matter of great controversy in political centres ever since the advent
of political relations: the treatment of the POWs, the situation of the
people in occupied lands, the religious freedoms of new subjects and
tens of other issues are directly or indirectly connected with human
rights without assuming such a title. If Cyrus, the founder of the
Achaemenid Dynasty, was the only non-Hebrew king mentioned in the Torah,
it was because he was a stunning paragon of one who observed the rights
of different people in his empire.

However, nowadays, human rights have transcended international
relations, and turned into a determining factor; as other similar
forces, it has been instrumental in changing the foundation of
contemporary international system. This change is the product of a long
process, which began, with the American Declaration of Independence and
the Declaration of Rights of Man and of Citizens of France and the
bitter experiences of 1930s and the conflicts ensuing World War II and
challenged one of the foundations of international system, namely the
rulership of state-nations to struggle the verge of destruction.

This process, which was accompanied with the misusing of human rights by
superpowers, left a double impact, intensifying the complication of the
issue. In point of fact, the pleasant breeze of freedom and respect for
human beings were infested by the vicious domination of the
world-devourers; hence human rights turned into a double-edged sword,
and the dangling state of the oppressed nations is the result of this
poisonous gift.

In order to lend intellectual flavour to our discussion, we need to
propose a question: has human rights remained constant despite the
changes in international relations? Or, has it been influenced like
other social concepts in the course of time? Why has human rights faced
opposition and denial especially on the part of countries, which were
expected to adopt a different attitude? Our conjectural answer is that
the concept of human rights has undergone changes for progress;
furthermore, varying interpretations are made touching it. Therefore,
human rights have lost its universality and turned into a controversial
issue in international relations.

Besides, a brief survey of the past eras enables us to build up our
discussion based on three historical eras conforming to three
international systems.

**First era**: Indeed, man is not the subject of any rights whatsoever;
people have no other task but obey the ruler or emperor as their
subjects; if the ruler is an easterner, he observes a better attitude
towards his subjects due to his moral sense; if the ruler is a
westerner, he observes the rights of his subjects because of his own
benefits; this is the era when the state-nations have not yet emerged.

**Second Era**: It begins with the end of the Medieval Ages and the
advent of humanistic thoughts; man becomes the centre of the universe.
However, the fundamental clash between new international system on the
basis of the unquestionable rulership of the State on one hand and the
rights of people on the other hand, results in a constructive struggle
which leads to the Declaration of Rights of Man and of Citizen of France
towards the close of the eighteenth century.

**Third Era**: In this era, human rights gradually turns into a main
element of international community in the form of the rights of people,
the rights of nations, the principle of the independence of nations, the
equal rights of nations, the necessity of respecting human rights for
the sake of world peace. The culmination of this process is the
Declaration of Human Rights in 1948. Since then, human rights have been
regarded as a goal to be achieved by international community; besides,
it has left an increasing impact on the policies of great powers.
However, in the first part of this brief report, we shall be dealing
with a short study of the first and the second era; in part two we shall
detail on the third era.

Part One -The Concept of Human Rights From Beginning up to the French Revolution.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Age Of Ignorance

If Greece was the bedrock for political thoughts and the core of those
thoughts was the inequality of human persons, Rome was the seat of
thoughts and legal foundations where the rights of people were
discussed. However, the Latin word *popolus* meaning people was not used
concerning just anyone. In fact, the unilineal descent group who enjoyed
civil and political rights and belonged to one of the Patrician or
Ecoists classes was called *gens* and the term *popolus* was used with
respect to upper classes.[^1] Hence, the impoverished plebeian people
did not enjoy the rights of people nor did women. Before they waged a
campaign to have their civil and political rights restored and get
themselves established as popolus, the organisations and civil and legal
institutes were obliterated from the core and the Roman democracy
changed into an empire.

The legal system, which could have gradually moved towards progress and
development deteriorated under the sway of the emperor and fell into
oblivion in the wake of the penetration of the Berbers. However, since
then, the bases for new divine laws were founded which eliminated the
difference between master (patrician) and slave (plebeian). The
interpretation of these rights and freedoms was distinctive from the
modern criteria of human rights. Man’s freedom consists in discovering
the Divine Will and obeying Divine commands. By recourse to Him, one can
find the straight path to life.

The Christian rights, which could be the right basis for human rights,
soon found mighty outriders who violated human rights more than any one
else. Despite the advancements and withdrawals, the Church of Rome
increased its authorities every ten years. The wealth and public
charities raised its dignity. For every important issue, the Christian
world was the counselling party. The innovation of fighting apostasy was
the defined law of the bible.[^2] The exigency increased when the papal
power exceeded that of the emperor.[^3] The crusade wars broke out. They
treated the pagans in a way that history had never witnessed.

Saint Thomas Aquinas, the outstanding medieval theologian tried to
reconcile reason and faith and apply Aristotelian logic in service of
religion. His move paved the way for natural rights, which were stressed
by the Roman lawmakers, for nature, the tangible and documented creation
of God is by referring to reason. This way was paved by the emergence of
renaissance into the European community.

### The Time Of Transition And New Hypotheses On Rights

Renaissance was a period marked by a surge of interest in every field of
activity. In the field of science, the Copernican Revolution (1473-1543)
was a striking change although there was great distance to the formation
of natural sciences. In politics, Machiavelli’s *Prince* (1513) paved
the way for the formation of new states, namely the functionalist system
substituting traditional ones although it first caused the creation of
despotic States. The Westphalia Covenant was the subsequent result of
this process, which necessitated the basis of international relations in
new national states.

On the other hand, renaissance is not separate from humanism, which
places man in the centre of material and spiritual issues. According to
Renaulder, the French writer, humanism is so great a moral and mental
improvement that we can call it the creation of the greatest kind of
humanity.[^4] Humanism[^5] bore no enmity to the church. Even people
like Lefebvre d’Etaple ( 1450-1536) were the first humanists who sought
to create a relationship between Platonic and Aristotelian thoughts and
Christian teachings. And Erasmus (1469- 1536), a powerful humanist, was
the founder of the Christian philosophy.

However, the spread of such thoughts brought back to man his forgotten
role. Thus, the church was no longer an intermediary between man and
God. When man was discussed, reason, man’s weightiest foundation of
existence, was recognised more than anything else. Reason was a torch to
discover laws. Thus, natural law, which was based on reason, took the
place of canonical rights.

However, the relation between natural rights and the rights of people
was not settled. Suarez, the Spanish scholastic philosopher and lawyer
(died 1617) whose thoughts were deeply influenced by Saint Thomas
Aquinas maintained that the rights of people must not be taken the same
as natural rights, for the necessities of the rights of people did not
stem from objective statements: for the same reason, they lacked the
stability and equality of natural rights equally recognised for all
nations. Grotius, the Dutch lawyer (1588-1645) known as the father of
people’s rights had a similar stand.

However, Hobbes, the English philosopher (1588-1679) questioned this
difference and later on, lawyers like Pofenderf (*Natural and People’s
Rights* 1672) and Wolff (*Principles Natural Law and People’s Rights*
1750) stressed the point that people’s rights were the continuation of
natural rights.[^6] Natural law gradually gave place to natural rights
stemming from the nature of objects, which was nothing but positivism in
rights. Likewise, Hobbes’ theories can be regarded a change in law and
politics and international relations.[^7] His theories of the natural
situation remained an accepted principle in the theories of
international relations until the emergence of the contemporary
realists.

The fundamental point was that although Hobbes reached leviathan or the
Ghoul State, which was the despotic State, his main concern was freedom.
Freedom is the inseparable part of nature, for animals enjoy absolute
freedom in nature.

The sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, in which traditions gradually
gave place to modernity, witnessed a fundamental conflict between the
principles dominating international relations and the situation of man’s
rights. At international stage, national States acted as a political
unit and a legal entity in a scene, which knew no bounds for their
freedoms. They were free and equal because they followed the laws of
nature just like animals. The only thing, which could impede their acts,
was power. Power was the only instrument which counteracted other
powers; balance of power.

However, people closed eyes to their right of enjoying freedom,
entrusting it to the state at the price of security. They exchanged
freedom for security and deprived themselves of the right to object
because the ruler had not assumed any responsibility. In other words,
there was no other party involved. People had entered a covenant to
entrust their freedoms and power to others whereas a legal contract
required two parties. On the other hand, that the people could overlook
their rights and freedoms indicated that there was a fundamental
difference between natural rights and the rights of people. Man
intervened in nature by virtue of his reason.

Whatever happened in the sixteenth century in the realm of ideas and
action was going to turn into a fundamental and stable basis in the
eighteenth century which not only fed Europe for two centuries but also
by the universalisation of the European system extended to the entire
globe. The European State, the international European system, the
European political thought, the European rights and values pervaded the
culture of the whole world in the form of imposed values.

### The Creation Of International System And The Study Of Lndvidual And Public Rights

State-nation, which was the innovation of Europe in the Westphalia
Covenant of 1648, had a gradual birth and what was certain at the
beginning was its first part, that is, the State. The first step was to
concentrate the power in the hands of the ruler and the disempowering of
the heirs in feudalism period.[^8] In other words, state-nation
consisted of two parts; central and circumstantial. Its centre was
established in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in the form of
state,[^9] but in fact, its circumstantiality was the urban community
which was to find a basic role by the process of people’s participation
and to fix its sublime status in its political life as the only source
of rulership. This took shape in the eighteenth century during the
revolutions, which happened in most European countries such as France
and England, and the issue of people’s participation gradually took
effect.

During the French revolution as the only source of rulership, its
definitions and dimensions were specified and since then, it has been
accepted as an independent element in civil and international life. What
created a new criterion in the political life was the reversion of the
state-nation. If until then people had a secondary role just because
they were the rule’'s subjects, the states found a legal character
because they were the representatives of people. Thus, the international
system took a clear shape based on this new element.

Until the eighteenth century, five powers determined their powers in the
pyramid of international power, namely France, England, Russia, Prussia,
and Austria. During the seven wars between the years 1756-1763, these
five powers realised that it was impossible to rout each other out of
the arena and that it was advisable to divide the booty among
themselves. Thus, the international system multidimensionally took shape
based on exchange in which the states were the main representatives of
nations in the scene.[^10]

As the international system took shape based on European state-nation,
the principles of political life were moulded based on reason,
secularism of individual rights and democracy. All principles were
summarised in philosophy and liberalism. The turning point in this
process was Lock’s theories (*On Civil State 1690*).[^11] Unlike Hobbes,
he did not believe in a
despotic state, for in his contract, people did not overlook all their
freedoms but rather they overlooked those freedoms of theirs, which were
for the good of their community, preserving individual freedoms for
themselves. These freedoms turned into the basis for socio-political
order in the light of reason and law of nature.

The quest for the laws of nature led to research touching the rights
based on the nature of man, the actualisation of which was possible on
the basis of social contract and the power which did not function to
create the world but the redemption of the sovereignty of reason, the
sovereignty which the feelings of man had then usurped.[^12]

As an eighteenth century encyclopaedia says, “The general law is reason,
governing all the people in the earth and the civil and political laws
of nations should not be but certain and objective cases of the exercise
of this public law.” Thus, reason was set against faith and individual
freedom against church, and its secular arm, the ruler. Freedom was not
only a matter of consciousness and conscience but also the basis of each
person’s autonomy against any alien power. Hence, the Christian freedom
was bound to give place to human freedoms.[^13] Here, human rights found
totally non-religious and mundane basis.

Two social and intellectual movements reached a common point in the
French Revolution: on the one hand, the centralisation of reason as the
wholesome power to distinguish right from wrong and truth from untruth
together with freedom as a necessary condition for it and on the other
hand, the social movement whose goal was the participation of people in
political affairs and the redemption of the sovereignty of people. This
process was manifested in the International Bill of Human Rights.

Before that, in the wake of the glorious revolution of England in 1688,
the bill of rights of 1689 served as a suitable model for the latter and
the American Declaration of Independence with Jefferson’s introduction
in which equal rights, the unalienable rights granted by the Almighty
such as the right to life, freedom, and that the ultimate goal of all
states was the perseverance of these rights and that the power of state
was dependent on the general will stressed therein.

Fifteen years later, these rights became the model for the Constitution
of France and the preamble of the International Bill of Human
Rights.[^14] All the freedoms reasonable and naturally particular to man
were universally and abstractly defined in the declaration of 1789. The
boundary for these freedoms according to article four of the declaration
included other freedoms, which should not be violated.

Since then, the relation between human rights and the international
relations mingled, like the influence of human rights within the
framework of liberalism and individual freedoms on political regimes and
naturally on the international relations and sometimes in the form of a
factor which has a direct economic or nationalistic form and sometimes
it is discussed from a Marxist point of view. Finally, new
interpretations of human rights are made in sociological context, the
protection of workers’ rights, the rights of women, the rights of
minorities, and the rights of refugees.

Part Two-Development of the Concept and the Function of Human Rights from the French Revolution up to the Present
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

From the French revolution onwards, three phases can be mentioned as to
the relation between the developments of international relation and the
concept of hu man rights: the first phase extends from the beginning of
French revolution until the end of World War II. New issues such as the
rights of women, of children, and of the refugees are contained within
the concept of human rights the concept of human rights includes two
points from the perspective of international relation: one, the
non-intervention of States in others’ privacy (on the basis of
liberalism) which leads to the development of non-state relations
particularly trade relations.

The other issue is the function of nationalism stemming from the right
of choosing the State by people which in fact carries the human rights
into national level, giving rise to the emergence of new European States
in the nineteenth century and the independence movements in the colonies
in the years between and after the war.

The second phase marks the period of institutionalisation of the human
rights at international level through bills and covenants on the one
hand, and the exercise of human rights as an instrument for the
intervention in internal affairs on the part of the Western countries,
mainly America and the settling with the totalitarian countries during
the Cold War on the other hand. The third phase in fact is a period,
which begins with the Islamic revolution of Iran. Its characteristic is
firstly the use of human rights against a third world country on the one
hand and the new interpretations of the bill of human rights on the
other, which may lead to varying interpretations of human rights and the
questioning of human rights in Europe.

### From The French Revolution To The End Of World War II

This phase, is in fact, a period, which nourished and influenced human
rights rather than being influenced by it. The declaration of 1789
defined human rights as the expression of principles transcending the
will of man without limitation due to birthplace, social status or
nationality. The universality of the declaration turned it into an
international document previously set forth in the framework of the
Great Bill (1215), the Lament for Rights (1628). the Declaration of
Rights (1689), Settlement Act (1701). The American Declaration of
Independence (1776) and the likes. However, the declaration of 1789
became a model for all liberalistic movements and even nationalistic
ones.

In the nineteenth century, human rights directly and indirectly left a
great though little known impact on international relations. The
indirect impact was made on the one hand by the liberalistic movements
including the leftist and the rightist namely liberalism and socialism
and the direct impact was made by nationalistic movements which led to
the creation of new countries, totally changing the European map and on
the other by exercising the international contracts.

The first article of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
enumerates man’s freedoms and determines the zone of power and the
degree of intervention of governments. In the wake of the fulfilment of
these freedoms, the despotic regimes turned constitutional. Since,
however, the States did not do this voluntarily, the nineteenth century
Europe instigated revolutions for achieving these freedoms.

The 1830 revolution led to the relative victory of the democrats in
France, Belgium, England and Spain and the constitution which was the
manifestation of this victory prevented the States or the rulers from
assuming excessive power. As opposed to these countries. there were
countries in which the revolutions came to waste.

Hence, an ideological and political segregation separated these two
groups of countries, turning compatible systems to non-compatible
ones.[^15] Another impact of such revolutions, which found a more
striking manifestation in 1848, was the shift of power. The mighty
Austrian State grew weak and France grew stronger than ever before.

Despite the similarities between human rights and liberalism and
individualism, the socialistic movements took recourse to human rights
to justify their demands. Exploitation of man by man and the sex
discrimination, which resulted in the violation of women’s rights, was
the debated subject of socialistic movements.

Thomas Spence (1750-1814) struggled against private ownership in the
name of human rights and demanded for the collectivisation of farms and
lands in a Federal government. Thomas Paine (1737-1809) advanced
democracy in the name of human rights with a view to equally
distributing the revenues.[^16] Later, in 1870s and 1880s, the working
hour was reduced to eight hours a day. The healthcare conditions and the
prohibition of child labour were called for by all the socialist parties
in Europe.

The development of individual freedom led to national freedom and the
right to self-determination. Another point is that the message of the
French Revolution was conveyed to all people by the leader of this
revolution, Napoleon I who himself violated these rights. The Italian
people were the first who sought to fulfil these rights with the arrival
of Napoleon in their country.

Two nationalistic movements, namely the movement of the Italian people
and the Germans in the nineteenth century led to the emergence of two
kingdoms of Italy and the German Empire, which had determining effects
on international relations. The emergence of the German Empire disturbed
the balance of power, providing the conditions for World War I.

Also, the nationalistic sentiments in the Balkan Peninsula especially in
the form of Pan-Slavism left perceptible effects. Many of new countries
which took shape after World War I such as Yugoslavia, Hungary, Poland,
Czechoslovakia, Lithuania, Litonia, and Estonia were all the results of
growth of national sentiments and the use of human rights which allowed
each nation to determine its own destiny.

The impact of human rights on international rights showed its signs in
the second half of the nineteenth century. The observance of human
principles in the field battles was considered in the Declaration of St
Petersburg of 1868, the Brussels Conference of 1874 and the Hague
Convention and achieved some success. With the act of June 2, 1890 on
abolition of slavery initiated by England and approved by some
countries, another sign of the impact of human rights on international
rights became manifest. The effect was extended to the Declaration of
Human Rights in the twentieth century.

Constitutions, declarations and charters point to human rights directly
or indirectly: the 1918 Bolshevik Declaration relating to the rights of
oppressed workers, the 1934 Declaration of the Falanges in Spain, the
Russian Constitution in 1936 and the 1933 Constitution of Portugal and
many others.

### Position Of Human Rights In Bipolar System

The bipolar system after World War II was not limited to the existence
of two powers. In fact, these two poles represented two different
cultural, political and social worlds. Hence, their struggle was a
perfect and many-sided one. It was under such conditions that human
rights found a prominent position as an organisation and as the product
of Western civilisation within the legal and political pillars of
international system.

Although according to Raymond Aron, the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights criticised the liberal society in the name of the social
ideal and the socialistic society in the name of liberalistic
ideal,[^17] it undoubtedly accorded more with the Western liberal
societies than with despotic eastern ones. The domination of Western
civilisation in shelter of human rights has two general manifestations.
First, the institutionalisation of human rights at international level
through declarations and conventions and its instrumentation in foreign
policies of Western powers.

#### International Institutionalisation of Human Rights

The recognition of human rights at international level started with the
reflection of parts of the principles set forth in the International
Bill of Human Rights. In the preamble of this bill, the basic rights of
man and the necessity for respect for them and in article 1, it talks of
international co­operation with a view to encouraging people to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Naturally, this is very general,
abstract and impractical. However, the nature of the matter could have
been effectual in developing human rights.

The most important and well-known international text on human rights is
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights approved on 10 December 1948
with 48 positive votes and 8 neutral ones by the General Assembly of the
United Nations (later, Declaration on Child Rights, the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women and Elimination of Racial Discrimination).
This bill enumerates the civil and political rights and freedoms,
presented as a common ideal of all nations and peoples: however, it
lacks international contract and the countries have no responsibility
towards it.

In my opinion, what in this declaration is more important than
commitment and guarantee is the way the rationalisations are done as in
the beginning of the declaration, in justification of planning this case
and the fact that there is a close relationship between the democratic
states and freedoms and international peace. If a government adopts a
tyrannical attitude within the country, it shall definitely adopt an
aggressive attitude within foreign policies. This was the experience
secured in the Fascist States in 1930s. Hence, for the preservation of
international peace, it is essential to supervise the happenings in a
country. This provides for the intervention in the affairs of other
countries.

Of course, if this supervision is done honestly and by international
authority, it shall prove to the benefit of international peace, for
regimes like Saddam Hossein’s regime in Iraq have started domination and
tyranny within the country, extending it to aggression against
neighbours at international level. However, as we shall see, the
supervision of human rights has become an instrument in the hands of the
despots.

These kinds of ratifications continued years later in the context of
universal and public declarations. Of these, is the Universal
Declaration of People’s rights as was published in the forrm of a
non-stat declaration on 4 July 1976 in Algeria: its goal was to ratify
the rights of people who had not taken the shape of state-nation (like
Palestine). Article 1 recognised the right to life and article 2
recognised the right to national and cultural identity. However, more
important than these declarations were the conventions, signed at
regional or international levels.

At international level, one should mention conventions formulated in the
framework of United Nations by the United Nations Organisation or other
organisations, for instance, the Four Geneva Conventions and their
properties in time of war, the Child Rights, the Elimination of all
Kinds of Discrimination approved by more than 140 votes. However, the
similar contracts signed in 1966 did not go into effect due to the
refusal of some countries until 1976.

On 16 December 1966, the General Assembly approved two Covenants, which
despite 1948 declaration were obligatory. The first was the Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights whose gradual realisation was
required in developing countries on the basis of observing human rights
and the attention to national economy and until 1980, about 63 countries
attended it and by 1990, they amounted to 100 countries. The second was
the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and self-determination whose
prompt realisation was required, until 1981, only 16 countries joined
it, and by 1990, they amounted up to 95.

However, the regional conventions enjoy more functionality because the
goals are clear and the members are self-motivated. In 1950, the
European Convention on Human Rights (it went into fore in 1953)
established a firm bond between morality and power, and between internal
commitments of the States and intergovernmental relations for the first
time in the province of human rights. It was because it responded to the
moral commitments of human rights on the one hand and on the other hand,
it used the power of the government as a support.

The articles set forth in this convention are kept but the European
commission on Human Rights which was made up of one judge from each
country supervises the observance of human rights in Member States. This
convention and the annexed protocols as to executive organisations
turned into a common point among the nations which had become members of
the European Council (founded 1949), except France which joined the
convention in 1981.[^18]

Article three of European Council provided that the members should vow
that everyone who is within their judicial domain should enjoy human
rights and fundamental freedoms. At first, the Council had 10 members,
which has reached 35 member countries (many of the eastern European
countries joined it between 1990 and 1996). In fact, the increase of the
countries is the expansion of the European Convention on Human Rights,
especially because the European social bill, observing the fundamental
social rights which was accepted in the 1989 Convention by the European
Council in Strasbourg was completed in 1950.

These fundamental rights included the right to profession with
sufficient wages, the right to the amelioration of living conditions,
the equal rights of man and women, the right to social security, the
right to participate in public gatherings, the right to job
instructions, healthy working condition, support for children, minimum
wages for old people, social and professional adaptation for the
disabled people.[^19] These show the change of human rights and their
development to a realm not conceived before. The right to healthy living
conditions and social security for senior citizens and disabled ones are
among the cases, which deserve contemplation as to the concept of human
rights.

European innovative functions in human rights were emulated by other
regions including the American Convention on Human Rights signed in 1969
between Latin American countries with 25 member countries today. The
articles in this convention are quite similar to the ones in the
European Convention. Even as to the mechanisms of exercise of these
rights, Europe has been the model.

In 1981, the African Organisation of the time ratified the African
Charter on Human and People’s Rights with 49 positive votes. In the same
year, the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam was reported to the
world by UNESCO, which was the work of the Islamic Council in Europe and
still does not have functional validity. In 1994, the Arab Union
approved the Arab Bill of Human Rights whose text has not yet been
ratified by any Member States.[^20]

The common point of international institutionalisation of human rights
and its employment in the foreign policies of great powers, is the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe known as the Helsinki
Conference. In this conference in which the European countries and the
two superpowers of Russia and America and Canada attended, regard and
respect for human rights was accepted. Although the articles in Helsinki
Conference were not as binding as in a convention, it was of importance
due to other reasons. The function that this declaration found in the
policies of Western countries especially the U.S.A. during the Cold War
accelerated its obvious effects, which shall be dealt with in due
course.

#### The Instrumentalization of Human Rights in the Foreign Policies in Western Countries

The American Declaration of Independence (1776) and the Declaration of
Rights of Man and of Citizen of France (1789) reveal the formal position
of human rights in the laws and policies of these countries. Besides,
there are two points which call for notice. One, most of the violations
of human rights in the world are done by the mighty Western countries
the evidence for which can be found in the independence wars of
different countries such as Algeria and Vietnam. Two, the only
protection for human rights is the weapon of morality. Maurice Cranston,
the British writer, states that human rights are moral rights, deriving
its executive power from social moralities.[^21]

These moralities are closely associated with public opinions, which in
the twentieth century turned into an organised process. This process can
be interpreted as the public opinion of the world.

Naturally, the use of human rights as a weapon in foreign policies
should be equally abolished. In this regard, the United States has been
a pioneer for two reasons: one is what Stanley Huffman says about the
Americans. He states that the Americans often imagine themselves on an
island surrounded by drowning people and their duty is to save them.
That is why they always assume a teacher-like attitude and based on
moral grounds they give themselves the license to interfere in the
affairs of others and guide them on the straight path.

Secondly, America turned into a power, which could do anything, thus
what remained was the justification of power. The Wilson Declaration
including 14 articles was a combination of a despotic nature in the
guise of saviour which did not succeed in adopting an isolated policy
but succeeded by the same strategy to force the old empires and the
despotic regimes to leave the scene so that the republic and democratic
states could be instated.

After World War II, the US directly struggled against Russia but with
the policy of New Look, it sought to control the rivals by using
diplomatic and legal weapons and to avoid direct conflict. In this
process, every instrument could be used, even human rights. However,
this required that the rivals should first accept the rules of the game
and then put a golden bridle around its neck. This important issue was
provided in Helsinki Conference.

Although the Helsinki Declaration did not have binding guarantee, it
strengthened the controversies within the eastern bloc. Russia gave in
to this deal for the determination of the boundaries in Eastern Europe
was not aware of its consequences. The Russians realised that the
refugees had increased and asked for migration to the West due to the
right to freedom of movement set forth in the Helsinki Declaration. Or
when the 77 Bill in Czechoslovakia succeeded in sending its documents to
the West, the Russian leaders realised that it had been short-dealt.

The matter turned serious when the American president, Jimmy Carter
protected the notorious adversaries such as Bukovsky and Sakharov.[^22]
Jimmy Carter who became president in the late 1976 officially
established the foreign policy on the basis of human rights: on 6
December, 1978, on the 30th celebration of the Declaration of Human
Rights, he stated, “Even these rights constitute our national identity.
This policy should be a poultice for the wounds of Vietnam and the
declaration a way to return to ideal and humane principles of the
liberal America and on the other hand, an instmment for imposing force
on its rival, Russia.”[^23]

Some believe that Carter really believed in human rights, applying them
in the third world and the American cronies. If that was the case, the
Christian aspects of this policy soon grew pale in the light of opposing
national interests. Some people consider the fall of Shah, this faithful
ally of the West as the result of the same policy and some others
describe the sorrow of the military regimes of Latin America as the
manifestation of this policy.

The American economic and political failures, which made American
leadership, look ridiculous to the Japanese and the Europeans, the
general policy of Carter, should be questioned.[^24] With the election
of Reagan as the president, the direct policy with Russia took the place
of human rights and when Gorbachev came to leadership in 1985, it seemed
that he had adopted the Western policy and that there was no longer the
need for human rights in Russia and the third world countries became the
targets of this weapon.

However, as Marcel Merle states, the way of using this weapon determined
from the beginning that the U.S.A. used human rights as a pressure
instrument and that sadly, the historical instances of such uses were
not few. For instance, the Russian Czars exerted pressure on the Ottoman
empires under the pretext of protecting the Christian minorities.[^25]

However, it is not only the U.S. that uses human rights as an external
instrument, but the European countries take such steps in the European
union as well. Entering this union not only necessitated the observance
of human rights the way Europe has in mind, but also the commercial
transactions are dependent on this condition. For the same reason,
Turkey has fallen behind and as long as it fails to provide political
freedoms for its subjects and settle accounts with the Kurds, it is
inconceivable for it to enter the European union.[^26]

The voluntary eastern European countries should accept the supervision
of the European commission on human rights. The conference on security
and co-operation in Europe, preparing itself to dominate all eastern and
Western countries, stressed the religious freedoms and the rights of
cultural, linguistic and religious identities in the Geneva session in
1989. In addition, this conference stressed human rights as the
foundation of this organisation in the session of 35 member countries in
Paris (November 1990) during which it changed its name to the
Organisation of Security and Co-operation.

On the other hand, the increase of the Member States from 35 to 53
during the years 1990 and 1996 which took place with the acceptance of
the countries broken away from Russia, helped develop the concept of
human rights to countries where there was no mention of European human
rights. It is understood that Europe seeks to use human rights as an
instrument in foreign policy just like the U.S. as the European
community demanded human rights in development plans, asking for a text
in re-signing the Lome pact known as Lome 4 between this union and 63
African countries, Caribbean and the pacific Oceania in December 1989,
despite the importance it accorded to African countries and the former
colonies.

### Critique Of The Principles Of Western Human Rights And Protest Against Its Misuse In Foreign Policies

At first, we need to point to an opposition in the attitude of third
world countries. The use of human rights by non-European people first
took place in the struggle against exploitation. Here, the non-European
people sought to fight Europe by means of European concepts. According
to a French writer, the European domination from the sixteenth century
up to the twentieth century induced the non-European people to think in
a European fashion. The people of Asia, Africa and America had to arm
themselves with European concepts in order to survive, for these
concepts had taken hold of other concepts, and guns had taken the place
of slings. The exploited ones used the same concepts that Europe had
used against their freedom, independence, and self-determination.[^27]
Thus, the function of human rights found international expansion by
dominated countries in the late 1960s.

In this time, the Russian-American relations were getting better and the
West-cast axis was losing its importance and on the contrary, the north
and south axis was finding importance. The discussion on universal
order, which was invigorated in the early 1970s, was soon concentrated
on the injustice in accessing to information. The importance of
information and its control by Western institutes was the main subject
of north and south relations and the UNESCO Conferences in Nairobi
(1976) and Paris (1978) allotted their main subject to his case. In the
end, McBride’s report in the general conference in Belgrade held on
October 25 1980 was accepted. In this context, the necessity of
observing justice is stressed.

1. Elimination of imbalance and inequality

2. Elimination of the negative effects of some of the public
monopolistic centres and the elimination of excessive concentration

3. The observance of the rights of all peoples in participating in
international exchange of information on the basis of equality, justice
and mutual interests

This debate gave rise to an overwhelming crisis within UNESCO. In
December 1948, the United States left this organisation. In December
1985, England joined the United States and condemned the so-called world
terrorism in UNESCO. As for the third world countries, they could not do
anything.[^28] At all events, there was no debate on the concept of
human rights and it seemed as if the concept of human rights as accepted
by the Europeans was accepted by all nations of the world.

However, in the early 1980s, this question emerged whether humanity was
a single, universal and inalienable affair and that human rights were
the clear sign of man’s position, a reasonable man, a master for whom
the society was a place of his flowering intellect or on the contrary it
was an affair influenced by time, place and diverse cultures. This
question was accompanied with the question, which emerged, from the
basic opposition of human rights with the authorities of states. The
Islamic revolution of Iran was instrumental in motivating these two
questions, for on the one hand, it demanded national authority and the
refusal of foreign domination and rejected any kind of interference
under any circumstances including human rights and on the other hand, as
a pioneer of a movement arising from Islamic values it sought to find a
new definition for social concepts especially the legal concepts and
principles including human rights.

Before this, diverse steps had been taken in Islamic countries. In 1968,
the union of Arab countries created the permanent Arab commission on
Human Rights and in 1981, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in
Islam was declared to the world through the immediacy of UNESCO.
However, none of these steps has been able to question the domination of
the European concept of human rights.

On the other hand, the policies for a Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in Islam in which the similarities and dissimilarities between
the West society and Islamic world are determined have not yet taken
place. The important point in this process is the initiation of debates
over the principles and the possibility of diverse ideas as to human
rights,

The Asian countries have well understood that the West employs human
rights as a pressure weapon in foreign policies. Chandra Mozafar,
professor of political science in Malaysia states that the foundation of
the debate between Asia and the West is economical. “On the basis of one
of the studies of European commission, until the year 2020 there will be
five strong economics in eastern Asia as to the equality of purchase
power. The economy of China will be the greatest economy of the world,
which will be 40 percent greater than the second economic power, that
is, the U.S.A. They feel that they are losing the domination that they
have had for over 200 years. Is the protection of human rights one of
the few policies in ensuring the preservation of such domination?”[^29]

Therefore, we realise that human rights have never been so entangled
with international relations. In fact, human rights are a part of the
international system, which is important both in dominating relations
and in debates. The uniformity and opposition in international system
finds reflection in the same way as in human rights. On the one hand,
the eastern domination and the attempt to protect it and on the other,
the opposition of the countries under domination. The future of human
rights is dependent on such debate. The countries under domination want
to keep human rights as a shield to preserve their identities (see the
Algerian declaration of 1976) and the dominating countries seek to use
human rights as the means to interfere in the affairs of others and use
the resolutions of the United Nations on humanitarian assistance as a
means to this end.

Conclusion
----------

From the beginning, human rights have been one of the data, subjects and
determining factors in international relations and the more we advance,
the more the relation between human rights and international relations
grows. It is true that governments are independent and have national
authority but there are two points which should not go unnoticed: the
increase of transnational forces associated with all communities, such
as environment and on the other hand, the increasing elimination of the
distance between national community and international community. This
means that the age of authority of States is diminishing and the
transnational forces including human rights have gained greater
importance and shall penetrate the national frontiers.

Encountering such forces, if necessary, should be done with forces of
the same nature. Stress on diminishing national authority will not be
sufficient for preventing the impact of human rights. There should be
another form of human rights of another kind to be placed against the
existing one.

On the other hand, the concept of human rights is not so stable in order
that we can recognise it as being limited to the 1789 declaration but
that which belongs to a contradictory issue, developing and involving in
international debates. Hence, it influences these debates and is
influenced by them. The sequence of debates over human rights and its
diverse interpretations, which are changing, is a witness to the same
case. The last point is that the third world countries are condemned to
either accept the European interpretation of human rights or offer a
reliable interpretation of them.

[^1]: Wil Durant, Story of Civilisation, Vol. 3, “Caesar and Christ”,
Translated by Hamid Inayat and Others, Tehran: Intisharat-i Ingilab-i
Islami, 1993, p. 28.

[^2]: Ibid., p.723

[^3]: J. B. Duroselle, et J. M. Mayeur, Histoire du Catholicisme, Paris:
PUF, 1974, pp. 62 et sq.

[^4]: Andre Corvisier, Precis d 'Histoire Moderne, Paris: PUF, 2em, ed
(1981) p. 50.

[^5]: For further information, see: A. Chastel et R. Klen, L’Age de
l’humanisme, Paris: PUF, 1963.

[^6]: For more information, see Marcel Merle, Forces et enjeux dans le
relations internationales, Paris: Economica, 1985, pp. 15-16.

[^7]: For more information, see R. Dolin, Politique et philosophie chez
Thomas Hobbes, Paris: PUF, 1953.

[^8]: Max Weber, Scientist and Politician, translated by Ahmad
Naqibzadah, Tehran: Tehran Univerrsity Press, 1994, pp. 110-130.

[^9]: B. Badie, Eisenstad’s Theories, Recan and Shiles in Political
Development, Translated by Ahmad Naqibzadah, Tehran: Qumis, 1997: B.
Badie:, le Development politique, Paris: Economica, 1984, pp. 111-134.

[^10]: Jacques Droz, Histoire Diplomatique de 1648 a 1919, Paris:
Dalloz, 1972, pp. 67-69.

[^11]: Essay on Civil Government, 1690

[^12]: Georges Burdeau, le Liberalisme, Paris: Seuil, 1979, p. 33.

[^13]: G. Burdeau, op, cit., p. 29.

[^14]: Albert Mallet, The History of Eighteenth Century, Translated by
Rashid Yasami, Tehran: Jahan-i Kitah, 1984, p. 234.

[^15]: Ahmad Naqibzadah, The Changes in International Relations, Tehran:
Qumis, 1997, p. 36 onwards.

[^16]: For further infonnation see Michel Lallement, Histoires des idees
Sociologiques, tom 1, Paris: Nathan, 1993, p. 70.

[^17]: R. Aron, ”Pensee Sociologique et Droit de l’Homme”, in: Etudes
Politiques, Paris: Gallimard, 1972, p. 234.

[^18]: Voir. J. Mourgeon, le Droit de l’Homme, Paris: PUF, 1996, p. 79.

[^19]: Pascal Fountaine:, l’Union Europeene, Paris: Seuil, 1994, p. 141.

[^20]: J. Mourgeon, Op, Cit., pp. 79-80.

[^21]: Maurice Cranston, Human Rights Today, London, 1962.

[^22]: Merle, Op. Cit. p. 50.

[^23]: Berstein and Milza, Op, Cit. p. 466.

[^24]: Pierre Melandri, La Politique Exterieure des Etats-Unis de 1945 a
nos jours, Paris: PUF, l982, p. 190.

[^25]: Merle, Op, Cit. p. 51.

[^26]: Fredric Charillon, “L’Union Europeene en 1995”, in: A. Grosser,
Les pays de l’Europe Occidentale, Paris: Documentation Francaise, 1996,
p. 304.

[^27]: Voir. P. Moreau· Defaeges, Relations Internationales, Vol. 2
Question Mondiales, Paris: Seuil, 1994. p. 22.

[^28]: Ibid., pp. 222-223.

[^29]: Chandra Muzafar, “Europe-Asia and the Case of Human Rights.”
Ittila’at Newspaper, 27 January, 1996, p. 12.


