Human Rights In Practice:The Violation Of The Muslims’ Rights Throughout The World And The Position Of The United Nations Towards This Issue
============================================================================================================================================

**Dr. Sa’idah Lutfiyan**

Five fundamental questions arise in the discussion of human rights:

1. What are human rights?

2. Should human rights be universal or associated with the cultural
characteristics of nations?

3. Is human rights a civil issue and within the domain of independent
countries or should it be treated as an international issue?

4. What factors cause the violation of human rights by the States?

5. How should international community and state and non-state
organizations protect human rights at international level?

Each one of these complicated questions concerns a certain field of
human rights. This article deals with the violation of human rights of
the Muslims throughout the world in certain cases and the positions of
international organizations in the context of the aforementioned issues.
In part one, we shall discuss “the historical change of human rights,
important international documents constituting the international regime
of human rights and the similarities between international human rights
and Islamic human rights. In part two, we shall discuss the freedom of
religion as one of the most fundamental human rights and the violations
of the human rights of Muslims in non-Muslim societies particularly in
Chechnya-Herzegovina and the Occupied Palestinian. Finally, in part
three, we shall draw a conclusion from our discussion.

Part One-International Regime of Human Rights. The Historical Change of Human Rights
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Contemporary human rights are shaped in three main generations. The
first generation human rights was declared in the democratic revolutions
towards the end of eighteenth century in America and France, which
centered on civil and political rights with the view to ensuring
individual rights and patriarchal system. These rights George Jellinek
called *negative situation* and *active situation*. The rights of
negative situation are of defensive nature, aiming to prevent the
violation of the right to life, freedom, and private property by the
State. The rights of active situation elate to participation in
political process, the freedom of expression, gatherings and suffrage.

The second generation of human rights finds its origins in the
nineteenth century known as *positive situation*. The idea of positive
rights was strengthened by the problems arising from the industrial
revolution and socio-political rights were set forth to eliminate
poverty.[^1]

Maurice Cranston defines positive rights as those, which are approved
and exercised by the system of civil laws. Positive rights are true,
particular to man. What man should have is a different issue.[^2]

The third generation of human rights was developed during the twentieth
century, adding two aspects to human rights. The first aspect was the
universality of human rights after World War II. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights was approved by the General Assembly on 12
December 1948.[^3]

Indeed, the idea of protection of human rights by the international
community goes back to the catastrophic events of World War II and the
exceeding despotism of great powers preceding the war. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights is regarded as the main document of the
international human rights regime. In 1966, the viewpoint set forth in
this Declaration was enhanced in the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.

In early January of 1987, 87 and 85 parties were respectively bound to
approve the covenants and almost all other countries signed the
agreement or at least expressed their support for them. These documents
are recognized as the International Bill of Human Rights, including
extensive civil and political rights (the right to life, the right to
security of person, non-discrimination, protection against arrest or
arbitrary detention, the freedom of expression, press and political
gathering) and economic, social and cultural rights (the right to food,
medical welfare, education, social security and job security.)[^4]

Another important aspect of the third generation human rights are the
attention focused on socio-economic rights the most important of which
are the right to development, the right to a healthy and balanced
environment, the right to participation in and benefiting from the
common heritage of mankind (shared Earth-space, resources: scientific,
technical, and other information and progress: cultural traditions,
sites, and monuments).

In discussing against economic, social and cultural rights, they regard
a distinction between negative rights (only demanding clemency and
forgiveness) and positive rights (requiring the concerted efforts of all
social forces to substantial degree on a planetary scale). The violation
of negative rights involves active injuries and the violation of
positive rights only involves earning support. For instance, the
protection of torture frequently said to be negative (because, the State
should abstain from torturing people) has indeed a positive character.
In many countries, the abstention from torturing people requires
fundamental changes in laws, the administrative policy and the
personnel.

Many civil and political rights are not manifestly negative. Suffrage is
a positive right: unemployment or the lack of medical welfare is
regarded as a threat to security of person and the dignity of man.[^5]
The obvious point is the flagrant difference lying in the observance of
negative and positive rights between the nations. Although the
International Bill of Human Rights (approved by most countries) places
stress on the observance of social, economic and cultural rights, the
poverty and deprivation of millions of people throughout the globe is an
undeniable fact.

Are human rights a national or international issue? How should we strive
to abide by it? Donnelly expreses the *own-state duty* which suggests
that since the international system is made of nation-state, the duty of
observing human rights is binding on the countries which should ensure
and respect the rights of their citizens.[^6] On the contrary, Vincent
suggests the idea of *other state duty*, contending that the duty of
observing socio-economic rights is binding not on the nation-countries
and the international community has responsibilities in this regard.[^7]
The point introduced is the universality of human rights. Do the
cultural differences among people mean that the concept of the
universality of human rights lacks validity? Are they really used to
advocate a dominant imperialistic ideology? Are human rights a Western
construct with limited applicability as they claim?[^8] Are human rights
universal because of its concern for all men! Do they keep concealed the
universal domination of a certain culture (the imperialistic culture of
Western countries)? Two different answers are given to these questions:

A) The advocates of universality believe that human rights are not
associated with a certain ideology or idea. Although the concept of
human rights finds its origins in the West and emerged in Europe and
northern America, the concept of human rights is not associated with
Western thought or culture and is exercisable not only in Western
communities but in non-Western communities as well.[^9]

B) The adversaries of the universality of human rights proposed the
philosophical view of cultural absolutism, implying that the culture of
every society has underlying moral values. Hence, they believe that
cultural features have more moral and spiritual value than the world of
justice. As cultures are different, human rights should not be universal
and the Westerners should not expect that the non-Western cultures
should change their moral system according to the international human
rights regime.[^10]

In international assemblies and non-state international organizations
supervising human rights in different countries, we have witnessed the
Western criticisms of Islamic laws and rights. Some theoreticians of
human rights claim that there are still discriminations between Muslims
and non-Muslims although in the constitutions of Muslim countries, equal
rights and freedom of religion are granted and in some of them (such as
Iran and Pakistan) the right to representation in the executive power is
allocated to religious minorities.[^11]

In defense of Islamic human rights, the Muslim lawmakers express that
Islamic human rights are based on the Qur’an and the practice of Prophet
Mohammed (P.B.U.H.). In Islamic societies, the punishment for theft can
be the chopping of the hand, and blood money must be paid to the
victim’s family. Despite the protest of Western proponents of human
rights against Muslim laws of punishment, most of the Muslims today obey
this law at large. Of course, the Muslim laws require the State to put
into effect its commitments for executing the socio-economic justice and
the preservation of a standard of living before it applies these
punishments. In other words, these punishments may be allowed when these
conditions are fulfilled.

According to the Islamicists and Muslim lawmakers, the Muslims are the
victims of discrimination in international communities. Ahmet Davutoglu
states in his *Civilizational Transformation and the Muslim World*:

Over the recent years, there has been a tendency in Western spiritual
and political centers to ill repute the Muslim communities as maladroit
clements in international System. The issue of Salman Rushdie and the
Islamic Hijab (Muslim dress code for women) of girls and women in France
and England aroused historical bias against Islam. Mass media has been
extensively used with a view to strengthening this thought. In the
Persian Gulf crisis, although Saddam Husayn’s wing was protected by many
Muslim countries, he is regarded as an ever-increasing symbol for
Islamic fundamentalism.[^12]

In this regard, Muhammed Makki Nasiri, one of the members of the
Religious Intellectual Council in Morocco, states:

Human rights might be a new phenomenon for the West, but we have had
human rights in Islam from the outset. We do not see any difference
between the whites, the blacks, the Jews and the Muslims; they are all
free. However, we never torture the Jews as they do in France and
England. Israel is given the license to commit massacre. The US did not
even condemn the bombardment of the Saf in Tunisia by Israel.[^13]

Although most of the Westerners claim that human rights are the
manifestation of Western culture, the Muslims contend that human rights
lie in the heart of Islam. The emphasis of the West on human rights does
not conceal the fact that the rights of citizens are violated every day
in the Western communities. Of course, Nassiri stresses that Islamic
freedoms do not permit everything. Saudi Arabia opposed the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights because it permits paganism.[^14] Ali
Mazru’i regards Islamic human rights and Islamic culture more humane
than the Western culture. He admits to the difference between men and
women in some Islamic countries: however, he believes that the
historical gap between the West and Islam is not a hundred years but
that the Muslim countries are a few decades behind the Western
communities in this regard.

Almost in all the Western countries except New Zealand, women did not
have the right to vote until the beginning of the twentieth century.
Britain granted this right to women in two stages, in 1918 and 1928
respectively. In the amendments to the American Constitution in 1920,
the US granted suffrage to women. Until 1971, Switzerland deprived women
of suffrage at national level whereas the Muslim women in Tunisia,
Morocco, Algeria, Indonesia and other Muslim countries enjoyed this
right.[^15] In 1870, British married women did not have the right to
property.

By comparison, the Muslim women have always enjoyed this right. The US
(the largest and the most influential Western country) has never had a
woman president whereas Pakistan and Bangladesh, which are among the
countries with the highest population in the Muslim world, have been
often run by woman prime ministers. Benazir Bhutto in Pakistan, Khalida
Ziya and Hasina Wajed in Bangladesh were chosen as Prime Ministers. In
Muslim Turkey, Tansu Ciler has served in various positions in the
government.

Now the Muslims and the Jews are equal in number in the US: however, it
is most improbable that a Muslim leader be chosen as president in the
near future in this country. By comparison, the Republic of Senegal in
which 95 percent of its population are Muslims was ruled by a catholic
president (Leopold Sedar Senghor) for twenty years (1960-1980). The
present leader of Senegal is a Muslim, but his wife is a catholic. In
Western Europe, millions of Muslims live:[^16] however, no Muslim has
ever been selected as a member of the Western Cabinet. From the facts
noted above, one can conclude that the Westerners are far less secular
than they often assume and that historically the Muslim communities are
far more humanitarian than what the Westerners believe.[^17]

Davutoglu criticizes the double standard function of international laws
and system, which has caused insecurity on the part of the Muslims. The
international system has tolerated the Israeli policy of expansion in
the occupied lands of Palestine. *Intifazah* is called the terroristic
act, but the popular riots in Eastern Europe arc supported. A serious
response was not given towards the Russian military intervention in
Azerbaijan in January 1990 and hundreds of Azerbaijanis lost their lives
due to this aggression.

However, the Western powers showed reaction against the Russian
intervention in Baltic republic. International organizations are
sensitive to the rights of the small Muslim minorities in Muslim
countries and publish diverse reports on the violations of the rights of
these groups; yet, they kept silence towards the oppression against the
Muslim minorities in Kashmir, India, Bulgaria, former Yugoslavia, Burma
and other places.

Atomic powers in the Muslim world (Pakistan and Kazakhstan) are
introduced as serious dangers to the world security whereas the
existence of such weapons in non­Muslim countries (Israel and India) is
accepted.[^18] The Muslims who constitute 25% of the world
population[^19] do not have a permanent member in the Security Council
of the United Nations and the requests of the Muslim world have been
repeatedly vetoed by the non-Muslim communities.[^20] The Secretary
General of United Nations has never been a Muslim and only a small
number of important organizations have been supervised by the Muslims.

Richard Falk alleges that there are the bipolarization and
discrimination of mass media and the American political leaders. It
seems that these organizations support those who tend to follow goals
contrary to Islamic interests. In regard to the differences between the
Arabs and Israel, this idea has come up that the violence of the
Israelis against the Palestinian refugees and other Arabs is generally
considered based on security policies but the Palestinian violence is
viewed as a terroristic act, injuring the moral and political claims of
Palestinian combatants.

Other clashes in which the Muslims have been the victims of the
violation of human rights (such as Chechnya, Bosnia and Kashmir) also
demonstrate the truth of the discriminatory policies. If the victim and
the victimizer changed places, the response of international assemblies
would definitely change.

In addition, Falk points to the discrimination regime of the prohibition
of nuclear weapons. Mass media overshadows the picture that the
military-nuclear capability of the Muslim countries is a threat to
international security. Although the motive of Pakistan in nuclear
weapons is a response to the nuclear threat of India and a superior
military capacity compared to its non­Muslim neighboring country.
Pakistan’s newly acquired nuclear capability is referred to as Islamic
bomb. No report is provided on Christian bomb, Hindu bomb or Confucian
bomb.

In the continuation of the anti-Islamic attitude of international system
towards Muslim countries, Richard Falk investigates the international
response to terroristic acts. In the first responses towards terroristic
acts, the Muslim world was considered a suspect. The labels *rebels* or
*rascals* are given to several Muslim countries (including Iran, Iraq
and Libya) to strengthen the suspicion that the Islamic combative
tendencies should be treated forcefully while the non-Muslim countries
(such as Burma over the recent years and south Africa during apartheid
era) which violated international laws and universal conscience were
treated with the policy of *constructive* *engagement*.

Besides, in the wake of the Cold War, the West expressed its commitment
towards the expansion of democratic rule (namely, encouraging public
elections and the observance of the constitution.) The Western fear of
the political influence of Islam led to the overlooking of the coup
d’etat which took place in Algeria to counteract the election victory of
Islamicists. The coverage of mass media towards the oppressed Muslims
was dry and scant attention to the spiritual and political stress
resulted in radical acts (such as voluntary bombing). The support of the
Palestinian Arabs and the adversaries of Western State (such as Iran and
Libya) of the actions of Arab democratic combatants are exaggerated but
the cry of the Israelis (with the slogans of death to Arabs and
Palestine) for revenge is ignored.

From the viewpoint of world economy, the Muslim countries are kept in
isolation. The G-7 composed of the great economic powers does not
include any Muslim country. Do Malaysia, Indonesia or Saudi Arabia not
have the right as Canada or Italy to participate in the decision-makings
of the world economy? In the age of enlightenment, is it not reasonable
that the Muslim countries participate in the international economic
system?[^21]

With view to enhancing the socio-economic cooperation among the Muslim
countries and also strengthening relations between these countries with
non-Muslim countries, eight Muslim counties (Iran, Turkey, Indonesia,
Egypt, Pakistan, Malaysia, Bangladesh, and Nigeria) have established a
new cooperative­economic organization called D-8 (Developing Eight). On
16 June 1997, this organization started work with the signature of the
common declaration of the Istanbul Bill by the heads of the States of
eight countries.

The decision of 10 July 1997 of the American Congress, which recognized
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and allotted one million dollars for
transferring the American embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, is another
undeniabie evidence of the anti-Islamic tendencies of American foreign
policies. This anti-Islamic act is insensitive to the feelings of
millions of Muslims about the future of this holy city and opposes the
resolutions of United Nations. Both the Muslim countries and the
underdeveloped non-Muslirn countries objected to the unfair judgement of
international assemblies in choosing regimes which should be studied and
criticized due to the violation of human rights.

In the following chapter, we shall treat this question whether
international assemblies including the Commission on Human Rights of the
United Nations and the international non-governmental organizations
advocating human rights and the western countries shall be partial in
their judgement of the human rights of the Muslims.

Part Two-Human Rights in Practice Muslims in non-Muslim Societies
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In the international laws on human rights, the observance of civil and
political rights seems more prominent than that of socio-economic
rights. As article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights states all the rights of minorities should be observed,

“In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities
exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied the
right, in community with the other members of their group, to enjoy
their own culture, to profess and practice their own religion, or to use
their own language.”

Also, the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or
Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities approved on 18 December 1992
stresses that such people have the right to the enjoyment of their
culture, the expression of their religion and the use of their
language.[^22]

Article 1 of the International Bill of Human Rights declares that the
Member States should propagate through this organization the respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for everyone without limitation of
any kind due to race, sex, language or religion.[^23]

The case studies of the situation of human rights of Muslims in
Bosnia­Herzegovina, Chechnya and the Occupied Palestine which will be
dealt with in the following part indicate that human rights are neither
(in practice) partial nor postulated.[^24]

### The Israeli Attitude Towards The Palestinians In The Occupied Lands

With the military occupation of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank of
Jordan River, Israel played the reciprocal role of the State and the
occupier. In both roles, the policy of Tel Aviv should be limited to the
laws of war and international standards of human rights. The deplorable
situation of the Palestinians indicates that there is a need for a new
set of laws and legal standards for the protection of civilians under
the long ascendancy of the occupiers, for the laws of human rights are
not observed for Palestinian military men. Peleg states that the
settlement activities of the Israeli Jews in the occupied lands are the
main cause of the extensive violation of human rights in the years
before the uprising that became known as *intifazah* (shaking off).

No other Israeli policy as the act of settlement of the Jews in
Palestine has ever left such a negative impact on the situation of human
rights in Palestine. These plans did not increase the hostility between
Arabs but they set many Israeli radical Jews in the neighbourhood of
these angry oppressed Arabs. Consequently, the violent and bloody
tension between the Arabs and the Israeli immigrants has been
inevitable.

In response to this ever-increasing violence, the government in Tel Aviv
has helped intensify the tensions with the more severe security measures
it has taken within its domain. Under such circumstances, the violation
of human rights has become more obvious than ever before. The Israeli
policy on the expulsion of the Palestinians from the lands, the
destruction of their houses, and the prolonged incarceration are used as
a means to achieve three goals. These goals are:

1) Preventing the growth of native leadership

2) Satisfying the demands of the emigrant Jews with a view to
intensifying the anti-Palestinian acts

3) Punishing non-military Palestinians for their previous acts.

Hence, the Israeli political motivations result in aggressive policies
instead of security motivations. Moreover, since Israel does not take
such measures due to military or security necessities; and does not
follow political goals, these policies violate international laws.[^25]

The violations of Palestinian rights by the Israelis are innumerable. We
shall be discussing the most important of these cases.

#### The Status of Palestinian Refugees

The 1948 war between the Arabs and the Israelis left 650,000 Arab
refugees who fled to the West Bank of the Jordan River or the
neighbouring Arab countries. In 1948, the General Assembly of the United
Nations approved resolution 194 and proposed a way for eliminating the
refugee’s problem. Paragraph 11 enumerates a few solutions such as
repatriation, or the payment of indemnity.

At first, the Palestinian refugees did not accept the resolution but
after some time, they viewed paragraph 11 of the same resolution as
guaranteeing unconditional return of the Palestinian refugees to their
land.

In 1967 war, approximately 300,000 Palestinians (among whom 100,000
people were the 1948 refugees) escaped from the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip and became known as the Palestinian refugees. The Security Council
of the United Nations approved resolution 237, demanding Israel to
provide facilities for the repatriation of these refugees. Israel
allowed only a small number of them to repatriate from Jordan. About
one-third of the Palestinian refugees were placed under Israeli
supervision in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

Resolution 242 of the Security Council (accepted by Israel and the major
Arab countries) is somewhat vague about the solution to the refugee’s
problem, pointing that the just solution to the Arab-Israeli differences
depended on the solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees;
however, it does not specify who these refugees are. In the wake of 1973
war, resolution 338 of the Security Council stressed implementation of
the resolution 242 and added that peace should be established through
direct negotiations. The Camp David Accords in 1978 between Egypt and
Israel did not consider any solution to the refugee’s problem.[^26]

It is common to compare enemy to little animals with the view to
humiliating them in ethnic differences. Also, in the differences among
the Arabs and the Israelis, comparisons of this sort are frequently
made. The extremist Jews supporting major Kahane compare Palestinians to
cockroaches, which should be collected and expelled from the country.
The Arab Bedouins are a small caste in the Sinai Peninsula, living in
the desert. With the advent of the Israeli State, approximately 100,000
Arab Bedouins found themselves within the borders of this country. Most
of them were expatriated to Jordan or Egypt and their expulsion
continued in 1950s. Tel Aviv State usurped 93 percent of the Negheb
desert without considering the rights of the Palestinian Arabs and
without paying indemnity.

The most blatant instance of the violation of international conventions
on human rights concerns 2000 Bedouins dwelling in the east of
Jerusalem. The members of Jahilin tribe living in Negheb were driven
away to the border of Jordan in 1950s and were in the occupied lands
towards the end of the 1967 war. From the time of their expulsion from
Negheb, these Bedouins continued farming by borrowing lands from the
Arab villagers.

For the expansion of Jewish settlements, Tel Aviv usurped these lands,
suggesting that they choose the stone hill, which is some 500 meters
away from the main garbage dump and the industrial waste in Jerusalem.
The important point is that the Israeli authorities have recognized the
place suitable for human residence. The issue of Jahalin was proposed in
the fifty first assembly on the International Commission on Human Rights
and some of the groups on human rights and non-state organizations
supported them.

The draft of the resolution inquiring Israel not to usurp 53 hectares of
land in Jerusalem was not ratified in the Security Council on May 17
1995 due to American veto.[^27] The Western countries, which claim to
protect human rights, have not taken any operative step to help the Arab
nomads and other wandering Palestinians.

#### Inhumane Conduct towards the Palestinian Prisoners And Arbitrary Execution

A disabled diminutive Palestinian man called ‘Abd al-Samad Hasan
Harizat, was detained in early April 1995 for the crime of co-operating
with Hamas (considered the most important Islamic party who reject
making peace with Israel) and was killed due to brain concussion during
the interrogation session of the Shin Beth.[^28]

In another occasion, Ehud Yatom, a former agent of Shabak (Israeli
Security Agency) admitted having a part in the wanton execution of the
two Palestinians called Subhi and Majid Abu Jamiya. He confessed that
these two Palestinians were badly beaten for the crime of participating
in the act of hijacking the Israeli bus number 300 carrying the security
forces and the non-civilians (including the Israeli foreign minister
Yitzhak Mordechai). About an hour after arrest, they were entrusted to
Yatom and other Shabak Agents while they were suffering from severe cuts
and bruises. During transferring them from the place of arrest, Abraham
Shalom, the chief of Shabak ordered Yatom to have them executed
immediately. According to Yatom’s confession, he obeyed this order at
once. Following the publication of Yatom’s interview, the Palestinian
Center for Human Rights sent a letter on 6 December 1996 to Israeli
authorities to disclose some facts about the bus 300: they received no
reply, however.[^29]

#### Armed Attack against the Civilians

On 27 September 1996, Israeli helicopters opened fire to the
non­residential zones of Rafah. In the Gaza Strip, the Israeli soldiers
have kept using weapons against the civilians. In the West Bank, it is
also reported that the Israeli soldiers have attacked the Palestinian
civilians. On the same day, during the Friday Prayer Congregation at
Masjid al-Aqsa, three Muslim worshipers were killed and seventy wounded.
The Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyaho did not opt for
negotiations on the tunnel under way near Masjid al-Aqsa and other
issues resulting in last summer’s clashes.[^30]

#### Surrounding the Occupied Territories

On the evening of October 23 1996, the Israeli authorities started to
surround the occupied Palestinian lands. The entire boundary passages
between the Gaza Strip and the Israeli domain were blocked and the
movement of persons and goods was limited in the Israeli-controlled
areas. These limitations affected all the aspects of the lives of people
dwelling in the Gaza Strip, creating innumerable difficulties as
follows:

1. Limitations of the trade transaction between the Gaza Strip and the
external world.

2. Preventing the Gaza workers from going to their place of work in
Israel

3. Not allowing access to medical services to the patients who were in
need of medical treatment outside the Gaza Strip

4. Preventing the freedom of movement between the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank, even for more than 1200 Palestinian students dwelling in the
Gaza Strip who were doing their studies in the universities of the West
Bank

5. Preventing visits to the relatives and the family members of the
Palestinian prisoners incarcerated in the Israeli prisons. About 750
Palestinian prisoners are being kept in the Israeli prisons.

6. Prohibiting freedom to leave Israel[^31]

The intensive military siege of the Gaza Strip started on 25 February
and continued for eight months, magnifying the miseries and sorrows of a
million people dwelling in the Gaza Strip. During the period of twenty
seven years of direct and military occupation, the Israeli authorities
started to destroy the economic substructures of the Gaza Strip with a
view to changing the territory to a free market for their products and a
source of cheap man power for their factories and industries.

During these years and as a result of the Israeli policies, the income
of the Arab Palestinian workers has become very vital for economy and
for the people in the Gaza Strip. However, due to repeated closures, the
Arab Palestinian workers have decreased in number in Israel. Before
February closure, the workers consisted of 22,000 persons. The decrease
of the workers has resulted in economic problems for this occupied
territory in which the rate of unemployment was 60 percent.

Tel Aviv is responsible for the economic destruction of Gaza after years
of military occupation and this responsibility should be considered in
time of imposing closure policies. These policies show the blatant
violation of the scientific freedom, the right to education, the right
to freedom of movement, the right of the prisoners to visit their
relatives and their right to have lawyers in the Gaza Strip.

What are the international reactions towards the blatant violations of
the human rights of Palestinian Muslims? Reports on the continuation of
Israeli policies contrary to humane dignity in the occupied territories
are erratically published. On February 9, 1995, Betselem, the Israeli
group of human rights declared that 1396 Palestinians had been killed by
the Israelis or their Arab allies since the advent of the Palestinian
*intifazah* in 1987. And this number includes 256 children under the age
16. The number of the Israeli casualties is 230 including 57 military
men.[^32]

Amnesty International Organization has criticized Israel and the
Palestinian authority for not observing the Arab human rights. This
organization reports that the ones accused of voluntary bombs planting
in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv have been exposed to torture. The bombing of
the refugee camps in the south of Lebanon, which claimed l03 lives, is
another instance of the violation of human rights.[^33] However, Israel
has not been the target of international sanction or punishment for the
violation of the Palestinian human rights (such as arbitrary execution,
torture and non­humane treatment towards the prisoners, unjust
execution, detetion and arrest without any obvious crime, the prevention
of thousands of refugees to repatriate to their lands, the destruction
of the houses of innocent people, the usurpation of Arab lands for
building Jewish settlements.)

Twenty-six members of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities approved a resolution concerning Palestine
and other lands occupied by Israel with eleven affirmative votes, six
negative votes and six absent votes. This resolution cites the appalling
cases noted in the previous resolutions. Israel is severely scolded for
the odious violation of the Geneva convention on the protection of
civilians in time of war, the persistence in occupying the Arab
Palestinian lands, the settlement in the occupied territories, the
refusal of the resolutions of the United Nations, the non-humane
treatment and terroristic acts against the Arab Syrian civilians.
Besides, this resolution insists on the protection of the international
conference of Middle East peace.[^34]

For the first time over the fifty years of the General Assembly of the
United Nations, an emergency special session was held on 24 and 25 April
1997 with a view to considering the Israeli illegal actions in the
eastern part of occupied Jerusalem and in other occupied territories of
Palestine. This assembly approved a resolution in which the settlement
in Jabal Abu Ghunaym was condemned. This special session of the General
Assembly was held in the Security Council following the second American
veto on 21 April 1997 which contrary to the resolution 51/223 of the
General assembly on 13 March and the severe position of the members of
the United Nations was held to condemn the policies of expansion of Tel
Aviv.[^35]

Despite the international oppositions, the rightist State of Netanyahu
has put an end to the limitations applied by the former State in 1992
for expanding the Jewish towns in the occupied territories and decided
to build new houses in the West Bank of the Jordan River. The recent
decision of the American Congress for the formal recognition of
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and the failure of the United Nations
in exercising the approved resolutions shows that the reactions of
Western countries (specially the US) and the international forums
towards the violation of human rights are dependent on the identity of
the victims and the accused regimes. If the Muslim Palestinians played
the part of the occupier regime and the occupier regime the part of the
refugees, prisoners and victims of the aggressive policy of expansions,
would the West keep silent in the face of this oppression? Or would they
reward the oppressor?

### The Muslims In Bosnia And Herzegovina

The emergence of new countries in the former Yugoslavia (Slovenia,
Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Meseroni) increased the Balkan countries
from six to ten. Muslims constitute 44 percent of the population of
Bosnia Herzegovina and it is reported that there are 3.5 millions of
them. Of course, due to ethnic expurgation, there is not an exact
statistical number and these numbers are to be roughly taken.

The Serbs constitute thirty one percent of the population of this
country, and the Croatians seventeen percent. Sixty percent of the
inhabitants of Serbia recognize themselves as belonging to Serb group
and the Croatians constitute 75 percent of the population of
Croatia.[^36] In Bosnia-Herzegovina as in the previous case, the
violations of Muslim human rights are blatant and undeniable and consist
of the following: the ethnic cleansing of the Muslims by the Serbs,
inhumane treatment of Muslim prisoners, the forcing of Muslims to work
for the Serbs, massacre, the torturing of the civilians, the deplorable
condition of the war refugees expatriated from their houses, the
destruction of the mosques and historical monuments (including the
destruction of the sixteenth century mosque Farhad Pasha in Benjaloc and
at least the destruction of thirteen mosques in Foca), the prevention of
movement of the caravans carrying food and medicine and other services
which could save people’s lives, intercepting the UN vehicles, attacking
and killing the ambassadors of the International Organisations.[^37] The
number of the Bosnian disappeared ones (most of whom arc Muslims)
exceeds 15,000 persons as recorded by the International Committee of the
Red Cross.[^38]

The reactions of international assemblies towards the crisis of Bosnia­
Herzegovina were first slow and insufficient. In December 1991, Alija
Izzet Begovic, the Bosnia President, in his trip to Washington, asked
for the dispatch of peacekeeping forces. And if the American
peacekeeping intervention and other great powers had taken place in
time, it would have stopped the atrocities resulting in the violations
of Muslim human rights by the Serbs.

In a letter to the Security Council dated 29 June 1992, the permanent
ambassador of Bosnia-Herzegovina asked the UN to intervene in this
crisis, enclosing a list of 94 prisoner camps in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and 11 other camps in the forrmer Yugoslavia. In a letter dated 5 August
1992, the American permanent ambassador in the United Nations
Organizations in Geneva called for an emergency session of the
Commission on Human Rights with a view to discussing the dangerous
situation of the former Yugoslavia. With the approval of the Commission
members, a special session was held.

The Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities approved a resolution, condemning the Serbian policy of
ethnic cleansing resulting in the dislocation of a great number of
people (especially the Muslims). The members of the sub-commission
inquired that the extensive violation of human rights should be stopped,
that indemnity should be paid to the refugees and the ones who have
committed crimes should be summoned to international tribunals. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported to Commission on
Human rights that the violation of human rights has been rarely so
planned, shameful and blatant as to drive people from their houses or
destroying the society.

More than half of the lands in Bosnia-Herzegovina have become a
detention center for creating ethnic territories. The International
Committee of the Red Cross visited twenty thousand prisoners among whom
8300 people were from Bosnia-Herzegovina. According to the report of
this commission, the Serbs regarded no respect to non-military
prisoners, the personnel giving medical services or the formal emblem of
the Red Cross or the United Nations Organization.

In a letter dated 5 August 1992 to the permanent ambassador of the
United Nations in Geneva, Izzet Begovic gave a report on the events, and
torture in the prisoner camps under the supervision of the Serbs
reminiscent of the appalling events of World War II. The reliable
reports of mass media and the non-governmental organizations verified
the violations of Muslim human rights.[^39]

Although the Dayton Peace Negotiations (1995) turned into Dayton Accord
with the support of great powers according to which, Bosnia Herzegovina
was divided into two almost independent political parts of Muslim Croat
federation (assuming the administration of 51 percent of the country)
and Serb Republic (ruling over the remaining 49 percent) with a weak
central government: however, the clashes of February 1997 in the city of
Mostar (divided between the Western part under the Croat supervision and
the eastern part under Muslim supervision)[^40] indicates the weakness
and instability of Muslim-Croat federation.

Deep chasms exist between the Muslims and the Croats and despite the
political endeavors of Euro­ American community, cooperation within the
federation is at a low level. If these two groups fail to create strong
common political organizations in this federation, the probability of
clashes between the ethnic, religious groups in Bosnia-Herzegovina will
increase.

Prompt and serious actions of international community for putting an end
to criminal acts of the Serbs could have prevented the crnel attacks
against the lives and properties of the civilians and the destruction of
historical and religious places, as well as anti-humane atrocities. Some
of the Western powers are against military intervention, emphasizing
that this war is based on national interests and seek to put an end to
the war among ethnic groups. Only after the divulging of the policy of
the Serb ethnic cleansing, their invasion was recognized as the main
factor for this war, exerting pressure on the Serbs by applying
sanction, creating no-fly zone, bombing of military installations of
Serbs and the dispatching of the peace keeping forces.[^41]

In order to justify the policy of ethnic cleansing, the Serbs claimed
that the goal of the Bosnian Muslim fundamentalists was to establish an
Islamic State in Bosnia, Serbia and Macedonia with a view to exporting
Islam from Sarajevo to Turkey in Europe. With emphasis on the
threatening growth of Islamic fundamentalism in Europe, the Serbs vowed
that they would do anything (even massacre) to change the demographic
composition of the Muslim territories.

The important historical point in the reactions of international
community against the issue of violation of human rights in Bosnia
Herzegovina is the execution of war criminals. By general consensus, the
Security Council approved resolution 808 dated 22 February 1993. It
stated, '”The Security Council decides on the establishment of
international tribunals for prosecuting those who are responsible for
the grave violations of international human rights in the former
Yugoslavia since 1991.”[^42]

The United Nations Commission on Human Rights approved a resolution in
March 1995 in which the Serbs of Bosnia Herzegovina and Croatia were
recognized responsible for the war crimes and the violations of human
rights in the former Yugoslavia since the beginning of armed clashes in
1992. This commission concluded that the Serbs were following the policy
of ethnic cleansing and mass murder (including unjust murder, torture,
disappearance, and executions without trial).[^43]

The continuation of the activities of the United Nations in preserving
peace and protection of human rights of threatened ethnic and religious
groups in circumstances where the Bosnian Serbs do sabotage and prevent
the progress of the Hague tribunal in investigating the war crisis is
vital.

### Chechnya In The Domain Of Russia: Independence Or Repression

The small republic of north Caucasus of Chechnya borders with Georgia
and the republic of Daghestan of Russia and is strategically important
due to being on the main highway and the only railway for the oil
pipelines running from the realm of Russia between the Caspian Sea and
the Black Sea. This republic is 13,000 kilometers wide and its
population before war was 1.2 million people. The people of Chechnya who
have been Muslims since the eighteenth century are among the oldest
people in Caucasus.

In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Chechnya struggled against
Russian expansionism in Caucasus, in 1926, Russia formed the
Chechnya­Ingushetia territory which in 1934 used to be a republic with
civil independence. In 1944, Stalin exiled to Middle Asia about 600,000
persons from Chechnya and Ingushetia for the accusation of cooperating
with the Nazi Germany. One third of these exiles died before they
reached their destination. In 1957, Nikita Khrushchev permitted the rest
of them to return to their country.

On 4 November 1991, contemporary with the collapse of Russia, Dzhokhar
Dudayev, the leader of separatist party of Chechnya declared
independence. On December 11 1994, in the wake of the failure of the
negotiations between Moscow and the government of Dudayev, the Russian
armies attacked this republic. In this clash which continued until
August 31 1996, between 40,000 to 100,000 military and non-military
persons were killed. One of the victims of this war was Dudayev who lost
his life in the bombardment of Russia on April 21 1996. Consequently,
Zelinkan Yandarbayev assumed the responsibility of leadership of the
separatist party.

On 31 August, General Alexander Lebed, the advisor to the National
Security of Yeltsin and Asian Maskadov, the commander-in-chief of the
separatist party of Chechnya agreed to put an end to the war which
lasted 21 months and postponed the decision-making concerning the future
political situation of this republic to the year 2001.[^44] In January
1997, all the military forces of Russia were withdrawn from
Chechnya.[^45]

There are scattered reports on the violation of Muslim human rights in
Chechnya. In January 1995, the Russian forces took control of many
territories in Grozni, the capital of the separatists of Chechnya and in
the operations for taking back the city, the city suffered many damages.
On 19 January, Boris Yeltsin expressed that the Chechnya strife had come
to an end and a few days later, he added that the military stage of
Chechnya had finished and the Ministry of Interior was responsible for
preserving order in this republic.

According to the statistics of the Chechnya government, more than 18,000
civilians were killed in the clashes up to 12 January 1995. Even a
delegate of Russian representatives condemned the Russian military
forces for a massacre on a massive scale, claiming that thousands of
innocent men and women were killed in the bombardment of the capital by
the Russians. Only 150,000 people out of the 400,000 inhabitants
remained in the city before war that included many of the Russians.[^46]

On the murder of civilians in Chechnya, the International Committee of
the Red Cross claimed on 12 April that the Russian soldiers had killed
at least 250 civilians during a severe attack on the village of Samashki
in Western Chechnya on 18 April. In this report, the Russian soldiers
were seriously condemned for attacking against the civilians and
participating in the actions without considering the difference between
the military men and the civilians, and the blatant violation of human
rights.[^47]

Hundreds of people (mostly civilians) were killed in the Russian air
raids. In July 1996, the Russian fighter planes participated in heavy
air raids over the south territories in Chechnya and dropped bombs and
missiles over the Chechnya people.[^48]

In the Russian air raids, many Chechnya families suffered heavy
financial damages. One of the victims of these bombardments was Aminat
Tsoyeva whose house was devastated once in April 1995 and had been
rebuilt and that which had caught fire again in the summer attacks of
1996.[^49] The Amnesty International provided a report on the violation
of Muslim human rights in Chechnya by the Russian military forces. The
Russian violences included the mass murder of the military people,
execution without trial, torture and inhumane treatment towards the
civilians and arbitrary arrest. According to the report of this
organization, hundreds of civilians were killed.[^50]

The Russia-Chechnya conflict resulted in the dislocation of a group of
Muslims. In the middle of 1995, about 144,000 Chechnya civilians lived
with the local people of Dagistan, which is one of the biggest
autonomous republics of northern Caucasus of the Russian federation on
the western shores on the Caspian Sea. Now, 22 thousand refugees are
living in this republic.[^51]

Even in time of peace, the Chechnya Muslims did not have the right to
choose their place of residence. Areas near Moscow continued the
Propiska System to stop the settlement of ethnic minorities. This system
served as the condition to stay in Moscow. By assisting the local
Cossacks, the Local governmental authorities in the areas of Don sought
to expel some of the Chechnya families living in the villages without
Propiska.[^52]

Different views are suggested on the future of Chechnya. Sergei
Gandlovsky prefers living in very small but free land. Vladimir Lukin,
the head of International Committee Affairs of Russian Duma believes
that the recognition of Chechnya independence is dangerous for many
countries, for other minorities groups are encouraged to fight for their
independence. Sergei Filatev, head of Public Movement of the Whole
Federation of Russia vows that concluded agreements between the
government and the representatives of Russia and Chechnya do not provide
legal conditions for full independence of Chechnya in the year 2001.

For Russia, agreement to separation from Chechnya is the first step
towards creating a confederation synonymous with retrogression. For
Chechnya, this is not the way to the freedom they dream of. Chechnya
(without Russia) turns into realm dependent on Islam or else chaos shall
run to other parts of north Caucasus. Bulat Okudzhava expresses that
Chechnya has never volunteered to join Russia. On the basis of
imperialistic grounds, this small nation was attacked for fifty years by
Russia in the nineteenth century. In 1994, the Chechnya people were
deported to exile places to die. In 1994, Russia brought about the death
of 80,000 Chechnya civilians. How can these people remain united with
Russia? Vadim Bakatim, the vice-president of the Reform Foundation
believes that separation from Chechnya is certain. However, this
separation did not take place in 1991 or 1997 or 200l, but it was when
the Russian politicians sent their tanks and soldiers to Chechnya to
re-establish order.[^53]

International assemblies remained mum on the Russian human rights
violations in Chechnya, for this would be regarded an internal issue.
Most of the Muslim countries remained neutral to this conflict.

Conclusion
----------

The case study of the Muslim human rights violations (Palestine, Bosnia
and Chechnya) indicates that the governments do not observe the rights
of the minorities and the reactions of international forums to such
sabotages is dependent on the identity of the victims. Can the West
adopt a neutral position towards the Muslim minorities in the non-Muslim
societies or even the Muslim majorities in the Muslim societies?
International forums under the domination of Western countries have
shown reactions under certain circumstances towards the violations of
human rights. These circumstances include:

This widespread sabotage must have taken place with certain plan with
the purpose of genocide. Barbara Harff and Ted Gurr describe four types
of massacre and political murder:

1. Massacring ethnic people (progressive massacre)

2. Massacre following de-exploitation in a bi-structural state (despotic
massacre)

3. Massacring during racial, religious, and ethnical attempts for
earning autonomy and independence (retaliating massacre)

4. Massacring hostages or the scapegoated groups (politicide)[^54]

The massacre of Muslims by the Serbs, the massacre of Palestinian and
Chechnya civilians respectively by the Israelis and the Russians are
instances of retaliating massacre. The intervention of international
community towards these genocides is dependent upon their scale.
Therefore, the international reactions towards the cruelties and the war
crimes of the Serbs have been more severe than the steps taken against
the Israeli aggressive and inhumane treatment of the Palestinians.

International rights have been blatantly violated. The UN was able to
stop the Serbian crimes, for the Member States have explained away the
massacre by international treaties. The concept of genocide in the
Convention on the Prevention and Protection of War Crimes approved in
1948 states that with a view to total destruction or limited to a
certain national, ethnic, racial or religious group, the signing parties
of the convention verified that massacre whether it takes place in time
of war or in time of peace was a crime in international law and they
vowed to prevent or punish it.[^55]

The national security of great powers (especially the five permanent
members of the United Nations Security Council) or their allies are
threatened. If intervention or protection of the victims of the human
rights violation proves detrimental to the political interests of great
powers, these states, using specific means of foreign policies seek to
prevent the condemnation of the states or groups accused of violating
human rights, even if these policies are to the detriment of civil and
political freedoms.

On the contrary, in some instances they support the despotic states
which claim in the name of national security that guerrilla fighters and
terrorists should be tortured and that the political prisoners should be
kept in prisons to prevent them from staging a coup. A striking instance
of this outlook is Washington policy towards the Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian Muslims. The observance of human rights and
democracy is encouraged where the Islamists are not given opportunity to
assume power. The violations of human rights are criticized where the
Muslims are weakened.

Another instance is the encounter with the crisis of Chechnya and the
complete silence of international community to the inhumane treatment of
the Russian military forces of the Muslim civilians. If Russia was a
smaller power without the right of veto in the Security Council, this
could be regarded international and the opportunities for the legal
intervention of the UN could be provided. As for the protection of
security for the Iraqi Kurds, the Security Council took unusual steps
(including creating a protective zone in the north of Iraq).

[^1]: Winfired Brugger, “The Image of the Person in the Human Rights
Concept”, Human Rights Quarterly 18 (1996); 597-598.

[^2]: Maurice Cranston, “What is Human Rights?”, In Walter-Laqueur and
Barry Rubin Eds. The Human Rights Reader, New York: New America Library,
Meridian Book, 1979.

[^3]: Brugger, op. cit., p.598

[^4]: Jack Donnelly, Human Rights at the United Nations, 1955-1985; “The
Question of Bias”, International Studies Quarterly 32, 1988, 275-303.

[^5]: Jack Donnelly, “Post Cold War Reflectionson the Study of
International Human Rights,” in: Joel H. Rosenthal, ed. Ethics and
International Affairs: A Reader, Washington DC, Georgetown University
Press, 1995, pp.241-242

[^6]: Jack Donnelly, Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice,
(1989) Cited in Daniel Stammners, “A Critique of Social Approach to
Human Rights”, Human Rights Quarterly 17, 1995, p. 495

[^7]: R. S. Vincent, Human Rights and International Relations. (1986),
cited in David Stammers Op. Cit. p. 496.

[^8]: Adamanta Pollis and Peter Schwab, “Human Rights: A Western
Construct with Limited Applicability”, in: A. Pollis and Peter Schwab
eds., Human Rights, Cultural and Ideological Perspectives (1979) Cited
in Heiner Bielefield, “Muslim Voices in the Human Rights Debate”, Human
Rights Quarterly, op. cit. 17, 1995: 587-617, p. 593.

[^9]: Heiner Bielefield op. cit. p. 593.

[^10]: Rhonda E. Howard, “Cultural Absolutism and the Nostalgia for
Community”, Human Rights Quraterly, (1993): 315-338, pp. 316-317.

[^11]: Heiner Bielefield, op. cit.

[^12]: Ahmet Davutoglu, Civilizational Transformation and the Muslim
World, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: Mahir Publications, 1994, Cited in
Richard Falk, “False Universalism and the Geopolitics of Exclusion: the
Case of Islam”, A paper presented at the Conference on the
Universalizing from Particulars: Islamic Views of the Human and the UN
Declaration of Human Rights in Comparative Perspective, The Institute
for the Transregional Study of the Contemporary Middle East, North
Africa and Central Asia, Princeton University, New Jersey, May 1996, p.
12.

[^13]: Kevin Dwyer, Arab Voices: The Human Rights Debate in the Middle
East, London & New York: Routledge, 1991, pp. 38-39.

[^14]: Kevin Dwyer, Op, Cit.

[^15]: Ali Mazru’i, “Westerners Are Far Less Secular than They Often
Assume”, The Diplomat 2, June 1997, p. 21-22.

[^16]: In 1995, More than 57 million Muslims lived in Europe (including
Russia) making 7 percent of the entire population.

[^17]: Ali Mazru’i, Op, Cit.

[^18]: Sa’idah Lutfiyan, ·”Double Standards in the Field of the
Expanding of Nuclear Weapons: The Atomic Weaponry of Israel”,
Economic-Political Information Magazine, Numbers 7 & 8 (1998), pp.
74-91.

[^19]: About 1033 million Muslims are in the world and 41 percent in
Africa and 21 percent in Asia and the rest in other parts of the world.
Britannica Book of Year, 1995. Cited in the Almanac 1996, 49th ed.,
Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Co. 1996.

[^20]: Ahmet Davutoglu, Op. Cit., pp. 103-104.

[^21]: Richard, Op, Cit. pp. 17-19.

[^22]: Nigel S. Rodely, “Conceptual Problems in the Protection or
Minorities: Interational Legal Development”, Human Rights Quarterly 17
(1995): 48-71.

[^23]: Danid Moynihan, “The Politics of Human Rights”, in: Walter
Laqueur and Barry Rubin, Op, Cit.

[^24]: Eghosa E. Osaghae, “Human Rights and Ethnic Conflict Management:
The Case of Nigeria”, Journal of Peace Research 33, 2 (1996): 171-188,
p. 171.

[^25]: Ian Peleg, Human Rights in the West Bank and Gaza: Legacy and
Policies, Syracuse, New York: Syracuse University Press, 1995.

[^26]: Shamay Kahana, “Differing and Converging Views on Solving the
Palestinian Refugee’s Problems”, Davis Papers on Israel’s Foreign
Policy, No. 52, The Leonard Davis Institute, Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, 1997, pp. 1-5

[^27]: Longina Jakubowska, All People are Human but Some are More Human
than Others: Cultural and Political Impediments to Human Rights, A Paper
presemed at the Conference on Univesalizing from Particulars: Islamic
views of the Human and the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights in
Comparative Perspective, (The Institute for the Transregional Study of
Contemporary Middle East, North Africa and Central Asia, Princeton
University, New Jersey, May 1996)

[^28]: “Controversy Over Death of Palestinian in Custody”, Keeping
Record of World Events 41, 4 (April 1995): p. 405-26.

[^29]: Attorney General of Israel Refuses to Disclose File of the Bus
300 Affairs, Press Release, Palestinian Center for Human Rights, Gaza 6
November 1996.

[^30]: “Clashes Continue in the Gaza Strip and West Bank as Israeli
Government Threatens Escalation of Violence”, Urgent Communique Release,
No. 5, Palestinian Center for Human Rights, Gaza, 27 September, 1996.

[^31]: “Report by the Palestinian Center for Human Rights on the Closure
Imposed by Israel on the Occupied Territories”, Closure Update No.15,
Palestinian Center for Human Rights, Gaza, 6 November 1996 and Closure
Update No. 13, 24 September 1996.

[^32]: “Human Rights Reports”, Keesing’s Record of World Events 41, 2,
February 1995, p. 40488 and Human Rights Watch / Middle East. “Gaza
Strip and Jericho: Human Rights under Palestinian Partial self-rule”,
Human Rights Watch, 1995.

[^33]: “Amnesty cites Appalling Human Rights Abuses in Middle East,
North Africa”, Iran News, June 20, l996.

[^34]: Alya Kaya and others, “The Forty Fourth Session of the UN
Sub-commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities and the Special Session of the Commission on Human Rights on
the Situation in the Former Yugoslavia”, Human Rights Quarterly no. 15,
1993: 410-458, p. 425.

[^35]: General Assembly Hold Xth Emergency Special Session on Jerusalem
and Illegal Israeli Settlements, Palestine and the UN 2, 4 (April 1997)
: 1

[^36]: The information furnished above is cited from The Almanac 1996,
49th edition, Boston & New York: Houghton Mifflin Co. 1996

[^37]: Roy Gutman, A Witness to Genocide, New York: Macmillan, 1993;
“Ethnic Cleansing: Bosnia’s cry for Help”, Newsweek, August 17, 1992;
Human Rights Watch; Helsinki Watch Committee, “War crimes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina”, Human Rights Watch, 1992; Laura Murlowe, “The Balkan After
the Cleansing”, Time, 6 June: 1994, 40; and Human Rights Watch/Helsinki,
“Bosnia Herzegovina: The Fall of Srebrenica and the Failure of UN
Peacekeeping”, Human Rights Watch 1995; Sa’idah Lutfiyan, Intervening in
the Crisis of Bosnia-Herzegovina, a paper presented at the International
Seminar: Bosnia-Herzegovina: The Future Prospect, Tehran, Bureau for
International and Political Studies, 1994.

[^38]: Sarajevo Sees Rebirth Among the Ruins”, Kayhan International 3
November 1993: 3; and “Tribunal Urges Probe into Milosevic-Karadzic
Links”, Iran News, July 1, 1996: 1.

[^39]: Alya Kaya and Others, Op. Cit.

[^40]: “Explosions Continue to Rock Mostar”, Iran News , February 16,
1997: 14.

[^41]: Until December 20, 1996 NATO deployed about 60,000 troops known
as Peace­ Implementation Force (IFOR) in the republics of the former
Yugosluvia to control the movement of the military forces of the two
parties. Sixteen member-states of NATO decided to dispatch the 20-30
thousund forces of the peacekeepers called SFOR (Stabilization Force) to
Bosnia instead of IFOR. This NATO force was stationed in Bosnia under
the protection of rapid deployment units in European countries (ltaly
and Hungary) or the units stationed in the war ships in the Adriatic
Sea. The SFOR forces were supposed to stay in this country until the
middle of 1998, but in the event of the improvement of situation, they
would be withdrawn. The IFOUR forces were condemned due to their
reluctance to seriously search for those who were free in Bosnia and
under suspicion by the international tribunal for war criminals in the
Hague. See: “NATO to Discuss New Peace Force for Bosnia”, Iran News,
August 25, 1996: 14, and '”NATO to Decide on Son of IFOR Today”, Tehran
Times, 18 November 1996: 1.

[^42]: Payam Akhavan, '”Punishing War Crimes in the Former Yugoslavia: A
Critical Juncture for the New World Order”, Human Rights Quarterly 15,
1993: 262-289, 263.

[^43]: “Bosnia-Hercegovina: UN Report on Human Rights”, Kessing’s Record
of World Events 41, 3 (1995), p. 404666.

[^44]: “Facts about Chechnya”, Iran News, January 26, 1997: 11, and
“Russian Government Approves Chechnya Plan”, Iran News, September 3,
1996; and Chechnya after Dudayev IISS Strategic Comment 2, 4, 16 May
(1996): 1-2.

[^45]: “Russian Auxiliary Units to Quit Chechnya by Sunday”, Iran News,
December 31, 1996: 15.

[^46]: “Russia-Chechen Conflict”, Keesing’s Record of World Events 41 ,
1 (1995): 40368-69.

[^47]: “Massacre of Chechen Civilians”, Keesing’s Record of World Events
41 , 4 (1995): p. 40514; Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, “Russia’s War in
Chechnya: Victims Speak out”. Human Rights Watch, 1995.

[^48]: “Russian Jets Pound Southern Chechnya”, Iran News , 21 July 1996.

[^49]: “Chechnya Submerged in Welter of Violence” Iran News, July 20,
1996: and “Russian Troops Kill 25 Chechen Civilians”, Iran News, July 17
1996.

[^50]: “Bosnia, Chechnya and Turkey Fuel Violations on Human Rights”,
Iran News, 20 June 1996.

[^51]: Anna Matveeva, Dagestan, FSS Briefing, Russia and Eurasia
Program, the Royal Institute of International affairs, No. 13, May 1997.

[^52]: Human Rights Watch: World Report 1994, New York: Human Rights
Watch, December 1993, pp. 233-234.

[^53]: “Has Chechnya Left Russia? Has Russia Left Chechnya?”, New York
Times, March 1997, pp. 22-23.

[^54]: Barbara Harff and Ted Robert Gurr, “Towards Empirical Theory of
Genocides and Politicides: Identification and Measurement of Cases Since
1945”, International Studies Quarterly 32, 3 (September 1988): 359-371,
p.361; Charles Lane, “When if it is Genocide?” Newsweek, August 17,
1992; 19.

[^55]: “United Nations Report on the Protection or Minorities (1967)
Special protection Measures of an International Character for ethnic,
Religious or Linguistic Groups”, in: Walter Laqueur and Barry Rubin,
eds., The Human Rights Reader, New American Library, Meridian Book,
1979, p. 157.


