Human Rights Developments After The Second World War
====================================================

**Dr. Bahram Mustaqimi Maryam Za’ir**

Introduction
------------

In the course of history, man has had an ongoing struggle for an
expanding body of fundamental human rights for as many people as
possible. Humanists and international lawyers have long endeavored to
protect these rights. They have discussed the position of the individual
in international law in particular. Although it is universally
acknowledged as a fact that the individual is the basic unit to whom any
legal system is directed, discussions of this nature have often resulted
in denying man of any position whatsoever.

According to the classical international law, the individual as an
object had no rights and duties. However, the relationship between the
individual and the society has undergone changes over the recent years.
Since the Western view on human rights has prevailed in contemporary
international society for a long time and can be traced back to medieval
Europe, it seems appropriate to consider it as a historic point of
departure for investigating that relationship.[^1]

The Reformation and Renaissance movements provided scientific, religious
and philosophical outlets for freedom and self-expression. In medieval
Europe, the ordinary individual was left beyond the jurisdiction of
international law and was treated as a mere object.

With the emergence of despotic regimes towards the close of the middle
ages, the struggle for human rights commenced. This struggle led to the
great political revolutions of the late seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries.[^2] Those facets of human rights that had, then, been
encroached upon were formulated into declarations and bills of
rights[^3] and written subsequently in national constitutions.[^4]

During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the commercial
activities of certain European States were expanded, and the need for
protecting groups of nationals was deeply felt by these states. They
satisfied the exigeny by including specific clauses in their treaties
with some non­European states. For example, the United Kingdom entered
into several treaties with Morocco whereby the latter agreed, inter alia
to treat its entire people alike no matter what religion they had.[^5]

On the other hand, the participants in the Congress of Vienna (1815)
showed deep concern for human rights at the international stage. They
dealt with religious freedom as well as civil and political rights and
heard petitions by individuals and groups for international protection
of those rights. Likewise, major powers agreed in principle to abolish
slavery and the slave trade. At Brussels Conference of 1890, a
comprehensive treaty for abolishing the slave trade was finally
concluded.

Despite the occasional actions, such as the above-mentioned examples, by
the individuals, and not by the nationals of protesting states, the
issue of human rights appeared on international political agenda during
the past three centuries, at least not before World War II broke out. It
was because human rights, which as a rule implied the way a state
treated its citizens in its own territory, were viewed as an entirely
domestic political affair. And the states were obligated by the
principle of non-intervention, as a subsidiary duty of the right of
sovereignty, not to interfere in the affairs that were basically within
the domestic jurisdiction of sovereign states.

However, a state generally tended to the granting of civilized treatment
to its citizens. This practice eventually led to the development of what
is generally described as treatment in accordance with the minimum
standard of international law. Since the beginning of the nineteenth
century, a few general treaties have been concluded with the effect to
stamp out the gross violations of human rights such as the slave trade.
Although it may appear that anti-slavery and humanitarian movements have
sought only sets of freedoms and rights of limited groups, they actually
have operated upon philosophical foundations closely connected with the
entire human kind.

Sympathy for religious minorities and humanitarian ideals helped further
expand the international protection of the rights of citizens, by way of
treaty and on occasions, by direct intervention. Furthermore, the
nationality principle received recognition in the international
protection of minorities.

During the Second World War, the Allied Powers found in the principle of
national self-determination a powerful weapon in their way against the
axis powers. In response to the German Peace Proposals of 1916 the
Allied Powers affirmed *inter* *alia* that “no peace is possible as long
as the reparation of violated rights and liabilities, the
acknowledgement of the principle of nationalities and of free existence
of small states shall not be assured.”

Though the League of Nations concerned itself with minority rights,
labor rights and rights of the individuals in mandated territories,
human rights did not receive specific mention in the language of the
convention. This was not surprising in view of the then prevailing
notion that these questions were not, primarily, of international
concern.[^6]

Indeed, a problem often becomes an object of international concern and
action, only after a dramatic event crystallizes awareness. This
explains why more immediate reasons for the genesis of international
concern for human rights were born out of the events concerned with the
origin and conduct of the Second World War. The systematic carnage of
millions of innocent civilians by Germany during the war resulted in the
general conviction that the effective international protection of
fundamental human rights was a fundamental condition for gaining
international peace and progress. This faith was given repeated
expression in several official statements and declarations of the
Allied.

Franklin D. Roosevelt, the president of the United States, in an address
to Congress, in January of 1941, set forth the doctrine of the Four
Freedoms. In August of the same year, Roosevelt and the Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom, Winston Churchill, formulated the Atlantic
Charter in the form of a joint declaration which laid down a number of
principles and policies to be put into effect when peace was achieved so
that the people of the world could live *free from fear and want*.[^7]

These principles included those that were to be incorporated four years
later in the Charter of the United Nations. The Preamble of the Charter,
which was set forth at San Francisco Conference 1945, reads as follows:

We the people of the United Nations determined

“To save succeeding generations from the scourge of war which twice in
our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind and to reaffirm faith
in fundamental human rights in the dignity and worth of the human person
in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small
and…”

“To establish conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law
can be maintained and…”

“To promote social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom”

To put human beings in their capacity as individuals, citizens and
members of a race governed by principles of equality, justice and
solidarity at the center of interest and action of the world order is
the novel element which gives the United Nations Charter its historical
value and present validity. This new emphasis is clearly discernible in
the light of the conviction that there is a close connection between the
respect for human rights and the preservation of international peace and
security.[^8]

However, the challenge to achieve universal respect for human rights are
still a matter of great importance. For example, slave-like practices
have remained a grave and persistent problem even in the closing years
of the twentieth century despite the fact that it is condemned. Another
example of this nature is the refugee problem. Although the immediate
cause of most refugees movements is armed stmggle or serious domestic
disorder the violation of human rights usually finds root in the
struggle itself.[^9]

In the present article we shall deal with the development of the concept
of human rights to determine the process of this developments, the
differentiation of each stage and the impact of the development on the
formation of human rights documents. At the end, we shall discuss human
rights under the influence of a new trend.

The Formation of Human Rights
-----------------------------

So far, human rights have undergone three phases. Each phase has given
birth to a new generation of human rights. The first or traditional
generation is based on individual rights. Social rights are the main
tenets of the second generation. Rights towards other countries and
international society form the cornerstone of the third generation of
human rights.[^10]

### First Generation Of Human Rights

The first generation was affected by the views of Western countries.
According to such views, civil and political rights are apparently of
primary importance although it is not really possible to rank human
rights in proportion to the priority of one over another. They help give
shape to the foundation on which the economic and social welfare of
individuals and communities should be built.

Those who advocate the preeminence of civil and political rights hold
that the lack of these rights may permit authoritarian governments to
remain in power, which ultimately will create an obstacle to economic,
social and cultural development. They state that the ability to combat
repression, corruption, environmental pollution and destruction over
land or working conditions depends on the liberty to exercise civil and
political freedoms.

Therefore, civil and political rights gained primary importance and
self­determination was considered only as a general principle and not a
full right of people. Western view had its reflection manifested on the
work of the United Nations.[^11] This will be dealt with later in this
article.

In fact, the stance of Western countries centered on an arena in which
socialist countries was at a disadvantage. Human rights, therefore, were
used as an ideological weapon against eastern European States.

### Second Generation Of Human Rights

Two important political events helped shape the second generation.
First, the strengthening of the socialist group of countries; second,
and as a consequence of the first one, the rise of the cold war, the
ideological and geopolitical struggle between the United States and the
Soviet Union. At this time human rights became just one more arena for
the superpower struggle. For example, in the late 1950s the Commission
on Human Rights, which was under the supervision of the United States
extensively discussed the right to freedom of information (a right that
the Soviet Union systematically violated) but completely ignored all
economic and social rights. Conversely, the Soviet Union tried to focus
attention on racial discrimination in the United States and unemployment
throughout the capitalist West.

It may be generally stated that the second generation was the result of
the encounter and the occasional convergence of Western and socialist
schools of thought. The latter was supported by the Third World. The
socialist countries tended to emphasize the importance of basic rights
and freedoms for gaining international peace and security. The context
of the international human rights obligations was defined solely by the
state in the light of the socio-economic advancement of that state. It
was the particular expression of an international human provision.

The socialist group tended to lay stress upon the rights relevant to
economic and social matters, self-determination and equality. Hence, it
minimized the importance of the traditional civil and political rights.

The input of the socialist and Third World states helped broaden the
general abstract concept of human rights, emerging from the liberal
values of the Universal Declaration. We shall consider its impact later
in this article.[^12]

### Third Generation Of Human Rights

The third generation was marked by the prevalence of developing
countries. Their strategies for socio-political and economic development
were based on the concepts of economic self-sufficiency and political
independence. Thereupon, the developing countries elaborated their own
philosophy and strategy of human rights on the basis of
self-determination and development. Their numerical superiority and
vociferousness made it possible for them to manage on the preponderance
of their own aspirations without necessarily requiring the support of
the socialist countries.

The general approach of the Third World States has been a combination of
the aforesaid concepts. The Third World’s view is characterized by the
importance attached to the equality and sovereignty of states as well as
the recognition of the importance of social and economic rights.

Accordingly, the traditional civil and political rights of these
countries, in fact, include a wide range of nations with different
interests and needs and at different stages of development.
Decolonization has left a deep influence on them. In addition, economic
problems have played a major role in drawing their attention to the
general development.

Developing countries felt that the world community had ignored their
urgent economic, social and cultural needs and the right to development.
They believed that the emphasis on civil and political rights served to
impose others’ values on their societies. They wished that the
international community should demonstrate as much commitment to
economic, social and cultural rights - and in particular to the right to
development of vulnerable groups - as it had to civil and political
rights.[^13]

The attitude of developing countries, in general, towards civil and
political rights was shaped by three factors:

Firstly, recognizing the importance of this category of right could
undermine or weaken the authority of the government in such countries.

Secondly, developing countries need a strong central government if their
economies are ever to grow. The restriction of certain rights and
liberties seems to these countries to be justified by the need to give
precedence to economic and social rights.

Thirdly, the social structure of many African and Asian countries is
that of a community with a leader exercising undisputed power.

Their doctrine is based on the following points:

1. The priority of economic, social and cultural rights;

2. the alteration of the present international economic system as it is
to a large extent responsible for the undeveloped conditions of the
poorer nations and hence for the lack of fundamental rights in these
countries;

3. only by changing the domestic-international context for the
violations of civil and political rights these violations can be brought
to an end.

The opinions of the developing countries have come to prevail in the
United Nations within a short period of time. The turning point was the
year 1974 when a series of important documents concerning the New
International Economic Order was approved. These documents rendered the
amelioration of the international economic and social order a
precondition for greater respect for human rights in developing
countries. Briefly, they sought to make clear, once and for all, that in
considering important and subtle matters such as human rights, one
cannot take an abstract and meta­ historical view but must look into the
general factual and economic context of human rights.

Nevertheless, there is the risk that too little attention would be paid
to certain classes of grave violations of human rights on the part of
some developing countries. In fact, many of these violations are fruits
of unjustified and arbitrary forms of authoritarian rule. They are not
dictated by conditions of economic underdevelopment but are the
aftermaths of abuses perpetrated by individuals or groups.

On the other hand, too much emphasis on economic context of human rights
does not cast enough light on a phenomenon which is common in developing
countries and which is often the cause of grave infringements of human
rights. Specifically, it sometimes happens that the ruling minority has
the backing of large-scale foreign interests and pursues ends, which are
not for the good of the whole population. This minority often uses the
support of foreign nations or powerful foreign economic interests to
oppress the population. The authoritarian method of these governments is
to some extent the outcome of underdevelopment but cannot be eliminated
by economic means alone.[^14]

Briefly, the main result of the new strategy of human rights has been to
stimulate the formulation of new rights. These are called collective or
group rights and include the right to development and the right of
peoples to cultural, economic, political and social
self-determination.[^15]

### New Trend

Although the emphasis on individual rights is not the sole prerogative
of liberalism, the liberal tradition has laid claim to these rights in a
special way. It has frequently done so at the cost of socio-economic
rights as well as cultural, religious and group rights. However,
personal well-being cannot be reduced to freedom of choice. In fact,
first generation rights may not be fully realized in isolation from
second generation and third generation rights.

A kind of truce has settled in which all states recognize different sets
of values. It is now accepted that there is no inherent conflict, no
hierarchy, and no priority among categories of rights or between any
particular rights in the other. There is no excuse for neglecting each
category of rights or for sacrificing rights in one category to rights
in the other. Moreover, governments have come to recognize the need to
continue to chip away at resistance rooted in government values in order
to realize more fully and more effectively human values both economic
and political.

Thereupon, the end of Cold War brought about a new phase in the
evolution of the universal protection of human rights. In fact, an
essential body of opinions has emerged on the basis of interdependence
of all three groups of states, which is now shared by them. For the
purpose of our discussion all groups of states agree on the following
essential points:

1. The dignity of human beings is a basic value, which every state
should try to protect;

2. it is compulsory to bring about the realization of fundamental rights
of groups and peoples; and

3. even though some states may for economic, social organizational or
political reasons find it hard to grant full respect of human rights, no
state must commit grave, repeated and large-scale violations of whole
categories of human rights.

Accordingly, promising paths for action by the United Nations have
opened from the late 1980s,[^16] which has led to the emergence of a new
fourth generation of human rights.

Each one of these generations has contributed in its own way to the
international documents, especially those of the United Nations, on
human rights.

Impact on International Documents of Human Rights
-------------------------------------------------

Since its inception, the United Nations has been striving to make real
the pledges made by the international community to the individual human
being. That the Organization has helped formulate a series of
declarations and conventions is of great significance. The International
Bill of Human Rights marks one of the august actions taken by the United
Nations with the intention of promoting human rights and fundamental
freedoms.

A first act of the Organization was to fulfill the recommendation of the
Preparatory Commission of the United Nations at San Francisco that the
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) should immediately establish a
commission on Human Rights and direct it to formulate the International
Bill of Rights. The General Assembly approved this recommendation on 12
February 1945 and later ECOSOC established the Commission on Human
Rights. Members of the Commission immediately decided whether the Bill
should take the form of a proclamation or a treaty.

At its second session on December 1947, the Commission on Human Rights
decided to designate a Covenant on Human Rights, and in its third
session on June 1948 agreed as a compromise that the International Bill
of Human Rights should consist of a declaration, a convention and
measures of implementation. The report of the session presented by the
Commission to the Economic and Social Council contained not only a Draft
of International Declaration on Human Rights but also a Draft of the
Covenant on Human Rights.

However, while the Draft of the Declaration contained all rights ­
civil, political, economic, social and cultural - under the influence of
Western view, specially the United states, which questioned the wisdom
of including both types of rights in the same instrument, the Draft of
the Covenant only contained articles on civil rights.[^17]

### Universal Declaration Of Human Rights

Although the promotion of human rights was referred to in the Charter of
the United Nations (1945), the real commitment to this ideal was only
expressed with the adoption and proclamation of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. The General Assembly adopted the Universal
Declaration, which recognizes the inherent dignity and, equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family, on 10 December,
1948.

A number of general ethical notions were enshrined in the Declaration.
It embodies the idea of human dignity, of being free and equal in rights
and opportunities and also ensured the material requirements for a
dignified existence; the principle of tolerance, involving respect for
the beliefs and views of others and allowing opportunities for all to
play a part in determining the conditions under which their society
lives; and the concept of solidarity which covers rights in civil,
political, economic, social fields.

On the whole, the view expressed on human rights is Western. Much
importance is allotted to civil and political rights than to economic,
social and cultural rights and of the rights of peoples no mention is
made at all. Nor does the Declaration say anything about economic
inequalities between states.[^18]

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is proclaimed as a common
standard of achievement for all peoples and nations. It recognizes that
the realization of this objective depends on both national and
international action. While expressing a universal morality of respect
for human dignity, it also indicates that the realization of human
rights must likewise start from a consideration of irrelevant principles
and standards.

The Universal Declaration is to be accorded a great step in stating
goals and principles. Although a declaration lacks the binding force of
a treaty, the Universal Declaration has secured the approval of a great
majority of states. It provided the basis for several international
treaties on human rights inspired constitutions of many states and
influenced the formulation of subsequent resolutions.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms that the exercise of a
person’s rights and freedoms may be subject to some limitations which
must be determined by law, only for the purpose of securing due
recognition of the rights of others and of meeting the just requirements
of morality, public order and the general welfare in a democratic
society.[^19] By proclaiming the Universal Declaration, the first part
of the Internal Bill of Human Rights, as provided by the Commission on
Human Right in June 1948, took shape. Consequently, the second phase
i.e. to design a covenant on Human Rights began.

### Human Rights After The Universal Declaration

#### Inside the United Nations

The drafters of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights intended to
follow it with a treaty or covenant that would give human rights binding
force in international law. Although the drafting was largely completed
by 1953, the covenant was tabled for more than a decade mainly because
of the cold war and ideological rivalry over the status of economic and
social rights. However, increase in the membership of the United Nations
by the Third World countries led the organizations to give priority to
the issues of human rights.

Notwithstanding, the influence of Western view is clearly discernible.
They questioned the status of economic, social and cultural rights and
claimed that these rights were not really human rights since they
belonged to a different logical category. Economic, social and cultural
rights such as right to food, healthcare, social insurance and education
are less important than civil and political rights such as due process,
and equal protection of the law.

Finally, Western view caused civil, political, economic and cultural
rights to be separated by the United Nations subsequent action into two
distinct treaties: the International Covenant on Civil, and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights.

On the other hand, the socialist camp and Third World Countries exerted
their influence on the 1966 Covenants. Upon the basic agreement of the
above-mentioned countries and Western countries, on the need to
translate the general principles of the Universal Declaration into
legally binding instruments, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights were adopted in 1966 and took effect in 1976. They
enable us to affirm that civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights are equally important and worthy of attention.[^20]

The preamble to each Covenant states that everyone is entitled to enjoy
civil and political rights as well as economic, social and cultural
rights. Article 1 of each Covenant says that the right to
self-determination is universal. Both Covenants add that by virtue of
that right states determine their political status and freely pursue
their economic, social and cultural development.

These similarities reflect endeavors of socialist and third world
countries, which favored the inclusion of both categories of rights in a
single instrument. They propounded several arguments.

1. Without economic, social and cultural rights, civil and political
rights are meaningless or ineffective;

2. the unity of all human rights and the integral personality of human
beings should be preserved:

3. a covenant which does not embrace economic, social and cultural
rights would merely reaffirm civil and political rights which exist in
all constitutions and it is hard to consider as a progress; and

4. the separation of the rights into two distinct covenants can cause an
indefinite postponement of the attainment of economic, social and
cultural rights.[^21]

While the influence of socialist and third world countries caused the
above similarities between the two covenants, the impact of Western view
brought differences for those documents. Advocators of separation put
forward the following arguments:

1. States have the duty to ensure the fulfillment of civil and political
rights as inherent rights of the human person; while the economic,
social and cultural rights are objectives to be achieved instead of
rights to be protected:

2. the implementation of civil and political rights needs inmmediate
legislative and administrative measures to ensure that states do not
intervene in the lives of individuals, but the implementation of
economic, social and cultural rights is a progressive process dependent
on socio-economic conditions and requires the positive action of the
state; and

3. a covenant including only civil and political rights would be
acceptable universally whereas the same was not true of economic, social
and cultural rights.

Thereupon, under the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Contracting
Parties undertook to respect and to ensure to all individuals within
their territory and subject to their jurisdiction the rights recognized
in the Covenant. The Covenant required them to take the necessary steps
in accordance with their constitutional process and with the provisions
of the Covenant, to adopt such legislative and other measures as may be
necessary to give effect to the rights recognized in that instrument.
Moreover, it designated a special organ of implementation (the Human
Rights Committee) and required the States Parties to submit reports to
the Committee on the measures they have adopted which give effect to the
rights recognized and on the progress made in the enjoyment of these
rights.

Whereas the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights stipulated
that the realization of the rights must be progressively achieved and
required a Contracting Party to act to the best of its potentials with a
view to gradually effect the full realization of the rights recognized
in the Covenant, it also refused to mention any measures of
implementation. All it did was to prescribe an obligation to submit
periodic reports to the Economic and Social Council on the measures
adopted and the progress made in the cause of realizing these
rights.[^22] However, the adoption of the Covenants completed the
process of giving shape to the second part of the International Bill of
Rights. Now it was the duty of Member States of the United Nations to
take steps towards providing measures of implementation.

In the wake of the adoption of the two Covenants on Human Rights, the
United Nations undertook standard sets of activities in human rights.
The Tehran Conference provided the opportunity to set goals for the
following years. This Conference was held from 22 April to 13 May 1968.
It adopted *inter* *alia* a proclamation. The Proclamation of Tehran
made the United Nations grant independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples on the grounds that it had created new standards and obligations
to which states should conform (par. 3). This was an evidence for the
advancement of the Third World stand towards human rights.

As the first step towards the exercise of human rights, Tehran
Proclamation stipulated that the laws of every country should grant each
individual, without limitation due to race, language, religion or
political belief, freedom of expression, of information, of conscience
and religion as well as the right to participate in the political,
economic, cultural and social life of his country (Par. 5.)

The Proclamation emphasized that since human rights and fundamental
freedoms are indivisible, the full realization of civil and political
rights without the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights is
impossible. The achievement of lasting progress in the exercise of human
rights is dependent upon sound and effective national and international
policies of economic and social development (Par. 13).[^23] It was an
important advancement for the Third World countries to propound the idea
of establishing a New International Economic Order and to promote the
concept of the right to development.

#### Outside the United Nations

Besides the United States documents, regional agreements were
supplemented, and expanded upon the above-mentioned instruments. Among
them are:

1. The European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms was
signed in 1950 and took effect in 1953 together with its eight
protocols:

2. the American Convention on Human Rights was signed in San Jose, Costa
Rica in 1969 and took effect in 1978;

3. the Helsinki Accords was adopted in 1975; and

4. the African Charter on Human Rights and Peoples’ Rights was adopted
in 1981.

The same situation as to the instrument adopted in the United Nations
has existed regarding international human rights instruments adopted
outside the UN system.

The European Convention on Human Rights covers a wide variety of
primarily civil and political rights. Therefore, it is formulated under
the influence of Western view. The rights in American Convention on
Human Rights are fundamentally those protected by the European
Convention and those economic rights contained in the Charter of the
Organization of American states (1948) as revised by the Protocol of
Buenos Aires (1967).

It can be easily understood why Helsinki Accords of 1975 laid emphasis
on political and civil rights. These accords were based on an overall
compromise in which Western States recognized post-war border and the
status quo in Eastern and Central Europe in exchange for human rights
commitment by the Communist countries.

The African Charter on Human and People’s Rights contains, in addition
to civil and political rights, the economic rights such as the rights to
self­determination and development. This charter reflects more than the
other documents third world views. The best expressions of these views
are rights to development and self-determination.[^24]

### Formation Of The Third World Human Rights

#### Right to Development

Development was once defined as almost entirely in terms of economic
growth. But the development strategies oriented merely towards economic
considerations have often failed to achieve social justice. In the
meantime, human rights may have been violated or denied. In the broadest
sense, development may be viewed as the process by which all human
rights are to be realized. In other words, the realization of human
rights is the goal of development.

The right to development is the right of individuals, groups and peoples
to participate in, contribute to and enjoy sustainable economic, social,
cultural and political development in which all human rights and
fundamental freedoms can be fully realized. This includes the right to
effective participation in all aspects of development and at all stages
of the decision making process: the right to equal opportunity and
access to resources: the right to fair distribution of the benefits of
development; the right to respect for civil, political, economic, social
and cultural rights and the right to an international environment in
which all these rights can be fully realized.

In fact, the right to development can be considered as the consequence
of the new outlook in the field of human rights. It was forcefully
asserted that individuals, peoples and the developing states have the
right to development. This right was a means of reformulating the whole
problem of the international law of development in terms of a
fundamental right.

Many developing countries felt that the world community had ignored
their urgent economic, social and cultural needs and the right to
development. They felt that the main obstacle to the realization of the
right to development lay at the international macro-economic level as
reflected in the widening gap between the North and the South, between
the rich and the poor.

Some developing countries believed that an emphasis on civil and
political rights served to impose others’ values on their societies. For
the future, many developing countries wanted the international community
to demonstrate as much commitment to economic, social and cultural
rights and in particular to the right to development of vulnerable
groups - as it had to civil and political rights.

In fact, such countries, constituting a wide range of nations with
different interests and needs and at different stages of development
have been deeply influenced by decolonization. In addition, economic
problems have played an important role in focusing their attention on
the general developmental issues. Accordingly, the traditional civil and
political rights tend to lose their superiority over the third world
states.[^25]

Efforts to fashion a right to development can be traced back to the
procss of founding the United Nations. In 1941, the Allied Powers of the
Second World War proclaimed *freedom* *from want* to be one of their
post war objectives.

Th preamble to the Charter of the United Nations speaks both of
fundamental human rights and social progress and better standards of
life in greater freedom. Article 5 of the charter stipulates that the
United Nations shall promote the condition of economic and social
progress and development. The right to development gradually emerged
upon these principles.

The Declaration on Granting Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, resolution 1414 (XV) of 1960 stipulates that all peoples can by
virtue of the right to self-determination, freely determine their
political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural
development.

According to the Declaration on Social Progress and Development adopted
by the General Assembly in 1969, social progress and development shall
aim at the continuous raising of the material and spiritual standards of
living of all members of society with respect for and in compliance with
human rights and fundamental freedoms.

The Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among states in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations resolution 2625 (XXV) on 24 October 1970 stipulated
that all peoples have the right to freely pursue their economic, social
and cultural development.

In 1974, the special session of the General Assembly issued three
resolutions which respectively embodied the Declaration on the
Establishment of a New Economic Order (A/Res. 3201), the Program of
Action on the Establishment of a New Economic Order (A/Res), and the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States (A/Res. 328l). It was
stated in these declarations that the existing international economic
system is unjust. Thereupon, developing countries called for a change in
the system. They aimed to create economic conditions, which would
improve their standard of principles of social justice and allow them to
compete in terms of trade with other states on an equal basis.

The developing countries argued that until a new international economic
order was achieved the economic and social conditions of
underdevelopment would constitute an emergency situation making the
implementation of at least some human rights difficult if not
impossible. It is the impact of the application of principles of social
justice and equity on international level which is pertinent to human
rights.

Since the developed nations took a negative stand towards the New
International Economic Order, the move to raise the moral imperatives
for the cause of development understandably entered the human rights
framework. Thus the right to development was initially raised in the
General Assembly through the resolution 32/132 (1977) which stated that
*the right to development is a human right and equality of opportunity
is as much a prerogative of nations and individuals.*

On the other hand, in its resolution 32/130 (1977) the General Assembly
stated, *inter* *alia*, that *the achievement of lasting progress in the
implementation of human rights is dependent upon sound effective
national and international policies and social development*. The
Declaration on the Right to Development reinforced this position.

In 1986, the General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Right to
Development (A/Res. 41/128) which established *an inalienable human
right by virtue of which each person and all peoples are entitled to
participate in, contribute to and enjoy economic, social cultural and
political development in which all human rights and fundamental freedoms
can he fully realized*.
The Declaration stated among other things that the human person is the
central subject of development and should be the participant and
beneficiary of the right to development. It also emphasized the efforts
at the international level to promote and protect human rights should be
accompanied by efforts to establish a new international economic order.

In his 1992 report on the Work of the United Nations, Secretary General
Boutros-Ghali wrote that sustainable development is not possible without
respect for human rights and that human rights are meaningless in an
environment of poverty and deprivation.

According to the statement of the then UN Secretary General, at the
opening the World Conference on Human rights on 14 June 1993, one of the
goals of the Conference was to reflect on the following the question:
what are the links between the goals pursued by the United Nations and
human rights including the link between development and enjoyment of
economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights? He emphasized
that the conference should reaffirm the link between development and the
enjoyment of all human rights.

The San Jose Declaration (Costa Rica, meeting in January 1993) stated
that the Latin America and Caribbean community regards peace, democracy,
development and social welfare as essential for the full realization of
human rights.[^26]

These documents show the process of the acceptance of development as a
right for people. However, certain requirements have to be fulfilled
before development is realised. Besides internal conditions, there
should be international favorable environment for development.
Self-determination is a means to this end.

#### Right to Self-determination

The principle of self-determination has developed from a philosophical
to a political concept in international relations and now has given
shape to a fiundamental principle of positive international law. It has
developed as an aspect of human rights. The right of self-determination
can be traced back to the First World War. After the war, a
politico-legal postulate had been advanced challenging certain facets of
the main fabric of the family of nations, namely the principle of
self-determination of peoples.[^27]

It became part of international law with its inclusion in the Charter of
the United Nations. According to the Charter of the United Nations one
aim of the Organization is to develop friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples. Furthermore, article 55 of the Charter
stipulates that with a view to the creation of conditions of stability
and well being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and
self-determination of peoples, the United Nations shall promote higher
standards of living, full employment and condition of economic and
social progress and development. Accordingly, the Charter sees a link
between self-determination and economic concepts like economic progress
and development.

The General Assembly directed by the resolution 545, the Commission on
Human Rights to draw up draft covenants to ensure international respect
for self-determination of people. Resolution 637 (VII) of 1952 provided
that the member states of the United Nations should uphold the principle
of self­determination of all peoples and nations.

However, the recognition of the principle came in the context of
Decolonization in which the United Nations played a key role. The post
war period witnessed former colonies joining the ranks of sovereign
states through pressure both the General Assembly of the United Nations
and the dependent nations themselves claiming their right to
self-government. The pressure led to the agreement that the principle of
self-determination had generated a rule of international law by which
the political future of a colonial or similar non-dependent territory
should be determined in accordance with the wishes of its inhabitants.
Accordingly, the Declaration on the Granting Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, resolution 1514 (XV) of 1960 provided that all
peoples had the rights to self­determination.

The Covenant on the Civil and Political Rights and the Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights both state that the right to
self­determination is a universal right which all peoples should enjoy.
According to the Common Article l all people have the right of
self-determination and accordingly the right to freely determine their
political status and to freely pursue the economic, social and cultural
development.

The Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in Accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, adopted as resolution 2625 (XXV) on 24 October 1970
also emphasizes the right to self-determination.

The African Charter on Human Rights and People’s Rights 1986 emphasizes
the right to self-determination.

The World Conference on Human Rights (1993) declared that all peoples
have the right of self-determination. By virtue of that right they
freely determine their political status and freely pursue their
economic, social and cultural development.[^28]

According to some writers, self-determination constitutes only a general
principle, not a full right of peoples. But the others believe in full
legality of it. Some are of the opinion that self-determination refers
to collectives rather than individuals, not yet subjects of
international law but potential recipients of direct rights under the
law. Such collectives wish to secede from or have autonomy within their
state, create their own state or join another state. The idea is
frightening to existing states.

Some others believe that the idea of self-determination entails not only
a right of a country to attain independence, rid itself of foreign
domination and remain free from foreign interference but also certain
human rights of the citizens of its territory. They argue that the
Declaration on the Granting Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples accelerated the acceptance of self-determination as a legal
right.

Besides the Covenant on the Civil and Political Rights and the Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights gave more validity to the right
of self-determination as a rule of law and a wider front, not limited to
colonial situation as a matter of treaty law. Its basic objective is to
guarantee that all the people have a government of their own choice that
respond to their political, economic and cultural needs. It aims at the
elimination of external or internal domination and the creation of the
proper atmosphere in which individuals have the possibility of enjoying
fundamental human rights. It also seeks to impose certain standards of
administration in all states regardless of race, creed color and sex.

Yet, support for self-determination can also be a political tool in the
hands of groups agitating for self-determination in other states to
embarrass or even dismember their states.[^29]

As we have already mentioned a new trend from the late 1980s, based on
an essential body of opinions has opened promising avenues for action by
the United Nations. Vienna Declaration and Program of Action adopted at
the World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, is an example
reflects this body of opinion.

For example, it recognizes and affirms that *all human rights derive
from dignity and worth inherent in human person and reaffirms the solemn
commitment of all states to fulfill their obligations to promote
universal respect for, and observance and protection of all human rights
and* *fundamental freedoms for all*.[^30] It shows that *the dignity of
human beings is a basic value which every stote should try to protect*.

Moreover, according to the Vienna declaration *effective international
measures to guarantee and monitor the implementation of human rights
standards should he taken with respect to people under foreign
occupation and effective legal protection against the violation of their
human rights should he provided in accordance with human rights norms
and international law, and great importance must he given to the
promotion and protection of the human rights of persons belonging to
groups which have been rendered vulnerable*.[^31] It accepts the
necessity of *aiming at the achievement of fundamental rights of groups
and peoples*.

The Declaration also provides that while the significance of national
and regional particularities and various historical, cultural and
religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of the
states, regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, to
promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms and while
development facilitates the enjoyment of all human rights, the lack of
development may not be invoked to justify the violation of
internationally recognized rights.[^32] It reflects the opinion that
even though some states may for economic, social, organizational or
political reasons find it hard to grant full respect to human rights, no
state must commit grave, repeated and large scale violations of the
whole categories of human rights.

However, the points cited above, altogether, reflect the present
situation of human rights under the influence of the new trend and refer
to the responsibility for human rights, indivisibility and universality
of human rights and the necessity of respect for democracy.

Present Situation of Human Rights
---------------------------------

### Responsibility Of Human Rights

It has been remarked for example in article 2 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that the state should
be the best guarantor of human rights. According to that article, a
Contracting Party undertake to take steps to the maximum of its
available resources with a view to achieving progressively the full
realization of the rights recognized in that covenant.

Most writers have assumed that a state has to care for its own nationals
to enjoy the fundamental human rights. This obligation relates to all
aspects of human rights. However, as Boutros-Ghali, the United Nations
Secretary General, has recalled when states prove unworthy of this task,
when they violate the fundamental principles laid down in the Charter of
the United Nations, the issue of interational action must be raised. In
these circumstances, the international community as a whole must take
over from the states that fails to fulfill their obligations.[^33]

### Indivisibility Of Human Rights

Which rights are preeminent? Is there a conflict between civil and
political rights on the one hand and economic, social and cultural
rights on the other? Do human rights begin with economic and social
concerns such as shelter, nutrition , health, education, and employment
or are political freedoms the key to fulfilling these and other human
needs? Do the countries have to reach certain levels of development
before the civil and political rights of their citizens can be
recognized? Are governments obliged to respect political rights if
countries are mired in poverty or chronic underdevelopment?

Debate over these questions has been heard within the United Nations
system since the Organization’s earliest efforts to define and protect
human rights.[^34] These questions are focused on the problem of
divisibility and indivisibility of human rights. In fact, since man is
an integrated whole, human rights are indivisible and must be regarded
altogether. Indivisibility or in the other words, interdependence of the
human rights is evident. Efforts to promote one category of rights must
take full account of the human right areas, which are interchangeably
interrelated.

It is visible, for example, in the reciprocal relationship between
respect for human rights and peace and stability, relation between the
enjoyment of trade union rights and respect for civil liberties,
participation of indigenous populations in decisions concerning their
status and conditions and civil liberties which make possible the free
shaping and expression of opinions and genuine involvement in processes
leading to decisions.

More generally, the denial of civil and political rights tends to have
adverse effects on the enjoyment of economic and social rights; neglect
of social protection and well-being often goes hand in hand with the
inability of poorer and more vulnerable population groups or people as a
whole, to have a voice in influencing decisions.

Interdependence is evident not only in measures and policies within
nations but also in their effects beyond international boundaries. It
has become ever more evident that no country can pursue economic and
social policies in isolation from developments in the world stage. This
fact finds reflection, for example, in current anxieties concerning the
global effects of the economic policies pursued by major industrialized
nations and the implications for world stability of third world
indebtedness. The policies pursued on such questions will have a direct
effect on the ability of individual countries to maintain and further
the enjoyment of human rights. International collaboration and
solidarity are thus a vital factor in efforts aimed at the realization
of human rights.[^35]

The indivisibility and interdependence of the two sets of human rights
is a fundamental tenet of the United Nations approach to human rights.
In 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights put the challenge for
United Nations Member States to enhance and sustain their commitment to
the realization of all human rights. While a general, abstract concept
of human rights, born of liberal values, prevailed initially as we can
see from the text of the 1948 Universal Declaration, the input of the
socialist states and the states of the third world helped broaden this
initial vision.

The General Assembly has confirmed, on several occasions, its view that
the full enjoyment of one category of rights depends on the realization
of the others. According to the Declaration of the Right to Development
(1986) all human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and
interrelated. The Assembly stated in 1991 that all human rights and
fundamental freedom are indivisible and interrelated and promotion and
protection of one category of rights should never exempt or excuse
states from the promotion and protection of another.[^36]

The foregoing makes it clear that all human rights are universal,
indivisible, interdependent and interrelated. Efforts to promote one
category of rights must take full account of the progress in
implementing others. As mentioned before, human rights are not only
indivisible but also universal.

### Universality Of Human Rights

Human rights should be viewed as a synthesis resulting from a long
historical process. As such they should be in accordance with history.
Yet, the fact that human rights keep pace with the course of history
should not change what constitutes their very essence, namely the
universality. The World Conference on Human Rights has reaffirmed the
importance of ensuring the universality, objectivity and non-selectivity
of the consideration of human rights issues. While some form of
ideological split and economic disparities may continue to be the
hallmark of our international society, they cannot interfere with the
universality of human rights.

However, it should be noticed that the universality of human rights fits
uncomfortably in a political order structured around sovereign states.
The future of international human rights activity can be seen as a
struggle over balancing the competing claims of sovereignty and
international human rights. While the universal nature of these rights
is beyond question, this concept of universality is not something that
is decreed nor is it the expression of the ideological dimension of one
group of states over the rest of the world. While human rights are
common to all members of the international community, and each member of
that community recognizes himself in them, each cultural epoch has its
own special way of implementing them.[^37]

This conditioning reveals that some form of limitation can be regarded
for human rights.

### Limitations On Human Rights

While human rights are common to all members of the international
community and each member of that community recognizes himself in them,
each cultural epoch has its own special way for carrying them out. The
significance of national and regional particularities and various
historical, cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind in
the adoption of the way.

Thereupon, in giving shape to the rights and measures for implementing
them, values of different cultures should be regarded. It is not an
innovation. Having proper regard for different legal systems in the
process of progressive development of international law has been under
consideration by the member states of the United Nations from the
earliest date. It can be seen, for example, in the status of the
International Law Commission, which has been approved by the General
Assembly through the adoption of the resolution 174 (II) on 21 November
1947. Article 8 of the Status provides *inter* *alia*, that in the
Commission as a whole representation of the main forms of civilization
and of the principle legal systems of the world should be assured.[^38]

In addition, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirms that the
exercise of person’s rights and freedoms may be subject to certain
limitations, which must be determined by law, only for the purpose of
securing due recognition of the rights of others and of meeting the just
requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a
democratic society.

In the Bangkok meeting of March-April 1993 Governments, while welcoming
the increased attention being paid to human rights by the international
community, stressed the need to consider human rights in national and
regional contexts and emphasized the principles of respect for national
sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs.[^39]

The foregoing reveals that human rights cannot be promoted without
respect for democracy.

### Democracy And Human Rights

In 1991, the General assembly stated that all human rights and
fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interrelated and promotion and
protection of one category of rights should never exempt or excuse
states from the promotion and protection of another.

Boutros-Ghali recalled in his message for Human Rights Day (10 December
1992) that democracy is more than elections. The mere introduction of
political pluralism is not enough to turn a poor society into a
prosperous one. The final document of the World Conference on Human
Rights inked in Vienna reaffirmed the recognition of the interdependence
between democracy, development and human rights.[^40]

Generally, democracy, development and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing. Since
the human person is the central subject of the right to development, the
enjoyment of all civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights
is both the necessary condition and the aim of the right to development.
Thus, States must not only take concrete steps to improve economic,
social and cultural conditions and to facilitate the efforts of
individuals and groups for that objective, but must do so in a manner
that is democratic in its formulation and results.

Democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to
determine their own religious, political, economic, social and cultural
systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives.
Democracy is a political framework in which human rights can best be
safeguarded and is a political system which best allows for the free
exercise of individual rights. It is not possible to separate the
promotion of human rights from the establishment of democratic systems
within the national and international communities. Democracy at all
levels and in all spheres is essential to true development. Structural
inequalities in international relations as within individual countries,
are obstacles to the achievement of genuine democracy and a barrier to
development and to promote internationally acceptable norms of human
rights.

Human rights should therefore be covered by effective mechanisms and
procedures to guarantee and protect them and to provide sanctions. Only
democracy, within and among states, can truly guarantee human rights. It
is through democracy that individual and collective rights, the rights
of peoples and the rights of persons are reconciled. It is through
democracy that the rights of states and the rights of community of
states are reconciled. This is why we must act constructively to build
an effective link between democracy, development, in all its aspects,
and human rights.[^41]

Vital importance of democracy for the promotion of human rights does not
mean that some states should limit others voluntarily or to expect them
to borrow political systems that are alien to them. Democracy is no
one’s private property. It can and ought to be assimilated by all
cultures. Democracy is not a model to copy from certain states but a
goal to be achieved by all peoples. It is the political expression of
the common heritage. It is something to be shared by all.Vital
importance of democracy for the promotion of human rights does not mean
that some states should limit others voluntarily or to expect them to
borrow political systems that are alien to them. Democracy is no one’s
private property. It can and ought to be assimilated by all cultures.
Democracy is not a model to copy from certain states but a goal to be
achieved by all peoples. It is the political expression of the common
heritage. It is something to be shared by all.

[^1]: In connection with the evolution of international society and
medieval international law, see G. Schwanenberger, The Frontiers of
International Law (London: Stevens, 1962), pp. 44-45.

[^2]: History is replete with great historic movements for man’s
freedom - the English, American and French revolutions bear testimony to
vindication of certain human values.

[^3]: The English Bill of Rights, 1688; Declaration of Man and of the
Citizen, 1789; and the United States Bill of Rights, 1791. For the text
of these documents see Ian Brownlie, ed. Basic documents on Human
Rights, 1981.

[^4]: The constitutions framed in the twentieth century contain
invariably provisions on fundamental rights of man and citizens. Cf. S.
I. Bhalla, Human Rights, An International Framework For Implementation,
(Delhi: Docta Shelf Publications, 1991), p. 2.

[^5]: Cf. C. Parry, Ed. The Consolidated Treaty Series, (Dobbs Ferry,
New York: Ociana Publications, 1969, Vol. 56 (1801-1803), pp. 93-103,
Vol. 116 (1856-1857), pp. 121 - 141.

[^6]: Erica-Irene A. Daes, Freedom of the Individual Under Law (Geneva:
United Nations, Center for Human Rights, 1990, pp. 1-2: Bhalla, Op.
Cit., p.21; Jack Donnelley, International Human Rights (Boulder:
Westview Press, 1993), pp. 5 - 7, passim.

[^7]: For example, US president Roosevelt postulated in his Annual
Message to the Congress on the state of the Union, Four Freedoms which
were freedom of speech and expression, freedom of every person to
worship God in his own way, freedom from want and freedom from fear. On
14 August 1941, president Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill issued
the Atlantic Charter and declared that “after the final destruction of
the Nazi tyranny they hope to see a peace established… which will afford
assurance that all men in all lands may live out their lives in freedom
from fear and want the Declaration of united nations Allied Powers
expressed their conviction that complete victory over their enemies is
essential to defend life, liberty, independence and religious freedom
and to preserve human rights and justice: in their own lands us well as
in other lands”: Cf Bhalla, Op. Cit pp.3-4; Santa Cruz, Herman, “The
Creation of the United Nations and ECLAC”, CEPAL Review, No. 57
(December, 1995), pp. 17 - 18.

[^8]: Donnelly, Op. Cit., p.6: Santa Cruz, Op. Cit., p. 21: Bhalla, Op.
Cit., p. 5

[^9]: United Nations, Notes for Speakers: Human Rights (New York:
Department of Public Relations, 1993). Forword and pp. 4, 38-39: United
Nations, Center for Human Rights, Contemporary Forms of Slavery, Fact
Sheet No. 14. (New York: United Nations, 1991), pp. 1-2: Gerald A.
Sumida, “Transnational Movements and Economic Structures”, in The
Structure of the International Order, Vol. IV, The Structure of the
International Environment, ed. By Cyril E. Black and Richard A. Falk
Future of the International Legal, (Princeton, N.ew Jersey: Princeton
University Press, 1972), Vol. IV, p.562: United Nations, World
Conference on Human Rights; The Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action, June, 1993 (New York: Department of Public Information, 1993),
pp. 33, 38.

[^10]: N. A. Maryan Green, International Law, Third Ed., (London: Pitman
Publishing, 1987), p. 123: United Nations, Notes for Speakers, p. 29:
Antonio Cassese, International Law in a Divided World; (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1986), pp. 297, 370: Malcolm N. Shaw, International
Law, (Cambridge: Grotins Publication Ltd, 1986), p.206.

[^11]: Cassese, Op. Cit. 297-99, Notes for Speakers, p. 31: Shaw, Op.
Cit., p. 173; Rebecca M. M. Wallace, International Law; A Student
Introduction (London: Sweet & Maxwell , 1986), p. 187: United Nations,
Center for Human Rights, The International Bill of Rights, Fact Sheet
No. 2, (New York: United Nations, 1992), pp. 6-7.

[^12]: Donnely, Op. Cit., pp. 7-8: Shaw. Op. Cit., pp. 174-75: Cassese,
Op. Cit., pp. 297, 300-303; United Nations, World Conference on Human
Rights, p. 12.

[^13]: United Nations, Notes for Speakers, p. 30-31

[^14]: Bahram Mustaqimi, '”Economic Rights and Democracy'”, in
Fundamental Economic Rights, Ed. By Fusahat H. Syed (Rawalpindi:
Friends, 1995), pp. 244-46.

[^15]: Cassese, Op. Cit., p. 310: Maryan Green, Op. Cit.. p. 123: United
Nations, Notes for Speakers, p. 29.

[^16]: UN The United Nations and Human Rights; 1945-1995, Blue Rook
Series, Vol. VII. (New York: Department of Public Information, 1995), p.
3: Cassese. Op. Cit., pp. 312-13; Center for Human Rights, World Public
Information Campaign for Human Rights, Human Rights Fact Sheet No. 8
(New York: UN 1989) p. 6; Charles Villa-Vicencio, “Identity, Difference
ans Belonging: Religious and Cultural Rights”, in Religious Human Rights
in Global Perspective; Religious Perspective, ed. By John Witte:, Jr.
and Johan D.Van der Vyver, (The: Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,
1996), 519; Louis Henkin, International Law: Politics and Values
(Dondrecht: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1995), p. 194.

[^17]: United Nations, Center for Human Rights, The Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural rights, Fact Sheet No. 16 (New York:
United Nations, 1991) p. 1 ; Bhalla, Op. Cit., p. 23, 27, 70-71; UN
Human Rights: The International Bill of Human Rights (New York: United
Nations, 1988), p. 1.

[^18]: Shaw, Op. Cit., p. 179; Cassese, Op. Cit., p. 299; United
Nations, The International Bill of Rights, pp. 6-7; United Nations,
Notes for Speakers, pp. 7, 8; Albanez, Teresa, “Human Rights and the
Child”, CEPAL Review, No. 57 (December, 1995), pp. 35-43; International
Labor Organization, Human Rights: A Common Responsibility, Report by the
Director­ General (part I). (Geneva: International Labor Office, 1988),
pp. 2-3.

[^19]: ILO, Human Rights: A Common Responsibility, p. 63; Cassese, Op.
Cit., p. 299; United Nations, Notes for Speakers, pp. 7-8; Bhalla, Op.
Cit., p. 34; Shaw, Op. Cit., p. 179; United Nations, The International
Bill of Rights, pp. 1 1-12.

[^20]: Donnelly, Op. Cit., p. 10, 25; Cassese:, Op. Cit., p. 302; United
Nations, World Conference on Human Rights, p. 12; United Nations, Notes
for Speakers, p. 29; Shaw, Op. Cit., p. 182.

[^21]: United Nations, The International Bill of Rights, pp. 9-10;
United Nations, Notes for Speakers, p. 30; Shaw, Op. Cit., p. 182

[^22]: Wallace, Op. Cit., pp. 187-8; Frederick F. Suyder and Surakiart
Sathirathai, Third World Attitudes Towards International Law; An
Introduction (Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1987), pp. 296-98;
Bhalla, Op. Cit., pp. 35-36.

[^23]: United Nations, The United Nations and Human Rights; 1945-1995,
with an introduction by Boutros Boutrous-Ghali , Secretary General of
the United Nations, (New York: Department of Public Information, 1995),
pp. 69, 71 , 247, 248.

[^24]: United Nations, Notes for Speakers, p. 10; Shaw, Op. Cit., pp.
196, 201, 203; Center for Human Rights, The International Bill of Human
Rights, Human Rights Fact Sheet No. 2 (New York: UN, 1992), p. 19;
Henkin, Op Cit., p.182.

[^25]: United Nations, Notes for Speakers, p. 4, 28, 30-31: Center for
Human Rights, Geneva, The Realization of the Right to Development;
Global Consultation on the Right to Development as a Human Right, (New
York: United Nations, 1991). pp. 44-45: Cassese, Op. Cit., p. 310: Shaw,
Op. Cit., p. 175.

[^26]: United Nations, Notes for Speakers, pp. 1 , 3, 29, 30; United
Nations, World Conference on Human Rights, p. 6; Pierce Machlouf, “The
Right to Development and the New International Economic Order: A Legal
Perspective”, in Essays on International Human Rights, ed. By ‘Abd
al-Rahim P. Vijapur, (New Delhi: South Asian Publishers, PVT, Ltd. 991),
pp. 213, 214-15. 218-19.

[^27]: Cassese, Op. Cit., p. 287; Aloycee Laiser, “Self-Determination: A
Perennial and Peremptory Norm of International Law”, in Op. Cit., p. 74.

[^28]: Laisert , Op. Cit., pp. 74-75; United Nations, The International
Bill of Human Rights, pp. 9- 10; Shaw, Op. Cit., p. 203; United Nations,
World Conference on Human Rights, p. 29

[^29]: Laiser, Op. Cit., pp. 75, 77; Ingrid Detter De Lupis,
International Law and the Independent States, Second ed. (Hampshire,
England: Glower Publishing Company Ltd., 1987) p. 13; Werner Levi,
Contemporary International Law: A Concise Introduction, Second Ed.
(Boulder: Westview Press, 1991), pp. 185, 186: Maryan Green. Op. Cit.,
p. 123; Cassese Op. Cit. p. 297.

[^30]: Second preambular paragraph and part I Paragraph I , UN, The
United Nations and Human Rights, 1945-1995, pp. 448, 449.

[^31]: Ibid., paras. 3 and 24

[^32]: Ibid., par. 5 and par. 10 (3).

[^33]: United Nations, World Conference on Human Rights, p. 14: Shaw,
Op.Cit., p. 182; Wallace, Op. Cit., p. 187; De Lupis, Op. Cit., p. 6;
United Nations, Notes for Speakers, pp. 30, 31.

[^34]: United Nations, Notes for Speakers, p. 28.

[^35]: UN, Center for Human Rights, Human Rights: The Commitment on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Fact Sheet No. 16 (New York:
Center for Human Rights, 1991), p. 8.

[^36]: ILO, Human Rights: A Common Responsibility, pp. 7-9; United
Nations, Center for Human Rights, Rights to Adequate Food as a Human
Right, Study Series 1, (New York: United Nations, 1989), p. 10; De
Lupis, Op. Cit., p. 10; United Nations, Notes for Speakers, pp. 1, 6,
32; United Nations, World Conference on Human Rights, pp. 12, 30; United
Nations, The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, p. 8.

[^37]: United Nations, World Conference on Human Rights, pp. 6-7, 10-13,
41; Donnely. Op. Cit, p. 30

[^38]: United Nations, World Conference on Human Rights, pp. 6-7, 30:
United Nations, The Work of the International Law Commission, Fifth Ed.
(New York: United nations, 1996), pp. 7, 152.

[^39]: 2 United Nations, The International Bill of Rights., pp. 11-12:
United Nations, Notes for Speakers, p. 4.

[^40]: United Nations, The International Bill Of Rights, p. 12; United
Nations, Notes for Speakers, pp. 28-13; Wallace, Op. Cit., p. 187;
United Nations, World Conference on Human Rights, pp. 2, 3.

[^41]: United Nations, World Conference on Human Rights, pp. 10, 17-18,
30-31: Mirza Aslam Beg, Development and Security: Thoughts and
Reflections, (Rawalpindi: Friends, 1993) pp. 139-40: Center for Human
Rights, Geneva, The Realization of the Right to Development; Global
Consultation on the Right to Development as a Human Right, pp. 44-45,
paras. 143, 147.


