Introduction To Irano-Islamic Views On Human Rights
===================================================

Assuredly, human rights are the most complicated human issue in the
twentieth century and a great challenge for the beginning of the twenty
first century. Human rights are the ideology of modern man and
suggestive of his identity and status in the modern world. Today, many
acts, conducts, decisions, and plans are weighed with the touchstone of
human rights, and even the adversaries in the final analysis try to
avoid laying bare their contrary views. At all events, human rights have
turned into a dominant discourse within the universal system. And the
terms arising from them such as self-determination, fundamental
freedoms, humanitarian conducts even in the case of the guilty ones,
women’s rights etc. have more or less been instrumental in different
policies.

The discussions arising from human rights have determining effect both
on the current functions and policies of the countries and on the
formation of the different political and judicial systems. Hence, human
rights may not be regarded as the paradigm of the function of the United
Nations Organisation or the institutes safeguarding human rights.

In addition, human rights cannot be counted absurd with the proving of
their unsuccessful function. It is true that in more cases the function
of the institutes safeguarding human rights has not been effectual and
human rights have been used as an instrument in the hands of the
superpowers and an ideological cover for their policy of expansion, but
it does not mean that the concepts arising from human rights should be
discarded.

Human rights are the manifestation of a concept and a new status which
modern man has found for himself. The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights of 1948 states: “Human rights are to be regarded as a common
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that
every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration
constantly in mind.” In addition, human rights are “the recognition of
the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all
members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and
peace in the world.”

With this view and as to the universalisation of the concepts of human
rights, no thoughts or policies can remain silent to them, as shown by
the scientific studies made by the Muslim Iranian scholars in this
respect. Although the fundamental principles of analysis of human rights
have common concepts and principles among Muslim Iranian thinkers, their
analysis and conclusions are different.

Iranian Muslim Thinkers and Human Rights
----------------------------------------

As is seen in the articles compiled herein, there is no single
interpretation of human rights by Iranian scholars. Although the
literature of human rights is not so vast in Iran, one can find three
general views in this regard by the Iranian writers. For the three
groups, the fundamental question is how far the concepts of human rights
can be effective.

Does what modern man found in the period of secularism accord with the
Islamic insight? Concerning theoretical and practical problems common in
the concept of Muslim human rights, can they take a step for a better
interpretation of human rights? Each one of the three groups provides a
different answer to this question.

The first group considers human rights outside the realm of Islamic
thought. These writers regard human rights as belonging to the secular
sphere of human thought and as an issue independent of religious sphere.
Even if they find any crisis or contradiction within it, this act is not
arrived at through religious principles but through scientific and
practical parameters. As an example, in a book entitled Human Rights in
International Assemblies, written by a board of writers under the
supervision of Muhammad Riza Dabiri, human rights have been discussed
not from a religious view-point but in the light of the international
assemblies and man’s attempts for achieving rights and justice.

Mahmud Masa’ili writes a few lines at the beginning of the book, “The
thought of protecting human rights has been of special attention for
resisting against tyranny. The aim of these attempts has been to provide
the minimum set of rights for individuals . Hence, human rights are as
old as history. In other words, from the time when man’s rights were
ignored, the struggle for human rights commenced. Therefore, history has
constantly been an arena for two opposite forces, the advocates of human
rights and the inheritors of the claim to tyranny.”[^1]

In another book entitled *Principles of Human Rights* by Dr Mahdi
Abusa’idi, there are views of this kind. In the introduction, he writes,
“Since the beginning of history, some people have been deprived of their
inherent rights, suffered tyranny at the hands of the powers-that-be,
but they have struggled to redeem their rights, they have given
sacrifice and they have enjoyed the moral and religious instructions and
the support of humanitarian philosophers and scientists. These attempts
have not proved abortive and throughout history, they have caused great
victories for humanity and they have achieved success in disseminating
the ethical principles and human rights. The greatest success so far
achieved in approving human rights is the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.”[^2]

The obvious point is that human rights are regarded as inherent rights
inspired by divine religions and by the ideas of modern theoreticians.
In this view, there is no contradiction between religion and human
rights but human rights are based on the natural rights of man
definitely approved by religion. In his book *Public Freedoms and Human
Rights* Dr Manuchihr Tabataba’i Mo’tameni regards human rights as
inherent rights and states, “What the formulators of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights meant by dignity is the inherent value and
dignity of man which are beyond his rights. In other words, people are
equal in two things, in their inherent values and in their rights, which
are particular to them in the society. It is said that these rights
arise from man’s value and dignity. for the nature of all human beings
is one and the same and no one can transfer them, for these rights are
not separate from him.”[^3]

Writings of this nature bespeak the ideas of the Iranian writers who
regard the issue of human rights to be beyond religious discussions. In
these writings, for better recognising the inherent rights of man, one
should consider the sources, which show man’s attempts to redeem these
rights. The international declarations and assemblies and the
conventions on human rights are the manifest common attempts of man
throughout history, which are attracted by these people. In this regard,
there is not much difference between the views of Iranian scholars and
scientific attempts made by non­Muslim thinkers, for many of them
discuss human rights outside the realm of religious thought.

Hence, their criticisms on human rights do not arise from religious
thoughts, but due to the fact that some of the articles set forth in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights do not accord with the realities
and do not have executive force or the views of small groups of people
on human rights. The criticisms based on these concepts are not derived
from Islam but made by lawyers or sociologists who try to obliterate
contradictions and ambiguities from human rights. Some of the articles
here are written with this view. In these articles, attempts have been
made to discuss human rights themselves but not from an Islamic
viewpoint. Some of the issues discussed by Iranian scholars are not
written with the purpose of offering an Iranic­ lslamic view on human
rights but with the purpose of investigating the issues relating to
human rights.

However, the views of the second group are totally different. Among
these writers are some distinguished Shi"ite theologians who regard
Islamic stance on human rights different from the humanitarian stance on
human rights. Of course, among the university scholars there are some
like Sayyid Ahmad Fardid who believe that human rights are the
manifestation of the rebellious self-centred man of the modern century.
In his eye, modern man has turned into a creature that regards himself
the viceroy of God in the universe and organised himself by adapting
himself to physical pleasures. That man finds himself in the position to
create rights based on desires and reject whatever God has commanded, is
an unpleasant event in the age of humanism. This great perversion in the
thoughts of man as the symbol of rebellion against the Almighty is
manifested in the modem humanitarian thoughts. Human rights and a glance
at socio-political issues arise from this great perversion. (Conference
on Zionism-Faculty of Law, Tehran University)

In his book *Philosophy of Human Rights*, Ayatullah Javadi Amuli
believes in the difference in principle of human rights seen in Islam
and by the West. He believes that defining human rights depends on
people’s world­ vision. As a Muslim scholar and thinker regards God as
the source of everything and the manifestation of the Almighty, he
cannot consider rights for man outside the Divine realm.

In his view, the ultimate goal of man’s life is the reaching of the
Almighty and man possessed of knowledge desires to realise God’s will
and act and find way to reach Him. Hence, there are no rights for man
except those arising from God’s will. Stressing that human rights cannot
be formulated through agreements or traditions and customs, he states,
“some people may think they can formulate human rights without
considering the world-vision and the bond between man and the world. The
advocates of this thought formulated the bill of human rights, calling
it the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Without consciously or unconsciously desiring it, they neglected the
fact that the signing of such a bill would not be to the gain of some or
the majority of the world. Rights are not a national issue like
traditions and customs, which might be different to different people.
The function of a true religion is not that it commands people what to
wear or what to eat, for these things vary in varying cultures and
places. What a true religion states includes all the facets of life
without regarding the differences.”[^4]

Ayatullah Javadi Amuli believes that man cannot gain a common and
universal source, which can determine human rights. In other words, man
cannot detennine human rights, for man has to break the chains of nature
to achieve solidarity.[^5] He holds that one cannot content himself with
the knowledge of the sages in religious matters and in matters of
world-vision, for the knowledge of the sages is not sufficient.[^6]

Meanwhile, the Divine nature is the most important common point with
everyone. Hence, by using this Divine nature and law, people can achieve
the true source of human rights. Therefore, Ayatullah Javadi Amuli holds
that self-determination is only particular to God, and the systems which
are not based on this thought, shall contain a degree of paganism. That
is why he states the democratic systems and other secular systems are
based on paganism.[^7] In addition, the formulation of laws requires the
complete recognition of the world and this recognition is only possible
by God who is capable of making laws and this is the advantage of Divine
rights and laws over the non-divine ones.

Therefore, only by referring to religious sources, one can determine
human rights. This is what the writer does after proving the necessity
of divinity of human rights. Quoting the Holy Qur’an, he discusses the
fundamental rights such as dignity, the right to life, freedom, and
justice and so on from an Islamic perspective. However, the
interpretations are substantially different from those in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

This is a striking example of the thoughts of the intellectuals who
regard differently the relation between Islam and human rights. This
difference is evident in the writings of Zain al-'Abidin Qurbani. In his
book entitled *Islam and Human Rights*, he states that there is no need
to refer to the declarations of the international assemblies considering
the sublime Islamic laws. In the introduction, he states, "Reading this
book, the esteemed readers shall ratify that these bills and
declarations are valid for those who do not have a bright civilisation
or divine laws. However, for nation with a bright civilisation and a
glorious religion like Islam and a sacred book like the Qur’an which
determines its ideological, ethical and legal fate, they are not only
invalid but with the study of the principles between the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Muslim laws the readers shall utter,
“They talk through their hats.”[^8]

Qurbani holds that the laws promulgated by man are doomed to a large
multitude of problems, for although the reasoning power of man is
instrumental in some cases, one cannot satisfy oneself with them due to
the limitations of reason and conscience. Man has very limited knowledge
about himself and the society and their knowledge in many cases is mixed
with personal interests, selfishness, emotions and thoughts.[^9]

Quoting a few Western thinkers and a few misfortunes arising from
man-made rules leads to the conclusion that it is only God that can
determine original rules for man. In his view, what is expressed in
Islam is much deeper than what is set forth in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.

As to the right to life, freedom, the abolition of slavery, resistance
against racial discrimination, Islam offers more sublime laws than the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. For instance, regarding freedom,
Zain al-'Abidin Qurbani holds that true freedom is in Islamic laws and
what is called freedom in the Western systems of human rights, is but
perversion and following amoral principles and physical desires. He
states, “Islam is the greatest pioneer of freedom and certainly, in no
other religion, freedom has been so advocated. But this fact is
noteworthy: most of the unpleasant events that have blackened history
were due to this democratic spirit, and were done in the holy name of
freedom.”[^10]

He holds that the superpowers of the world violate the rights of the
downtrodden classes of the society in the name of freedom and regard
women's perversion as moral traits.

Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Khamini ‘i, in an article included herein,
discusses the fundamental difference between the Islamic and the
humanitarian views on freedom, and states what is called freedom in the
current views on human rights contradicts the sublime concept of freedom
whose goal is to elevate the human soul and not the human desires. In
his view, freedom in the West is more the unleashing of the carnal soul,
which is per se the forestalling of true freedom, which is the freedom
of soul and the elevation of truth within man.

In general, in the second groups view, there is a fundamental difference
between Islamic thought and the concept of contemporary human rights. Of
course this group of thinkers does not deny some of the concepts set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. However, their
definition and interpretation of concepts such as right, freedom, and
equality are different from those commonly advocated. They define these
concepts from a religious viewpoint and regard them limited within the
realm of religious laws and insight.

However, there is a third group among the Iranian thinkers and writers
who do not find substantial differences between some of the fundamental
principles set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the Islamic thought, but believe that in some cases, Islam cannot agree
to some of the principles in these Declarations. In other words, the
Islamic thought conditionally approves some contemporary human rights.

In a book entitled *Study of the Two Systems of International Human
Rights in the West and Islam*, the late Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi Ja'fari
discusses the two systems of human rights in the West and the human
rights in Islam due to the existence of two declarations of human
rights, that is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Cairo
Declaration of Human Rights in Islam. In practice, he believes in the
existence of the two systems but does not see any fundamental difference
between them.

In his opinion, man’s awareness of his natural rights has caused the
emergence of the concept of human rights. This is what the divine
religions are based on. The divine religions are based on human nature,
which is the nature of man. He states, “Since man acquired knowledge of
the common aspects of life among his fellow-beings and realised the
necessity of social life, he has understood the first principles of his
inherent rights (inherent rights in the true sense of the word).”

The criterion for the first natural rights includes the protection and
organisation of human life in their two fundamental dimensions, absolute
natural life and good life. The first principle that man has as an
inherent right, is the right to life officially accepted by all
religions, laws and regulations. Good life has four fundamental
principles, which include the right to dignity, education, freedom and
equality before the law. These principles are based on the most original
Islamic sources which complete all other divine religions.[^11]

The writer brings different historical evidence, implying that human
rights exist in the very nature of man and throughout the history the
principles of the natural rights of man have entered into the minds of
the intellectuals, laws and human culture.[^12] In his opinion, the
foundation of what takes shape in divine religions does not contradict
man’s inherent rights. Man’s dignity is so vast that only a supernatural
law can describe it. He holds that the universities of the world have
not yet succeeded in taking a proper step in proving the dignity of man
and this is what a divine religion like Islam can achieve with its
sublime utterances. He states, “The basis for human rights in the West
is compromising coexistence with peace, freedom and justice in human
societies and of course, no one can question the idealistic aspect of
these affairs.

However as we shall see, the claim to the necessity of these principles
with the help of inherent feelings of man, has not satisfied the very
basic human need for creating a world in which everyone may consider
themselves as members of one family, for such a claim should be based on
a more sublime basis which is God.[^13]

As we see, the late Ayatullah Ja’fari does not question the inherent
nature of human rights. but believes that these rights are so sublime
and fundamental that man’s attempts for proving them have not been
enough and only the divine utterance can achieve this goal.

In his different books and articles, Dr Husain Mihrpur in one way or
another discusses such a viewpoint. He holds that Islam officially
recognises man’s inherent value and dignity and accords special
attention to his equality and freedom. In his book *Human Rights in
International Documents and the Position of the Islamic Republic of
Iran*, he states, “Man’s freedom and respect for his dignity and rights
without any limitation such as race, language, colour, nationality etc
have been accorded much attention in Islam and that the main mission of
the prophets especially the holy Prophet of Islam has been to emancipate
man of these bonds and induce him to consider his dignity and
value.[^14]

Therefore, gaining back man’s dignity and the fundamental rights and
freedoms is not only the principle but also the goal of Islam and the
Qur’anic verses testify to this fact. Ergo, there are not fundamental
differences between the officially recognised rights in the Universal
Declaration and the Islamic thought. In this regard, Dr Mihrpur states,
“It can be explicitly claimed that almost all the fundamental rights set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights exist in the Islamic
system and in most cases, have been excellently done.

However, there are two salient points:

1. Islam accords considerable attention to the proper guidance and
growth of man’s morality. Hence, for those who commit tyranny, imprison
the oppressed servants of God, prevent the spread of the concept of
monotheism, and commit corruption or dissension, Islam does not accept
the negligence of religion. Islam regards religious prejudice
contradictory to the inherent dignity of man. Hence, it does not
encourage it but forbids it through logical ways.

2. As to women’s rights and the equality of men and women, Islam states
that men and women are equal in dignity. However, they are from the same
essence who have different duties and responsibilities due to their
physiognomy.[^15]

On this basis, the Islamic thought conditionally accepts the rights set
forth in the Universal Declaration. Mihrpur holds that human rights are
accepted in Islam and there are no fundamental differences between them.
However, there is an additional emphasis or tendency in Islam based on
which some of the principles, which ignore religious aspects, are
rejected.

Such an interpretation is well observed in Dr Husayn Safai’s article
entitled *Fundamental Freedoms in Islam*. Quoting a few verses from the
Holy Qur’an, he tries to show there are no fundamental differences
between the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and those in Islam.

In addition, Hujjat al-Islam Muhaqqiq Damad has an identical
interpretation of humanitarian laws. Citing a few approved points and
the observance of humanitarian rights especially in time of war, he
tries to compare the common views between the Islamic thought and the
ideas expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights although in
his opinion there are some differences between the two.

With a brief survey, we realise that there are three different views on
human rights among the Iranian scholars. Of course in all these three
views, these scholars look differently at the concept of religion, human
rights and their philosophical interpretation of the relation between
religious concept and the human findings. The interpretation of the
first group from the viewpoint of religion in the society, man’s dignity
in knowing himself and his inherent rights differ from those of the
second group. The third group tries to offer a viewpoint in which man’s
dignity in recognising his rights and advantages is recognised and the
current views in religious concepts get mingled with it.

Of course, in the views of the third group, when they discuss a certain
contradiction between Islamic utterance and man’s interpretation of
human rights, naturally Islamic thought is preferred. At any rate,
discussing human rights from an Iranian-Islamic perspective has not yet
ended. In the Holy Qur’an and the religious sources there are diverse
points, which can be discussed at this point. On the inherent value and
dignity of man, there are clear utterances, which no Muslim thinker can
reject. In the following, you will find some of them:

1. ***“And surely we have honoured the children of Adam .”*** ***(Surah
al-Isra 17:70)***

In this verse, God places emphasis on the inherent dignity of man .

2. ***“O Mankind, We have created you male and female, and appointed you
races and tribes that you may know one another.”*** ***(Surah
al-Hujuraat 49:13)***

In this verse, the Holy Quran verifies the equal rights of people
without regard for their race.

3. ***“And when thy Lord said to the angels “I am setting in the earth a
viceroy.” They said, “What, wilt Thou set therein one who will do
corruption there and shed blood*** ***while we proclaim Thy praise and
call Thee holy?” (Surah al-Baqarah, 2:30)***

Here, man is the viceroy of God in the earth and has the highest station
of being, for God commanded all His angels to bow down before Adam.[^16]

4. On the freedom of man, Imam ‘Ali states, “Do not be servant to
anyone, for God has created everyone free.”[^17]

5. Man has the spirit of God. The Holy Qur’an states,

***“See, I am creating a mortal of a clay. When I have shaped him, and
breathed My*** ***spirit into him, fall you down, bowing before him.”
(Surah as-Sad, 38:71-72)***

Based on these pieces of evidence and many more, man has a sublime
dignity in Islam. The way Islam regards human nature is such that one
may make varying interpretations of it. Assuredly, the Islamic
interpretation of the goal of life and man’s creation is such that it
can influence the concept of human rights. With a brief glance at the
Qur’anic verses, we realise that the goal of life is not to enjoy the
worldly pleasures although they are not prohibited. Man has been created
to worship the Almighty and attain Him. The main goal of creation is to
reach the station of divine servitude.

***“I have not created jinn and mankind except to serve me.” (Surah
ad-Dhariyat, 51:56)***

In addition, the creation of man in Islam is to experience divine
visitation. Does man tread on the path of divine servitude with the
power of choice and freedom?

***“We create man of a sperm-drop, a mingling, trying him: and We made
him hearing and*** ***seeing.” (Surah al-Insan 76:2)***

Hence, the goal of man’s creation is trying him and causing him to reach
divine propinquity. The existence of Resurrection Day shows that this
world is not the end of his life. “The world is the farm of the
afterworld.” Based on this insight, man's life is not eternal and begins
with this world and continues until the visit of the Almighty is made
possible.

***“O Man Thou art labouring into your Lord laboriously, and thou shall
encounter Him.”*** ***(Surah al-Inshiqaq 84:6)***

Therefore, the progressive movement is towards God.

Therefore, the meaning of man's life is different and so is man's
station in life. From a religious point of view, everything taken from
security, life, freedom and equality is for attaining inner truth of man
and divine propinquity. Hence, the Islamic stance on these fundamental
rights is influenced by this general impression. When the goal of man’s
life is reaching divine servitude, it is obvious that his interpretation
of his rights and duties shall be influenced by fundamental goals.

From an anthropological glance at Islamic sources, man despite his
sublime station and dignity has fundamental weak points. Terms such as
weak, and the poor used in the Qur’an in relation to man shows that man
has weaknesses, which can be obliterated only by God though he has the
highest place in the chain of being. The Qur’anic verse,

***“Man is created weak” (Surah an-Nisa 4:28)***

shows the limitations of man’s existence. These limitations are
reparable by attaining to the Almighty and His guidance. Men need the
guidance of God.

***“O People, you are poor before God.” (Surah al-Fatir 35:15)***

The goal of every religion is to guide man and lead him to perfection.

The purpose for stating these instances has not been to reveal the
complete Islamic view of man and its influence on human rights, but that
in Islamic sources, there are discussions on the true nature of man, and
the goal of his life different interpretations of which can have a
determining effect on offering human rights. What is man’s dignity? What
is divine propinquity? What are man's existential limitations? Does it
mean the description of natural characteristics of the being? These are
the questions, which are proposed by seeing the present sources, and
different answers to these questions can follow different views on human
rights.

In these articles, attempts have been made to discuss human rights from
different perspectives. Each one of these writers may belong to the
aforementioned groups and for this reason, one cannot find a single
style in these articles. Varying views on human rights suggest the
varying options of Iranian scholars. It is hoped that in this first
step, issues relating to this field are properly discussed, though
finding final answers may not be possible in the modern atmosphere of
Islamic thought and in ordinary man's thought.

Offering sufficient discussions on human rights calls for a bulky
volume, which is possible with the assistance of all Muslim scholars and
their continuous attempts. Assuredly, what is discussed in these
articles is a small part of the vast discussions on human rights. It is
hoped that this first move will be the basis for future attempts for
more extensive volumes on human rights.

**Dr Husayn Salimi**
**Editor and coordinator of Congress**

Bibliography
------------

Abusa’idi, Mahdi. *The Priciples of Human Rights*. Tehran, Asia. 1964.

Ja’fari, Muhammad Taq'i. *Universal Human Rights as viewed by Islam and
the West*. Tehran, Daftar-i Khadamat-i Huquqi Bain al-Milali. 1991 .

Javadi Amuli, 'Abdullah . *The Philosophy of Human Rights*. Tehran. Asra
Press. 1995.

Qurbani, Zain al-Abidin . *Islam and Human Rights*. Tehran. Daftar-i
Nashr-i Farhang-i Islami. 1995.

Arfa'i and others. *Human Rights as viewed by International Assemblies*,
under the supervision of Muhammad Riza Dabiri, Tehran. Daftar-i
Mutali’at-i Siyasi va Bain al-Milali. 1993.

Tabataba'i Mu’tamini, Manuchihr. *Public Freedoms and Human Rights*.
Tehran, Tehran University Press. 1991 .

Mansuri Larijani, Isma’il. *The Process of the Development of Human
Rights and the Comparative Study of it and the Cairo Declaration of
Human Rights in Islam*. Tehran. Taban. 1995.

Mihrpur, Husayn. *Human Rights in International Documents and the
Position of the Islamic Republic of Iran.* Tehran. Ittila’at. 1995.

*The Conference of Human Rights as viewed by Islam and Christianity.*
Tehran. Tehran University Press. 1991.

[^1]: Aliyah Arfa'i and others, Human Rights in International
Assemblies, Supervised by Muhammad Riza Dabiri, (Tehran, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, 1993), p.3

[^2]: Mahdi Abusa’idi, Priciples of Human Rights, (Tehran, Asia 1964),
p. 12

[^3]: Manuchihr Tabataba’i Mu’tamani, Public Freedoms and Human Rights,
(Tehran, University of Tehran, 1990), p. 221.

[^4]: ‘Abdullah Javadi Amuli, Philosophy of Human Rights, (Tehran, Asra,
1996), p.89

[^5]: Ibid., p. 93

[^6]: Ibid., p. 94

[^7]: Ibid., p. 116

[^8]: Zayn al-Abidin Qurbani, Islam and Human Rights, (Tehran, Bureau
for Islamic Culture, 1996, p.10

[^9]: Zayn al-Abidin Qurbani, Islam and Human Rights, (Tehran, Bureau
for Islamic Culture, 1996, p.18, 20, 32, 33

[^10]: Ibid., p.496

[^11]: Muhammad Taqi Ja’fari, International Human Rights in Islam and
the West, (Tehran Bureau for International Rights, 1991), pp.13-14

[^12]: Ibid., p.15

[^13]: Ibid., p.54-55

[^14]: Husain Mihrpur, Human Rights in International Documents and the
Position of the Islamic Republic of Iran, (Tehran, Ettila’at, 1995),
p.39

[^15]: Ibid., pp.38-39

[^16]: Surah al-Baqarah (2:34), “And when He said to the Angels, “Bow
yourselves to Adam”.

[^17]: Nahj al-Balaghah


