Sources Of Human Rights In Islam
================================

**Ayatullah ‘Abdullah Javadi Amuli**

Man is in essence valuable and worthy
-------------------------------------

The holy Qur’an regards man as one endowed with dignity.

***“We have honoured the children of Adam.” (Surah al-Isra 17:70)***

This dignity is a theoretical value, which may find a practical aspect.
However, it must not be imagined that this theoretical value exists in
the considerations. Man’s dignity is the same as the dignity of the
angels and the Qur'an, which is the manifestation of God’s dignity. Of
course, the Holy Spirit is in essence great. Man's dignity shows that he
has advantages. In other words, man’s dignity implies that he has
sublime traits. By virtue of the same reason, after the creation of this
great essence, God thus addressed lblis (Satan),

***“Why did you not bow down before what I created with my own hands?”
(Surah Sad 38:75)***

This statement, namely the creation of Adam by God’s two hands shows
that man is in essence valuable and worthy, for this statement is used
when we regard especial respect for something. For instance, if someone
prays for something with open hands, it shows his special favor, as God
is such when granting something.

“O you who grant things with two open hands.”[^1]

This explanation elucidates the point that the implications of such
statements are not that God has physical body or hand but the idea is
that all divine essence has played a part in the creation of Adam;
hence, man can be the manifestation of all divine qualities and
consequently, God’s viceroy.

This theoretical dignity may contain much practical greatness. Due to
this dignity, all legal and ethical teachings must be designed in
accordance with this theoretical principle. When we admit that man is in
essence valuable and worthy, we are consciously or unconsciously induced
to believe that neither freedom, security and so on is his right but
they should be designed in such a way which might correspond with his
dignity.

Man is a God-seeking being
--------------------------

Man innately tends to seek God, for he sees Him, not with his physical
eyes but with the eyes of his heart. This God-seeking attitude is not
unconscious, as it is not deterministic. It must not be assumed that man
seeks after someone lost but after a God whom he loves. On the basis of
reason, man does not have an independent entity but his existence is
constantly dependent. However, this dependence has nothing to do with
another dependent being but it is dependent upon an independent soul.
Man is nothing but a dependent being. It is not such that man has
perfect relation to God but that the relation between Man and God is
like spiritual poverty and perfect need for Him;

***“O people! You are poor before God.” (Surah al-Fatir 35:15)***

In this verse, there are two realities: firstly, man does not have an
independent soul; secondly, his relationship is only with God and he has
no other relationship whatsoever .

Thus, any kind of formulating rights should correspond with this
God­seeking spirit. The set of rights considering for man an independent
soul or considering man independent of God does not spring from a divine
source. Of course, those who do not accept this source generally fall
into the pitfall of comparing things while everyone knows that man is a
dependent soul. The atheists have pinned their hopes on something or
someone. The difference is that they do not consider God as the
independent soul. .

Man is eternal
--------------

From other sources in Islam, it is understood that man is eternal. This
is perceived both by reason and by the holy sayings. The holy Qur'an
regards that man has an eternal soul who will step into another world
after this world and will enjoy eternity there. According to reason, man
has an incorporeal soul and that this soul is not exposed to
destruction. According to reason, death includes the separation of the
soul from the body. And once more this separation is obliterated at the
command of God, the body becomes fit for the hereafter.

Everyone accepts this and the existing differences arise from the
mistakes in comparison. All human beings long for a longer life and
strive to live longer. This implies that man innately seeks after
eternity; however, in comparison, some think that belongs to the
hereafter.

However, one must know that man is a traveler on the path of life; of
course, man comes to middle abode in the minor apocalypse, then he
enters the major apocalypse but the world comes to destination in the
minor apocalypse. The holy Qur'an holds that all cosmic order moves
towards God. This cosmic order goes towards resurrection to testify what
its travelers have done or complains of what they have done to redeem
them. According to authoritative *hadiths*, this cosmos and all its
parts complain of, testify to or redeem deeds of man.[^2]

Thus, all human beings seek after eternity but some others think that
the world is eternal and do not know that eternity is particular to the
spirituality. This ignorant way of thinking has taken hold of people
from the very beginning. People accumulate wealth to achieve eternity or
to destroy death. On different occasions, the holy Qur’an views this way
of thinking to be vain and elucidates the real eternity:

***“What is with you comes to an end but what is with God abides.”
(Surah an-Nahl 16:96)***

Man reaches the abode of stability
----------------------------------

It might be imagined that eternity means reaching the abode of
stability. However, it must be noted that these two are separate from
each other for we can imagine a being to be eternal but he will never
reach the destination but wander for all the time to come. The holy
Qur’an uses delicate statements to show that the cosmic order is
purposeful.

***“They will question thee concerning the Hour, when it (world) shall
berth.” (Surah al-A’raf 7:187 and Surah an-Naziat 79:42)***

According to this statement, the cosmic order sails like a ship in the
ocean of the Being. It is impossible that this ship may keep sailing but
it must someday berth. From this one gathers that the world will stand
still somewhere and reach its abode of stability. Besides, the abode of
stability in this world is resurrection when man comes to meet the
Almighty. For the same reason, one of the names for paradise is Eden.
Eden means place of rest. ln resurrection, man reaches his real place of
rest.

Man has Genetic Relationship with the Cosmos
--------------------------------------------

Man - this eternal incorporeal essence that comes to meet the Almighty
has inseparable relationship with the Cosmos. Hence, nothing happens in
man unless it affects his soul. Any movement, speech and writing issuing
from man affect his temperament; it begets either light or darkness.
Hence, all the issues including the legal principles are associated with
man’s nature. With the acceptance of this principle, it may no longer be
concurred that man is free in everything. Eating, dressing and the likes
affect man.

Lawful (halal) food does not exercise the same effect that unlawful
(haram) food does. Truth does not have the same effect that untruth
does. All these have special functions. For example, sin blackens the
heart and removes purity from it:

***“What they have done has blackened their hearts.” (Surah
al-Mutaffifin 83:14)***

Upon committing a sin, some dust settles upon the heart and if man does
not remove the dust, the heart gradually becomes blocked and real
blindness begins. Even any good or bad memory affects the heart and the
mind. With an ugly glance, the dust of sin settles on the heart. Then,
it seems that the ears and the eyes are functioning properly but they
are out of their proper function. Although the Holy Qur'an has stated
the same thing about the eyes, but it is clear that this is allegorical,
not particular to the eyes only.

***“It is not the eyes that are blind, but blind are the hearts within
the breasts.” (Surah al-Haj 22:46)***

By virtue of the same reason, although the Almighty transmitted His
message to mankind, there are some people that do not understand it.
This verse also suggested the same thing as implied in other verses that
regards this group as deaf and dumb.[^3] Thus, according to Islamic
doctrine, every human act exercises a deep impact upon the soul and the
mind.

Man has two Dignities: Social and Individual
--------------------------------------------

To explain this, we have to talk in brief about the dignity of man.

That it is man that has originality or the society is to be dealt in the
realm of philosophy, for originality means true human being; and it is
the philosopher who can determine what really exists. Thus, the
researchers in this field are indebted to the philosophers, for as long
as the principle of social life has not yet been detennined, it is
impossible to provide proofs. It is clear that as the present article
does not deal with a philosophical topic, we should suffice ourselves
with brief explanations.

The real existence of the society is always questioned; however, there
is no doubt that many people are really existent and each one of them
has a special entity, their special attitudes and functions and
understand their being by intuitive knowledge. It has not occurred to
anyone that the existence of others is hypostatized, for anyone can
perceive that their fellow beings exist and that many of the traditions
and customs are according to their nature. In some aspects, they satisfy
his needs and in some other aspects, they are in need of him. So,
neither the existence of a large multitude of people nor the mutual
effects are rejected.

If a society has real entity, it has real single effects. However, if
its existence is hypostatized, it has no single effect. However,
whatever comes from it, belongs to the members of the society. In the
present discussion, the topic will be dealt with in two parts: firstly,
does the individual have originality in the active system or the
society? Secondly, which one of them is original in the ultimate system?

On discussing the originality in active system, we shall discus whether
the individual has effect on the society and that the individual has the
power to cause his ascent or descent. Of course if a society has an
independent entity, the discussion is clear; but if the individual
himself does not have independent entity, then the implication is that
anyone who enters a group consciously or unconsciously is affected by it
and will follow the laws and the traditions.

What can be said in the first part is that ordinary persons are usually
influenced by the traditions and ways of others, for although the
society has no separate entity from the individuals, it is mightier than
a single person for it is made up of many individuals. In contrast, the
geniuses who are endowed with exceptional talents and can distinguish
right from wrong, have the courage to break from the false traditions
and customs. Some of them have the power to understand the truth in the
society and put aside the untruth and repair the shortcomings for
themselves and not for others.

However some others have the power to correct others. Among them are
exceptional people who embark on correcting the whole society and
attempt to enliven the truth and bury the untruth and withhold no
sacrifice in this regard. Regarding them, one can say that originality
belongs to them, for their power exceeds that of the society. In other
words, in the present system, originality is stronger than that. If the
power of the society is greater than the individual, the originality
belongs to him; and if the individual is more powerful than the society,
it is he who leaves influence on the society.

All these explanations were, in fact, about the geniuses save the
prophets and the divine authorities. The manifestation of prophecy and
the rise of esoteric guidance is far greater than the genius of man and
basically, one cannot compare them with each other.

***“This is Allah's grace; He shall give it to whom He pleases.” (Surah
al-Maidah 5:54)***

The Almighty chooses these people with certain criteria and assigns them
to transmit the holy message:

***“Allah best knows where to place His message.” (Surah al-An’am
6:124)***

Such people are a society in themselves and have the power to change the
society;

***“Surely Abraham was a nation.” (Surah an-Nahl 16:120)***

The study of manners of these great people implies how they could make
the monotheism echo in the pagan atmosphere of the society and even
sometimes, they struggled long for their goal;

***“And certainly We sent Noah to people, so he remained among them a
thousand years save fifty.” (Surah al-Ankabut 29:14)***

Now that these principles are elucidated, it might be said that
originality belongs to the individual; for any wise individual leaves
effect on others and this influence extends to the far stretches of the
society. Where the society leaves effect on the society, it influences
several people for when the rights of individuals and the society are in
mind, the right of the society is of primary importance, and the rights
of individuals have priority over the rights of one individual. Albeit,
every multiplicity has priority over every unity although it might be
preferred to superior unity.

Now we must see how things stand in the ultimate society. In this part,
we shall be discussing whether the ultimate goal in the human society is
leading the individuals to bliss or that the ultimate goal includes
leading the society to bliss.

If we say that the goal is leading the individual to bliss, the idea is
that we regard originality as being particular to individuals and if
believe that the goal includes leading the society to bliss, it means
that originality belongs to the society. That what bliss is, depends
upon the social insight. The materialists do not believe that bliss is
outside the realm of nature and they found any interpretation of
morality and spirituality on material values. However, according to the
theologians, bliss is of a vaster realm and embraces both nature and
metaphysics.

Those who do not think beyond their whims and passions, act on the
hypothesis of individual originality. Hence, they found their way on
despotism, exploitation and enslavement. It is with this thought that
some believe they are a better race than others. Among them are those
who lord over people and all social forces should be in their service.
Pharaoh was one of them who said,

***“I am a better god.” (Surah an-Naziat 79:24)***

In contrast, there is another group who has achieved relative freedom.
They hold that originality is particular to the society and step in the
way of serving people. They think that if the society is corrected, the
ultimate goal is achieved. If this way of thinking belongs to a
monotheist, it arises from his ignorance; for this way of thinking is
particular to the school of materialism. It must be noted that a
materialist grabs at this thought ignorantly, for he cannot believe
sacrificing himself for others.

The secret of this matter lies in this that a materialist accepts that
death is the end of man and that he does not perceive any pleasure or
pain after death. On the same basis, how can this person learn about
social welfare after death? After all, the life of any living creature
is based on truth. If man does not have eternal soul, how can one sense
people's pains and pleasures?

The third group are the monotheists who have freed themselves from the
dungeon of the individual and the society and have ascended to the peak
of divine school. They all have the divine color, which are above all
other colors.

***“Who has a·better color than the Almighty?” (Surah al-Baqarah
2:138)***

They protect their deeds from any sort of desruction and reach to the
glorious peak of goodness after passing the stage of justice and seek
others joy at the cost of their own pain to lead others to bliss. They
justify their hunger with the saturation of people and buy their thirst
by quenching the thirsty ones and justify their lack of shelter by
sheltering others. They are the striking examples of this verse:

***“They prefer others to themselves, although they are themselves in
need.” (Surah al-Hashr 59:9)***

Another characteristic of this group is that they always prefer others
to themselves, but try to vie others in goodness.

***“They vie each other in good deeds.” (Surah al-Baqarah 2:148 and
Surah al-Maidah 5:48)***

The most important point to be taken into consideration is that they do
sacrifices simply because they wish to provide perfection to elevate
their souls. In other words, all this goodness is not only the sign of
the originality in the ultimate order but it is a sign for the
originality of the individual as well, namely that in the ultimate
order, one has to do good works to elevate his spirituality.

Thus, in divine school, individual originality finds its special
meaning. Therefore, in the active order, the superior human beings make
the society and originality belongs to them. In the ultimate order,
originality belongs to individuals but as it was expressed.

It must not be forgotten that these words are brought up in legal and
moral discussions. However, if they take the shape of philosophy, then
it becomes evident that in the ultimate order and the active order,
originality belongs to God alone, and not to the individual or the
society. This is our belief:

***“God is the beginning and the end.” (Surah al-Hadid 57:3)***

With this conviction, the originality of anything save God in the active
order does not correspond with the priority of truth; as the originality
of anything but God in the ultimate order does not correspond with the
truth which is the end of anything.

Principles of Human rights in Islam
-----------------------------------

### Life

#### Everyone has the right to life

The first right enumerated for man by the holy Qur’an is the right to
life. There are two phases for life: physical and spiritual. No one has
the right to take this right from others. The violation of physical
right is done with killing. According to the holy Qur’an, this is equal
to destroying the whole society unless it is done under sound reasons.

***“Whoso slays a soul not to retaliate for a soul slain, nor for
corruption done in the land, shall be as if he had slain mankind
altogether.” (Surah al-Maidah 5:32)***

The violation of the spiritual right to life is done by misleading
others. They destroy their spiritual life. The loss of spiritual life
means the loss of bliss; otherwise the spirit of man shall not be
destroyed. For the same reason, the Holy Qur’an regards spiritual life
as opposed to atheism. In other words, anyone that becomes atheist, they
shall lose bliss and die spiritually. This contrast is thus described:

***“... that he may warn whosoever is living, and that the Word may be
realized against the unbelievers .” (Surah Yasin 36:70)***

As is evident from this verse, those who have not become pagans are
living; in other words, the infidels do not enjoy life.

According to the holy Qur'an, the right to life is granted to man by God
and hence, it is God who can interfere in it. Thus, any kind of
violation of physical or spiritual right without God’s permission is
forbidden. In other words, life is the right of man, it is his duty, and
no one can shirk this responsibility.

It was said that the right to life is the first right of man. On the
other hand, in *Treatise on Rights*, Imam Sajjad (peace be upon him)
holds that rights spring from the knowledge of God. The secret of the
words of that venerable Imam lies in the aforementioned words; if anyone
does not know God, he indeed divests himself of the right to life. Thus,
the knowledge of God is enjoying spiritual life.

Thus, according to the Holy Qur’an, those who have surrendered to the
Culture of Ignorance are dead:

***“You were dead; then, God gave you life.” (Surah al-Baqarah 2:28)***

In this verse, the meaning is the life after this world and the
spiritual life after ignorance.

#### Kinds of life and the Relationship Between Them

As was mentioned in the previous part, the Holy Qur’an elucidates two
kinds of life; spiritual and physical. Now we shall be discussing three
types of life; vegetable, animal and human.

In many Qur'anic verses, God sends down rain for the growth of plants
and for the growth of man. This life is called vegetable life. It seems
that this verse talks about vegetable life:

***“We created every living thing from water.” (Surah al-Anbiya
21:30)***

This vegetable life belongs to those who summon up all their power to
grow up and nothing else. This group does not enjoy animal life, let
alone human life. Plants have the same life and their growth is limited
to their getting tall.

A superior stage is the animal life. In this stage, there is the
question of kindness, love, affection and hatred and hostility. The
present order of the world is founded upon this animal life. Even the
formulation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights has been meant
to silence the oppressed.

When the Holy Qur’an talks about animal life, it places men in the rank
of the cattle.

***“These blessings are for you and the cattle;”*** ***(Surah an-Naziat
79:33 and Surah al-Abasa 80:32)***

***“do you eat and pasture your cattle.” (Surah Taha 20:54)***

It is evident that the Holy Qur’an should be refined in style. This way
of talking is because it intends to impart a message to us. That message
is that these blessings are common among you and the cattle and if you
stick to them, you shall be relegated to the degree of animals.

However, when the Holy Qur’an talks about human life, man is ranked
among the angels. For instance, about the virtuous sages, the Holy
Qur’an has stated:

***“God bears witness that there is no god but He-and the angels and men
possessed of knowledge-upholding justice.”*** ***(Surah Aale Imran
3:18)***

This spiritual life is also described in the Holy Qur’an:

***“And whosoever does a righteous deed, be it male or female,
believing, We shall assuredly give him to live a goodly life.”***
***(Surah an-Nahl 16:97)***

The attribute pure for life shows that this life is superior. This pure
life may never be found in vegetable or animal life.

Sometimes, the holy Qur’an describes the kind of life they conduct. For
example, about the martyrs, it says,

***“Count not those who were slain in God's way as dead, but rather
living with their Lord, by Him provided.”*** ***(Surah Aale Imran
3:169)***

In this verse and other verses as this, we realize that they have
spiritual and human life; otherwise, having the advantage of living is
not enough, for as mentioned earlier, death does not exist. Even those
who are slain in the cause of falsity are eternal although they do not
have the same eternity as the martyrs:

***“They are summoned from a distant land.” (Surah al Fussilat 41:44)***

This truth may be observed in a scene from the Battle of Badr. When the
holy prophet addressed people near the well abounding with the dead
bodies of the pagans: “You have now understood that the divine promise
has been fulfilled.”[^4]

As mentioned earlier, the holy Qur’an proves the different kinds of
man’s life. Concerning the vegetable and animal life, corresponding
indication was as it was shown but the indication per nexum is expressed
through verses which forbid the killing of others.

However, concerning the human life the corresponding indication comes
from the verses quoted above. And the indication per nexum comes from
the verses which condemns life like Noah who prayed to God to destroy
all the pagans, for their life jeopardized the spiritual life of others:

***“If you do not kill the pagans, they will lead your servants
stray.”*** ***(Surah Nuh 71:27)***

Besides, the Holy Qur’an refers to the relation between the two kinds of
spiritual and physical life. According to the holy Qu’'an, if man has to
choose one between the two, he should sacrifice the physical life and
choose the spiritual life. Those who live with the truth have always
this choice in mind like the combatants who fight in the cause of God:

***“Those who sacrifice the physical life for the spiritual one, must
fight in the way of God.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisa 4:74)***

Those who do not make this choice will suffer on the Last Judgment:

***“Why did we not gather provision for our spiritual life*****?”**
***(Surah al-Fajr 89:24)***

Another point mentioned by the holy Qur’an is that spiritual life is
more fruitful than the physical life. Thus, those who threaten the
spiritual life are more dangerous than the ones who threaten the
physical life:

***“Persecution is more grievous than slaying”*** or ***“Persecution is
more heinous than slaying”. (Surah al-Baqarah 2:191 & 2:217)***

Dissension includes the violation of spiritual life and religious
belief. One of the examples of dissension is disseminating false and
corrupted thoughts. Hence, it is far harder and more useful to combat
dissension than to combat crimes such as killing.

#### The Most Important Distinct Feature Between Physical and Spiritual Life

In the two previous parts, we talked about the two aspects of life. Now
the question is how useful this division may be to the understanding of
human rights. To discover this effect, one must understand the
relationship between the soul and the body.

The most important feature of the body is that it has different
conditions in different situations, for instance, the difference in
climate, race and geographical features of different people. Even the
way plants influence other things in a certain area is geographically
different. Sometimes it is observed that the plants with medicinal
properties grown in the tropical areas are void of medicinal properties
in other areas. Even a wise and experienced pharmacologist cannot say
for sure that a certain medicine has equal properties for different
people.

However, man's incorporeal spirit is never prone to climatic
differences. This spirit which may exist in the east exists in the west.
A spirit in the equator has the same features as a spirit in the South
Pole. The incorporeal spirit is bound neither to the earth nor to the
sky. However, it is on earth and in the sky. In other words, unlike the
body, the spirit is one, not plural; it is static but not dynamic. For
the same reason, there is no change in the spirit:

***“There is no change in the creations.”*** ***(Surah ar-Rum 30:30)***

If the spirit is only on earth, it cannot move in the sky while man's
spirit can find God in the sea and in the sky: “O you who are in the
earth and in the sky.” [^5] Because of this lack of boundary of the
human spirit, God says:

***“Wherever you tum, you see the face of God*****.”** ***(Surah
al-Baqarah 2:115)***

Now, the fruit of this discussion can be observed in legal topics. Human
rights are formulated within the realm of human body. Hence, these rules
are dependent upon different places. Thus, they cannot be universal.
However, religion, which is in the realm of the spirit, does not belong
to time and place. It is obvious that all the things associated with
religion, including legal-religious rules have the same characteristics.
For the same reason, the prophets have brought down the message of the
sublime religion. For the same reason, one can never reach a dogmatic
certainty in material sciences. Every day the world witnesses something
new founded on other propositions. However, religious concepts never
know decay and change.

#### Islam Condemns Suicide

More than any other religions, Islam has placed stress on the
prohibition of suicide. There is historical evidence that says, the holy
prophet said about someone, “He will surely go to hell.” Upon hearing
this, people were surprised and asked the reason because the person in
question was outstanding as a warrior and as a politician. Afterwards,
they learned that the person in question had committed suicide.[^6] The
right to life is so valuable that if ever anyone violates this right and
commits suicide will go to hell.

It must be noted that mental suicide is far worse than physical suicide.
It may not be imagined that Islam accepts such freedom of opinion.
According to other religions, man is free to choose his own way of life.
However, as mentioned earlier, the holy Qur’an holds that life is not
only man's right but also his duty. This is a precious gem in the hands
of man and he should try his best to guard it. It goes without saying
that the violation of spiritual life is worse than the violation of
physical life. It is interesting to note that committing physical
suicide is forbidden by certain religions but cramming the minds with
poisonous ideas is not considered forbidden.

#### Reasons for Forbidding Suicide and Homicide

Now we must see why suicide or homicide is forbidden. Firstly, it must
be said that even the angels considered the shedding of each other's
blood as a vile act:

***“Will thou set therein man who will shed blood?”*** ***(Surah
al-Baqarah 2:30)***

If there were no truth in what the angels said, God would not have
accepted it. God implicitly accepts this truth which shows that the idea
of homicide was vile and revolting. In later ages, other signs for this
prohibition were seen. For example, one of the promises taken from the
Sons of Israel was not shedding blood:

***“And when We took compact with you: ‘You shall not shed your own
blood.’”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:84)***

This promise is not particular to one single group, but belongs to all
religions. Retaliation used as a means to stop blood shedding is common
in all religions. Thus, the Holy Qur’an states retaliation with a view
to approving the previous holy books.[^7]

However, besides these common examples there are other reasons. The
prohibition of killing is one of the first commands of the holy Prophet:

***“Come, I will recite what your Lord has forbidden you; that you
associate not anything with Him, and to be good to your parents, and not
to slay your children because of poverty; We will provide you and them;
and that you approach not any indecency outward or inward, that you slay
not the soul God has forbidden, except by right.” (Surah al-An’am
6:151)***

In yet less limited realm, the killing of children by parents has been
forbidden. In the Age of Ignorance, some people killed their children.
There were so many motivations for this. Sometimes, they killed their
daughters, for they thought they would be ravished by the enemy in case
of invasion. Sometimes they killed their children in fear of drought and
hardship. In this regard, the holy Qur'an states,

***“Do not kill your children because of poverty . We shall provide you
and them.” (Surah al-Isra 17:31)***

Sometimes they killed their children before the idols to come close to
them. This indiscreet act was also prohibited by God:

***“Those who killed their children ignorantly suffered.”*** ***(Surah
al-An’am 6:140)***

The same prohibition is included among the conditions for entering into
covenant with women. The Holy Qur'an states,

***“Enter into covenant with those who do not kill their children.”***
***(Surah Mumtahanah 60:12)***

ln this part, one can resort to verses, which determine the punishment
for the killer. This is one of the reasons for prohibiting killing. Some
of these punislunents are spiritual and some others physical. Physical
punishments include retaliation or paying blood money. One of the
spiritual punishments for killing a believer is remaining eternal in
fire.

***“Whoso slays a believer willfully, his recompense is Gehenna,
therein, dwelling for ever.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisa 4:93)***

If anyone slays a believer for his faith, he is a disbeliever and his
recompense is dwelling in Gehenna forever. However, if he has slain him
not for his faith, he will dwell long in Gehenna.

The violation of others right to spiritual life incurs the selfsame
punishment. Those who lead others astray should repent of their deeds.
However, this repentance is accepted when they repair all the
destructive thoughts they have brought about. Thus, repentance is
considered as a solution for these people:

***“... be cursed by God and the cursers, save such as repent and make
amends, and show clearly- towards them I shall turn.”*** ***(Surah
al-Baqarah 2:160)***

To put it in a nutshell, Islam regards life as man's right and duty,
considering two phases for it: physical and spiritual; it prefers the
spiritual phase to the physical one. It considers certain punishments
for the violators of this right.

### Freedom

#### All prophets were freedom-bringers

To understand the message of the prophets, it is enough to present the
message by one or some of them. The reason is that the achievements of
the prophet were the same in many cases. In this regard , the holy
Qur’an uses shari’ah or minhaj:

***“To every one of you We have appointed a right way (shari'ah) and an
open road (minhaj).”*** ***(Surah al-Maidah 5:48)***

However, where there is talk of the main principles of religion, the
holy Qur’an states that all prophets transmitted the same message. For
instance, the al-Hijr

***“cried lies to the Envoys;”*** ***(Surah al-Hijr 15:80)***

***“The men of the Thicket cried lies to the envoys when Shu'ayb said to
them, will you not be God- fearing?”*** ***(Surah as-Shu’ara 26:176)***

We all know that the people in both places had then one prophet. That
the Holy Qur’an condemns the people's rejection of the Envoys shows that
all the prophets had one single message.

Another sign for this truth is that every prophet confirms the words of
the preceding prophets. This was one of the characteristics of the
prophets which shows that the main axis of the prophets’ messages was
the same:

***“And We have sent down to thee the book with the truth, confirming
the Book that was before it, assuring it.”*** ***(Surah al-Maidah
5:48)***[^8]

Now we shall consider one of these messages by Moses. After bidding the
people to worship the one God, that great prophet cried freedom to them.
This message was not for the freedom of the land and the economic
resources of Egypt. The purpose was freeing the Egyptians from the
bondage of falsity. Of course, if a people are freed, the economic
resources will surely be freed. This was the message of Prophet Moses:

***“O false Gods, deliver to me God’s servants.” (Surah ad-Dukhan
44:18)***

Pharaoh’s followers answered that they would not surrender to those who
were their own servants. It is clear that he did not mean that he was
the Lord of others. Pharaoh said,

***“I am your superior Lord.” (Surah an-Naziat 79:24)***

However, he did not mean that he was the master of other affairs.
Pharaoh and his followers were idolaters. For the same reason. Pharaoh’s
followers told him.

***“Will you allow Moses and his followers to ignore your Lord?” (Surah
al-A’raf 7:127)***

Hence, Moses demanded the freedom of others from this servitude,

***“That is a blessing thou reproachest me with, having enslaved the
Children of Israel.”*** ***(Surah ash-Shu’ara 26:22)***

So Moses meant that it is not fit to worship anyone but God and that all
human beings should be free from this bondage and that they should not
follow the man made rules.

In the works of the Innocent Imams, the message of freedom is clearly
discernible. The most obvious document in this regard is Nahj
al-Balaghah where Imam’'Ali addressees his son Mujtaba, “Be not servant
to anyone but God, for He has created you free.”[^9]

As is seen in this statement , true freedom lies in breaking from any
servitude but from God. For the same reason, Imam 'Ali finds his honor
in this kind of freedom, “O God, it suffices me to be Thy servant; this
is great honor for me to have Thee as my Lord.”[^10]

#### The Difference between Islamic Stance On Freedom and that of other Schools of thought

As pointed out, freedom lies in freedom from servitude of others but
Allah. However, the proponents of other schools believe that freedom
lies in man’s capability to choose anything. In their eyes, man is free
to choose any religion he desires, for they regard religion as an
ordinary thing. Thus, as man chooses his profession and residence, he
chooses his own religion . According to this belief, religion finds its
origins in the traditions and beliefs of people. However, in Islam, this
absolute freedom is servitude, for if man is free to choose whatever he
likes as his religion, then he falls into the pitfall of his desires and
follows them,

***“Has thou seen him who has taken his caprice as his god?” (Surah
al-Jathiyah 45:23)***

The implication is that man has to choose the true religion although he
is free not to choose any religion?

This different interpretation of freedom misguides causes the followers
of other doctrines. Now we shall discuss some of these issues. One of
these issues is political freedom. In the dark atmosphere of atheism and
egoism, political freedom means that people participate in the elections
and vote for anyone they wish and boast of this democracy.

However, in the bright atmosphere of monotheism, political freedom is
never limited to this. In this atmosphere, there is the talk of
leadership and representation. In addition, there is a fundamental
difference between the representation of Faqih and his deputyship. It
must not be imagined that Islam accepts democracy and that we can choose
the leader of the Islamic community with the votes of others. It is
never so. What the votes of people have part in is neither the
leadership nor his representation.

According to the Islamic thought, the Lord has chosen the qualified
jurisprudent to lead the Islamic community. The society accepts the
leadership of this leader with its vote as he himself accepts his
leadership but he has no part in placing him as a leader. Hence, he
accepts his leadership as a legal person. For the same reason, if he
issues a verdict, no one is allowed to violate it nor is he allowed to
violate it. So there is no difference between him and others as fair as
the observance of rules and laws is concerned.

Another difference is the kind of interpretation of opinion and
expression . In this regard, the Holy Qur'an states,

***“So give thou good tidings to My servants who give ear to the Word
and follow the fairest of it.”*** ***(Surah az-Zumar 39:17-18)***

On the other hand, the Holy Qur’an explains what the fair word is,

***“And who speaks fairer than he who calls unto God and does
righteousness and says, surely I am of them that surrender?”***
***(Surah al-Fussilat 41:33)***

Thus, although the Holy Qur’an bids others to listen to different
sayings and choose the fairest, it introduces the fair words. In other
words, it offers the general syllogism, “Freedom in choosing the fairest
word” it offers the minor syllogism "the nature of fair words". The
proponents of atheism do not pay attention to this minor syllogism and
think that man is completely free to choose his way.

The common point between the Islamic thought and the atheistic thought
is the general principle but it must be noted that the Holy Qur’an
explains the better world. Besides, this premise is itself a broad
premise, for the more delicate premise is mentioned in the Holy Qur'an
which may be called the narrow premise. In the narrow principle, a
better instance is indicated. And that instance is the word of the holy
Prophet (S.A.) which has been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an as a minor to
that broad principle:

***“I invite ye all unto God; with clear sight which I and he who
followeth me”*** ***(Surah Yusuf 12:109)***

On the basis of minor and major premise cited as broad premise, the
better word is inviting people unto God. In this verse, the holy Prophet
(S.A.) is introduced as being the one who invites people unto God. With
this narrow premise and through a new comparison, it can be concluded
that the holy prophet (S.A.) is the bringer of the fairer word.

However, the followers of atheistic thought accept only the broad
premise and neglect these two premises which are the central motifs of
that premise. It must be noted that all schools of thought believe
themselves to have the fairer words. Even the followers of Pharoah who
perpetrated numerous crimes believed themselves to be the followers of
the superior doctrine and warned their people that Moses and his brother
Aaron were determined to destroy that.

***“These two want to wipe out your most exemplary tradition.”***
***(Surah Taha 20:63)***

Another instance of difference may be observed in economic freedom. In
the open Islamic atmosphere, after enumerating the lawful and the
unlawful, it has been stated that everyone can be a master of his
economic achievements.

***“For men shall have of what they earn: and for women shall have of
what they earn.”*** ***(Surah an-Nisa 4:32)***

It must be noted that wherever the Holy Qur’an lays stress on a common
affair between man and woman, it enumerates it separately for them.[^11]
In most cases, the Holy Qur’an explains the common affair between man
and woman with a certain expression; however, in striking instances, it
employs a special expression for each of them. From this one can gather
that freedom of profession and economic independence are of paramount
importance, otherwise God would have said, “For everyone shall have of
what they earn.”

From the discussion on economic independence and lawful and unlawful,
one can perceive that in Islamic thought, economic freedom is
interpreted within the matrix of the servitude of God and respecting the
lawful and the unlawful. However, in materialistic thought nothing but
the economic considerations of man determine for man any boundary for
trading and economic policy of man. In view of this, the most unpleasant
transactions and the ugliest tradings are allowed in materialistic
thought, even if it jeopardizes the most decent moral and human
institutions.

The very difference may be observed in freedom of residence. In divine
thought, man is not free to travel where he likes and make his residence
wherever he wishes. Although the Holy Qur'an regards the earth as being
extensive, religious teachings warn us to make residence where we are
capable of preserving our religious values. This idea is implied in the
words of Imam Ali, “The best place of residence is the one, which can
tolerate you.”[^12]

For this reason, it is not essentially advisable to travel to a land
where one's religion is endangered. In other words, the freedom of
residence is acceptable as far as the spiritual life of man and his
original freedom are not threatened. However, in this case, the
adherents of atheistic thought do not see any boundary for themselves
and decide to settle by their materialist criteria. And they do not
accept that the moral and religious criteria can limit this freedom.

#### The Glorious Manifestations of the Qur’anic Attention to Freedom

Freedom as expounded earlier in this article is of great value in the
Qur’anic view. This value is such that the Holy Qur'an bids people to
worship before the symbol of freedom and undertake other worthy tasks
before it. That symbol is Ka’ba which is called Bayt al-Atiq (the
Ancient House). Some believe that this way of naming it is due to the
reason that the Ka’ba is ancient and historically valuable.

However, according to some tradjtions the Innocent Imam (A.S.) has
observed that this method of naming it is because no tyrants have
succeeded in conquering it.[^13] In other words, this house has always
been free. Hence, they have called it 'atiq (derived from ‘Atiq meaning
freedom). So, the Ka'ba can be regarded as the symbol of freedom.

Now let us see how the Holy Qur’an regards this symbol and induces
people towards it. On the one hand, the Holy Qur'an has bidden people to
stick to this symbol and glorify it.

***“And let them circuit the Ancient House.”*** ***(Surah al-Haj
22:29)***

On the other hand, it has commanded people to turn to a mosque in life
in which Bayt al- ‘atiq is located.

***“Turn then thy face towards the Sacred House.” (Surah al-Baqarah
2:144 & 150)***

Besides this eternal approach towards Ka’ba, many of man's actions are
related to this symbol. Most of the worthy acts such as praying should
be done towards Bayt al- ‘Atiq. Some of them like reciting the Holy
Qur'an had better be done towards this symbol. Reciprocally, the ill
acts should not be done towards this symbol and if so, it is generally
deemed offensive. So everyone is in one way or another associated with
this house of freedom. Even in the last moment of presence in this
earthly world, we should turn towards this house.

This deep attention to Bayt al- ‘Atiq and guarding it, means that the
Muslims ought always to struggle for their freedom and should not risk
heavenly freedom for enthralling enchantments. It is manifest that among
the most striking enchantments are man's engaging thoughts manifested
within the matrix of the teachings and laws of philosophical, moral,
legal and political schools and drag some groups from here to there.

#### The Difference between Genetic Freedom and Legal Freedom of Man

In studying the freedom of choice, we have to distinguish between
genetic freedom and legal freedom. By genetic freedom is meant that the
choice of path and opinion is not compulsory in the Cosmos. Religion is
a set of particular beliefs, which may never be imposed upon anybody. If
the principles and tenets of religion are not achieved for a person,
religion goes beyond its realm. Hence, the Holy Qur'an states,

***“There is no compulsion in religion.”*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2:256)***

Besides, by legal freedom is meant that man is not obligated in any
affair as he is not free. In scientific terms, the cosmos is neither
within the realm of determinism nor is it within the realm of
libertarianism.

However from this genetic freedom, one cannot conceive that man can move
towards any direction in the choice of opinion and that God may not
regard his desire. This is never so! That genetic freedom is
interpretable vis­a-vis the religious duties.

***“The truth is from your Lord; so let him who pleaseth believe; and
let him who pleaseth disbelieve.”*** ***(Surah al-Kahf 18:29)***

Hence, what is accepted by the Lord and belongs to Him is right; but
some people move towards untruth on the basis of genetic freedom.
Numerous Qur’anic verses have determined the boundary for these two
freedoms and have drawn man's attention to accept religious duties.

***“Hold ye fast that which We have bestowed upon you with strength.”
(Surah al-Baqarah 2:63 & 93; Surah al-A’raf 7:171)***

So in the choice of truth or untruth, man must not only accept the truth
but also guard it with strength of determination. If someone accepts the
untruth after complete investigation and in complete awareness, and
refrains from accepting the truth, he is ranked among those against whom
the holy Prophet (S.A.) has issued the order of preliminary jihad. And
if the preliminary jihad is not accepted by some, everyone surely
believes that these people dwell forever in the fire of Gehenna and do
not have before them any path of salvation.

Therefore, it must be noted that although the Lord has created man free
in choosing religion, he has explained for him the path of growth.

***“Indeed truth has been made manifest distinct from error.”***
***(Surah al-Baqarah 2:256)***

In view of Islamic world vision, every belief of man in the Resurrection
Day and the purgatory is manifested in a special way. And man is a
creature who is constantly traveling from the world to purgatory and
from the purgatory to the Hereafter. In the meantime, apostasy and
atheism are manifested in the shape of snake and scorpion. This shows
that ill thoughts are equal to venomous poison. And it is obvious that
the Lord does not allow man to choose the poison and perish himself.

In Qur’anic terms; such a person flames his soul as the devourer of
unlawful things fill their souls with fire.[^14] In this regard, the
Holy Qur’an states,

***“They eat nothing but fire into their bellies.”*** ***(Surah
al-Baqarah 2:174; Surah an-Nisa 4:10)***

It is clear that the Lord does not allow man to have freedom in the
choice of flower and fire or honey and poison. Religious freedom is
never accepted in the Qur'an or by the Islamic culture.

#### The Relationship between Life and Freedom

In Qur’anic view, freedom is the prelude to life. All the freedoms
allowed to man are meant to induce man to lead a worthy life. In order
for man to achieve a worthy material and spiritual life, he should be
free and in order to achieve freedom he should relieve himself from the
bond of lusts. All people are the hostages of their own conducts. Only
those who are ranked among the upright and the believers shall be free
from this bond.

***“Every soul for what it earned is held in pledge save the people of
the Right hand.”*** ***(Surah al-Mudaththir 74:38-39)***

Now we should see how the upright people have relieved themselves of
this bond. The answer to this question can be found in the words of the
holy Prophet which he delivered on the last Friday of the month of
Sha'ban. “O people! Your lives are imprisoned by your conducts; so save
your lives by repenting your deeds.”[^15]

So the genuine freedom of man lies in relieving himself of his sins by
repenting and they may be ranked among the upright people by virtuous
acts. This is the freedom, which can be the prelude to original and
sublime life.

### Justice

#### Analytical Definition of Justice

You have frequently heard that justice means “putting things in their
right place.” Some have presumed that this definition is replete with
ambiguity for it is a general axiom whose purports are not quite clear.
However, it must be noted that a definition becomes ambiguous when the
totality of it is questioned. However, if a definition has no
shortcomings in this respect, it is not ambiguous although its purports
may not be clear. To decipher the purports, one must refer to the
source, which is responsible for adjusting them.

When a lawyer intends to know justice , he must be aware in recognizing
its purports . To this end, one must understand the phenomena, and the
place of the phenomena in the universe; one must also know how to put
each phenomenon in its place. If like everyone else involved with
justice a lawyer takes the three steps mentioned above, he can adjust
that general axiom to clear purports.

After all, one must be aware that justice is not hypostatized although
it is an evaluative concept. The implication is not that justice does
not really exist in the universe, but fabricated by human mind. Like all
other evaluative concepts, justice is derived from the universe and
abstracted from genetic affairs.

It is appropriate now to give an instance at this juncture. When some
people gather together with the intention of undertaking something
purposeful and organized, their situation may be interpreted as a
manifestation of a living human person. A human person has a head (the
center to command the limbs) and limbs (the parts of taking command,
each of which has a particular function.) With this choice and
abstraction, one can choose among them one as the head to lead others
and the rest of the limbs as parts engaged in a particular function.
With this choice, the terms *head* and the members come into being. This
is true for justice. In the universe, each phenomenon is in its place
and busy with a task appropriate to its situation.

This harmony and proportion bespeak the justice of creation. One
abstracts this from genetic affairs and with this choice, any time each
member of the community the instance of which was given earlier performs
his function, the situation is regarded as being just. Although justice
is an evaluative concept, it runs within the stream of existence;
however, in evaluative issues, the concept is a hypostatized one and in
genetic affairs, a real concept.

With this in mind, it becomes evident that justice is not a concept
replete with literal ambiguities. It cannot be said that justice in the
creation of God holds a particular sense or that the human justice is
different. It must not be imagined that social and political justice
have two distinctive meanings. In addition, it cannot be accepted that
these have difference of meanings.

The truth is that justice is a spiritual ambiguity and holds the same
meaning in all this. The difference of purport never agrees with the
conceptual unity . To clarify this point, one can consider science.
Science is of different kinds such as hypostatized sciences or real
sciences; immediate or intuitive knowledge; or the knowledge, which is
identical to nature and the one going beyond it. These differences come
from the difference of purports rather than that of concept. In fact,
knowledge is not a sheer concept. However, in different cases, it has
different manifestations. In other words, knowledge is a spiritual
ambiguity. The same case is true for justice.

#### Understanding and Feeling Justice

At times this question comes up: how can one feel justice? Can one
understand justice with tangible and experienced signs? If not, how can
one understand justice in real life or in the realm beyond the human
mind?

First, it must be said that justice is not of the perceptual concepts to
have perceptual signs. One cannot experiment justice in the laboratory.
Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) states, “Truth is not of the experimental signs through
which one can distinguish between right and wrong.” [^16]

However, this does not mean that one cannot distinguish between just and
unjust. To understand right and just is not confined to sense and
experiment. This Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) has shown us. The eminent Imam has
stated in one of his letters, “Those who reside in my government, and
joined the Umayids, saw and heard justice and placed it in their hearts,
but did not accept it.”[^17]

From this pithy statement, it is perceived that Imam Ali had treated in
his time in a way that people could understand justice. In other words,
a just government can introduce justice to people by showing the
evidences of justice. By virtue of this reason, on the basis of a
statement by the same venerable Imam, the best servants of God are those
who can make understood justice by their deeds. “The nearest servants to
the Lord are those who are more truthful than others though to their
detriment, and stick to truth more than others, though there might be
harm in it.”[^18]

Although it is hard to be adorned with justice and truth, it is the best
way possible to introduce it.

Basically, the politician who can be the representative of justice with
his foresight shall prosper . Hence, reason is no other than justice. In
defining the sage, Imam ‘Ali has given the same statement as for
justice. It was asked of Imam: “Define the wise man for us.” The Imam
said, “The wise man is he who puts everything in its right place.” Then
the Imam was asked, “who is ignorant?” the Imam replied, “the same thing
I said about the wise man.”[^19]

This means that the reverse image of the wise man mirrors the ignorant.
Definitions of this type, which are sometimes observed in the sayings of
the innocent Imams, are polemic definitions, albeit of the superior
polemic. In this type of definition, an affair is not clarified by genus
or differentia but by its likes. In the definition cited above, the same
polemic method is used. Of course, the Imams have defined concepts by
genus and differentia elsewhere.

With attention to the function of justice in policy making, one can
perceive why justice is a better concept for some rulers. For instance,
Imam Ali in response to a question said, “Justice puts things in their
right places and puts them in categories; justice coordinates the public
policy and gives benefit to those who are forgiven: so justice is nobler
and superior.”[^20]

In other words, from charity, one can benefit in time of tumult but what
should be done by a ruler or a policy maker is justice. In view of what
was said, justice is like reason and practical wisdom.

Now that our discussion has diverted to this point, it deserves note
that one of the secrets of the needs of man for innocent Imams lies in
this very fact. If they are not innocent, how can one choose among the
numerous evidences something as justice? If the innocent Imam does not
show justice within the matrix of evidences, how can one recognize
justice? As understood by what Imam ‘Ali said, one can understand the
right with utter simplicity.

However, when applying the truth, who but the innocent Imams can
exercise the truth and offer it to people? “The truth in description is
of great expanse but in practice, it is of the narrowest realm .”[^21]

Nobody censors Plato, Aristotle or other sages as to why they have not
presented a practical instance of their ideals?! They are scholars who
do not have chastity in practice although they have sublime knowledge.
However, the society expects an innocent Imam to present a practical
instance of right and justice and truth so they may not fail to
understand the truth. And if it is not so, how can one understand those
general concepts?

#### Explaining Justice within the Realm of Human Powers

As was mentioned earlier, there are many things to say about right and
justice. Some scholars have embarked upon describing corporeal qualities
and human powers. Based on their experiences, observations, testata, and
those of others, they have concluded that human powers may be classified
under three categories. And although they are not unrelated to each
other, the boundary of each one of them is separate from that of the
other.

The first category is the intellectual and scientific power of man. The
second category consists of the power of attraction. And the third
category is the power of dispelling. Based on this division, the human
powers do not go beyond these three categories for each one of the human
behaviors is of two kinds; either they are associated with intellect and
perception which is related to the first category or with conduct which
belongs to the second and third categories.

Each one of these powers has three stages: moderateness (tafrit), middle
or immoderacy. The intellect is sometimes within the realm of
moderateness. In this state, the individual is slow. Sometimes, this
power is in the stage of immoderacy, which renders one sharp. If this
power is in the middle stage, it means that the individual has
intellectual balance and understands each affair properly; neither does
he delay in understanding nor does he go beyond what is necessary, that
is he does not beat about the bush.

This state of immoderacy, that is precocious understanding and untimely
wandering of the mind is called *jurbuzah*. As a slow person does not
reach anywhere, the person with jurhuzah does not achieve success.
However, the one whose intellectual power is balanced, merely accepts
rational affairs, champions it and does not wash his hands off it so
easily. The one who possesses such a power (and in this respect), he is
in a state of justice and intermediacy is called a sage. And this
central kernel is called theosophy which apart from absolute science is
juxtaposed with theology an Gnosticism.

Now let us speak about the second category, that is attraction. This
power can also have one of these three states. Sometimes man strives to
achieve his aspiration and inclines towards it with greed. This state is
called *shirah*. Sometimes he procrastinates in reaching his aspiration,
which is called *khumul*. However, if the power of attraction is in a
state of equity, it is called iffat (chastity.) Of course, this method
of naming is of the instinctive affairs.

These three states are respectively called *hirs* (greed), *tabdhir*
(extravagance), and *sikhavat* (generosity) in financial affairs. Thus,
the central kernel of power of attraction is generosity and chastity. If
someone achieves this central kernel, he may give away all his wealth,
this act being called generosity, not extravagance.

To ascertain what is generosity or extravagance deserves special
alertness. Especially to ascertain this, one has to accord special
attention to the stages of this state and the relation of every
individual to those states. For instance, there are many stages for
generosity and each individual has one of these states. It is evident
that ascertaining that central kernel plays an essential role in legal
and moral perceptions.

In the third category, that is the power of dispelling, the case is the
same. Sometimes an individual wishes to obliterate all the affairs he
considers unpleasant. This state is called *tahawwur* (audacity). And
sometimes he keeps silent in the face of tyranny and finds himself hand
tied in dispelling the misfortunes of life. This state of moderateness
is called *jubn* (cowardice). However, sometimes the individual adopts a
middle manner and observes equity. This state is called *shuja* *‘at*
(courage). Here as in the second category, the states are different.
Someone may have a lot of courage and some other person a little of it;
at any rate, he is in the same central kernel of the power of
dispelling.

It is good for the individual to be in these three central kernels, that
is theosophy, generosity, chastity and courage as someone who walks on a
straight path and avoids walking in the bypasses. When man is in the
main path, he shall definitely have different speeds. The one who is in
the path should have different speeds as his situation necessitates.
Therefore, equity does not mean stability or equality, but on the same
path, going with speed is like equity. In this way, our leaders are the
innocent Imams who manifest real equity with their conducts. If someone
wishes to distinguish between the boundary of immoderacy and middle and
move with balance along the path, they have to walk in the ways of those
eminent Imams.

In view of what was said, justice is the outcome of the balance of the
three human powers and can never be counted as an independent identity.
The one who walks in the main path, is called just. If someone is in the
middle of two powers, this means what is used in philosophy and major
jurisprudence.

However, in minor jurisprudence, this does not have the same meaning;
the just one is he who puts aside the prohibited and does the obligatory
affairs. For instance, a person may not be courageous but minor
jurisprudence regards him as being just whereas philosophy and major
jurisprudence do not consider him so. Therefore, it must be noted that
what we stated concerning the meaning of justice, is derived from the
sayings of the sages and is common among them.

Of course, there have been and are people who reject this categorization
and gives such criticisms: it is not obvious that every affair may have
middle or immoderacy. Also, extravagance cannot be beyond the realm of
justice. However in view of what was stated, it became evident that what
they criticize does not hold any similarity with sayings of the sages,
but fabricated by their minds.

The great sages, those who lived before Islam or before it, were all the
followers of the Abrahamic prophets and these criticisms are not true
about their sayings. As you observed, in the eyes of the sages, as soon
as man steps into the main path, speeding up or walking slowly does not
oppose to justice. And sometimes walking with speed is good. Before
stepping into this path, the rule of “the best of affairs is the middle”
is prevalent. However, after it, sometimes

***“Hasten then to precede each other in everything good”*** ***(Surah
al-Baqarah 2:148; & Surah al-Maidah 5:48)***

appears. All these are conditional upon the fact that man gets lesson
from the evidences of justices as manifested in the sayings and conducts
of the innocent Imams and distinguish his way from them so he may not
fall into the pitfall of miseries and substitute immoderacy and middle
with justice.

#### Justice is All-Pervasive

All human beings, no matter what language, tradition or culture they
have, long for and love justice. That is why the Holy Qur’an has
introduced the essence of everyone as being truth and justice.
***“The Lord created you and bade you to justice.” (Surah al-Infitar
82:7)***

This justice in creation manifested itself in the way that God bestowed
upon the universe whatever it required for existence and gave it
whatever it needed to achieve its end:

***“Our Lord is He who created everything and then guided it.”***
***(Surah Taha 20:50)***

So, justice and equity are located within the existential structure of
everything and all creations have the essence of justice. By essence, no
one goes beyond the realm of justice unless they assist the anti-essence
factors. The Lord, who is in control of everything, has placed the
straight path before the Cosmos and all creatures by nature strive for
this straight path.

***“There is no living creature but He holdeth it in His control by its
forelock. Verily my*** ***Lord is on the Right path.”*** ***(Surah Hud
11:56)***

By virtue of this reason, the Holy Qur'an bids everyone to uphold
justice:

***“O ye who believe! Do stand firmly with justice. Witnesses for God's
sake.” (Surah an-Nisa 4:135; Surah al-Maidah 5:8)***

Here, the Holy Qur’an talks about *qawam* not *qaim*. This indicates the
difficulty of upholding justice. Man should uphold justice through
experience so he may reach from *qa’imiyyat* to *qawwamiyat*. There is
many a time when man is seized with doubts concerning upholding justice.
If someone overcomes these doubts and upholds justice, then he shall be
the upholder of justice. It is through this process which man becomes
impelled to ignore his personal benefits and avoids kinship in the way
of justice. Here, for the sake of kinship, man ignores the truth.

***“When ye speak, be just, though it be against a kinsman.” (Surah
al-An’am 6:152)***

Here is why revenge does not become an excuse for tyranny.

***“And let not hatred of a people incite you not to act equitably.”***
***(Surah al-Maidah 5:8 & 2)***

Hence the Holy Qur’an enjoins man not to use friendship as a way of
immoderacy and enemy as a way of ignoring. This is the best way possible
to avoid blindness arising from greed and animosity.

As everyone strives for justice, the Holy Qur’an bids everyone to
justice. In his letter to Malik, Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) wrote, “Do not
tyrannize over people like a voracious wolf, for people are of two
kinds: either they are your brethren or your equal in creation.”[^22]

This command of Imam Ali (A.S.) embodies all the teachings of the Holy
Qur’an which bids the holy Prophet to uphold justice towards the
non­Muslims. For instance, every time the people of the book find legal
differences, and step into a Muslim court, the Prophet is given
authority to either solve their problem himself or send them to the
court of the people of the book.

***“If they come unto thee judge between them or turn aside from them:
and if thou turneth aside from them, then never shall they harm thee in
any way, if thou judge, judge thou between them with equity; verily God
loveth those who deal equitable.”*** ***(Surah al-Maidah 5:42)***

The very same Qur’anic principle is prevalent in our jurisprudence and
well indicates that the Holy Qur'an values all-pervasive justice.

#### Justice: One of the Goals of the Prophetic Missions

Th Holy Qur’an states that upholding justice is one of the goals of
prophetic missions. However, it must be noted that the Holy Qur’an
states this along with two major principles. Firstly, the Holy Qur’an
regards the Cosmos as being on the axis of justice - we shall treat this
later - secondly, the upholding of justice is considered as the
intermediate mission of the prophets, not their ultimate goal: Thus, on
the axis of truth, justice is not located in the beginning to be
considered as the beginning nor is it located in the end to be regarded
as the ultimate goal.

As to justice being one of the goals of the prophetic missions, the Holy
Qur’an states,

***“Indeed sent We our apostles and clear proofs and sent We down with
them the Book and the scale that people may establish themselves in
justice.”*** ***(Surah al-Hadid 57:25)***

However, it must be noted that the talk has been diverted here after
some processes. Prior to this, the Holy Qur’an considered God as the
upholder of justice and introduced the angels as the witnesses to the
oneness of the just Lord,

***“God is witness that there is no God save Him and the angels and men
of learning (too are witness) maintaining His creation in justice, there
is no God save Him, the Almighty, the Wise.”*** ***(Surah Aale Imran
3:18)***

In this verse, the oneness of God is united with the justice of
creation. In other words, as God is the upholder of justice, it shows
the oneness of God, for if this origin was organized before this, the
harmony, order, and justice would leave the cosmos and everything would
decide its own fate. Then, the law and justice did not manifest
themselves so that God founded His work upon it, but justice is begotten
by His work: and He is the Heart of justice. As the scholars see this
justice, they testify to the oneness of God. This means that justice is
not located at the beginning of that line.

On the other hand, justice is not the ultimate goal of the prophets. The
Holy Qur’an regards for middle men justice as the goal of prophetic
mission. However, for the seekers the main goal is that they should tear
the dark veils and penetrate into the world of light.

***“This is a Scripture We have revealed unto thee that thereby thou
mayst bring forth mankind from darkness unto light.”*** ***(Surah
Ibrahim 14:1)***

There is a big difference between a just man and a luminous man. The
just man upholds justice for he regards it as his own duty; but the
luminous man is himself the source of justice and justice is manifested
by him. One can understand this difference in the comparison between the
*mujtahids* and ordinary men. An ordinary man tries to create within
himself *ijtihad* through study; but as to those who have attained to
the degree of *ijtihad*, the qualities of *ijtihad* are manifested
within their thoughts and souls, the same qualities others attempt to
create within them.

What was said becomes manifest in the question and answer of the holy
Prophet. The Great Prophet was asked, “Although you are infallible, why
are you so humble before God?” The Prophet answered, “Should I not be a
grateful servant of God?” This means that the holy Prophet did not show
humbleness in fear of divine punishment, but that he was humble before
God because he had the sense of gratefulness.

Therefore, justice is a goal for those who are in the middle of the
path. He, who attains light, does not consider a goal the upholding of
justice but he is the personification of justice. Concerning such a
person, the Holy Qur’an states,

***“And set for him a light wherein he walketh among men.”*** ***(Surah
al-An’am 6:122)***

Whereas the people in the middle of the path try to reach through
justice a light by which they can live with people.

#### Justice Runs through the Entire Universe

One of the sweetest fruits of Islamic thinking is that justice is not
confined to one or several creatures but runs through and with the
entire universe, even the Exalted Nature of the Almighty. It is
appropriate to quote an example from the Holy Qur’an. In the Sura of
Kahf (Cave), there is a mention of two gardens, which are both lush and
green and bear many fruits. The Holy Qur’an states in this regard,

***“Each of the gardens gave its fruit and withheld naught thereof.”***
***(Surah al-Kahf 18:33)***

It must not be imagined that the use of the word “withheld” is
metaphorical. It is neither metaphorical in word nor in transmission; it
is neither intellectual metaphor nor is it literal metaphor.

The garden is indeed just. The idea is that it perfonns its duty in the
cosmos. All other creatures are founded upon justice like these two
gardens. However, the beings endowed with intellect are bound to be
genetically just and religiously responsible . It is everyone’s task to
accept justice. Even the angels and perfect men are bound to perform
this duty. Despite the fact that the angels are free from sins, they
shall be chastised if they shirk their responsibility.

***“And one of them who should say: Lo! I am a God beside Him, that one
We should repay with hell.” (Surah al-Ambiya 21:29)***

Even the great Prophet of Islam - who is the most perfect man - is bound
to this genetic and religious duty. On the one hand, he is located
within the realm of existence and is born and dies like everyone else
and on the other hand, he is bound to uphold justice like everyone else,

***“If thou ascribe a partner to Allah, thy work will fail and thou
indeed wilt be among the losers.”*** ***(Surah az-Zumar 39:65)***

So, whatever exists in the world, is bound to uphold justice and that
justice runs through the universe. Now this question comes up: if so, is
the Lord bound to this must? The answer is that the Lord is just and
never tyrannizes: however, there is a substantial difference between the
acceptance of justice on the part of God and on the part of others.
About any creature but God, we say, “He deserves justice.” But about
God, we say, “Justice should be meted out by God.” The idea is that God
never tyrannizes, it does not mean that He should uphold justice and
should not tyrannize.

The Lord, unlike other beings, is not confined to the realm of musts.
And no superior system may impose anything on Him. Whatever God does is
pure justice, for He is pure perfection. And every must, justice springs
from Him. The same proof that demonstrates the truth of God, shows His
qualities and then evaluates His actions on the basis of these
qualities. Therefore, God and existence are all the upholders of
justice.

This justice running through the entire universe shall never cease to
be. For instance, Some people believe that the lack of justice arises
from the social deprivations. As people are deprived, they are thirsty
for justice: and if their deprivations are gone, there is no more need
for justice. This is extremely wrong for they have stated that justice
is not only the goal but also the duty of every creature in the
universe. This duty should be done under any circumstances.

Besides, justice and deprivation have two different relationships with
each other. Sometimes this relationship is based upon precaution and
sometimes upon dispelling. Sometimes, justice is meant to combat the
existing deprivations with the present situation. But this does not
cause the other duty, justice to be forgotten which involves creating a
background and escape from the society and the aloofness of the society
from ills. Anytime the superior society is inflicted with a misfortune.
it struggles against it through justice to eliminate it. And any time it
does not have any deprivation, it strives to eliminate the ills by
upholding justice. Therefore, it is everyone’s duty to uphold and
champion justice and justice constantly runs through the warps and wefts
of the society.

#### The Union of Justice and Moral Issues

It must be noted here that although the materialistic schools have
accepted the relationship between legal and moral issues, this bond is
considered to be confined to nature and material. However, in the
Islamic thinking, this bond is firmer in the Hereafter. At any rate, in
this part, we shall deal with the relationship between justice, love,
equality. and charity.

Let us begin with the concept of love. Do love and feeling leave no room
for justice? If the members of any society love each other, will there
be any talk of justice? Those who give a negative answer to this
question, have stated that any time there is any mention of love, the
tyranny is not obliterated but everyone tries to give his rights to
others. For instance in a family brimming with love and affection,
everyone gives his financial benefit to others with utter enthusiasm and
risks their own comfort for the comfort of others. In such a family,
there is never any talk of justice. Now if we round our society on the
basis of love and charity, we shall not need to talk about justice.

The answer is that love is a moral value which although it has union
with rights, it has a different realm. On a longitudinal axis, rights
come first and then morality. If someone succeeds in respecting the
moral issues, he shall then step into the realm of moral affairs. The
Holy Qur'an constantly reminds us of this sequence. Firstly, it bids us
all to justice and then to good works.

***“Allah bids to justice and good-doing.”*** ***(Surah an-Nahl
16:90)***

If we look at the relationship between love and justice from this angle,
the status of each of them is clarified and there will be no room to
bring up the previously mentioned discussion.

Now it is the time to study the relationship between justice and
equality.

This engaging slogan has long been common that the laws should be done
equally towards people. This slogan has constantly drawn the oppressed
people and has been used as an instrument by the policy makers and the
tricksters. But the truth is that there is difference between justice
and equality. To explain this difference, we had better choose a star
from the sky of Imam ‘Ali’s words.

During his reign, a group went to him and said, “Why do you distribute
the common wealth equally among people?” They thought that if the Imam
gave more to the powerful group of the society, they would protect him.
However, the great imam answered, “Do you want me to win victory at the
price of tyranny?”[^23]

To understand this, one must know that in the Islamic thinking
properties are of different kinds to three of which we shall refer. One
group of properties should be distributed equally among people. The
second group should be distributed differently among people. The third
group should be distributed among some people.

Equality runs in the society where everyone performs their duty shoulder
by shoulder. For instance, the booty should be distributed equally among
those who have fought side by side. However, if among them are some who
have taken greater pains, they shall have more booty. Thus, if some
people have shirked responsibility during the war, they will not benefit
from the booty. As you see the three different type of distribution are
seen in the three instances given above which include equality,
difference and allocation.

With this explanation it becomes evident that Imam Ali believes the
common wealth to belong to the first category and believes it to belong
to all members of the society and considered equality in the
distribution of it. Now once again observe his answer, “Do you want me
to win victory at the price of tyranny?” This answer embodies some
lessons.

The first lesson is that the end does not justify the means. To achieve
victory - even if the victorious ruler is Imam Ali, one cannot choose an
inappropriate path to violate the truth. Imam Husayn repeats the same
thing when he says, “If someone tries to reach his goal through sin, he
shall lose way before everyone else and plunge into pitfall.”[^24]

Sin can never be a way towards victory but it is a bypass.

***“But they will meet deception.”*** ***(Surah Maryam 19:59)***

The lesson we get from the sayings of Imam Ali. “Indeed it is not proper
to bestow one’s wealth upon those who do not deserve it. This raises the
status of the one who bestows but debases him in the Hereafter. That is,
it endears him among people but puts him to shame before God. He who
squanders his wealth and bestows it upon those who do not deserve, God
will make them ungrateful and he will not win their friendship. Thus, if
some day something awful happens to him and he happens to need them,
they will be among the most censorious friends.”[^25]

So in distributing properties, one does not have to be too extravagant
or too generous. *Tabdhir* means spreading the seeds in a place like a
heath from which there will be no fruit. Apart from this minor
syllogism, he propounds the major syllogism. “He who puts wealth in an
inappropriate place, he shall be endeared by people but will be humbled
before God.”

From this syllogism, it is concluded that he who squanders his wealth
will be put to shame before God. This is the outcome of the first
lesson. The first lesson was this; that from tyranny one cannot attain
his end. Now the manifestation of the same truth can be observed. A
ruler might be held dear through tyranny by powerful people, but he will
be humbled before God and if one day he takes recourse to these powerful
people, he shall realize that they are the worst friends. And they will
save him from solitude. The secret lies in this that the cosmos is
governed by God and if God does not will, man will not be dear in the
eyes of people even if he shows great generosity.

The same leader who so firmly manifests equality, elsewhere shows that
justice does not equal equality. As was said earlier, there are
different ways to bestow one’s wealth. Now, an instance shall be given
concerning the funnction of the Imam. One of his disciples came to him
and asked for some part of the booty. Although he was a friend of the
Imam, the Imam stated:

“Indeed, this is not yours but the property of the Muslims and the fruit
of their swords. If you had participated like everyone else in this
battle, you would have some. However, if it is not so, none of the booty
shall reach you.”[^26] As you see, allocating wealth here is to those
who have had a part in gaining it and there will not remain a chance for
propounding the slogan of equality.

In the end, it must be said that the slogan of equality is equal to
truth and justice when there is talk of the wealth of the first group.
Yes, everyone is equal before the law but the law of equality is not
equal for everyone. It is not in harmony with intellect and equity that
the people with intellect and diverse physical and spiritual interests
and benefits to have equal laws. It cannot be accepted that the members
of the society shall be rewarded equally, given the amount of pain they
take. Hence, equality is not equal to justice and cannot be replaced by
it although it might not seem pleasant to some people.

Here, it is good to quote Mohaqeq Tusi, “There must be two bases for
every writing and saying; they must be understood by the common folk and
the elite alike.” Those who chanted the slogan of equality and justice
and drew people behind them, did they not think that speaking of a
classless society before the scholars, would entail so many criticisms?

Now let us see how justice is unified with charity. Firstly, it must be
admitted that in the Islamic thinking, there are two aspects for
charity; one is moral, the other being legal. Its moral aspect manifests
itself when man cooperates with others and assists them in good works.
However, the legal aspect of charity which is our concern is manifested
when there is the question of the basic needs of man. That a Muslim
should answer the basic needs of the needy is not among the
jurisprudential or moral issues for the verses touching it descended in
Mecca; and we know most of the Meccan verses did not involve
jurisprudential issues. One of such verse is this:

***“Give the kinsman his due, and the needy and the wayfarer.”***
***(Surah al-Isra 17:26)***

Although some believe that this verse is descended in Medina, there is
no doubt that the other verse concerning this matter is Meccan:

***“Those in whose wealth is a right known for the beggar and the
outcast.”*** ***(Surah al-Ma’arij 70:24-25)***

From this verse it is concluded that God, in the very beginning days of
advent of Islam, has considered a right for the poor which is divine and
should be respected. The one who gives this right should not think that
he has done it. He should know that it belongs to the poor: not a right
alms-giving (zakat), attonement (kaffiirah), khums (one fifth of one’s
income) and other jurisprudential payments. Even another verse which was
descended in Mecca before the aforementioned verse speaking about alms,
deals with this kind of payment and not jurisprudential one:

***“Prosperous are the believers who ... at the almsgiving are active.”
(Surah al-Mu’minun 23:1-4)***

This means that anyone endowed with genius-whether intellectual economic
etc. benefits as far as his power allows. But he who does not have such
genius, if he obtains what he deserves and then falls into shortcoming,
the powerful people are bound to pay him the divinely recognized rights.
The secret of this matter lies in this: that the Lord has bestowed
genius upon some groups to test them and he who has provided his
divinely recognized rights will become victorious in this test. If some
people do not do this, they are not among the worshippers and the
Almighty God thus states about them,

***“Have they not traveled in the land and seen the nature of the
consequence for those who were before them? They were stronger than
these in power, and they dug the earth and built upon it more than these
have built. Messengers of their own came unto them with clear proofs (of
Allah's sovereignty). Sure Allah wronged them not, but they did wrong
themselves.”*** ***(Surah ar-Rum 30:9)***

This is a great lesson so that we may not forget that if we do not pay
divinely recognized rights, our children will suffer deprivation and
grief. And is there any wise man who wishes to fall into depravity? All
parents after death are aware of the fate of their children and gladden
with their joy and grieve with their sorrow. Then, the powerful groups
should observe charity as a legal duty not a moral one so that they may
not share in the sorrow of their children.

***“And let those fear (in their behavior towards orphans) who if they
left behind them weak offspring would be afraid for them. So let them
mind their duty and speak justly.” (Surah an-Nisa 4:9)***

Thus, the superior aspect of charity is its legal aspect which is in
complete harmony with justice. It must never be supposed that the paying
of religious taxes such as *khums* (one fifth levy), *zakat* (religious
tax), and *kaffarah* (atonement), is the only duty of the Muslim in
eliminating social needs. The Lord esteems the geniuses and talents and
has bidden everyone to benefit as much as he can; and He has also bound
the supervisor of the common wealth to answer the needs of those who
have less genius.

### The Principles Of Rights As Reflected In The Sahifah Sajjadiyah

In the last part of this article, it is good to cast a glance at the
glorious book of Imam Sajjad (A.S.)

Through this, one may learn useful legal lessons and perceive how the
difference of principles of rights of one person affects his approach
towards rights. Now let us try to present in isolated titles the
principles of human rights as reflected in the legal treatise of that
great Imam.

#### The Philosophy of Human Rights

The legal treatise has been included in the works of some great
scholars. The original treatise as narrated by Abu Hamza Thamali and
other narrators, includes the philosophy of rights and legal cases, that
is in the same year the Late Shaykh Saduq has stated in *Khasal*[^27]
and has also come in *Tuhaf al-Uqul*[^28] and not what is stated in “Min
la Yafzaruh al-faqih.”[^29] The text included here begins with legal
cases and does not include the first part of the treatise, that is the
philosophy of rights.

The philosophical statement of the rights included in this treatise is
such that the Imam begins with his world vision. In this introduction,
Hazrat Sajjad states, “Know that your Lord has some rights towards you
which control in every move you make, in the place where you are, in the
place where you sit, in the part which you move and in the tool which
you apply. Some of these rights are greater than the others and the
greatest is that which has been made incumbent upon you and it is the
essence of all other rights. Then, the turn comes to the rights which
have been made incumbent upon your soul, the rights from the head to the
toe.”[^30]

From this statement, it may be concluded that the foundation of all
rights is oneness of God. Freedom, justice, order etc is not the goal of
human rights, but procedures for achieving that ultimate goal, that is
visiting the Lord. Before reaching this goal, one may ask oneself.
“Where am I going?” However, when you reach that destination, you have
transcended the borders.

If this foundation is excluded from the rights, there remains only a
little necessity and unnecessity. As they extract rose water from the
rose, there remains only a scentless thing. In the ninth chapter of the
celebrated book of *Isharat* of the late Muhaqqiq Tusi, he passes
judgment on the words of Avicenna. That is, after employing so many
proofs and reasons to prove the necessity of mission, he asks what is
the goal anyway? If the goal is reaching after an organized way of life,
one can reach this without inspiration as some communities have reached
it.[^31] Of course Avicenna has brought up the discussion of prophecy
free from this criticism in the mystical discussions of that book and
has considered the goal as finding mysticism of the people and visiting
the Lord.[^32]

He who worships God, will make this worship as a means to visit God,

***“O ye who believe! Be mindful of your duty to Allah, and seek the way
of appoach unto him.” (Surah al-Maidah 5:35)***

He who does this is indeed the one who is standing on the ladder, he who
climbs up the ladder, if he forgets the ladder and moves it away, will
fall down from the height. The pious man as well climbs up the ladder to
reach intuition and never forgets worship. At the same time, he does not
regard it as his goal. All the worships are the firm bonds with God. He
who seeks after the ultimate goal, must tie to this string,

***“He who believeth in Allah has grasped a firm handhold which will
never break.” (Surah al-Baqarah 2:256)***

The Holy Qur’an shows us why the right of oneness of God is prior to all
other rights. The Holy Qur’an regards the entire universe to be the
divine grace and every creature-from the angel to the heaven to be the
signs of God. This is relevant to the principle of existence. However,
from the viewpoint of the knowledge of God, the Holy Qur'an states that
the knowledge of God runs in the knowledge of everything, that is before
anything else, one has to know God. This truth is thus stated in the
Holy Qur'an,

***“Verily, Allah is visible through everything.” (Surah al-Haj
22:117,*** ***Surah as-Saba*** ***34:44, Surah al-Fussilat 41:53, Surah
al-Mujadilah 58:6)***

To understand this, it must be noted that in this verse, the letter
*ala* has been used not the letter b*a*. In the statement, “God is
witness to everything”, the idea is that God is cognizant of it. But in
this verse, there is the mention of the vision of God before anything
else. On this basis, in the Surah of al­Fussilat (Distinguished), the
same verse is included with the view to putting aside doubt with the
vision of God. If the meaning of this verse is that God is cognizant of
everything, has it been enough to eliminate the doubts of those who were
in doubts? Let us cast a glance at that verse in the Sura of al­
Fussilat, (Distinguished)

***“Doth not thy Lord suffice, since He is Witness over things? How! Are
they still in doubt about the meeting with their Lord?” (Surah
al-Fussilat 41:53-54)***

Aye, man recognizes the light first before knowing other things and then
he comes to know that thing. Then, there will remain no doubt as to the
existence of light. On this basis, the knowledge of God runs in the
knowledge of eveything else. Therefore, the proving of other rights in
the universe and their knowledge arises from proving the existence of
God which is the main concern and from theology and monotheistic world
vision.

The delicate point derived from this matter is that the signs of the
same statement of Imam Sajjad are present in other parts of the
treatise. After this introduction, the turn comes to proposing legal
issues. Imam Sajjad reminds us that the foundation of all rights is
oneness of God. This reminding is manifested in two ways. Sometimes with
the phrase of “*billah nasta'in*.”[^33] And sometimes with the phrase of
"there is no power save God."

Having expounded the philosophy of rights, the venerable Imam teaches
the rights one by one and some of these rights are superior to some
others as the philosophy of rights is dominant in all of them. Now we
shall refer to four legal cases to show glimses of what is stated in the
fifth and sixth chapters of the book.

#### The Right of God over Men

The first right stated by the venerable Imam is the right of God towards
the servants. “But the greater right of God is this that you worship Him
and take none as His partner. So every time you uphold this right with
sincerity, God has made incumbent upon Himself to render you needless
and guard whatever is dear to you.”[^34]

In this regard, the minor syllogism comes from the general principle of
the Holy Qur'an. The Holy Qur’an has asked us,

***“Doth God not suffice his servant” (Surah az- Zumar 39:39)***

And we have answered,

***“You are our guardian.” (Surah as-Saba 34:41)***

The Imam states that the efficiency involved is that man should pay
God’s right which is the greatest right. And that right includes
believing sincerely in God. He who has God before his eyes in everything
can entertain this pure oneness in his heart. It is appropriate here to
quote *Kashaf al-Ghata*. Like some other jurisprudents, he believes that
“bi hawlillah” (I rise with Allah’s power) is the continuation of the
prostration prayer. He believes that “I sit” along with: “I rise with
the power of God” indicates that man needs God in things which demand
power and energy and he is dependent upon Him in actions like
sitting.[^35] Hence, man is in constant need of God and he who remembers
this need, will have in mind the right of God. Hence, the worshippers
whether sitting or standing need say that.

If someone reaches this stage of gratefulness to God, then all his
*dhikrs* (remembrances of Allah) are like prayer and all his deeds are
prayer and worship. There is a hadith that says, “He who has God in mind
constantly is like one constantly praying.”[^36] The Holy Qur'an says
something similar,

***“Those who are constantly praying.” (Surah al-Ma’arij 70:23)***

It must not be supposed that in this verse, there is talk of the timely
worshippers. That idea is suggested in this verse,

***“Those who guard their prayers.” (Surah al-Mu’minun 23:9)***

Baba Tahir’s quatrain suggests the same idea, “blessed be those who are
constantly praying.”

#### The Right of Oneself over Oneself

In another part of the treatise, Imam Sajjad speaks of the right of
oneself over oneself. In the Islamic thinking, man is not his own owner
so he may treat himself the way he desires. This prayer all the prophets
sing, “those who know no benefit for themselves, no harm, no death, no
life and no resurrection.”[^37]

Then it may be asked why Moses said to God;

***“I am the only master of myself and my brother.” (Surah al-Ma’idah
5:25)***

Of course it is probable that the meaning of the verse be such, “I am
the master of myself and my brother is the master of himself.” In
answer, it must be said that here, there is talk of religious ownership
not genetic ownership. Moses speaks to God and asks Him whether he is
the master of himself and his brother is the master of himself or that
everyone is their own master and no one can draw them to God. But what
has come in the prayer of all prophets is genetic ownership; namely that
man is not genetic owner of himself, therefore he does not have any sort
of right and must pay his rights.

#### The Right of Non-Muslims

Now we shall talk of the last part of that treatise. As you observed, we
were determined to present some of the manifestations of the principles
of Islamic thinking, and we do not consider even a drop of that sea.
Therefore, we shall talk of the last part, “The rights of the
non-Muslims (who are with you in this land and live in shelter of the
Muslims) are that you accept from them whatever God has accepted from
them; and accomplish whatever God has promised them. You do not have to
be cruel to them and you have to leave them with the promises they have
made; and decree as God has placed between you and them. You do not have
to be cruel to them and you have to observe whatever God has placed as
their rights; because the news has come to us that the holy Prophet
said: I am the foe of those who are cruel to the non-Muslims with whom
they have made promises.”[^38]

You see how the things talked about concerning justice and Islamic
conduct are prevalent as to people in other religions in this part of
imam’s teachings. In other words, he who tyrannizes an infidel, has
shown animosity towards the holy Prophet. These types of teachings
clearly show that Islam is an all-pervasive religion which has had a
pleasant behavior towards people of different religions and never needs
the teachings and principles of other religions in this regard.

[^1]: Mafatih al-Janan, Deeds of Friday Night

[^2]: Bihar al-Anvar, Vol.7, chapter 16

[^3]: For example, Surah al-Baqarah, verse 18 &171; Surah al-Anfal 8:22

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.8, chapter 1, p.187, tradition no. 18

[^5]: Mafatih al-Janan

[^6]: See: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.2, chapter 12, p.98, tradition no.28

[^7]: See: Surah al-Maidah (5:45-48)

[^8]: Also Surah al-Baqarah (2:97), Surah Aale Imran (3:3&50), Surah
al-Fatir (35:31)

[^9]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Letter 31, p.128, part 87.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.74, chapter 15, p.42, tradition no. 23 and
Vol.91, chapter 32, p.92, tradition no. 6

[^11]: As a similar instance, see: Surah al-Hujurat 49:11

[^12]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Maxim 442, p.189

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 96, chapter 7, p.58, tradition no.16

[^14]: See Surah an-Nisa 4:10

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 93, chapter 46, p.356, tradition no. 45

[^16]: Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 53, p.141, part 123

[^17]: Ibid., letter 70, p.148

[^18]: Sharh-i Ghurar wa Durar, vol. 2, p.448

[^19]: Nahj al- Balaghah, Maxim 235, p.171

[^20]: Ibid., Maxim 437, p.189

[^21]: Ibid., Sermon 216, p.105, part 2.

[^22]: Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 53, p.137, part 8.

[^23]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 126, p.56

[^24]: Kafi, Vol.2, p.373, narration no.3

[^25]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 126, p.57

[^26]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Maxim 232, p.112

[^27]: Abwab al-Khamsain ma Fawqah, p.564, narration no.1

[^28]: The chapter on the words of Imam Sajjad, first tradition

[^29]: Vol 15. (Al al-Bayt), chapter 3, p.172, vol.26, chapter 3, p.241

[^30]: Risalat al-Huquq, Majmal al-Huquq, p.7

[^31]: Al-Isharat wa al-Tanbihat, Vol.3, chapter 9, p.374

[^32]: Ibid., Vol.3, chapter 9.

[^33]: Risalat al-Huquq, Haqqullah, p.9

[^34]: Ibid.

[^35]: Kashaf al-Ghata, p.294, line 1

[^36]: Imam Baqir (P.B.U), Wasa’il al-Shi’ah, book of Salat, chapter 1,
Al-Dhikr chapters, tradition no. 5.

[^37]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.13, chapter 4, p.82, tradition no.9

[^38]: Risalat al-Huquq, Haq al-Zama, p.37


