Individual Rights In Islam
==========================

**Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Khamini’i**

Freedom is too broad a concept to claim definition, the truth of which
can be best perceived by human conscience and soul. The most limited
definition for freedom is not being in a state of slavery and the
broadest one is not remaining in chains of servitude.[^1] This article
is concerned with the definition of freedom particular to man in general
and the explanation of individual freedoms in particular.

The use of the word freedom, which has traveled from the realm of
philosophy and law to that of politics, is paradoxically used in
different connotations, and sometimes lacks a stable political status.
Hence, this spiritual definition of freedom is used as a political
weapon.

One of the most important points of our discussion is to study the exact
definition of words. One of the difficulties of encountering the clashes
between ideas and opinions is the ambiguity one may encounter in case of
undefined words. In addition, these lexical common points can lead to
logical fallacy and sophistry.

Words such as right, human being and human rights, freedom, justice and
tens of other words are of this sort which are frequently talked about
and for which there are no certain definitions. That is why instead of
solving the problem, they only intensify it.

At this juncture, a fundamental question comes up: Who is this human
person? And where is he for whom rights are considered?

In some of the cultures and civilizations - either in the past or in the
present - man was defined in very limited terms, which only included a
certain nation or a certain ethnic group or followers of a certain
religion excluded other human beings. Instances of this are the idea of
the Greek people about the non-Athenians (calling them Berbers) and the
idea of the Romans about the non-Romans and the idea of Semite
contemporary Western countries about the non-Europeans or the non-whites
or the Semite tribes, this being implicitly stated in their holy book,
the Talmud, that regard the non-Jews as having human dignity.

Hence, when discussing freedom or when interpreting the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and other international documents of the
United Nations or the international compacts and agreements, the concept
of human rights should be first clarified by the two parties and the
signers or the users of this word should agree upon an exact definition
for this concept.

To complete our discussion here on the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights
in Islam on freedom, we need to mention that *man* in Qur'an and in
Islam is used to mean man without regard to any limitation such as race
or color or religion or culture. The word *nas* (which means people) in
Qur'an includes all people in the world and it is not important whether
they are Muslims or whether they have a certain race or not.

The holy Prophet always stated, “All people are the descendents of Adam
and of one family and race. Adam was from dust and pride does not become
of the children of Adam and in practice, he did not make any distinction
between the Arabs and the non-Arabs, between Muslims and non-Muslims and
treat everyone equally.”

Freedom at First Glance
-----------------------

Every living creature is endowed with a natural yearning for freedom.
Plants need freedom to take in light and heat in order that they may
have their roots take in food and grow although there are natural
impediments which prevent them from earning this freedom or even from
reaching natural growth.

Every creature struggles for breath, food, water, mate and an arena for
a comfortable life, regarding itself rightful to provide these things
and struggle towards this end. In addition, according to the natural law
or the laws of jungle he fights the rivals or tries to remove the
obstacles. And ultimately due to the last resort which is force and
domination, right is distinguished from wrong and justice from injustice
and one reaches one’s natural freedom and others lose it and reconcile
oneself to limited freedom.

Man has the same instincts as well like any creature obeying natural
laws. If there were no humane elements such as conscience, religion, and
tradition, he would pursue his animalistic desires and follow the law of
force for survival.

Hence, it is natural that all creatures share a yearning for freedom.
Therefore, freedom is an important principle in nature although it is
rarely found.

Freedom within Man’s Realm
--------------------------

At a deeper level, man is supreme compared to other creatures. Besides
his carnal and vegetable desires, (or in philosophical term, animal and
vegetable self) he has the rational soul, reason, power of distinction,
and most importantly, the willpower for organizing his human desires and
the power of choice for choosing the best and the most rational things.

In other words, the willpower logically leads us to the existence of the
inherent freedom in man, for freedom must have inherent roots. Moreover,
if freedom is not inherent in man, it is meaningless to grant him
willpower.

In short, man is a creature endowed with special dignity and rational
soul and voluntary power of choice. Hence, it should be said that man is
the only creature on earth that has two kinds of natural and inherent
freedoms:

First: the same instinct for freedom, which exists in all creatures just
as the instincts for eating, sleeping, passions, and rage. The child is
an instance of this whose behaviors like animals are all based on
instinct and without the interference of will power[^2] or based on
natural or conditional reflexes.

Second: the freedom particular to man which due to his inherent dignity
and respect for his reason and this power and divine gift in the Holy
Qur'an is described as heart and from this power man is bound to
revelation and religion and deserves the title of being addressed: that
is why all human beings and animals have rights but assignment is
particular to man.[^3]

The interesting point is that in Islam and in most traditions and
customs, the freedoms of the second group (human freedoms) are
juxtaposed with the first group freedoms (wild freedoms), putting them
aside or limiting them. From this one can realize that in human and
social communities, the limiting of wild freedoms (the freedoms shared
by man and animals) is in fact to the gain of man. Since the beginning
of civilization wherever there is a society, which considers the general
welfare, the animalistic freedoms are limited and laws have taken the
place of force and domination.

Man’s Freedom in Islam
----------------------

According to Islam, the second group freedom, which is particular to
man, is the main basis of social, political and even individual life of
the human person. In addition, the Divine laws (known as Shari’ah) are
fixed based on this external reality for man. A perfect man is he who
transcends the realm of animal life, uses his inexhaustible power and
attains worldly and spiritual bliss or in philosophical terms, the
second inherent perfection and the second nature of the creation of
Adam.

All manners and traits of man must emanate from his basic natural
dignity; in other words, man should have the commendable traits he is
expected to have. ·

In the story of the creation of Adam in the Qur’an, when God tells the
angels, “I am setting in the earth a viceroy.” The angels reply, “What,
wilt Thou set therein one who will do corruption there, and shed blood,
while we proclaim Thy praise and call Thee holy?” Then God answered,
“Assuredly, I know that you know not.”[^4]

In other words, Adam is distinctive from other creatures because God is
setting in the earth Adam and his descendents as his viceroys; it is
manifest that in Islamic and Qur’anic sense, Adam is a creature endowed
with a faculty and aptitude to be God's viceroy and not a wild one. In
addition, the goal of Islam is to build the very same chosen man, not an
animal one.

Islam and Man’s Instincts
-------------------------

Islam agrees to the first group freedom and the rights relative to it to
a large extent, for it is the selfsame gift granted by the Lord to man:
however, as I said earlier, Islam limits it to individual and social
welfare; for instance, if it says, “Eat and drink” it also enjoins
extravagance in these acts.

The nature of animals is such that they do not know extravagance and
unlike man, they act on their unconscious nature, which is harmonious
with their welfare and real needs, and the general system of nature.

This limitation exists even in the realm of liberalism and absolute
liberalistic freedom is a clear matter, for with regard to the common
freedom of animals and the special freedom of man, they mix it with
civil and penal laws of each society and inevitably limit it.

Hence, the limitation of freedoms is not particular to Islam or to other
religions inasmuch as anywhere any society is established based on a
social convention, freedoms are limited.

Limitations and Boundaries
--------------------------

This freedom is generally limited or confined in two ways; first, by the
traditions and habits of the people of the society, even in the farthest
and wildest regions or in the oldest human societies. Thus, a kind of
limitation has existed differently in every society in each age.

In sociology, these traditions and habits are referred as being social
norms. And the binding guarantee of abnormalities in any society or
social group is the penal behaviour of people (or the majority of
people) towards abnormal person. Secondly, the limitation of nature by
law namely the same laws made by people as deriving from experience,
thought, culture, traditions and habits of that society.

In no society, especially in the civilized ones, individual or
individuals have the right to freely take whatever their instincts
covet.

The right to private property or the respect for the family unit and
other civil and human rights, exist in fact to limit the reckless
animalistic freedoms and man’s wild instincts. Man has constantly
regarded this limitation as prevention from invasion and violation and
social welfare and an emblem of his urbanity.

The result of these two freedoms is the freedom that makes Islam
meritorious of man. Indeed, instinct is the innate programming
characteristic of man, enabling him to respond appropriately to
particular stimuli; the wisdom and the rational soul check and guide it.
In addition, a well­ appropriated combination of these freedoms arising
from these two forces in man guide man and his actions, enabling him to
perfonn his humane-divine acts.

Backgrounds of Freedom
----------------------

Theoretically speaking, the freedoms of man can be catalogued under six
categories, each one of which is observant of one aspect of his freedom
and a manifestation of that freedom.

### One-Freedom Vis-A-Vis Others

In this kind of freedom, people do not have the right to hurt the
physical health of their wives and children, and others' properties,
secrets or personal affairs. Civil rights and parts of the penal rights
are relevant to this kind of freedom.

### Two-Freedom Vis-A-Vis The Society

This kind of freedom constitutes great respect for the life, property,
family, dignity of people in the society, giving each individual freedom
of residence, movement , religion, opinion and expression and the right
to participate in the government towards his own destiny.

### Three-Freedom Vis-A-Vis The State

Although in an equitable humane and religious system, the State is the
representative of people, due to the authorities of the State and the
political and legal authority it exerts on the individuals, the
individual and social freedoms of people should be studied in isolation
and ensured. As we shall see, the basis of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights is laid on these relations.

Besides the rights noted above, we should include the right to the
choice of administrative and political representation, the right to
comment on the political approach, the right to participate in public
supervision, the right to protest against the vices of the authorities
and the likes.

### Four-Freedom Vis-A-Vis The International Community

Every nation is entitled to the enjoyment of public rights such as
independence, leadership, natural resources, defense against the enemy
or any form of invasion or retaliation against the enemy, the
instituting of relations with nations or other nations or private rights
such as the right of movement, the seeking of asylum, and complaint in
judiciary centers.

These four rights are recognized by Islam and the common rights in use;
however, there are two other rights in Islam, which form the fifth and
the sixth category.

### Five-Freedom Vis-A-Vis The Almighty

Although man, due to inherent poverty in his essence and in his
acquisition of natural qualifications and in his real relations is
dependent on the Almighty, this man due to his power of choice is
entitled to choose his destiny and accept or reject the divine
religion[^5] and no one shall be compelled to accept Islam; even after
the acceptance of Islam and all the commitments imposed by it, man finds
himself in the horizon of allowed freedoms.

### Sixth-Freedom Vis-A-Vis Oneself

As man is made of different psychological and internal elements, (for
instance, the Qur’an refers to three souls, the despotic soul, the
reproaching soul and the peaceful soul and psychology points that human
psyche is divided into three parts, the id, the ego and the superego)
there is automatic relation between the clash of these internal souls
with man’s inherent power of choice and man is responsible to himself
and his conscience serves as an interward mediator, he is free towards
it. That is why some are virtuous and others are unrighteous. That is
why some accept moral values while others reject them.

In Islam, freedom embodies a vast body of meanings and realities, which
may be discussed under the six categories noted above, and none of them
can obstruct any other one. These freedoms can be divided into two main
human aspects, soul and body, namely the physical and spiritual or
mental freedoms.

Physical liberty includes whatever belongs to him[^6]; hence, slavery,
detention, exile, prevention of life and free movement are the violation
of man’s physical freedom and the violation of the right to property is
the violation of the freedom of property. \_

Spiritual liberty includes the freedom of thought, will, choice, and
destiny, opinion, science, art and traditions.

These two liberties are generally interpreted as civil freedoms,
individual freedoms, and the freedom in enjoying fundamental rights, the
will and choice of individual, social destiny and political freedom.

Study of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
--------------------------------------------------

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was provided in 30 articles by
the Western European countries, approved by the General Assembly on
December 1945. The Declaration was actually influenced by post
revolutionary mottoes of France and the United States, itself arising
from influence of Islamic culture on the West. A large portion of the
declaration is allotted to different forms of freedoms.[^7] In fact,
stress is on the first group freedoms, the freedoms common among men and
animals, although in the preamble, it talks of the inherent dignity of
man and the inalienable rights. The comparison between these rights and
the rights in Islam reveal certain facts.

The freedom of thought, opinion, religion or participation in elections
or complaining is particular to man, but the rest of the freedoms cited
therein are common among men and animals. The important thing neglected
or forgotten is the spiritual freedom, which we refer to as *liberty*
and Islam places particular stress on it.[^8]

Physical freedom relates to man’s carnal desires; although it is
essential as breathing, and eating, it is not very instrumental in the
spiritual perfection of man,and in escalating him from the common level
of being to perfection. By natural disposition, every creature seeks
freedom of marriage, residence, movement, property, occupancy, and gets
enraged when these rights are denied him and combats oppression and
violations.
However, man’s special freedoms such as the freedom of expression,
thought, belief, religion, and the right to participate in his social
and political destiny known as political rights, are but vaguely
adumbrated in this declaration despite its apparent statements.

There are two ways for voluntarily entrusting political rights and
iindividual leadership to a certain individual, State or group:

1. **Open and Wholesome Atmosphere** - in which each individual relying
on his reason, conscience and experience can exercise his will; for
instance, he may choose an eligible individual or individuals endowed
with a wholesome soul, and belief in justice-and good will as
authorities.

This is the same way emphasized by Islam and the Qur’an. The Holy Qur’an
enjoins people to think wisely before they choose and enjoy the
historical experiences. It even attributes the acceptance of the divine
religion and prophet to the conscience, reason and intellect.[^9]

2. **Unwholesome atmosphere** - In which the deceitful religious or
political demagogues lay before people's feet the enchantment of
propaganda, and inculcations and false promises. In Islam, this kind of
leadership is called hidden servitude and those who drag people behind
them like slaves are called the lords of people.

The Holy Qur’an scolds those people of the book who take their rabbis
and monks as their lords and addresses them thus;

***“Come now to a word between us and you, that we serve none but God,
and that we associate not aught with Him, and do not some of us take
others as Lords, apart from God.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:64)***

In another verse, God chides those that have forsaken God, placing the
chain of servitude of their masters on their necks and says;

***“They have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords apart from
God” (Surah at-Tawbah 9:31)***

and there is a hadith as a protest against the despotic Amavid
government: Itakhezu din alah dowalan wa ibadellah kholan.[^10]

According to the Qur’an, this type of enjoying the will and choice is
hidden force and is thus condemned as people are pushed to an imposed
way in the name of democracy.

With a keen glance, we can find the forestalling of freedom in two ways:

1. By force, namely by imposing one’s will on others which is, in
jurisdiction, called coercion or aversion, rendering void any contract
thus agreed on and in international custom, illegal duress is condemned
and void.

2. By directing people’s benighted minds to a trajectory which is
nothing but mere mirage: however, Machiavellian demagogy makes it look
like a clear stream, goading people into the vortex of that otiose
wasteland.

This unconscious force and the clandestine forestalling of freedom are
generally found in most countries noted for their democratic manner. The
mass media take from people the power of telling right from wrong, and
evil from good, and drag them on under the banner of democracy. This
apparent existence of choice is, in fact a kind of lordship over them.

Lordship means that the Lord decides and exerts his will in every
affair. This existed in the form of master vis-a-vis peasant in the
Iranian rural system before the Islamic revolution.

However, the Islamic Shi’ite Imamate (political leadership), despite
what the foreigners had in mind, is based on the free choice of people
and this rulership is based on alliance (the will and the free choice of
people in an open horizon and without discrimination of any kind) and
compulsion is not allowed therein.[^11]

In this kind of free choice and will, the mental state of people should
be at peace and for the same reason, Islam and the Qur’an bid people to
free thinking and reasoning before making a choice and commends the
intellectuals and regard only those who choose the best they hear as
‘abd, namely the true believers.[^12]

On the contrary, the perversion of people’s thoughts from the right path
and true expediency to unlawful goals are called bandits, those who
impede the path to nature and the right path in the Qur’an, considering
chastisement for them.

One of the problems with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights lies
in its preamble where it talks of the inherent dignity and equal,
inalienable rights of man, but they are without equal basis to explain
why man has inherent dignity, for the probation of such dignity seems
impossible without philosophical or inherent or reasonable basis and
anyone can reject them and as long as the origins of these inherent
traits are not made clear, the function of laws-which are the
subdivisions of ideology-shall not be made clear.

We know that such a claim is completely logical and acceptable in Islam,
for the root of this dignity lies in the viceroyship of man granted by
God who has put the crown of nobility on man’s head.

Hence, the inherent dignity of man is the main basis for granting rights
to man. His advantages can be taken into account, he can be given ample
freedom in order that he may determine his own destiny. Or the human
beings should be equal in rights and dignity[^13] and nothing sch as
race, color, sex, language, religion and political opinion as well as
nationality, the social status, wealth, birth or any other status[^14]
can disturb this equality or no one can hold others in slavery[^15] or
subject them to torture.[^16]

However, the probation or the fonnulation of such rights or committing
others or expecting them to accept these laws from others is impossible
without a philosophical or religious basis and this shortcoming still
exists in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

After all, words such as right, man, freedom, dignity and the likes have
not yet been properly defined and their boundaries have to be detennined
by the States. That is why the Western States in the attitude of the
Greeks and the Romans denounce rights of others and relates man to the
people of Rome (or any country populated with white people) and freedom
to a kind of slavery.

By comparing the Islamic stance on spiritual and political rights with
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights one can understand that
despite the deep Islamic stance on human freedoms, what in practice is
proposed at international level as human freedoms is ambiguous and in
practice and in theory, they pay scant attention to them in
international laws and policy: in fact they are political playthings for
players in political arena although people are apparently free and
freely go to the polls.

Individual Freedoms in Islam
----------------------------

The concept of liberty in Islam is so comprehensive that it arouses
wonder and praise in all scholars: in this brief article, the writer
strives to explain liberty to the best of his ability.

It must be noted that on the basis of the same inherent dignity granted
by the Almighty, and the same viceroyship of man granted by God and the
same freedom particular to man the violation of which is not allowed.
Islam recognizes its ultimate aim and the aim of other religions as the
liberating of man, because the inherent dignity is impossible without
freedom. In this regard the Holy Qur’an states,

***“The prophet of the common folk, whom they find written down with
them in the Torah and the Gospel, bidding them to honor, forbidding them
disonor, masking lawful for them the good things and making unlawful for
them the corrupt things, and relieving them of their loads, and the
fetters that were upon them.” (Surah al-A’raf 7:157)***

In this verse, the fundamental mission of the holy Prophet is introduced
as bidding people to honour, forbidding them dishonour, and making
lawful for them the corrupt things and relieving them of their loads.

Unlike the Declaration of Human Rights of France and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the concept of freedom in Islam is not the
corollary to the bloody revolutions in Europe or the response to the
oppression of people for their wishes, but basically it was per se an
impromptu revolution for granting rights to man although none of the
civil, urban. continental or international situation of that day-the
great empire of Pesia had surrounded the world from both sides and the
Roman empire from the north-were not in harmony with this revolutionary
concept.

Besides, the depth of freedom in Islam far more transcended the carnal
or material freedoms. The freedom of self from the self includes the
freedom of human self from the animal self and the civilised self from
the uncivilised self. Hence, people were relieved of national and racial
prejudices, of imitating the false customs, and of the corrupt bonds, of
the passions, ignorance, rage, jealousy, avarice and egotism.[^17]

In Islamic and humane concept, freedom regards rebellion and carnal
desires as prisons; true freedom lies in refraining from them.[^18] For
instance, a train freely running along the endless tracks is contained
by the tracks although it is apparently free. The freedom of the train
lies in the freedom from the tracks. Similarly, the man who is
incarcerated in the dungeon of his passions, rage, sleep and food and
knows himself free is not in fact free but imprisoned. And his freedom
is achieved when he steps beyond new horizons and into the vast realm of
humane-divine light, thus relieving himself of animalistic nature which
is to man an open foe.

Now that we have briefly talked about the vast concept of freedom in
Islam, we shall deal with the individual freedoms in Islam, and sections
of its legal and jurisprudential principles. However, before embarking
on discussing these freedoms, we deem it necessary to elaborate on the
terms *rights* and *freedoms*.

In the works of the outstanding Shi’ite jurisprudents, there are useful
and extensive discussions on the definition of right and the difference
between it and decree. However, it is beyond the scope of our brief
study. Right may be shifted from its owner to others but decree may not
be transferred to others unless by law.

Some of the rights set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights are regarded as decree which may not be shifted to others neither
by the owner himself nor by others.

One of these rights is the right to life (Article 3) which deserves
respect and observance in Islam and most of the valid laws of the world
and even the person himself cannot destroy it. Hence, in Islam suicide
and some other related subjects are crimes and liable to punishment. In
the preamble of the Universal Declaration, the rights are called
inalienable. If a decree is inalienable, it is no longer a right.
Besides, some of the rights mentioned therein may be entrusted (like
property) so the use of decree is null and void.

One of the individual rights of man is that he shall not be held in
slavery (article 4 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
article 12 of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam). This is a
fundamental right in Islam and a jurisprudential principle (Asalat
al-Huriyyah) and has been mentioned in a hadith.[^19] Also, another
hadith by Imam ‘Ali, says, “Worship not any one but the Almighty: indeed
God created everyone free.”

This testifies to the fact that man is the master of his own destiny and
no one can hold him in slavery or arrest him without legal sanction.

Based on this fundamental principle, everyone-men and women- has the
right to live freely and enjoy the divine blessings. However, on a legal
basis, the enjoyment of natural resources and wealth is clear in Islam,
for according to the clear sayings reflected in the Holy Qur’an and in
hadiths, these resources are created for the sole benefit of man in
order that they may use them as much as they need.[^20] However, in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, it is neither explained nor is it
clear.[^21]

Another right of man is the right of movement and residence,
nationality, or their dissolution. In addition, everyone has the right
to choose any profession he desires.

These rights are clearly explained in the Cairo Declaration of Human
Rights in Islam and the Islamic jurisdiction is filled with laws
concerning these freedoms. There is a hadith that says, “The best
residence is the place, which accepts you.”[^22] As a poem says,
“Paradise is where there is no perturbation.” In addition, regarding
freedom and will power, the jurisprudents have said, “People are the
masters of their belongings.”

Respect for private property is so strong and clear in Islam the need
for explaining them is obviated. It has made some of the jurisprudents
recognize the right to property as private property and regard public
property as an exception to it.[^23]

There are limitations for private property in Islam as well as in
reliable rules. There are times when ownership seriously hurts others or
the society and therefore, legal limitations are natural in many
societies.

The freedom to choose a profession exists in Islam in its best form.
Based on primordial nature, Islam recognizes profession as a principle
for man and regards unemployment a malady and against the laws of
nature. It encourages people to work and provide for their family and
reproaches unemployment.[^24]

Employment is an obligation in Islam as far as it does not endanger the
family members and overwork to earn more comfort for the family is
highly commendable, though not necessary.

Although man is free to choose a profession, a legal limitation
prohibits working beyond one’s ability. This prohibition exists
regarding the profession forbidden by law, which is hurtful to the
society or engaging in beggary, which does not accord with the exalted
dignity of man.

Another natural right approved and encouraged by law is the founding of
family. Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights says,
“Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race,
nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family.”
Paragraph three of the same article says, “The family is the natural and
fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by
society and the State.”

Islam highly recommends the founding of family, considering it a vital
component of the society; however, it builds marriage on the basis of
inherent principles executed by the observance of human dignity to
ensure its durability and regards divorce as the ugliest acts.

The only condition for marriage is the existence of balance between the
two parties in morale, thought and personality without limitation of any
kind due to race, nationality, and family with the exception of religion
which is not mentioned in article 16 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

As Islam states that all religions preceding it are lawful, it entitles
man to form a union with a woman of another religion,[^25] for in such
case the harmony on the part of man-whose duty is to provide for his
wife-will be consistent.

In other individual rights, on the level of legal and religious basis,
Islam is pioneer to other systems of rights and accepts it as a logical
and natural form.

Freedom of Opinion
------------------

Another freedom is the spiritual and human freedom not found in other
creatures; it is interpreted as the freedom of thought, conscience and
religion in article eighteen of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights.

The reason for the inclusion of this article in the Universal
Declaration and the attention of the Europeans to such freedoms in the
last two centuries is the pressure exerted by the church and the monks
on the beliefs and thoughts opposite to the Torah, the Gospel and the
beliefs of the church which entitled itself to combat heresy and things
such as alchemy, witchcraft, and sorcery and wielded considerable power
in medieval and early modem times and put them to apprehension and trial
by burning them at the stake or making them repent.

Basically, the church opposed reason and man’s capability to interpret
the bible and regarded this act against faith and combated it. And no
one could encounter the natural issues of the world but with a heart
brimming with faith and no one had the right to be a non-Christian and
the church exerted all its might to christianize all the people and send
them to paradise.[^26]

With the advent of the French Revolution, the collapse of sovereignty
and feudalism and the emergence of the bourgeois and the decline of
power and sovereignty of the church in Europe particularly after the
emergence of Protestantism and the bloody battles between the two
parties and the Declaration of Human Rights in Europe, these nations
collapsed yet in another way, falling from extravagance to shortcoming
and went to the point where everyone found enough freedom to change
their religion and to think the way they wished.

Consequently, under the influence of this culture, freedom of religion,
thought and opinion is included in the Universal Declaration. As Islam
is a religion of moderation, it is far from extravagance. Islam entitles
man to think any way he wishes and knows no limitations for his thoughts
and opinions; yet, ill-founded thoughts bound to hurt or destroy the
society and disturb the general order are invalidated by law. In
addition, whatever contrary to this is an oppression against the social
welfare and thus against logic and law.

In article 22 of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam, the
Muslim countries entitle man to the enjoyment of freedom of thought and
opinion and these freedoms are banned when they disturb the general
order or hurt the public opinion.

Freedom of Religion
-------------------

Absolute freedom of religion mentioned in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights is the aftermath of the misinterpretation of religion by
the European intellectuals. Religion is ill- defined in the West. They
look at it from a sociological perspective. On this basis, religion is
personal, heartfelt and therefore a matter of taste; and everyone has
the right to preserve it for himself just as some people are interested
in music or a sport: Western interpretation of religion is sometimes
heard from the easterners who opine that the diversity of belief is to
be respected.

However, religion-in its objective and subjective entity-and in Islam
(which regards religion as the inherent law in man) lives in the minds
and hearts of people, but the origin is an outward one; the ideology,
world vision, the explanation of the realities in the world and the
rules stem from natural laws and as Muslim ulama (religious scholars)
state, “Religious matters stem from genetic realities and the belief in
religion means the harmonizing of man with nature.”

Hence, as nature is not illusionary or absurd, religion should not be
based on illusion, and absurdity. Any misinterpretation of the world or
God, nature or man is not religion and any opinion-when absurd- cannot
be respected.

Be that as it may, as man and his belief are to be respected, Islam
allows that everyone who is no able to understand the amazing nature of
Islam and accepting and no one has the right to refrain his fellow
beings from accepting Islam. Concerning this, the Holy Qur’an states,

***“There is no compulsion in religion.”***[^27] ***(Surah al-Baqarah
2:256)***

The path to salvation is made distinct from aberration and no one shall
be compelled to accept religion, for everyone is free to choose the
right path by virtue of his rationale and intellect and tell apart wrong
from right.

As pronounced in the Holy Qur’an, one can exercise freedom in the choice
of one’s religion, but thereafter one is bound to follow it as a
covenant is made with God, based on the will of man.

Other rights such as the right to complain to the court or immunity from
others’ interference in one’s affairs, letters and correspondences or
the right to recreation or education or participation in social literary
and artistic gatherings have been predicted which may be classified as
individual rights and with the understanding we have of Islam these
rights exist in Islam in their entirety.

The only point which we need to make here is that paragraph three of
article 29 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states, “These
rights and freedoms in no case be contrary to the purposes of the
principles of the united nations.”

The word *purposes* is very ambiguous here; it has not been properly
defined in any culture. Ultimately the Declaration gives a definition
for freedom and human rights and adds that all these rights and freedoms
are dependent on them and the institutes of the United Nations do not
have the right to allow veto to them; otherwise all those rights become
null and void.

[^1]: This is called negative freedom and positive freedom suggests the
ability to do any desired thing.

[^2]: That a child does not use his willpower before the age of maturity
is because it has not reached full maturity. In addition, this is one of
the veiled scientific points, which has found scant attention. There are
philosophical and psychological differences between will and desire,
although they have been mixed up.

[^3]: Some criticize the Islamic laws and jurisprudence for heing filled
with assignments and different commands and if the words of this humhle
writer are true which are not, this is not the fault of the Muslim
jurisprudence but the perfection of it and that of a community in which
these rules dominate for if that community is tilled with rights but
without assignments, is not a human community and in practice, such a
community has never existed. Even in the olden communities, (like
Hammurabi or in time of Ghengiz), the assignments had priority over
rights.

[^4]: Surah Al-Baqarah (2:30)

[^5]: “There is no compulsion in religion.” Surah al-Baqarah, 2:25;
“Indeed God changes not what is in a people, until they change what is
in themselves.” Surah ar-Rad, 13:11

[^6]: Freedom is a spiritual affair which may have spiritual and
physical manifestations.

[^7]: At least 18 articles out of 30 articles.

[^8]: Like ''Worship not any one but The Almighty'", which will be later
on dealt with.

[^9]: “And think in the creation of the heaven and the earth, (Surah
Aale Imran, 3:191); I exhort you only to one thing, that rise up ye for
God’s sake in twos and singly, then ponder ye, (Surah as-Saba 34:46);
“Reflect they not within themselves” (Surah ar-Rum 30:8); “So related
the story; haply they will reflect” (Surah al-A’raf 7:176; Surah
al-Hashr 59:41; Surah al-Jathiyah 45:13; Surah az-Zumar 35:42; Surah
Yunus 10:24 and the likes, and verses like “Do you not understand?” in
surahs: al-Baqarah 2:44, 76 & 442; Aale Imran 3:32: al-A’raf 7:169;
Yunus 10:16 and several other verses.

[^10]: See Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 22, p.391, “izaa balagha abi al-as
thalathin rajolan itakhezu din allah dakhalan wa ibadallah kholan wa mal
allah dowalan”, (in a hadith of Abudhar from the Holy Prophet and in the
sermon of Imam Husayn (a.s)

[^11]: Imam ‘Ali, Nahj al-Balaghah, Is Victory at the Price of Tyranny
over Me Allowed?

[^12]: “The true servants of God are those who hear everything, follow
the best and these are the ones whom God guides and people call wise.”
Verses which encourage thinking are already dealt with.

[^13]: Article 1

[^14]: Article 2

[^15]: Article 4

[^16]: Article 5

[^17]: From this one can realise morality -unlike the beliefs of other
idealogists is an inseparable part and cannot he separated from human
idealogy and rights, law and traditions.

[^18]: It is quoted from Imam ‘Ali “He who overcomes his carnal desires,
he is free.”

[^19]: “O People! Adam did not beget slaves or maids and people are all
free.”

[^20]: “It is He, Who created for you all that is in the earth.” Surah
al-Baqarah 2:29.

[^21]: Article 17, Everyone has the right to own property alone as well
as in association with others.

[^22]: Bihar, Vol. 32, p. 134.

[^23]: See Public Ownership of the same author.

[^24]: There is a hadith that says, “La’n allah in zigha man ya’ul.”

[^25]: They are considered lawful by some of the jurisprudents and
unlawful by others.

[^26]: The basis of sending the missionaries for disseminating religion
adds up to this fact.

[^27]: Also verses: “To you your religion, and to me my religion” (Surah
al-Kafirun, 109:6); “Wouldst thou then constrain the people, until they
are believers?” (Surah Yunus 10:99), “So let whosoever will believe, and
let whosoever will desbelieve'” (Surah al-Kahf 18:29); “Then remind
them! Thou art only a reminder; thou art not charged to oversee them”
(Surah al-Ghashiyah 88:21-23); “It is thine only to deliver the Message,
and Ours the reckoning” (Surah ar-R’ad 13:40); “It is only for the
Messanger to deliver the Message” (Surah al-Ma’idah 5:99); and the
likes.


