Survey Of The Similarities And Differences Of Human Rights In Islam And In The West
===================================================================================

**Hujjat al-Islam Muhammad Javad Hujjati Kirmani**

Necessity of the Discussion
---------------------------

Disregarding the difference between the two terms Human Rights in Islam
and Human Rights in the West[^1] the article attempts to look for the
similarities and differences between human rights in Islam and the
so-called human rights in the West as reflected in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the annexed conventions. After all, the
article concentrates its focus on the similarities and the differences
shall be briefly dealt with.

What induces us to concentrate on the similarities rather than the
differences is that man is in need of the message of peace among
religions and nations in this age as in all other ages. The proof for
this claim is that dialogue among religions, specially the dialogue
between Islam and Christianity has been in vogue during the recent years
and the gatherings towards this end have played an incontrovertible role
in bringing the Muslims and the Christians closer, and in creating ties
between Muslim and Christian philosophers and scholars.

Furthermore, the message given by Sayyid Muhammad Khatami, the Iranian
President, to the American people and the issue of “Dialogue among
Civilizations” brought up by him which was fortunately welcomed by the
universal community, requires the thinkers to contemplate and converse
more on the linking bonds between international rights through
conferences and meetings.

Another factor which makes the necessity of this discussion even clearer
is the fact that despite the passage of a span of twenty years after the
advent of the Islamic Revolution and despite the clear an inspiring
messages of the Founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Hazrat Imam
Khumaini, and the sayings of the Present Leader of the Revolution,
Hazrat Ayatullah Khamini’i in respect to the common points among
religions and civilizations and specially what was announced to the
world in the recent one and a half years by the President, a number of
the world’s super-powers and politicians are, however, trying to distort
the face of the Revolution and the Islamic Republic.

They are incapable of enduring Iran’s claim for freedom and
independence, which is, accompanied by calling for observance of the
rights of the oppressed people throughout the world specially the rights
of the Palestinians. They try to render the minds of the nations
rebellious to us especially to our ideological principles with a view to
satisfying their domineering interests. Thus, it is incumbent upon us,
and the seekers of truth and of happiness for man and the true advocates
of universal peace and mutual understanding of the religions and the
dialogue among civilizations to identify the linking bonds of world’s
religions, civilizations and cultures, promote friendship and love
between human beings throughout the world and shield against anti-human
and hostile propaganda of international Zionism and Imperialism who see
their existence in the dissension and hostility among nations.

Approaches
----------

The comparative study of Islamic human rights and Western human rights
has long prevailed in the Islamic societies and a great bulk of books
and essays have been written on this subject. The Western and Islamic
scholars generally adopt three approaches toward this issue:

1. The first approach is total acceptance or rejection; in other words,
they either accept one or reject the other without any reservation. Some
Muslim thinkers reject the principles set forth in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and seek after such rights only in Islam and
assume the aforementioned Declaration as originating from human desires
and even atheism. As opposed to their stance, some advocates of western
human rights hold that the Islamic instructions are insufficient and
even unjust. They question the origin of Islam, believing that such
issues in Islam have been bound to time and place.

2. The second approach pertains to those drawn in by the western
civilization. They know no other issue as this except in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. After all, some believe in a religion like
Islam, and see human rights as something outside the realm of religion;
if they regard a worldly mission for religion, they consider it a
phenomenon not as valid now as at the advent of religions. Therefore, if
religions, which claim to express the divine knowledge, have stated
anything on this subject, it has been only applicable for their own time
and they may never be generalized for all times including our age.
Deciding on this matter has been delegated to man by God.

When we come to the question of politics, this approach demonstrates the
view that religion should be isolated from politics. According to this
view, this separation is not a defect but the sign of religion’s
perfection. They hold that religion is in many ways superior to worldly
affairs. However, what makes things difficult are the occasional
contradictions between the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Holy Qur’an or other religious writings. This point will be briefly
clarified at the end of this article.

3. The third approach is an intermediate one, which finds many
similarities and connections between the sources, foundations and the
materials of Islamic and Western human rights. The article attempts to
display the point that similarities exceed the differences.

The Approach of this Article
----------------------------

This article adopts a similar approach and intends to show that the
previously mentioned rights are similar even in respect to source, i.e.
the ideological and general theoretic infrastructures. It is noteworthy
that Ayatullah Javadi Amuli believes that sources should be identified
first, then legal fundamentals be extracted from those sources and then
legal texts be compiled in order to extract legal rules. For example,
one of the articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is that
all people are equal before the law. The basis for this article is
justice. Justice also originates from public and ideological approaches.

4-Public and Common Sources of Islamic and Western Rights
---------------------------------------------------------

The origins of rights differ in materialistic and divine schools.
Lawyers, who do not recognize a divine origin for rights, believe its
source to be the human conscience and wisdom, which differentiates
between good and the evil in individual and social areas. In Emile, for
example, Jean Jacque Rousseau describes conscience as divine immortal
instinct, celestial voice, virtuous and benevolent judge of the good and
the evil. However, the disciples of the prophets believe that the
prophets have infonned people of such rights upon divine command. It
seems that these two views are not contradictory and in fact complete
one another. On human nature, the Holy Qur’an says:

***“By the soul, and that which shaped it, and inspired it to lewdness
and god-fearing.” (Surah as-Shams 91:7-8)***

This verse clearly tells of divine inspirations granted to everyone and
the path of goodness and evil has been shown to everyone. Therefore, in
Qur’anic view, human nature, conscience and wisdom can distinguish right
and wrong based on divine inspiration. On the other hand, revelation is
a superb quality, manifested only in exalted spirits and wisdom. In
other words, revelation and prophecy are the peaks of human wisdom and
only suit those who have exalted spirit and superior wisdom. This is why
our scholars regard the holy Prophet (P.B.U.H.) as the Absolute Wisdom.

Therefore, it is better to find the linking bond between these two,
which is in fact focusing on human wisdom and conscience instead of
causing opposition, only with the difference that in divine schools,
this human spirit and wisdom have exceptionally evolved in the better
men who are the prophets so as to make them capable of receiving divine
revelations. In fact, scholastic theologians rely on human wisdom, but
the wisdom, which has enabled them to fully perceive the truth with the
aid of divine revelation. While in the works of other scholars, even
philosophers, lawyers, and thinkers who have helped give shape to new
schools, the likelihood of error and mistake may always be seen.

It is interesting that evidence for this view is clearly discernible in
the works of western pioneers. For instance, somewhere in his work
Rousseau says, “In order to discover the best rules and laws for the
people, a total wisdom is required to see all human desires but not
sense any of them, have any relation with nature but know it thoroughly:
his happiness is not relevant to or dependent on ours, but is ready to
help promote our happiness.”[^2]

It must be added that this total wisdom as described by Rousseau is
crystallized in divine prophets, although Rousseau’s indications show
that he meant God.

Common Foundations
------------------

### Unity Of Mankind

The original infrastructure of the first Universal Declaration of Human
rights is the unity of mankind. This view is not only compatible with
religious approach but it directly or indirectly arises from that, as,
except when addressed generally for which terms like “O People”, “O
Men”, “O Mankind” and are used, it is clear that in Qur’anic insight all
men are equal. The sacred verse of

***“O Mankind. We have created you male and female, and appointed you
races and tribes, that you may know one another,” (Surah al-Hujurat
49:13)***

verifies this view. Furthermore, what is received from the oral and
practical traditions of the holy Prophet and our religious leaders
indicate the same approach.

In this regard, the holy Prophet states, “You are all the descendents of
Adam and Adam came from dust.”

The provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights also
originate from a public and ideological approach governing at the time
of formulating this Declaration, i.e. after the end of the Second World
War, the formulators of the Declaration of the Human Rights believed
that human family was a single entity with common gains and losses. This
foundation per se originated from their ideology, which made them see
external reality as this. Thus, the notion of man’s unity is based on
the reality of the existence. Here, we also reach the linking bond of
Islamic and Western human rights systems, as in the Islamic approach,
the human family is one unit with common gains and losses.

As Sa’di, the outstanding Persian poet, says:

“The sons of Adam are the limbs of each other
Having been created of one essence
When the calamity of time afflicts one limb
The other limbs cannot remain at rest
If thou hast no sympathyfor others
Thou are unworthy to be called by the name of a man.”

### Man’s Natural Value

The other common element between the human rights in Islam and the
western human rights is the natural value and respect for man.

The Holy Qur’an states, “The best among you is the most upright one,”
and the preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights talks of
the recognition of the innate value of all members of the human family;
it comes to our mind that this declaration has been, directly to
indirectly, influenced by that Qur’anic instruction or at least both of
them are compatible with supreme reason and man’s wisdom. The deep
difference between these two is believed to be the one that originates
directly from revelation and the other relates to the divine revelation
by some intermediate factors.

### The Individual And The Society

Another linking bond between the Islamic and the Western human rights
systems is the issue of individual and the society and man’s individual
and social dignity. Disregarding the theoretic and philosophical
discussions related to individualism and socialism, in both legal
systems, the interests of society are prevailing on the individuals.
Means and instruments have been devised to protect the interests of each
against the other.

The interesting point is that the conflict of the interests of the
individuals and the society with the individual may be removed only by
social institutions. This deep­rooted experience has made mankind
establish the government in order to regulate the relations of
individuals with one another and with the society and give power and
legitimacy to this institution. In this area, there may be seen many
similarities between the statutory laws of man and the provisions of the
Holy Qur’an and the tradition of the prophet.

Common Provisions
-----------------

Besides the parts in which we discussed the fundamentals and sources of
human rights, the similarities may be identified in the articles and
principles of human rights as well. Here, we shall give some instances

A) Life

B) Freedom

C) Justice

### Life

Some Muslim scientists have divided life into two parts: material and
spiritual. The attention to spiritual aspects in Islam and its deletion
from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is the priority of
Islamic human rights over the western one.[^3] In Islamic and Western
Human Rights System, by material life we mean that man is born one day
and dies another day and paying attention to this very life (or the
material life) is another common point and a linking bond of these two
systems. “Blood Shed and murder” is so vile and condemned in Islam that
killing one person is regarded equal to killing all mankind and the
verse

***“He who kills one man it is as if he has killed all mankind,” (Surah
al-Ma’idah 5:32)***

is certainly about the common meaning we have in mind of “murder.” Of
course, a more general interpretation might be derived from the context
of the verse as well.

### Freedom

Concerning the sublime value of freedom which serves as another link
between the two law systems involved, it is to be stated that the fact
that in this area, the mystical and religious concepts of freedom which
is freedom from carnal desires and slavery by everybody but by God
should not be mixed with the common meaning of the word in the concept
of human rights.

By freedom, we mean the same concept given in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights implying that man is born free, slavery is banned and
that everybody is entitled to live free and secure.

It is worth mentioning that man’s responsibility originates from his
freedom. Man is by nature a free being. As he is wise, he himself
regards restrains for his individual and social life based on wisdom and
reason. These rational limits take a pure and real face in the process
of mystical illumination and through divine revelation.

As suggested at the outset, human wisdom when exalted from the ordinary
restrains and elevated to the superior state becomes capable of
achieving the truth and human laws and rules of life through revelation.
Therefore, as a reasonable being, man puts curbs on his natural and
innate freedoms in individual and social life. Any man with a religion
or belief in a school of thought has limits and regulations as well.

If some differences are observed in the Islamic and Western Human Rights
with respect to the limits of freedom, this does not impair the rational
and fundamental freedoms.

In other words, the Islamic and the Western human rights have set limits
for man’s inherent freedom. From epicurist view, the limits and
restraints on sexual freedom are much less than divine value-oriented
approach, but even in the same western view, there are limits for this
freedom such as the ban on rape and overt sexual activities. In other
words, even in the freest of societies, human reason has not stopped
working; it has restrained freedom though on a very small scale.

In order to remove any misconception, the basis of western view toward
sexual freedom is a mixture of feeling and desire and if it has any
rational basis it is mixed with irrational and diverted extravagances
and with a reaction against sexual ban and guilt feeling concerning the
sacred issue of marriage as sermonized by Church authorities. At any
rate, this approach is condemned in Islam.

### Justice

In the preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, it is
expressed that lack of recognition of human rights has led to barbarous
acts which have in turn made human souls revolt and in general, the
rights of people should be protected by law enforcement so that man may
not be urged to revolt against injustice and cruelty as a last resort.
The following points may be seen in the articles provided in this
declaration:

Prohibition of slavery (Art. 4), prohibition of tenure, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment (Art. 5), Equality of everyone before
the law (Art. 7), the right to an effective remedy by the competent
national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted by
the law (Art. 8), prohibition of arbitrary arrest, detention or exile
(Art, 9), the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty
according to law in a public trial at which he has had all the
guarantees necessary for his defense (Article 11, paragraph 1 ), holding
anyone guilty of any penal offense under national or international law
at the time when it was committed (Article 11, paragraph 2), prohibition
of arbitrary interference with people’s privacy, family, correspondence,
or attacks upon his honor and reputation (Art. 12), prohibition of
arbitrarily depriving others of their property (Article 17, paragraph
1.)

These provisions are in fact evidence for enforcement of justice and
removing injustice and the links of Islamic and Western human rights
systems are quite firm and stable in them. The concept of justice in the
Islamic teachings is so extensive which is an attribute of the highest
rank of existence (God) and this attribute, like other attributes of
God, is His nature.

What is stated is enough to show the superiority and the elevation of
this issue, but the problem does not end here and the realm of justice
has covered all the universe and all particles of the existence are
covered by this general overwhelming issue so as it is said “The
universe is made stable by Justice.”

On the other hand, man with any religion, seek justice by virtue of
reason and wisdom and hate cruelty and injustice and pressure in
religious, social and economical domains. Therefore, what we see in the
Declaration of Human Rights is a proper manifestation of man’s wishes.
Man strives to actualize and realize in his individual and social life
what originates from the Creator of the World and what is current in the
existence and what is the cause of its strength as instructed by his
reason and wisdom.

In other words, man tries to make a model of the real external sample of
justice, prevalent in the universe, deriving a value from an objective
real affair.[^4]

The Holy Qur’an states,

***“Be believers, be you securers of justice, witnesses for God. Let not
detestation for a people move you not to be equitable; be equitable-that
is nearer to god-fearing” (Surah al-Ma’idah 5:8)***

and

***“And when you speak, be just even if it should be to a near kinsman.”
(Surah al-An’am 6:152)***

These verses and similar verses show the esteemed position of Justice in
the Qur’anic instructions. Whatever mentioned on the aforementioned
issue in the Declaration of Human Rights is a direct or indirect
reflection of the sacred teachings of Islam and other divine religions
believed by man and cherished by man.

Differences
-----------

Let us now look at some parts of the Universal Declaration for Human
rights, which are different from the Islamic approach and call the
western and Islamic thinkers for dialogue and discussion on these parts:

1. All members of the human family have equal rights (introduction). It
seems that Islam has a different view of the rights of non-Muslims.

2. All men are equal in dignity and rights (Art. 1 )

3. The followers of any religion are entitled to all rights and freedoms
mentioned in the Declaration (Art. 2)

4. Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race,
nationality or religion have the right to marry and to found a family.
They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at
its dissolution (Art. 6).

5. Everybody has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief,
and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or
private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice,
worship; and observance (Art. 18).

6. Everybody has the right to freedom of opinion and expression (Art.19)

7. All children whether born in or out of wedlock shall enjoy the same
social protection (Article 25, paragraph 2).

These cases should be studied in comparison with the Islamic rights.

At the end, we shall touch upon a pithy and noble point derived from the
sublime teaching of Islam and can be counted as the striking differences
between these two declarations. Although this case may be beyond the
scope of our discussion according to some philosophers, lawyers, and
politician, we deem it proper to bring it up as this article deals with
the similarities and differences between the western and the Islamic
rights.

The point involved is the right of God and His will. This right is the
basis of all human rights as viewed by Islam. As mentioned earlier,
human wisdom and reason are the gifts of God but the point is that the
knowledge of God is only His sacred nature. In this regard let us
consider a saying by Imam Zain al-‘Abidin, ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (P.B.U.H.)
who believes that all movements and actions are surrounded by divine
rights and that it is incumbent on man to fulfill them; then he says,
“The most important right of God is the right that God has set for
Himself. The right, which is the origin of all rights and all rights,
originate from it, from head to toe. And the greater right of God is to
worship Him and take nothing as His partner.”

[^1]: This mistake is due to the fact that many of the articles set
forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are based upon the
principles of all religions and sects such as the right to property,
security, ownership etc. on the one hand and on the other what is called
the Islamic human rights enumerated in the Cairo Declaration of Human
Rights are common readings of the Islamic teachings which allow no
marring. It is safe to say we Muslims should not attribute our personal
reading and interpretation to Islam.

[^2]: Jean Jacques Rousseau, Social Contract, p.81

[^3]: The idea of corporeal life is not free from mistake for life
belongs to the soul and the soul is abstract.

[^4]: Ayatullah Javadi Amuli’s words have been used.


