Criticism And Study Of Cairo Declaration Of Human Rights In Islam
=================================================================

**Dr Husayn Mihrpur**

The principles and contents of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is largely influenced by the
principles set forth in the Declaration of Rights of Man and of Citizen
of France. In this Declaration, much emphasis is laid on the inherent
dignity of man and his fundamental freedoms without tracing their
origins back to God or divine inspiration. If there is a mention of the
Supreme Being in the Declaration of Rights of Man and of Citizen of
France, there is no mention of His supreme name in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

Brazil suggested that instead of stating that everyone is endowed with
the faculty of conscience and reason and should act towards one another
in a spirit of brotherhood, it should be stated that God created
everyone equal, endowing them with conscience and reason. However, the
representatives of some other countries objected, declaring that there
must be no mention of God or divine decree in the United Nations
documents; therefore, the name of God was removed from the bill.[^1]

Human rights in the Universal Declaration are not derived from divine
decree but from the will of the General Assembly of United Nations based
on the general interests. The formulators of the human rights seek to
provide conditions for a standard social life at international level and
respect for human rights is recognized as a necessary means to prohibit
man from resorting to force to ward off pressure and tyranny.[^2] In the
preamble of the Universal Declaration, it says, “Whereas it is
essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last
resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights
should be protected by the rule of law, ...”

From a philosophical point of view, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights is based upon the fact that man is free in everything as long as
it does not hurt others as described in the Declaration of Rights of Man
and of Citizens of France. From a practical point of view, it is based
on the fact that it aims to provide a suitable social life at
international level, for in the course of the destructive World Wars I
and II, the violation of these rights led to riots and revolutions which
jeopardized the peace of international community. The Declaration has
practical aims, having nothing to do with providing eternal bliss. The
rights and freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration are aimed at
providing the international community with peace, and man with his
inherent rights and to prevent riot or force.

The Declaration falls under three parts: in articles 1 to 21 of part
one, political and civil rights are explained; the right to life,
liberty, and the security of the person; freedom from slavery or
involuntary servitude; freedom from torture and from cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment or punishment; freedom from arbitrary arrest,
detention, or exile; the right to a fair and public trial; freedom from
interference in privacy and correspondence; freedom of movement and
residence; the right to asylum from persecution; freedom of thought,
conscience, and religion; freedom of opinion and expression ; freedom of
peaceful assembly and association; and the right to participate in
government, directly or through free elections.

The important point is that everyone is entitled to all the rights and
freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind
due to race, sex, color, language, religion or political or other
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. In
other words, men and women have equal rights as to the choice of
residence, nationality, spouse and the right to property.

Also, the atheists and the deists, the Muslims and the non­ Muslims, the
God-worshipers and the idolaters and all people regardless of their
religion or political opinion have equal rights as to the freedom of
expression, occupation and participation in all governments ... and if
some limitation is perforce fixed, it must be for all and sundry, but
not for a certain religious group or sect.

The second part of the Declaration from article 22 to 27 is related to
economic, social and cultural rights, described in the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights approved in 1966 by the
United Nations General Assembly.

In part three, the Declaration deals with the order and the limitations
of exercising these rights. Article 29 states that “The exercise of
rights and freedoms is subject only to such limitations as are
determined by law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and
respects for the rights and freedoms of others and of meeting the just
requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a
democratic society.”

Although the Declaration mentions many fundamental rights and freedoms,
main rights such as the right to independence and development are not
included therein. Besides, it is recognized as the accepted bill of
concepts and principles shared by all in the hope that it shall one day
turn into a universal culture.

At all events, the Universal Declaration found a special place, became
the basis for many international bills, and brought forth many hopes.
Rene Cassin, one of the formulators of the Bill, states, “The bill is
the most important document ever acquired by man. It has opened a new
chapter in the history of man. The bill is the freedom of all the
victims of tyranny. It defines the limits that every powerful State
should take into account in relation to its subjects. Most importantly,
the Declaration states that human rights should be protected and
guaranteed by a legal regime.”[^3]

International Covenants on Human Rights
---------------------------------------

With the approval of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948,
the General Assembly of the United Nations pleaded with the Commission
on Human Rights to include a draft of the covenant on human rights in
their instructions. After a long controversy, two covenants were
concluded; the International Covenant on Political and Civil Rights and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural rights, both
of which were approved by the General Assembly on 16 December 1966.[^4]
In fact the content of part one of the International Covenant on
Political and Civil Rights was included in part two of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social, Cultural Rights with some revisions or
additions such as the right to self-independence, the right to ruling
system and the right to utilizing the natural resources.

The Covenant on Political and Civil Rights consists of a preamble, 53
articles, 27 of which primarily deal with rights, freedoms, and others
with organizational issues. The Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights consists of 31 articles and the States that approved it
should apply the principles set forth in the Covenants and give in a
report every three years.[^5] Iran approved these two Covenants in 1975
and should give in the report.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the two Covenants are
called the International Bill of Human Rights.

Human Rights From a Religious Perspective
-----------------------------------------

It is no exaggeration in saying that the fundamental concepts of human
rights such as the inherent dignity of man, his natural freedoms and
equal rights before the law and non-discrimintion, find their origins in
divine religions and prophets’ words. Religion deals with the human
person, his destiny corruption and correction regardless of the
relationships he conducts in relation to others; it aims to increase the
spiritual qualities of every individual in the society: it is not
indifferent to the perverse behaviors or beliefs of others: it seeks
man’s eternal bliss with the help of monotheism, the observance of
divine laws and religious duties and proper social conduct and
observance of others’ rights.

According to the school of human rights, if a person does not believe in
God, and worships stone, wood, or any other thing and does any indecent
act which does not hurt others is not blameworthy. However, from a
religious perspective, such a person should not be left to himself, but
be guided to the right path. From a religious view, the virtuous and the
infidels are not looked upon equally although they are of one essence.
According to the Holy Qur'an, those who cast off God’s signs and follow
Satan and their caprice are perverts; they are likened to dogs and those
who have eyes, but do not see the divine truths are likened to cattle
but rather further astray.[^6]

One of the main missions of the holy prophets was to guide people and
purify their spirits. This of course does not mean that we should
interfere in others’ affairs and compel them to accept monotheism. At
all events, religion has high regard for the private aspects of
individuals’ life.

The Social Aspect of Religious Vision
-------------------------------------

Another mission laid on divine prophets concerns the material and the
social aspects of life, such mission being the best harbinger of
justice, freedom, equal rights, indiscrimination, and divine teachings.
In the Holy Qur’an the prophets are all envisaged as proponents of
freedom of thought, upholders of justice and rights, and preventers of
oppression and tyranny, and their adversaries depicted as selfish,
illogical, and tyrannical rulers, proponents of discrimination and class
privileges. Basically, idolatry which is so much reproved in divine
religions, and particularly in Islam is largely due to the fact that
idols are symbols of ignorance, blind prejudices, class privileges and
tyranny. Concerning the appointment of prophets, the Holy Qur’an states,

***“Indeed, We sent Our Messenger with clear signs, and We sent down
with them the Book*** ***and the Balance so that men might uphold
justice.” (Surah al-Hadid, 57:25)***

The Holy Qur’an recalls Pharaoh as one who extolled himself in the
earth, divided its inhabitants into sects, and oppressed people:

***“Now Pharaoh had exalted himself in the land and had divided its
inhabitants into sects, abasing one party of them, slaughtering their
sons and sparing their women.” (Surah al-Qasas 28:4)***

Moses is appointed by divine decree to eradicate tyranny and save the
downtrodden people. In Surah of Ta Ha, God addresses Moses and Aaron,

***“Go therefore, thou and thy brother, with My signs, and neglect not
to remember me. Go to Pharaoh, for he has waxed insolent; yet, speak
gently to him, that haply he may be mindful, or perchance fear.” (Surah
Surah Ta Ha 20:43-44)***

The main mission of Jesus Christ was to combat the corruption of the
rabbis who used religion as a means to fill their pockets, conceal the
truth, and rule over people with deceit. In scolding them, the Holy
Qur’an states,

***“O believers, many of the rabbis and monks indeed consume the goods
of the people in vanity and bar from God’s way. Those who treasure up
gold and silver, and do not expend them in the way of God -give them the
good tidings of a painful chastisement.” (Surah at-Tawbah, 9:34)***

Although all religions, and Islamin particular, claim to be universal
and tend to dominate all cultures, the main social aim of Islam is to
establish justice, eradicate discrimination of any kind, and oppression
against man. The aim was never to establish a chosen religious class.

***“It is He who has sent His Messenger with the guidance and the
religion of truth that he may uplift it above every religion, though the
unbelievers be averse.” (Surah at-Tawbah, 9:33)***

***“And He made the word of the unbelievers the lowest; and God’s word
is the uppermost; God is All-mighty, All-wise.” (Surah at-Tawbah,
9:40)***

In many of the Qur’anic verses, much emphasis is laid on upholding
justice, speaking the truth, and administering justice even if it is to
their loss.

***“O believers, be you securers of justice, witnesses for God, let not
detestation for a people move you not to be equitable: be equitable;
that is nearer to god­ fearing.” (Surah al-Ma’idah, 5:8)***

***“O believers, be you securers of justice, witnesses for God, even
though it be against you or your parents and kinsmen, whether they may
be rich or poor; God stands closest to either; then follow not caprice,
so as to swerve; for if you twist or turn, God is aware of the things
you do.” (Surah an-Nisa, 4:135)***

Although the religious government is guided by the prophet, imam or
religious sages, the most democratic government is the one properly
governed by religion in which people have freedom of choice, opinion,
thought and ideas and participation in the government. The most striking
characteristic mentioned by the Holy Qur’an for the Islamic Ummah (the
Islamic community) distinguishing them from other communities is the act
of bidding to goodness and forbidding the evil which allows people to
bid the government to goodness or forbidding it the evil,

***“Some of the people of the Book are a nation upstanding, that recite
God’s signs in the watches of the night, bowing, therefore, believing in
God and in the Last Day, bidding to goodness and forbidding the evil,
vying one with the other in good works; those are of the righteous.”
(Surah Aale Imran 3:110)***

The prophets, Imams, or rulers remind people of their shortcomings
instead of boasting of their innocence or efficiency. The most striking
instance in this regard is implied by Imam Ali’s statement, “Treat me
not like the tyrants: flatter me not: avoid not speaking the truth, for
fear it may be grievous to me: therefore tell me your opinions and
criticisms; after all, I am a human being and human beings are prone to
err.”[^7]

In the time of the holy prophet and the orthodox caliphs particularly at
the time of Imam Ali’s rulership when religious government was
completely dominant, the most democratic government was dominant and
people were free in all spheres of human activities, had effective roles
in the government, freely expressed their comments and criticisms and
neither the great power nor the sublime spiritual station of prophecy,
Imamate and caliphate did not prevent them from freely expressing their
views; of course they were extremely upbraided when they acted
otherwise.

Unfortunately, the Islamic State was soon entrusted to the power of
tyrannical rulers; not only did they use force but they used caliphate
and authority as a taboo that the members of the Islamic Ummah did not
allow themselves to do but obey them and did not dare to give any
opinion. Thus, the despotic religious regime was instituted, for the
dictatorship took the shape of religion whereas this government was not
religious but despotic. In fact, it was this tyrannical regime ruled
under the cover of religion and with the misinterpretation of religion
and religious concepts.

With a glance at the policy of Imam Ali (peace be upon him) and
especially the order that he gave in a letter addressed to Malik Ashtar,
his chosen governor of a region in Egypt, one can see how human rights
and freedoms are treated; even the rights of non­Muslims are esteemed.
Meanwhile, Imam Ali bids his governor observe the rights of his citizens
and says, “Never set upon them like a ferocious wolf, for either they
are your brothers or your fellow-human beings.”[^8] In other words, they
are your fellow-human beings and human beings are to be respected.

Regardless of the guiding mission of religion, there are not many
differences as to practical and social aspects between the standards set
forth by religious teachings and what the social thinkers reached at the
dawn of enlightenment and the end of the murky era of the Middle Ages.
If we carefully study the goal of the prophet’s mission and the
practical ways of the holy prophet and Imam Ali, and at the Qur’anic
verses especially those which bid people to the common points such as,

***“Surely they that believe, those of Jewry, and the Christians, and
those Sabaeans, whoso*** ***believes in God and the Last Day, and work
righteousness-their wage awaits them with*** ***their lord, and no fear
shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.” (Surah al-Baqarah,
2:62)***

We shall realize the principles set forth in the Declaration of Rights
of Man and of Citizens in France and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights are not very different from religious principles. Perhaps the
emphasis on religious freedom was not due to enmity against religion but
a reaction against creating sects, and the avoidance of prejudice.

The Muslim World Vis-a-vis Human Rights
---------------------------------------

The Muslim World has undergone three phases as to the human rights
formulated in the Declaration of Rights of Man and of Citizens of France
and later in the International Bill of Human Rights[^9] which were
extremely influenced by the Western political thought particularly in
freedom of thought and organizing parties: the first phase tried to
nullify them for the freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, especially religious freedom and propagating any kind of
sect or religion are contradictory to Islamic Shari’ah which recognizes
Islam as the true religion and does not regard any other religion as
true and regards the change of religion as apostasy. In holy Qur’an God
states:

***“The true religion with God is Islam.” (Surah Aale Imran 3:19)***

And also states;

***“whoso desires another religion than Islam, it shall not be accepted
of him: in the next world he shall be among the losers.” (Surah Aale
Imran, 3:85)***

In another verse we read;

***“…and whosoever of you turns from religion and dies disbelieving -
their works have failed in this world and the next: those are the
inhabitants of the Fire: therein they shall dwell forever.” (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:217)***

The second phase tried to adapt and justify the Bill of Human Rights.
Some Muslim thinkers accepted the Bill of Human Rights, trying to adapt
the rights mentioned therein to Muslim principles and endeavored to
demonstrate that these rights were better explained in Islam.

In the third phase, the Muslim thinkers thought of using the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as a paradigm for formulating the human
rights as accepted by Islam. So far more than seven declarations have
been issued as to the human rights in Islam by the Muslim Assembly in
Europe, the Kuwait Conference and the Organization of Islamic
International Conference and more than five Islamic constitutions have
been published; the Islamic Constitution of the Assembly of Islamic
Thoughts in al-Azhar in 1978 is an example of this case. Most of these
bills are relevant to the last twenty years from 1978.

Three bills on human rights were published by the Organization of
Islamic Conference; one was published in Mecca in 1979 on the
fundamental rights and duties in Islam; the second was approved and
issued by the Summits Conference in 1981 on the human rights in Islam
and the third one was the Cairo Bill of Human Rights in Islam approved
in 1990 in the nineteenth conference of the foreign ministers of the
Member States. In fact, it was the most comprehensive and official bill
ever approved and issued. We shall be discussing it later in this
article.

Study of the Cairo Bill of Human Rights in Islam
------------------------------------------------

### Its Approval And Its Contents

With emphasis on the existing backgrounds of Islamic human rights, the
experts on jurisprudential and legal issues of the Islamic Conference
set forth a plan and the last draft was approved in Tehran (26-28
December 1989). It was agreed that the aforementioned draft be proposed
and approved in the nineteenth assembly of the foreign ministers of the
Islamic Conference members.

The assembly was held from 31 July to 5 August 1990 in Cairo and was
subsequently approved via resolution no. p. 49/19. The aforesaid
resolution states, “The nineteenth summit of the Islamic Foreign
Ministers Conference, with the knowledge of man’s position in Islam as
God’s viceroy in the earth and the importance of a bill of human rights
in guiding the Member States in all aspects of life and with a study of
the aforesaid document and the report of the experts in legal issues in
Tehran, agrees to the bill of human rights in Islam in order that the
document may be used by the member states in human rights.”

As is seen, the Islamic Conference Organization approved the Declaration
of Human Rights in Islam as introducing the common interpretation of
human rights and not a committing contract of convention, made a few
emendations and additions, rendering it more similar to an international
declaration of human rights. So far, several meetings and work groups
have been held with a view to studying the bill and putting its rights
to effect. However, it has not gone beyond a declaration.

The declaration consists of 25 articles and a preamble which begins with
these words, “The Member States of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference reaffirming the civilizing and historical role of the Muslim
Ummah which made the best nation that has given mankind a universal and
well-balanced civilization in which harmony is established between this
life and the hereafter.... all Arabic, English, and French versions of
the declaration were studied, the English version, in particular starts
the same way. Only the Farsi version including the Arabic, English and
French version published by the Conference Organization has a longer
preamble which begins with the glorious verse

***“O mankind! We have created you male and female and appointed you
races and tribes that you may know each other. Surely the noblest in the
sight of God is the most god-fearing of you.” (Surah al-Hujurat
49:13)***

And the statement that all the Member States of the Islamic Conference
trusting God, the Creator of all ... and it is not clear why such
additions are included. At all events, we shall use the English version
received from the bureau in Geneva which was included with the
resolution p. 49/19.

### The General Features Of Cairo Declaration Of Human Rights In Islam

Basically, the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam like the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights places stress on human dignity and
enumerates the rights, which should be exercised. Some of the principles
mentioned in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are also
mentioned therein with a few additions and emendations. Some others
mentioned in the Covenant on Civil, Political and Social, Rights or in
conventions such as the Convention on Children’s Rights and the
Convention on the Right to Development are mentioned therein. Some
rights are especially emphasized like the banning of exploitation, the
right to resist it or the right to resist aggression, and the right to
life in a clean atmosphere free from moral corruption. Besides the
security of life and family, the respect for man even after his death,
the respect for his corpse, and the banning of hostage.

### Equality Of Responsibilities Or Equality Of Rights

The fundamental difference between the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the Declaration of Human Rights in Islam is that in the
former, the attitude towards religion is unconditional. It only
enumerates a few rights particular to man in any society. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights is practical and if it refers in the
preamble and article one to the philosophical principle of the inherent
dignity of man and that God created everyone equal is because it seeks
to exercise these rights without distinction of any kind in order that
no one might have any cause to revolt and that it might ensure peace and
security. Thus, it has nothing to do with elevating the spirituality of
people and does not enumerate duties for man, for consciously or
unconsciously, the man living in the society and under a government is
obligated to obey the binding rules of the State.

However, what has induced the formulators of human rights to formulate
such rights is that human rights were violated. Hence, they felt
obligated to enlarge on them. The comparison between article two of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 1 of the Cairo
Declaration of Human Rights in Islam clarifies this point. Article two
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states,

“Everyone is entitled to all rights and freedoms set forth in this
declaration without distinction of any kind, such as race, color sex,
language and religion, political or other opinion, national or social
origin, property, birth or other status.”

However, article one of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam
emphasizes the equality of human dignity for all, and equality in basic
obligations and responsibilities. Paragraph one of the article states.
“All human beings form one family whose members are united by submission
to God and descent from Adam. All men are equal in terms of basic human
dignity and basic obligations and responsibilities, without any
discrimination on the grounds of race, color, language, sex or religious
belief, political affiliation, social status or other considerations.”
Then it adds: “True faith is the guarantee for enhancing such dignity
along the path to human perfection.”

In other words, all human beings are equal in that they are the best
creatures in the earth; however, those who earn proper religious belief
gain more dignity and outdo in the acquired dignity. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights has nothing to do with this and offers no
repudiation or acceptance of this but insists that we should have equal
treatment in insurance of the right of life and ownership of properties
and contribution in the management of the affairs of the country and the
right to accomplish position and occupation to people with different
beliefs and opinions. This is not understood from article one of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights although we can see the difference
when we consider article 24 of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in
Islam that states, “All the rights and freedoms stipulated in this
Declaration are subject to the Islamic Shari’ah.”

### Freedom Of Choice And Change Of Religion

Another important featµre of the bill is the freedom and change of
religion. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights places stress on the
freedom of belief, and religion. Article eighteen states, “Everyone has
the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion and this right
includes freedom to change his religion or belief either alone or in
community with others in public or private to manifest his religion or
belief.”

Likewise, article eighteen of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights states the same idea with a little difference.
“Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a
religion or belief of his choice, and freedom, either individually or in
community with others and in public or private to manifest his religion
or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching.” And paragraph
two of the same article states, “No one shall be subject to coercion
which would impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief
of his choice.”

The same idea is mentioned in article one of the Declaration of
Elimination of Inequality and Religious Discrimination approved by the
General Assembly on 25 November 1981.[^10] Now let us see how the Cairo
Declaration of Human Rights in Islam treats this. Is this right
officially recognized that gives man the freedom of belief, religion,
and the freedom to change his religion without fear of punishment or of
being deprived of certain rights? Unfortunately, the bill does not
explicitly state this.

Article ten of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam recognizes
Islam as an inherent religion and states, “The use of poverty or
ignorance to change a religion is not allowed.” However, this leaves a
dark point. Is personal urge to change religion to Islam allowed? Does a
Muslim have the right to change his religion? As we know, apostasy is
severely condemned by the Qur’an and according to the current fatwa
(Islamic decree), the apostate is doomed to death and some civil and
social rights are denied him. For instance, if a Muslim man becomes
apostate, his wife is immediately divorced from him, and his properties
are distributed among his beneficiaries.[^11]

Of course, article ten and article one are expressed in such a way that
they arouse this ambiguity that it is not allowed to change one’s
religion of Islam to another religion or to turn to apostasy: however,
the criticism that tends to express fundamental freedoms and rights of
man in Islam and shows the Muslim’s stance on the rights set forth in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is valid. Why has it not
explicitly expressed such an important matter? It was incumbent on the
Muslim jurisprudents and experts of different Islamic schools to make an
exhaustive study in this area and elucidate the point whether from an
Islamic point of view the state can interfere in people’s affairs,
punish some for the crime of changing their religion or deprive them of
certain rights. After all, the Holy Qur’an states that there is no
compulsion in religion[^12] and that it opposes blind imitation in
religion. Even the Holy Prophet said that one could not compel people to
accept religion.[^13] The only thing one can do is to enlighten people’s
minds. This should have been proved or rejected after long reflection.

### The Source Of The Government Authority

Another different point lies in the matter of the government and the
source of government authority in the two declarations. Paragraph three
of article 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights explicitly
asserts, “The will of people shall be the basis of the authority of
government: this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine
elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be
held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.”

The theme of this article is dependent on a socio-philosophical basis,
implying that man is the master of his social destiny and does not have
any authority over others. However, since man is by nature a civil and
social being, he has to administer his life in harmony with others.
Hence, the members of the society should participate in the government
by going to the polls and vote for a person or persons who act in their
stead. Naturally, any time people take back their vote, those elected no
longer have the authority to govern.

The constitution of the Islamic republic of Iran accepts this notion in
absence of the Innocent Imam Mahdi (Peace be upon him). Article 56
states, “God is the supreme authority over man and world; it is He who
has made man the master of his fate; no one can deprive man of this
right or direct it in his own favor: the nation exercises this right as
described in the following provisions.” And the procedures will be
conducted through the Islamic Assembly consisting of the elected
representatives of the people, and the approval of the laws may be
secured by recourse to referendum and direct referral to the votes of
people. (See articles, 58, 59, 60, 62, 100, 197, 198, and 114 of the
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran.)

The Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam compares the government
authority to a deposit entrusted to the care of the ruler. The nature of
a deposit is that it should not be taken advantage of. Hence, tyranny,
trust or any other misuse of power is regarded as a betrayal of trust.
Hence, the one the deposit is entrusted to and betrays the deposit has
no longer valid authority.

Paragraph A of article 23 of the Declaration of Human Rights in Islam
states, “Authority is a deposit; and abuse or malicious exploitation
thereof is absolutely prohibited, so that fundamental human rights may
be guaranteed.” In this article, it is not obvious from whom to whom
this deposit is shifted. Does God grant it? Is it granted to a ruler by
people’s vote? It seems that it is due to the difference of opinions
between the Shi’ah and the Sunni regarding the caliphate after the holy
prophet. In the first draft of the Declaration, this has been much more
extensive. Paragraph A of the same article continues, whether this
deposit is granted by God as the Shi’ah believes or granted by people’s
vote as the Sunnis believe or by both and in the end, the ways of
interrogation are discussed.

### Prohibition Of Slavery

Another noteworthy point here is that slavery is explicitly prohibited.
Paragraph A of Article 11 states, “Man is born free and no one shall be
held in captivity or servitude; no one shall be humiliated or exploited.
Servitude belongs to God alone.”

As we know, slavery is stated as prohibited in article 4 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. However, what matters is that
first, the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam has prohibited
slavery and all forms of exploitations as stated in the International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and secondly, slavery has been
legal in Islam and even today some religious leaders regard the slavery
of the pagan prisoners of war as legal and defend it.[^14] Slavery is
explicitly prohibited and this is commendable.

### Recognition Of The Right To Literary Works

Another right officially accepted by the Cairo Declaration of Human
Rights in Islam is the right to literary, scientific, artistic and
technological products. Of course, this is expressed in paragraph two of
article 27 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as well.
“Everyone is entitled to the protection of moral or material interests
of the scientific, cultural or artistic productions of which he is the
author.”

However, the recognition of such a right in Islam is of great
controversy. Some of the jurisprudents such as Imam Khomeini believe,
“What is known as copyright is not a legal right. Hence, the inclusion
of the word copyright in a book does not create any right. So, others
can get it published, copy from it and no one can deprive them of these
rights.”[^15] Some have questioned the legality of it simply because
such a right does not exist in religious Shari’ah. There must have been
literary or artistic products but there were no rights for them and the
legislators did not allocate any right for them.[^16]

Still, some other jurisprudents regard such rights as definite rights,
considering respect for them and for their observance.[^17] At all
events, there is controversy over its legality in Islamic circles. This
declaration has adopted a positive step in this regard, considering the
aforementioned right as one of the rights officially accepted by Islam.
Article 16 states, “Everyone shall have the right to enjoy the fruits of
his scientific, literary, artistic or technical production and the right
to protect the moral and material interests stemming therefrom, provided
that such production is not contrary to the principles of Shari’ah.”

### Equality Of Men And Women

One of the important issues of human rights is the equality of men and
women or the elimination of sex discrimination. As mentioned earlier,
Article 2 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights solemnly states
that everyone has to enjoy the rights and freedoms set forth in the
declaration and then in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the fourth document of the World
Conference of Women in Beijing and tens of other bills and resolutions
emphasize that sex discrimination should not deprive some of the
enjoyment of rights, namely that a woman for being a woman may have
fewer rights than men and this equality is shown through freedom of
choice of a spouse, the enjoyment of equal rights with men for marriage,
the duties during married life, and equal provision of education and
gaining jobs in the government, the equal and independent right to
property and the likes.

Paragraph one of article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
states, “Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race,
nationality and religion , have the right to marry and to found a
family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during
marriage and at its dissolution .”

The Declaration of Human Rights in Islam places stress on the equal
station of men and women as human persons. However, it says that women
have fixed duties at home. Therefore, they have fewer responsibilities
and duties. And this should not be attributed to inferiority of women in
respect to men. To what extent this can justify the distinctions between
men and women such as the rejection of women’s testimony in some
affairs, and their blood money being half of that of men, and their
incapability of taking custody of their own children deserves due
contemplation.

At all events, article six of the Declaration of Human Rights in Islam
states, “A) Woman is equal to man in human dignity, and has rights to
enjoy as well as duties to perform; she has her own civil entity and
financial independence and the right to retain her name and her lineage.
B) The husband is responsible for the support and welfare of the
family.”

Article 5 regards marriage as equal right for men and women, adding that
marriage cannot be prevented by any restrictions stemming from race,
color or nationality but there is no mention of religion, for the
marriage of Muslims with the non-Muslims is not allowed and especially a
non-Muslim woman cannot marry an infidel under any circumstances.

### The Condition Of Accordance With The Islamic Principles

Another feature of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam is
that all the rights and principles enumerated therein should accord with
the Islamic Shari’ah. Article 24 states, “All the rights and freedoms
stipulated in this Declaration are subject to the Islamic Shari’ah.”

Hence, considering the differences of opinions between the Shi’ah and
the Sunni, the elucidation of this article in this way is open to
criticism for many of the rights and freedoms set forth in the
declaration might not accord with the Islamic Shari’ah. For instance,
some may regard the right to literary product as opposed with the
Islamic Shari’ah. As mentioned earlier, the complete elimination of
slavery may oppose Islamic Shari’ah. Therefore, how can one regard the
rights mentioned in the declaration the recognized rights of man
according to Islam? We can regard these rights as human rights when they
accord with Islam. Of course, one’s interpretation of them should not
contradict the Islamic principles.

### The Innovations Of The Cairo Declaration Of Human Rights In Islam

Some rights set forth in the Islamic Declaration are missing in the
Universal Declaration. Some of these innovations are also mentioned in
the International Covenant on Civil and Political, Cultural and Social
Rights and the Convention on Children’s Rights and the Convention on
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, friendly
International Relations or the international laws of the red cross.
These examples can be observed in articles 3, 7, 12, and 20.

However, one of these rights which is not mentioned in other universal
bills of human rights is paragraph B of article 11 when the battle
against exploitation is stressed. The article states. “Colonialism of
all types being one of the most evil forms of enslavement is totally
prohibited. Peoples suffering from colonialism have the full right to
freedom and self-determination; it is the duty of all States and peoples
to support the struggle of colonized peoples for the liquidation of all
forms of colonialism and occupation.”

Another one is paragraph A of article 17 and paragraph A of article 18.
Article 17 states, “Everyone shall have the right to live in a clean
environment, away from vice and moral corruption, an environment that
would foster his self-development and it is incumbent upon the State and
society in general to afford that right.” And paragraph A of article 18
states, “Everyone shall have the right to privacy in the conduct of his
private affairs, in his home, among his family, with regard to his
property and his relationships.”

It must be noted that the other rights stipulated in the Cairo
Declaration of Human Rights in Islam are in one way or another mentioned
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The characteristic feature
of the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam is that it relates the
articles to the Qur’an or to Islamic Shari’ah. In other aspects, it is
the same as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Conclusion
----------

In fact, the Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam is an attempt to
show the identity of Islam at international plane and to introduce
Islamic stance towards human rights. As is seen in this brief survey,
there are not fundamental differences as to the human rights set forth
in the Islamic Declaration and the Universal Declaration. Some rights
are ignored in the Universal Declaration, which are dealt with in the
Islamic Declaration. And there are subtleties in the Islamic
Declaration, which help further expand the spiritual aspects of human
life, which the Universal Declaration has ignored.

The most important difference between the two declarations lies in the
relation to the role of religion. The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights has nothing to do with religion, it neither rejects nor accepts
it but gives the individuals the freedom to choose any religion. The
implication is that everyone has the freedom to choose any religion they
like and no one can compel others to accept a religion, for there is no
compulsion in religion. In fact, this right is considered as one of the
most fundamental rights. It suggests that everyone should have the right
to freedom of the choice of religion and that there is no compulsion in
religion whatsoever. The attachment to a certain religion should not
deprive one of the rights set forth in the Declaration. The only
limitation mentioned for the exercise of rights and freedoms is law and
within each democratic community based on the observance of human
rights, the public order and the observance of religious belief, one can
exercise limitations.

However, article 29 in the Islamic Declaration, Islam plays an essential
role. The rights and freedoms mentioned in the declaration should accord
with Islam. If they accord with it, they should be officially accepted.
Having proper Islamic belief is an important right for which proper
atmosphere should be provided. However, changing one’s religion, that
is, Islam is not allowed.

Also, while everyone is equal in dignity, and religion does not have any
role in recognizing this right, everyone is obligated to exercise these
rights and this is one of the most important differences in the two
declarations. The Cairo Declaration of Human Rights in Islam should
express its stance towards the one stated earlier so that the stance of
Islam may be clearly shown.

The human rights deriving from the Universal Declaration with complete
disregard of religion has itself turned into a universal religion. The
human rights deriving from the Islamic declaration should express its
stance and prove its potentiality for universality and this requires
great effort in which the Universal Declaration has not been successful
and has failed in preventing discrimination and the violations of human
rights and freedoms. Even the Western States, which upheld the
declaration, refused to exercise the rights and freedoms in relation to
the Third World Countries.

However, this does not suggest that the Cairo Declaration of Human
Rights in Islam was a success. In this regard, a strong need for
knowledge and colossal effort is felt. At any rate, a great achievement
will be reached if the ways to the exercise of those rights and freedoms
are made possible with the help of executive committees especially in
relation to civil and social rights and the right to participate in the
government.

[^1]: Les Musulman Face Aux Droit De l’Homme, Sammie Adib, 1994, p.35

[^2]: Ibid., p.35

[^3]: Droite De l’Homme, Ibid., p.87

[^4]: Human Rights, Fact Sheet No.2, p.4; The Blue Books of United
Nations and Human Rights, pp.38, 229

[^5]: For further information, see Human Rights in International
Documents, p.323 onwards

[^6]: And recite to them the tidings to whom We gave Our signs; but he
cast them off, And Satan followed after him, and he became one of the
perverts. And had We willed, We would have raised him up thereby; but he
inclined towards the earth and followed his lust. So the likeness of him
is as the likeness of a dog; if thou attackest it, it lolls its tongue
out, or if thou leavest it, it lolls its tongue out; that is that
people’s likeness who cried lies to our signs. (Surah al-A’raf 7:176);
We have created for Gehenna many jinn and men; they have hearts, but
understand not with them; they have eyes, but perceive not with them;
they have ears, but hear not with them. They are like cattle; nay,
rather they are further astray. (Surah al-A’raf 7:179).

[^7]: Fayz al-Islam Nahj al-Balaghah, p.687

[^8]: Ibid, p.993

[^9]: Antonio Cassese, Human Rights in an UN-united World, translated by
Dr. Kalantariyan, p.337

[^10]: See Blue Books: United Nations and Human Rights, p. 291. It must
be noted that the freedom to adopt a religion has always heen
controversial in the declarations of human rights. Discussing article
18, which mentions the freedom of religion, the Lebanese ambassador to
the United Nations suggested that the freedom to change one’s religion
be added. He reasoned that his country served as an asylum to those who
had changed their religion. The Muslim countries showed severe
reactions, especially the ambassadors of Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Syria.
The ambassador of Saudi Arabia mentioned the advantages the religious
missionaries took of people and their situation and suggested that the
phrase: freedom of religion be mentioncd. The Egyptian ambassador
emboldened many religious missionaries who tried to turn the Muslims to
apostasy. The same discussions were brought up about article 18 of the
covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The ambassadors of Arab
countries and Egypt insisted that the phrase “freedom to change one’s
religion” be changed, however, ultimately with the suggestion of the
ambassadors of the Philippines and Brazil, they decided that instead of
“to change one’s religion”, “to adopt a religion” be used. When the
declaration of religious intolerance was brought up in 1981, the same
discussion took place. This time the ambassador of Iran also disagreed
with this suggestion. The Iraqi ambassador representing the Organization
of Islamic Conference declared the right to reservation to any rules,
which contradicted Islam. The ambassador of Egypt declared that the
spirit governing this declaration is religious forbearance and that no
one can interfere in Egyptian affairs under the pretext of this
declaration and the freedom of religion. See Le Musulman Face/Aux Droit
De l’Homme, p. 194. UN Documents: A/C3/14229 A/C3/1422

[^11]: Sharh-I Lum’ah, Vol.5, p.230.

[^12]: Surah al-Baqarah (2:256)

[^13]: For instance, see Surah Yunus, (10:99), “And if thy Lord has
willed, whoever is in the earth would have believed, all of them, all
together. Wouldst thou then constrain the people, until they are
believers?” And verse 108 of the very surah, “Say: ‘Oh men, the truth
has come to you from your Lord. Whosoever is guided is guided only to
his own gain, and whosoever goes astry, it is only to his own loss. I am
not guardian over you.’”

[^14]: For further information see 'Islam and Human Rights” by the
present writer, Majallah Siyasat-i Khariji, Vizarat-i Umur-i Khariji,
Tenth Year, No. 1, Spring of 1965.

[^15]: Imam Khumaini, Tahrir al-Wasilah, Vol. 2, p. 625, quoted by
Ayatullah Safi.

[^16]: Hamid Ayati, The rights of Artistic Creation, p.71, quotedby
Ayatullah Muntazari and Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi.

[^17]: Ibid, p.70


