Human Rights: The Clashes Between Individual And Collective Rights
==================================================================

**Dr Husayn Salimi**

What are the limitations and the borderlines for human rights? How far
and by what criteria do social rights and welfare limit man’s rights and
freedoms? This is a question of great significance, which without
answering, one cannot reach a universal hypothesis on human rights.

Before we embark on answering the question, which is the main concern of
this article, it is worth mentioning that those who generally propose
questions of this sort tend to mar human rights. The bulk of work
written on this issue is meant to find ways either to threaten human
rights or to flinch them. The best example in this regard is the theory
of Stalinist Marxists on human rights, which tends to invalidate the
theoretical foundations of human rights and to limit them by means of
giving credence to social rights. It cannot be disputed that many of
these theoreticians seek to vindicate the atrocities of Marxist states
and their violation of human rights by reinforcing the general social
welfare.

At this point I deem it necessary to cast a brief glance on this
viewpoint so as to determine that our discussion on the limitations of
human rights and the relationship between individual and collective
rights is totally separate from other views like those of the Marxists.

From the viewpoint of orthodox Marxists, one has to bear in mind a few
hypotheses when discussing human rights:

1) Social rights have priority over individual rights and social
expedience and the expedience of the progressive class has priority over
the rights and welfare of each individual.

2) Human rights are the ideology and power tool of international
capitalists who wish to extend their powers to every part of the globe.

3) Human rights justify the interests of the superior classes of the
society.

Based on these hypotheses, orthodox Marxists have sought to analyse
human rights, intimating various conditions and limitations for
them.[^1] Whenever any international organisation remonstrated against
the violation of human rights in the Soviet Union or any eastern bloc
country, their writers, politicians and thinkers discussed human rights
in the light of hypotheses noted above.

Basically, orthodox Marxists are against man’s having inherent right to
freedom and property, believing that this form of defending human rights
is an individualistic outlook arising from the bourgeois trend of
thought which ultimately will end in justifying the interests of the
ruling class in the capitalist system. What in their view can be used,
as the main basis for human rights is the concept of expedience and
public rights. In their eyes, social rights and interests have priority
over the individual’s rights and privileges. Indeed, what is called
human rights serves the interests of those that safeguard the
capitalistic system or those that benefit from it. Thus, human rights
can be violated when social well being is jeopardised.[^2]

Many of the gruesome events, which took place during the Marxist period
in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, were justified in the name of
defending social welfare. The violation of the most fundamental human
rights such as freedom, the right to property and even life was
perpetrated under the pretext of public welfare, which assures true
human rights.

It goes without saying that what we endeavour to express in this article
is radically different from this outlook on human rights. Discussing the
limits that social welfare and rights can create for individual rights
does not mean discounting the inherent rights of individuals or
justifying the violation of human rights under any circumstances.

The Clash Between Individual and Public Rights According to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With a brief glance at the first steps taken in formulating the new
human rights, one wonders if granting extreme freedom to man does not
lead to social chaos. With this view, the formulators of human rights
have striven to find ways to protect human rights and to forestall
social chaos. Therefore, individual and public welfare has become so
complicating an issue that they have not yet found a fundamental
solution to it.

The first indication of this perturbation can be observed in the
Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen approved on August
26, 1789. According to this Declaration, “men are born free, remain free
and equal in rights; the aim of all political association is the
preservation of the natural and imprescriptable rights of man. These
rights are liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression.”

In Article four, liberty is thus described. “Liberty consists in the
freedom to do everything, which injures no one else: hence, the exercise
of the natural rights of each man has no limits except those which
assure to the other members of the society the enjoyment of the same
rights. Law can only determine these limits.”[^3]

According to Article five of the same Declaration, “Law cannot prohibit
such actions as are hurtful to society. Noting can be prevented which is
not forbidden by law, and no one may be forced to do anything not
provided for by law.”[^4] According to this Declaration, law is the
expression of the general will and what the people’s representatives
determine is the manifestation of law and general will.

As observed in this Declaration, there are some limits for individual
rights and freedoms, which are, accepted facts. That human rights and
freedoms are limited where they are injurious to society or where the
rights of others are infringed upon is a concept accepted as the first
and most impassioned step in formulating human rights. This is the point
where the clash between individual and public rights emerges, as the
representatives of every society, basically known as fomrnlators of the
general will according to the Universal Declaration of Rights, can
detemiinc the limits and the hurtful aspects of human rights.

Since there are different values, cultures, principles and traditions
among different nations, a number of different interpretations appear:
What is hurtful? What threatens public well being? How and by what
criteria must the law limit individual rights and freedoms? This is the
crux, which may give a different spin to the fate of human rights in
different countries.

Different solutions are provided to this crux within the context of
political obligations and the dominant culture within each society. In
the eighteenth and nineteenth century France, the first step to
safeguard and advance human rights was taken in what appeared to be the
violation of the basic human rights. At that time it was deemed
advisable that the revolutionary authority of the French Community be
guarded against alien aggression and that the power of the French
government, which served to protect revolutionary values and those of
the general public, be consolidated.

The achievement of this aim called for a powerful army, independent of
the wealth of the feudalists and nobles. With respect to this law,
miltary service was made obligatory. Obligatory military service is a
clear sign for limiting human rights with the purpose of serving public
welfare.[^5] By virtue of this law, men are deprived, for some time, of
choosing profession and residence, of the right of political choice and
sometime-even life itself and placed under full military supervision and
service to ensure public security. Historians state that the armed
forces are created as a result of obligatory military service, as one of
the pillars of the French government and that of Napoleon Bonaparte.[^6]
It was an army, which marched along with its soldiers, French
revolutionary values and new concepts like human and civil rights to the
far reaches of the world .

However, the army in question consisted of men who were deprived of
parts of their rights to ensure public security. Accordingly, limiting
human rights to ensure public welfare existed at the very first step of
formulating them. Perhaps, that is why the formulators of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights have sought to block all the ways to the
abusing of this inevitable necessity. Attempts have been made not to
include any limits or stipulations for the basic human rights in the
totality of the 30 articles of the Universal declaration of Human
Rights. The preamble to the Universal declaration of Human Rights,
states:

This Universal Declaration of Human Rights a common standard of
achievement for all peoples and nations, to the end that every
individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration
constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote
respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures,
national and international, to secure their universal and effective
recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member States
themselves and among the peoples of the Territories under their
jurisdiction.[^7]

According to the Universal Declaration, human rights are, therefore, an
ideal for which everyone should strive. By way of avoiding any probable
misinterpretation for the violation of human rights, the last article of
the Declaration (article 30) states: “Nothing in this Declaration may be
interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right to
engage in any activity to perform any act aimed at the destruction of
any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein.”[^8]

These emphasises show the deep awareness of the formulators of these
international bills as to the misinterpretations made with the effect of
violating fundamental human rights . Besides, they imply that they are
fully aware of the clash between individual and collective rights. For
the same reason, a similar emphasis is made in Article Five of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights declared
on December 16, 1966:

Nothing in the present Covenant may be interpreted as l) Implying for
any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to
perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights or
freedoms recognised herein, or at their limitation to a greater extent
than is provided for in the present Covenant. No restriction upon or
derogation from any of the fundamental 2) Human rights or existing in
any country in virtue of law, conventions, regulations or customs shall
be admitted on the pretext that the present Covenant does not recognise
such rights or that it recognises them to a lesser extent.[^9]

Emphases of this sort are frequently observed in other books or
interpretations on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Can the
point that states or governments should in no case violate human rights
be a legal solution to the violation of human rights? Can we shut eyes
to the fact that states and governments inevitably limit individual
rights and freedoms to serve social interests? The answer stems from the
ill intention of the ideological States that oppose human rights but in
general, it arises from inescapable social facts.

The article on Hygiene and Human Rights in *Payam-i* *UNESCO* provides a
striking example of these facts. The article centres on the point that
when mortal diseases like AIDS spread, and social health and even life
is jeopardised, the States have no choice but to limit human freedoms
and check their slightest movements. In fact, when it seems necessary to
prohibit freedom of movement, residence, and intercourse in case of fear
for the spread of maladies, which threaten social life, limiting human
rights is meant to safeguard social welfare and expedience.[^10]

At first glance, this issue seems to be an established principle well
understood by the formulators of human rights. As cited from the French
Declaration of Human Rights in the preceding pages, legitimate Staes
arising from public will and the free choice of people have the right to
promulgate laws which serve the rights of the entire community. Such
laws originate from the general will, which determines social welfare
and limits human rights.

This idea is suggested in paragraph two of article 29 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, “In the exercise of his rights and
freedoms, everyone shall be subject only to such limitations as are
determined by law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and
respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of meeting the just
requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a
democratic society.”

Of course, in paragraph three of the same article, it says, “These
rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations.”[^11]

Apparently, this solution has put an end to this crux, namely that if
democracy is established in a society, the law in this democratic
society can determine the conditions for achieving the full realisation
of the just requirements of morality, public order, and the general
welfare and these conditions are the limitations, which the general
welfare imposes on individual rights.

However, this is the point from which the inextricable crux of human
rights comes up. What if they establish a democratic society without
promulgating laws in harmony with those enumerated in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights? Should we ignore the general will,
considering article 30 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
article 5 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, for the sake of observing the principles in these bills? Should
we place a nation as opposed to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights if through democratic means that it administers religious
principles as the paradigm of its ruling policy? Questions of this kind
bring up more fundamental questions with respect to human rights. Can
human rights be universal without considering the differences in
culture, religion and race?

If we take it for granted that the new human rights stem from modern
man’s thoughts and modern western civilisation, is it not possible that
the nations of the world may interpret and utilise human rights in the
light of their own cultures and religions? Alternatively, is the
universality of the present human rights dependent on the universality
of western beliefs and values?

The general welfare and interests in each society are determined in
accordance with culture, nationality and religion. Now should we ignore
the culture and religion of a nation when there is a clash between its
religion and culture and the new human rights? Is such a thing possible?
If yes, is such an insistence not an indication of the disregard of the
present realities in different nations?

These questions will be dealt with in the remaining pages of the present
article. In case we fail to find definite answers to them, we could at
least propose them properly.

Two Views on the Universality of Human Rights
---------------------------------------------

Nowadays there are diverse articles on human rights written with the
purpose of answering such questions as proposed earlier in this article.
Amidst the topics which interest modern scholars are the impacts of
nationality and national traits on the concepts of human rights, the
differences and diversities among the nations and their effect on human
rights, the universality and non-universality of western interpretation
of human rights and the effect of ideas, philosophies, and religions on
the concepts and the exercise of human rights.

As an example, A.G. Milen seeks to answer these fundamental questions in
a book entitled *Human Rights and Human Diversity.* He discusses human
rights under two main titles *morality* and *rules*. In his opinion, the
social roots of morality are, on the one hand, common and universal and
on the other hand, different and regional. The concepts of justice, good
and evil are accepted by all in one way or another; however, two
different elements, namely religion and ideology, among different
peoples give rise to different principles of morality and different
norms of good and evil in different societies.[^12]

As each society is built upon the prevailing normality and customs,
human rights are interpreted differently in different nations. Hence,
the idea of human rights, in Milen’s opinion, may ultimately be
recognised as the modicums of the universal moral rights and exercised
at different stages.[^13] Consequently, due to the existence of
different traditions, norms, moralities, religions and ideologies, human
rights are interpreted and exercised differently which may be
universalised as the modicums that the universal morality accepts as
rights.[^14]

Like many other writers, Milen wishes to generalise human rights but the
point has come within his grasp that human rights cannot be exercised
equally and equitably for all societies merely because human societies
are very different from one another.

Notwithstanding, there are writers like Jack Donnelly who lay stress on
the universality of human rights despite the fundamental differences in
religion, culture, and ideas. Donnelly maintains that the universality
of human rights arises from the simple principle that every one has
rights because they are human beings, not because they live in such and
such a society. He asserts that although man develops different cultural
traits in different societies, different cultures and cultural
relativism do not in the least impair the universality of human
rights.[^15] What is introduced as human rights by different religions
such as Islam and Confucianism or African interpretations is not in fact
human rights but a group of common themes in relation to human rights
and is only an interpretation by a certain religion.

In Donnelley’s eyes, the term right embodies a political and an ethical
conception in all languages. These two concepts include being right and
rightful. In the former, what is meant is being in the right and in the
latter, having right. He posits that human rights embrace the two
concepts, namely those human rights are a truth and a right to be
enjoyed by man by virtue of his nature. According to him, human rights
belong to a certain category of rights.

Human rights are ethical, arising from the humanity of man, confined to
the highest level of social rights. However, they may affect the lower
rights. For instance, non-discrimination may affect the legal rights of
homosexuals and the rights of employment in a country like the United
States.[^16]

In Donnelley’s view, the main source of human rights is Man’s Moral
nature, deriving from man’s nature. Human nature can be illustrated
based on a scientific definition of his needs, not meaning, of course,
human needs for survival but rather for conducting an existence worthy
of the dignity of man.

Unlike other social activities, Human rights are not granted to man by
the one Supreme Being, nature or the physical facts of life but rather
they spring from man’s free will.[^17] For this hypothesis, Donnelley
offers no scientific or philosophical reasons but states it as an
obvious hypothesis, which is the root of universal human rights.

In addition, he asserts that the individual constitutes the basic
subject of human rights. It is the individual, not general and social
welfare, which is the intent of human rights.[^18]

Elsewhere Donnelley gives examples from other religions and cultures
such as Islam, Christianity, and Chinese and African philosophy to the
effect that the notion of human rights existed not only among Western
countries but among non-Western states as well. However, the notion of
human rights in these cultures is totally apart from the human rights
stemming from western liberalism . Quoting Edward Said, he asserts,
“Islam does not declare that the state should preserve man’s dignity and
values and that it should assure his happiness.[^19] Hence, Donnelley
believes that Islam focuses more attention on man’s duties than on human
rights.

Ultimately, Donnelley maintains that multiculturalism and cultural
relativism are by no means impediments in the way of the
universalization of human rights. What in different societies is
affected by their cultures indicates the ways that human rights are
exercised but not their totality and foundation because human rights
arise from human nature, manifested in its best form within the context
of western liberalism.[^20]

This is one of the ideas, which seek, by refuting the claims of
culturalists and relativists, to prove that human rights are universal
and that nothing can cause to change them in any areas or cultures.
While the individual is the cornerstone of human rights, no one shall
have the right to limit or impair the rights included in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights in the name of the collective rights or
under the pretext of differences in needs or conditions in a certain
culture.

In defiance of the fact that ethnocentrism is imputed to a fundamental
and important matter in international studies and human rights, it has
left but a slight influence on human rights. Article 27 of the
International Covenant on Civil and political Rights declares that “in
those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist,
persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied the right, in
community with the other members of their group, to enjoy their own
culture, to profess and practice their own religion or to use their own
language.”[^21] This implies that the formulators of human rights well
knew that ethnocentrism in different communities could possbly affect
the exercise of human rights.

Although this article tends to the maintenance and preservation of human
rights even in societies with different ethnic backgrounds, it also
signifies that the influence of ethnic difference on the exercise of
human rights is not a matter to be disregarded. This point has been of
interest to Rodolfo Staven Hagen, which he has treated, in his *Ethnic
Questions*.[^22]

In view of the different ideas furnished here, let us return to our
discussion on the impact of limiting the collective rights and benefits
on human rights. Although commentators have placed emphasis on the
universality of human rights, it seems that human rights shall have
different conditions to be fulfilled due to the existence of different
mechanisms in determining the general welfare in different societies.
This, of course, does not defy universal principles, known as human
rights. However, it affects the exercise of human rights. The two
backgrounds, which we shall deal with, are scientifically verified which
will cause differences in giving shape to the general welfare in
different societies and naturally will affect the strategies of
exercising or limiting human rights.

### Cultural Relativism

The cultures generally distinguished by their language or art indicate
the spiritual identity of different social groups, people or nations.
The existence of different cultures suggests the existence of diverse
identities, customs, manners and values which different people have
chosen to live by. This concept is one of the principles of
anthropology. Fundamentally, cultural anthropology has come into
existence with a view to investigating the reasons for cultural
differences and to find out why people in different societies choose
different ways for living.[^23]

For instance, wearing clothes in a certain fashion is considered a habit
or even a value in one society whereas it is looked upon with contempt
or surprise in other societies. Why are the concepts of good and evil,
right and wrong, loss and benefit, different in different societies?
Cultural anthropology seeks to answer questions of this sort by
discovering the differences among peoples in different societies.

The concept of cultural relativism is of the main principles of modern
anthropology. “Of the most important principles of anthropology, is
cultural relativism, that is, the ability to look upon the beliefs and
customs of different peoples according to their own cultural boundaries
not ours.”[^24]

In the broad sense of the term, culture is a system of beliefs, values,
manners and customs applied by the society members to adjust themselves
to the situation in which they live or to one another. Culture consists
in the sets of behaviour acquired by instruction, reward and
frustration, which teach man the social behaviour.

Culture is a system of socialisation and social assimilation.[^25]
Because social assimilation differs in different societies and the
cultures are different, it seems natural not to evaluate them with a
single touchstone.

Although the anthropologists adopt different attitudes in explicating
the cultural differences in different societies, they admit to these
differences and by a general consensus, declare that they can give rise
to different social procedures each one of which in one way or another
is effective in determining the general welfare. Hence, the existence of
different spiritual identities and cultures specifies the ways of
determining the general welfare and reinforcing individual rights.

Multiculturalism somehow has its roots in the selfsame anthropological
findings and has an inescapable fact made by different cultures in
different societies. Multiculturalism is juxtaposed with
monoculturalism.[^26]

Monoculturalism, basically arising from western culture and
Euro­American culture, believes in the supremacy of a certain culture,
which will soon pervade the entire universe. The values proceeding from
modem western thought have pervasive quality and monoculturalism states
that regional cultures will soon and inevitably be incorporated into
this culture.[^27]

The concept of universalisation in international relations or the idea
of the end of history proffered by Fukuyama is in a way assimilated with
monoculturalism[^28] because in all these theories, the existence of a
superior and unique culture: which will absorb all other cultures, is
universally accepted. In other words, it is generally believed that the
power and potentialities of this culture exceed those of other cultures
and history will ultimately flow in a course in which the communities
will reach a common point in their cultures and norms.

The notion of the universality of today’s human rights shares this
belief and authorities like Donnelley who offer its universality believe
that human rights in their entirety have roots in western liberalism and
like monoculturalists and the advocates of the universalization of human
rights regard the western values as superior and developing in all parts
of the world.

It is worth mentioning that the writer of this present article thinks
that the fundamental individual rights should not be sought out in the
western culture and community, for these rights spring from human beings
which cannot be limited by the norms arising from a certain culture or
value. The crux of contemporary human rights is intensified where it is
limited and interwoven with another culture and attempts are made to
assimilate the treatment of religion, the relation between God and man,
the way of dressing, and even the judiciary methods with human rights
within the realm of western culture.

While some commentators regard the universality of human rights in this
way, they tend to accept monoculturalism and do not tend to accept the
fundamental role of different cultures in the exercise of human rights.

As opposed to this view stand the multiculturalists. Multiculturalism
which is based on facts from cultural studies suggests that the
different nations, communities and groups due to having history, social
heritage, language and consequently different cultures have different
identities and adopt separate methods of living.[^29] Based on the views
the multiculturalists, which have recently turned in the form of Chicago
Cultural Studies to Critical Multiculturalism, stress that the
universalisation of some principles of the Western culture is
impossible.

What Clinton states as the *American fashion of life* and what George
Bush recalls as the *new universal system* because it is based on some
kind of monoculturalism, are criticised by this group.[^30] This
criticism includes the attempt to universlise and assimilate the
political models and systems. According to this group, the historical
heritage and the different cultural identities of peoples cause the
political systems and different decision-making organisations to take
shape in different countries and even democracy if accepted, shall have
varying fonns and even different natures in different countries.[^31]

The much debated subjects in multiculturalism are extensive, and out of
the scope of the present article. However, what can be the corollary to
this current of thought is the impossibility of complete assimilation of
social, political and cultural conditions in different societies. Over
the recent years, this concept has been debated not only by different
thinkers and theoreticians but in international assemblies as well.

In the World Conference on Cultural Policies held in Mexico City in
1982, much emphasis has been placed on the cultural differences and the
necessity of preserving the cultural identity of different nations. In
the report of the first commission, cultural identity is thus explained:

Cultural identity is the fundamental axis which gives shape to most
decisions, conducts and fundamental behaviors and a dynamic process
which enables the society to develop and preserve its specific
characteristics.[^32]

In the recommendations of the conference, the first part is allotted to
cultural identity. Somewhere it says, “The conference accepts that
cultural identity is determined not only in distinguishing between the
forms and ways of cultures and arts of a people, but includes the
spiritual values of a people in morality, habits and customs of that
people as a whole.[^33] Hence, the States gathered in Mexico City
Conference accept that peoples can have different spiritual values and
found their social life on this basis. Hence, they suggest. “The Member
States are recommended that they should:

1. Respect the preservation of cultural identity of all nations, places
and peoples and fight any discrimination in cultural identity of other
countries, places and peoples

2. Develop the cultural identity through all suitable means

3. Protect the cultural and national heritage which determine the
national and cultural identity by analyzing their contents and
importance

4. Accept that culture is created by people and that the people’s life
is the source of all cultural creativities and that culture should arise
from real life of people in order that the possibility of reaching a
constant progress becomes available.[^34]

Therefore, the existence of different cultural identities and values and
the need for preserving these differences and the compromising change of
these between them is accepted by all the participants in the
conference. Of course, these declarations and recommendations contain
extensive dimensions and varying concepts. However, this point can be
stressed that the existence of identities and different ways of life and
socio-cultural values in different nations are accepted in this
conference and their recommendations and reports reveal the recognition
and importance of cultural differences in the world.

On the same basis, some new views on social sciences especially
international relation are based on the fundamental cultural differences
between different nations and parts of the world. Regardless of the
point whether these theories are completely acceptable or not, the
existence of them reveals the attention that modern scientists pay to
fundamental cultural differences between nations in different cultural
realms of the world.

Samuel Huntington’s view on the clash between civilizations, which has
attracted much attention, is a striking instance of such views.
Huntington states, “Civilization is a cultural entity. The villages, the
ethnic groups, lands, nationalities, and religious sects all have
certain cultures which contradict each other at different stages. The
culture of a village in the north of Italy may be different from the
village in the south of Italy but they have in common the Italian
culture, which distinguish them from German villages. The European
communities have common cultural features, which distinguish them from
Arab communities . The Arabs, the Chinese, and the westerners are not
considered as a part of an extensive cultural entity, but that each one
of them constitutes a civilization. Hence, civilization is the highest
cultural classification and the most extensive cultural identity.

The civilization should be defined concerning common elements (language,
history, religion, traditions, and organizations) and about the mental
associations of men.[^35] Somewhere else, he says, “the difference
between civilizations is fundamental. The civilizations are
distinguished from history, language, culture, tradition, and religion.
Their views on the relation between man and God, individual and group,
State and citizen, husband and wife, parents and children and issues
such as freedom, equality and hierarchical order are different. These
differences are far more important than political and ideological
differences.”[^36]

Undoubtedly, Huntington’s definition of civilization and their ways of
treating this are debated and tens of books and articles have so far
been written on this issue. However, why are Huntington’s views and his
explanations on the differences between seven or eight main
civilizations of the world (western, Confucian, Japanese, Islamic,
Hindu, Slav-orthodox, Latin American and African) so interesting under
the present conditions? Today, even the commentators believe that this
interest in Huntington’s approach is due to an unknown fact.[^37] He has
attracted the authorities to a subject, which has been paid less
attention to. Hence, those who have launched severe attacks on views of
the clash between civilizations, implicitly accept that there are
different civilization-cultural realms in the world today in which the
foundations of socio-political relations are different and this is the
point which we have in mind in this article. On the same basis,
Huntington calls the West Unique not universal in the Foreign Affairs in
his recent article. He holds that the western culture and civilization
are based on history, language, social classification and different
cultures which shall never be repeated in all parts of the world, for
the concept of modernization is different from the concept of
westernisation and no nation shall ever be able to be western without
enjoying the historical, cultural, and political conditions particular
to the west.[^38]

Based on principles, which claim to universalisation, if mingled with
the western culture and civilization the possibility of universalisation
is taken from it. This concept does not only spring from Huntington’s
views but from the views of those who accept the fundamental
socio-cultural differences between different cultural realms.

The Gras School in France developed by the leadership of Allan Debenoius
is an instance of this. This school of thought severely criticized
Huntington’s views and regarded them as Western expansionism against the
world’s cultures. The thoughts of Allan Debenoius and his counterparts
are close to the right wing even the French radical right wing. However,
they regard their most important duty to criticize the western
civilization against American leaders. Debenoius believes that democracy
and new liberalism are at a dead-end and that the nations of the world
have cultural identities and life, which ultimately stand against the
western developing ideology and culture and even the human rights
arising from them.[^39]

In short, the Gras School opposes the complete assimilation and
universalisation of western values. They defend the nations’ right to
difference and seek to prove the cultural identity of different nations
against the American technocracy. In their views, the nations with
cultural and civilization identity will stand against the assimilation
and universalisation and the tomorrow of the world shall belong to
countries such as Iran, Egypt, India and China, which have deep cultures
and civilizations.[^40]

The resistance of these nations and all groups, who wish to preserve
their identity against the westerners, will create the future tensions
of the world. Allan Debenoius regards the ideology of human rights as an
American model and although he does not reject it altogether, he
believes that the right of nations and the preservation of cultural
identity of nations have priority over human rights.[^41]

The aim of pointing to the current thoughts of Gras school is not the
approval of all the stances including the complete rejection of human
rights, but shows this point that the consideration of
civilization-cultural differences in different thoughts can influence
the concept of universalisation of western interpretations of human
rights.

Therefore, the existence of cultural differences between different
nations and areas is an undeniable fact. Undoubtedly, these differences
will have a determining effect on the ways of formation and collective
interests in different parts of the world. Considering that collective
interests are given shape to through democratic ways, the main factor
limiting human rights is different in different societies. Hence, the
way of applying human rights in cultural areas and in different parts
shall be different. This does not mean the limiting of human rights, but
a study of human rights as a principle separate from the western
reading.

The western reading of human rights which has been present in fomulating
the Universal Declarations of Human Rights has been used in the most
particular aspects of human life such as dressing, the relation between
men and women and civil law and sought to organize the most particular
social conduct on this basis regardless of the fact that the different
socio-cultural conditions in different countries do not allow the
assimilation of all social conducts and organizations even under the
pretext of human rights.

The existence of different regimes and political systems in different
countries shows the existence of different processes for decision-making
and the ways of safeguarding collective interests among nations. These
different processes shall influence the decisions and the nature of the
decisions taken in different nations. When Graham Alison drew his
decision-making models, he well realized that the nature of the
organizations and decision-making systems would influence the nature of
the decision-making processes.[^42] Of course, Alison’s model is used
more for decision-making in foreign policies but one can realize that
the existence of the different political organizations and systems shall
be followed by collective interests.

In *Countries and Concepts*, Michael Roskin has made a comparison on
different political systems in the seven important countries of the
world. After examining the historical background and the vital role of
history in shaping the political systems of these countries, he has
scrutinized the main political foundations of these countries. He holds
that there are key organizations in the policy-making of any country,
the recognition of which is one of the main factors in recognizing the
political system in that country. The main political norms of any
country are the second main factor in the shaping of policy.[^43]

The models of political wings to each other and the methods and models
which each political group uses in relation to its opposite side, are
the third main factor in policy and ultimately, the issues under debate
in each country and the political groups are the fourth main factor in
the general decision-makings. Hence, the different political systems are
distinguished from one another based on important organizations,
strategies and action models and the issues under debate. Undoubtedly,
the method of decision-making on the main discussed issues in any
community will be different from one another. In other words, the
existence of different political systems will cause the collective
interests in any society to be substantially contradictory to those of
others.

Here, our discussion is not on the recognition of the backgrounds of
differences in political systems but we propose to clarify this point
that the different political regimes will nourish within them different
collective interests and these different collective interests shall to a
large extent influence the different attitudes towards human rights.

The existence of communistically political system in China will cause
the collective interests as to the present ideal of any regime to be
defined differently from those in Taiwan, which has a different
political system. The culture, rituals, traditions and languages of the
two countries are the same but the their different political systems
have caused the collective interests in these two countries to have
contradictory definitions. The interpretation of human rights and the
methods of limiting them by collective interests are extremely different
in the two countries.

The different interpretations of the interests in North Korea and South
Korea are another instance of the influence of political systems on the
methods of determining collective interests and treating human rights.
This is intensified when the political system of a country is mingled
with the certain ideology or political theory and that this ideology is
the basis for the legitimacy of that political system.

The sovereignty of religion in society especially when it is done with
certain democratic mechanisms can also influence the political system
and the method of determining the social welfare. In Saudi Arabia, the
Islamic republic of Iran and the Islamic republic of Pakistan, Islam is
considered the official religion but the main basis is political. Except
in Saudi Arabia, in both countries, Islam is chosen through democratic
means by the majority of the community as the basis for government. It
is understood that it will have the most important influence on the
shaping of collective interests and the general welfare and the methods
of exercising human rights.

Of course the existence of different political systems in these three
countries have caused different interpretations of Islam and the methods
of determining collective interests on the basis of Islamic
thoughts.[^44] This shows the independent influence of political systems
on the methods of determining collective interests even in the countries
in which they have accepted a single religion for the social welfare. In
these three countries, the way of looking at women’s rights, the
people’s participation in political matters, and the methods of
exercising judicial laws, the freedom of religions are exceedingly
different. These differences arise not only from different
interpretations of religion but from political systems. Also, there are
some common points in the functions of these countries.

Hence, the existence of different political systems especially when
ideology and religion are interwoven the method of interpreting human
rights will be different.

Undoubtedly, this is not alien to any theoretician on human rights, but
many thinkers view this affair with a critical eye and believe that the
universal ideal of human rights is such that all the political systems
in the world will adapt themselves to it. In other words, the advocates
of the complete universalisation of human rights accept the fundamental
difference between political regimes but believe that the universal
current of human rights require to influence the unacceptable political
systems in order that they make ready to fully exercise human rights.

This great expectation reminds man of the idealistic goals between the
two World Wars. They believed that with the spread of morality, the
international organizations could overcome the discussions, debates and
blood shedding in the international arena. With the advent of fascism,
Nazism and the second world war, the idealists came to a dead-end and it
seems that the advocates of the unconditional universalisation of human
rights shall suffer a similar fate in encountering the facts arising
from different political regimes.

Hans J. Morgenta believed that human and international rights took shape
in the exchange of powers, namely when the superpowers of the world
would create a balanced atmosphere at international plane. However, even
under such circumstances, human rights might turn into a power tool in
the hands of the superpowers.[^45]

At all events, the undeniable differences between political systems are
an assumption on which modem sociology is founded. These differences not
only detennine the mechanisms determining the social welfare but also
lend different nature to the concept of collective interests, the
general welfare and human rights.

Conclusion
----------

Human rights arise from man’s inherent rights; hence, one cannot
consider them as synonymous with the reading or interpretation of a
certain domain of human civilization Assuredly, men are inherently noble
and have the right to life, property and fundamental freedoms; however,
the way of granting these rights and freedoms cannot be done similarly
throughout the world.

As discussed in this short article, the necessity of limiting human
rights for protecting social welfare is as accepted and emphasized as
the role of human rights. In addition, human rights are accepted in most
of the basic bills on human rights. However, the way of limiting them
exactly refers to cultures and the current necessities within the
different civilizations. Hence, the steps taken with a view to detailing
the regulations regarding the exercise of human rights do not answer the
real needs of different peoples. For instance, the minimum age for
marriage, minimums for clothing of men and women or the ways of civil
judgement are designed on the basis of western models and the attempt to
universalize them is the expansions of western readings rather than
propagating the principles of human rights.

The main contradiction in contemporary human rights arises from the same
thing, for the Universal Declarations of Human Rights allow the limiting
of them through the fixed rules by proletarian states. In other words,
the rules formulated by the State, which is the general will, can limit
human rights for protecting the general welfare. However, if such a
State acts based on the religious teachings accepted by the majority of
people and determine some of the rules determined in the international
regulations of human rights, then it becomes accused of violating human
rights. Therefore, the mechanism arising from within human rights may
lead to the violation of human rights.

At this point, this question emerges if the general will has severe
limitations for determining the social welfare. Can the State play its
role as long as individual rights and interests are not hurt as the
proponents of social convention believe? Apparently, it is impossible to
provide an exact answer to this question, for on the basis of new human
rights, the members of the society should not behave in a way that will
contradict any rules set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights even if they value their local culture or accept a religion as
the criterion for individual and collective interests. It seems that the
right of choice and self-determination and the right to determine public
interests due to facts arising from different cultures and values may be
juxtaposed with some individual rights and freedoms. What is called the
enigma of the clash between individual and collective rights contains
this meaning.

Apparently, the conditions are such that only the cultures, which accord
the western liberalism, shall not encounter this contradiction. Indeed,
can we make equal all cultures and political regimes to reach human
rights? Or in formulating the executive rules of human rights and their
evaluating criteria, we have to move in a direction the realization of
which becomes possible in all parts of the world and the human persons
shall reach their inherent unalienable rights besides protecting the
social identities and originalities.

In a lecture at Tehran University on l0 December 1997 which coincided
the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Kofi Annan, the Secretary General of the United Nations, regarded human
rights as a universal affair:

Human rights are the manifestation of forbearance in all cultures, which
are the basis for peace and progress. If human rights are properly
understood and justly interpreted, they are not alien to any culture.
This universality of human rights gives authority to them, enabling them
to cross the frontiers, the impediments and thwarts any force. Human
rights are universal not because they find their origins in all
traditions and cultures but because they were approved by 185 member
states of the United Nations. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
is the fruit of the discussions of certain scholastic gatherings most of
which were not from the western countries.

This interpretation of human rights universality is different from the
western one. This interpretation in one way or other accords the harmony
of human rights with different cultures. Kofi Annan cites Imam Ali’s
letter to the ruler of Egypt :

Let the treasure of good deeds be the nearest treasure to you; fill your
heart with pity, love and kindness towards others; do not act towards
them like a voracious animal which has fallen upon an easy prey, for
they are either your brothers or equal with you in creation.[^46]

In Kofi Annan’s opinion, human rights are common treasure, which can be
found not only in all religions but also with all eastern and western
philosophers. In his eye, human rights do not spring from western
civilization with which other cultures or peoples should endeavor to
adapt, but arise from man’s nature and accord all cultures. He states:

There is no single model for democracy and human rights or cultural
symbol. However, there should exist democracy, human rights and cultural
freedom for all peoples. Man’s talent shall guarantee respect for these
values in all societies. That is why in Africa, I talk of African human
rights. In other words, we should find the meaning of human rights in
the language of people whom human rights protect. This gives me
confidence that human rights shall some day be universal. Besides
emphasizing equality, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a
fundamental condition for universal variety and this signifies the
authority and eternity of human rights. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights respects universal variety and pluralism, and explicates it
clearly. This Declaration is a standard for an age, which we have in
view, the age in which relations and co-operations between peoples and
nations shall guarantee their durability. The struggle for human rights
has been against tyranny and injustice everywhere; struggle against
slavery, exploitation and racial separation. Today, human rights are not
different from this affair.[^47]

This explanation of the Secretary General of the United Nations is a
fundamental interpretation of human rights and different from the
western reading of these rights which is found with some contemporary
writers. So, human rights arise from man’s nature and find universality
in the mingling with different cultures and civilizations. Moreover,
this is the only interpretation, which shall cause them to last.

[^1]: Zagorka Golabovic, “Philosophical Basis for Human Rights in
Marxism in: Human Rights, Christians, Marxists and Others in Dialogue,
Edited by by Leonard Swilde, (New York: Paragon House, 1991), pp. 71-80.

[^2]: Vesna Pesic, “A Marxist Conception of Equality and the Problem of
Civil Rights, in: Human Rights, Christians, Marxists and Others in
Dialogue, op. cit, pp. 85-100

[^3]: Bill of Human Rights, Ed. Hushang Nasirzadeh, (Tehran, Jihad-I
Danishgahi, 1993), p.89

[^4]: Ibid., p.90

[^5]: Robert Roswell Palmer, The History of Modern World, translated by
A. Mubashiri (Tehran, Khwarazmi, 1991).

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: The United Nations, The United Nations and Human Rights, 1945-1995
(New York: UN, 1996), p. 153.

[^8]: Ibid., p.155

[^9]: Ibid., p.230

[^10]: Jonathan Mann, “Hygiene and Human Rights”, The Message of UNESCO,
no. 301, 1996, pp. 35-40.

[^11]: The United Nations, op.cit., p. 154.

[^12]: A.G. Milen, Human rights and Human Diversity, (New York: State
University of New York Press, 1986), pp.62-70

[^13]: Ibid., pp.102-131

[^14]: Ibid., pp.139-145

[^15]: Jack Donnelley, Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice
(London: Cornell University Press, 1989) pp. 9-12.

[^16]: Ibid., p.13

[^17]: Ibid., p.17

[^18]: Ibid., p.19

[^19]: Ibid., p.52

[^20]: Ibid., pp.143-161

[^21]: The United Nation, op. cit.

[^22]: Rodolfo Staven Hagen, The Ethnic Question, (New York, United
Nations University Press, 1990), pp. 60-63.

[^23]: Daniel Thebes & Fred Plague, Cultural Anthropology, translated
into Farsi by Muhsin Thaliathi, (Tehran: Ilmi, 1996), pp. 25-30.

[^24]: Ibid., p.42

[^25]: Ibid., p.45

[^26]: David Theo Goldberg, Multiculturalism, (Cambridge: Blackwell,
1994), p. 20-35.

[^27]: Ibid., pp.35-43

[^28]: Francis F. Fukuyama, The End of History and Last Man, (New York:
Praeger, 1992).

[^29]: Ibid., pp. 50-56

[^30]: Chicago Cultural Studies Group, “Critical Multiculturalism.” in
op.cit. pp. 114-125.

[^31]: Ibid. pp. 125-135 and see:Ramon A. Cutiere, Ethnic Studies, Op.
cit. pp. 157-168.

[^32]: World Conference on Cultural Policies, (Paris: UNESCO, 1982), p.
22.

[^33]: Ibid., p.59

[^34]: Ibid.

[^35]: Samuel Huntington, The Clash between Civilizations in: The Views
on the Clash between Civilizations, Compiled and translated into Farsi
by Mujtaba Amiri, (Tehran: Bureau for Political and International
Studies, 1995), p. 47.

[^36]: Ibid., pp. 48-49

[^37]: Ibid., pp. 10-25, 85-100

[^38]: Samuel Huntington, “West Unique Not Universal,” in: Foreign
Affairs, Nov./Dec. 1996, pp. 28-47.

[^39]: Allan Debenoius, The Critique of Democracy, translated into Farsi
by Hushang Farkhujastah - not printed.

[^40]: Shahruz Rastigar Namdar, Farewell to the Twentieth Century by
Allan Debenoius, Siyasi­ Iqtisadi Ittilaat, nos. 105, 106, pp. 15-16.

[^41]: Ibid., pp.17 & 18

[^42]: Graham Alison, Methods of Decision-making in Foreign Policies,
translated by Manuchihr Shuja’i (Tehran: Bureau for Political and
Economical Studies, 1994), pp. 70-95.

[^43]: Michael Roskin, Countries and Concepts, (Eaglewood Cliffs:
Prentice: Hall, 1989).

[^44]: Hans J. Morgenta, Policy in Nations, Translated into Farsi by
Humayra Mushirzadah, (Tehran: Bureau for Political and International
Studies, 1994).

[^45]: Kofi Annan’s Lecture at Tehran University on the Occasion of the
Fiftieth Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Tehran: Center for Information of the United Nations, 1997, p. 3.

[^46]: Ibid., p.4

[^47]: Ibid., pp.5-6


