Part Five: Eschatology
======================

**43. Doctrine of the Resurrection
**
We believe that Allah, the Exalted, will revive all people after their
death on a certain day which he has promised them, and that He will then
reward the obedient and punish the wrong-doers. In this simple form,
this is what all the Divine religions and philosophies have accepted,
but Muslims must believe in it because it is contained in the Qur'an
which our Prophet brought, and one who believes in Allah and Muhammad,
His Messenger, must also believe in what is related in the Qur'an:
resurrection on the Day of Judgement, reward and punishment, Paradise
(al-jannah) and its blessings (an -na'im), the Fire (an-nar) and Hell
(al-jahim). About one thousand verses in the Qur'an have mentioned the
Day of Resurrection. There is no reason to doubt it, unless one doubts
Allah, His Power and His Messenger. In fact this amounts to doubting all
religions.


**44. Doctrine of Bodily Resurrection
**
This is one of the fundamentals of Islam, as it is said in the
Qur'an:

What! Does man reckon We shall not gather his bones. Yes, indeed, We
are able to shape again his fingers. (75;4)

If thou wouldst wonder, surely wonderful is their saying : What, when
we are dust shall we indeed then be raised up again in a new creation.
(13;5)

To state it succinctly, bodily resurrection means that man's
terrestrial body will be revived after having been destroyed, and it
will return to its first form after it has rotted in the earth. It is
not necessary to believe in resurrection in its details, and more than
has been revealed in the Qur'an. But we must believe in those
particulars which are mentioned in the Book, such as al-hisab (the
reckoning), as-sirat [^12] (the bridge), al-mizan (the balance),
al-jannah (Paradise) and an-nar (Hell), ath-thawab (reward) and al-'iqab
(punishment).

"Knowledge of these subjects in detail is not incumbent upon us:

whether these earthly bodies will return or identical ones; whether
souls will be lost like bodies or whether they will wait to join their
bodies on the Day of Resurrection; whether resurrection is only for
humans or if it is for all animals as well; whether it will happen
suddenly or gradually. As long as we believe in Paradise and Hell, it is
not necessary for us to know if they have already been created or
whether they will be created in the future; if they are in the sky, or
on the earth or in various different places. Similarly, when we believe
in al-mizan, it is unnecessary to know if it is a spiritual entity or a
physical one with two pans, nor is it necessary to know if as-sirat is a
thin material object or a spiritual straightness".

So Islam has stated these things about the resurrection in outline. If
someone wants to question about them further than their mention in the
Qur'an, in order to satisfy himself and remove doubts which have been
raised by those who seek a rational explanation or to understand these
things through the senses, such a person does wrong, and will fall into
difficulties and disputes that have no end. There is nothing in the
religious texts concerning those details with which the philosophers and
theologians have filled their books. Nor is there any religious, social
or political necessity which causes them to fill their books with such
writings and discussions. There is no use in these inquiries, unless it
is to consume energy by thinking. It is enough to say that the details
of resurrection raise doubts which we are unable to dispel and problems
which are beyond our understanding.

That the resurrection will come is beyond doubt, because Allah, Who is
Omniscient and Omnipotent, has announced it. Human knowledge,
experiments or other methods of verification are incapable of
discovering anything which is beyond human experience, and man can
neither observe nor see the resurrection until after his death and his
removal from the terrestrial world to the everlasting world, so how can
he prove or deny it independently by thought or experiment? And he is
even less capable of understanding its details and peculiarities.
because he depends for this on prediction, intuition, and mere
fascination with amazing and surprising things. This is what human
nature is accustomed to do with anything with which it is unfamiliar
through its senses or through the sciences.

It is the same with the man who shows his ignorance concerning the
strangeness of resurrection. So Allah has mentioned his amazement in the
Qur'an:

Who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed. (36;78)

The only reason for his amazement is that man has never seen any
decayed or rotten corpse that has been brought back to life, but he
forgets how he was when he was created in the first place, when he was
nothing, and the components of his body were scattered here and there.
Then they were collected from the earth, from this place and that, so
that he became a perfect, intelligent man possessing speech. The Qur'an
says:

Has not man regarded how We created him of a sperm-drop? Then lo, he is
a manifest adversary. And he has struck for us a similitude and has
forgotten his creation. (36;77-78)

It should be said to such a man:

Say, He shall quicken them (the bones) Who originated them the first
time; He knows all creation. (36;79)

While he professes faith in the Creator of all beings, His Power. His
Messenger and what he brought, how can he deny the resurrection? His
science is so limited that he does not know how he was created and how
he changed from a sperm drop which has no sense, will or wisdom, into
higher states, climbing gradually; how he was built up from different
particles so that he became a perfect man possessing wisdom, foresight,
sense and feeling. So, after noting these facts, how can he still find
it so strange that he will be resurrected after having rotted away? Is
it so very surprising that, with his limited knowledge and experience,
he cannot understand what he can see? There is no way, except he must
believe, submit and profess this truth which has been taught by the
Disposer of all beings, Who is Omniscient and Omnipotent and has created
man from nothing.

Every discussion about seeking knowledge which is impossible to find,
and which present knowledge is unable to discover, is as useless as a
man who is lost in the desert, or who wants to distinguish between two
colours in pitch darkness. Man, who has discovered radar, electricity
and split the atom still hasn't discovered the true nature of either
electricity or the atom. If someone had mentioned these discoveries in
previous centuries, man would have thought them impossible and ridiculed
them at once. So how can he hope to investigate Creation? or discover
the facts about resurrection?

He must, after accepting Islam, avoid following his desires, and start
doing that which has value for his hereafter and this world, and that
which will raise his rank in the presence of Allah, the Exalted. He
should think about that which can help him when he dies, and those
difficulties which he will encounter in his grave and at his
resurrection, when he will find himself in the presence of the
Omniscient King. So he should:

beware of a day when no soul for another shall give satisfaction, and
no intercession shall be accepted from it, nor any compensation be taken
from it, neither shall they be helped. (2;48)

