Appendix : the Life of Ash-shaykh Muhammad Rida Al-muzaffar
===========================================================

The writer of this book comes from a respected family called by the
name of al-Muzaffar. This family of academics and scholars has been
recognised by this name in Najaf since the twelfth century of the hijra.
Some members of the family reside in al-Jaza'ir, which is in the
district of Basra (in Iraq).

The father of ash-Shaykh Muhammad Rida al-Muzaffar, ash-Shaykh Muhammad
ibn 'Abdullah, a jurist and amujtahid, was amarja'at-taqlid. Born and
educated in Najaf, he spent his youth in studies, his only other
activity being prayer and teaching, until he had distinguished himself
as a great jurist. He wrote a very comprehensive commentary on the'Shara
i' al-Islam'[^13] which he named'Tawhid al-Kalam'.

Muhammad Rida al-Muzaffar was born on the 5th of Sha'ban, 1322 A.H.,
.1904 A.D., five months after the death of his illustrious father. Since
his father died before he was born neither could meet each other, and
Muhammad Rida grew up under the guardianship of his elder brother
ash-Shaykh 'Abdu 'n-Nabi, who devoted so much love and affection on the
child that he did not feel the absence of his father.

Ash-Shaykh al-Muzaffar grew up in the learned atmosphere of Najaf. He
took part in the meetings of its groups and circles of learning, as well
as attending lectures and classes. He took part in the most advanced
seminars, and received recognition of the highest order from the most
celebrated jurists and teachers. He developed his full potentiality
within one of the most scholarly families in Najaf, under the
guardianship of his two elder brothers, ash-Shaykh 'Abdu 'n-Nabi and
ash-Shaykh Muhammad Hasan.

After he had completed the syllabus which is customarily taught in the
Islamic madrassahs in Najaf, and after he had achieved great
distinction, he attended the classes given by his brother, ash-Shaykh
Muhammad Hasan, as well as the classes of ash-Shaykh Aqa Dia'd-din
al-,Iraqi in Islamic jurisprudence, and the lectures of Mirza Muhammad
Husayn Na'ini in law (fiqh) and jurisprudence. However, he was most
deeply impressed by the classes of ash-Shaykh Muhammad Husayn
al-Isfahani and was most particular in attending all the talks and
lectures of this eminent scholar of law, jurisprudence and philosophy.
He was so impressed by this teacher that he never failed to pay him the
highest tributes whenever the occasion presented itself. He followed the
method of this scholar in the arrangement of his own famous work on
Islamic jurisprudence, 'Usul al-Fiqh'.

His keen interest in his studies was noted by all his teachers, and by
the authorities of the religious academies of Najaf. so he was given the
highest degree of ijtihad. It will he remembered that all throughout his
studies, ash-Shaykh al-Muzaffar remained an active teacher of law,
jurisprudence and philosophy. However, his chief occupation was the
establishment of 'Muntada an-Nashr', an institute for the publication of
books on modern lines, with the purpose of renovating the syllabus of
the madrassahs. He devoted his life to the growth and development of
this institute, the need for which he was most aware of because he had
undertaken to acquaint himself with modern ways of thinking and
intellectual trends right from the very beginning.

He made it the main purpose of his life to bring about a rebirth of
Islamic learning, and to achieve this aim he wrote many books in a more
modern style for students, and in this he was extremely successful. He
combined beauty of expression with exactitude of meaning, and he had
such a command over words he neither sacrificed his simple style to the
exigencies of the subject matter, nor a correct exposition of his themes
to the demands of style. He wrote with a fluency and conviction that
carries the reader along with him wherever he wants to take him. He is
at the height of his powers in his book 'Ahlam al-Yaqzah' (The Waking
Dreams) where he enters into a kind of communion with his spiritual
teacher Mulla Sadra (ash-Shirazi). This book places him securely among
the masters of metaphysics, for in it he puts questions before his
mentor and then supplies answers on his behalf. clarifying the deepest
metaphysical problems by means of the most beautiful anecdotes. He
manages to preserve this same superb style in his book on logic
'al-Mantiq'.

No less remarkable is his ability as a story-teller when he relates the
eventful meeting at the Saqifah of the Banu Sa'idah after the death of
the Holy Prophet, which has proved to be the cause of all the
differences and divergences among Muslims.

Eventually, ash-Shaykh al-Muzaffar, because of his zeal to improve the
educational and academic status of the traditional Islamic teachers and
speakers, became a most active member of all organisations formed for
this purpose. Because of his sincere efforts, he succeeded in
discovering the cause of the prevailing mental lethargy, and took
positive steps to eliminate it. He felt that reform was necessary not
only in the academic field but also in the field of the propagation of
Islam.

It should be pointed out here that the teaching in the madrassahs of
Najaf comprises two stages. The first stage is a preparatory one in
which the main texts are taught so as to prepare the student to move on
to the second stage in which he must attend the classes of the leading
teachers and acquire specialised knowledge, It was the preparatory stage
which w as in need of reshaping and revising. M uzaffar realised that
new books had to be written and new subjects added to the curriculum,
and in furtherance of his aims he founded Kulliyah al-Fiqh' the College
of Islamic Studies.

As far as the presentation of Islamic thought is concerned, this also
consists of two branches : speaking and writing, and ash-Shaykh
alMuzaffar paid attention to both of them. Through his Muntada an-Nashr,
the institute mentioned above, he was able to form a new generation of
speakers and teachers, and publish a new style of books. The College,
Kulliyah al-Fiqh' also mentioned above, was founded in 1355 A.H., and in
1376, Muzaffar managed to lay the foundation stone of a complete
educational institute, which obtained government recognition from the
Ministry of Education in 1377 A.H. Both of these establishments remained
his responsibility up to the end of his life, and he spared neither
energy nor money to see his institutes flourish and prosper.

As a man he was free from egotism, and never held any grudge against
any person. He rendered his services to the Creator alone, and paid no
attention to rewards from others. His selflessness knew no bounds. It is
fitting to end this short biography with his own words.

"We are prepared for new sacrifices, we are ready to resign and give up
our activities as soon as we find someone else to take on these
responsibilities, all the more so if this were to result in a widening
of these institutions. These people should be confident that after we
have given over the reins of office into their hands we should not cease
serving this venture in whatever capacity it may be. These expressions
of ours are sincere, and not merely to show our good intentions. It is
no significance that we should play a part, what is important is that
the venture should go ahead in a way befitting Najaf, and that persons
perform their duties to perfection.

It is of no importance what price is demanded, even if it be the price
of our souls, and how cheap this price is if one's duty is done."

Muhammad Mahdi al- Asafi

**NOTES TO TEXT
**
1.

The major sins (al-kuba'ir) from the point of view of Islam are,
according to some, seven, but according to others uncountable. The
latter say that they are arranged in degrees. They include Shirk
(associating anything or anybody with Allah) which is the greatest sin
and cannot be forgiven by Allah (see Qur'an, 4;48 & 116), killing a
believer unjustly, fleeing from jihad, causing distress to one's
parents, falsely accusing a woman of adultery, usury, appropriating the
property of orphans. The punishment for these is mentioned in the
Qur'an. 2. When the Prophet fled from Madinah to Mecca, he spent three
days in a cave (Thawr) with Abu Bakr. He was pursued from Mecca by the
Quraysh, but they were unable to find him even though they approached
the cave, for a spider had built its web across the mouth Of the cave
and they went away thinking it impossible for someone to have entered. A
few years before the Hijrah, the Quraysh decided to cut off all
relations with Muhammad (S.A.) and his followers, and to have no
exchange with them of any kind. The Prophet moved with his followers to
a mountain pass near Mecca where they stayed for nearly three years.
They suffered many hardships, and the only time they could communicate
with the outside world was during the months of truce.
3. This is not a particular group, but is used in general for anyone
who insults or shows disrespect for the family of the Prophet. 4. 18th
Dhu'l-Hijjah 10 A.H.

5. The Kaysaniyyah were followers of Kaysan, a freed slave of 'Ali ibn
Abi Talib and supposedly a student of his son Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyyah. They exaggerated in their belief about him, ascribing
complete knowledge to him. They held an esoteric belief that religion
involved following a human, that Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah was immortal
and the Mahdi There were subsequent divisions into the Mukhtariyyah, the
Hashimiyyah, the Bayaniyyah and the Razamiyyah sects.
6. Amir al-Mu'minin (A.S.) said: "Clean yourselves by water from
offensive odours and examine your bodies carefully. Surely Allah detests
those of his servants who are not clean, so that when people sit with
them they are repelled by their odour.
7. This does not only mean verbal remembrance of Allah such as say
"Subhanullah wa'l-hamdulillah" (Glory be to Allah, and praise be to
Allah) and the such-like repeatedly, but it means what Imam Ja'far Sadiq
(A.S.) said in interpretation of the remembrance of Allah: "We do not
only say subhanullah wa'l-hamdulillah wa la illaha illa 'llah wa allahu
akbar although this is a means of remembering Allah, but rather Allah
should be remembered everywhere whether we obey him or not.
8. In illustrating the same point, Imam 'Ali, Amir al-Mu'minin, (A.S.)
said in his sermon known as 'al-Qasi'at'. "Verily, for all creatures of
the heaven and the earth His command is the same, and there is no
leniency in His law between Allah and anyone, so that he may do unlawful
things.
9. "It is said that a man from Sham saw Imam Hasan riding and began to
insult him, but the Imam did not answer him. When the man had finished
Imam Hasan looked at him and smiled and said: 'O Shaykh! I think you are
a stranger and perhaps you have some misunderstanding (about us), so if
you have some criticisms we shall accept what you say, and if you ask
for something we shall give it to you, and if you want guidance we shall
guide you, and if you want to ride we can give you a mount, and if you
are hungry we can feed you, and if you have no clothes we can provide
you with some; if you need something we can help you, and if you have no
refuge we can protect you, if you have any aim we can assist you, and if
you come and be our guest until such time as you wish to leave It will
be an excellent idea because we have a large property with many servants
and provisions.' When the man heard this he wept and said : 'I testify
that you are vicegerant of Allah on earth Allah knows best where to put
His message. You and your father were the most hated of men for me, but
now you are the most beloved of creatures for me.' He took his baggage
to the Imam's house and was his guest until the time that he continued
his journey, and he believed in and loved the Imams.
10. The Virtuous City /State. Notably the ideal in government and
politics as described by al-Farabi (259-339/872-950), and modelled by
him on Greek political theory.

11. Wasa'il ash-Shi'a. The largest and most widely referred to
collection of Shi'i traditions relevant to all branches of fiqh,
compiled by Muhammad Hasan al-Hurr al-'Amili (d. 1104/ 1693). The latest
printing in Iran is in 20 vols.

12. As-sirat is the way of Allah as in the first surah of the Qur'an,
'Al-Hamd, .but. such things, it is believed will take a material form on
the Day of Judgement, and there are hadith which describe it then as a
bridge. Shaykh Saduq said: "our belief about sirat is that it is true,
and that it is the bridge over Hell, and that over it all people shall
pass. Allah has said: Not one of you there is, but he shall enter it
(Hell); that for thy Lord is a thing decreed, determined.' (19;71)
13. By Najm ad Din al Muhaqqiq al-Hilli (d. 676/1277). A text in fiqh
used In teaching to this day.

