Part Three: the Imamate
=======================

**23. Doctrine of the Imamate
**
We believe that the Imamate is one of the fundamentals of Islam (usul
ad-din), and that man's faith can never be complete without belief in
it.

It is wrong to imitate our fathers, family or teachers in this matter,
even if we respect them, for it is just as necessary rationally to
consider the Imamate as it is to consider tawhid and nubuwwah. If a man
does not believe in it, and supposes that it is not a fundamental of
Islam, he should, nevertheless, examine the concept of the Imamate, if
only to absolve himself of responsibility in this matter. The reason for
this consideration is that, since we do not receive commands concerning
our religious duties directly from Allah, we must refer in this matter
to someone in whom we can trust, by following whom we may be sure that
we will not be held responsible by Allah for having committed errors.
According to our belief, the members of the Household of the Prophet
fulfil such requirements.

We believe that, just as it is necessary for Allah to send someone as a
prophet, so it is also necessary for Him to appoint an Imam. It is
necessary that at all times there should be an Imam to represent the
prophet, and that he should perform the duties of the prophet, such as
guiding the people, and showing them the way of goodness and prosperity
in this world and the next. He ought also to hold the highest position
as a public authority in all aspects of people's lives, so that he may
cause Justice to increase among them and eliminate enmity and oppression
from between them. The Imamate is therefore a continuation of the
prophethood, and the reasoning which proves the former's necessity is
the same as that which proves the latter's.

It is for this reason that we may say that the appointment of someone
as Imam can only be accomplished by the Will of Allah through the
Prophet or through the previous Imam. People cannot choose someone as an
Imam because they have no authority to do so, and, should they seek to
depose him: "He who dies without knowing the Imam of his time, it is as
if he dies in jahiliyyyah (the time of ignorance)". It will be seen from
the above that it is impossible for there to be a time without an Imam
appointed by Allah, and that it makes no difference if human beings deny
him or not, help him or not, obey him or not, or if he is absent from
people's sight. Just as the Prophet was absent from people in the cave
and in the mountain pass[^2], so is it possible for the Imam to be
absent. It also makes no difference, logically, if the absence is long
or short.

Allah has said:

And there is a guide for every people. (13;7)

and

There is not a nation but a warner has passed among them. (35;24)


**24. Doctrine of the Infallibility of the Imam
**
We believe that, like the prophet, an Imam must be infallible, that is
to say incapable of making errors or doing wrong, either inwardly or
outwardly, from his birth to his death, either intentionally or
unintentionally, because the Imams are the preservers of Islam and it is
under their protection. Their position in regard to Islam is the same as
the Prophet's, and the reasoning which necessitates their infallibility
is the same as that which necessitates the Prophet's infallibility, and
there is no difference between them in these matters.

An Arabic verse says:

"For Allah it is not impossible:
to unite all the world in one person."


**25. Doctrine of the Attributes of the Imam
and Knowledge of the Imam
**
We believe that the Imam, like the prophet, must be the best among
mankind, and that he must excell in all human qualities, such as
bravery, generosity, chasteness, truthfulness, justice, prudence,
reason, wisdom and morality. The reason for this is the same as that
which we gave for the prophet's superiority. He derives his education,
the Divine commandments and all his knowledge from the Prophet or from
the previous Imam. When a new question arises, he knows the answer from
Divine Inspiration through the pure mind that Allah has given him. If he
gives attention to some matter in order to know it, he will obtain a
perfect understanding with no error, for the Imams do not derive their
knowledge from methodological reasoning, or from the teachings of men of
knowledge, although it is possible for their knowledge to be increased
and strengthened. For the Prophet said:

O Lord, increase my knowledge!

It has been shown by psychological investigations that every man has,
during his lifetime, one or two moments in which he is able to
understand something by intuition. In fact, this is a kind of
inspiration from Allah. This power has not been given to mankind
equally, but in different degrees, according to their capacities. At
such a time the human mind is capable of discovering certain facts
without thinking or reasoning, and without guidance from someone else.
Everyone acknowledges this condition from his own personal experience
many times during his life.

Therefore it is possible that a human may attain to the highest degree
of this state, one which both ancient and contemporary philosophers have
described. We maintain that the powers of the Imams to receive
inspiration have reached the highest degree of excellence, and we say
that it is a Divinely-given power. By this means the Imam is able to
understand information about anything, anywhere, and at any time, and he
understands by means of this Divinely -given power at once, without
recourse to methodological reasoning or guidance from a teacher. When he
desires to know about some matter, it is reflected in his pure mind as
if in a polished mirror. It is clear from the histories of their lives
that, like the Prophet, the Imams were not trained or taught by anyone
at all, not even in reading and writing, from their childhood's to the
maturing of their minds. No author or teacher was seen to instruct one
of them, but they were incomparable masters of knowledge, so that they
were never asked about any problem without being able to answer it
immediately, and they never said that they did not know. They never
required time to consider a question before replying.

In comparison with this, it has never been said of any Islamic scholar,
narrator or scientist, in his biography, that he did not study or was
not educated by some other scholar, or that he never had any doubts
about any problem, for human nature has always been thus.


**26. Doctrine of Obedience to the Imams
**
We believe that the Imams have authority, and that Allah has ordered
people to obey them. They are witnesses for mankind, doors opening the
way of Allah, guides to Him, guardians of His knowledge, interpreters of
His revelation, pillars of His Unity, and custodians of His Wisdom. They
are the cause of peace among the inhabitants of the earth, just as the
stars are for the heavens. And so the prophet said:

My household is like the ark of Nuh; whosoever embarks upon it
will be saved, and whosoever turns away from it will be drowned.

In accordance with the Qur'an, the Imams are:

Honoured servants who speak not until He has spoken and act by His
command (21;26-7)

those whom he has kept away from uncleanness and cleansed with a
thorough cleansing.

We believe that their orders and prohibitions are Allah's orders and
prohibitions, that obedience and disobedience to them, friendship or
enmity towards them, are all the same as if towards Allah. It is a sin
to deny them, for everyone who denies them in fact denies the Messenger,
and that is the same as denying Allah.

It is incumbent on all people to submit themselves to the Imams, to
follow their commandments and to obey their sayings. So we believe that
all commandments must be learned from their pure teachings, and that if
one refers to another person concerning a commandment of the din, one
will not be cleared of responsibility towards Allah and will not be sure
that he has correctly performed his duty. Like the ark of Nuh, everyone
who goes on board is saved, but those who remain behind are drowned in
the stormy sea of doubt, wandering, pretension and strife.

We do not seek at this time to prove that they were the legal khulqfa'
and that they possessed Divine authority, because this is not the place
to do so, and discussing this question cannot bring back times gone by,
nor restore things to their rightful owners. We only mean to show that
we are obliged to refer to them to obtain the Divine commandments and to
find out what the prophet truly said.

The path of those who were not educated by the Imams, or whose minds
are not enlightened by knowledge of the Imams is in deviation from the
straight path of Islam, and such a person will never be sure that he is
free from the obligations and necessary duties that were revealed by
Allah; for, granted that there are differences in opinion between Muslim
groups as regards the commandments of the din, and that there is no hope
that they will agree with each other in their opinions, one cannot just
follow them blindly. It is necessary to consider each one until one
gains positive assurance of the truth from one of them and is sure that
he is doing what Allah commanded him to do. For if one is under an
obligation, one must clear oneself of that obligation with certainty
through rational means.

Clear reasoning thus obliges one to refer to the Household of the
Prophet. We must refer to them concerning Islamic doctrine and
legislation as they were revealed to the Prophet. The Prophet said:

I leave two great and precious things among you: the Book of Allah and
my Household. If you keep hold of both of them, you will never go astray
after me. One of them is greater than the other.
The Book of Allah is like a rope hanging from heaven to earth, and the
other is my Family and Household. Remember, these two will never be
separated from each other until they encounter me at Kawthar (in
paradise).

This tradition is narrated by Sunni and Shi'a traditionalists alike. If
you consider it carefully, you will be amazed and convinced by its good
sense and by its excellent expression, because at first it says "if you
keep hold of both of them, you will never go astray after me". What the
Prophet left among us were two worthy things; together he considered
them to be one, and he did not say that one need only hold on to one of
them, but that one should hold on to both of them so as not to be
misled. He explained the reason in the next phrase very clearly. "these
two will never be separated from each other until they encounter me at
Kawthar". So, if a man separates them and takes hold of only one of
them, he will never be rightly guided. So they are the ship of Nuh, and
peace for the inhabitants of the earth. All those who do not take refuge
with them will be drowned in the depths of perdition.

It is not correct to say that the meaning of this tradition is that it
is necessary merely to love the Household of the Prophet, without
following and obeying them; no-one can apply this interpretation unless
he be a fanatic or totally ignorant, because this is an incorrect
interpretation of the Arabic sentence.


**27. Doctrine of Love for the Household of the Prophet
**
Allah said:

Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I do not ask of you a wage for this
except love of my kinsfolk. (42;23)

We believe that in addition to the obligation to hold fast to the
Household of the Prophet, it is necessary for every Muslim, from the
point of view of his din, to love them. For Allah, in this verse, has
told mankind to love them.

It is narrated from the Prophet:

Love of them (my Household) is a sign of belief, and to show enmity
towards them is a sign of unbelief. Whosoever loves them, loves Allah
and His Messenger. And whosoever shows enmity towards them shows enmity
towards Allah and His Messenger.

Naturally we must love them; it is one of the necessary Islamic duties
over which there can be no dispute or doubt. All the sects of Islam have
accepted this, apart from a few people who are recognised to be enemies
of the Household of Prophet, and they have been given the derisive name
of Nawasib[^3] (i.e. those who have planted enmity of the Household in
their hearts). They are counted among those who deny one of the
necessary beliefs of Islam.

One who denies one of the Islamic commandments about which there is no
doubt, such as the obligation to pray or to pay zakat, undoubtedly ranks
with a denier of Prophethood, even though he may utter the two
testimonies of the Islamic faith (i.e. ashhadu an la ilaha ila 'llah wa
ashhadu anna Muhammadan rasul Allah. I testify that there is no god but
Allah, and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah). Enmity towards
Muhammad's Household is a sign of unbelief, and love of them is a sign
of faith. Therefore enmity towards them is the same as enmity towards
Allah and His Messenger.

Allah has ordered us to love the Imams, because they merit this, and
because of their high degree of obedience to the commands of Allah,
their high position in the presence of Allah, their purity from
polytheism, sin and that which keeps His servants away from the Mercy of
Allah.

It is impossible that Allah should enjoin us to love someone who
commits sin and does not obey Him as he should be obeyed; for all
mankind are His slaves and created equally, and none have a special
relationship or friendship with Him. The noblest of them in the sight of
Allah is the best in conduct. So, if He instructs all people to love
someone, that person must be the best among them in virtue and above
them all, otherwise he would not deserve to be loved, and Allah would
never prefer some person to another for no reason, or if that person had
no merit.


**28. Our Belief in the Imams
**
We do not exaggerate about the Imams as some sects have done:

A monstrous word it is, issuing from their mouths. (18;5)

but we believe that they are human beings like ourselves, i.e. that if
they do good they are rewarded and if they commit sin they are punished.
Indeed, they are honoured servants and Allah has given them great
dignity and authority, for they have the highest perfections, namely
knowledge, goodness, bravery, generosity, chastity and every virtue and
worthy quality. Nobody can equal them as far as morality is concerned.
Thus, they deserve to be Imams; guides and authorities after the Prophet
in those matters in which people require help: religious commandments
(ahkam), judgement (hukm), legislation (tashri'), and the commentary
(tafsir) and interpretation (ta'wil) of the Qur'an.

Imam Ja'far Sadiq said:

Whatsoever is reported about us, if it is possible for one of mankind
and you do not understand or comprehend it, do not deny it, but you can
attribute it to us. However, if it is impossible for anyone of mankind,
then deny it, and do not attribute it to us.


**29. The Imamate must be from Allah
**
We believe that the Imamate, like the Prophethood, must be an
appointment from Allah, through His Messenger, or an appointed Imam.
From this point of view, the Imamate is the same as the Prophet hood.

It is wrong for people to dispute against him whom Allah has sent as a
guide and leader for all people, for they cannot elect him. One who is
able to bear the responsibilities of the Imam of the people and the
guide of mankind can only be recognised and appointed by Allah. We
believe that the Prophet declared who was to come after him (his
khalifah), and that he appointed his cousin 'Ali ibn Abi Talib as the
Commander of the Faithful (Amir al-mu'minin), guardian Of the revelation
and Imam for the people on several occasions. The Prophet obliged
everyone to take an oath to agree to 'Ali's succession on the day of
Ghadir,[^4] and he said at that time:

O faithful! for whomsoever I am his master (mawla) and the authority
whom he obeys, 'Ali will be his master. O Allah! be friendly towards the
friends of 'Ali; help those who help him, and hinder those who hinder
him, and may the Truth always be with him.

The first place in which the Prophet declared the Imamate was when he
had gathered his close relatives and kinsfolk and said to them:

He ('Ali) is my brother, inheritor (wasi) and vicegerent (khalifah).
You must listen to him and obey him.

At the time the Prophet said this, 'Ali had not yet come of age.

The Prophet spoke many times on this matter:

O 'Ali! your place in relation to me is the same as that of Harun in
relation to Musa; except that there will be no prophet after me.

Other traditions indicate that 'Ali had guardianship over the people,
as do the verses in the Qur'an such as:

Your friend is only Allah and His Messenger, and the believers who
perform the prayer and pay the alms while they do ruku'. (5;55)

The last part of this verse was revealed about 'Ali who gave his ring
to a beggar while doing ruku' in prayer. Naturally we are not able, in a
book such as this, to q uote all such traditions and verses, and to
consider them.

Imam 'Ali publicly declared the Imamate of Hasan and Husayn, and the
latter declared the Imamate of his son 'Ali Zayn al-'Abidin, and
similarly each Imam was appointed by the previous one.


**30. Doctrine of the Number of the Imams
**
We believe that the Imams are twelve in number; that the Prophet
publicly announced them by name; and that each of them announced his
successor. They are:

We believe that the Imams are twelve in number. that the Prophet
publicly announced them by name; and that each of them announced his
successor. They are:

1) Abu'l-Hasan 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, al-Murtada.
Born 23 years before the hijrah (601 A.D.), died in the year 40 A.H.
(661 A.D.)

2) Abu Muhammad Hasan ibn 'Ali, called Zakiy. (2-50/623-670)

3) Abu 'Abdillah Husayn ibn 'Ali, called Sayyidash-Shuhada'.
(3-61/624-680)

4) Abu Muhammad 'Ali ibn Husayn, called Zayn al-Abidin.
(38-95/658-713)

5) Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn 'Ali, called al-Baqir. (57-114/678-732)

6) Abu 'Abdillah Ja'far ibn Muhammad, called as-Sadiq.
(83-148/702-765)

7) Abu Ibrahim Musa ibn Ja 'far, called al-Kazim. (128-183/745-799)

8) Abu'l-Hasan 'Ali ibn Musa, called ar-Rida. (148-203/765-818)

9) Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali, called al-Jawad. (195-220/810-835)

10) Abu 'l-Hasan 'Ali ibn Muhanmnmad, called al-Hadi.
(212-254/827-868)

11) Abu Muhanmmad Hasan ibn 'Ali called al-'Askari. (232-260/846-870)

12) Abu'l-Qasim Muhammad ibn Hasan, called al-Mahdi (256- /870- )

The last is the Imam of our time, but he is absent and we are waiting
for his reappearance, may Allah hasten it to spread justice and equity
throughout the world, filled as it is with oppression and wrong.


**31. Doctrine of the Mahdi
**
Many people have narrated from the Prophet concerning the reappearance,
at the end of time, of the Mahdi, who is a descendent of his daughter
Fatimah, and how he will spread justice and equity throughout the world,
after it has been overcome by injustice and oppression. All sects of
Muslims have accepted this good tiding, but with different
interpretations.

It is not a new opinion or idea that has come into existence only among
the Shi'a, and in which they were prompted to believe by oppression,
dreaming of someone who would come to clear the world of injustice, as
some malevolent sophists have suggested. On the contrary, the concept of
the reappearance of the Mahdi has been well known among all Muslims, and
they have believed in it. Proof of this is that some persons falsely
called themselves Mahdi during the first century after the advent of
Islam; such were the leaders of the Kaysaniyyah,[^5] the 'Abbasids and
the 'Alawiyyah. Only because people believed in the Mahdi could these
persons have deceived them, exploited their belief and seized power. So
they made their claims in order to impress the people and spread their
influence.

We, the Shi'a, on the one hand, believe in the truth of the Islamic
religion as the last Divine religion, and have no expectation of another
religion to come and reform humanity. But, on the other hand, we observe
oppression and corruption spreading day by day throughout the world,
resulting in a total lack of justice and improvement anywhere in the
inhabitable countries of the globe. We have also witnessed Muslims
foresaking every Islamic principle, commandment and law in every single
Islamic country. We know that we must wait for the reestablishment of
Islam in all its power, to reform this world, drowned as it is in
oppression and corruption.

Naturally, with such diversity of opinion among people pretending to be
Muslim as we see today, it is impossible that the superiority of Islam
should return, unless a great reformer appears to protect it, and,
through Divine providence, unite people and eradicate the error,
perversion and wrong which has become admixed with Islam. To be sure,
this guide must possess such a great position, such general authority
and such supernatural power as to fill the earth with justice and equity
when it is full of evil, injustice and wrong.

In short, the observation that humanity is in a pitiful condition, the
assertion of the truth of Islam, and its position as the last religion
leads to the expectation of such a great reformer (mahdi) to bring
salvation to the world. All Muslim sects and the peoples of other
religions believe in this expectation, the difference being that the
Imamate sect believes that this reformer is a definite person, that he
is the Mahdi, and that he was born in 256 A.H. (870 A.D.), that he is
alive now, the son of Imam Hasan al-'Askari, and that his name is
Muhammad. Many narrators have passed to us ahadith (pl. of hadith) from
the Prophet and his Household concerning his birth and his absence.

The Imamate must continue uninterrupted, although the Imam may live
hidden among mankind until Allah wills that he reappear on a certain
day, a Divine mystery known only to Him. The fact that he has lived for
such a long time is a miracle granted to him by Allah, and it is no more
amazing than the miracle of the start of his Imamate for humanity at the
age of five, when his father's life was taken away. Nor is it any more
surprising than the miracle whereby 'Isa talked with people from his
cradle, and w as appointed a prophet when still an infant. From the
physiological point of view, it is quite certain that to live more than
the natural span of life, or more than the imagined natural span, is not
impossible, even though medical science is not yet able to prolong human
life as much as possible. But while medicine is unable to do this, Allah
can, for He is All- Powerful and Omnipotent. For the Qur'an states that
Nuh lived to a very old age, and that 'Isa is alive now, and once one
has accepted Islam, there can be no denying what the Qur'an says. It is
incomprehensible that a Muslim should dispute the possibility of these
things, while at the same time calling himself a believer in the
Glorious Qur'an.


We should remember at this point that the expectation of this saviour
and reformer, the Mahdi, does not mean that Muslims should stand idle in
their religion, or abandon their religious duties, but that they should
perform all the Divine commandments and make every endeavour to seek out
the way of Truth. It is an obligation for them to fight for Islam, to
put the principles of Islam into practice, to order others to do
likewise and to prohibit them as far as possible from doing wrong. As
the Prophet said:

Every one of you is a shepherd, and every one is responsible for his
flock.

Therefore it is wrong for a Muslim to pay no attention to his religious
duties, and to abandon them because he is expecting the Mahdi, the one
who brings good tidings; because such an expectation must not induce us
to have no responsibility or duty, or to postpone any of our actions,
and it will not leave people aimless like animals.


**32. Doctrine of the Return (raj'ah)
**
In this question the Shi'a follow what has been said by the Household
of the Prophet : that Allah will cause people to return to this world in
the same form as they were before; that He will distinguish between the
righteous and the wrong-doers, and between the oppressed and the
oppressors; and that this will take place during the time of the
Mahdi.
Allah will not cause anyone to return unless he has attained a high
degree of faith or has sunk deep into corruption. After this they will
die again, and on the Day of Resurrection they shall be raised again to
be rewarded or punished, for Allah has mentioned in the Qur'an the
desire of these people who have come twice into this world to come yet a
third time in order to repent of their sins.

They shall say: "Our Lord! Thou hast caused us to die two deaths, and
Thou hast given us twice to live; now we confess our sins. Is there any
way to go forth?" (40;11)

Truly the Qur'an came to proclaim raj'ah in this world, as did many
traditions from the house of Infallibility, and all the Imamites believe
this, except a few .who have interpreted the pronouncement on raj'ah as
meaning that the government will return to the Household of the Prophet
together with the power to forbid and command, and that this will be
when the Awaited One reappears, without involving the return of people
or the giving of life to the dead.

Belief in raj'ah is considered among the Sunni to be repugnant, and
they deem it a heretical belief. Their collectors of ahadith considered
one who had transmitted ahadith about raj'ah to be discredited, and
caste aspersions on the characters of such people so as to undermine the
value of their transmission. Moreover, they considered one who believed
in raj'ah to have descended to the ranks of unbelief (kufr) or
polytheism (shirk), or worse. This belief was therefore one of the
biggest causes for the despising of the Shi'a by the Sunni, and their
slandering of them.

Undoubtedly, this was all part of the sabre-rattling engaged in by some
Islamic sects in the past to damage each other and cause dissention. In
fact, there is no evidence to substantiate their accusations, because
belief in raj'ah cannot cause any blemish on belief in tawhid or
nubuwwah; it only emphasizes the correctness of the two, because raj'ah
testifies to the supreme ability of Allah to resurrect and raise from
the dead, and is one of the supernatural events that will testify as a
miracle for Muhammad (S.A.) and his Household. It is similar to the
miracle of the raising from the dead performed by 'Isa, only more
important, as it involves raising those bodies that have rotted away.

Says he (man): "Who will give life to the bones when they are
rotten?"

Say: "He will give life to them Who brought them into existence at
first, and He is cognisant of all Creation." (36;78-9)

One who denegrates raj'ah as being a kind of transmigration of the
soul, which we know to be incorrect, has not differentiated between
transmigration and bodily resurrection, because the meaning of
transmigration is that the soul moves into another body, and this is not
the same as bodily resurrection. The meaning of this latter is that the
soul returns to the same body with all its individual characteristics;
and raj'ah is the same as this. If raj'ah were a kind of transmigration,
the restoring to life by 'Isa must also be transmigration, and the
Resurrection (ma'ad) would be as well.

Now there remain two points to discuss concerning raj'ah: firstly ,
that it is impossible that it should take place; secondly, that the
traditions relating to raj'ah are not true. Now, if it is worth
discussing these two subjects, raj'ah cannot be as despicable a subject
as the enemies of the Shi'a have suggested. How many beliefs of other
sects of Islam which are either extremely improbable or else entirely
unsubstantiated by religious texts have led to these sects being accused
of being unbelievers or of being beyond the pale of Islam? And for this
there are many examples : the belief that the Prophet was liable to
forget or to disobey Allah's Will; the belief that the Qur'an is
eternal; the belief that when Allah said He will punish, he is obliged
to do so (al-wa'id); the belief that the Prophet did not appoint a
khalifah after him.

As for our two points of discussion, and for there being no basis in
truth for raj'ah due to its being impossible, we hold that it is a kind
of bodily resurrection, differing only in that it takes place in this
world.
Therefore the same evidence that proves the possibility of resurrection
will also prove the possibility of raj'ah. There is no reason for
amazement, except in that it is unusual for us and we are not accustomed
to such things in the life of this world. But we know of no cause or
impossibility that would bring us near to an understanding or refutation
of raj'ah, only that human imagination does not find it easy to accept
what is out of the ordinary. So there is no more reason to refute it
than there is to refute resurrection.

Who will revive these bones when they have rotted away. (36;78)

Say: "He will revive them Who brought them into existence at first, and
He is Cognizant of all Creation." (36;79)

In such a situation, where there is no intellectual evidence either to
deny or to prove raj'ah, or even if it is just our imagination that says
that there is no evidence, we must have recourse to the Islamic texts
which are from the source of Divine inspiration. For there is proof in
the Qur'an to substantiate the occurrence of raj'ah in this world for
some of the dead, as there is also for the miracle of 'Isa in restoring
the dead to life.

And I heal the blind and the leprous and bring the dead to life with
Allah's permission. (3;49)

And Allah said:

When will Allah give it life after its death? So Allah caused him to
die for a hundred years, then raised him to life. (2;259)

And also in the verse we have seen before:

They shall say: "Our Lord! Thou hast caused us to die two deaths . . ."
(40;11)

And the meaning of the verse will not be fulfilled unless there is a
return to this world after death, although some commentators of the
Qur'an have tried to give an exigesis (ta'wil) which cannot, however,
satisfy us or reveal the true meaning of the verse.

Concerning the second point of discussion, which claims that the
traditions referring to raj'ah are not authentic, this has no foundation
in truth, because raj'ah is a necessary belief according to the
Household of the Prophet, and this has been narrated by many
transmitters.

After this, it is rather surprising that a famous writer, Ahmad Amin,
who claims to be knowledgeable, says in his book "The Dawn of Islam'
(Fajr al-Islam): "Judaism makes its appearance in Shi'ism in the belief
in raj'ah." We would say to him: Judaism also makes its appearance in
the Qur'an through raj'ah, as it has been mentioned in those verses of
the Book which have been quoted above.

And we would also tell him : there is no way in which Judaism and
Christianity cannot appear in Islam, because the Prophet came to confirm
what existed of the Divine shara'i', even though he abrogated some of
their laws. So the appearance of Judaism and Christianity is not a
disgrace in Islam, even if, as the writer claims, raj'ah is one of the
beliefs of the Jews.

Anyway, raj'ah is not one of the fundamentals of Islam, belief in which
is compulsory; but our belief stems from the authenticated traditions of
the Household of the Prophet, whom we know to be infallible. For it is
one of the unseen things which they relate, and there is nothing which
suggests that it cannot take place.


**33. Doctrine of Dissimulation (taqiyyah)
**
It is related from Imam Sadiq in an authenticated tradition:

Taqiyyah is my din and the din of my forefathers.

Whosoever has no taqiyyah has no din.

It was the motto of the Household of the Prophet. so as to protect
themselves and their followers from harm and bloodshed, and to better
the condition of the Muslims and to cause agreement among them, and
restore them to order.
3 And this is still a sign by which the Shi'a are known, and which
distinguishes them from other sects and other peoples. Everyone, when he
feels that there is danger to himself or to his property through the
preaching of his beliefs or through the practicing of his beliefs in
public, should practice taqiyyah. And this is something which appears
reasonable to our natural intelligence. It is known that the Shi'a and
their Imams have suffered much and have been denied their freedom
throughout history, and that no sect or people have suffered like them.
Thus they have been forced on many occasions to practice taqiyyah in
order to conceal themselves from those with other beliefs; to keep
themselves and their practices hidden, as long as their religion and
their survival was threatened. And this is their cause for being
distinguished from others by their taqiyyah.

Taqiyyah has rules and observations which indicate whether it is
obligatory (wajib) or not, and these are mentioned in the relevant
chapters of the books of those learned in jurisprudence (fiqh). It is
not obligatory at all times, but is sometimes optional; and sometimes it
is obligatory not to do it, as when it is necessary to proclaim the
truth publicly, to protect Islam and save it, or to fight in the cause
of Islam. On these occasions, property is of no value, and individual
souls are of no importance. Taqiyyah is forbidden (haram) when someone's
life is in danger, or when falsehood is being propagated, or when
anything is threatening Islam, or when Muslims are menaced, or injustice
and iniquity are spreading among them. The purpose of taqiyyah, in the
view of the Shi'a, is not to form a secret organisation dedicated to
destruction and subversion, as some of their enemies, who are not able
to see things in there true light, have imagined, for such people have
made no effort to really understand what we say. The point is not to
make Islam and its rules a secret which cannot be divulged to those who
do not believe. No, the books of Shi'a and their writings in the fields
of jurisprudence (fiqh), law (ahkam) and theological studies, as also
their beliefs, are in great abundance in the world, more than any other
sect that is sure of its way. Our belief in taqiyyah has been abused by
those who want to denegrate the Shi'a, and they consider it to be one of
their weak points, for it seems that they are not satisfied with the
necks that fell to the sword in the attempt to finish them off in that
age when it was enough to say that someone was a Shi'i to assure his
death at the hands of the enemies of the Household of the Prophet, from
the Umayyids and the 'Abbasids up to the Ottomans.

If our attackers wish to say that there is no evidence for taqiyyah in
Islam, we can refute this. Firstly we follow our Imams and are guided by
their guidance, and they have ordered us to practice taqiyyah when it is
necessary, and it is to them an integral part of Islam, as we saw from
the saying of Imam Sadiq:

Whosoever has no taqiyyah has no din.

Secondly, it has been commanded in the Qur'an:

Not he who is compelled while his heart is at rest on account of his
faith. (16;106)

This verse was revealed about 'Ammar ibn Yasir, who took shelter by
proclaiming unbelief in order to protect himself from the enemies of
Islam. Also Allah has said:

And a believing man of Pharoah's people who hid his faith . . .
(40;28)

