Chapter 10:Let Us Be Fair In Our Judgments
==========================================

The only caliph who was elected with the unanimous votes of the
immigrants (Muhajirin and Ansar) was Imam Ali (as). In the history of
the Islamic caliphate, this was a unique and unprecedented occurrence,
which never repeated itself again.

When Muawiyyah (who had established the foundation of his empire in
Syria and had severe enmity towards the Prophet's household) became
aware of the fact that the Muhajirin and Ansar had elected Imam Ali (as)
as the caliph, he became extremely agitated and had no intention of
allying with the Imam. He not only avoided entering into allegiance with
the Imam, he accused the Imam of having participated in the death plot
against Othman and of supporting Othman's assassins.

In order to silence him, Imam Ali (as) in one of his letters to
Muawiyyah wrote that the individuals who had entered into allegiance
with Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman had also done so with him (Imam Ali). He
also added that if Muawiyyah respected those caliphs, then he had to
respect the Muhajirin and Ansar's votes in electing him (i.e. Imam Ali).

Now let us refer to the letter
------------------------------

“The same individuals who had allied with Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman have
entered into allegiance with me. Thus, everyone is free to vote for
another Imam. The Muhajirin and Ansar are permanent members of the
council so their election for any person as Imam will be acceptable to
God and will satisfy Him”.

Imam Ali's objective in writing this letter was to silence Muawiyyah and
to close the door to his further rationalization. Muawiyyah used to be
the province governor during Omar's caliphate. He later accepted such a
post in Syria under Othman. Muawiyyah used to call them God's caliphs
and himself as their representative. If the election of the previous
caliphs was supposed to be legal, then Imam Ali's election must have had
the same legitimacy.

Imam Ali (as) condemned Muawiyyah's disagreement with his caliphate and
started in the following manner:

Those who allied with Abu Bakr, Omar and Othman have allied with me.
Then why would you not consider my caliphate legitimate?

The very essence of his dispute is to condemn the opponent with the
issues the opponent consider respected and honorable. This letter does
not approve the election of a caliph through the council of Muhajirin
and Ansar. Imam(as) believes that the role of Imamate is not appointed;
rather it is an issue of election.

In the following sentences, Imam says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إنّه بايعني القوم الّذين بايعوا أبابكر و عمر و عثمان علی ما بايعوهم
عليه فلم يكن للشاهد أن يختار و لا للغائب أن يرد و إنّما الشوری
للمهاجرين و الأنصار اجتمعوا علی رجل وسموه إماماً كان ذلك (لله) رضا”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is a kind of dispute against the contender (the word God does not
appear in the original versions of the Nahj-ul-Balaqa, but it appears in
parenthesis in the Eyptian editions. This indicates that the presence of
the word “God” in the Imam's letter is doubtful).

In fact, the Imam states: If Muslims could unanimously agree on the
leadership of an Imam this would be acceptable. The same thing has
happened in my case. Then why do you disagree to ally with me?

The first person who has used this sermon to prove the view of the
Sunnites is Ibn Abi Al-hadid, the describer of Nahj-ul-Balaqa. Being
unaware of the clues in the body of the letter and other sermons, he has
used this sermon as a document for the validity of the Sunnites and has
taken the Imam's statements as his belief towards this issue [^1].

The Shiite scholars have referred to the same topic mentioned above
concerning this sermon.

It is surprising that Ahmad Kasravi has stuck to this sermon and has
used it to prove that the Shiite view is wrong! It is more surprising
that some others have repeated the same arguments in order to deceive
others. They are not aware that Shiahs have been permanent protectors
who will unveil such deceptions.

Let us be fair
--------------

We should draw conclusions only when we have read and comprehended all
of Imam Ali's views in the Nahj-ul-Balagha.

The same Imam who has written: “those individuals who had entered into
allegiance with three caliphs have allied with me and if Muhajirin and
Ansar agree on somebody's Imamate, he should be the leader and others
should comply”. In the ‘Shaqshaqiah’ sermon states the following
concerning the caliphates:

‘I swear to God, that the son of Abi Qahafah put on the garment of
caliphate while he was aware that I deserved such a position and that I
was the very pivot of caliphate, that I was the source of knowledge and
that I excelled all others in my thoughts but I dispensed with the
garment of caliphate and I deliberated whether to fight for my rights
with empty hands (i.e. no Army) or to be patient. Ultimately I chose the
second choice and waited while I was harshly suffering the loss of my
lost heritage until the day when the first caliph's (Abu Bakr) day was
over; but he appointed some one else as his successor.’

It is surprising that while the Imam was alive he used to ask people for
his resignation. However, he surrendered the caliphate to other
individuals when they had divided caliphate between themselves.

Then the Imam continues: ‘Omar, too, went his own way, although he let a
group decide about the next caliph and I was included among that
group[^2].

In a letter, the Imam reveals the way the allegiance came about and how
he was treated unjustly. In answer to Muawiyyah's letter who, in turn,
had said in his letter to the Imam that they had drawn Imam Ali in to
allegiance with Abu Bakr in the same way that they would drawn a camel
with a piece of wood in its nose, the Imam wrote:

‘You had mentioned that they had drawn me to the allegiance ceremony the
same way a camel is drawn with a piece of wood in its nose. I swear to
God, that you had admired me while you had the intention to blame me;
you wanted to betray me, but you have betrayed yourself (because you are
confessing that I was treated unjustly).’

Could the Imam consider caliphate legal while he asserts that he was
forced to vote for the caliph? Definitely not. There fore his intention
in this letter was to dispute for his rights, as it is noted compulsory
to do so in the Quran.

In another letter which the Imam sent via his province governor, Malik,
to Egypt, he writes:

“By God I had not thought that Arabs would be deprived after 's death.
What hurts me most is the people's hurry to ally with Abu Bakr[^3].

[^1]: . Sharh Nahj-ul-Balaghah, Hadidi, vol. 14, p. 36.

[^2]: . Sharh Nahj-ul- Balaghah, vol 1, third sermon.

[^3]: . Nahj-ul- Balaghah, letter No. 62.


