Chapter 12: The Logic Of The Ansar And The Muhajirin
====================================================

So far we have read the Saqifah event fairly carefully. We must now
analyze the logic behind its planning.

The significant points of this gathering could be summed up in the
following manner:

1. The holy Quran orders the believers to unite and to solve their
problems collectively.

The purpose behind this significant Islamic order is for the rational
scholars to come together in a quiet atmosphere and discuss different
affairs without prejudice.

But was the Saqifah convention really without prejudice? Did the wise
members of the Islamic community gather together in this convention? Did
they try to solve the problems of caliphate through discussion? The
course of action was quite the opposite.

In this so-called “gathering” there were only three members of Muhajirs
present and even these three had not informed the others, in order to
keep them in the dark. Could then such a gathering in which great
personalities of Islam, such as Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as) Salman, Abizar,
Meqdad, Hozaifeh, Ibn Abi Kaab, Talhah, Zobayr and tens others, were not
present, be called a counseling gathering?

Was it the right thing to convene such a short meeting on such a
significant issue while the candidates for Ansar were beaten up? Or
should such a vital gathering have been convened several times so that
the Islamic scholars and dignitaries could have expressed their views
and could have elected their true leader with more deliberation?

Abu Bakr's election for caliphate in such a hurry was so baseless and
opposable that Omar was heard later to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“كانت بيعة أبي بكر فلتة ...”
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Abu Bakr's election was nothing more than a coincidence; it was not
done with deliberation.

From now on you are to kill anybody who invites you for a similar
action”[^1].

2. Another important issue is the people’s logic.

Muhajir's reasonings revolved around two issues:

One was their ability to pioneer in accepting the Prophet's religion;
and the second one was their kinship with the Prophet. If these two
items distinguished them from others, then Abu Bakr should not have
misused Omar and Abu Obaydah in this political game because there were
other dignitaries in Medina who had accepted the Prophet's religion much
earlier than the two and were even closer to the Prophet than them.

Ali (as) was the first to believe in the Prophet. He was his close
relative, honest disciple, and son-in-law. Could Abu-Bakr ever gain one
of these peculiarities?

Omar sees Abu Bakr's priority in his wealth, his being close to the
Prophet in the cave of Thur and that he prayed in the place of the
Prophet.

As for the first priority, not much can be said, except that this was a
misconception common to the man of the age of Ignorance when great
wealth was a sign of prestige.

One of the criticisms directed at the Prophet by disbelievers was why
the Quran had not been revealed unto a rich and wealthy prophet.

If we take the association with the Prophet at the cave of Thur as a
sign of priority then we should give Ali (as) more credit, since he
slept on the Prophet's bed on the night when the disbelievers had aimed
to kill the Prophet. Ali slept in the same place where the Prophet laid
so as to misguide the Prophet’s assassins. All interpreters admit the
following verse was revealed unto the Prophet regarding this issue

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَ مِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغاءَ مَرْضاتِ اللَّهِ وَ
اللَّهُ رَؤُفٌ بِالْعِبادِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah;
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants”.***[^2]

Abu Bakr's praying instead of the Prophet, when he was ill, is quite
ambiguous. We do not know whether he carried out the prayer or not; we
are not sure whether or not it was done with the Prophet's consent; we
do not know whether it was done due to a suggestion made by some of the
Prophet’s wives. (In a subsequent chapter we will study this issue).

Nevertheless, if this issue could be taken as credit for becoming
caliph, we should add here that whenever the Prophet was not in town, he
would always appoint a substitute for himself f and would assign him the
rein of government including praying with people at congregations; the
names of such people are recorded in the biographies of the Prophet.

3. The two basic requirements for an Imam, and for the Prophet's
successor are thorough knowledge of the principles and the practical
laws of Islam and immunity against sins and wrongdoings. But there was
no mention of these two conditions in the Saqifah council.

Would it not have been appropriate for these individuals to bring up the
issues of knowledge and chastity instead of other imaginary criteria
such as nationality or connection with others?

4. The way these two groups reasoned shows that they only had
superficial domination over people in mind and that they had ignored the
Prophet's other roles and positions. For this very reason, the Ansar
boasted of the great number of their tribes and considered themselves
most deserving.

It is a fact that the great prophet was the leader of the people; but
besides this, he possessed other virtues which did not exist in the
candidates of either Mohajirs or Ansar. The Prophet presented the
Shariat to the Ummah, explained Islamic principles and practical laws.
He was innocent and infallible. How could the candidates then ignore the
spiritual and mental issues and just focus on political and superficial
supremacy, which are based on wealth and tribal power?

The reason for this ignorance is clear. If they looked at the Islamic
caliphate from this point of view, they would see their ignorance in
Islamic principles and practical laws. How could these candidates lay
the foundations of a government which was based on knowledge, virtues,
spiritual and mental perfection, and immunity against sins?

Imam Ali (as) diagnoses the logic of the people of Saqifah
----------------------------------------------------------

Imam Ali (as) described their logic in the following manner: a reporter
entered the Imam's house and informed him of the event of Saqifah,
telling him that the two groups of Ansar and Mohajirs had considered
themselves worthy of the position of caliphate:

Imam Ali (as) asked: why didn't you remind them of the Prophet's
statement that we should remember the good ones with their good deeds
and forgive their wrongdoings and that if they deserved caliphate they
should recommend it to others.

Then Imam (as) asked: On what grounds did Quraysh consider themselves
worthy of caliphate?

The reporter replied: they were saying they belonged to the Prophet's
family genealogy and were of the same tribe as the Prophet.

The Imam (as) replied: they reasoned on the genealogy tree but spoiled
its fruits. If they reason that they are the leaves of the Prophet's
tree, I am the fruit of that tree then why shouldn't I deserve
caliphate[^3]?

Imam Ali's rationale for his right on the caliphate
---------------------------------------------------

The Saqifah meeting ended in a disgusting manner, with Abu Bakr leaving
as the victor. A group of people were gathering around him asking people
to utter the words of allegiance with him and the Prophet's successor in
order to generalize this allegiance, they forced people to touch the
caliph's hands.

After this and other scornful events, which we will not deal with now,
they took Imam Ali (as) to the mosque to ally with the caliph.

In order to prove his right to the caliphate, Imam Ali (as), with his
thorough knowledge of the divine book (the Holy Quran) and the Prophet's
traditions and due to his firm belief in treating the Ummah justly,
uttered the following speech:

“O Mohajirs, do not let the government which Muhammad (S) founded go out
of his household and enter yours. I swear by God, we, the household of
the Prophet, deserve it more.

Among us there are those who have a thorough knowledge of the Quranic
concepts, who fully recognize the principles of Islam and its practical
laws, who know the Prophet's tradition, who know how to lead the Islamic
community and who can stop corruption. As long as such a person, with
these qualities exists in our Islamic community, no one else is eligible
for such a position. Such a qualified person lives only in the Prophet's
Household. Be alert so that your desires do not cause you to fall out of
the right path”.[^4].

In accordance with the Shiite narrations, Imam Ali (as) together with
some members of Bani Hashim, attended Abu Bakr's presence and proved his
capability for caliphate through his thorough knowledge of the Book, his
pioneering in accepting Islam, his perseverance in the Holy wars, his
eloquence in speech and his bravery. Then, he added:

I deserve the position of the Prophet after his death. I am the minister
and successor and his treasurer in the unknown affairs and knowledge. I
am his most sincere follower. I was the first to believe in the
Prophet's religion and to confirm it. I am the sturdiest of you in
fighting the infidels, the most knowledgeable in the Book and the
Prophet's tradition; the most learned in the principles of Islam and its
practical laws; the most eloquent in speech and the bravest of you in
times of conflict. Then why have you risen against me in this issue?[^5]

In yet another sermon, Imam Ali (as) considers a caliph to be the most
capable individual in a country’s affairs, the one who is most
knowledgeable in divine orders:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أَيُّها النّاس إنّ أحقّ الناس بهذا الأمر أقواهم عليه وأعلمهم بأَمر
الله فيه فإن شغب شاغب استعتب فإن أبى قوتل”
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O people! The most appropriate ones to govern are the most aware in
divine commands. If a person commits corrupt acts, he shall be punished;
and if he does not repent he shall be killed.

O people! The most deserving individual for caliphate is the most
capable one in the administration of the community and the most
knowledgeable in divine commands”. [^6]

Anyone, who invokes corruption and disregards the righteous shall be
reproached, and if he continued to do so, shall be killed.

This is Ali’s (as) logic. Some of his opponents, when they thought
conscientiously, confessed to his right of the caliphate and realized
that by depriving him of such a right they have made a huge mistake.

When Abu Obaydah Jarrah became aware of Ali's refusal to ally with Abu
Bakr, he told the Imam:

Let Abu Bakr be the caliph. If you live longer, you will be the most
deserving person for such a position. That is because everybody knows
your high virtues, strong faith, vast knowledge and your relation with
the Prophet[^7].

[^1]: . Sirah Ibn Hisham, vol. 4, p.308; Ershad Mofid, p, 260.

[^2]: . Quran 2:207.

[^3]: . Nahj-ul- Balaghah, sermon no. 68

[^4]: . الله الله يا معشر المهاجرين لا تخرجوا سلطان محمد في العرب عن
داره وقعر بيته الى دوركم وقعور بيوتكم ولا تدعوا أهله عن مقامه في الناس
وحقه فو الله يا معشر المهاجرين لسخن. Al-Imâmat wa Al-Sîâsat, Ibn
Qutaîbah Daînawarî, t.1, p.12; Ihtiyây At-Tabrisî, t.1, p.96.

[^5]: . ( أنا أولى برسول الله حيّاً وميّتاً وأنا وصيّه ووزيره ومستودع
سرّه وعلمه، وأنا الصّدّيق الأكبر والفاروق الأعظم، أوّل من آمن به وصدّقه،
وأحسنكم بلاءً فى جهاد المشركين، وأعرفكم بالكتاب والسنّة، أفقهكم فى الدين
وأعلمكم بعواقب الأمور وأضربكم لساناً وأثبتكم جناناً فعلام تنازعوا في هذا
Ihtiyây At-Tabrisî, vol.12, p.95.

[^6]: . Nahj-ul- Balaghah, sermon no. 168.

[^7]: . Al-Emamat va Al-Syasat, vol. 1, p.12.


