Chapter 14: Governing Is Not Distinct From Spiritual Leadership
===============================================================

There is no doubt whatsoever that while the great prophet of Islam was
the governor of people he was, at the same time, the spiritual leader of
the people.

According to the Quranic verses, and Islamic texts and history, the
Prophet began founding the structure of the Islamic government from the
day he started living in Medina and resumed all the obligations of a
genuine governor and delegated some of the political, social and
economic affairs of the Islamic community to the qualified individuals.

The signs of the Prophet's appointment by God are too many to be dealt
with here. However, a few of them will be presented.

1. The Holy Quran considers the Prophet worthier than Muslims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ النَّبِيُّ أَوْلى بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves”.***[^1]

2. The Holy Quran assigns the Prophet to judge over the divine laws for
people,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَاحْكُمْ بَيْنَهُمْ بِما أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ وَ لا تَتَّبِعْ
أَهْواءَهُمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore judge between them by what Allah has revealed and do not
follow their low desires (to turn away from the truth)”.*** [^2]

3. Not only did the Prophet himself govern people and judge over them
but he used to appoint a qualified man as the governor, another person
as the judge and a third person as the teacher for religious issues as
soon as he conquered a location. On some occasions all three positions
would be given to one individual.

While the Prophet lived, Imam Ali (as), Abdullah Ibn Masud, Abu Ibn Kaab
and Zayd Ibn Thabit and others used to carry out Judicial affairs[^3].

When the Prophet conquered Mecca and Yemen he appointed Atab Ibn Asid as
the governor of Mecca and Bazan as the governor of Yemen.

Abdul Hayy Ketani, the author of Al-Taratib Al-Edariyyah has collected
the names of the Muslim governors who worked as the Prophet's
representatives in different fields in the socio-political and economic
affairs. The study of this book gives us a glimpse of the Prophet's
approach in governing the Islamic territories[^4].

By inviting people to take part in holy wars for the spread of
monotheism, by propagating military and defensive instructions among
Muslims, and through the Prophet’s participation in twenty seven holy
wars, and finally. the through appointment of fifty five leaders for the
wars in which he did not participate, Islam depicted its true picture of
the Islamic government. It proved that unlike Christianity, its
invitation did not deal only with spiritual and mental aspects of life;
neither was its main objective giving people advice; rather, the Islamic
invitation included the foundation of a powerful government which could
protect Muslims against foes and its book and religion against tyranny
ensuring the realization of the divine rules in the community.

The economic institutes of Islam which deal with governmental revenues
(such an Infal or war-booty) and national revenues (such an alms Khums-
the statutory 20% Islamic levy on certain qualifying amounts) are a
clear sign of the fact that Islam is a comprehensive and complete social
system that deals with all aspects of man's social life and does not
limit itself to a series of rigid religious ceremonies, which take place
only once a week. This statement however, does not imply that the very
foundation of true Christianity was like this. Rather it was the fake
Christians, such as Caesars and the popes, who gradually transformed
Christianity into its present form and deprived this religion of its
social aspects despite the fact that most prophets possessed high
positions in society. The Holy Quran explicitly talks about Lut and
Joseph:

***“And as for Lut, we gave him wisdom and knowledge”***[^5].

***“And when he [Yusuf] had attained his maturity, We Gave him wisdom
and knowledge”.***

And Yusuf [Joseph] thankfully replies to God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ رَبِّ قَدْ آتَيْتَنِي مِنَ الْمُلْكِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“My Lord! Thou hast given me of the kingdom and taught me the
interpretation of sayings”***[^6]

The Holy Quran has talked about David’s judgment and Solomon's
government and Talut and his special privilege for government, and in
this way has introduced divine prophets as the very founders of divine
government and as the performers of hidden commands[^7].

By studying the issue of enjoining the Good and forbidding the Evil,
which is one of the active principles of Islamic government, and through
studying the Islamic laws on transactions, boundaries and other
jurisprudential chapters, we could understand the very nature of Islamic
government which has been laid by the Prophet of Islam. This sort of
government is so obvious that we do not have to explain it here.

The position of explaining the Divine commandments and guiding people
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Beside his political position, the great prophet of Islam was the
describer of the divine commandments and the objectives and contents of
Quranic verses.

In the following verse, the Holy Quran introduces the Prophet as the
introducer of the sacred concepts in the Holy Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنْزَلْنا إِلَيْكَ الذِّكْرَ لِتُبَيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ ما نُزِّلَ
إِلَيْهِم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have revealed to you the reminder that you may make clear to
men what has been revealed to them”.*** [^8]

The word “لبيّن” so that you may make clear to men indicates that the
Prophet's job was not merely the reading of these verses to people but
also to explain to people what they meant.

The Prophet, due to orders from the Holy Quran was the divine instructor
of the Holy Book and the true teacher of God's wise commands. The Holy
Quran says:

**  
**
﴿ هُوَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ فِي الأُْمِّيِّينَ رَسُولاً مِنْهُمْ يَتْلُوا
عَلَيْهِمْ آياتِهِ وَ يُزَكِّيهِمْ وَ يُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتابَ وَ
الْحِكْمَةَ

  

**  
**

﴾

***“He it is Who raised among the illiterates an Apostle from among
themselves, who recites to them His communications and purifies them,
and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom, although they were before
certainly in clear error”.*** [^9]

During his life-time, the Great prophet possessed two positions
simultaneously (i.e. being a commander and the divine Guide); naturally,
after his demise, the Islamic community needed another dignitary such as
the Prophet to carry out these two related positions.

Now, we should find out who could perform these two roles.

It is clear that the announcement of the divine commandments and guiding
people in the right way depend on immunity against sins and wrongdoings.
This is because such guidance requires absolute chastity and immunity
against sins and immense of knowledge. In other words, the leader of the
Islamic community should have a command over the principles and
practical laws of Islam; or else he would not act as a divine leader
among people. In the future we will prove that such a guidance would be
impossible without chastity on the part of the leader.

The Holy Quran provides two reasons for the appointment of Talut as the
commander:

1. His superiority in knowledge;

2. His physical and bodily strength by which he could work for people
under severe conditions (the necessity of this physical condition has
been proved by experience in the past and has become a proverb, which
says: true wisdom is located inside a healthy body).

Now observe the text of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفاهُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَ زادَهُ بَسْطَةً فِي الْعِلْمِ
وَ الْجِسْمِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah has chosen him in preference to you and he has
increased him abundantly in knowledge and physique”.*** [^10]

While Imam Ali (as) was speaking to a group of soldiers and army
officers to invite them for Holy wars he used the above verse to prove
his merit and worthiness in the management of the affairs of the Islamic
community, saying:

O people! Follow and obey the Quran which was revealed to your prophet.
By God, we still read in the Holy Quran that after the demise of Moses,
a group of Isralites asked their prophet to ask God to send them a
governor and commander so that they could participate in Holy wars. Then
God appointed Talut as their commander. But that group did not accept
him and doubted his capabilities in the management of affairs. Then God
revealed to his prophet that Talut was appointed because of his
superiority in knowledge and his physical capabilities”[^11].

To verify the appropriateness of the Infallible for caliphate, Imam
Mujtaba (as) too, stressed on their vast knowledge of religious commands
and the Ummah's needs, saying:

O people, the leaders should be among the Prophet's Household and nobody
else is qualified for such a position. Through His Quran and His
prophet, God has approved of such a position for us. This is because
knowledge is with us. We are aware of any event that will take place in
the world up to the day of resurrection, even of any scratch on
anybody's skin”[^12].

It is not right to separate these two positions
-----------------------------------------------

The separation of the governor and the spiritual leader is not the
product of the Sunnite ideology: rather, it has a precedent in history.

The Saqifah event came to its end and Abu Bakr came out as the governor.
Among the Prophet's followers and friends some became extremely angry
over Imam Ali's deprivation of the right of leadership; this is because
they still remembered what the Prophet had said concerning Imam Ali at
the occasions of their departure from Medina at the war of Tabuk,[^13]
and on the day of Ghadir[^14] and on his death bed[^15].

Thus, a group of Muslims became agitated over Abu Bakr's election and,
without taking sides, came to the caliph, asking him questions
concerning Ali (as). The caliph and his associates had no answer except
for the rationalization that these two positions should be separated,
saying the positions of commandment and religious leadership could not
be gathered in one family.

Buraidah Ibn Khusaîb was one of the Prophet's close friends who was
absent from Medina when the Prophet passed away. When he entered Medina,
he observed the turbulence. Then he established the flag he had in his
hands in front of Ali's house and, agitated, he entered the mosque.
Addressing the caliph and his associates, he said:

Do you remember the day when the Prophet ordered us all to greet Ali as
our head and as the commander of all faithful ones by the expression
**“السَّلام علَيْكَ يا أَميرالمُؤمنين”**. Now you have forgotten all
these recommendations?

Adhering to the theory of the separation of the two positions, the
caliph said: each day God carries out different affairs. He would never
put both prophethood (the spiritual leadership) and commandership in one
person.

This is taken to mean that the Prophet's Household members should either
be the Muslims’ leaders and teach shariah or be the political leaders
for Muslims; and these two should never come together.

But these two positions had been gathered in the person of the Prophet.
Other prophets, too, such as Solomon, had these two positions
simultaneously.

Or perhaps the caliph meant that these two positions had to be separated
after the Prophet's demise? However, this hypothesis, like the previous
one, is baseless.

Thus, while Imam Baqir (as) discusses the theory of the separation of
these two positions as held by the coordinators of Saqifah, he quotes
the following verse of the Holy Quran to annul the separation view: this
verse confirms the view that these two positions were put in Ibrahim's
children:

**  
**
﴿ أَمْ يَحْسُدُونَ النَّاسَ عَلى ما آتاهُمُ اللَّهُ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ فَقَدْ
آتَيْنا آلَ إِبْراهِيمَ الْكِتابَ وَ الْحِكْمَةَ وَ آتَيْناهُمْ مُلْكاً
عَظِيما ً﴾

***“Or do they envy the people for what Allah has given them of His
grace? But indeed We have given to Ibrahim's children the Book and the
wisdom, and We have Given them a grand kingdom”.*** [^16]

After reciting the above verse Imam Baqer (as) asked: why do they
confess to the combination of these two positions in Ibrahim’s Household
but deny it in Muhammad's Household?

Christianity – oriented view
----------------------------

Fundamentally the separation of these two roles is a
Christianity-oriented view. This is because it is today's metamorphosed
Christianity which declares that it is its job to let a Caesar do a
Caesar’s job. But Islam is a system of laws which can deal with all
sorts of materialistic and spiritual affairs and can provide man with
social, moral, political and economic approaches to solve his problems.

Islam whose very foundation is based on social management, could not
separate spiritual leadership from political leadership.

In Islam, governing people is not an objective in itself and an Islamic
leader accepts such a role only to correct an evil-doer.

Imam Ali (as), referring to those governors who look at the government
as an objective in itself, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“و إنّ دنياكُم هذهِ أزهدُ عندي من عفطةِ عنز”
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The world of yours is meaner in my view than the water from a goat's
nose”.[^17]

A group of the elite in the past and in the present assume that the only
way to unite both Shiites and Sunnites is for them to divide these two
roles between then caliphs and the Prophet's Household and let the
caliphs rule and govern and the spiritual leadership do the job of the
Infallible so that in this way the fourteen century conflicts between
these two sects could come to an end and let Muslims be united vis-à-vis
the imperialism of east and west.

However, this view is also wrong because it is squarely based on a sort
of Christianity-oriented view or secularism.

How could we, contrary to the Quranic text, separate these two?

There are other ways for the unity of these two sects, and that is the
commonalities between them. All follow one book, one prophet and one
Qibla (kaaba) and share many principles and practical laws.
Disagreements in other aspects should not end in calamities and
blood-shed. Having unity and political harmony, each group should be
free to defend its ideology and at the same time should not forget their
unity against the common foes (colonialism and Zionism).

[^1]: . Quran 33:6.

[^2]: . Quran 5:84.

[^3]: . Al-Taratib Al-Edariyyah, vol 1, p. 285.

[^4]: . Refer to volume 1, pp. 240-264.

[^5]: . Quran 22:74, Quran 12:22.

[^6]: . Quran 12:10.

[^7]: . Refer to the surahs Quran 38:26 and to 35:247.

[^8]: . Quran 16:44.

[^9]: . Quran 62:2.

[^10]: . Quran 2:247.

[^11]: . Ehtejaj Tabarsi, vol. 1, p. 353, (in a shortened from).

[^12]: . Ehtejaj Tabarsi, vol. 2, p. 6.

[^13]: . While the prophet was on his way to Tabuk, he appointed Ali
(as) as his successor, saying: you are to me like Harun was to Musa,
except for the fact that there would be no prophet after me. Through
thin statement, he gave all his positions, except for his prophethood to
Ali.

[^14]: . We will see the details of Ghadir in chapter 19.

[^15]: . By this is meant the narration of Thaqalein. See chap 22.

[^16]: . Quran 4:54.

[^17]: . Nahj-ul- Balaghah, sermon no. 3.


