The Introduction To The Second Edition
======================================

***In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful***

The issue of Leadership is one of the most significant issues in Islam,
on which the prosperity of the ummah is dependent. This is because the
beloved Prophet of Islam laid the foundations of the religion and
presented it to the Muslims in its perfect form, but put the task of its
continuity and maintenance upon the shoulders of his future successors.
The recognition of these leaders, however, has a tremendous impact on
the destiny of the Muslims.

While the Holy Prophet's body wan not yer buried, there appeared
disagreements among the ummah over the issue of leadership and during
the Saqifah convention there arose two different views. Finally, through
various deceitful diplomacies the immigrant sector which had five or
three representatives seized the rein of leadership.

Now, the burning question is the following: could the Divine verdict be
seen only in those two points of view or had the Prophet already solved
the problem of leadership through the Divine Revelation much earlier
than the muhajirin (immigrants) or the Ansar could have found the chance
to delve upon such a delicate issue?

This book offers an answer to such a question and will offer some
profound reasons by resorting to Qur’anic verses and to prophetic
narrations in order to explain the issue of leadership, illustrating
that the Divine verdict concerning the Islamic Leadership was quite
different from the view that was brought up in the Saqifah convention.

The position of leadership, given its special sacredness, belongs
exclusively to the infallible, i.e. flawless persons who have Divine
education and are introduced to the ummah through Allah via the Prophet
(S).

This book was written more than twenty years ago for the interested
youth and has been taught in Tehran several times and is now presented
to interested readers after elaborate editorial work. I hope it can
guide the readers in the right direction.

**Ja’far Subhani**  
**Qom, the Imam Sadiq Institute**  
**Zil Haijah 7, 1415**  
**17/2/1374**


