Chapter 17: The Narrative Reasons For The Leadership Of Imam Ali (as)
=====================================================================

The previous discussions explicitly confirm that the selection of an
Imam by God is completely distinct from the issue of dictatorship. The
person appointed by Allah to govern and judge among people is the most
righteous on earth.

This is because, in this kind of government the governor is appointed by
Allah who, using His sublime wisdom would select the best person for the
leadership of Muslims; there is no room for illogical determination with
Allah.

Allah is a genuine anthropologist who recognizes the needs of His
creatures better than the creatures themselves. In the same way that the
divine laws and commands are unique, so is the leader who is selected by
Him. We could never compare a governor whose government involves a
series of serious errors and a governor selected by Allah.

The previous discussions also proved that the innocent and infallible
Imam, who is well aware of the divine laws, is a good and reliable
resort for the Ummah. Muslims constantly need such an individual. As a
general rule, when the great prophet of Islam passed away, the Islamic
Ummah had not reached a complete thinking pattern to be able to rely on
themselves in the absence of such a divine leader.

Now it is time for us to find out who was elected by the Prophet to rule
over the Muslim community.

Here we have to resort to narrative reasoning: the documents issued by
the Prophet of Islam have been reported most frequently, those documents
are far from being artificial or fake. Furthermore, these documents
clearly indicate the appointment of specific individuals for leadership;
no sensible person would ever doubt the authenticity of such documents.

For this reason, we will present here some of these narrative documents
which are definitely issued by the Prophet. Since both the pages of this
book and the readers time are limited, we have to select only a few of
such documents concerning Imam Ali's appointment as the leader of
Muslims by the great Prophet.

The Narration of Endearment
---------------------------

The trade caravan entering Hijaz from Syria informed the Prophet of the
readiness of the Roman soldiers to attack Medina. As a rule, prevention
is always better then cure.

So, the Prophet announced a general mobilization in Medina and its
suburbs; an army of thirty thousand troops, in the severe heat which was
fit for the ripening of fruits, announced their readiness to take part
in this huge Islamic war.

Some reporters gave the Prophet the news that the hypocrites of Medina
were determined to kill innocent people in his absence. To stop any
probable incident, the Prophet appointed Imam Ali (as) as his substitute
in Medina.

Realizing the fact that their plan had been betrayed (by the Imam
staying in Medina) they decided to employ a plot to make Imam leave
Medina. For this reason, they spread a rumor that there were
disagreements between Imam and the Prophet causing the Imam to be the
side lines to the Prophet’s affection. The reason they presented for
this rumor was the claim that Ali (as) was not permitted to take part in
that religious war.

This rumor worried Imam Ali and his associates, who had always been
loved by the Prophet. To falsify this statement, he approached the
Prophet, who was not very far away from Medina, informing him of the
story. To show his utmost love and care for Imam Ali (as), the Prophet
delivered the following historical message:

“Are you not willing to remain for me as Harun was for Musa? With the
difference that there would be no prophet after me. It is not proper for
me to pass away without having appointed you as my successor.

This narration, which is called the narration of Endearment by the
Islamic reporters, is one of the most frequent and definitive narrations
of Islam.

The narrator Buhrani, in his book called “Qayatul Maram” has mentioned
the names of those authors who have reported this event in their books,
showing that the Muslim narrators have reported this event in one
hundred and seventy different ways, one hundred ways of which belong to
the Sunnite scholars and narrators.[^1]

Sharaf Al-din Ameli, in his book “Al-Morajeat” has reported the
documents of this narration. Reports by the Sunnite writers, state that
it is narrated in ten books of theirs.[^2]

On the authenticity of this narration it is enough for us to observe
that the writers of ***Sahih*** (correct) books by the Sunnites, Bokhari
and Muslim have reported this narration as the “right narration” in
their books.[^3] In the firmness of these reports, it is sufficient to
know that Saad Waqqas, Imam Ali’s (as) bitter enemy, considered this
event as one of the three bright points in Imam Ali's life.

When Muawiyyah entered Mecca to receive people's allegiance for his son,
Yazid, he convened an assembly in “Al-Nadut” in which some dignitaries
of the Prophet's close friends had taken part. He started his statement
with cursing Ali (as) and expected Saad to join him in this
condemnation, but addressing Muawiyyah, Saad replied: whenever I
remember Ali's three virtues, I wish I could have those three virtues.
Those virtues being:

1. The day when the Prophet told Ali that Ali was to him as Harun was to
Musa;

2. During the Khaybar Holy war, the Prophet said: Tomorrow I will give
the flag to an individual who is loved by Allah and by His Apostle. He
would be the conqueror of Khaybar and would not flee the enemy, (and
then he gave Ali the flag).

3. On the day of Mubahilah (cursing) with the Christians of Najran, the
Prophet gathered Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husain, saying: O God, these are
my Household.[^4]

Therefore, we should not ever doubt the validity and authenticity of
this document; rather we should step forward and try to think over the
content of this narration.

Firstly, we should stress on the expression **الاّ انه لا** **نبي بعدي**
except for the fact that there would be no prophet after me.

In this narration, the Prophet likens his relation to Ali's to the
relation of Harun and Musa. However, this narration takes away the
position of prophethood from Ali (as) despite the fact that Harun was a
prophet. This is related to the command used in the title وخاتم النبيّين
“the last of the Prophets” and so Ali (as) would never attain such a
position.

Now let us see what kind of positions and titles Harun possessed in
accordance with the Holy Quran; Ali (as) possessed all these positions
except for the position of prophethood.

When we refer to the Holy Quran, we observe that Musa (Musa) had asked
God to bestow upon Harun the following positions:

1. The position of minister: Musa Ibn Omran had asked Allah to appoint
Harun as his minister: “And give me a helper from my family, Harun, my
brother “[^5].

2. Strength and confirmation: Musa asked Allah to confirm him through
his brother Harun:

“Strengthen my back through him “.

3. Prophethood: Musa Ibn Omran asked Allah to join Harun in the affair
of prophethood: “And associate him with me in my affair”[^6].

The Holy Quran mentions that Allah accepted all Musa's request and
bestowed upon Harun all those positions He said: you are indeed granted
your petition, O Musa.[^7]

Furthermore, while Musa was absent, Harun was his successor among Bani
Israel: “Musa told Harun: be my caliph and successor among my
tribe”[^8].

A reference to the above verses clarifies all of Harun's positions and
in accordance with the narration of endearment all these positions
(except for prophethood) belong to Imam Ali (as).

Due to these valid reasons, Imam Ali (as) was the Prophet's cleric,
associate and caliph among people and should have been the leader of the
Ummah in the absence of the great prophet.

An Answer to a Question
-----------------------

It might be said that Ali (as) was the Prophet's successor only during
days when the Prophet had left Medina. This is different from being an
absolute and life-time successor of the Prophet after his death.[^9]

But a brief look at the Prophet's life will provide an answer to such a
question:

Firstly: Ali (as) was not the only person who was appointed as the
Prophet's successor in Medina in the Prophet's absence. Rather, during
his ten year stay in Medina the Prophet never left the Islamic center
(Medina) without having appointed a successor. If by the statement
expressed by the Prophet is meant only “a temporary successor” why
didn't he use this expression for other successors of his time, they,
too were appointed, on a temporary basis, the transitory substitute for
the Prophet while he had left Medina for Mecca or during the Holy wars?
Then why didn't the Prophet use this distinction for his other
substitutes?

Secondly, if the given position was temporary, the Prophet did not have
to express such a statement and then subtract prophethood from the
position he offered Ali.

Besides, such a temporary position could not be given a high value
rather it should have been a permanent position because years later Saad
Waqqas wished for such a position and was ready to pay a hundred
red-haired camels for such a position. He considered this position among
Ali's significant virtues (Ali as the victor of Khaybar and his role in
Mubahilah with the Najran Jews).

Thirdly: if the Prophet had expressed such a statement only on the
occasion of his departure towards Tabuk, the critics could have been
right. But the Prophet expresses such a statement at other times. The
books on narration are witness to this event.

Here, we shall refer to two cases.[^10]

1. Once Abu Bakr, Omar and Abu Obaydah Ibn Jarrah were in the Prophet's
presence when the Prophet, putting his hand over Ali's shoulder, said:

**“ يا عليُّ أنت أولُ المؤمنين ايماناً وأولهم إسلاماً،و أنت منّي بمنزلةِ
هارونَ من موسى “**

“O Ali! You were the first to believe in me and to accept Islam. You are
to me, what Harun was to Musa”.[^11]

2. In the early days of Hijrat, the Prophet gathered Muhajir and Ansar
around himself, calling every two of them, brothers. Ali (as) was the
only one who did not get a brother. While weeping, Imam Ali (as) asks
the Prophet: O Apostle of Allah! I have not done anything wrong.

How come you did not appoint a brother to me? Once more the Prophet
repeated the previous statement in front of a group of his closest
followers:

**  
**
“

**  
**
والّذى بعثني بالحقّ ما أخرتُكَ إلّا لنفسي و أنت منّي بمنزلة هارونَ من
موسى غير أنّه لا نبيّ بعدي و أنت أخي ووارثي

  
“

“I swear to Allah who has rightly appointed me as His Apostle, I did not
appoint any brother for you because I myself wanted to be your brother.
You are to me what Harun was to Musa except for the fact that there
would not be any prophet after me. You are my heir”[^12].

Another reason for the fact that Imam Ali (as) possessed Harun's status
was the Prophet's endeavor to let people realize that what Harun was to
Musa was like the position of Ali relative to the Prophet, except for
the fact that he did not possess the position of prophethood.

When the Prophet's dearest daughter (Fatimah) gave birth to two sons,
the Prophet ordered Ali (as) to call them Hasan and Husain on the basis
of Harun's sons Shabbar and Shabayr in Hebrew.

A research or the lives of these two will lead us to more similarities
between them with which we shall not deal here. Sharaf Al-din, in the
book “Al-murajeat” has thoroughly dealt with the similarities.[^13]

[^1]: . Ghayat Al-Maram, pp.107-152.

[^2]: . Al-Morajeat, pp.131-132.

[^3]: . Sahih Bokhari, t.3, p.58 Sahih Muslim, vol.2, p.323.

[^4]: . Sahih Muslim, vol. 7, p. 120.

[^5]: . Quran 20: 29-30.

[^6]: . Quran 20:31.

[^7]: . Quran 20: 36 besides this, in one verse, the Holy Quran confirms
Harun's prophethood "We gave to him out of Our mercy his brother Harun a
prophet" (Quran 19:53).

[^8]: . Quran 7:142.

[^9]: . This question was raised by the Sunnite scholar "Amedi".

[^10]: . The Great prophet has expressed this sentence eleven times;
however we shall refer to only two such cases here.

[^11]: . Kanzul ‘Ammal, vol. 6, p. 395, narration no 6032.

[^12]: . A selection of Kanzul ‘Ammal (in the margin of musnad), vol. 5,
p. 31.

[^13]: . Al-Murajeat, pp. 141-147.


