Chapter 18: The Event Of Ghadir (Part 1)
========================================

The global movement of Islam from the start encountered a lot put forth
by Quraysh and the whole class of idolaters of the peninsula. They
whole-heartedly tried to put out this divine light but the more they
tried, the less they succeeded.

Their last perception was the great movement to shatter and spread apart
its members, with the death of its founder [^1].

The Holy Quran, which reveals most of their tricks in its verses, this
time, uncovers their desire for the Prophet's death, depicted in the
following verse:

**  
**
﴿ أَمْ يَقُولُونَ شاعِرٌ نَتَرَبَّصُ بِهِ رَيْبَ الْمَنُونِ

  
،

**  
**

قُلْ تَرَبَّصُوا فَإِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنَ الْمُتَرَبِّصِينَ، أَمْ
تَأْمُرُهُمْ أَحْلامُهُمْ بِهذا أَمْ هُمْ قَوْمٌ

**  
**

**  
**
طاغُونَ ﴾

***“They say the Prophet is a poet, we a wait for him some calamity [we
shall wait for him to die]. Say: Surely I too wait a long with you. Have
their understandings bid them this? [Have their hollow imaginations
caused them this?] Or are they inordinate people?*** [^2]***.***

It is advisable for us to present here a list of the obstacles created
by the idolaters in the path of Islam, and then see how Allah made void
and obsolete their treason and offset their plots by raising of the
issue of Ali's leadership.

1. Accusations
--------------

By baseless allegations such as the following: the Prophet is a poet, he
is a fortune-teller, he is mad, he is a wizard and a magician, the
Qurayshi infidels tried to reduce the effect of the Prophet's speech.

However, the vast spread of Islam among different classes of people
proved that these accusations could not be leveled against the Prophet.

2. The torture of the followers
-------------------------------

The other plot of the enemies of Islam was to torture and annihilate the
Prophet's followers so they could stop the spread of Islam in this way
however the Quraysh leaders could not accomplish much due to the
perseverance of the followers. The foes of Islam were highly amazed at
the sincerity and endurance of these followers. In this regard, Abu
Sufyan once remarked: I have seen Caesar and Kesra but I have never seen
anybody like Muhammad. Among the followers of these leaders who could
have been so determined as the Prophet.[^3]

3. Inviting the Arabs' great story-teller
-----------------------------------------

Being extremely astonished by the Quran's spiritual attraction, the foes
of Islam assumed that people were attracted by the verses of the Quran
because they contained ancient mythology.

For this reason, they invited Nasr Ibn Harith, the great Arab
story-teller, to recite for people some stories related to the kings of
Iran and Iraq so in this way they could stop the people from gathering
round the Prophet. This plot was so ridiculous that the Quraysh became
bored by listening to such stories.

4. Prohibiting the recitation of the Quran
------------------------------------------

Another plot was to discourage people from listening to the Quran. This
plot too was useless. People had become so attracted to hearing the
Quran that they used to hide behind the Prophet's house at dawn to
listen to the recitation of the Quran, when he was praying.

The Quraysh not only stopped people from reading the Quran, but made it
hard for the people to meet the Prophet so much so that when Arab
dignitaries, such as A’sha, and Tufail Ibn Omar entered Mecca to visit
the Prophet, they were severely restrained from doing so by the
Quraysh[^4].

5. The Economic sanctions
-------------------------

Through an order published by the Quraysh, nobody was allowed to carry
out any trade transactions with Bani Hashim or Muhammad's followers. For
this reason, the Prophet had to lead a hard life in Shaib Abi Talib.

However, these sanctions were removed through the proceedings of some
Quraysh leaders.

6. The plot to assassinate the Prophet
--------------------------------------

Forty Quraysh youth from forty different tribes were appointed to attack
the Prophet's house at night and cut him apart. But Allah, Who always
protected His Apostle, let him know of the plot. The Prophet, commanded
by Allah, asked Ali (as) to sleep in his bed and left Mecca for Medina.
The Prophet's migration to Medina and the inclination of the tribes Aus
and Khazraj towards Islam, provided Muslims with a sure place and led to
the spread of Islamic troops to coorporate to defend the religion.

7. The Bloody conflicts
-----------------------

The idolaters of the peninsula were frightened by the concentration of
Muslims in Medina and by the establishment of an Islamic government. So
they endeavored to put it out through bloody confrontations as soon as
possible. Their bloody wars with Muslims at Badr, Uhud and Khandaq and
Hunayn, with all their ups and downs, finally terminated in the
supremacy of the Islamic military and belittled the idolaters in the
peninsula.

8. The Prophet's demise
-----------------------

The enemy's last wish was the Prophet's demise. They were under the
assumption that the Prophet's end would also put an end to the Islamic
movement for ever. To set off this crisis, two options could be
available to the Muslims:

**1**. For the mental level of the Ummah to reach such a standard, as to
be able to lead the newly-established Islamic movement and to protect it
from any hazard, after the Prophet.

After the Prophet's demise, this condition unfortunately did not
materialize we could not identify all the reasons for this.

However we could present the following remarks:

The wide-ranging and comprehensive revolution in the heart of a nation
would not occur within one or, two days, nor a year or ten years. Within
a short time this could not happen at all. Rather, in order to keep the
very foundation of the revolution intact, a capable individual or
individuals would be required to handle the affairs of the nation after
the demise of the revolution leader, and who could keep the nation safe
and sound against poisonous indoctrinations until the older generation
could pass and the new generations could come forth with the Islamic
etiquette.

If this did not occur, then a great number of Muslims would withdraw
from their ideology as soon as the founder of the revolution passes
away.

Besides, out of all divine movements, Islam possessed another trait
which made it urgent for such capable individuals to exist:

Islam found its way among the most retarded and backward nations of the
world who were living in pure depravity. Out of religious traditions
they were only familiar with the Hajj ceremony which they had inherited
from their ancestors (and that too mixed with superstitions). Neither
Musa' teachings, nor Christ's instructions had penetrated their land and
the majority of the Hijaz population was deprived of such religious
teachings. On the other hand, they were under the influence of the
customs of the age of Ignorance.

The religious reform in its initial state, might not look difficult
among such nations.

However, its continuity among people whose spirits are filled with
negativity, is quite difficult. Such a continuity needs persistent care
so that such nations do not go astray.

The distressing and depressing events of the wars of Uhud and Hunain in
which the combatants left the Prophet alone on the arena, showed there
were few genuine Muslims who wanted to sacrifice everything for the
Islamic movement, and that the members of the community had not mentally
progressed to the stage where they could be left guideless.

We see that after the Prophet's demise, such an Ummah divided themselves
into seventy three sects.

From what was said above we can now understand that the Islamic Ummah,
after the Prophet's demise, had not mentally reached the stage to be
able to undo the enemy's plots for the complete annihilation of Islam.
So there should have been another option to which we will refer to.

**2**. For the Islamic movement to continue, the easiest way is to elect
a person for the leadership who is as firm in his faith as the Prophet
so that he can lead the Ummah with prosperity.

This is the same issue which is raised by Shiism, and there are numerous
historical documents which attest to the fact that the Prophet of Islam,
on his return from the farewell pilgrimage [Hajjul Wida], on the 18th of
Zihajjah, with Allah's assistance, solved this problem, and through the
appointment of his successor ensured the continuity of the Islamic
revolution. This event took place in the following way: in the tenth
year of Hijra, the Prophet headed for Mecca to instruct the Hajj
ceremonies. This year, his Hajj ceremony coincided with the last year of
his fruitful life; for this reason, it is called “Hajjul Wida” [farewell
Hajj]. Historians tell us more than one hundred and twenty thousand
pilgrims accompanied the Prophet in this religious ceremony.

When the ceremony was over, the great prophet of Islam headed for
Medina. A great number of people accompanied him. The caravan arrived at
a desert, called Ghadir Khum located three miles away from Jahfah.
Suddenly the angel of revelation ordered the Prophet to stop.
Subsequently, the Prophet ordered the caravan members to stop their
movement in a desert on an extremely hot day which puzzled people
greatly. They were whispering:

A command is going to be issued by God and the significance of the
command is so great that people are ordered to stop their movement under
such harsh conditions.

God's command to the Prophet was issued through the following Quranic
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ بَلِّغْ ما أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ وَ
إِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلْ فَما بَلَّغْتَ رِسالَتَهُ وَ اللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ
مِنَ النَّاسِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message. Allah will
protect you from the people”***[^5]***.***

Considering the content of the verse, we will find out the following
points:

Firstly, Allah's command to the Prophet to announce such a divine
message was so great that if the Prophet had not announced it
immediately he would not have completed his prophetic task properly.

As we will find out later, his prophetic mission was completed.

In other words, by the expression “ what has been revealed unto you”
could not have been meant the collection of the Quranic verses or the
Islamic commands because of the fact that if he had not announced the
divine commands, he would not have accomplished his prophetic mission,
and such an obvious act would not have needed the revelation of a verse.
Rather the content of such a verse was the revealing of a specific issue
whose announcement was a complement of his prophethood, and without such
an announcement his prophethood would not have been completed.

Thus, the content of such a mission must have been one of the
significant Islamic principles which was in harmony with the other
Islamic principles. Secondly, the Prophet's calculation showed to him
that he might be exposed to harm from the people. In order to strengthen
the Prophet's determination, Allah declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله يعصمك من الناس
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah will protect you from the people's harm”.***

Now, we should find out which one of the probabilities[^6] which the
Islamic interpreters have assumed regarding the subject of the Prophet's
mission comes closer to the above verse.

All Shiite narrators and thirty[^7] Sunnite narrators believe that this
verse was revealed to the Prophet on Ghadir Khum, i.e., the day Allah
missioned the Prophet to introduce Ali (as) to the Ummah as “the head of
believers”.

The Imam's supremacy over the Ummah was considered so important that the
Prophet's mission would have been incomplete if he had not announced his
successor.

And the Prophet was right to fear the situation because the appointment
of Ali as his successor when he was not older than thirty three while
others were much older, was extremely hard and problematic[^8]. Besides
many people, whose relatives were now among the Muslims, were killed in
the wars by Ali (as).

Naturally, his government would not be easily accepted by their
relatives. Furthermore, Ali was the Prophet's cousin and son-in-law and
his appointment as the Prophet's successor would be reckoned as
prejudice by the short-sighted people, whose number is not few in any
community.

But despite these unfavorable conditions, Allah had determined to
appoint a successor for the Prophet so that the universal movement of
Islam could be eternal.

Let us explain this historical event in some detail:

[^1]: . Like Waraqa Ibn Noofl, who through the study of the Christian
books, left idolatry and adopted Islam.

[^2]: . Quran 52: 30-32.

[^3]: . Sirah Ibn Hisham, vol. 2, p. 172.

[^4]: . Sirah Ibne Hisham, vol. 1, PP. 386-410.

[^5]: . Quran 5:67.

[^6]: . In his great interpretation (vol. 3, p. 635), Fakhr Fazi has put
forth ten probabilities for the content of the prophet's mission, while
none of them besides lacking proper documentation, possess the two
conditions mentioned in the verse and most of them are so insignificant
that not announcing could have neither jeopardized the prophetic mission
or could it have intimidated him. Let us refer to these probabilities:
1) This verse is concerned with the stoning of male and female
wrong-doers; 2) This verse concerns the Jews’ criticism of the prophet.
3) When the Holy Quran warned the prophet's wives that if they prefer
the worldly ornaments, the prophet is ready to divorce them. The
prophet's worry was that they would choose the worldly ornaments; 4)
This verse is related to Zayd, the prophet's step-son, whose wife the
prophet had to marry due to Allah's command; 5) This verse relates to
the prophet's invitation to people and to the hypocrites to participate
in Holy wars; 6) This verse concerns the prophet's silence as to the
criticism of idols; 7) This verse was revealed to the prophet at the
time of Hajj Al-Wida while he was performing the Hajj ceremony. 8) This
verse was revealed to the prophet to boost his morale because he feared
the Quraysh, Jews and Christians. 9) During one of the Holy wars, while
the prophet was resting under a tree, an Arab was getting ready to
attack the prophet with a drawn sword, asking the prophet: who can now
protect you against my sword? The prophet replied: At this moment, the
enemy was filled with fear and anxiety and started to retreat when he
stuck a tree and broke his head. It was at that moment that this verse
was revealed to the prophet: ﴿والله يعصمك من الناس﴾ The content of this
verse, however, is not in harmony with some of the above-mentioned
probabilities. Some of them are in harmony with the event of Ghadir.

[^7]: . Allamah Amini has mentioned the names of these thirty
individuals in his extraordinary work called Al-Ghadir (vol
1/pp.196-209). Among them are Tabari, Abu Naeem Isphahani, Ibn ‘Asâkir,
Abu Ishaq Hamvini and Jalal Al-Din Siuti. These names have been
mentioned earlier by Ibn Abbas, Abu Saeed Khadri and Bara Ibn Aazeb.

[^8]: . Especially among the Arab nation, among whom it was customary to
have their elders as leaders and the young were not given a chance under
the pretext that they were raw and inexperienced. Thus, when the prophet
appointed Attab ibn Usayd as the governor of Mecca and Usamah as the
troop general, he was severely criticized by his followers. However,
they ignored the fact that Ali was different from others and that he had
achieved a sublime position in the light of Allah's assistance. A
position which saved him from any errors and constantly protected him by
the unknown World.


