Chapter 21:Answers To Questions
===============================

Two Questions
-------------

The dearest prophet of Islam announced Ali's caliphate on the day of
Ghadir and made the Muslims’ obedience towards him compulsory.

Now, here are two Questions:

1. If Ali's caliphate was announced on such a day, then why was his
caliphate ignored altogether and why did people follow somebody else?

2. Why didn't the Imam employ the content of this narration to prove his
legibility?

The Answer to the first Question
--------------------------------

Although some of the Prophet's followers forgot about Ali's Imamate and
ignored the divine order on the day of Ghadir and despite the fact that
the number of indifferent people is very high in any community, there
were a great number of people who remained faithful towards Ali (as).
Compared with the first group their number was low, but this group
consisted of a large list of the Prophet's distinguished followers, such
as Salman Farsi, Abuzar Ghaffari, Meqdad Ibn Aswad, Ammar Yaser, Abi Ibn
Kaab, Abu Ayyub Ansari, Khozaymah Ibn Sabit, Baridah Aslami, Abu Heytham
Ibn Altyhan, and Khalid Ibn Saeed and tens of others whose names and
criticisms of caliphate are recorded in history books and who were
famous for their loyalty towards Imam Ali (as).

The history of Islam records two hundred and fifty Sahabi (the Prophet's
friends) who were the Prophet's faithful followers and never left him up
to their last days and some of them got martyred while they were at the
Imam's service[^1].

It should be regretfully said that the issue of Imam Ali's Imamate was
not the only issue against which some of the Prophet's friends rose;
rather, even at the time of the Prophet, some Muslims explicitly ignored
the Prophet's orders or interpreted them in their own interest.

In other words some of the Prophet's followers would carry out the
Prophet's orders if they were not an obstacle to their political
thoughts or wishes. However, if the Prophet's religious instructions did
not match their thoughts or ideas, they would try to advise the Prophet
against those instructions. And if the Prophet did not surrender to
their wishes, they would entirely either ignore the Prophet's orders or
they would complain, insisting that the Prophet give up his position.

Here are some samples of misbehavior:

1. In his last days the Prophet ordered a pen and an inkpot so that he
could write something which could have stopped his ummah from going
astray. However, some of the audience, through their special political
guess-work, understood the reason for the demand of the pen. So they
opposed the Prophet's orders and did not provide him with it.

While weeping profusely Ibn Abbas used to say: the Muslims’ calamity
started on the day where the Prophet, severely ill, asked for a pen so
that he could write something which could stop the Muslims’ misery after
his death but at this moment there was a dispute among those present:
some agreed, but others disagreed. Finally, seeing this opposition, the
Prophet gave up doing what he had planned to. [^2]

2. Upon the death of Zayd Ibn Haritha, the army commander, in the war
with the Romans, the Prophet, in his last days, started collecting some
troops and made some distinguished men of Muhajirs and Ansars its
members and appointed Usamah as the army commander. He then prepared a
flag and submitted it to Usamah but that day the Prophet had come down
with a fever which caused him to fall ill. At this time there started
confusion and disagreements among the Prophet's close followers. Some
became upset over Usamah's election as the leader and angrily asked the
Prophet to take away that position from him.

A group for whom the Prophet's death was imminent refused to attend the
battlefields rationalizing that it was not advisable to leave Medina at
such a critical moment.

Whenever the Prophet became aware of his army-men's negligence to carry
out their military operations, he would become furious and irritated and
would issue strict orders to them to leave for the roman borders.
Despite the orders however some of the troops ignored the Prophet's
commands and preferred to follow their own wishes.

3. The objections of some of the Prophet's followers to his orders far
exceeded these two cases. Such people expressed their disagreement
towards the Prophet even at Hudabiyyah while the Prophet was convening a
peace treaty with the Quraish.

The objections of such people to the Prophet's orders after his death
are more, because these people changed the quality of prayer and call
for prayer and ignored the verse on temporary marriage and performed the
special prayers of Ramadan in congregation while they had to be
performed individually. They brought forth some other changes in
inheritance laws as well.

The elaboration of each one of these distortions, disturbances and
conflicts is beyond the scope of the present book. In this regard it
will suffice for the reader to refer to the valuable book called
Al-Morayeat (pp.218-282) and another precious book called Al-Naswa
Al-Ejtehad.

The opposition of the Prophet's followers towards him had reached such a
critical level that the Holy Quran, using a severe language, warned them
against such cases of disobediences. In this regard, the Holy Quran
says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَلْيَحْذَرِ الَّذِينَ يُخالِفُونَ عَنْ أَمْرِهِ أَنْ تُصِيبَهُمْ
فِتْنَةٌ أَوْ يُصِيبَهُمْ عَذابٌ أَلِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore let those beware who go against his orders lest a trial
afflict them or there befall them a painful chastisement”***[^3]***.***

Elsewhere the Holy Quran warns those who insist that the Prophet should
follow their advice:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللَّهِ
وَ رَسُولِهِ وَ اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His
Apostle, and be careful of your duty to Allah; surely Allah is Hearing,
Knowing”***[^4]***.***

These events and verses all lead us to realize that not all of the
Prophet's followers showed him the necessary obedience and discipline;
rather, in most cases where divine orders were in contrast with their
personal desires, they preferred to disobey the Prophet and tried in
vain to force the Prophet to follow them blindly.

It was the same group of people who, after the Prophet's demise,
convened those so-called consuls and openly defied the Prophet.

The answer to the second Question
---------------------------------

It should be pointed out that Imam Ali (as) in different occasions, used
the Event of Ghadir to prove his rights. Whenever he could, he used this
event to suppress his opponents and to boost his position in the eye of
people; in this way, he revealed the truth to the people.

Not only Imam Ali, but also Fatima (sa), her sons Hasan (as) and Husain
(as) and a group of distinguished Islamic personalities, such as
Abdullah Ibn Jaafar, Ammar Yasir, Asbaq Ibn Nabata Qais Ibn Saad, and
even some of the Umayyad and Abbasid caliphs, such as Umar Ibn Abdol
Aziz and Maamun, the Abbasid caliph, and above all dignitaries, such as
Amr Waas Save reasoned over the Event of Ghadir.

Thus discussions over the Ghadir event have always been the issue since
Imam Ali's time and it is being used to prove the issues of Imamate and
Welayat. Here we shall present some of these arguments:

1. The six-member council, which was convened by the second caliph,
formed in a special way so that everybody knew Ali would not be the
winner. This is because Umar had given the right of veto to Abdol Rahman
Ibn Auf, the great capitalist (and the relative of Othman).

With regards to the special relations between Abdul Rahman and Ali's
opponents it was obvious that Ali (as) would not win on the day when the
council was in operation, and when the ball of caliphate was shot
towards Othman by Abdul Rahman, the Imam began his speech to question
the validity of this session. He said I will use such an argument which
nobody can deny. He then asked the audience:

Do you swear to God that the following sentence could have meant anybody
else than me?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“مَنْ كُنْتُ مَولاهُ فَهذا عليٌّ مَولاهُ، اللّهمّ وال من والاهُ
وانْصُرْ مَنْ نَصَرَهُ ليبلغ الشاهد الغائب”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever I am the superior to, Ali is superior to him. O God, love
anybody who loves Ali and assist anybody who assists Ali and let those
present tell the absentees what happened today”.

At this moment, all the members rose up to confirm Ali's speech. All of
them declared: we swear to God that nobody has your virtues[^5].

This was not, of course, the last time that the Imam used Ghadir in his
argumentation.

In other cases, too, the Imam referred to Ghadir.

2. Once Imam Ali was lecturing in Kufa during his speech he addressed
his audience asking those who heard the Prophet, that appoint him as his
successor to stand up and tell others what they had heard. I want those
people who have directly heard from the Prophet to stand up. At this
moment thirty people rose.

We should note that at the time, the Ghadir event was twenty-five years
old, and some of the caliph's close followers were not living in Kufa
anymore, or had already died, and those present were not ready to
testify.

Allamah Amini has provided us with a lot of proofs in his worthy book;
those interested could refer to that book[^6].

3. During the reign of Othman two hundred distinguished personalities of
Muhajirs and Ansars had gathered at the Prophet’s mosque and were
deliberating on different issues.

One of the issues dealt with the Quraish’s virtues and their backgrounds
and their migrations.

During this session, which had started early in the morning and
continued till noon, Ali (as) only was listening to people without
uttering a word. Having noticed Imam Ali's silence the crowd begged him
to talk upon people's insistence, Imam rose up and talked, in detail,
about his relation with the Prophet's household and about his past
glories adding:

Do you remember the day of Ghadir when the Prophet was ordained by Allah
to introduce me as his genuine successor in the same way he had made
clear the nature of prayer, alms and hajj ceremonies? Do you remember
the Prophet had declared: God wants me to declare something; but I fear
that people might not accept it; but God had ordered the Prophet to
declare it, having promised to guard him against people.

O people! Do you accept said the Imam that God is my superior and I am
superior to the believers?

Every one answered: yes. Do you remember at that time the Prophet asked
me to rise, I did, he then declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“ولاء كولائي، من كنت أولی به من نفسه فعليُّ أولی به من نفسه”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do you remember, Ali asked the people once more. The minute when Salman
asked the Prophet:

How is Ali superior? The Prophet replied Ali's superiority over you is
like that of mine over you; anybody upon whom I am superior Ali is
superior upon him[^7].

4. It was not only Ali who used the event of Ghadir to prove his right
to Imamate; the Prophet’s daughter too during a historical day when she
was talking about her rights asked the people whether they had forgotten
the day when the Prophet had told Ali من كنت مولاه فهذا على مولاه or
not.

5. When Hasan Ibn Ali decided to sign a cease fire with Muawiyyah, he
added:

“God purified the members of the Prophet's Household by Islam” and
further said: Everybody heard the Prophet having said to Ali: what you
are to me is like what Harun was to Musa.

Then Fatimah (s) continued: everybody saw and heard that the Prophet
raise Ali's hand telling people[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“مَنْ كُنْتُ مَولاهُ فعليٌّ مولاه اللّهمّ وال من والاهُ و عاد من
عاداه”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6. In a huge meeting at Mecca, were some of the Prophet's closest
followers, Husain Ibn Ali (as) said, “By God, do you know that at Ghadir
event, the Prophet appointed Ali as his successor and asked those
present to relate the event to those who were absent?”

Theaudience said in unison: we do confirm this event.

7. In addition to these events, as we have seen previously, a group of
the Prophet's close followers, such as Ammar Yasir, Zayd Ibn Arqam,
Abdullah Ibn Jaafar, Asbaq Ibn Nebatah and others have reasoned on this
event on their argumentation through Ali's successorship[^9].

[^1]: . Seyyed Ali Khan "Madani" in his book called Al-Darayat
Al-Raf’iah fi Tabaqat Al-Shi’atul Emamiyah", has gathered the names of
those who remained faithful towards Ali (as). And in his book "Al-Fusul
Al-Muhimmah " (pp. 177-192), Sharaf Al-din Ameli has added some more
names to this list. The writer of the present book, has written a book
on "the Islamic personalities in Shiism," and through some authentic
documents has dealt with the life of people. This book will be published
in several volumes.

[^2]: . Sahih Bokhari, vol. 1, p.22 [the book of science].

[^3]: . Quran 24:63.

[^4]: . Quran 49:1.

[^5]: . Manaqib Kharazmi, p. 217.

[^6]: . Al-Ghadir, vol. 1, pp. 153-171.

[^7]: . Fara’ed Al-Simtein, ch 58. Besides these three cases, Imam Ali
(as) had reasoned on his Imamate in other occasions: in Kufah on a day
called “Youm Al-Rahbah”, on the day of Jamal, during an event called
Hadythul Rakban and during the war of Siffin.

[^8]: . Yanabi Al-Muwaddah, p. 482.

[^9]: . For more information on these argumentations and their
documents, refer to the worthy book of Al-Ghadir (vol 1/pp.146-a 195):
in this book there are 22 such arguments based on documents.


