Chapter 22: The Events Of Thaqalain And Safinah
===============================================

The Holy Quran and the Prophet's Household are inseparable
----------------------------------------------------------

The narration of “Thaqalain”[^1] is one of the most frequently reported
Islamic narrations narrated from the Prophet by scholars.

Most profound documents will lead us to believe that this narration is
authentic.

In order for the Sunnis to realize the authenticity of this document, we
shall present here some of the Sunnite scholars’ statements related to
this topic:

“Munadi” says: “more than twenty of the Prophet's close followers have
reported this narration from the Prophet”[^2].

Ibn Hajar Asqalani writes “the narration of Thaqalain has been reported
by more than twenty sources”[^3].

Allamah Mir Hamid Husain, the great Shiite scholar, who died in the year
1306 of the lunar calendar, has extracted this narration from 502 books,
all written by the Sunnite scholars. His research on the authenticity of
this narration has been published in six volumes in Isfahan. Interested
readers might refer to this valuable source.

If we add up the number of the Shiite and Sunnite scholars who have
dealt with this issue the narration of Thaqalain would have the most
authentic value; nothing would be equal to it except for the Ghadir
narration. Now let us see the text of the narration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنِّي تارِكٌ فِيكُمُ الثَقَلَيْنِ كِتاب اللهِ وَ عِتْرَتِي أَهْل
بَيتي ما إِنْ تَمَّسَكْتُمْ بِهِما لَنْ تَضِلُّوا أَبَداً وَ لَنْ
يَفْتَرِقا حتّی يَرِدا عَلَيَّ الْحَوض”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I will leave you two worthy items: One is God's book and the other one
is my Household. If you resort to both of these, you will not go astray;
and these two shall never separate.

Ibn Hajar contends that the Prophet added the following phrase to the
above narration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“هذا عِليٌّ مَعَ القُرآنِ وَ القُرآنُ مَعَ عَليّ لا يَفْتَرقان”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Ali is always with the Quran and the Quran is always with Ali; these
two shall never separate”[^4].

What we have briefly reported here has been confirmed by both Shiite and
Sunnite scholars. The reason for disagreements between these two groups
concerns the form of the narrations that relies on the fact that the
great prophet of Islam has used different interpretations concerning the
irrevocable bonds between the Holy Quran and the Prophet's Household.
The Prophet has emphasized the bond between these two on different
occasions such an Hajjatul Wida, Ghadir Khum, from the pulpit[^5] and on
his death-bed, while his room was filled with his close followers[^6].

Despite the fact that the narration is reported in differing shapes and
that the Prophet refers to his two precious remnants with the titles
“Thaqalain” or “Khalyfatein” or “Amrein” but it carries one single
objective and that is the inseparability between the Holy Quran and the
Prophet's Household.

A survey of the contents of the narration of Thaqalain
------------------------------------------------------

Deliberation on the content of the narration of Thaqalain will reveal to
us that the members of the Prophet's household are immune against sin:
they are infallible.

This is because something which is inseparable from the Holy Quran up to
the day of resurrection should be infallible like the Holy Quran itself
(whose content is everlasting). In other words from the Prophet's
explicit order that the Islamic Ummah should resort to these two
remnants of his, up to the day of resurrection and that they should obey
these two, we can easily deduce that these two are always immune from
any distortion. This is because Allah would never ask His servants to
obey a wrongdoer; neither would He ever set a bond between wrong-doers
and the Holy Quran. Only one group would deserve to be juxtaposed with
the Holy Quran and that group, infact should be infallible.

As we have previously mentioned, one of the prerequisites for Imamate is
infallibility. In the coming chapters we will show, through reasoning,
the necessity of such prerequisites in the divine leaders as a whole
Thus, the Thaqalain narration clearly depicts the fact that, members of
the Prophet's household, like the Holy Quran, are flawless and
infallible.

Imam Ali's resort to the Thaqalain Event
----------------------------------------

Ahmad Ibn Ali Ibn Abi Talib, the writer of the worthy book “Ehtejaj”
reports from the book written by Solaym Ibn Qais (one of the most
distinguished students of Imam Ali (as) that at the time of Othman’s
caliphate there a meeting was convened at the Prophet’s mosque in which
some Muhajirs and Ansars were participating. Each participant started
boasting about their past glories.

Everybody was talking in that session except for Imam Ali (as), who was
silent. Due to the participants’ insistence, Imam Ali started talking
having recited some verses of the Holy Quran relevant to his right of
Imamate Ali said: “By God, do you remember, the Prophet in the last days
of his life, recited a sermon and stated the following statement?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“يا أَيُّهَا الناس إِنِّي تاركٌ فِيكُمُ الثقلين كتاب الله و عترتي أهل
بيتي فتمسكوا بهما لا تضلوا”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I have left for you two precious items: God's book and my Household;
there fore resort to these two and you will not be misled”[^7].

Definitely by “Household” is not meant all the relatives of the Prophet
because not all of them were flawless; rather by this word is meant only
a selected group who are believed by Shiites to be their genuine
leaders.

In other words if we accept the documents of Thaqalain then we have to
accept the true and genuine members of the Household. This is because
out of the Household members only a selected group is the true referent
of this narration. The selected group is well known among the Ummah for
their purity, their virtues their ethical values, and their vast and
immense knowledge.

But notice
----------

We have so far presented the text of the Thaqalain narration. As we have
seen the Prophet always refer to **“** **كتاب الله وعترتي”** “The book
and the Household” as two precious items which shall never separate.

However, at times the phrase **“كتاب الله وعترتي**” is replaced with
**“كتاب الله وسنتي”** “The Book and my tradition” in the Sunnite books
as an insignificant narration.

In his book [^8] Ibn Hajar Asqalani has narrated the narration with the
latter expression. He then adds: The Prophet's tradition refers to the
book itself; so obedience towards both of them is compulsory.

We are not concerned with the validity of such a narration what we are
concerned with is the fact that the content of the Thaqalain narration
is what we have dealt with so far and if a narration is reported from
the great prophet of Islam with the expression “كتاب الله وسنتي” “God's
Book and my tradition” that would be another issue which would not
contradict the genuine Thaqalain narration.

The Prophet's Household acts as Noah’s Ark
------------------------------------------

If we add up the Safinah [Noah’s ark] narration to the Thaqalain
narration we would come up with a world of virtues for the Prophet's
Household.

Salim Ibn Qais says: while I was present at a Hajj ceremony, I saw Abu
Zar Ghaffari holding the door of the Kaaba, shouting.

O people, some of you know me well, but I introduce myself to those who
do not know me: I am Jandab Ibn Jenadah, or Abu Zar. O people, I have
heard your prophet say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنَّ مَثَلَ أَهْل بَيْتي في أُمَّتي كَمَثَلِ سَفِينَةِ نُوْحٍ في
قَومِهِ مَنْ رَكِبَها نَجا وَ مَنْ تَرَكَها غَرق”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“My presence among you seems like Noah’s Ark among his people: Those who
got onto the arc were rescued, but those who refused to do so were
drowned”[^9].

The Safinah narration like Ghadir and Thaqalain narrations is among the
frequently narrated ones.

Mir Hamed Husain, the author[^10] has reported this narration from
Islamic scholars, all of which are Sunnites[^11].

A survey of the contents of the Safinah narration
-------------------------------------------------

From the Safinah narration, in which the Household of the Prophet is
likened to that of Noah’s Ark, it is understood that following the
Prophet's Household in our lives would lead to one's salvation and
opposing it causes one's destruction. The question that needs to be
answered here: shall we follow the chosen household only in permitted
and forbidden actions or in the political and social issues as well?

Those who believe they only need to follow the first category of orders
have unnecessarily narrowed down the domain of our obedience towards the
members of the household.

But such conditions are not stipulated in the narration itself.

Thus, like other narrations, the Safinah narration is another proof of
the capability of the household members to lead the Islamic nation.

Furthermore the above-mentioned narration is the clearest indication of
the infallibility of the Household members. This is because a person on
the verge of collapse could never save others from pitfalls.

The reasons for the capability of Ali (as) and his followers to lead the
Islamic Ummah are too numerous to be included in this book however we
shall deal with the issue of infallibility, which is essential for
leadership.

[^1]: . If pronounced this word as Thaqal, it means worthy thing and if
it is pronounced "Theqi" it means a heavy material.

[^2]: . Feizol Ghadir, vol. 3, p. 14.

[^3]: . Al-Sava’eq Muhraqah Asqalani, narration no. 135.

[^4]: . Yanabia Al-Muwaddah, PP. 32-40.

[^5]: . Biharul Anwar, vol. 22, p. 76 (reported from Majalis Mufid)

[^6]: . Sava’eq Muhraqah Asqalani, p. 75.

[^7]: . Al-Ehtejaj, vol. 1, p. 210.

[^8]: . Al-Sawaeq Al-Moharaqe, p. 89.

[^9]: . Al-Ehtejaj Tabarsi, p. 228.

[^10]: . Refer to the second section of the twelfth volume, p 914.

[^11]: . Such as Mustadrak Hakem, vol 3/p. 343; Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol 1/p.
250; As-Sawa’eq, p 75: Feizol Ghadir, vol 4/p. 356.


