Chapter 26
==========

At this final chapter we have to note two important topics:

I. When Talking of the Thaqalain narrations, some Sunnite scholars use
the expression “**كتاب الله وسنتي**” “God's book and my tradition” in
place of **“كتاب الله وعترتى”** “God's book and my household”.

II. When praising the Prophet, they would not mention the Prophet's
Household.

These two viewpoints are the source of dispute between these two groups.
In turn we shall deal with both viewpoints.

Which Interpretation Is Correct: “God's Book And My Household” Or “God's Book And My Tradition”?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Which Interpretation Is Correct: “God's Book And My Household”**
**كتاب الله وعترتي اهل بيتي** **Or “God's Book And My Tradition”**
**كتاب الله وسنتي?**

**Question:** The Imamat-relying scholars, such as Saduq, Mofid and Tusi
(may God bless them) in their religious issues, refer to the narrations
related to the Prophet's Household, stressing the Thaqalain narration in
particular, while other scholars report this narration in another form
(using “My tradition” for “My Household).

With this disagreement, how can we discuss the following topic?

**An explanation:** While in principle and religion the Shiites follow
sound reasoning, they consider authentic the narrations on the Prophet's
Household with the condition that they have been correctly conveyed. One
of the sources of authenticity of the narrations on Household is the
Thaqalain, which is approved by the Islamic narrators.

They say the Prophet has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنِّي تاركٌ فِيكُمُ الثقلين كتاب الله و عترتي ما إِنْ تَمَسَّكْتُمْ
بِهِما لَنْ تَضِلُّوا”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

But since in some narrations the term “**سنتي**” my tradition” is used
for**عترتي**” “ “my household” the validity of either one of the
expressions becomes questionable.

Concerning this issue the Shiite scholars have written some treatises
one of which is the publication called **دار التقريب بين المذاهب
الاسلاميه** which is published in Cairo.

Recently one Jordanian scholar called Sheikh Hasan Ibn Ali Saqqaf has
answered this question. Here we will present a translation of it (since
it is a research paper we will not add anything to it).

**Question:** I have been asked the issue of Thaqalain and the
authenticity of either **عترتي”** **“وأهل بيتي** or **“سنتي**” (please
answer this question based on documents).

**Answer:** The authentic narration from the great prophet is with the
term **“وأهل بيتي**” [and my Household]. The narration which appears
with the word **سنتي** “my tradition” is wrong.

Now we shall present the documents for the reliability of the narration
with the expression “and my Household”.

### The document for the narration which contains the words “and my Household”

This text is issued by two great narrators:

1. In his ***Sahih***, a Muslim narrates from Zayd Ibn Arqam. He says:
once the Prophet delivered a sermon on a river called Khom, which is
located between Mecca and Medina saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
““أَلا أَيُّهَا النّاسُ! فَإِنَّما أَنَا بَشَرٌ يُوشَكُ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ
رَسُولُ رَبّي فأُجيبَ، وَ أَنَا تارِكٌ فِيكُمْ ثِقْلَيْن: أَوَّلُهُما
كِتابُ اللهِ فِيهِ الْهُدی وَ النُّور، فَخُذُوا بِكتابِ اللهِ وَ
اسْتَمْسكُوا به”- فحثّ علی كتاب الله و رغّب فيه ثمّ قال:-”وَ أَهلُ
بَيْتي، اذكّركُمُ الله فِي أَهْل بَيْتِی، اذكّركُمُ الله في أَهْل
بَيْتي، اذكّركُمُ الله في أَهل بَيْتي”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O people! I am no more than a human being and in a short time God's
angel would come and ask me to go with him. I will leave for you two
precious things: one is God's book, which contains guidance and light;
take this book and deliver it since the Prophet wishes that you do so;
the second is my household; I emphasize this last part. The Prophet
repeated this last part three times”.

This text is relayed in ***Sahih***[^1] by Muslim and by Darimi in his
***Sunan.***[^2] The documents of both are as clear and vivid as the
sun, with no flaw whatsoever.

2. Tirmizi, too, has narrated this text with the expression **“وعترتي
واهل بيتي”** [and my Household]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنّي تارِكٌ فِيكُمُ ما إِن تَمَسّكْتمْ بِهِ لَنْ تَضِلُّوا بَعْدِي،
أحدهُما أَعْظَمُ مِنَ الآخرِ: كِتابُ الله حَبلٌ مَمْدُودٌ مِنَ
السَّماءِ إِلَی الأَرْضِ، وَ عِتْرَتِي أَهْلَ بَيْتِي، لَنْ يَفْتَرِقا
حَتّی يَرِدا عَلَيَّ الْحَوض، فَانْظُروُا كَيْفَ تَخْلِفُونِي فِيها”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I will leave for you two items while you resort to them you shall not
weaken: one is greater than the other: one is God's book, which is a
cord of benevolence extending from the heaven towards the Earth. The
other one is my Household, these two shall never separate till they meet
me at Kauthar”.

Be careful in handling these two.

These two texts, which stress the expression “my Household” are
authentic and need no further elaboration since their narrators are
reliable.

### The document of the narration with the expression “and my tradition”

**The document of the narration with the expression “وسنتي** **and my
tradition”**

The narration with the word **“وسنتي”** is fake and is produced by the
Omavi agent.

**First, Hakim's Narration**

In ***Mustadrak***, Hakim Neishabari has reported his narration from the
following:

1. (Abbas) Ibn Abi Owais.

2. Abi Owais.

3. Thur Ibn Zayd Al-Deylami.

4. Akramah.

5. Ibn Abbas saying that the Prophet has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“يا أَيُّهَا النّاسُ إِنّي قَدْ ترَكْتُ إِنِ اعْتَصَمْتُم بِهِ فَلَنْ
تَضِلُّوا أَبَداً كتاب الله وَ سنّة نَبِيّه”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O people! I have left among you two things. While you resort to them,
you shall not fade: God's book and the Prophet's tradition.” [^3]

The quoters of these texts are the father and the son who have been
reported at the beginning of the document: i.e.

1. Ismael Iabn Abi Owais;

2. Abu Owais.

These two are accused of lying and deception.

Now let’s see what scholars have to say concerning the father and son:

Hafiz Mazi, in his book ***Tahdhib Al-Kamal*** concerning Ismael and his
father reports:

Yahya Ibn Moin (a great scholar on narration) writes: Abu Owais and his
son are weak people Yahya Ibn Mo’in has said: these two are thieves of
narrations. Ibn Moin concerning the son, has said “He is not to be
trusted”.

Nesaee has said the son is weak and unreliable. Abu Al-Qasim Lalkaee has
said: Nesaee has said a lot against him.

Ibn Odai (an expert in narrations) says: Ibn Abi Owais reports some
strange narrations from his maternal uncle which nobody may believe[^4].

In the introduction ***Fath Al-Bari*** Ibn Hajar writes: the narration
relayed by Ibn Abi Owais could not be disputed[^5].

In his book Fathul Mulk Al-’Allee Hafiz Seyyed Ahmad Ibn Al-Sadiq
reports from Salma Ibn Shobeib that he has heard from Ismael Ibn Abi
Owais, saying: the people of Medina disagree and fall into two groups, I
shall make up narrations[^6].

Thus, the son (i.e. Ismael Ibn Abi Owais) is accused of making up
narrations. Ibn Moin says he is a liar. Besides, his narration is not
reported in ***Sahih*** of either Muslim or Tirmazi.

Concerning the father Abu Hatam Razi in his book Jarh Wa Taadil writes:
His narration is reported, but could not be declared. His narration is
not strong enough[^7].

And Abu Hatam has reported from Ibn Moin saying that the narrations
reported by these two are never reliable.

The point to be emphasized here is that the reporter of the narration,
i.e. Hakim Neishaburi has confessed to the weakness of the narration and
for this reason has not tried to correct it. However he has offered a
document which tries to prove the authenticity of its contents; this too
is weak and proves nothing, which adds to the weakness of the narration
rather than strengthening it. Let us present his whimsical document:

### The second document “wa sonnati”

Hakim Neishaburi, reports from Abu Horayrah in a Marfua[^8]form: [^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“إِنّي قَدْ ترَكْتُ فِيكُمْ شَيْئَين لَنْ تَضِلُّوا بَعْدَهُما: كِتابَ
اللهِ وَ سُنّتي وَلَنْ يَفْتَرِقا حَتّی يَرِدا عَلَيَّ الْحَوض”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hakim has issued this text based on the following documents:

1. Al-Thabi, from.

2. Saleh Ibn Musa Al-Talhi, from,

3. Abdol Aziz Ibn Rafia, from,

4. Abi Saleh, from,

5. Abi Horayrah.

This narration, too, like the previous one is fake.

Among the narrators we put our finger on Saleh Ibn Musa Al-Talhi. Let us
see what the narration experts have to say about this person:

Yahya Ibn Moin writes: Salih Ibn Musa is not to be trusted. Abu Hatam
Razi says: his narration is weak and untrue: he narrates fake
narrations. Nesaee writes: His narration could not be written down. In
another occasion he writes: His narration is out[^10].

In “Tahzib Al-Tahzib” Ibn Hajar writes: Ibn Habban says: Salih Ibn
Musa's narration is not valid. And Abu Noaim says:

His narration is out and he always reports fake narrations[^11].

In Taqrib[^12] Ibn Hajar writes: His narration is out; and Zahabi says
in Kashif:[^13] His narration is weak. Zahabi, in Mazan Al-Eatedal[^14]
reports that his narration is not authentic.

### The third document of the narration with the expression “my tradition”

**The third document of the narration with the expression “سنتي” “my
tradition”**

Ibn Abdul Berr, in his book Tamhid[^15] narrates this text with the
following sources:

1. Abdul Rahman Ibn Yahya, from.

2. Ahmad Ibn Saeed, from.

3. Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim Al-Davili, from.

4. Ali Ibn Zayd Al-Faraezi, from.

5. Al-Hunayni, from.

6. Kathir Ibn Abdullah Ibn Amr Ibn Auf, from.

7. Abih, from his grandfather.

We shall point our finger to Kathir Ibn Abdullah, out of narrators. Imam
Shafee says: he is one of the foundations of lying[^16]. Abudawoud says:
he is one of the great liars. Ibn Habban says: Abdullah Ibn Kathir
narrates from his father and his grandfather; his book is based on
falsehood. To narrate from that book is Islamically forbidden except for
critique[^17].

Nesaee and Darqutni write: his narration is out. Imam Ahmad says: he is
not to be trusted. Ibn Moin, too, expresses the same idea.

It is surprising that Ibn Hajar, in his book Al-Taqrib, uses only the
word “weak” and has called extremists those who assure Ibn Kathir of
lying. This is when narration experts accuse him of mere lying. Zahabi
says in this regard: his speech is whimsical and illusionary.

### Narration based on no documents

In Al-Mowatta, Malik calls this narration baseless and undocumented.

This research shows that this narration is fake and is created by the
lying narrators who were agents of the Umavi court. It is the counter
fit of the narration which is based on “my Household” narration.
Therefore it is compulsory for religious speakers to put aside those
narrations which are not conveyed by the Prophet and to familiarize
people with genuine narrations.

These speakers should convey the narration which Muslim narrates in his
***Sahih*** as “my Household” and the narration which Tirmazi relates as
“my Household and my relatives” it is up to the religious students to
adopt the science of narration and to distinguish between the strong and
the weak ones.

At the end of this book, I should remind you that by Household is meant
Fatimah, Hasan, Husain (and Imam Ali) and not Ayeshah as Muslim in his
***Sahih*** and Tirmazi in his ***Sunan***[^18] mention:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“نزلت هذه الآية على النبيّ : “إِنَّما يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ
عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيراً “ في
بيت أُمّ سلمة، فدعا النبيّ : فاطمة وحسناً وحسيناً فجلّلهم بكساء وعليّ
خلف ظهره فجلله بكساء ثُمّ قال: اَللّهمّ هؤلاءِ أهل بَيْتي فاذهبْ
عَنْهُمُ الرَّجسَ وَ طَهَّرهُمْ تَطْهيراًز قالت أُمّ سلمة: وأنا معهم
يا نبي الله؟ قال: أَنتِ علَى مَكانِك وأَنْتِ إِلَى الْخَيْرِ”.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The following verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّما يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَ يُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيراً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“***[Allah desires to keep away the impurity from you, O people of the
House! And to purify you a thorough purifying]***”[^19] was revealed
unto the Messenger at the home of Umme Salma the Prophet put Fatima,
Hasan and Hussain under his aba (cloak) and Ali was standing behind him
and the Prophet covered him with a coarse garment (kisa); then
addressing God, the Prophet said: “O God these are the people of my
house; purify them thoroughly and make them clean”. Umme Salma asked the
Prophet: O messenger of God! Am I not one of them? [Am I included in the
people referred to by this verse?] The Prophet replied: you stay where
you are do not enter the aba) and you are on the right way[^20].

The translator says: Hasan Ibn Ali Saqqaf in his reply assumes that the
Prophet's wives are also included, whereas Omme Salama's narration which
is reported by ***Sahih*** of Muslim and in ***Sunan*** by Tirmazi, is
against Saqqaf's view.

If the Prophet's wives had been included in the Prophet's Household then
Umme Salama would not have been barred from entering the aba and having
been told “stay at your place”.

Furthermore, those who have carefully read the Quranic verses dealing
with the Prophet's wives have found that the tone of these verses is
reproaching and punitive. Such individual could not be the referent of
the verse on purity or subject to the Prophet's benediction.

For more details see the interpretation of Manshur Jawid[^21].

How To Praise And Salute The Prophet
------------------------------------

One of the cases of disaccord between the Sunnites and Shiites in
praising the Prophet is that the Sunnites would not refer to the
Prophet's Household when they praise him. They would say “send your
blessings to him” while the Shiites say “send your blessings to him and
to his Household”. Now the question is: which one of the two are
correct?

No doubt our religious leaders have chosen the latter form. Now let us
see the narrations the sunnites have concerning in praise of the
Prophet.

Previously we tried to answer this question briefly. However now we
shall present the whole text. When the following verse was revealed unto
the Prophet:

***“Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe!
Call for divine blessings on him and salute him with a becoming
salutation [Quran 33:57],*** the close friends of the Prophet asked him
how to praise him He replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تصلوا عليَّ الصلاة البتراء
  </p>
</blockquote>

do not praise me with short blessings.

His friends asked him: how could we bless you? The Prophet replied: say

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهمّ صلِّ علی محمّدٍ و آل محمّد
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God send your blessings to Muhammad and his Household”[^22].

The expression “Al-e-Muhammad” [the Prophet's Household] is so important
that some sects of Sunnites have stipulated the addition of this
expression to the Prophet's blessings. Related to this Imam Shafee says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا اهل بيت رسول الله حبكم فرض من الله في القرآن انزله كفاكم من عظيم
القدر انكم من لم يصل عليكم لاصلاة له
  </p>
</blockquote>

O the Household of the Prophet, loving you is an obligation which is
stipulated by God in the holy Quran, you are so great that if anyone
does not praise you his prayers are null and void.

For the Sunnites the ***Sahih*** of Bokhari is the most reliable book
after the Holy Quran. I would like to attract the attention of our
Sunnite brethren to the narration reported by Bokhari in his ***Sahih***
at the place where he interprets surah Ahzab:

Abdul Kahman Ibn Abi Leili reports: Kaab Ibn Mojarah met me and asked me
if he could give me a narration as a gift; the narration runs in the
following manner:

Once, the Prophet came to Sahabah. We asked the Prophet how they could
praise him. He replied:

**  
**
“

**  
**
اللّهمّ صلِّ علی محمّدٍ و آل محمّد، كما صلّيتَ عَلی إبراهيمَ انَّكَ
حَميدٌ مَجيدٌ

**  
**
”

**  
**
.

  

[^23]

Thus, the Islamic etiquette forces us to bless the great prophet in the
full form and not to separate him from his honorable and sacred
Household.

[^1]: . Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, pp.3-18 under the number 2408 Abdulbaqi
publication.

[^2]: . Sunan Darmi, vol. 2, pp. 431-432.

[^3]: . Al-Mustadrak, Hakim, vol. 1 p.93.

[^4]: . Tahzib Al-Kamal, Hafiz Mazi vol. 3, p. 127.

[^5]: . Fath Al-Bârî, Ibn Hajar ‘Asqalani (introduction), p. 391 Dâr ul
Ma'rifat public description.

[^6]: . Fath Al-Malik Al-'Ali, Hâfiz Seyyed Ahmad Ibn As Sidî, p. 15.

[^7]: . Al-Jarh wa Al-Ta’adil, Abu Hatam Razi, vol.5, p. 92.

[^8]: . A narration is called Marfua when its narrator does not narrate
from a Flawless Imam.

[^9]: . Al-Mustadrak, Hakim, vol. 1, p. 93.

[^10]: . Tahdhib Al-Kamal, Hafz Mazi vol. 13, p. 96.

[^11]: . Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Ibn Hajar vol. 4, p. 355.

[^12]: . Taqrib, Ibn Hajar (translation) no. 2891.

[^13]: . Al-Kashif, Dhahabi, translation no. 2412.

[^14]: . Mizan Al-Eatedal, Dhahabi, vol. 302, vol. 2.

[^15]: . At-Tamhid, vol. 24, p. 331.

[^16]: . Tahdhib Al-Tahdhib, Ibn Hajar vol. 8, p. 377, section Darrul
Fekr; Tahdhib Al-Kamal vol. 24, p. 138.

[^17]: . Al-Muwatta, Malik, p. 889, narration No. 3.

[^18]: . Tirmidhi, vol. 5, p. 663.

[^19]: . Quran 33:33.

[^20]: . Adopted from Sahîh sifati salât an Nabî, Hassan Ibn Ali,
pp.289-294.

[^21]: . Tafsîr Manshûr Javîd, t.5, p.294.

[^22]: . As-Sawâ‘iq Al-Muhriqah, second edition, Maktabat Al-Qâhirah,
publications Egypt section 11, chapter 1, p. 146. A similar narration is
repeated in the book called "Al-dor Al-Manthur" by Siuti, vol 5 with the
interpretation of the verse 56 of Ahzab surah. He has referred to great
narrators, such as Abdul Razzaq the writer of Al-Mosannef and Ibn Abi
Shibah and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Bokhari and Muslim and Abu Dawoud and
Tirmazi, and Nesaee and Ibn Majah and Ibn Marduqah.

[^23]: . Sahih Bokhari, the Book on Interpretation, section 6, p. 217
(Surah Ahzab).


