Chapter 3: The Reasons For The Validity Of Shiite’s View
========================================================

The rational and narrative reasons all lead us to the fact that the
Imam's position, like the one of the Prophet:

• is a divine position;

• the Imam should be appointed by God; and

• he should have all the conditions and characteristics of the Prophet
except for the ability to receive revelations.

Now let us present our reasons:

The New Problems
----------------

During his lifetime the beloved Prophet of Islam put forward the basic
and practical principles of Islam which consequently led to the
completion of the sacred religion of Islam. But are these principles
enough without an Islamic authority who has the ability to solve
people's problems? Definitely not. Rather, there should have been an
infallible Imam, after the Prophet, who could in the light of the Holy
Quran, deal with new situations, especially those situations which did
not arise during the Prophet’s lifetime.

After his prophethood, the Prophet spent thirteen years in Mecca
struggling with idolatry, during which, due to the lack of proper
conditions, he was unable to teach people the Divine rulings; therefore
he spent most of his energy trying to inform people of the Islamic
principles and the issues related to the Creator and resurrection. Since
the issues of ‘Islamically permitted and forbidden acts’ could not be
raised at the time, they were postponed to a later date.

Upon his entry into Medina, the Prophet was faced with insurmountable
obstacles.

His life in Medina did not exceed ten years but during this time he
personally took part in twenty seven Holy Wars against the idolaters and
the Jews of Medina and Kheybar. His precious time was also spent on
fighting with the infidels and hypocrites.

All the events caused the Prophet to present only an introduction of the
Islamic principles. Therefore, he allowed his successors to explain and
meditate related issues.

In surah Maidah we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ دِينَكُمْ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This day I have perfected for you your religion***[^1]***“***

This surah was revealed to the Prophet on the tenth year of his
prophethood. The issues of resurrection and the Islamic principles were
perfected by the Prophet up to the time of the revelation of this verse.

Now we must think. Who could satisfy all the needs of the Ummah based on
these principles after the Prophet?

Adopting the right ways to deal with events, which will arise until
Doomsday, based on the verses of the Holy Quran, or limited narrations
related to us by the Prophet are huge problems indeed and beyond the
conceivable power of ordinary people.

This is because the number of Quranic verses which deal with
jurisprudential issues is not more than three hundred and the number of
the narrations which are narrated from the Prophet concerning the issues
of permitted and forbidden acts does not exceed four hundred.

Never can an ordinary man, with his limited knowledge, deal with the
ever increasing events and occurrences of the present day Islamic
community; rather, a capable man would be required to solve the problems
with his Divine education.

Such a learned man must be immune to all sorts of sins so that he could
be trusted by all. Such a person should be appointed by God.

Another Interpretation Of The Issue Of The Perfection Of Religion
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Another interpretation of the issue of the perfection of religion that
could be offered here is the continuity of the mission. This is because,
according to numerous narrations, this verse was revealed to the Prophet
on the day of Ghadir when Ali (as) was appointed by the Prophet as the
Caliph Imam, his successor. Without an Imam there was no guarantee for
the religion of Islam to continue with its existence. The chances
existed that Islam would cease to exist were it not for the Imams.
Because of this, Ali (as) was appointed by the Prophet to continue the
Prophet's mission.

However, it should be noted that, after the Prophet’s demise divine
revelation came to an end. This is because all of man’s needs, up to
resurrection, were taken care of by the Prophet. But there are
jurisprudential affairs which show themselves each day and should be
resolved by the Prophet's successor.

Considering all this, we should admit that all of God's commands related
to Islam were revealed to the Prophet during his lifetime. However, due
to the limited years of prophethood and due to the daily problems he
faced, he was unable to teach the Ummah all that he had received from
Allah. Under such circumstances, the Prophet had to teach his successor,
who like himself was innocent, all that he had received from God
concerning the Divine commands and Islamic practical laws. Naturally,
such a knowledgeable person, who is innocent flaw less, could only be
appointed by Allah. The Ummah could never appoint such a person.

When we say that the Prophet had to “teach” his successor the Divine
issues, the word “teach” is not a usual word; rather this was the
complete capturing of his successor's soul, so that he could learn all
that the Prophet was about to teach him.

In the end, it should be noted that Muslims, after the expansion and
spread of Islam all over of the globe, were faced with unprecedented
problems and new issues, which were never brought up at time of the
Prophet.

The discovery of solutions to such issues through the Holy Quran or
narrations is problematic and disputable. Under such conditions, it is
up to a direct recipient of the Divine revelation to interpret the
verses of the Holy Quran and the narrations and to issue the proper
verdict.

One of the problems of the Sunnite community is that they want to
interpret all Islamic affairs by the limited number of Quranic verses.

They feel hindered and frustrated in many cases when they are unable to
solve problems and they resort to analogy, which everyone knows to be
baseless when answering the needs of the Ummah. However, if there was a
qualified individual who could get the solutions from the Prophet and
could resolve people's problems, he could put an end to such chaos,
which exist to this day and would guide people to the right path.

If analogies could be resorted to only under rare occasions, we could
say Islam permits us to solve the rare problems via analogies. But, on
the other hand, if the very basis of Islam lay on guesses, we would have
introduced to the world the legal and moral system of Islam on a
baseless foundation. Then how could we expect the people of the world to
carry out the Islamic legal and moral system when we doubt the Divine
inspiration for such commands?

The Ignorance of the Ummah’s religious leaders
----------------------------------------------

There are numerous cases of ignorance by religious leaders in history.
Scientific calculations will lead us to the fact that there should be
among the Ummah a learned, well informed and knowledgeable Imam who
could protect and secure the very treasure of Divine commands and let
people know of Divine instructions.

Here are some cases of ignorance on the part of the Caliphs:

1. In the presence of the Prophet's companions Omar ordered a pregnant
woman who had committed adultery to be stoned. However, the order was
annulled by Imam Ali (as) under the pretext that the woman was guilty
but the unborn child was in fact innocent.

2. The Caliph ordered a man who had committed adultery to be stoned.
This man and his wife were living in different cities. The Islamic
punishment for such a crime is torture by whipping and not stoning.

This time too the verdict was annulled by Imam Ali (as).

3. Five wrongdoers were brought to the Caliph for having committed
fornication. The Caliph ordered each one to receive whips. Imam Ali (as)
was present. He said each one has got a special case and punishment. One
is a non-Muslim infidel who should be killed because he was living in a
Muslim community but had violated his obligations; the second one was a
married man who had to be stoned; the third one was a young bachelor who
had to receive whips; the fourth one was a bachelor slave who had to
receive half the punishment for a free person; and the fifth was insane,
who had to be released.

4. At the time of Abu Bakr, a Muslim man had drunk wine, but claimed
that he was living among a group who used to drink wine and that he did
not know drinking wine was prohibited in Islam. Abu Bakr and his aid
Omar were puzzled and had to refer to Imam Ali (as) for a solution. Imam
(as) said: ‘let this man be brought to the gathering of Ansars to see if
any one of them had recited to him the verse on the prohibition of
drinking wine. If it is found out that he has previously been exposed to
such a verse he should be punished or else he should be released.’

5. A married woman was arrested because she had committed adultery;
therefore, she was ordered to be stoned. But Imam Ali (as) asked for
more investigation. The woman was ordered to be put on trial once again
so that she could present the reasons for her crime. She said she had
taken her husband's camels to the pasture and got extremely thirsty in
the desert. She then had asked a man to give her some water, but he had
said that he would give her water only if she slept with him. Since she
had been on the verge of death because of her thirst, she had accepted
such an abominable act. At this time, Imam Ali (as) quoted this Quranic
text:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَمَنِ اضْطُرَّ غَيْرَ باغٍ وَ لا عادٍ فَلا إِثْمَ عَلَيْهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A person who commits something, not for sin or aggression but because
of emergency, is innocent” [^2]

The total of such cases in the history of Caliphs is so numerous that
one might gather them in a whole book. Who could be responsible for such
verdicts? Such dealings had not occurred while the Prophet was still
alive so that people might hear the right verdicts from the direction of
revelation. After the Prophet’ who could protect the treasure of God's
commands? Could it be said that God had left people on their own and had
stopped His kindness and generosity from people[^3]?

[^1]: . Quran 5:3.

[^2]: . Quran 2:173.

[^3]: . We do not need to go into details of such cases of the Caliphs'
ignorance. Such details are dealt with in history books. The cleric
Allamah Amini, in the sixth, seventh and eighth chapters of his precious
book, Al-Ghadir, has revealed the status of the Caliphs' knowledge
through various documents. The interested readers could refer to that
book.


