Chapter 5: Islamic Rules And The Holy Quran Need The Interpretation By Infallibles
==================================================================================

The Islamic legal system always needs to be explained however vivid and
obvious it may seem. In the same way that laws of countries require
interpretation by qualified experts. The Holy Book and its commands need
clarification, even if they had been spelled out by the Prophet himself.
Tens and hundreds of cases have been witnessed where there have been
disputes over the meaning of the verses of the Holy Quran and over
Islamic narrations.

Is the Islamic religion, which is eternal, not in need of a prominent
leader who is well aware of the Prophetic knowledge and whose judgment
could be used as a base?

Was the presence of such a leader not necessary for putting an end to
disputes and the realization of the Islamic unity?

In Omar’s time, a man came to the Islamic court saying that it had been
only six months since he had married his wife, but that she had given
birth to a healthy child.

The judge ordered the woman to be stoned. On the way, the woman saw Ali
(as) and asked for help, saying she was innocent and had not slept with
any one else except for her husband. Ali (as) became aware of the error
of the judge. He ordered the man in charge of stoning to return to the
mosque. Addressing the Caliph and reproaching him, Ali (as) said: what
kind of judgment is this? The Caliph answered: six months ago the two
got married and now his wife has given birth to a child. Ali (as) said:
don’t you know, that the Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ حَمْلُهُ وَ فِصالُهُ ثَلاثُونَ شَهْراً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

“and bearing him and weaning him was thirty months”[^1].

The Caliph replied: Yes. Then Ali (as) said: Hasn't the Quran regulated
two whole years for breast feeding the child when it says

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَ الْوالِداتُ يُرْضِعْنَ أَوْلادَهُنَّ حَوْلَيْنِ كامِلَيْنِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And the mothers should suckle their children for two whole years”*[^2]

The Caliph replied: Yes. Imam Ali (as) then replied: When we subtract 24
months, required for breast-feeding, from thirty months, six months will
remain and during this time a woman might give birth to a healthy child.

Imam Ali (as), by using two verses of the Holy Quran, came to the
conclusion that no man could arrive at. Can we then claim that the
Prophet of Islam did not have any plan for this Divine book which is an
eternal light for humanity?

It might be claimed that such a rare occasion would not hurt Islamic
unity. Then we could reply that the cases of dispute and disagreements
were not among the rarest things; rather, the disagreements might arise
concerning most of Muslims’ everyday affairs. However, these
disagreements and disputes could not be neglected.

In one of its surahs the Holy Quran[^3] has explained how ablution must
be performed. What's more, Muslims used to see how the Prophet did his
ablution everyday. However, after the Prophet’s death, the Quran was
published in many far away lands which resulted in different
interpretations of the verses by various scholars. Verses related to
jurisprudential issues were also discussed. Consequently, there were
complete disagreements on the verse which dealt with the performance of
ablution – this disagreement exists today: the Shiites and Sunnites
perform it quite differently.

If there had existed among Muslims an innocent and infallible Islamic
leader, who knew the Islamic principles well, such a dispute, which
later divided the Muslims into two fractions, would have never arisen
and Islamic unity would have been secured.

Disagreements over the interpretation of the Quran
--------------------------------------------------

One of the Islamic penal laws is the cutting of the thief's hand under
special conditions which are stipulated in jurisprudential books. Until
a few years ago, when Islam was in its glory days and the Islamic
governments adopted their penal systems based on the Quran and the
western penal systems had not found their way into the Islamic
countries, the only punishment for a thief was the cutting of his hand.
But this case too, unfortunately is one over which Islamic scholars do
not completely agree, even after fourteen centuries of Islam.

At the time of Mo’tasim Abbasi, when Islam was two centuries old, the
Islamic scholars disagreed on the interpretation of the verse which
dealt with the cutting of a thief's hand, for it was unclear which part
of the hand should be cut. The Caliph then had to resort to Imam Jawad
(as). He said a thief's four fingers should be cut. When he was asked
for the reason the Imam (as) replied: God says in the Holy Quran

﴿

**  
**

وَ أَنَّ الْمَساجِدَ لِلَّهِ

  

﴾

***“Places of prostration belong to God”***

He added “one of those places is the palm of the hand which should touch
the ground at the time of prostration which should not be cut because it
belongs to God”.

Were there such a great scholar among the Ummah, who could decide on
such delicate issues, many of the Muslims’ problems would not exist, the
Ummah would go its straight path and they would not waste their time
over absurd issues.

The Holy Quran is the basic source for any correct Islamic
interpretation and nothing in the world is equal to it. If we ever
received two contradictory explanations from the Prophet, we would
accept the one which was in harmony with the Quran.

But are all the Quranic verses on the same footings regarding clarity?
Isn't there a verse in the Quran which will need the interpretation of
an infallible?

Such a claim would be issued by one whose contact with the Quran is
superstitious and whose heart is not linked with the Quran. It is a fact
that most of the Quranic verses are clear and that some of the ambiguous
verses are made clear with the help of other clear verses .[^4]However,
there are some verses in the Quran which were ambiguous since they were
revealed or have become so because of the distance in time from the
revelation. What could be done regarding such verses? Should there not
be a scholar who can decode such ambiguous verses?

When Imam Ali (as) dispatched Ibn Abbas to reason with the Khawarej, he
ordered him not to use Quranic verses. His rationale was that if he were
to use a verse for a reason they would use another verse to contradict
what he might say[^5]. The Imam certainly did not mean the whole of the
Quran; rather, he was referring to the ambiguous verses.

For these reasons it is urgent that there be an innocent Imam among the
Ummah, who is well-aware of the Islamic principles and who could be a
final judge in disputes.

If there were not such an authority available, some portions of the
Quranic verses would be subject to erroneous interpretations, and this
would cause Muslims to divide.

A statement from Hisham
-----------------------

Hisham Ibn Hakam, Imam Sadiq's distinguished student, an expert in
literary debate and discourse in the second century reasons in the
following manner for the necessity of an Imam among the Ummah for
judgment in difficult cases.

One day he had a discussion over the issue of having an Imam among the
Ummah with Amr Ibn Obayd, head of the Moatazelah sect and the religious
leader of Basrah.

Hisham asked him to answer his questions even if they were simple and
clear.

**Q**: Do you have eyes?

**A**: Yes, I do.

**Q**: What do you do with them?

**A**: I see people and colors.

**Q**: Do you have ears?

**A**: Yes, I do.

**Q**: What do you do with them?

**A**: I hear voices and noises.

**Q**: Do you have a nose?

**A**: Yes, I do.

**Q**: What do you do with it?

**A**: I smell with it.

Hisham then continued asking questions related to other human sense
organs. Then he continued:

**Q**: Do you have a heart?

**A**: Yes, I do.

**Q**: What is its function in human life?

**A**: I recognize, through it, anything that goes on in my body.

Hisham then added: if any one of the human senses made a mistake, a man
would resort to his heart to resolve the doubt.

Hisham then came to the following conclusion: Could God leave the human
society with no resort to whom they may refer when He has created human
hearts to resolve the errors of the human sense organs?[^6].

Imam Sadiq (as) describes the characteristics of the Prophet's successor
in the following manner:

“After the Prophet, there should be an Imam who could protect the
Islamic principles from any damage”[^7].

One day, in the presence of Imam Sadiq (as), Hisham Ibn Hakam debated
with a Syrian scholar asking him: Has God appointed a successor for the
Prophet or not? The scholar replied: Yes, He has, and such a successor
is the interpreter of the Quran and the Prophet's statements. Then,
Hisham asked the Syrian scholar if the Quran and narrations would
suffice for settling disputes. He answered: yes. Then Hisham asked: If
it is enough, why do you and I disagree on many issues even if we are
two branches of the same tree? Why have we selected a different
direction? At this time the Syrian scholar had to confess to the truth
of Hisham's statements[^8].

[^1]: . Quran 46:15.

[^2]: . Quran 2: 232.

[^3]: . O you who believe! When you rise up for prayer, wash your faces
and your hands as far the elbow, and wipe your heads and your feet to
the ankles; and if you are under an obligation to perform a total
ablution, then wash yourselves and if you are sick or on a journey, or
one of you come from the toilet or you have touched a woman and you can
not find water, betake yourselves to pure earth and wipe your faces and
your hands with it. Allah does not desire to put on you any difficulty,
but He wants to purify you and that He may complete his favor on you, so
that you may be grateful [Quran 5:6].

[^4]: . Regarding the verses, Imam Ali (as) says: كتاب الله تبصرون به
وتنطقون به وتسمعون به وينطق بعضه ببعض ويشهد بعضه على بعض

[^5]: . Nahj-ul-Balagha Abdoh, vol. 3, p. 150.

[^6]: . Usul Kafi, vol. 1, p. 170.

[^7]: . Usul Kafi, vol. 1, p. 172.

[^8]: . Usul Kafi, vol. 1/ p. 178.


