Chapter 6: The Triangular Danger, The Three Enemies Of Islam
============================================================

On the day when the great Prophet of Islam passed away, there were three
enemies who threatened Islam from both inside and outside and the fear
was that they might attack Islam.

The first side of the triangle of enmity
----------------------------------------

The internal danger was due to the hypocrites of Medina and its suburbs
who had intended to kill the Prophet when he was returning from the holy
war of Tabuk. They had planned to startle the Prophet's camel so that he
might lose his life.

Aware of their nasty intentions, the Prophet could easily foil their
intrigues. However, for the general good, he never told anyone except
for selected friends such as Hothaifah about these conspiracies.

A group of hypocrites were awaiting the Prophet's death. Exposing them,
the Holy Quran says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿.نَتَرَبَّصُ بِهِ رَيْبَ الْمَنُونِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘therefore continue to remind … you are not a soothsayer, or a mad-man’
or do they say: A poet, we anticipate for him the evil accidents of
time”[^1] we are waiting for his death and for the decline of his
religion.

A group of enemies were under the illusion that with the Prophet's death
Islam would cease to expand. Some others thought with the weakening of
Islam they could revert to their ideology of the pre-Islamic age.

Upon the Prophet’s demise, Abu Sufyan, who had decided to bring forth
discrepancy between the Quraysh and Bani Hashim, hypocritically entered
Ali's house and asked him for allegiance, telling him: in this way the
children of Taym and Adi would not oppose you. Imam Ali (as) realized
that he had the intention of creating disagreements among people and
causing bloodshed. He, therefore, refused his allegiance and continued
with the burial ceremony of the Prophet.[^2]

The mosque of Tharar, which was built in the ninth year of Hijra, and
was later destroyed by the order of the Prophet, was an underground
center for the hypocrites towards the final years of the Prophet. They
were connected to Ibn Amer, the enemy of God upon the capture of Mecca.
Ibn Amer escaped to Rome from where he could distribute the necessary
orders.

In the ninth year of hijra, the Prophet left Medina for Tabuk, extremely
concerned with the internal chaos and the coup d’etat which the
hypocrites had planned to carry out. Therefore, he appointed Ali (as) as
his substitute in Medina and he delivered his historic statement
regarding Ali (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“أنت منّي بمنزلة هارون من موسى”
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You are to me what Harun was to Musa”[^3].

Then he reminded Ali (as) to stay in Medina to handle the internal
chaos.

There are many verses in the Holy Quran which deal with the hypocrites
plotting against Islam. All the verses confirm their enmity towards
Islam.

When the Prophet passed away, there were many saboteurs living in
Medina.

Upon the Prophet's demise, a group of Arabs reverted to their apostasy
and were backslidden. By expelling the alms officials, they started
their opposition. Although they were not from among the hypocrites, they
were weak in their religion, changing to different directions as
conditions changed. They tried, in this way, to avoid the newly founded
Islam.

With such enemies in the vicinity constantly awaiting opportunities to
disrupt Islam, how could the Prophet not consider a successor for
himself?

Other sides of the enmity triangle
----------------------------------

The other two sides of the triangle were two great empires of the time:
Rome and Iran. The first military clash took place between the Christian
army of Rome in Palestine in the eighth year of Hijra which ended in
severe defeat for the Islamic army and in their return to Medina under
the command of Khalid Ibn Walid. In this war, the great leaders of the
Islamic army were killed: Jaafar Tayyar, Zaid Ibn Harith and Abdullah
Rawahah. Such a clear defeat by the army of infidels, would give
momentum to Caesar’s army. Every minute there was the danger of their
attack to the very center of the newly built Islam.

For this reason, the Prophet along with thirty thousand troops headed to
the coasts of Syria in the ninth year of hijra to take part in a
military maneuver to discourage the army from future attacks and to
enter into military pacts with some tribes. In this military movement,
which was full of various obstacles, no clash took place between the
Muslims and the Romans. The Prophet then headed for Medina.

This sort of victory did not convince the Prophet, who was restless to
compensate for such defeat. So, a few days prior to his death, he
prepared a flag for Osamah Ibn Zaid and ordered his followers to
accompany him to the coasts of Syria and start an attack before being
taken by surprise by the foreign troops.

All these movements indicate that the Prophet was extremly worried about
the north and he predicted that Islam would be attacked by the Roman
state.

The other side of this triangle of enmity was the Sassanid Kingdom of
Iran. This enmity was so bitter that Khosro Parviz tore up the Prophet's
letter in rage and killed the Prophet's ambassador and wrote to the
governor of Yemen to kill the new Prophet and send his head to the
Madaen court!

Hijaz and Yemen had long been colonies of Iran. But then, due to the
advent of Islam the two gained independence and it was probable that the
two states stage attacks against Iran.

Although Khosro Parviz passed away while the Prophet was still living,
the separation of Yemen and Hijaz and their shores was always in the
minds of the kings who reigned after Khosro Parviz, who were worried
about the new power whose troops were equipped with faith, sincerity and
unity.

With such powerful enemies, could the Prophet pass away without having
nominated a political successor for himself? Reason would not allow us
to attribute such negligence to the Prophet.

[^1]: . Quran 52:30.

[^2]: . Al–Darajat Al–Rafiah, p. 77. Ali (as) expressed his ideas
concerning Abu Sufyan with the following statement. ما زلت عدوّ الإسلام
وأهله "you have always been an enemy to Islam and Moslems". Refer to
"Al-Esty’ab" vol. 2 / p. 690.

[^3]: . This narration has been repeated frequently.


