[Introduction]
==============

Fasting in the month of Ramadan is one of the \`pillars' of the Islamic
faith. No proof is required to establish its being obligatory*(wajib)*
and one denying it goes out of the fold of Islam, because it is obvious
like salat, and in respect of anything so evidently established both the
learned and the unlettered, the elderly and the young, all stand on an
equal footing.

It was declared an obligatory duty*(fard)* in the second year of the
Hijrah upon each and every mukallaf (one capable of carrying out
religious duties, i.e. a sane adult) and breaking it*(iftar)* is not
permissible except for any of the following reasons:

1. Hayd and nifas: The schools concur that fasting is not valid for
women during menstruation and puerperal bleeding.

2. Illness: The schools differ here.

• The Imamis observe: Fasting is not valid if it would cause illness or
aggravate it, or intensify the pain, or delay recovery, because illness
entails harm*(darar)* and causing harm is prohibited*(muharram)* .

Moreover, a prohibition concerning an \`ibadah (a rite of worship)
invalidates it. Hence if a person fasts in such a condition, his fast is
not valid*(sahih)* . A predominant likelihood of its resulting in
illness or its aggravation is sufficient for refraining from fasting. As
to excessive weakness, it is not a justification for iftar as long as it
is generally bearable. Hence the extenuating cause is illness, not
weakness, emaciation or strain, because every duty involves hardship and
discomfort.

• The four Sunni schools state: If one who is fasting (sa'im) falls ill,
or fears the aggravation of his illness, or delay in recovery, he has
the option to fast or refrain. Iftar is not incumbent upon him; it is a
relaxation and not an obligation in this situation. But where there is
likelihood of death or loss of any of the senses, iftar is obligatory
for him and his fasting is not valid.

3. A woman in the final stage of pregnancy and nursing mothers.

• The four schools say: If a pregnant or nursing woman fears harm for
her own health or that of her child, her fasting is valid though it is
permissible for her to refrain from fasting. If she opts for iftar, the
schools concur that she is bound to perform its make up (qada') later.
They differ regarding its substitute*(fidyah)* and atonement*(kaffarah)*
.

- In this regard the Hanafis observe: It is not at all wajib.

- The Malikis are of the opinion that it is wajib for a nursing woman,
not for a pregnant one.

- The Hanbalis and the Shafi\`is say: Fidyah is wajib upon a pregnant
and a nursing woman only if they fear danger for the child; but if they
fear harm for their own health as well as that of the child, they are
bound to perform the qada' only without being required to give fidyah.
The fidyah for each day is one mudd, which amounts to feeding one needy
person (miskin.).1

• The Imamis state: If a pregnant woman nearing childbirth or the child
of a nursing mother may suffer harm, both of them ought to break their
fast and it is not valid for them to continue fasting due to the
impermissibility of harm. They concur that both are to perform the qada'
as well as give fidyah, equalling one mudd, if the harm is feared for
the child. But if the harm is feared only for her own person, some among
them observe: She is bound to

perform qada' but not to give fidyah, others say: She is bound to
perform qada' and give fidyah as well.

4. Travel, provided the conditions necessary for salat al-qasr, as
mentioned earlier, are fulfilled as per the opinion of each school.

• The four Sunni schools add a further condition to these:

• The journey should commence before dawn and the traveler should have
reached the point from where salat becomes qasr before dawn. Hence if he
commences the journey after the setting in of dawn, it is haram for him
to break the fast, and if he breaks it, its qada' will be wajib upon him
without a kaffarah.

• The Shafi'is add another condition, which is that the traveller should
not be one who generally travels continuously, such as a driver. Thus if
he travels habitually, he is not entitled to break the fast.

• In the opinion of the four Sunni schools, breaking the fast is
optional and not compulsory. Therefore, a traveller who fulfils all the
conditions has the option of fasting or iftar. This is despite the
observation of the Hanafis that performing salat as qasr during journey
is compulsory and not optional.

• The Imamis say: If the conditions required for praying qasr are
fulfilled for a traveler, his fast is not acceptable. Therefore, if he
fasts, he will have to perform the qada' without being liable to
kaffarah. This is if he starts his journey before midday, but if he
starts it at midday or later, he will keep his fast and in the event of
his breaking it will be liable to the kaffarah of one who deliberately
breaks his fast.

And if a traveler reaches his hometown, or a place where he intends to
stay for at least ten days, before midday without performing any act
that breaks the fast, it is wajib upon him to continue fasting, and in
the event of his breaking it he will be like one who deliberately breaks
his fast.

5. There is consensus among all the schools that one suffering from a
malady of acute thirst can break his fast, and if he can carry out its
qada' later, it will be wajib upon him without any kaffarah, in the
opinion of the four schools. In the opinion of the Imamis, he should
give a mudd by way of kaffarah. The schools differ in regard to acute
hunger, as to whether it is one of the causes permitting iftar, like
thirst.

• The four schools say: Hunger and thirst are similar and both make
iftar permissible.

• The Imamis state: Hunger is not a cause permitting iftar except where
it is expected to cause illness.

6. Old people, men and women, in late years of life for whom fasting is
harmful and difficult, can break their fast, but are required to give
fidyah by feeding a miskin for each fast day omitted: similarly a sick
person who does not hope to recover during the whole year. The schools
concur upon this rule excepting the Hanbalis, who say: Fidyah is
mustahabb and not wajib.

7. The Imamis state: Fasting is not wajib upon one in a swoon, even if
it occurs only for a part of the day, unless where he has formed the
niyyah of fasting before it and recovers subsequently, whereat he will
continue his fast.


