The New Moon and Astronomy
==========================

This year (1960) the governments of Pakistan and Tunisia have decided to
rely upon the opinion of astronomers for the confirmation of the new
moon with a view of putting an end to confusion3 and the general
inconvenience resulting from not knowing in advance the day of \`Id,
which at times comes as a surprise, and at other times is delayed
despite all the preparations.

This decision of the two governments has become an issue of heated
controversy in religious circles. The protagonists of the move observe
that there is nothing in the religion that disapproves of reliance on
the opinion of astronomers; rather it is supported by this verse of
Surat al-Nahl:

<p dir="rtl">
وَعَلامَاتٍ وَبِالنَّجْمِ هُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ
</p>

***“...And way marks; and by the stars they are guided.” (16.16)***

The antagonists state: The decision contradicts the above-mentioned
prophetic traditon:

<p dir="rtl">
صوموا لرؤيته وأفطروا لرؤيته
</p>

That, because the word ru'yah*(sighting)* implies sighting the moon with
the eyes, which was common among the people during the time of the
Prophet (s ). As to using a telescope or relying on astronomical
calculations, they are inconsistent with the literal import of the
tradition, they point out.

In fact, none of the sides has advanced sound reasons, because
\`guidance by the stars' implies determination of land and sea routes
with the help of the stars, and not determination of days of months and
new moons. As to the tradition, it does not contradict sound scientific
knowledge, because \`seeing' is a means for acquiring knowledge and not
an end in itself, as is the case with any means that helps confirm
facts.

However, in my opinion, the judgment of astronomers do not lead to
certain knowledge, nor do they remove all doubts as removed by vision,
because their judgments are based on probability not on certainty. This
is evident from their divergent judgments about the night of the new
moon as well as the time of its occurrence and the period that it
remains (above the horizon).

If a time comes when the astronomers attain accurate and sufficient
knowledge, so that there is consensus among them and they repeatedly
prove to be right to the extent that their forecasts become a certainty
like the days of the week, then it will be possible to rely upon them.
Rather, then it will be obligatory to follow their judgments and to
reject everything that goes against them.4


