Conditions (Shurot) of Fasting
==============================

As mentioned earlier, fasting in the month of Ramadan is wajib for each
and every mukallaf. Every sane adult (al-baligh al-\`aqil) is considered
mukallaf. Hence fasting is neither wajib upon an insane person in the
state of insanity nor is it valid if he observes it. As to a child, it
is not wajib upon him, though valid if observed by a mumayyiz.

Also essential for the validity of the fast are Islam and*niyyah*
(intention). Therefore, as per consensus, neither the fast of a
non-Muslim nor the imsak of one who has not formed the niyyah is
acceptable. This is apart from the afore-mentioned conditions of freedom
from menses, puerperal bleeding, illness and travel.

As to a person in an intoxicated or unconscious state:

• The Shafi\`is observe: His fast is not valid if he is not in his
senses for the whole period of the fast. But if he is in his senses for
a part of this period, his fast is valid, although the unconscious
person is liable to its qada', whatever the circumstances, irrespective
of whether his unconsciousness is self-induced or forced upon him. But
the qada' is not wajib upon an intoxicated person unless he is
personally responsible for his state.

• The Malikis state: The fast is not valid if the state of
unconsciousness or intoxication persists for the whole or most of the
day from dawn to sunset. But if it covers a half of the day or less and
he was in possession of his senses at the time of making niyyah and did
make it, becoming unconscious or intoxicated later, qada' is not wajib
upon him. The time of making niyyah for the fast in their opinion
extends from sunset to dawn.

• The Hanafis, an unconscious person is exactly like an insane one in
this respect, and their opinion regarding the latter is that if the
insanity lasts through the whole month of Ramadan, qada' is not wajib
upon him, and if it covers half of the month, he will fast for the
remaining half and perform the qada' of the fasts missed due to
insanity.

• The Hanbalis observe: Qada' is wajib upon a person in a state of
unconsciousness as well as one in a state of intoxication, irrespective
of whether these states are self-induced or forced upon them.

• In the opinion of the Imamis, qada' is only wajib upon a person in an
intoxicated state, irrespective of its being self-induced or otherwise;
it is not wajib upon an unconscious person even if his loss of
consciousness is brief.


