Muftirat
========

The muftirat are those things from which it is obligatory to refrain
during the fast, from dawn to sunset. They are:

2. Eating and drinking*(shurb)* deliberately. Both invalidate the fast
and necessitate qada' in the opinion of all the schools, though they
differ as to whether kaffarah is also wajib. The Hanafis and the Imamis
require it, but not the Shafi\`is and the Hanbalis.

A person who eats and drinks by an oversight is neither liable to qada'
nor kaffarah, except in the opinion of the Malikis, who only require its
qada'. Included in shurb [drinking] is inhaling tobacco smoke

2. Sexual intercourse, when deliberate, invalidates the fast and makes
one liable to qada' and kaffarah, in the opinion of all the schools.

The kaffarah is the manumission of a slave, and if that is not possible,
fasting for two consecutive months; if even that is not possible,
feeding sixty poor persons. The Imamis and the Malikis allow an option
between any one of these; i.e. a mukallaf may choose between freeing a
slave, fasting or feeding the poor. The Shafi'is, Hanbalis and Hanafis
impose kaffarah in the above-mentioned order; i.e. releasing a slave is
specifically wajib, and in the event of incapacity fasting becomes
wajib. If that too is not possible, giving food to the poor becomes
wajib.

The Imamis state: All the three kaffarahs become wajib together if the
act breaking the fast*(muftir)* is itself haram, such as eating anything
usurped*(maghsub)* , drinking wine, or fornicating. As to sexual
intercourse by oversight, it does not invalidate the fast in the opinion
of the Hanafis, Shafi\`is and Imamis, but does according to the Hanbalis
and the Malikis.

3. Seminal emission (al-'istimna'): There is consensus that it
invalidates the fast if caused deliberately. The Hanbalis say: If manhy
is discharged due to repeated sensual glances and the like the fast will
become invalid:

• The four schools say: Seminal emission will necessitate qada' without
kaffarah.

• The Imamis observe: It requires both qada' and kaffarah.

4. Vomiting: It invalidates the fast if deliberate, and in the opinion
of the Imamis, Shafi\`is and Malikis, also necessitates qada'. The
Hanafis state: Deliberate vomiting does not break the fast unless the
quantity vomited fills the mouth. Two views have been narrated from Imam
Ahmad. The schools concur that involuntary vomiting does not invalidate
the fast.

5. Cupping*(hijamah)* is muftir only in the opinion of the Hanbalis, who
observe: The cupper and his patient both break the fast.

6. Injection invalidates the fast and requires qada' in the opinion of
all the schools. A group of Imami legists observe: It also requires
kaffarah if taken without an emergency.

7. Inhaling a dense cloud of suspended dust invalidates the fast only in
the opinion of the Imamis. They say: If a dense suspended dust, such as
flour or something of the kind, enters the body the fast is rendered
invalid, because it is something more substantial than an injection or
tobacco smoke.

8. Application of kohl invalidates the fast only in the opinion of the
Malikis, provided it is applied during the day and its taste is felt in
the throat.

9. The intention to discontinue the fast: If a person intends to
discontinue his fast and then refrains from doing so, his fast is
considered invalid in the opinion of the Imamis and Hanbalis; not so in
the opinion of the other schools.

10. Most Imamis state: Fully submerging the head, alone or together with
other parts of the body, under water invalidates the fast and
necessitates both qada' and kaffarah. The other schools consider it
inconsequential.

11. The Imamis observe: A person who deliberately remains in the state
of janabah after the dawn during the month of Ramadan, his fast will be
invalid and its qada' as well as kaffarah will be wajib upon him. The
remaining schools state: His fast remains valid and he is not liable to
anything.

12. The Imamis observe: A person who deliberately ascribes something
falsely to God or the Messenger (s) (i.e. if he speaks or writes that
God or the Messenger said so and so or ordered such and such a thing
while he is aware that it is not true), his fast will be invalid and he
will be liable to its qada' as well as a kaffarah.

A group of Imami legists go further by requiring of such a fabricator
the kaffarah of freeing a slave, fasting for two months, and feeding
sixty poor persons. This shows the ignorance or malice of those who say
that the Imamis consider it permissible to forge lies against God and
His Messenger (s).


