Qada' of the Ramadan Fasts
==========================

1. The schools concur that a person liable to the qada' of Ramadan fasts
is bound to perform it during the same year in which the fasts were
missed by him, i.e. the period between the past and the forthcoming
Ramadan. He is free to choose the days he intends to fast, excepting
those days on which fasting is prohibited (their discussion will soon
follow). However it is wajib upon him to immediately begin their qada'
if the days remaining for the next Ramadan are equal to the number of
fasts missed in the earlier Ramadan.

2. If one capable of performing the qada' during the year neglects it
until the next Ramadan, he should fast during the current Ramadan and
then perform the qada' of the past year and also give a kaffarah of one
mudd for each day in the opinion of all the schools except the Hanafi
which requires him to perform only the qada'' without any kaffarah.

And if he is unable to perform the qada'--such as when his illness
continues throughout the period between the first and the second
Ramadan--he is neither required to perform its qada ' nor required to
give kaffarah in the opinion of the four schools, while the Imamis say:
He will not be liable to qada' but is bound to give a mudd as kaffarah
for each fast day missed.

3. If one is capable of performing the qada' during the year but delays
it with the intention of performing it just before the second Ramadan,
so that the qada' fasts are immediately followed by the next Ramadan,
and then a legitimate excuse prevents him from performing the qada'
before the arrival of Ramadan, in such a situation he will be liable
only to qada' not to kaffarah.

4. One who breaks a Ramadan fast due to an excuse, and is capable of
later performing its qada' but fails to perform the qada ' during his
lifetime:

• The Imamis observe: It is wajib upon his eldest child to perform the
qada' on his behalf.

• The Hanafis, Shafi\`is and Hanbalis state: A sadaqah of a mudd for
each fast missed will be given on his behalf.

• According to the Malikis, his legal guardian*(wali)* will give sadaqah
on his behalf if he has so provided in the will; in the absence of a
will it is not wajib.

5. In the opinion of the four schools, a person performing the qada' of
Ramadan can change his intention and break the fast both before and
after midday without being liable to any kaffarah provided there is time
for him to perform the qada' later.

The Imamis observe: It is permissible for him to break this fast before
midday and not later, because continuation of the fast becomes
compulsory after the passing of the major part of its duration and the
time of altering the niyyah also expires. Hence if he acts contrarily
and breaks the fast after midday, he is liable to kaffarah by giving
food to ten poor persons; if he is incapable of doing that, he will fast
for three days.


