Fasts of Atonement (Kaffarah)
=============================

The fasts of atonement are of various kinds. Among them are atonement
fasts for involuntary homicide, fasts for atonement of a broken oath or
vow, and atonement fasts for zihar. These atonement fasts have their own
rules which are discussed in the related chapters. Here we shall discuss
the rules applicable to a person fasting by way of kaffarah for not
having observed the fast of Ramadan:

• The Shafi\`is, Malikis and Hanafis say: It is not permissible for a
person upon whom fasting for two consecutive months has become wajib
consequent to deliberately breaking a Ramadan fast to miss even a single
fast during these two months, because that would break their continuity.
Hence, on his missing a fast, with or without an excuse, he should fast
anew for two months.

• The Hanbalis observe: If he misses a fast due to a legitimate excuse,
the continuity is not broken.

• The Imamis state: It is sufficient for the materialization of
continuity that he fast for a full month and then a day of the next
month. After that he can skip days and then continue from where he had
left. But if he misses a fast during the first month without any excuse,
he is bound to start anew; but if it is due to a lawful excuse, such as
illness or menstruation, the continuity is not broken and he/she will
wait till the excuse is removed and then resume the fasts.

Furthermore:

• The Imamis further observe: One who is unable to fast for two months,
or release a slave or feed sixty poor persons, has the option either to
fast for 18 days or give whatever he can as sadaqah. If even this is not
possible, he may give alms or fast to any extent possible. If none of
these are possible, he should seek forgiveness from God Almighty.

• The Shafi'is, Malikis and Hanafis state: If a person is unable to
offer any form of kaffarah, he will remain liable for it until he comes
to possess the capacity to offer it, and this is what the rules of the
Shari'ah require.

• The Hanbalis are of the opinion that if he is unable to give kaffarah,
his liability for the same disappears, and even in the event of his
becoming capable of it later, he will not be liable to anything.

The schools concur that the number of kaffarahs will be equal to the
number of causes entailing it. Hence a person who breaks two fasts will
have to give two kaffarahs. But if he eats, drinks or has sexual
intercourse several times in a single day:

• The Hanafis, Malikis and Shafi\`is observe: The number of ka ffarahs
will not increase if iftar occurs several times, irrespective of its
manner.

• The Hanbalis state: If in a single day there occur several violations
entailing kaffarah, if the person gives kaffarah for the first violation
of the fast before the perpetration of the second, he should offer
kaffarah for the latter violation as well, but if he has not given
kaffarah for the first violation before committing the second, a single
kaffarah suffices.

• According to the Imamis, if sexual intercourse is repeated a number of
times in a single day, the number of kaffarahs will also increase

proportionately, but if a person eats or drinks a number of times, a
single kaffarah suffices.


