Journey to the Unseen World
===========================

![](/sites/default/files/2_0.gif)

When I died, I saw myself standing, relieved of my illness, feeling fit
and healthy; I saw my relatives mourning around my corpse. I was
saddened by their crying and told them that I was cured and not dead;
but nobody heard me.  
![](/sites/default/files/3.gif)

My body was bathed and shrouded. I even joined the funeral procession,
in which I saw many wild animals which frightened me. But the other
people didn't even notice these beasts.

![](/sites/default/files/4.gif)

My body was lowered head-first into the grave. Just at that moment many
animals emerged and started attacking my body. My fear knew no bounds
but the other people behaved as if they did not even see them! My cries
for help fell on deaf ears!  
![](/sites/default/files/5.gif)

Suddenly some people entered the grave and shooed away the animals. I
thanked them. They told me that they were my “Good Deeds”, while the
beasts were my “Evil Deeds”.

![](/sites/default/files/6.gif)

The grave was closed over my dead body and all my friends and relatives
deserted me in my lonely confinement. I was afraid and bewildered.
Suddenly the grave trembled and split open.

![](/sites/default/files/7.gif)

Two huge Angels with fearful faces entered. Smoke and fire bellowed from
their mouths and nostrils. They were holding red hot iron rods in their
hands. Suddenly in a thundering voice, they asked me: “Who is your
Lord?” In my extreme fear I could not speak and beseeched Allah for help
and sought the intercession of Imam ‘Ali (as) knowing that he helps in
the most difficult of circumstances.

![](/sites/default/files/8.gif)

My silence angered them and they repeated their question. My fear left
me and I replied by reciting the ayats of Sura al-Hashr (Verse 22, 23).
Next they asked me, “Who is your Prophet? Which is your Book? (Kitaab),
Direction of Worship (Qibla), Imams”. My answers seemed to satisfy them.

![](/sites/default/files/9.gif)

They then asked me “What is the source of these answers?” I again became
confused. Would the arguments I learned in the dark, ignorant and
material world hold true in this enlightened, illuminated place ?

I again beseeched Allah with Imam ‘Ali's intercession. Suddenly the
answer was revealed to me. I was guided by Allah. I replied. They said
“Then sleep like a newly-wed” and left me. I felt the fear leave me and
I slept peacefully.

![](/sites/default/files/10.gif)

When I woke up, I found myself in a pleasant room with a handsome youth.
After greeting each other with respect, he told me “My name is Haadi
(Guide). I guided you to your last answers. Had you answered wrongly
your grave would have been filled with fire from Hell.”

![](/sites/default/files/11.gif)

I asked him “Tell me how do you know me so well, without having met me?
“ He replied “I am the relationship of love and friendship which you had
with Imam ‘Ali (as) and the Ahle-Bayt of the Holy Prophet (S). I have
been with you always, but you never sensed my presence since in the
material world your sight lacked the power to perceive me.” After some
discussions, he left me. I soon went to sleep.

![](/sites/default/files/12.gif)

On awakening, I saw two men sitting on my either side, one handsome and
the other ugly. They kept sniffing my body from head to toe, whispered
to each other, and then filled up certain boxes and sealed them. I
realized that my deeds were being judged and recorded. On completing
their task, they tied some sheets round my neck and kept the boxes
beside my head.

![](/sites/default/files/13.gif)

Next they put me inside an iron cage, which was made smaller by twisting
a lever. I was terrified and couldn't breathe. I heard my bones cracking
and oil oozed out of my body which they mopped up. I soon fainted and
became unaware of what was going on.

![](/sites/default/files/14.gif)

When I regained consciousness, I found my head on Haadi's lap. I started
crying in a weak voice. He consoled me and then said, “Everyone has to
face this in the initial stage in the grave. It is due to one's own past
deeds.” After making things comfortable, he left me. My body appeared to
have been purged of all debasements and become pure and clean. I now
understood that the constriction had actually been an act of purifying,
so that if a man possessed evil traits these debasements would, as a
result of the constriction, be squeezed out of him like the black oil
which I had seen.

![](/sites/default/files/15.gif)

On Thursday night, I visited my house in the form of a dove. I saw my
family and friends were reciting Quran, listening to religious lectures
and then eating good food. I was saddened as all this was being done for
tradition's sake. No needy or deserving person was invited. Of what good
was such food to me?

![](/sites/default/files/16.gif)

When I returned to the grave, I saw Haadi with a tray of sweet ripe
apples. “Where have these come from?” I asked. “Somebody sincerely
recited Sura al-Fateha near your grave, and Allah has rewarded you”, he
replied. He then informed me of another good news, “The Imam's son whose
grave you visited and the religious scholars whom you used to remember
in your night prayers are coming to visit you.”

![](/sites/default/files/17.gif)

Suddenly the guests arrived, most prominent amongst them were Hazrat
Abbas and Hazrat ‘Ali Akber Their majestic faces were very bright and
they were wearing a war-helmet, shield, sword etc. as if prepared for
battle. Hazrat Abbas spoke to me, “Your remembering my father, Imam ‘Ali
(as), has proved your salvation. You have been pardoned and absolved.”
After some conversation, the guests departed.

![](/sites/default/files/18.gif)

It was time to move ahead and picking up my bag of Deeds, I started
walking along the path that Haadi had shown me. After covering some
distance, I began feeling a bit tired and thirsty.  
![](/sites/default/files/19.gif)

At this point, an ugly person, “Abu Lahaw” joined me. He told me, “They
call me “Ignorance.” My title is “Waywardness”. My family name is “Abu
Lahaw” (Father of playfulness and wasting time). My aim is to create
mischief, mislead people and cause them to go astray.”

![](/sites/default/files/21_0.gif)

He tempted me into a “short cut” and I left the main road. This proved
to be more difficult, full of ditches, dirt and thorns with many snakes
and scorpions. The unbearable heat made me very thirsty, but my
companion laughed and seemed to enjoy my plight.

On an open ground, we saw some watermelons which he ate with relish and
also offered me some. “It is somebody's property and hence it's not
right to eat this without permission.” He tempted me again saying,
“Don't be so pious. The Qur'an says, “Whoever is driven to necessity,
not desiring nor exceeding the limits….” I fell into his trap again and
bit into the fruit. To my horror, it was so bitter that my mouth and
throat hurt.” Watermelons of Satan and Ignorance!” I thought.

![](/sites/default/files/22.gif)

Suddenly we were attacked by a dog and a guard of the land. I was beaten
viciously for being on the property without permission. By the time I
reached the true road, I was in a bad state. Abu Lahaw, who had escaped
the beating, was laughing and enjoyed seeing me crying and calling out
to Haadi for help. “The seeds of these sorrows were laid by yourself on
the earth.” he shouted.

![](/sites/default/files/23_0.gif)

After sometime, I reached an open airy and bright city. I requested the
guard to rid me of Abu Lahaw. He replied, “Abu Lahaw is inseparable just
like your shadow! But he cannot enter the City of Light. Though, when
you resume tomorrow, he'll be beside you again.”  
![](/sites/default/files/24_0.gif)

I spent the night in this place. It was beautiful and here I met some
old acquaintances. We were happy here with the best of people, food and
service. We were thankful to Allah that for our small deeds on the
earth, He had richly rewarded us.

![](/sites/default/files/25.gif)

The next day, I moved on. At a bisection, to my dismay, I saw Abu Lahaw
approaching me like a black smoke. The Duty-officer saw this and said,
“Abu Lahaw is the face of your own bad traits, like injustice, pride,
desire, anger etc. etc. If you did not desist from them on earth, how
can you separate them from yourselves now?”

![](/sites/default/files/26.gif)  
 I moved on with Abu Lahaw by my side. We soon reached a mountain, which
had a deep moat on one side. Abu Lahaw tempted me to climb this. I
accepted and to my great surprise, it proved to be very difficult and
dangerous. Several times, I slipped and hurt myself almost falling into
the moat. Abu Lahaw laughed and said, “He who is proud in this world,
Allah will break his back, and he who tries to be higher than others,
Allah will rub his nose in dust. You have read all this (in the Qur'an),
but never acted on it!”  
![](/sites/default/files/27.gif)

After some time I reached a garden with a pond around which some people
were sitting and eating fruits. They greeted me and invited me, “We had
been fasting at the time of our death; Since you had played host to
people who were fasting, you can also have these fruits. As for Abu
Lahaw, your defense weapon against him is the control which you had
exercised in your life over your desires.”

![](/sites/default/files/28.gif)

The next part of the journey was easy going. There were fruit laden
trees on both sides of the road and a river flowed alongside it. It was
as if we were beholding the beauty of God.

![](/sites/default/files/29.gif)

I reached the next station without feeling tired. A separate silver and
gold bricked palace reserved for me to stay in. The servants were
handsome and well-mannered and took care of every comfort for me.

![](/sites/default/files/30.gif)

At nightfall, the palace became illuminated. I realized at once, that
this light was of the tree of Muhammad (S) and his progeny and this
city, was for those who had love for them. I thanked Allah for His Grace
and Bounty and to Muhammad (S) and his progeny for having guided us
towards the straight path.

![](/sites/default/files/31.gif)

The next morning, I headed for the next station. Again the path was easy
and beautiful with lush green trees, cool water in the lakes and a
pleasant breeze.

![](/sites/default/files/32.gif)

Once out of the city, the path became narrow and rocky. Suddenly, Abu
Lahaw appeared by my side and tried to tempt me into taking another
“short cut”, but I kept to the same road, having no trust for him and
having already suffered at his hands before. As Imam ‘Ali (as) has said,
“To try him whom you have already tried (and he has failed) is
stupidity.”  
![](/sites/default/files/33.gif)

In a short while we reached the good road again and were soon at the
next station. Haadi met me at the gate. We greeted and embraced. He
said, “Don't consider yourself to be safe from Abu Lahaw as yet. He has
powerful weapons of deception and I can only warn and alert you against
Abu Lahaw's deceptions, so be very careful that you don't fall into
traps now. As today is Friday, go and visit your family, and see if they
have done any good deeds on your behalf.”

![](/sites/default/files/34.gif)

I visited my home again. What I saw saddened me. My family was going
through difficult times without anyone caring for their welfare. I
prayed “O Most Merciful, have pity on my family and myself, because you
are the Lord of all.” I then noticed that my family were also praying
for me and weeping remembering the good times they had in my lifetime.

![](/sites/default/files/35.gif)

When I returned, I found a strong horse besides Haadi. “Your family
prayed for you and Allah's blessings has come to you in this form.
You'll need this horse for your next journey,” he said, “Moreover, your
prayer for your family has been granted and henceforth, they will live
in comfort and well-being.”

![](/sites/default/files/36.gif)

I returned to my room and was pleasantly surprised to find a beautiful
maiden there. Her eyes were bright and her shining face seemed to
illuminate the whole room. “This maiden has been wed to you and
especially sent here for tonight from the valley of Peace.” Haadi
announced and left us.

![](/sites/default/files/37.gif)

The next morning with a stick and sword, I mounted the horse and rode
away. The ground was sandy and slippery. I saw monkey-like creatures
who, I realised were actually humans for they had no tails nor hair and
walked on two legs. Pus and blood emitted from their private parts
accompanied by a bad stink. “This is the land of Lust and Desire,” Haadi
said, “These people were adulterers. Beware you don't deviate from the
straight path, or it might spell the end of you.”

![](/sites/default/files/38.gif)

Next, I saw people resembling animals hanging from posts and their
private parts had been nailed to the posts with big iron nails. Some
were also being whipped and were screaming in pain. Haadi informed me
that these people used to indulge in various forbidden sexual
pleasures.  
![](/sites/default/files/39.gif)

Suddenly, Abu Lahaw appeared and tried to lure me into the adjoining
path. I resolutely followed Haadi's advice and stuck to the straight
path because salvation lies only in following the straight path.

![](/sites/default/files/40.gif)

Riding on, I experienced the earth shaking, the winds raging and the sky
darkening. A hail storm of stones was falling. All around me I saw
people who had followed their Abu Lahaw's advice sinking into the mire
or being crushed by the falling huge stones. “These people were
homosexuals.” Haadi cried. “Now get out fast from here, or otherwise you
might be subjected to the same punishment!”

![](/sites/default/files/41.gif)

We travelled only a couple of miles more to find ourselves out of the
place. I thanked Allah and went on with the journey.

![](/sites/default/files/42.gif)

Suddenly the accursed Abu Lahaw arrived. My horse shied at his sight and
threw me down. I was badly hurt. Haadi arrived and helped me mount
again. I bitterly complained, “whenever you leave, Abu Lahaw arrives to
cause trouble.” He replied, “No, I always leave when Abu Lahaw arrives,
but this is also due to your misdeeds on earth”.

![](/sites/default/files/43.gif)

Ahead of us was another Land of Desire. Here were people who used to be
heavy eaters. Those who used to overeat their food obtained by lawful
means, had faces like donkeys and cows. Those who had obtained their
food by unlawful means had faces of pigs and bears with huge bellies and
thin legs! They were being severely punished. It was as if their bellies
were full of fire.

![](/sites/default/files/44.gif)

We quickly moved on and soon reached a rest house in a barren and
deserted area. Some other travelers were also there, eating from their
bags. As my limbs were still painful, Haadi applied some ointment and
instantly the pain vanished! “Haadi, what medicine is this?” I inquired.
“This is the praises and thanks to Allah you used to give for any gift
you were blessed with!

![](/sites/default/files/45.gif)

The next day, Haadi warned me that I would now witness punishments due
to the sins of the tongue and advised me to take along water and shield.
“Your fasts on the earth is the shield which will now protect you from
Hell fire.” On the way we saw various animals fighting with each other
viciously, some even eating the flesh of the dead bodies. They were
extremely thirsty and flames emerged from their mouth and ears. These
are the back-biters and their audience, liars, fault finders and those
who laughed and made fun of the faithful.”

![](/sites/default/files/46.gif)  
 We then came near a garden with fruit trees. Suddenly I realized that
they were burning! “What is happening here?” I asked. “This is the
garden made by the faithful from the praise and remembrance of Allah.
But when these faithful lied, or indulged in back-biting or insulting,
this garden went up in flames. That is their sins caused the reward of
their good deeds to go to waste”.

![](/sites/default/files/47.gif)

On Friday night, I went to my home again as a bird. My children had
gathered under the fruit tree I was sitting on. “Our father planted this
fruit tree and we are enjoying its fruits. May Allah bless him.” One
recalled and then they recited Sura al--Dukhan and Sura al-Dahr Their
prayers made me happy and I also prayed for them and then returned to my
current abode.

![](/sites/default/files/48.gif)

When I returned, my horse was ready. Haadi presented me two gifts. One
was from Hazrat Fatimah Zehra (as) and the other from Hazrat ‘Ali (as)
as the two Suras recited by my children are connected to them. “At the
time of need these two gifts will open by themselves.” Haadi told me.

![](/sites/default/files/49.gif)

After some time, we reached the land of Greed and Avarice. There we saw
people with faces like dogs fighting among themselves. Some were eating
dead bodies and fire was coming out from their behinds. Haadi informed
me, “These people used to take bribes and embezzle or steal wealth
belonging to orphans.”

![](/sites/default/files/50.gif)

Next we entered the Land of Jealousy. I saw robot like giants
approaching us. Suddenly Abu Lahaw appeared. My horse shied away at his
sight, throwing me down. Abu Lahaw screamed with laughter, “O fool! Name
me one learned man who has been free from jealousy. You'll never get out
from this trap of mine!”  
![](/sites/default/files/51.gif)

I was angry and started fighting him but he was stronger and was
overpowering me. I cried for help. “Ya ‘Ali Madad!”

![](/sites/default/files/52.gif)

Immediately the robot like creatures turned around and retreated. Abu
Lahaw too tried to run away but was crushed under the wheels of a giant
roller. This was my last encounter with him!

![](/sites/default/files/53.gif)

Getting up, Haadi and I started walking away quickly. “Haadi, it seems
Abu Lahaw is dead”. I said. “No,” Haadi replied, “Abu Lahaw never dies.
But he will not approach you now as we are quite far from the Valley of
Barhoot. Ahead, people are being punished for Pride and Arrogance but
since you rid yourself of these traits in your lifetime, you will not be
troubled.”

![](/sites/default/files/54.gif)

It got pleasant as we went ahead, with cool breeze, mountains, greenery
and waterfalls. Numerous tents soon became visible. “This is the city of
'Huma', Haadi told me. It is the valley of Right and Sacred Land and
you'll stay here a few days.”

![](/sites/default/files/55.gif)

Some attendants appeared and Haadi instructed me to go with them, “Go to
your tent with them. You'll find friends there”.

![](/sites/default/files/56.gif)

On entering, a beautiful maiden greeted me. We sat down and were served
by a handsome lad. She spoke to me about religious issues. The depth of
her knowledge impressed me. “I was educated in the Holy City of Medina
and brought up by Hazrat Fatimah (as) who, like her father is herself a
city of knowledge and purity”. She told me.  
![](/sites/default/files/57.gif)

Then we went for a walk in the woods. As I would approach a tree, its
fruit laden branch would bend down towards me. The fruits were sweet and
fresh and did not decrease regardless of how many I ate. Melodious
voices rang out from the trees inviting me to eat whatever I liked.

![](/sites/default/files/58.gif)

On returning to the tent, I was greeted by Haadi, ready for the onward
journey. We departed, accompanied by friends and some angels. Soon we
approached a hill overcast with dark clouds and sparks emitting from it.
We could hear thunder in the distance. The angels immediately burst out,
“There is no course of circumstances and no power except Allah's!”

![](/sites/default/files/59.gif)

We climbed down the hill and looked down. “This is the Valley of
Barhoot”, the Angels said, “and these sparks resembling arrows, spears
and swords are in fact curses which the faithful send upon the enemies
of the Ahlul Bayt (as) and these are hitting their targets.”

We could see these fiery arrows passing through numerous people in the
valley and they could not escape these. They were wailing and the voices
sounded like yelping of dogs! All of us cursed the enemies of the Ahlul
Bayt. This resulted in a ten-fold increase in the fiery showers.

![](/sites/default/files/60.gif)

Seeing the fate of the enemies of Ahlul Bayt made me happy and satisfied
and we resumed our journey saying, “O Allah, give them such a punishment
from which even the dwellers of Hell would wish they were freed”.

**The End**


