Introduction
============

Where do I go after death? Would I return once again? What was the aim
of my creation? Is it necessary to ponder upon these points? What is
imminent would definitely come to pass; so why to worry about it?
Imagination of death and the events after it make one’s life
disagreeable, so why should I worry about it and lose sleep over it?

Yes, these questions arose throughout the ages and occupied the minds of
people in the past and still do so; and are on the verge of getting
convincing replies. Therefore intellectuals and philosophers tried to
answer these questions to realize the truth; satisfy themselves and that
they may hand over the conclusions of their researches to others.

Divine messengers believed in resurrection and based the foundation of
their call on it. In heavenly religions, life after death is considered
a necessary principle of faith and hundreds and thousands of books are
written in different languages on this subject. The Messenger of Allah
(S) and the Holy Imams (as) hold a very eminent position in propagating
and proving faith in resurrection. The Holy Quran has stressed on this
matter more than other heavenly scriptures, and has explained its
various aspects in many verses. Deep contemplation on the verses of this
heavenly Book, along with their interpretation through the sayings of
the Messenger of Allah (S) and the Holy Imams (as) can enable us to
understand life after death, which is an unseen world; as without that
it would have been impossible for us to do so. That is why we have based
this book on verses of Quran; with the hope that it would be useful for
all those who are in search of truth and especially that it may benefit
the youth.

Before actual discussion, we think that it is necessary to mention some
features about the two convergent views on resurrection: the view of
believers and the view of disbelievers.

Life, according to the two views
--------------------------------

Faith in resurrection sometimes does not go beyond the limit of words
and imagination, as it is not actual faith and does not have the
qualities of the world and the hereafter and sometimes it goes beyond
the stage of meaning and reaches to genuine faith. This is in fact true
faith in resurrection and it will have the traces of the world and the
hereafter with it according to the resolution of the person in carrying
out the duties made incumbent on him and depending on the strength of
his faith.

Views of the believers about resurrection
-----------------------------------------

Those who have real faith in resurrection do not consider their lives
limited to a few years in this world; on the contrary, they have a broad
view and they know that it is only a beginning; and that it is going to
continue forever in the hereafter.

They don’t regard death as annihilation and the end of life; on the
contrary they consider it to be a means of being transferred to the
world of the hereafter and an eternal life in that world. They consider
themselves to be travelers, who have come into this world to equip
themselves for the perpetual life of the hereafter. Such persons, just
as they follow a detailed plan and make efforts in this limited life of
the world, in the same way they are also not unmindful of their life in
the hereafter. They consider the world to be a harvest field for the
hereafter and consider their lives to be the best provision of obtaining
the means of building a prosperous after life. They do not waste the
most valuable capital in useless ways, lest they should face regret on
the day of resurrection.

They know this and they believe in the sayings of the prophets that man
is a being having a free will and is answerable for his good and bad
deeds in the hereafter. His success and misfortune in the hereafter will
depend on his beliefs and morals in this world. Paradise and the
bounties of Paradise and Hell and the chastisements of Hell in the
hereafter will be based on his good or bad deeds in this world. Such a
person would be aware of his duties, have a good nature, is a
well-wisher, trustworthy, truthful and justice loving. And he will avoid
bad morals and evil deeds.

In face of the calamities of the world and difficulties of life, which
are there for everyone, whether one likes them or not, he does not evade
and does not protest; on the contrary he remains absolutely patient and
says: Indeed we belong to Allah and to Him we shall return.

During old age and the last period of his life, he does not abandon
patience and hope; and he is not afraid of death as he has the good news
of the future and he knows where he is going.

In this condition, faith in resurrection does not impel man to go into
isolation and give up social duties; on the contrary it prepares him to
obtain knowledge, and to discover the secrets of nature, his life,
population of the world, social service, defense of human values and
martyrdom; since it is with faith in resurrection and rewards of the
hereafter that sacrificing one’s life in the path of truth can be
justified. How peaceful and pleasing is life in the shade of belief in
resurrection! Alas, if all the people had faith in hereafter and
accounting of deeds! What is the beauty in such a supposed world?

But what is the life of the deniers of resurrection like? It is very
short and death means the end of life and decline into the valley of
non-existence. For them, life in this world is regrettably full of
sorrow and grief; it is futile and aimless and without logical
justification. During calamities, the denier of resurrection is
discouraged by difficulties of life that befall everyone intentionally
or unintentionally and he is not comfortable in them. And any sort of
pleading is also not effective. Sometimes, in order to comfort his
inward pains, he resorts to alcoholic drinks and other drugs, so that he
may for some time forget himself and his painful thoughts. But temporary
intoxication is also of no use.

Sometimes he is so much affected by the severity of discomfort and
feelings of discouragements that he commits suicide. When a denier of
resurrection witnesses injustice of oppressors on himself or others, and
their successful escape from legal punishments, he becomes despondent
and is convinced that there is no justice in this world and no sort of
reward and punishment. Denial of resurrection necessitates that
practicing good morals, doing good to others, defending the rights of
the deprived, sacrifice and martyrdom in defense of truth etc. should
not have rational justification and practical cover.

The most difficult period of the life of a denier in resurrection is
when he is down with an incurable disease or extreme old age when he
knows that death is imminent; at that time he despairs of life and can
only imagine himself falling into a deep oblivion of nothingness. Alas!
How terrifying is the imagination of annihilation into nothingness and
inexistence! How difficult and unbearable is life without faith in
resurrection! The cause of most oppressions, battles, and violation of
rights, killings and murders, crimes, cruelties, corruptions is denial
in resurrection. If all the people of the world become deniers in
resurrection, accounting, rewards and punishments; what a terrible world
it would be!


