Scale Of Deeds
==============

According to verse of Quran and traditions of the Infallibles, it can be
concluded that in Qiyamat, a scale would be established in order to
weigh the good and bad deeds of people. Weighing of deeds is an Islamic
principle and it is a part of accounting.

The Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَضَعُ الْمَوَزِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيَمَةِ فَلَا تُظْلَمُ
نَفْسٌ شَيْئاً وَ إِن كَانَ مِثْقَالَ حَبَّةٍ مِّنْ خَرْدَلٍ أَتَيْنَا
بِهَا وَكَفَى‏ بِنَا حَسِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We will set up a just balance on the day of resurrection, so no
soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; and though there be the
weight of a grain of mustard seed, (yet) will We bring it, and
sufficient are We to take account. (21:47)***

Balance (Mizan) is an instrument of fixing the quantity of goods and
commodities. This instrument has been common in different nations and
communities in various forms, although mostly it is constructed from
tangible materials and bodies are weighed through it, but it is not
restricted only to material affairs; on the contrary in reality it is
used in other matters as well.

The science of logic used to discriminate between right and wrong
judgment, is also called as the ‘science of balance’. In the exposition
of the quantum of consciousness, memory, sciences, information, people
use the written and oral experiments and name them as ‘balance of
exposing the reality’, and other matters of this type. Therefore the
implication of ‘balance’ does necessarily have to be something material.

Since the balance of Qiyamat is also same, because it is a medium to
identify faith and principles of belief, good and bad morals, righteous
and evils deeds, it cannot be a worldly and a physical matter.

Can prayer, fasting, sincerity, piety, faith, truthfulness,
trustworthiness be weighed on a worldly balance?

A person asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as): “Would the deeds of people not be
weighed in Qiyamat?”

He replied:

“No, since deeds have no body; that which would be weighed in the
balance would be its quality (effect). One who wants to find the weight
or quantity of something needs a balance. While the fact is that nothing
is hidden from the Almighty Allah.”

So, the person asked: “Then what is the meaning of the weighing of deeds?”
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Imam said:

“That is justice would be observed in accounting and recompense of
deeds.”

He asked, “Then what is the meaning of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَن ثَقُلَتْ مَوَ زِينُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…then as for him whose measure (of good deeds) is heavy… (7:8)***

He replied:

“It means that his good deeds would be more.”[^1]

Therefore the balance of deeds in Qiyamat is not like the usual
balances, which have a worldly body; on the contrary it should be of
another kind. It is possible to choose between two causes in the
interpretation of balance in Qiyamat:

First reason: It is that balance consists of correct beliefs, ethical
values and laws of the Shariat, which are in fact the straight path,
wayfaring on the path of Allah and attainment of the lofty stages of
humanity. Therefore, in Qiyamat, the deeds of every man would be weighed
on the criterion of Shariat and rewarded accordingly. The same point is
indicated in traditions:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Justice is the balance of God on the earth, one who acts on it would be
admitted in Paradise and one who leaves it, would be thrown into
Hell.”[^2]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said:

“One who recites the formula of ‘there is no god except Allah,’ with
sincerity would be admitted in Paradise and sincerity lies in the fact
that the testimony of ‘there is no god except Allah,’ should prevent him
from committing of prohibited acts.”[^3]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Prayer is the balance; one who fulfills its rights would be recompensed
completely.”[^4]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Nothing is placed in the balance of deeds of the people in Qiyamat,
which is superior to good behavior.”[^5]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said:

“One who meets the Almighty Allah with the following ten things would be
admitted to Paradise: Testimony of ‘there is no god but Allah,’;
testimony that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; confession of all
that has come from the Almighty Allah; establishing of prayer; paying of
Zakat; fasting in the month of Ramadhan; Hajj of the Holy Kaaba;
acceptance of the guardianship (Wilayat) of the holy personalities
(Awliya) of Allah; immunity from enemies of Allah and refraining from
alcohol.”[^6]

Second reason: It is that balance of deeds is in fact the holy
reflection of deeds and views of prophets and infallible Imams. Since
these holy personalities are guides of humanity, they themselves acted
in accordance to laws of Shariat and practiced the best of morals in
such a way that perfections of humanity were personified in them. They
also called the people to same beliefs and morals. Hence all beliefs,
acts, morals and traits of character can be judged on their criterion;
thus they are considered to be the balance of deeds. The same
interpretation is mentioned in some traditional reports.

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said in the interpretation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَضَعُ الْمَوَزِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيَمَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We will set up a just balance on the day of resurrection…
(21:47)***

“They are the prophets and their successors.”[^7]

Imam Sajjad (as) said:

“Ali (as) is the chief of faith and the balance of deeds.”[^8]

Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said:

“By Allah, Ali is the straight path and the balance of deeds.”[^9]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“I am the balance of knowledge and Ali is the two pans of balance, Hasan
and Husain are its cords and Fatima is the connecting rod between them
and the Imams after Hasan and Husain would be the criterion of
recognition of their friends and their enemies.”[^10]

Therefore the holy beings of prophets and their infallible successors
can also be interpreted as the balance to weigh the deeds of the people
of the community, but think upon it for a moment and you will see that
that the second reason also returns to the first cause, since the beings
of the prophets and successors are personification of beliefs, morals
and good character of religion, they are introduced as balance; thus the
balance is in fact a criterion to weigh beliefs and deeds and laws of
religion. And the deeds of every person can be weighed in it and he
could be rewarded and punished accordingly. In this weighing, beliefs
and deeds of a person would be placed in one pan and the other pan
contains all beliefs, morals and laws of religion.

From some verses of Quran it can be concluded that man has not one, but
many balances.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْوَزْنُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ فَمَن ثَقُلَتْ مَوَ زِينُهُ
فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ‏ \* وَمَنْ خَفَّتْ مَوَ زِينُهُ
فَأُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ خَسِرُواْ أَنفُسَهُم بِمَا كَانُواْ بَِايَتِنَا
يَظْلِمُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the measuring out on that day will be just; then as for him whose
measure (of good deeds) is heavy, those are they who shall be
successful. And as for him whose measure (of good deeds) is light, those
are they who have made their souls suffer loss because they disbelieved
in Our communications. (7:8-9)***

In this verse, the point mentioned is about the heaviness of the
balances of some people and the lightness of the balances of others. It
can be concluded that every person would have a number of balances.
Perhaps it would be from the aspect that the beliefs would be weighed in
one balance, while morals would be weighed in another and deeds would be
weighed in yet another balance; thus if each belief is weighed against
the correct belief, and every deed is weighed against proper deeds and
every moral is weighed against right morals all in different balances,
each person would have a number of balances.

Process of Weighing The Deeds
-----------------------------

The background of the heaviness and lightness of the pan of balance is
obtained in this world through beliefs, morals, character and speech of
man: correct beliefs make the self-illuminated, and one who has a
stronger faith has more illuminated self. Even though good morals and
nice manners are also of the same sort, good deeds, worship and other
charitable acts are accidental and they do not endure, but through
sincerity and good intention assume the form of a second nature and
illuminate and polish the self of man and strengthen his human aspects
and make the pan of his deeds heavier.

On the other hand, false beliefs, morals and evil deeds make the soul
dark and terrifying; his aspect of humanity is weakened and the aspect
of his bestiality is strengthened and so much so that sometimes in his
inner being, he assumes the form of a carnivorous beast and the pan of
his humanity becomes light.

All these acts, reactions and changes occur in this world and inside the
self, but he himself is unaware of them, till on Judgment Day the
curtain would be removed from his eyes.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تُبْلَى السَّرَآئِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when hidden things shall be made manifest. (86:9)***

He would see all of them with his own eyes. At that time he would find
the pan of balance of his self either light or heavy.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 7, Pg. 248.

[^2]: Mustadrakul Wasail, Vol. 11, Pg. 388.

[^3]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 15, Pg. 257.

[^4]: Kafi, Vol. 3, Pg. 268.

[^5]: Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 100.

[^6]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 1, Pg. 30.

[^7]: Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 420.

[^8]: Mustadrakul Wasail, Vol. 10, Pg. 224.

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 35, Pg. 343.

[^10]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 23, Pg. 107.


