Intercession (Shafa’ah)
=======================

Intercession of people is an important Islamic concept, which would be
there at the time of accounting and on Judgment Day. Its negation and
proof and limits and conditions have always been topics of discussion in
scholastic theology and interpretation of Quran.

True cognition of the meaning of intercession is very important for one
who believes in Allah and the Judgment Day and who considers following
the laws of Shariat to be the means of success and salvation in the
hereafter. We shall study this important aspect under the following
headings:

Definition of Intercession
--------------------------

The literal meaning of intercession is mediation or recommendation of
forgiveness or kindness with regard to a person deserving of mercy from
another powerful person. Intercession is found in all small and big
human societies and is even customary between members of a family and it
is considered a necessary factor of social life. Intercession in a place
creates an implication that a person or a powerful group of people
control administration of social matters, and frame rules and
regulations for those subordinate to them and they also fix rewards for
those who obey and punishments for disobedient.

In such a society if all the people perform their duties they would be
rewarded for it and there would be no need of intercession; but if some
of them oppose it, the ruler or rulers have the right to punish the
wrong doer as they had promised.

But sometimes higher exigencies dictate that some of their mistakes be
overlooked. It is in these circumstances that the possibility of
intercession arises or that the ruling person himself is included in the
action and by observing some qualities or good deeds, which he knows are
present in the person who is to be interceded for, points which deserve
mercy; in that case he forgives his crime and orders his release. Or
that a respectable and well-wishing personality interferes and asks the
ruler to forgive.

Sometimes the same action is taken with regard to some persons, who have
performed their duties nicely and are given more rewards than that which
is fixed for such deeds so that they may be appreciated and encouraged.
However in any case, some points must not be overlooked:

One: Acceptance or rejection of intercession is under the discretion of
ruler and criminals should not sin in hope that they would get
intercession. Two: Intercession would not be without criteria; on the
contrary it would be possible in circumstances that the person to be
interceded should possess qualities making him eligible to be interceded
for.

The interceder does not ask the ruler to forsake the commands of his
guardians or to disable the law of punishing criminals; on the contrary
he mentions some specialties of the person to be interceded for and
appeals to the greatness and mercy of the ruling person and keeping in
mind the present exigencies, requests the ruler that he should exercise
the rights of his rulership and have mercy on the person who is to be
interceded for and that he should bestow his favor and forgiveness on
him. Therefore, intercession is a social exigency and does not conflict
with laws of recompense.

Intercession in Quran
---------------------

Now it must be seen what Quran says about intercession. In this matter
it is better to study the verses related to intercession:

Verses on this topic can be divided into different types:

### First Group: Verses that apparently negate intercession

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُواْ يَوْماً لَّا تَجْزِى نَفْسٌ عَن نَّفْسٍ شَيْئاً وَلَا
يُقْبَلُ مِنْهَا شَفَعَةٌ وَلَا يُؤْخَذُ مِنْهَا عَدْلٌ وَلَا هُمْ
يُنصَرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And be on your guard against a day when one soul shall not avail
another in the least, neither shall intercession on its behalf be
accepted, nor shall any compensation be taken from it, nor shall they be
helped. (2:48)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُواْ يَوْماً لاَّ تَجْزى نَفْسٌ عَنْ نَفْسٍ شَيْئاً وَلاَ
يُقْبَلُ مِنْهَا عَدْلٌ وَ لاَ تَنْفَعُهَا شَفَعَةٌ وَلاَ هُمْ
يُنْصَرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And be on your guard against a day when no soul shall avail another
in the least neither shall any compensation be accepted from it, nor
shall intercession profit it, nor shall they be helped. (2:123)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ أَنْفِقُواْ مِمَّا رَزَقْنَكُمْ مِنْ
قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِىَ يَوْمٌ لَابَيْعٌ فِيهِ وَلَا خُلَّةٌ وَلَا
شَفَعَةٌ وَالْكَفِرُونَ هُمُ الْظَّلِمُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! spend out of what We have given you before the day
comes in which there is no bargaining, neither any friendship nor
intercession, and the unbelievers- they are the unjust. (2:254)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ لَا يُغْنِى مَوْلىً عَن مَّوْلىً شَيْئاً وَلَا هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The day on which a friend shall not avail (his) friend aught, nor
shall they be helped. (44:41)***

### Second Group: Negation of intercession for a Special Category

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ حَمِيمٍ وَلَا شَفِيعٍ يُطَاعُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…the unjust shall not have any compassionate friend nor any
intercessor who should be obeyed. (40:18)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَضَلَّنَآ إِلَّا الْمُجْرِمُونَ‏ \* فَمَا لَنَا مِن
شَافِعِينَ \* وَلَا صَدِيقٍ حَمِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And none but the guilty led us astray. So we have no intercessors,
nor a true friend. (26:99-101)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنذِرْ بِهِ الَّذِينَ يَخَافُونَ أَن يُحْشَرُواْ إِلَى‏ رَبِّهِمْ
لَيْسَ لَهُم مِّن دُونِهِ وَلِىٌّ وَلَا شَفِيعٌ لَّعَلَّهُمْ
يَتَّقُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered to their
Lord- there is no guardian for them, nor any intercessor besides Him-
that they may guard (against evil). (6:51)***

### Third Group: Verses that limit intercession to Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لِّلَّهِ الشَّفَاعَةُ جِمِيعاً لَّهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَوَاتِ
وَالْأَرْضِ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Allah’s is the intercession altogether; His is the kingdom of
the heavens and the earth, then to Him you shall be brought back.
(39:44)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ يَوْمَ الْفَصْلِ مِيقَاتُهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ‏ \* يَوْمَ لَا يُغْنِى
مَوْلىً عَن مَّوْلىً شَيْئاً وَلَا هُمْ يُنصَرُونَ‏ \* إِلَّا مَن
رَّحِمَ اللَّهُ إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely the day of separation is their appointed term, of all of them.
The day on which a friend shall not avail (his) friend aught, nor shall
they be helped. Save those on whom Allah shall have mercy; surely He is
the Mighty the Merciful. (44:40-42)***

### Fourth Group: Proof of intercession by the approval of Allah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ لَّا تَنفَعُ الشَّفَاعَةُ إِلَّا مَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ
الرَّحْمَنُ وَرَضِىَ لَهُ قَوْلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On that day shall no intercession avail except of him whom the
Beneficent God allows and whose word He is pleased with. (20:109)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَشْفَعُونَ إِلَّا لِمَنِ ارْتَضَى‏ وَ هُم مِّنْ خَشْيَتِهِ
مُشْفِقُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and they do not intercede except for him whom He approves, and for
fear of Him they tremble. (21:28)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَنفَعُ الشَّفَاعَةُ عِندَهُ إِلَّا لِمَنْ أَذِنَ لَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And intercession will not avail aught with Him save of him whom He
permits. (34:23)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَم مِّن مَّلَكٍ فِى السَّمَوَاتِ لَا تُغْنِى شَفَاعَتُهُمْ شَيْئاً
إِلَّا مِن بَعْدِ أَن يَأْذَنَ اللَّهُ لِمَن يَشَآءُ وَيَرْضَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And how many an angel is there in the heavens whose intercession does
not avail at all except after Allah has given permission to whom He
pleases and chooses. (53:26)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللَّهُ الَّذِى خَلَقَ السَّمَوَتِ وَالْأَرْضَ فِى
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى‏ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُدَبِّرُ الْأَمْرَ
مَا مِن شَفِيعٍ إِلَّا مِن بَعْدِ إِذْنِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in
six periods, and He is firm in power, regulating the affair, there is no
intercessor except after His permission. (10:3)***

Reconciling The Different Types Of Verses
-----------------------------------------

To reconcile different types of verses, it can be said that:

Firstly: Intercession is the right of the Almighty Allah and it is
limited only to Him and in this aspect has no fixed limit, since He is
the true owner of all existing things. All are in need of Him and He
alone is absolutely needless. All causes and effects since in their own
being, are in need of the creator of the world, in their causation and
action also are attached to Him, so that whenever He desires He may take
their being, causation and effect.

And in this regard, additions and negation of additions to His qualities
like: beneficence, generosity, forgiveness, kindness, force and anger
are mediums and intercession is also in the same meaning. What was
mentioned was with regard to innate matters; it is the same in
legislative matters also. Reward and punishment of people on Judgment
Day is also at discretion of Almighty Allah and no one can interfere in
it, except through His permission and approval. Therefore intercession
is also under His discretion.

Secondly: Other than the Almighty Allah other people may also intercede,
but subject to the fact that Almighty Allah should accord them
permission to intercede and that He should accept their intercession.

Thirdly: Those who would be permitted to intercede are only those who
can intercede; as Almighty Allah has approved their intercession.
Therefore intercession is not without criterion and it originates from
particular circumstances of one who is to be interceded for.

Who all would be included in intercession?

Now let us see who would be included in intercession of the
intercessors.

In this matter also, the best solution is to refer to verses of Quran:

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَحْشُرُ الْمُتَّقِينَ إِلَى الرَّحْمَنِ وَفْداً \* وَنَسُوقُ
الْمُجْرِمِينَ إِلَى‏ جَهَنَّمَ وِرْداً \* لَا يَمْلِكُونَ
الشَّفَاعَةَ إِلَّا مَنِ اتَّخَذَ عِندَ الرَّحْمَنِ عَهْداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The day on which We will gather those who guard (against evil) to the
Beneficent God to receive honors. And We will drive the guilty to hell,
thirsty. They shall not control intercession, save he who has made a
covenant with the Beneficent God. (19:85-87)***

It can be concluded from this verse that only those would be able to
benefit from intercession that are promised intercession from Almighty
Allah. In the interpretation of this promise it can be said: The
Almighty Allah, glorified be He, in the Holy Quran has limited His
forgiveness only to those who give up particular sins or subjected it to
performance of particular good deeds.

For example it says: If you refrain from so-and-so, I will forgive your
other bad deeds also. And this in itself is a sort of promise between
Allah and His servants, and the Almighty Allah would invariably fulfill
His promise. This is the meaning of intercession of Allah and
intercessors with Allah. One of those promises is glad tiding of
acceptance of repentance of sinners as clearly mentioned in verses of
Quran.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ عَمِلُواْ السَّيِّئَاتِ ثُمَّ تَابُواْ مِن بَعْدِهَا
وَءَامَنُواْ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ مِن بَعْدِهَا لَغَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And (as to) those who do evil deeds, then repent after that and
believe, your Lord after that is most surely Forgiving, Merciful.
(7:153)***

And also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِى يَقْبَلُ التَّوْبَةَ عَنْ عِبَادِهِ وَيَعْفُواْ عَنِ
السَّيِّئَاتِ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons the
evil deeds and He knows what you do. (42:25)***

Further it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَن تَابَ وَءَامَن وَعَمِلَ عَمَلاً صَلِحاً فَأُوْلَئِكَ
يُبَدِّلُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ حَسَنَتٍ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُوراً
رَّحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Except him who repents and believes and does a good deed; so these
are they of whom Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones; and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful. (25:70)***

Another group, which is promised forgiveness by the Almighty Allah, is
of those who have faith in Allah, the Prophet and resurrection and those
who are pious and who refrain from greater sins.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَجْتَنِبُواْ كَبَآئِرَ مَا تُنْهَوْنَ عَنْهُ نُكَفِّرْ عَنْكُمْ
سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ وَ نُدْخِلْكُمْ مُّدْخَلاً كَرِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If you shun the great sins which you are forbidden, We will do away
with your small sins and cause you to enter an honorable place of
entering. (4:31)***

And also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَ لِكَ أَمْرُ اللَّهِ أَنزَلَهُ إِلَيْكُمْ وَمَن يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ
يُكَفِّرْ عَنْهُ سَيِّئَاتِهِ وَيُعْظِمْ لَهُ أَجْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***That is the command of Allah which He has revealed to you, and
whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah, He will remove from him his
evil and give him a big reward. (65:5)***

It also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اتَّقُواْ اللَّهَ وَ آمِنُواْ
بِرَسُولِهِ يُؤْتِكُمْ كِفْلَيْنِ مِن رَّحْمَتِهِ وَ يَجْعَل لَّكُمْ
نُوراً تَمْشُونَ بِهِ وَ يَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ وَ اللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and believe in
His Apostle: He will give you two portions of His mercy, and make for
you a light with which you will walk, and forgive you, and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful. (57:28)***

Quran has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُصْلِحْ لَكُمْ أَعْمَالَكُمْ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَمَن
يُطِعِ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ فَقَدْ فَازَ فَوْزاً عَظِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He will put your deeds into a right state for you, and forgive you
your faults; and whoever obeys Allah and His Apostle, he indeed achieves
a mighty success. (33:71)***

Whatever was mentioned was about the promise of the Almighty Allah that
He would overlook some sins subject to particular conditions.

The glorified Lord has also promised the righteous an increase in
rewards. The Quran say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن جَآءَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ فَلَهُ عَشْرُ أَمْثَالِهَا وَمَن جَآءَ
بِالسَّيِّئَةِ فَلَا يُجْزَى‏ إِلَّا مِثْلَهَا وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it, and whoever
brings an evil deed, he shall be recompensed only with the like of it,
and they shall not be dealt with unjustly. (6:160)***

Ibne Abi Umair says: I heard Imam Musa Kazim (as) say:

Every believer who keeps away from greater sins, would not be
interrogated about his small sins. The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَجْتَنِبُواْ كَبَآئِرَ مَا تُنْهَوْنَ عَنْهُ نُكَفِّرْ عَنْكُمْ
سَيِّئَاتِكُمْ وَ نُدْخِلْكُمْ مُّدْخَلاً كَرِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If you shun the great sins which you are forbidden, We will do away
with your small sins and cause you to enter an honorable place of
entering. (4:31)”***

Then the reporter asked: “In whose favor would intercession take place?”

The Imam replied:

“My father has narrated from his father from Imam Ali (as) and he has
narrated from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: My intercession
is for those who have committed greater sins; as for the righteous, they
would have no problem.”

Ibne Abi Umair asked: “O son of Allah’s Messenger, how would
intercession be done for sinners of great sins when the Almighty Allah
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَشْفَعُونَ إِلَّا لِمَنِ ارْتَضَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and they do not intercede except for him whom He approves…
(21:28)***

That is I will never forgive one who has committed great sins?”

Imam (as) said:

“The real believer, whenever he commits a sin, he becomes restless and
regretful and the Holy Prophet (S) has said: Regret is enough for
repentance and he said: One who is pleased on performing a good deed and
is regretful on committing a sin is a believer…and one who is not
regretful of his sins is not a believer and intercession would not
benefit him.”[^1]

If faith is taken in this meaning, it can be said: Most or all the
believers would enter Paradise by intercession of the Holy Prophet (S).

Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَسَوْفَ يُعْطِيكَ رَبُّكَ فَتَرْضَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And soon will your Lord give you so that you shall be well pleased.
(93:5)***

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“The Almighty Allah has left a matter at my discretion, and I delayed it
till Judgment Day so that I may intercede for the believers.”[^2]

In the same way, the Holy Prophet (S) said:

“When I assume the seat at the Praised Station (Maqaam Mahmood), I would
intercede for those sinners of my nation who have committed greater sins
and it would be accepted by the Almighty Allah. But by Allah, I would
not intercede for anyone who had harassed my descendants.”[^3]

With reference to these verses and traditions and tens of similar
statements, intercession cannot be rejected as a whole. The Almighty
Allah has promised it to sinners and He would definitely keep His word.
But the promise of intercession is not such that should abrogate the
foundations of Shariat laws and religious duties as a result of which in
hope of intercession, people commit all sorts of sins.

Laws and rules of Shariat, obligatory duties and prohibited acts have
grown through actual exigencies and evils; the straight path is
specified only for perfection of humanity and wayfaring to Allah, which
may guarantee spiritual salvation and save from destructions. Paradise
and bounties of Paradise; Hell and chastisements of Hell are there as a
result of good and bad deeds in the world.

Therefore anyone who commits a bad deed would definitely be recompensed
for it in the world or the hereafter, except that he should repent
before death and make amends for his behavior.

The following points must also not be overlooked:

Firstly: Even if you suppose that some sinners would be included in
intercession, you should know that intercession is only in Qiyamat; and
as mentioned in traditions, Barzakh is not the place for intercession.

Amr bin Yazid says: I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as): “I have heard that
you said:

All our Shias would go to Paradise?”

He replied:

“Yes, I said it and I am right; by Allah, all of them would enter
Paradise.”

The narrator asked: “May I be your ransom, even if they have numerous
great sins to their credit?”

The Imam said:

“As for Judgment Day, all of you would enter Paradise through
intercession of the Prophet or his successor. But I am fearful about you
with regard to Barzakh.”

The narrator asked: “What is Barzakh?”

He replied:

It is there from the time of death and burial up to Judgment Day.”[^4]

Chastisements of Barzakh and the long period of it should not considered
minor according to traditional reports, it is a sample of the
chastisement of Hell.

Secondly: Hardships and back breaking difficulties of Judgment Day; and
the accounting of deeds of the sinners also must not be overlooked.

Thirdly: It is correct that a large number of believer sinners would be
saved from entering Hell through the intercession of Prophet and other
intercessors, but all would not be like this; on the contrary those who
committed more and deadlier sins, would be sent to Hell to wash off
their crimes and after a period of time, less or more, after tasting
chastisement, in the end would be saved from punishment of Hell through
the intercession of intercessors and finally enter Paradise; hence the
true believer in monotheism would never remain in Hell forever.

Fourthly: That which is promised is intercession with regard to
believers and monotheists and committing some great sins especially
committing them repeatedly may lead to loss of faith; in that case one
would not be included in intercession.

Fifthly: Although the glorified Lord has promised intercession to the
doers of greater sins, it would never be unconditional. It is not known
who would be included in it, with what conditions and in what position
they would be.

From all that was mentioned so far we can conclude that committing sin
in hope of intercession is the greatest fallacy.

Who Would Intercede?
--------------------

In the above-mentioned verses, intercession is proved for the Almighty
Allah, absolutely, without any limit and for angels, through the
approval of Allah, although their intercession is innate. In the same
way it is proved for the Holy Prophet of Islam (S), under the permission
of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَسَوْفَ يُعْطِيكَ رَبُّكَ فَتَرْضَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And soon will your Lord give you so that you shall be well pleased.
(93:5)***

Although after reconciling the unequivocal traditions recorded about
this. Except for these circumstances, Quran does not declare
intercession for anyone else, but it has also not denied it, if it is by
the permission of Allah.

However in traditions, intercession is proved for other groups also:

a) Quran and memorizers of Quran; and those who act on it.

b) Successors of the Prophet and the Infallible Imams (as).

c) Lady Fatima (as), the respected daughter of the Prophet and the
mother of the Holy Imams (as).

d) Martyrs who laid down their lives in defense of Islam.

e) Divine scholars who propagated Islam verbally, practically and
through their writings and who have a role in guidance of people.

Lastly, we think that it is necessary to mention a few points:

1. Power of intercession would depend on the role of intercessors in
spread of Islam and how faithful they were to its rules and regulations.

2. Intercessors would intercede for their own followers and not for
everyone else.

3. Their intercession would depend on permission of Almighty Allah.

4. Intercession will not be like a business deal without criteria and
based on whims without any eligibility in one who is interceded for.

Therefore, it is but a great fallacy and a satanic deception to avoid
religious duties and to consider sins as minor hoping in intercession of
intercessors.

[^1]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 15, Pg. 335.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 8, Pg. 37.

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 8, Pg. 37.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 6, Pg. 267.


