Death and its hardships
=======================

We don’t have proper knowledge of the reality of death, because the
reality of life is also unknown to us. Our understanding with regard to
these two important matters is only to the limit of their traces not
more. A phenomenon, which has a particular condition and which carries
the qualities of nutrition, growth and reproduction is considered by us
to be a living being. In some beings, in addition to this, we consider
perception and voluntary movement as signs of life.

In man, in addition to these, we consider acquisition of intelligence,
contemplation and speech as additional signs of life; but all of these
are signs of life and not its reality. Death is also like this and any
living phenomena, which loses the signs of its life is said to be dead.
But these are signs of death and not its reality. The reality of death
is unknown. According to the Holy Quran, life and death are two created
things created by the Almighty Allah.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِى خَلَقَ الْمَوْتَ وَالْحَيَاةَ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ
أَحْسَنُ عَمَلاً وَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الْغَفُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(It is He) Who created death and life that He may try you- which of
you is best in deeds; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving, (67:2)***

It is known that only an existing matter can be created and not an
inexistent matter. What is remarkable in this verse is that death is
mentioned before life. That which can be stated about death and life is
that the soul of man is having two stages of existence. The soul of man
in the stage of life is of the type which is in need of a material body
to continue its life and to reach to its perfection and it is having a
particular life. But after death it is able to live on its own without a
material body. In this stage it would have another life, which is very
much opposed to the past life and most important of all, it is an
everlasting life.

In both conditions it is one person and not more. The Messenger of Allah
(S) has stated:

“Death is the first stage in the stages of the hereafter and the last
stage from the stages of the world.”[^1]

Imam Khomeini says:

Death is the transfer of man from the apparent proprietary formation to
the unseen celestial formation; along with the fact that death is second
celestial life, after the first proprietary life and in any case is an
existing matter. On the contrary it is the most perfect proprietary
existence, because the worldly proprietary life contaminated with the
substance of death, and their life is a passing accident as opposed to
the natural celestial life, which in such circumstances is present in
independent souls and it is the abode of life and a necessary component
of life.[^2]

He also says:

Seed (sperm) is in motion within its essence and continues to undergo
transformations, till finally its form is changed into the soul. The
soul also satiated with essence is in constant motion till it reaches
different stages and ranks of abstraction, although its nature is
present in the stages of its existence; but as result of its continuous
substantial motion its abstraction goes on increasing and its natural
aspect goes on decreasing and finally it pulls out itself from nature.

This presence, in which stage it takes out itself from nature is in fact
the same previous natural form which arose due to its substantial motion
and in every step freed itself from one stage of its nature. When it
finally frees its whole existence from the shackles of nature, it
becomes independent and its independence is that it has freed itself
from nature for the last time, and becoming independent is same as
coming out of the nature.

Death of man follows the independence of the soul and not that it is by
chance and then man comes out of the nature; the independence which has
actualized is in the meaning of emerging and emerging from the nature is
in the same sense.[^3]

Throes of Death
---------------

It is learnt from verses of Quran and traditions that death is
accompanied with great pain, which is mentioned in Quran as Sakara and
Ghamara (stupor/agony of death).

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَآءَتْ سَكْرَةُ الْمَوْتِ بِالْحَقِ‏ّ ذَلِكَ مَا كُنتَ مِنْهُ
تَحِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the stupor of death will come in truth; that is what you were
trying to escape. (Surah Qaf 50:19)***

And also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ تَرَى‏ إِذِ الْظَّلِمُونَ فِى غَمَرَتِ الْمَوْتِ
وَالْمَلَئِكَةُ بَاسِطُواْ أَيدِيهِمْ أَخْرِجُواْ أَنفُسَكُمُ
الْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ عَذَابَ الْهَوْنِ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَقُولُونَ عَلَى
اللَّهِ غَيْرَ الْحَقِّ وَكُنتُمْ عَنْ ءَايتِهِ تَسْتَكْبِرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and if you had seen when the unjust shall be in the agonies of death
and the angels shall spread forth their hands: Give up your souls; today
shall you be recompensed with an ignominious chastisement… (6:93)***

Stupor and agony are used in the meaning of a senseless state, which is
due to the severity of those circumstances. In these verses they are
interpreted to be the hardships of death. The hardships of death are not
physical pains and discomfort; on the contrary it is spiritual and
internal and it is much more severe than physical tortures. Physical
pains are felt through senses and they reach the soul from this channel,
but spiritual and internal chastisements scorch the being.

Hardships of death can be from various aspects:

1. Attachment to what he has gathered in his life: Like the house,
property, wealth, children and other worldly things. Man struggled all
his life to obtain them and committed lawful and unlawful acts in their
pursuit with the hope that they would give him some advantage at the end
of his life. Their love had taken a deep root in his being that it is
very difficult for him to ignore them now. At the time of death, he sees
that he would be compelled to leave every worldly thing to which he was
attached and move to the everlasting world of the hereafter
empty-handed.

2. Seeing his past deeds: Throughout his life man continues to commit
numerous small and big sins and after sometime forgets most of them in
such a way that as if he had never committed them. He does not even
recall them in order to repent for them. While the fact is that all his
words, acts and morals are recorded in the scroll of his deeds and these
same deeds have earned for him Hell and the chastisement of Hell. At the
time of death, the curtain will be removed from his eyes and he will see
each act committed by him during his lifespan and the recompense of the
same. And how severe it would be for one to see all one has committed in
his lifespan in an instant?

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُّحْضَراً وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِنْ سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَداً
بَعِيداً وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللَّهُ نَفْسَهُ وَ اللَّهُ رَءُوفٌ
بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day that every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil, it shall wish that between it and
that (evil) there were a long duration of time; and Allah makes you to
be cautious of (retribution from) Himself; and Allah is Compassionate to
the servants. (3:30)***

3. Seeing his bad position in the everlasting world of the hereafter: A
sinner or one who is basically not having faith in Allah, the hereafter
and sayings of prophets; in such a way that his expression of faith was
only formal and not rooted in his being and that is why he justified his
offensive acts and always contented himself with vain and useless hopes
and some of his minor acts and was uncaring about the imminent
consequences of the hereafter. But as mentioned in traditions, at the
time of death, the curtain will be removed from the conscience of man
during the throes of death and in one instant he would see with his own
eyes, his position in the hereafter as well as the consequences of all
his deeds, views and behavior and also observe all his hopes being
dashed and he would pass away in that condition. And how difficult dying
is in this condition!

4. Cutting off perpetual relations: Another reason for the hardship of a
dying person and his opposition to physical pain is that in physical
pains, one or more organs feel the pain and transfer the stages of their
restlessness to the soul, but at the time of death, the human man
desires to cut off forever its connection with all the organs and limbs.
And this is but a very difficult task.

That which was stated above was about infidels, oppressors and sinners,
but as mentioned in traditions, death for the righteous believers is not
only not hard, on the contrary, it is very pleasant and nice. The Holy
Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ \* ارْجِعِى إِلَى‏ رَبِّكَ
رَاضِيَةً مَّرْضِيَّةً \* فَادْخُلِى فِى عِبَادِى \* وَادْخُلِى
جَنَّتِى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O soul that are at rest! Return to your Lord, well-pleased (with
him), well-pleasing (Him), So enter among My servants, And enter into My
garden. (89:27-30)***

It was said to Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as): “Please explain death to us.”

He replied:

“For the believer, it is like a nice fragrance, which comforts him and
cures all his pains. But death for a disbeliever would be like the sting
of a snake or scorpion; on the contrary it would be much more
severe.”[^4]

Imam Hasan (as) was asked: “What is death?”

He replied:

“It is greatest happiness that would be bestowed to the believers when
they would be transferred from the world full of hardships to the
bounties of the everlasting world. And it is the great destruction that
would befall the disbelievers, when they would be transferred from their
worldly paradise to the everlasting fire (of Hell).”[^5]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“People are of two kinds, one is those from whom others will get relief
and the other kind are those who would get the relief themselves. Those
who get the relief themselves are believers. When death approaches them
they would get relief from hardships and pains of this world. And those
from whom others would get relief are the disbelievers. When they die,
the trees, animals and a large number of people would get relief from
them.”[^6]

Imam Sajjad (as) was asked: “What is death?”

He replied:

“For the believer it is like the taking off of a dirty garment and an
iron collar and chain; changing into the nicest garments, the most
fragrant perfumes and riding the best mount and the best of the abodes.
For the disbeliever, it is like taking off the garment of pride and
transfer from the best abodes into the filthiest and the roughest
garments and into the most terrifying houses and to the most severe
chastisements.”[^7]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said:

“At the time of death, the angel of death says: ‘What you hope for will
be given to you and that from which you fear, you will be given
security.’ At that moment, a door to Paradise will be opened before him
and he will see his position. He would be told, ‘Look at your abode in
Paradise and look at the Prophet, Ali, Hasan and Husain (as); they are
your neighbors.’ This is statement of the Almighty Allah in the Holy
Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَكَانُواْ يَتَّقُونَ‏ \* لَهُمُ الْبُشْرَى‏ فِى
الْحَيَوةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِى الاَْخِرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who believe and guarded (against evil): they shall have good
news in this world’s life and in the hereafter. (10:63-64)***[^8]

From the above mentioned traditions and tens of others like them, it
becomes clear that righteous believers having faith in Allah, the
Prophet and the Judgment Day, and who perform their religious duties,
not only will they be safe from the agonies of death, on the contrary,
at the time of death, they would see their position in Paradise and
their life in the neighborhood of the Prophet and the Holy Imams (as).

And with most satisfaction and absolute free will and with the
recommendation of the Prophet and the affections of the angel of death,
they surrender their lives and hasten to the everlasting world to meet
their Lord.

They are released from a world replete with sorrow and grief, hardships
and problems, injustice and inequity, pain and diseases and transferred
to a world full of effulgence and happiness and life in neighborhood of
the chosen servants of the Almighty Allah, where they might enjoy the
choicest divine bounties. How sweet and pleasant is dying in this way!

Believers are not attached to this world that they should fear being
separated from it. They have not committed sins that they should be
terrified of its consequences in the hereafter; even if they have
committed some sinful acts in ignorance, they have repented for it and
have got it erased from the scroll of their deeds. They have improved
their hereafter with meritorious deeds and good morals and have been
honored in the view of the Prophet and the Holy Imams (as); therefore
why should they fear death? Hence the friends of God do not seek to
evade death; on the contrary they hasten to it eagerly.

Although it is not that all believers would be safe from agonies of
death, on the contrary, the sinners among them who died without
repenting – proportionate to their attachment to the world and depending
on the magnitude of their sins – they would have to taste the agonies of
death, but not as much as infidels and oppressors. In the same way, all
disbelievers and oppressors also would not be same from the aspect of
suffering the agonies of death.

It is said that the bitterness of dying is other than the pain and
discomfort suffered by those who are ill at the time of their death. It
is not that if the righteous believer has been on the sick bed for a
long time, this suffering can be counted as the agonies of death; on the
contrary the dying of this person would be in the same meaning as stated
before; with his approval and by his free will. On the other hand, it is
not that if a disbeliever or an oppressor dies in an instant, we should
say that he did not have to taste the agonies of death.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 6, Pg. 133.

[^2]: Maad az Deedgah Imam Khomeini, Pg. 137.

[^3]: Maad az Deedgah Imam Khomeini, Pg. 138.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 6, Pg. 152.

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 6, Pg. 154.

[^6]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 6, Pg. 151.

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 6, Pg. 155.

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 6, Pg. 177.


