Signs of the Judgment Day
=========================

The literal meaning of the Arabic word Qiyamah is something that happens
all of a sudden. In the terminology of Quran, it is an important event
that would occur at the end of the world and continue thereafter. All
divine prophets and especially the Holy Prophet (S) have informed about
this significant event.

The Holy Quran has mentioned it in various terms. For example: Judgment
Day, the Last Day, a day in which there is no relationship and
friendship, the day on which all the people would be gathered, the day
on which the people would be raised, the day of separation of the doers
of good and evil, the day which would occur all of a sudden and so on.

According to the Holy Quran the arrival of that day is absolutely
imminent and it says: There is no doubt about it. But it has not
mentioned the exact date of this event and has introduced it only as
something, which would come all of a sudden. It can only be said that it
would occur all of a sudden after the period of Barzakh is over.

But as mentioned before, the world of Barzakh is contemporary to the
period of this world and it is not bound by time and space. Since time
and space are worldly phenomena, and Judgment Day is also after Barzakh;
but this ‘after-ness’ is not the ‘after-ness’ of time and space, since
in Qiyamat, the concepts of time and space would be cancelled and a new
concepts would come into being; that is why the folks of Barzakh do not
have proper awareness of the passage of time.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يَحشُرُهُمْ كَأَن لَّمْ يَلْبَثُواْ إِلَّا سَاعَةً مِّنَ
النَّهَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And on the day when He will gather them as though they had not stayed
but an hour of the day… (10:45)***

And it also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ يُقْسِمُ الْمُجْرِمُونَ مَا لَبِثُواْ
غَيْرَ سَاعَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And at the time when the hour shall come, the guilty shall swear
(that) they did not tarry but an hour… (30:55)***

Although the Holy Quran has not mentioned the exact date of the
occurrence of Qiyamat, it has indicated its signs.

Blowing of the Trumpet
----------------------

One of the signs of Qiyamat is the blowing of the trumpet. According to
Quran, at the end of the world, before the occurrence of Qiyamat, the
trumpet would be blown twice and this important event is a sign that
Qiyamat is near.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُفِخَ فِى الصُّورِ فَصَعِقَ مَن فِى السَّمَوَاتِ وَمَن فِى
الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا مَن شَآءَ اللَّهُ ثُمَّ نُفِخَ فِيهِ أُخْرَى‏ فَإِذَا
هُمْ قِيَامٌ يَنظُرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the trumpet shall be blown, so all those that are in the heavens
and all those that are in the earth shall swoon, except such as Allah
please; then it shall be blown again, then lo! they shall stand up
awaiting. (39:68)***

The literal meaning of ‘صعق’ is to become unconscious due to a
terrifying heavenly scream and sometimes it brings death to the one who
hears it according to the commentators who have interpreted this verse.

According to this verse, before Qiyamat the trumpet would be blown
twice; on the first time, all the people present in the world would die
and enter the world of Barzakh. And the second time all those who are in
Barzakh would be enlivened and raised for Qiyamat.

In another verse, it is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِى الصُّورِ فَفَزِعَ مَن فِى السَّمَوَتِ وَمَن فِى
الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا مَن شَآءَ اللَّهُ وَكُلٌّ أَتَوْهُ دَخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And on the day when the trumpet shall be blown, then those who are in
the heavens and those who are in the earth shall be terrified except
such as Allah please, and all shall come to Him abased. (27:87)***

According to this verse, before Qiyamat, the horn would be blown twice.
The first time it would be to warn the people and prepare them for
Qiyamat. During this first time all the inhabitants of the earth and the
heavens would swoon due to its terror. But it is not mentioned that they
would die. If the phrase ‘those who are in the earth’ implied those who
are not dead yet, and who live in the earth, it should have mentioned:
All would die at the first blowing and join those with the other folks
of Barzakh, so that they may become ready for Qiyamat.

If it implies those who had died previously and who are present in
Barzakh, but since they are still attached to worldly matters and are
not able to forgo their attachment, and that is why it is possible to
call them as ‘those who are in the earth’; and it is also unlikely.
Therefore it is necessary to consider the first blowing to be aimed at
warning the people and making them ready for Qiyamat.

In the second blowing, by the natural command of the all-powerful Allah
the system of matter and materiality would be destroyed and dismantled
and the real exigencies of the system of cause and effect would become
obvious. The inner aspects of man would become apparent. The reward and
punishment of the deeds of man would be clear before the Almighty Allah
and all this will not take more than a moment. The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ هُم بَارِزُونَ لَا يَخْفَى‏ عَلَى اللَّهِ مِنْهُمْ شَىْ‏ءٌ
لِّمَنِ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(Of) the day when they shall come forth, nothing concerning them
remains hidden to Allah. To whom belongs the kingdom this day? To Allah,
the One, the Subduer (of all). (40:16)***

Yet another verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُفِخَ فِى الصُّورِ فَجَمَعْنَاهُمْ جَمْعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and the trumpet will be blown, so We will gather them all together.
(18:99)***

On the basis of the above mentioned verses and other traditions, it can
be said that the blowing of trumpet is imminent and that it is a sign of
Qiyamat.

Now it should be seen what kind of a trumpet it is and how it would be
blown? The dictionary meaning of ‘trumpet’ is something blown usually to
make a public announcement or to warn the public about an impending
invasion. In the past, this instrument was fashioned from animal horn,
but it has evolved through the ages. Blowing the trumpet means creating
a loud sound from it. Does the trumpet mentioned in the verse is in the
same meaning and whether blowing into it should be interpreted as
killing? Or it means something else?

With a little consideration, it would become clear that trumpet neither
signifies the same particular instrument nor blowing of it can be said
to be putting to death, because God is not a body that He should use a
physical mean to make the living dead or to make them alive again. The
actions of the Almighty Allah are not like those of human beings that
they should be in need of a tangible instrument.

The Almighty Allah is not in need of the blowing into a material tool in
order to put to death the living or to enliven those who are dead. On
the contrary, He does this through the angels appointed to capture the
souls (Izrael) and angels appointed to enliven the dead.

Therefore, as Allamah Tabatabai has mentioned in the interpretation of
the verse: Blowing of the trumpet is an allusion to a warning and the
call for people to be present for Qiyamat.[^1]

Other commentators have also interpreted this verse in the same way. A
tradition of the Messenger of Allah (S) is used to support this
contention. Sulaiman bin Arqam says: It has come down from the Holy
Prophet (S) that when he was asked about the ‘trumpet’, he said that it
was a horn (an instrument) of effulgence (Noor).[^2]

In this tradition of the Messenger of Allah (S) the trumpet is a horn
(an instrument) of effulgence (Noor). Therefore it does not have a
material body like the horn or a metallic instrument; on the contrary it
is a non-material medium for issuing a warning.

Collapse of the Solar System
----------------------------

One of the signs of Qiyamat is the collapse and complete derangement of
the Solar System as mentioned in a number of verses of the Holy Quran.
Some of them are as follows:

The Quran say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ \* وَ إِذَا النُّجُومُ انكَدَرَتْ \* وَإِذَا
الْجِبَالُ سُيِّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When the sun is covered, and when the stars darken, and when the
mountains are made to pass away. (81:1-3)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا السَّمَآءُ انفَطَرَتْ \* وَإِذَا الْكَوَاكِبُ انتَثَرَتْ \* وَ
إِذَا الْبِحَارُ فُجِّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When the heaven becomes cleft asunder, and when the stars become
dispersed, and when the seas are made to flow forth. (82:1-3)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا النُّجُومُ طُمِسَتْ \* وَإِذَا السَّمَآءُ فُرِجَتْ \* وَإِذَا
الْجِبَالُ نُسِفَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So when the stars are made to lose their light, and when the heaven
is rent asunder, and when the mountains are carried away as dust.
(77:8-10)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَمُورُ السَّمَآءُ مَوْراً \* وَتَسِيرُ الْجِبَالُ سَيْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when the heaven shall move from side to side, and the
mountains shall pass away passing away (altogether). (52:9-10)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذَا وَقَعَتِ الْوَاقِعَةُ \* لَيْسَ لِوَقْعَتِهَا كَاذِبَةٌ \*
خَافِضَةٌ رَّافِعَةٌ \* إِذَا رُجَّتِ الْأَرْضُ رَجّاً \* وَبُسَّتِ
الْجِبَالُ بَسّاً \* فَكَانَتْ هَبَآءً مُّنبَثّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When the great event comes to pass, there is no belying its coming to
pass - abasing (one party), exalting (the other), when the earth shall
be shaken with a (severe) shaking, and the mountains shall be made to
crumble with (an awful) crumbling, so that they shall be as scattered
dust. (56:1-6)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَطْوِى السَّمَآءَ كَطَىِّ السِّجِلِّ لِلْكُتُبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when We will roll up heaven like the rolling up of the
scroll for writings… (21:104)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا السَّمَآءُ انشَقَّتْ \* وَ أَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَ حُقَّتْ \* وَ
إِذَا الْأَرْضُ مُدَّتْ \* وَأَلْقَتْ مَا فِيهَا وَتَخَلَّتْ \*
وَأَذِنَتْ لِرَبِّهَا وَ حُقَّتْ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When the heaven bursts asunder, and obeys its Lord and it must. And
when the earth is stretched, and casts forth what is in it and becomes
empty, and obeys its Lord and it must. (84:1-5)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْئَلُ أَيَّانَ يَوْمُ الْقِيَامَةِ \* فَإِذَا بَرِقَ الْبَصَرُ \*
وَخَسَفَ الْقَمَرُ \* وَ جُمِعَ الشَّمْسُ وَ الْقَمَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He asks: When is the day of resurrection? So when the sight becomes
dazed, and the moon becomes dark, and the sun and the moon are brought
together. (75:6-9)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَسْئَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْجِبَالِ فَقُلْ يَنسِفُهَا رَبِّى نَسْفاً\*
فَيَذَرُهَا قَاعاً صَفْصَفاً \* لَّا تَرَى‏ فِيهَا عِوَجاً وَلَا
أَمْتاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they ask you about the mountains. Say: My Lord will carry them
away from the roots. Then leave it a plain, smooth level; You shall not
see therein any crookedness or unevenness. (20:105-107)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الْأَرْضُ غيْرَ الْأَرضِ وَالسَّمَوَاتُ وَبَرَزُواْ
لِلَّهِ الْوَحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On the day when the earth shall be changed into a different earth,
and the heavens (as well), and they shall come forth before Allah, the
One, the Supreme. (14:48)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِذَا دُكَّتِ الْأَرْضُ دَكّاً دَكّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nay! when the earth is made to crumble to pieces… (89:21)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا زُلْزِلَتِ الْأَرْضُ زِلْزَالَهَا \* وَأَخْرَجَتِ الْأَرْضُ
أَثْقَالَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When the earth is shaken with her (violent) shaking, and the earth
brings forth her burdens… (99:1-2)***

It can be concluded from such verses that very significant events would
occur in this material world and there would be complete derangement in
it. The heavens would split and merge into each other. The sun would
lose its brilliance and heat and become dark. The moon would also
darken.

Stars would loose their sheen and be scattered in the atmosphere.
Mountains would be rocked with tremors and shatter into particles. A
terrible earthquake would rock the earth and all that is inside it would
be expelled. The earth would sink into itself completely and would be
changed into a completely new earth.

An important point: As mentioned previously with regard to the world of
Barzakh, Qiyamat and total gatherings is an existing world, which would
occur after the world of Barzakh; it is not in the breadth of this world
or Barzakh; on the contrary with regard to the position of its existence
it is along the length of the world of Barzakh and above it and
encompassing it. Therefore it cannot be asked: When and where would
Qiyamat occur?

[^1]: Tafsirul Mizan, Vol. 14, Pg. 226.

[^2]: Ibne Atiyya Andalusi, Al-Muharrarul Wajeez fee Kitabil Azeez, Vol.
5, Pg. 358; Asfar, Vol. 5, Pg.274; Faiz Kashani, Ilmul Yaqeen, Vol. 2,
Pg. 891.


