Judgment Day in Quran
=====================

After the blowing of the trumpet and the death of all men; and the
changing and sinking into themselves of the general systems of the earth
and the heavens, the trumpet would be blown once again and all the human
beings present in Barzakh would become alive again and present
themselves before the Almighty Allah for accounting of their deeds.

The Holy Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَا يَظُنُّ أُوْلَئِكَ أَنَّهُم مَّبْعُوثُونَ \* لِيَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ \*
يَوْمَ يَقُومُ النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do not these think that they shall be raised again, for a mighty day,
the day on which men shall stand before the Lord of the worlds?
(83:4-6)***

According to the Holy Quran, the occurrence of Qiyamat is imminent and
no one should have any doubt in it. It says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ لَآ إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ لَيَجْمَعَنَّكُمْ إِلَى يَوْمِ
الْقِيَمَةِ لَا رَيْبَ فِيهِ وَمَنْ أَصْدَقُ مِنَ اللَّهِ حَدِيثاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah, there is no god but He – He will most certainly gather you
together on the resurrection day, there is no doubt in it; and who is
more true in word than Allah? (4:87)***

Resurrection and life after death is a deep rooted belief as all divine
prophets have informed about them. And most people throughout the ages,
even in the pre-historic age, had believed in it. Although there are
also some who have no faith in it. But they don’t have any evidence to
negate it; on the contrary they show its occurrence to be a doubtful
matter.

The Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُ الإِْنْسَانُ أَءِذَا مَا مِتُّ لَسَوْفَ أُخْرَجُ حَيّاً \*
أَوَلَا يَذْكُرُ الْإِنسَانُ أَنَّا خَلَقْنَاهُ مِن قَبْلُ وَلَمْ يَكُ
شَيْئاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And says man: What! when I am dead shall I truly be brought forth
alive? Does not man remember that We created him before, when he was
nothing? (19:66-67)***

In reply to them and to negate its improbability, the Quran mentions the
initial stage of the creation of man and says: We created man from a
lifeless matter and then gave life to him. To enliven him a second time
is obviously easier than the first creation and I have the power to do
this. The following verses are clear evidences of it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُخْرِجُ الْحَىَّ مِنَ الْمَيِّتِ وَيُخْرِجُ الْمَيِّتَ مِنَ الْحَىِ‏ّ
وَيُحْىِ الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَكَذَ لِكَ تُخْرَجُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead
from the living, and gives life to the earth after its death, and thus
shall you be brought forth. (30:19)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِى يَبْدَؤُاْ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ وَهُوَ أَهْوَنُ
عَلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He it is Who originates the creation, then reproduces it, and it
is easy to Him… (30:27)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِن كُنتُمْ فِى رَيْبٍ مِّنَ الْبَعْثِ فَإِنَّا
خَلَقْنَكُمْ مِّن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِن نُّطْفَةٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ عَلَقَةٍ
ثُمَّ مِن مُّضْغَةٍ مُّخَلَّقَةٍ وَغَيْرِ مُخَلَّقَةٍ لِّنُبَيِّنَ
لَكُمْ وَنُقِرُّ فِى الْأَرْحَامِ مَا نَشَآءُ إِلَى‏ أَجَلٍ مُّسَمّىً
ثُمَّ نُخْرِجُكُمْ طِفْلاً ثُمَّ لِتَبْلُغُواْ أَشُدَّكُمْ وَمِنكُم
مَّن يُتَوَفَّى‏ وَمِنكُم مَّن يُرَدُّ إِلَى‏ أَرْذَلِ الْعُمُرِ
لِكَيْلاَ يَعْلَمَ مِن بَعْدِ عِلْمٍ شَيْئاً وَتَرَى الْأَرْضَ
هَامِدَةً فَإِذَآ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْهَا الْمَآءَ اهْتَزَّتْ وَرَبَتْ
وَأَنبَتَتْ مِن كُلِّ زَوْجٍ بَهِيجٍ‏ \* ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ
الْحَقُّ وَأَنَّهُ يُحْىِ الْمَوْتَى‏ وَأَنَّهُ عَلَى‏ كُلِّ شَىْ‏ءٍ
قَدِيرٌ \* وَأَنَّ السَّاعَةَ ءَاتِيَةٌ لَّا رَيْبَ فِيهَا وَأَنَّ
اللَّهَ يَبْعَثُ مَن فِى الْقُبُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O people! if you are in doubt about the raising, then surely We
created you from dust, then from a small seed, then from a clot, then
from a lump of flesh, complete in make and incomplete, that We may make
clear to you; and We cause what We please to stay in the wombs till an
appointed time, then We bring you forth as babies, then that you may
attain your maturity; and of you is he who is caused to die, and of you
is he who is brought back to the worst part of life, so that after
having knowledge he does not know anything; and you see the earth
sterile land, but when We send down on it the water, it stirs and swells
and brings forth of every kind a beautiful herbage. This is because
Allah is the Truth and because He gives life to the dead and because He
has power over all things. And because*** ***the hour is coming, there
is no doubt about it; and because Allah shall raise up those who are in
the graves. (22:5-7)***

The Holy Quran considers resurrection to be bodily and spiritual; common
Muslims, on the contrary, followers of all heavenly religions have the
same belief. That man would be raised on Judgment Day with the same
personality and the same body that he had in this world. He would be
raised in the same form and built as he had in the world and he would
present himself before the Lord of the world.

In such a way that those who are acquainted with him would recognize him
and remark: He is so and so person who was there in the world.

Most Muslims have consensus on the belief and it is also considered as a
necessary principle of faith.

Allamah Majlisi has written in this connection:

All the believers in heavenly religions have consensus that resurrection
would be bodily and it is a necessary principle of faith. Verses of
Quran have very clearly explained this point and it is not right to
interpret them in any other way. In addition to this an inordinate
number of traditions (Mutawatir) prove the same.[^1]

Sadruddin Shirazi writes:

The fact is that in resurrection, this same worldly body will return and
not something like it; in such a way that if one sees that, he would
say: He is so and so person that was present in the world.[^2]

Faiz Kashani writes:

One who would come back in resurrection and one who would be herded in
the hereafter, is the same human person that was present in the world
and Barzakh, from the aspect of the soul as well as from the aspect of
the body, in such a way that if someone sees him in the field of
gathering, he would say: He is so and so person that was present in the
world. As Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said with regard to Barzakh: If you see
him, you would say: He is that same so and so person that was present in
the world.[^3]

Therefore we should accept that the man who would be herded in Qiyamat
is the same person from the aspect of the soul as well as the body, who
lived in the world with the important difference that the body of the
world was subject to change, it was prone to disease and old age; but on
the contrary the form of the hereafter does not age and is not prone to
disease.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

O children of Abdul Muttalib, the guards do not lie to their folks. By
Allah, you will die just as you go to sleep and just as you awake from
sleep, you would also be raised up after death.

After death, there is nothing except Paradise or Hell and the creation
and raising of people for Qiyamat is just like the creation of a single
person and not more than that. The Almighty Allah says in the Holy
Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَاخَلْقُكُمْ وَلَابَعْثُكُمْ إِلَّا كَنَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Neither your creation nor your raising is anything but as a single
soul… (31:28)***[^4]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said:

Luqman said to his son: My son, if you have doubt about death, you
should try not to go to sleep; and see that you would not be able to do
that. And if you have doubt about the raising in Qiyamat, try not to
wake up; and you will not be able to do that. If you think upon this,
you would understand that your soul is in the control of someone else.
Indeed, sleep is like death and waking up from sleep is like raising
after death.[^5]

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 7, Pg. 47.

[^2]: Al-Mubda wal Maad, Pg. 490.

[^3]: Ilmul Yaqeen, Vol. 2, Pg. 902.

[^4]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 7, Pg. 47.

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 7, Pg. 42.


