Gathering of Humans (Hashr)
===========================

In some traditions, it has come that human beings would assemble in
Qiyamat in various forms. Mu’adh bin Jabal asked the Messenger of Allah
(S) about the interpretation of the verse of Quran that reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِى الصُّورِ فَتَأْتُونَ أَفْوَاجاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The day on which the trumpet shall be blown so you shall come forth
in hosts. (78:18)***

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

You have asked about an extremely great matter!

Then, with tearful eyes, he said:

Ten groups from my Ummah would be distinguished from others and they
would be gathered in different forms: some would come in form of monkeys
and pigs in Qiyamat. Some would be brought upside down; they would be
dragging their shoulders. Some would be presented blind and they would
also walk in the same way.

Some would be brought deaf and dumb and they would not understand
anything. Some would come chewing their tongues while it would be
hanging on their chests and blood and puss would be flowing from their
mouths and the folks of the gathering would be disgusted with them.

Some would have their limbs cut off. Some would be crucified on branches
of fire. Some would stink more than carrion. Some would be dressed in
clothes that would be dyed in tar and it would be sticking to their
bodies.

Those who would be brought in the form of monkeys are actually those who
spread mischief through lies and rumors. Those who would be brought in
the form of pigs would be those who made money through unlawful means.
Those who move on their faces would be those took usury. Those who would
be brought deaf and dumb would be those who were conceited.

Those chewing their tongues would in fact be religious scholars and
judges, whose actions were opposed to their words.

Those who would have their limbs cut off would be those who had harassed
their neighbors.

Those who hung from branches of fire would be those who spy on others.

Those stinking more than carrion would be those who followed the
unlawful carnal desires and who did not pay the share of Allah and the
poor from their wealth.

Those who would come with their clothes smeared in tar would be the
conceited and arrogant ones.[^1]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

The proud would be brought on Judgment Day in the form of small ants and
they would be trampled by the folks of gathering till the accounting of
the people is over.[^2]

The Messenger of Allah (S) also said:

One who cheats Muslims in trade is not from us (a Muslim) and on
Judgment Day he would be raised with the Jews, since they were also
habitual cheaters.[^3]

From the abovementioned traditions and tens of other such reports, it
can be concluded that some people would be raised on Judgment Day in the
form of animals. It is said that it does not imply that their form and
worldly body would be changed into the form and worldly body of animals,
as it was previously stated that man after death would come in Barzakh
and Qiyamat with the same body that he possessed in the world. In such a
way that whoever sees him would remark: It is the same so and so person
who was there in the world. On the contrary, it implies that the being
of such persons would change into the being of animal and they would
really be brought as animals.

Even though their forms would be human, since in the world the animal
manners and powers have completely dominated them, internally they have
turned into animals, but others would be unaware of this; but since
Judgment Day is the day when the inner being of man would be exposed,
their being animals would also become apparent, although they would be
there in human forms, since there is beastliness of animals in their
beings and not in form or make-up.

Imam Khomeini has said with regard to this:

Just as man is having a particular worldly form in this world…there is a
particular form for him, which is unseen, whose form is under the
control of self and inner being in the world after death, whether it be
Barzakh or Qiyamat. If the inner and secret being of man is human, his
spiritual form is also human. But if it is non-human, his form is also
not human. For example, if carnal and beastly desires dominate his inner
self and the inner being becomes a beast, man is a beast in the form of
a celestial entity according to that creation. And if feeling of anger
and ferocity dominates his inner being, that fierceness would become his
unseen celestial form. And if doubts and satanity become dominant and
his inner being assumes satanic inclinations like deception, dishonesty,
lying, back biting, his unseen and ethereal form is that of one of the
satans, depending on the evil quality affecting him.[^4]

[^1]: Jalaluddin Suyuti, Durre Manthur, Vol. 8, Pg. 393.

[^2]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 15, Pg. 379.

[^3]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 17, Pg. 383.

[^4]: Maad az Deedgah Imam Khomeini, Pg. 354.


