Oblivious Religion
==================

It is a universally accepted principle that a person either accepts or
denies something based upon the amount of knowledge they have regarding
that subject. If a person accepts or denies something without having
full knowledge of what it is they are accepting or denying, then their
acceptance or denial will be batil (false).

If you have no knowledge regarding a particular issue, then you can
neither accept it nor can you deny it. For example, if you ask a child
to look in their room to see if there is a laptop there or not, the
child will come back and say yes there is. Then if you ask the child, do
you know what a laptop is.

The child will reply "I don't know". So in this situation, what is the
worth of the word of this child? In the same way, if you follow a
religion which you have absolutely no knowledge about, then that
religion is nothing more than ignorance.

If you claim to be a follower of the Shia religion, then it is
compulsory that you have knowledge regarding the Shia religion. The
foundation of this religion is completely based upon tauheed (Oneness).
So first of all you must know what tauheed is. Then in order to gain
proof for your religion you must also fully understand the other
principles of that religion as well.

Otherwise no one in this whole world will accept a religion with
absolutely no proof. Remember! All of your good deeds and acts of
worship depend totally upon your aqeedah (beliefs). If your aqeedah is
correct, then even your lesser good deeds will also be accepted. However
if your aqeedah is incorrect, then no matter how many good deeds you
have, they will all be worthless. Your aqeedah will lead you towards
hell.


The so called scholars have made the aqeedah become worthless in the
eyes of others. They have made people believe that it is not necessary
that you understand what you believe, but it is enough that you simply
say it. Because of this the whole Shia nation is now obliviously
following a religion.

The Shia do not even realize their religion has become a source of
amusement to others. Because of these so called scholars, shias now
believe that simply performing acts of worship without fully knowing or
understanding why they are doing them is enough. This is why Ameerul
Momineen Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as) said, "No one can be deserving of
any status until he becomes fully aware of all of the attributes of that
status" (Najul Israr First Edition page no 41).

In this brief thesis, we cannot cover the entire Shia religion.
Therefore we have chosen to discuss only upon the topic of wilayat
because wilayat is that which the entire Shia religion revolves around.
No Shia belief can be understood without wilayat. Now we shall begin
from aqeedah tauheed (belief of oneness) because wilayat can only be
understood through tauheed. Tauheed is the only source from which one
can gain an understanding of wilayat.


**Tauheed**

The same rule applies regarding tauheed. Having belief in tauheed
without fully knowing what tauheed is is of absolutely no value.
According to Allah, the best form of belief is the recognition of Allah.
Ameerul Momineen (as) says, "The beginning of the religion is gaining
the marifat (recognition) of Allah".

It means you have no right to recite "La illaha illalah" (There is no
god other than Allah) until you gain the marifat (recognition) of
tauheed.

Mani ul Akhbar page no 443 hadith 49, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) says " I
have found the whole knowledge of humanity in four places; gaining the
marifat of Lord, gaining the marifat regarding one's own creation,
gaining the marifat of what your Lord wants from you, and gaining the
marifat of that which can exclude you from the religion."


**Gaining the marifat of Allah**

The first responsibility a person has is recognizing his Lord and
Creator because rubiyat (lordship) is the responsibility of the Creator.
Every person must answer to his Creator regarding gaining the marifat
(recognition) of his Lord. Allah has revealed all proofs upon humanity
so that when the time comes and mankind is stood before Allah they will
have no excuse. There are two kinds of proof; apparent and hidden.

Apparent proof is Imam (as) and hidden proof is intellect. Now you must
completely understand there are so many places in this world where Allah
did not send a prophet or sharia (law). Even today, there are nations in
the jungles of Africa who have no idea about the concept of wearing
clothes. Will such people not also have to answer to their Lord?

Will they be able to say "You did not send to us any prophet, sharia
(law), or book. So how were we suppose to gain Your marifat
(recognition)?" Absolutely never. They will not be able to use this
excuse simply because an apparent hujjat (proof) didn't come to them
because Allah gave them a hidden hujjat (proof) and that is intellect.

The purpose of intellect is to allow one to be able to recognize his
Creator. Not only this but it is also the responsibility of intellect to
recognize the attributes of his Creator. The first attribute which
intellect guides one towards is knowledge. Without knowledge, even
making a simple ordinary clay pot is impossible.

Then how is it possible this entire universe can be created without
knowledge? The second attribute which intellect guides one towards is
ability. If a person does not also possess ability, then their knowledge
is of no benefit. For example, even though a person might have knowledge
regarding how to make a clay pot, but if he is disabled, he will not
possess the ability to do so.

The third attribute which intellect guides one towards is authority.
For example, if a person is thirsty and knows where the water is and has
a bucket which to remove the water from the well, but the owner of the
well does not permit him to draw water from the well, so despite having
knowledge and ability, he still will not be able to remove his thirst.
Therefore there are three essential requirements in order for one to be
able to create something; knowledge, ability, and authority. The
combination of these three is called wilayat. Now it has been proven the
purpose of intellect is to lead humanity towards wilayat.


**Purpose of Creation**

If a person has 1000 pots of biryani, he will only eat about 1-2 plates
from it. So what will he do with the rest of the biryani? Only an insane
person will simply leave it so that it goes to waste. Definitely a
person with intellect will distribute it amongst the people. Now from
this example we can understand that the one who is the owner of this
whole universe and has no need of it, what will He do with it?

Certainly He will bestow His treasure upon His creation. This is an act
of compassion. For this reason it is wajib (compulsory) that Allah must
be compassionate. However He is also adl (just). Adl (justice) demands
that before one can be blessed, he must first be deserving. Therefore
Allah established a standard. Allah blesses those who meet the standard.
Remember! Allah did not create any of His creation simply to punish
them. He created them so that He could bless them. If a person is
unfortunate and devoid of blessing, it is his own fault. The Creator
cannot be accused.

**Demand of Creator**

The third thing which every person must have knowledge of is those acts
which make him become deserving of the blessings of Allah. Mullahs have
given you a very long list of acts which make you become deserving. The
list is so lengthy that if a completely normal person ponders upon it
they will become abnormal. There are only two things which Allah demands
from us. If we fulfill these two demands of our Creator, then without
any doubt, we will become deserving of His blessings.

1. Sura adh-Dhaariyay ayah 56: "And I have not created the jinn and the
men except that they should worship Me"

In this ayah, the first thing which Allah demands is worship. Believe
me when I say, regardless of what these mulvis have told you, only
Masoomeen (as) have the right to interpret the words of Allah. Therefore
we will ask Masoom (as) for the explanation of the word "worship". In
the tafseer of this ayah, Imam Zainul Abideen (as) says,

"In this ayah, the meaning of worship is gaining the marifat
(recognition) of Imam" (Tafseer e Furat). The first thing which Allah
demands of you before you will become deserving of His blessings is that
you gain the marifat (recognition) of the Imam of your time. This is why
RasoolAllah (saw) said, "Anyone who dies without gaining the marifat of
the Imam of his time has died the death of a jahil (ignorant), kufr
(disbelief), and nafaq (hypocrisy)".

Now imagine a person who takes his shahadah (testimony of faith) and
prays his whole life, fasts, performs numerous hajj, but does not gain
the marifat of the Imam of his time. Now despite all of his acts of
worship he will die as a kafir (disbeliever) and munafiq (hypocrite).
All of his acts of worship became worthless because he did not fulfill
the purpose of his life which is gaining the marifat of the Imam of his
time. When he does not achieve his purpose, then all of his deeds become
batil (false).

2. Sura Mulk ayah 2: "Who hath created life and death that He may try
you which of you is best in deed; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving"

In this ayah the singular form has been used for the word "amal"
(deed). It means there is only one deed. So it becomes wajib
(compulsory) upon every person who seeks forgiveness and mercy from his
Lord that he must obtain knowledge regarding that deed which is the only
way he can obtain salvation.

3. Sura Naml ayah 89-90: "Whoso bringeth a good d eed will have better
than its worth; and such are safe from fear that Day. And whoso bringeth
an evil deed, such will be flung down on their faces in the Fire. Are ye
rewarded aught save what ye did?"

This ayah tells us that our Lord does not want numerous good deeds. He
only demands one good deed from us. That good deed is a combination of
all good deeds and without this good deed every act which one does
becomes evil. Now we will see what that good deed which Allah demands
from us is. We will answer this question using both Shia and Sunni
sources.

1. Tafseer e Safi page no 35, it is narrated from Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
that Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says, "Ameerul Momineen (as) said in the
tafseer of this ayah "That good deed is marifat (recognition) of the
wilayat of Us Ahlul Bayt (as) and Our love. That evil deed is denying
the wilayat of Us Ahlul Bayt (as) and hatred and envy towards Us. Then
Ameerul Momineen (as) recited this ayah."

2. This narration can also be found in Tafseer e Qummi as well.

3. Yanabil Muwaddah page no 161, Ameerul Momineen (as) said, "I will
inform you regarding a good deed. If one does this, Allah will enter him
into jannah. I will inform you regarding an evil deed. If one does this,
Allah will throw him into the fires of hell and no good deed will be
accepted if one performs this evil deed." Then Moula (as) said, "That
good deed is Our love. That evil deed is being envious of Us."

4. Yanabil Muwaddah page no 435, Imam Hussain (as) said, "That good
deed is loving Us Ahlul Bayt (as)."

Now it has been made absolutely clear that our Lord wants nothing more
from us except that we love Ahlul Bayt (as) and hate Their enemies. If
we fulfill His demand, then we become deserving of His blessings.


