Things Which Exclude One From the Religion
==========================================

It has been proven from the sayings of Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) that it is
compulsory for man to know those things which will exclude him from the
religion. Here we shall point out a few of those things:

1. It has been clarified from our above words that the purpose of
religion is to love Ahlul Bayt (as). Then without doubt the first thing
which will immediately exclude one from the religion is the hatred of
Ahlul Bayt (as) or the love of Their enemies. Attention is that which
keeps the love alive. Negligence is that which destroys the love. So
being negligent in the love of Ahlul Bayt (as) is included in those
things which will exclude you from the religion.

Quran has clearly ordered us to perform muwaddah. As Allah says
"O'Prophet! Say! I do not ask you for any reward for My prophet hood
except the love of My nearest kin."

Muwaddah of Ahlul Bayt (as) is wajib (compulsory) because this is the
reward of prophet hood, and without paying prophet hood its reward no
one can enter into the religion. Therefore being negligent in the
muwaddah of Ahlul Bayt (as) will without doubt exclude one from the
religion. You must be very careful and be very aware of this extremely
important matter. Even having some minor negligence in the muwaddah of
Ahlul Bayt (as) can destroy your whole iman (faith).

We have spoken in great detail on this topic in our book Kashaful
Muwaddah. Here we wish to say something that is off topic but will be of
great benefit to you. All shia and sunni translators translate the word
"qarba" (near kin singular form) as "qurba" which is absolutely wrong.

I have no idea where they get this translation from because in Arabic
the word "qurba" is used for relatives (more than one). Qurba is plural
while qarba is singular. In Quran Allah uses the word "qarba" which is
feminine. For example the word "kabeer", it means great. Its superlative
is "Akbar" which means the greatest. However akbar is masculine.

Therefore when you see the term "akbar" it is referring to the greatest
"man". Its feminine will be "kubra" which will mean the greatest
"woman". Likewise there is a word "sagheer" which means young. Its
superlative is "Asghar" which means the youngest. Asghar is masculine.
So akbar means youngest "man". Its feminine is sughra which means
youngest "woman".

The superlative of the word kareeb (near) is "Akrab" (nearest). Akrab
is masculine. Its feminine will be karba which means the nearest "woman"
which is Syeda Fatima Zahra (sa). This is why Allah ordered us to love
those who are associated with Syeda (sa) (qaraba).

2. The second thing which will exclude one from the religion is to
decrease or increase those who are considered as Aimmah Masoomeen (as).
This is an extremely important issue. However people do not ever give
any importance to this issue.

We must be very careful and not shrug our responsibility regarding this
very sensitive issue. Imam is that sacred term which countless shia have
sacrificed themselves in order to protect the honor and dignity of. Shia
have never ever used this term for a non Masoom. However nowadays
simpleton shia have begun allowing any non Masoom to use this title for
themselves in the name of "unity" with other muslims.

Non shia have intentionally used this term in order to destroy the
importance of the title of "Imam" because imamate is not included in
their usool e deen. However even though shia know the importance of the
title of Imam, suddenly out of ignorance and without any fear of Allah,
they have begun using this word for any non Masoom the same way as non
shia. We shall tell you what an "Imam" is and what is the importance of
"Imam" to Allah.

Sura Tawba ayah 36: "Lo! the number of the months with Allah is twelve
months by Allah's ordinance in the day that He created the heavens and
the earth. Four of them are sacred: that is the right religion"

In this ayah Allah is telling us that the 12 months are the true
religion. In Umda tul Matalib First Edition page no 239, Imam Jafar
Sadiq (as) said, "These 12 months are the 12 Imams (as)." You must
ponder upon this point that Allah did not declare His tauheed as the
true religion nor did He declare the prophet hood of RasoolAllah (saw)
as the true religion.

He declared the number of 12 Imams (as) as the true religion. Now you
must realize that how greatly Allah wishes to protect the number of 12.
Including another or excluding one of those whom Allah has included in
the 12 is the same as if you have destroyed the whole religion.
Therefore anyone who excludes even just one of those 12 or includes even
just one other with Them, then most certainly he becomes excluded from
the religion because the 12 Imams (as) are the true religion.

3. The third thing which can exclude one from the religion is
personality worshipping. It means following and accepting the word of
another so blindly without any regard as to whether or not what he is
saying is actually a part of the true religion or not.

Allah has extreme dislike for the one who follows others so blindly and
never tries to gain the marifat (recognition) of the religion himself.
It is wajib (compulsory) upon everyone to continuously keep trying to
gain as much knowledge as one possibly can regarding the religion.

Without knowledge neither will your belief nor your good deeds be of
any benefit to you. As Masoom (as) says, "Be knowledgeable or try to
gain knowledge, but do not follow others blindly" (Mazan ul Hikmat 8th
Volume page no 431). One who does not recognize his religion and simply
follows others blindly, then that person will certainly be excluded from
the true religion. Ghaybat e Nomania page no 22 and Mazan ul Hikmat 8t h
Volume page no 476:

Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) says, "Anyone who will enter into the religion
through others, he will be taken out of the religion by those same who
entered him into the religion. Anyone who will enter into the religion
through Book and Sunnah, the mountains will move before he will be
removed from the religion."

These are a few of the points which we had briefly wanted to mention.
When you will begin to study, you will slowly begin to understand
everything. InshaAllah.

Marifat (recognition)

The meaning of marifat is to recognize one by those attributes which
only he possesses and no other has. For example, when we wish to gain
the marifat of RasoolAllah (saw), we do this through His attribute "The
Seal of all Prophets" because RasoolAllah (saw) is the only one who was
given the attribute of "Seal of all Prophets" and it has never been
given by Allah to any other person. Likewise, regarding the marifat of
all Masoomeen (as) you must recognize each by those attributes which are
associated with only that individual Masoom (as). Tauheed will also be
recognized in the same way.


**Marifat of Tauheed (recognition of Oneness)**

It is quite clear that we will gain the marifat of Allah through His
attributes because it is impossible to gain His marifat through His zaat
(essence). You cannot even recognize an ant by his zaat. We will also
recognize it through its attributes. So it is absolutely impossible to
recognize Allah through His essence. We will recognize Allah through
those attributes which are apparent (zahir). No one can be recognized
through his hidden (batin) attributes.

This is why the attributes of Allah must be apparent (zahir). When they
are apparent, then anyone who claims to find fault in these attributes
in reality is claiming that Allah Himself has some fault. Now that we
have brought you to this point you must begin to understand that the
very first attribute which was made apparent and through which Allah
could be recognized was the attribute of wilayat.

All of His other attributes are under wilayat. So the one who will be
the apparent manifestation of His "Ism al Wali" must therefore possess
all of His other attributes as well. Then we must believe the Mahzer of
Allah is also a Khaliq (Creator), Rizzaq (Sustainer), Mohi (One who
gives Life), Mumit (One who brings Death to the Living), Ghafar (All
Forgiving),

and Sattar (One who covers sins). Anyone who will deny the Mahzer of
Allah possesses these attributes has in reality denied Allah. We cannot
associate any attribute or action with Allah because action means to
change from one state into another, and change of state can never be
associated with Allah.

Creation, distributing rizq, merciful, and lordship are actions which
cannot be associated with Allah. The Wali ul Muttaliq (absolute wali) of
Allah performs all of these acts. Whatever action is done by the Wali ul
Muttaliq is called as "the action of Allah". We believe that Allah is
our Creator, gives us rizq (sustenance), is merciful, is our Lord
because all of these acts have been revealed through His "Ism al
Wali".

Allah cannot be recognized or believed in without wilayat. The reality
of tauheed is wilayat. Gaining the marifat of wilayat is gaining the
marifat of tauheed. You must remember that wilayat of Allah is
associated with the wilayat of Moula Ali (as).

Allama Dastghayab writes in his book "Wilayat", "Wilayat of Moula Ali
(as) and the wilayat of Allah are one and the same". This sentence of
Allama Dastghayab is a translation of a saying by Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
which can be found in Usool e Kafi in which Imam (as) says "Our wilayat
is the wilayat of Allah". In this regard we shall present more proofs
for you.

1. Sura Kahf ayah 44: "There, the (only) wilayah comes from Allah, the
True One" In the tafseer of this ayah Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) says "This
is the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as)" (Usool e Kafi).

2. Haqooqul Yaqeen Second Volume page no 75, Allama Majalisi narrates a
hadith of RasoolAllah (saw); "People asked RasoolAllah (saw),
"O'RasoolAllah, who is the wali?" RasoolAllah (saw) replied, "Ali (as)
is your wali in this time. After Him, His successor (11 Imams as)."

3. Haqooqul Yaqeen Second Volume page no 218, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as)
said, "Allah has declared Ali (as) as His sign between Him and His
creation. Other than this there is no sign."

4. Umdatul Mattalib First Edition page no 433, RasoolAllah (saw) said,
"Allah has associated Me with prophet hood and My Ahlul Bayt (as) with
wilayat".

Now you must know that absolute wilayat is associated with Moula Ali
(as) and the Offspring of Moula Ali (as). People have always been
confused regarding what is wilayat because all of the attributes and
actions of Allah are revealed through wilayat. If you have a look at the
miracles of RasoolAllah (saw), they are around 10,000 in numbers.

If you compare this with the miracles of Ameerul Momineen (as), then
you will see the number of miracles associated with Moula Ali (as) are
very few. However even though the miracles of RasoolAllah (saw) are
greater in numbers, there still is not one single person who has claimed
that RasoolAllah (saw) is Allah while in every era there are great
numbers of people who claim Moula Ali (as) is Allah.

We must reflect upon this point that there is something inside of Moula
Ali (as) which causes the people to consider Him to be Allah. We have
already told you what is that thing which causes the people do this. All
of the attributes and actions of Allah are revealed through His Wali e
Muttaliq so the people who believe in apparent actions only begin to
believe Moula Ali (as) is Allah because Allah has been apparently
manifested through His Wali e Muttaliq, Moula Ali (as).

However in reality, Moula Ali (as) is not Allah. He is the Hujjat ul
Allah (proof of Allah).


