More Clarification
==================

From the moment man was placed upon this earth until now, man has
always worshipped something because worshipping is a part of his nature.
Sometimes he worships trees, rivers, stars, rocks, or mountains, but
regardless of what he worships, he has imagined some power in that which
he is worshipping and has submitted himself to that power.

**As time passed, man kept**

gathering his imaginary thoughts regarding that which he worshiped
until the time for Islam drew near. Then he found all of his imaginings
contained in one person, and He contained enough power and attributes in
His actions that the people became convinced He was actually their
Lord.

When the people saw all of these attributes in Moula Ali (as), they
immediately said, "This is our Lord". In this situation, if Moula Ali
(as) had not performed sajdah, then all of humanity would have
considered Moula Ali (as) to be Allah.

However Moula Ali (as) bestowed upon tauheed its true honor and dignity
because whenever this world called Him as "Allah", He immediately put
His head into sajdah so that this world could know that Ali (as) also
has a Lord, and Ali (as) also worships someone. This sajdah of Moula Ali
(as) is the only proof of tauheed. This is the only way to absolutely
prove tauheed. All other arguments are simply baseless and without
merit.

The pinnacle of intellect is making someone be able to recognize his
Creator. However humans are unable to determine who their Creator is.
This is why no one has been able to comprehensively prove the myth of
tauheed until today.

**Tauheed can only be proven through**

the sajdah of Moula Ali (as). It is absolutely impossible that anyone
can prove tauheed without Moula Ali (as) even if they try from now until
the day of judgment it can never be proven without Moula Ali (as). He
will simply continue to worship his own imaginary god. He believes he is
a follower of tauheed, but in reality, he is an absolute mushrik
(polytheist).

**Charismatic Revolution of Essence**

If something is beyond the understanding of human intellect, then
regardless of how much anyone tries they will never be able to explain
or introduce something which is incomprehensible to mankind. For
example, a person has never eaten a mango.

Regardless of how much you try you will never be able to make him
understand what a mango tastes like until he tastes it for himself. Now
here the issue is introducing the essence of Allah which is beyond the
examination and understanding of humans. As Ameerul Momineen (as) said,
"The essence of Allah is unknown to humans".

It means that no one knows or understands the essence of Allah nor will
they ever be able to do so. In a situation such as this, then how is it
possible the essence of Allah will be introduced? That essence which is
beyond examination and understanding cannot be explained or introduced
by such an essence which is within the examination and understanding of
humans.

The essence of Allah can neither be seen nor can it be divided into
parts. Only that which has a physical body can be seen, and in order to
have a physical essence one must possess three dimensions; height,
width, and depth. Therefore the essence of Allah cannot be introduced or
explained by any essence which possesses any one or all of these three
dimensions.

Now take a look throughout this whole universe, and use everything
which is at your disposal and try to find one thing which has not one
single dimension. No one can deny that such a thing exists because if it
did not, then Allah would not have been introduced while the purpose of
Masoomeen (as) was to introduce the essence of Allah. After searching
throughout the whole universe, we found that thing which has not one
single dimension, not height, nor width, nor depth. When it has no such
dimensions, then it does not have a physical body.

Therefore if it has no physical body, it cannot be seen. Despite of all
of this, no one can deny its existence. This thing introduced the
essence of Allah, and that thing is "nuqta" (Dot). According to physics,
that thing which has no height, width, or depth is called a "nuqta"
(Dot). Neither does it have a physical body nor can it be divided into
parts nor can it be seen. When we draw a circle using a compass,

in the center we make a small dot. This dot is only temporary, but in
reality this dot is also a small circle. Because dot does not have a
physical body, it is impossible to recognize it or examine it. Despite
of this, you will not find one single person who will deny the existence
of the essence of the dot. Allah has created this whole world in the
shape of a circle. Whether its earth, sun, moon, or other planets,

Every circle is a proof that there is a center because if its center
was not there it would not be able to survive. The survival of the
universe is a proof that there is also some center to it. That center is
called nuqta (Dot). The same dot is a proof of the essence of Allah. As
Ameerul Momineen (as) says in Najul Israr First Edition page no 34,
"Everything is based upon the dot.

The dot is a proof of the essence of Allah." Now it becomes very clear
the only way Allah can be introduced or explained is by the dot, and
from the beginning of the creation of this universe until the day of
judgment there has been only one personality which has claimed to be a
Dot, and that is my owner, my Moula (as),

Ameerul Momineen Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as). Now it has been proven
that the introduction of tauheed is impossible without the wilayat of
Ameerul Momineen (as), and anyone who believes tauheed without Moula Ali
(as) is nothing more than an idol worshipper.

**By the Lord of the Kaaba, I am successful**

This is the sentence which my Moula (as) said when abdur rahman ibne
muljoom maloon (la) struck his sword on the sacred head of Moula Ali
(as). In this one sentence Moula (as) explains the reality of the whole
universe, His wilayat, and the truth of tauheed. One who understands
this one sentence will never be deceived by the explanation of
tauheed.

Throughout the whole history of mankind, Moula Ali (as) is the first
and only personality who uttered these words at the time of His death.
We must reflect upon these words of Moula Ali (as). When Moula (as)
said, "By the Lord of the Kaaba, I am successful", what is that thing
which made Him be successful? Maaz'Allah was Moula (as) not successful
before this time? I don't care what non shia say regarding this matter,
but I am so hurt when I see "shia" scholars lowering the status of One
who is the greatness of all greats.

They say that even though Moula (as) had all of the attributes, but He
(maaz'Allah) was devoid of the honor of martyrdom. So when He obtained
martyrdom, He announced His success. I don't think there is any more
insulting and degrading statement than this. First of all why didn't the
people who were martyred before Moula (as) such as Hz Hamza (as), Hz
Jaffar Tayyar (as),

Hz Ammar Yassir (ra), Hz Owais Karni (ra), etc say these words? Was the
shahadat (martyrdom) worthless in their eyes? Why was Moula (as) so
proud of that moment in which one loses all of his senses? The second
point is martyrdom is that thing which is the sadqah of Moula (as)'s
shoes. Even if a person dies in his own bed but he has the love of Moula
Ali (as) at the time of his death, he also is given the status of
shaheed (martyr). As RasoolAllah (saw) said, "Anyone who dies on the
love of Aal e Muhammad (as) dies the death of a shaheed (martyr)".

In such circumstances, what type of honor could shahadat (martyrdom)
bring to Moula Ali (as)? Allah gave two tasks to Moula Ali (as) which
were completely opposite to each other. It is considered impossible to
perform two totally opposite tasks at the same time. However Moula Ali
(as) proved it to be possible even though according to intellect it is
absolutely impossible that one can be able to perform both these
completely and totally opposite tasks at the same time.

Moula (as)'s first responsibility was to prove the essence of Allah and
to practically prove the tauheed of Allah in order for the people to
believe in the Oneness of Allah and to worship Allah. This task was not
possible until people were able to see the attributes of Allah with
their own eyes. It only becomes possible when all of the attributes of
Allah were revealed through Moula Ali (as) so that the people could
witness them by their own eyes and testify to what they had seen
themselves.

However in this situation, no one would ever have believed there was
any other Allah except Moula Ali (as) because whatever imaginings they
had about Allah in their minds and whatever attributes they had
associated with Allah, they were seeing even greater than that being
revealed through Moula Ali (as).

The purpose of Moula Ali (as) seemed to be unsuccessful. Now Moula Ali
(as) had to prove His servitude. Servitude cannot be proven until you
express your humility. Power and humility are complete opposites of each
other. If you prove you are powerful, then you cannot prove you are
humble.

If you prove you are humble, then you lose power. In this circumstance,
Moula (as)'s purpose could not be fulfilled. On the 19t h of Ramadan in
Masjid e Kufa a horrible incident occurred. This incident has been
preserved in the history for all of mankind until the day of judgment.
When Moula Ali (as) was struck upon the head, He was performing sajdah
to someone and no one is able to deny this. This was that success which
turned the impossible into possible.

**Humbleness of Masoom (as)**

At this point it is compulsory to understand that humility which
Masoomeen (as) use to reveal in order to protect tauheed. Otherwise the
people of lesser intellect will start to believe that sometimes
Masoomeen (as) are powerful and sometimes They are humble. You must
remember Masoomeen (as) are Mazher e Tauheed (manifestation of
Oneness).

Their purpose was to prove tauheed. Therefore it is wajib (compulsory)
that They possess all of the attributes of tauheed because at the time
of the revelation of tauheed if that which is going to prove tauheed
possesses even a fraction of a fault, then that which it is attempting
to prove (tauheed) will also be incomplete.

So it is wajib (compulsory) to believe Masoomeen (as) have absolute
commandment. Their commandment is not temporary. Their commandment has
always been in existence and is a part of Their essence. It is
absolutely impossible that even for a single moment that Their
commandment can become separated from Them.

They expressed Their humility according to Their will not because of
some helplessness. For example, if an ant is walking on your body, you
just flick it off. You do not kill it. Sometimes it will bite you and
you will have a red swollen spot and will feel itching. However if in
this situation you do not kill it, it is not due to your humility. It is
due to your mercy.

Likewise, if Masoom (as) allow someone to overcome Them it is not due
to Their humility. It is due to Their hikmat (wisdom) because Masoomeen
(as) are the Caliphs of Allah, and the hikmat (wisdom) of Allah is
revealed through Them. Firoun (la) claimed to be Allah for 1000 years
and Allah remained silent. For centuries 360 idols were kept inside of
that house which Allah calls as "His House" while Allah remained silent.
It was not due to the humility of Allah. It was His hikmat (wisdom).

That same hikmat (wisdom) which is revealed through Masoomeen (as).
There are numerous examples throughout history. The victor of Badr o
Hunain o Uhud o Khayber, Ameerul Momineen (as) who was more powerful
than whole armies, then how is it possible for a few people to place a
rope around His neck and drag Him through the streets?

However history is a witness that such an event did occur. Another
example was during the time the people were busy appointing their so
called calipha and forgetting the demise of their Prophet. Once they had
finished with their appointments they found that their Prophet (saw) had
already been buried.

Upon hearing this they became extremely angry and wanted to dig up the
grave of RasoolAllah (saw) in order to take His body out and recite the
funeral prayer again. At that moment, there was a huge gathering of
people and according to narrations, all of the people were carrying
weapons. On the other hand, Ameerul Momineen (as) was all alone.

Ameerul Momineen (as) stood beside the grave of RasoolAllah (saw), drew
a line upon the ground with His sword and said, " Anyone who steps over
this line will not be able to survive the blow of My sword". Was it
difficult for the entire army to make an united attack against Moula Ali
(as)? However they were not as stupid as the mulvis of today and that is
why they returned back quietly.

The question is at that moment where did that power which Moula Ali
(as) revealed come from? After the incident occurred, where did that
power go? This contradiction in the actions of Masoom (as) is itself a
proof that the humility of Masoom (as) is related to hikmat (wisdom) not
absolute humility. This was that humility which Moula (as) used to
express in order to keep the people from becoming deceived.

He did this so that those people who had been worshipping idols for
thousands of years and had idol worshipping in their blood would not
abandon worshipping their idols and simply begin to worship Masoomeen
(as) instead. In order to gain this purpose these Sacred Essences had to
suffer unimaginable sufferings. They bore unimaginable atrocities, were
assassinated, this is Their greatness to Allah and the whole Quran is
full of Their greatness.

**Wasila (Intercession)**

In order to make a connection between two things which cannot be
directly connected to each other, we must have some third thing to
connect those first two. That third thing is called wasila. For example,
water and fire cannot connect to each other. In order to heat the water
by fire we must have a third thing which is a pot which is connected to
the fire on one side and the water on the other. It takes heat from the
fire and gives to the water. Any connection between Creator and creation
is absolutely impossible. Therefore without any doubt there is an
absolute need for a wasila.

All the blessings of Allah can only reach to the creation through that
wasila. There are two kinds of blessings which come from the Creator to
the creation; faiz e tashrie and faiz e taqwini. The orders which come
from Allah to His creation is called faiz e tashrie. Whatever benefits
come from the Creator to His creation is called faiz e taqwini. For
example, life, health, rizq,

children etc. This is why there are prophets and messengers because the
creation is unable to receive orders directly from Allah so they must be
some form of wasila to give these orders to the creation. Likewise the
creation cannot also receive these faiz e taqwini directly from Allah.
There must also be a wasila. That wasila must be different from whatever
two things it connects. As in the above example, the pot which is the
wasila is different from the two things it is connecting, fire and
water. So that wasila which is between Allah and His creation will not
be like Allah nor will He be like creation.

Two words are used for wasila; hijab (Veil) and barzakh. There are
uncountable processes which could be found throughout the universe which
occur spontaneously on different occasions which are absolute vital to
the survival of the universe.

Likewise there are uncountable veils or wasilas between Creator and
creation, and every veil is dependent upon the one before it until this
process reaches to the last veil where there is no third thing between
this veil and Allah. This veil is not dependent upon any other thing
except Allah. Allah has ordered us in regards to this Hijab , "In order
to turn towards Allah search for a specific wasila". So the purpose of
our life is to search for this last Veil. When we find it

then we must attach ourselves to this wasila. We will ask the Prophet
of Allah to tell us who that last Veil is for whom there is nothing
between Him and Allah and is directly related to Allah. RasoolAllah
(saw) said, "There is no veil between Allah and Ali (as) and Ali (as) is
a veil between Allah and His creation".

It has been clearly proven from this hadith beyond any doubt that Moula
Ali (as) is that last Veil and there is no veil between Moula Ali (as)
and Allah. Whatever Ali (as) gets, He does so directly from Allah, and
everyone else obtains it through Moula Ali (as) regardless if it's life,
health, rizq, children, prophet hood, imamate, or wilayat. Moula Ali
(as) is the absolute and only one who blesses everyone (Kitab Sulaim bin
Qais page no 275).

Usool e Kafi Kitab e Iman o Kufr chapter 293 hadith 2, Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as) said, "Allah made Ali (as) as a sign betw een Him and His
creation. One who gains His marifat is a momin. One who denies is a
kafir. One who remains ignorant (one who does not gain marifat) has gone
astray. One who includes something with Him is a mushrik
(polytheist)".

Through this hadith, every person can examine for himself and know what
his status is. We also learn from this hadith that the real shirk is
when someone includes another in the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as).
If you see someone claiming to have the same wilayat as Moula Ali (as),
then you should be able to know what is this person's status very
easily.

**Stages of Wilayat**

That last veil which we just introduced is the wilayat of Allah who is
the Creator, Sustainer, Lord of the whole Universe and Heavens, and
holds the whole universe in His palm. You cannot deny any of the
attributes which are related to Allah because every attribute of Allah
is revealed through Him. Because people are unaware of the truth
regarding wilayat, they have mixed together different kinds of wilayat
and have become doubtful regarding the wilayat of Allah.

They are always afraid of committing "shirk". Even though if they
ponder they will know that finding faults in the wilayat of Allah and
not believing in the powers of wilayat is the real shirk. In reality
there are different kinds and stages of wilayat. So you must be aware of
these differences and must be able to separate the wilayat of Allah from
these other wilayats and then reflect deeply upon this.

We shall explain the different kinds of wilayat, but before doing so,
you must understand the fact that these wilayats are not found in books.
Their foundation is based purely upon examination. These names are the
result of examining these wilayats.


