Wilayat E Fitri (natural Wilayat)
=================================

Every human possesses this wilayat. The minimum wilayat which man
possesses is that he has authority over his body and its parts. However
when a part of the body becomes disabled, this wilayat is removed. For
example, if hands or feet become disabled or one loses his eyesight or
ears become deaf, then the person loses his authority over his body
parts.


**Wilayat e Sharie**

The sharia gives this wilayat to mankind. For example, a father is wali
of his daughter or after the demise of father, son becomes his wali, if
one adopts an orphan, he becomes the wali of that orphan. Even though
this wilayat is common, but only those who embrace islam can obtain this
wilayat and come within the circle of shariat e Muhammad (saw).

This wilayat is also not permanent. In certain circumstances it is
removed. For example, when a daughter gets married, the wilayat of the
father is removed from her, or if a son is disinherited, and when the
orphan becomes an adult, then the wilayat of his patron is removed.

**Wilayat e Zilli**

The third stage of wilayat is one which is obtained through love. When
the love of the Wali of Allah is firmly attached inside one's heart,
then the noor of wilayat is revealed upon that heart. The secrets of
wilayat reveal themselves to his heart. This wilayat is a blessing from
Wali of Allah not the personal effort of the one who has it. Hz Salman
Farsi (as), Hz Abu Dhar (ra), Hz Messam Tammar (ra), and Hz Bahlool (ra)
are included in those Awaliya Allah.

This wilayat can also be removed. For example, if greediness or self
admiration comes into one's heart or if he uses this wilayat in order to
gain worldly desires. In such circumstances, the wilayat will be removed
from him.

The example of Balam Baoor is in front of us. Allah blessed him with
His Ism e Azm, but he became treacherous towards the Proofs of Allah, Hz
Musa (as) and Hz Haroon (as) and Allah removed this blessing of Ism e
Azm from him.


**Wilayat e Illahiya Sughra**

The fourth stage of wilayat is associated with prophets and their
successors. This is a limited wilayat based upon the level of status
which the prophet has and cannot go beyond that level.

**Wilayat e Fitri (natural wilayat)**

The fifth stage of wilayat is associated with those members of Ahlul
Bayt (as) whose wilayat is connected with the wilayat of Imam (as) such
as Syeda Zainab (sa), Hz Abbas Alamdar (as), Hz Ali Akbar (as), Hz Ali
Asghar (as), and Hz Qasim (as). All the Mothers of Masoomeen (as) are
also included in this stage of wilayat such as Syeda Aminah (sa), Fatima
binte Asad (sa), Syeda Khadija (sa), Shahr Banoo (sa), and all Mothers
of the Imams (as).

**Wilayat e Illahiya Kubra**

The sixth stage of wilayat is associated with the Seal of all Prophets
Hz Muhammad (saw). The circle of His Wilayat is spread throughout the
entire universe. There is not a one single particle in this universe
which does not fall under His Wilayat.

**Wilayat e Illahiya Muttaliqa (Absolute Wilayat of Allah)**

The seventh and final stage of wilayat is the wilayat of Allah Himself
which is free from any limit or conditions and a part of all worlds.
Divinity and humanity are not connected. If this connection was
possible, then there would be no need for wasila while the words of
Quran "Search for the wasila" is a proof that the essence of wasila is
compulsory between the Creator and creation.

So we have to admit that there is a wasila and Veil between divinity
and humanity which is the source that allows the blessings of Allah to
reach to His creation, and this is the wilayat of Allah.

The marifat of this Wasila and Hijab is called the marifat of Allah.
From one seed of rizq until the nabuiyat, imamate, and wilayat,
absolutely everything comes from this Greatest Veil. No one has claimed
to be the Greatest Veil except my Moula (as), Ameerul Momineen Ali (as)
ibn Abi Talib (as).

Apparently a claim is worthless without proof, however proof is also
worthless without a claim. If a solicitor without filing a claim stands
in front of the judge and starts giving a deposition, the first question
the judge will ask him is "Mr. Solicitor, have you filed a claim for
this testimony which you are presenting today?" Until a claim is filed,
no proof will be of any benefit. No one can be included with Ameerul
Momineen (as) at the status of Greatest Veil because Moula Ali (as) is
Mahzer of Tauheed and doing shirk in the essence of Moula (as) is the
same as doing shirk in the essence of Allah. As we have previously
mentioned, shirk is always done within wasila not within in the essence
of Allah.

**What is Religion?**

The history of shia is very bloody. The pens of historians are filled
with the blood of shia. The history of the shia religion itself is very
painful. This is that religion which is so oppressed that it is hidden
by both its enemies and its followers. Even today there is no example of
the shia religion in any organized form throughout the entire world.
People are told that if you offer prayer with your hands at your sides
and put your head in sajdah on a piece of clay, then you are shia. If
you notice today shia religion has become a copy of sunni religion.

The sign of every religion is its kalima (testimony), and the sign of
the shia religion is the kalima "Aliunwaliullah". However today this
sacred testimony has been excluded from the shia kalima . Read the
tawzih of any mujtihid and you will find the same kalima which is
recited by sunnis. Aliunwaliullah has become just a formal thing.

They also do not declare Aliunwaliullah as wajib (compulsory) in adhan
either. They have even excluded "Wasi RasoolAllah (saw) wa Caliphatahu
billa fasal" because sunnis dislike this. They have declared if you read
Aliunwaliullah in your prayer, then your prayer will become batil
(false). Now decide for yourself. When the kalima (testimony) itself has
been changed, then where is the shia mazhab?

Marifat is the basic pillar of the shia religion because if any person
dies without gaining marifat, then based upon the saying of RasoolAllah
(saw), he has died the death of a kufr (disbelief) and nafaq
(hypocrisy). But today the shia do not even know the meaning of the word
marifat.

Many people ask each other "What is marifat"? If someone explains it,
then he is labeled nusairi. Even though nusairi is one who believes Ali
(as) is Allah and Moula Ali (as) has no Lord. However if someone
believes that if we are given millions of lives even then we will not be
able to describe all of the attributes of Moula Ali (as), they still
believe Moula Ali (as) has a Lord, and also use to worship Allah, such
people as this are the true and pure shia.

This is the real shia religion. As Ameerul Momineen (as) Himself says,
"Believe that We have a Lord, other than this say whatever you want
regarding Our attributes. Even then you will not be able to describe
even one of Our attributes because you can never empty an ocean with a
cup" ( Bihar ul Anwar) But now people have created boundaries for Moula
Ali (as), and anyone who crosses their boundaries is declared as a
nusairi.

People are so afraid of this word that without knowing the truth of
this word they stay far away from such person who describes the
attributes of Moula Ali (as) in this way. This is how those who are in
charge of the shia religion have removed its true spirit and made it
become a lifeless religion. They have done the same thing to wilayat.

Even though the reality of the shia religion is the wilayat of Ameerul
Momineen (as) which is the wilayat of Allah, but these religious
landlords have made shia so ignorant in regards to the term wialyat that
if you asked them what the true religion is , they would be unable to
answer you. Even though the one and only answer to this question is
wilayat e Moula Ali (as).

1. Sura Room ayah 30: "Then set your face upright for religion in the
right state-- the nature made by Allah in which He has made men; there
is no altering of Allah's creation; that is the right religion, but most
people do not know"

In Usool e Kafi, Tafseer e Qumi, and Tafseer e Safi, in the explanation
of this ayah Imam Muhamamd Baqir (as) says "Religion is wilayat of
Ameerul Momineen (as). This is the nature and this is the true
religion."

2. Sura ash-Shura ayah 13: "He has made plain to you of the religion
what He enjoined upon Nuh and that which We have revealed to you and
that which We enjoined upon Ibrahim and Musa and Isa that keep to
obedience and be not divided therein" In Tafseer e Safi and Qumi, Masoom
(as) says, "Religion is wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as)".

3. Sura Tawba ayah 33: "He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance
and the religion of truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all
religions, though the polytheists may be averse."
In Usool e Kafi Kitab e Hujjat chapter 107 hadith 91, Imam Jafar Sadiq
(as) says, " Wilayat is the religion of truth".

4. Sura Ma'oon ayah 1: "Have you seen him who calls the religion a
lie?" In the tafseer of this ayah, Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) and Imam Reza
(as) say, " The religion is the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as)".

We have only presented four ayahs from amongst the hundreds in Quran
which clearly prove tha

1. Wilayat is that nature upon whose basis all of humanity was
created.
2. Wilayat is the righteous religion.
3. Wilayat is the true religion.
4. Wilayat is that religion upon which all of the sharia of every
prophet depends.
5. Through wilayat islam will overcome all other religions.
6. Wilayat is that absolute truth which the people deny.

These explanations are a proof that the present shia religion which has
excluded wilayat in every aspect is an unnatural, false religion of
deniers. Now whoever wishes may remain stuck in this fake religion, but
those who wish to be blessed by Allah must search for the true
religion.

If you truly want to be associated with the real and true religion,
then you must send lanat upon this fake religion. The true religion is
that which begins with Moula (as), ends with Moula (as), its zahir
(apparent ) is Moula (as) ,and its batin (hidden) is Moula (as),and that
is the wilayat e Ameerul Momineen (as). If you wish to rid of yourself
of falsehood and begin searching for the truth, our books are very
useful in this regard.


