The Kings in the Age of the Imam
================================

We should have a short stop to talk -in brief- about the kings whom Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was contemporary with, and give a picture about
their conducts and the misfortunes and distresses the imam suffered
under their reigns.

Al-Mutawakkil
-------------

Al-Mutawakkil son al-Mu’tasim assumed the rule in 232 AH.**[1]** In the
same year Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was born.**[2]** When al-Mutawakkil
assumed the rule, people were afflicted with a natural disaster that
they had never seen before. A simoom blew in Iraq, and destroyed the
plants of Basra, Kufa, and Baghdad and killed many travelers. It lasted
for fifty days and reached Hamadan, Mosul, and Sanjar. It destroyed
plants and cattle, prevented people from dealing in markets and walking
in streets, and killed a big number of people.**[3]** It might be an
alarm from the Heavens on the evil omen of the reign of this king.

When al-Mutawakkil was paid homage as king, Ubaydillah bin Tahir gave
him as a present four hundred bondmaids at the head of whom was Mahbubah
whom al-Mutawakkil

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh al-Khulafa’ by as-Sayouti, p.346.  
 **[2]** Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.117.  
 **[3]** Tareekh al-Khulafa’, 346.

became very fond of.**[1]**

### His Characteristics

Al-Mutawakkil lived a life of play with no tendency to seriousness. His
life was full of amusement and joking. Historians say, ‘No play, joking,
or clowning appeared in the meetings of the Abbasid caliphs before
al-Mutawakkil. When al-Mutawakkil assumed the rule, he brought all that
to his meeting and then most of the upper class imitated him in
that.**[2]** He brought imitators, who imitated the gestures and voices
of some people and did comic acts, in his meeting.**[3]**  

He was very interested in pleasures and drinking.**[4]** Banan and Zanam
were two boy servants of his. They were skilled in playing and singing.
One played the lute and the other blew the pipe. He did not drink except
with their playing.**[5]**

His retinue curried favor with him by giving him as a present beautiful
bondmaids and matured wines because he was too much fond of both. Once,
al-Fat~h bin Khaqan gave him, after he recovered from illness, a very
beautiful bondmaid, a gold cup, a crystal vat full of wine, and a piece
of paper written in it some verses of poetry.

Al-Mutawakkil admired that. Youhannah bin Maswayh, his special
physician, said to him, ‘O Ameerul Mo'minin, by Allah, al-Fat~h is more
curative than me. Do not oppose what he advised you of!’**[6]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nisa’ al-Khulafa’ (the caliphs’ women), p.92.  
 **[2]** Lectures on the History of the Islamic nations, p.265-266.  
 **[3]** Ad-Diyarat, p.26.  
 **[4]** Baynal Khulafa’ wel Khula’a’ (between the caliphs and the
dissolute), p.115.  
 **[5]** Thimar al-Quloob (fruits of hearts), p.122.  
 **[6]** Encyclopedia of the Twentieth Century, vol.10 p.964.

He was preoccupied with sexual life. Historians say that he had five
thousand concubines and that he had slept with all of them. Abd said,
‘By Allah, if al-Mutawakkil was not killed, he would not live more
because of the plenty of his sexual intercourses.’**[1]**

He was very fond of beautiful bondmaids and of talking with them. He
loved a bondmaid called Qabihah. He said to Ali bin al-Jahm, ‘One day, I
went to Qabiha and saw that she had written my name with the ghaliyah (a
kind of perfume) on her cheek. By Allah, I have not seen a thing more
beautiful than the black of that ghaliyah on the white of that cheek.
Would you please compose some verses on that?’

Once, he became angry at his bondmaid Mahbubah and left her alone for
some time. He saw in sleep that she made peace with him. He sent one of
his servants to see what the matter with her was. The servant came back
telling him that she was sitting singing. He and his servant went to
listen to her singing. She was singing some verses of poetry which
pleased him. When she felt him, she came and told him that she saw in
sleep that he came and made peace with her and so she recited this
poetry. Al-Mutawakkil and his bondmaid went together to drink. He gave
his companions good presents on the occasion.**[2]**

Al-Mutawakkil committed vices openly and he did not feel shy before
people. Once, he played backgammon with his vizier al-Fat~h bin Khaqan.
Judge Ahmad bin Dawud asked permission to come in to al-Mutawakkil.
Al-Fat~h wanted to hide the backgammon but al-Mutawakkil prevented him
and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.6 p.69.  
 **[2]** Nisa’ al-Khulafa’, p.95-96.

said, ‘Do I do something before Allah and conceal it from His
people?’**[1]**

He was reckless and did not fear Allah. His companions played chess
before him,**[2]** and if they knew that it displeased him, they would
not dare to do that.

His recklessness and committing vices were known to all people. He asked
his wife Reetah bint al-Anbas to unveil herself and to braid her hair
like boys did, and when she refused, he divorced her.**[3]** All people
talked about that, but he was indifferent to any criticism.

From his other characteristics were haughtiness and pride especially on
his last days when his rule became constant and firm. He was despotic,
proud, and haughty towards people.**[4]** He despised al-Buhturi, the
emir of poets at that time, who praised him in his poems. Al-Mutawakkil
incited Abul Anbas to harm and disgrace al-Buhturi who ran away saying,
‘Knowledge has been lost and literature has perished.’**[5]**

### His Enmity Towards The Alawids

Al-Mutawakkil’s heart was full of enmity and spite against the Prophet’s
progeny. He tried his best to exhaust them. They met many misfortunes
and distresses during his reign that they did not met from the unjust
rulers before him. He imposed on them economical blockade and officially
prohibited any help to them. Whenever he was informed that someone
helped them, he severely punished him and imposed

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Zahr al-Adaab, vol.4 p.31.  
 **[2]** Baynal Khulafa’ wel Khula’a’, p.108.  
 **[3]** Mir’at az-Zaman, vol.6 p.169.  
 **[4]** Uyoon at-Tawareekh, vol.6 p.170.  
 **[5]** Akhbar al-Buhturi by as-Sawli, p.89.

a heavy fine on him.**[1]** People refrained from helping or associating
with the Alawids for fear of the severe punishment of this tyrant.

The economical blockade harmed the Alawids and exhausted them to a
degree that one dress was used by some women of them. One of them wore
it and offered the prayer and then another one and so on. They always
patched it. They sat at their spindle semi naked with unveiled
heads,**[2]** whereas the tyrant al-Mutawakkil spent on his red nights
millions of dinars, and donated, without measure, thousands to singers,
drinking companions, and effeminates, but prevented the progeny of the
messenger of Allah (a.s.) from receiving their rights and legal dues
until he made them poor and wretched.

Besides, he made all the media in his government defame and degrade the
Alawids. Mercenary poets, like Marwan bin Abul Janub, dispraised the
Alawids and preferred the oppressive and tyrants to them. Al-Mutawakkil
gifted those poets with gold and silver to go further in defaming the
Alawids thinking that these procedures would take Muslims away from the
progeny of their prophet (a.s.). He was too mistaken in that, for that
made people believe more that the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) were the real leaders
of the nation. All classes of people glorified and highly regarded them.
They preferred them to all other people.

Al-Mutawakkil bore hatred and spite against Imam Ali (a.s.). He denied
him and declared his hatred and despise towards him openly. He made one
of his effeminate servants dance and compare himself to Imam Ali (a.s.).
This ugly doing provoked al-Muntasir, al-Mutawakkil’s son, and made him
kill his father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Maqatil at-Talibiyeen, p.597.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p.599.

Al-Mutawakkil was full of rage whenever he heard or saw crowds of people
visit the shrine of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) the master of the youth of
Paradise, whereas the graves of his (al-Mutawakkil’s) fathers and their
cousins the Umayyads turned into dunghills in dark, dreary places which
became as resorts for beasts. Those graves, with their misery and
gloominess, told the oppression and violence of their inhabitants
against Muslims.

Historians say that the reason, which made al-Mutawakkil destroy the
holy shrine, was that some songstress sent him her maids before he
assumed the rule to sing for him when he drank, and when he became the
caliph, he sent for her to send him a songstress but she was not there.
It was said to him that she had gone to visit the holy tomb of Imam
al-Husayn (a.s.). She was informed of that while she was in Kerbala. She
hurried back to Baghdad and sent al-Mutawakkil one of her maids. He
asked the maid where they were and she said, ‘My lady went to perform
the hajj (pilgrimage) and took us with her.’ It was the month of
Sha’ban. Al-Mutawakkil was astonished and said to her, ‘Where did you
perform the hajj in Sha’ban?’ She said, ‘To the tomb of al-Husayn.’

The tyrant was alarmed and angry when he heard that the pilgrimage was
to the holy tomb of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.). He arrested the lady of the
maid and confiscated all her wealth, and ordered his officials to
destroy the tomb. They refused insistently to destroy the tomb of the
grandson of their Prophet. Then, al-Mutawakkil asked some Jews, headed
by ad-Dayzaj, to destroy the tomb. They responded to him and destroyed
the holy tomb in 237 AH,**[1]** and destroyed all buildings around the
tomb. They plowed the land around the tomb and made water flow over the
land,**[2]** but water turned

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.359.  
 **[2]** Maqatil at-Talibiyin, p.598.

around the tomb without reaching to it; therefore, it was called
al-Ha’ir. A pleasant smell was emitted from the tomb that people had
never smelt like it.**[1]**

A nomad from bani Asad got the honor of visiting the holy tomb after it
had been destroyed. He began smelling the earth so that it might guide
him to the holy tomb. When he took a handful of earth, smelt it, and
found it emitting a very pleasant smell. He cried and addressed Imam
al-Husayn (a.s.) saying, ‘May my father and mother die for you! How fine
you are! How fine your tomb is, and how fine your earth is!’ Then he
recited the following verse,

“They wanted to hide his tomb from his companion,

but the fine smell of the tomb’s earth guided to the tomb.”

Muslims complained of al-Mutawakkil and abused him in their societies
and meetings, and prayed Allah against him in their prayers. They wrote
the cursing against him on mosques and walls. The following verses,
which were composed by a poet who concealed his name for fear of the
government, though it was ascribed to ibn as-Sikkit or
al-Bastami,**[2]** were memorized by people and spread among all classes
of society:

*“By Allah, if the Umayyads had killed the son***[3]** *of the Prophet
unjustly,  
 his cousins***[4]** *did the same; here is his tomb destroyed!  
 They felt sorry that they did not participate in killing him,  
 So they chased him in the grave.’* **[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Maqatil at-Talibiyin, p.598.  
 **[2]** Fawat al-Wafiyyat, vol.1 p.203.  
 **[3]** Imam Husayn (a.s).  
 **[4]** The Abbasids who were the cousins of the Prophet (a.s) and of
Imam Husayn (a.s).  
 **[5]** Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.159, Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.347.

Kingdoms come and go, but al-Husayn (a.s.) with his mention and shrine
remains as a shining star in the sky of the Arabs and Muslims for he has
occupied the hearts of Muslims and his love flowed in their veins,
whereas al-Mutawakkil and his likes are chased by the curse, wrath, and
punishment of Allah.

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was in the prime of youth and he heard about
the unjust decision that al-Mutawakkil had taken against the shrine of
his grandfather, and about the severe punishments the visitors of the
shrine faced from al-Mutawakkil. Surely these procedures caused him
pains and distresses.

### With Imam Al-Hadi 

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) was the master of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) at that age.
All the nation regarded, glorified, and preferred him, due to his
knowledge, piety, and virtues, to all others, besides that a part of the
nation believed in his imamate. Al-Mutawakkil could not bear to see a
great personality from his enemies, the Alawids, in the Muslim nation
that all people talked about and all meetings mentioned his talents and
geniuses. Mercenaries, opportunists, and the government agents began
informing against the imam saying that great monies were sent to him,
and that he had determined to revolt against the Abbasid rule.
Al-Mutawakkil became so upset and angry. He ordered his men to bring
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) to Samarra’ the capital of the Abbasid state at that
time. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and his family were brought from Medina to
Samarra’. Al-Mutawakkil imposed house arrest on the imam and did not let
him leave Samrra’ after surrounding his house with detectives and
policemen to watch all his activities, and to prevent the Shia from
contacting with him.

After some time, al-Mutawakkil imposed an economical blockade on the
imam and his family that no money came to him from his followers except
after hard efforts. The Shia

followed all ways and means to take money to the imam. One of those
means was that they pretended to sell oil, and inside the bottles of oil
they sold to the Imam they put money.

Some villain went to al-Mutawakkil and informed him against Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) claiming that he had books, arms, and monies and that he might
revolt against the government of al-Mutawakkil, who became worried and
terrified when hearing that. Al-Mutawakkil ordered some of his Turk
policemen to attack the house of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) in the night and
arrest him. They attacked Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) unexpectedly and found him
in a simple house wearing a garment of wool and there was nothing
between him and the ground save a carpet of sand and pebbles while
facing the qibla and reciting this saying of Allah, *(Nay! do those who
have wrought evil deeds think that We will make them like those who
believe and do good that their life and their death shall be equal? Bad
it is that they judge)*.**[1]** They took him to al-Mutawakkil while he
was in that state**[2]** that represented the asceticism of prophets and
spirituality of apostles. Al-Mutawakkil was drunk at the table of wine.
When he saw Imam al-Hadi (a.s.), he offered him a glass of wine, but
Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) shouted at him, ‘By Allah, it has never mixed with
my blood and flesh at all.’

Al-Mutawakkil asked the imam, ‘Recite me some poetry!’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘I seldom recite poetry.’

Al-Mutawakkil insisted on him saying, ‘You must recite me some poetry!’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) found himself obliged to recite some poetry, and so
he recited the following verses that changed the ecstasy of
al-Mutawakkil into sorrow and weeping,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 45:21.  
 **[2]** Rawdhat al-A’yan, manuscript.

*“They were on the tops of mountains,  
 guarded by strong, brave men, but those tops sufficed them not.  
 After glory, they were taken down from their positions,  
 and put into holes. How bad abode they dwelt in!  
 A crier called them after been buried:  
 Where are the thrones, crowns, and treasures?  
 Where are the faces that were at ease and luxury,  
 that curtains and screens were put before them?  
 The grave showed those faces where worms were fighting on them.  
 How long they ate and drank!  
 But after that long eating, they were eaten!”* 

Al-Mutawakkil was shaken and intoxication flew from his head. He began
terribly crying. The attendants in the meeting feared for Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.) that al-Mutawakkil might assault him and they thought that
al-Mutawakkil would revenge on him.

Al-Mutawakkil ordered his men to take the glasses of wine away from the
meeting. He turned to the pure Imam (a.s.) and said to him reverently,
‘O Abul Hasan, are you in debt?’

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) said, ‘Yes, four thousand dinars.’

Al-Mutawakkil ordered four thousand dinars to be given to Imam al-Hadi
(a.s.). He returned him back to his house with respect and honor.**[1]**

This event showed the jihad of Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and his fixed
situation towards that tyrant. He did not care for his rule and power.
He preached and warned him from the punishment of Allah and said to him
(through poetry) that he would die and neither his armies nor his
authority would save him from death, and that his delicate body would be
food for worms in the grave. Certainly, al-Mutawakkil had never heard
such

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.44-45.

preaches before. Instead, he filled his ears with the voices of
songsters and songstresses. Finally, death came to him while he was
between musicians and cups of wine.

Anyhow, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) saw what happened to his father from
al-Mutawakkil.

### The Death Of Al-Mutawakkil

Al-Mutawakkil and his vizier al-Fat~h bin Khaqan were killed after a
plot concluded by al-Mutawakkil’s son al-Muntasir, Waseef, and Bugha the
Turks. They attacked him in the night and cut him and his vizier by
their swords into pieces that his flesh could not be distinguished from
his vizier’s.

Al-Mutawakkil was killed and a black page of debauchery, diversion,
corruption, and oppression was folded, and people could breathe freely
for a short time.

The Reign Of Al-Muntasir
------------------------

Al-Muntasir assumed the rule after the coup he led against his father.
The Shia felt delight and joy after the nightmare of oppression
disappeared.

Al-Muntasir followed a rightly, fair policy towards the Alawids and the
Shia. From the good achievements he did to the Alawids were that he
returned Fadak**[1]** to the Alawids, cancelled the interdict on the
entails of the Alawids and gave them back to them, deposed the wali of
Yathrib Salih bin Ali, who treated the Alawids badly, and appointed Ali
bin al-Hasan instead of him. He ordered him to treat the Alawids kindly
and do them good. He gave him some money to distribute it among the
Alawids and among his family according to their ranks. Al-Muntasir
permitted Muslims to visit the tomb of Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) after
al-Mutawakkil had forbidden that and decreed severe penalties against
whoever visited that holy tomb.

Poets praised al-Muntasir in their poems and people appreciated his
favors and good situations towards the Alawids.

This noble man, who refreshed the hearts of the Alawids, did not live
long. Death came over him in the beginning of his rule. Most of
historians said he did not die a natural death but he was poisoned. The
Turks assassinated him fearing that he might kill them and do away with
their influence and domination over the Islamic nation.

The Turks bribed his physician ibn Tayfur by giving him thirty thousand
dinars to assassinate him. Al-Muntasir was ill

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Fadak was a very vast, fertile village that the Prophet (s) had
donated to his daughter Fatima (s). It was rich of date palms and other
fruitful trees.

and the physician advised to bleed him. He bled him with a poisoned
blade and he died soon.**[1]** He died on Saturday, the fourth of Rabee’
ath-Thani,**[2]** 248 AH and was buried in al-Jawsaq.**[3]** By his
death, people lost much. It was he who destroyed his father’s throne,
which was based on oppression and tyranny, and enmity towards the
infallible imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s).

The books of history at hand did not mention any meeting or event that
took place between Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and al-Muntasir. The certain
thing is that the Imam (a.s.) was delighted for al-Muntasir’s procedures
towards the Alawids that returned to them safety and settlement which
they missed during the reign of al-Mutawakkil. People, especially the
Shia, refreshed during his reign though it was very short.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh al-Khulafa’ by as-Sayooti, p.357.  
 **[2]** It is the fourth month in the Islamic lunar calendar.  
 **[3]** Al-Anba’ fee Tareekh al-Khulafa’.

The Reign of Al-Musta’een
-------------------------

After the death of al-Muntasir, al-Musta’een assumed the rule on Sunday,
the fifth of Rabee’ ath-Thani in the year 248 AH. He was as a tool run
by the Turks. He had no political influence over the body of his
government. One of the poets said on that,

“A caliph in a cage between Waseef and Bugha,

he says what they both say to him as a parrot does.”**[1]**

Al-Musta’een before the Turks was as a dead in a washer’s hands. He had
no power or authority. The state was run by the Turks while he was busy
with lusts, pleasures, drinking, and listening to singing.

### His Spite Towards The Imam

Al-Musta’een bitterly hated Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). The following are
some of the reasons that were behind his grudge towards the imam:

First, people, in their meetings, always talked about the imam’s high
position, talents, and geniuses, besides that a good part of the nation
believed in his imamate and followed him, whereas al-Musta’een, though
he was the caliph, had no respect or value near Muslims.

Second, mercenaries and agents of the government often flattered the
rulers by informing against the imam claiming that great monies came to
him from the Shia and that he might rise in a violent revolt against the
Abbasid rule. This made al-Musta’een fear the imam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.357.

Third, from the reasons that made al-Muta’een bear a grudge against Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was his fear from his son the awaited imam (a.s.)
whom the Prophet (a.s) had brought good news about. Many true traditions
said that it was he who would repair religion, do away with injustice
and oppression, and relieve the oppressed and the wronged. The hearts of
the Abbasids were full of fear from him thinking that he would do away
with their rule, and therefore they bore a grudge against Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.). They put him under strict observation and sent women to
spy on the birth of the awaited imam in order to arrest him.

### Arresting The Imam

Al-Musta’een gave his order to his policemen to arrest Imam Abu Muhammad
(a.s.). He was arrested and put into the prison of Ali bin Awtamish who
was from the bitterest enemies of the progeny of Abu Talib. The
authority insisted on this jailer to harm and press the imam, but he was
affected by the imam. He changed and his grudge towards the imam was
removed from his heart. He put his cheek on the ground out of humbleness
to the imam, and did not raise his eyes before the imam out of
glorification and respect. He turned to be one of the best people in
thought and faith towards the imam.**[1]**

Eessa bin al-Fat~h was in prison with Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) said to him, ‘O Eessa, you are sixty-five years and a
month and two days old.’

Eessa was astonished. He reviewed his birth date in a book with him and
found it was as the imam told.

Then the imam asked Eessa if he had a son and he said he had not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool al-Kafi, vol.1 p.508.

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) prayed Allah for him saying, ‘O Allah, give him
a son to be a support for him. The best of support a son is…’

Eessa said, ‘O my master, and you? Do you have a son?’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘By Allah, I shall have a son who will
fill the earth with justice and fairness, but not now.’**[1]**

### Fright Of The Shia

The frightening news of the imprisonment of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.)
reached all milieus of Muslims that made a reaction of sorrow and
revenge against the Abbasids. The Twelver Shia, who believed in the
imamate of Abu Muhammad (a.s.), were shocked after they were informed
that al-Musta’een had determined to kill their imam by ordering his
chamberlain Sa’eed to take the imam to Kufa and assassinate him in the
way.

Muhammad bin Abdullah and al-Haytham bin Subabah wrote a letter to Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) saying, ‘May we die for you! We have heard a news
that worried and distressed us…’

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) calmed them down and told them that no fear
should be on him and that his oppressive enemy (al-Musta’een) would be
deposed after three days. It was as he said.**[2]**

Amr bin Muhammad bin Rayyan said, ‘Once, I went to Abu Ahmad bin
Abdullah bin Tahir and found in his hand the letter of Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) written in it: “I prayed Allah against this tyrant (al-Musta’een)
to take him after three (days).’ On the third day, the Turks deposed
him.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Jawharat al-Kalam, p.155.  
 **[2]** Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.273.  
 **[3]** Al-Ghaybah by Sheikh at-Toosi, p.132.

### The Deposition Of Al-Musta’een

The Turks snubbed al-Musta’een and feared him. One day, he set out
towards Baghdad. The Turks sent for him asking him to return to
Samarra’. He refused and went on to Baghdad. They deposed him and took
al-Mu’tazz out of prison and paid him homage as the caliph. They
prepared a great army to occupy Baghdad. The two armies met and both
sides suffered great losses but the war continued. At last, they agreed
on that al-Musta’een should announce his resigning and give the
caliphate to al-Mu’tazz on some conditions that they agreed on.

Al-Musta’een handed the caliphate over to al-Mu’tazz who did not observe
the conditions required from him and he put al-Musta’een in the prison
of Wasit. He remained for nine months in that prison. The Turks felt
fear of al-Musta’een although he was in prison. They took him out of
prison and brought him to Samarra’. Al-Mu’tazz asked his chamberlain
Sa’eed to kill him and he did.**[1]** The author of al-Fakhri said he
was weak in mind, reason, and administration, and that many seditions
happened during his reign and his state was full of troubles and
confusion.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.358-359.  
 **[2]** Al-Fakhri, p.132.

The Reign of Al-Mu’tazz
-----------------------

He was az-Zubayr son of Ja’far al-Mutakkil. He assumed the rule while he
was in the prime of youth. He was experienced neither in politics nor in
administration. The Turks appointed him as king to be as bridge for them
to pass across it in order to achieve their aims and wishes. He had no
will or option.

He inherited from his fathers that enmity towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s).
He hated Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.). Once, he tried to kill him but he
failed. He asked Sa’eed the chamberlain to take the imam to the palace
of ibn Hubayrah and assassinate him there, but Allah saved the
imam**[1]** after some events took place that made them busy away from
the imam.

Al-Mu’tazz ordered his men to arrest the imam and put him into prison,
for he could not bear to hear all people talk about his virtues, vast
knowledge, and piety, besides that the imam was the father of the
awaited imam who would remove oppression and injustice and do away with
the governments of the oppressive.

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) became unable to bear the oppression of
al-Mu’tazz any more, and so he prayed Allah to save him from the evils
of this tyrant, and Allah responded to him after no long. Imam Abu
Muhammad (a.s.) had told his followers about the deposition of
al-Mu’tazz before it took place. He replied to Abul Haytham bin Subabah
saying, ‘After three (days) deliverance shall come to you.’ On the third
day, al-Mu’tazz was deposed.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dala’il al-Imamah, p.225, Muhaj ad-Da’awat.  
 **[2]** Dala’il al-Imamah, p.225. Akhbar ad-Duwal, p.117.

### The Deposition Of Al-Mu’tazz

After the prayer of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.), Allah revenged on
al-Mu’tazz. Some Turk leaders asked al-Mu’tazz to give them their
salaries, but there was nothing in the treasury. Al-Mu’tazz went to his
mother, who was so wealthy of millions of dinars, but she refused to
give him any. When the Turks became desperate of getting their salaries,
they attacked al-Mu’tazz. They drew him by his leg, stung him with pins,
and stood him under the sun on a very hot summer day saying to him,
‘Depose yourself!’ Then, they brought the judge of Baghdad and some
prominent men and announced his deposition. Five nights after his
deposition, the Turks took him to the bathroom. After washing, he felt
thirsty. They did not give him water for a period, and then they gave
him icy water and he died.**[1]**

The men of Salih bin Waseef followed after Qabihah, mother of
al-Mu’tazz, and took her money that was about five hundred thousand
dinars. They found wardrobes of her under the ground having big amounts.
They found one million and three hundred thousand dinars in an
underground room. They found a quantity of emerald in a basket, big
pearls in another, and ruby in a third one. All this wealth was taken to
Salih bin Waseef. He abused her and said, ‘She exposed her son to
killing for fifty thousand dinars while she had all this wealth!’**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.360.  
 **[2]** Tareekh ibn al-Atheer, vol.5 p.344.

The Reign of Al-Muhtadi
-----------------------

After the deposition of al-Mu’tazz by the Turks, al-Muhtadi, who was
thirty-seven years, assumed the rule.**[1]** He, like his fathers, bore
a grudge towards Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and afflicted him with
distresses and pains.

He ordered his men to arrest the imam and put him into prison. He
determined to kill him as he determined to annihilate all the Shia. Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.) remained for some days in prison where Abu Hashim
was with him. He said to Abu Hashim, ‘O Abu Hashim, this tyrant wanted
to kill me this night, but Allah has cut his old. I have no son but
Allah will give me a son.’**[2]**

Some of the imam’s followers wrote to him, “We have been informed that
he (al-Muhtadi) threatens your Shia and says, ‘By Allah, I will remove
them from the face of the earth.’

Imam Abu Muhammad replied, ‘That is beyond his life. Count, from this
day, five days and he shall be killed in the sixth day after disgrace,
meanness, and lowness befall him.’ It was as the imam said.**[3]**

The Turks became displeased with al-Muhtadi. They attacked him with
daggers and killed him.**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.124.  
 **[2]** Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.274.  
 **[3]**Ibid.  
 **[4]** Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.4 p.127.

The Reign of Al-Mu’tamid
------------------------

The caliphate came to al-Mu’tamid while he was twenty-five years
old.**[1]** Historians say, ‘He was dissolute, and interested in lusts
and amusements. He was busy with music and singing paying no attention
to his subjects. He committed sins that made people hate him.’**[2]**

In his reign, Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) died after meeting distresses and
misfortunes from him.

He ordered his men to arrest Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and his brother
Ja’far and put them into prison. He instructed the jailer Ali bin Jurayn
to inform him of his news and his talks at all time. The jailer told the
caliph that the imam did not do anything that might oppose the Abbasid
policy, and that he turned his back to this world and turned to Allah
the Almighty. He fasted the day and spent the night in worships. Another
time, the caliph asked the jailer to inform him about everything the
imam did or said, and he answered with the same. He ordered him to set
the imam free, send him his greeting, and apologize to him. The jailer
hurried to the imam and found him ready to get out. He had put on his
clothes and shoes. The jailer wondered at that. He informed the imam of
the decision of al-Mu’tamid. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) rode on his horse
but did not move. The jailer asked him why and he said, ‘Until Ja’far
comes.’

The jailer said, ‘But he ordered me to set you free alone without him.’

The imam said, ‘Go and tell him that I and he were taken together from
the house. If I go back alone, there will be something that you know!’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.4, p.138.  
 **[2]** Tareekh al-Khulafa’, p.363.

The jailer went and told al-Mu’tamid what the imam said. He ordered him
to set Ja’far free too. Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) left the prison while
reciting, *(They intend to put out the light of Allah with their mouths
but Allah will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be
averse)***[1]***.***[2]**

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) suffered different kinds of harms and
distresses from al-Mu’tamid. He surrounded the imam with detectives and
policemen to watch him and to chase anyone of jurisprudents, ulama, or
the Shia who tried to meet him. He remained under watch until he was
assassinated with poison by the order of al-Mu’tamid.

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) was contemporary with these Abbasid kings, who
oppressed him, threw him into prison, and tried to do away with him, but
Allah protected him from that by afflicting those kings with important
events like rebellions or the domination of the Turks over them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur'an, 61:8.  
 **[2]** Muhaj ad-Da’awat, p.274.
