Impressions About Him
=====================

The scholars and men of intellect, who were contemporary with Imam
al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), glorified him, and acknowledged his virtue
and preference to all others for his talents, geniuses, vast knowledge,
and piety. Here we quote some words said by some of those men about him:

#### 1. Imam Al-Hadi

Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) praised the high position of his son Abu Muhammad
(a.s.) by saying, ‘My son Abu Muhammad is the best of the progeny of
Muhammad in nature, and the most trustworthy in authority. He is the
eldest of my children, and he is my successor and to him imamate and our
verdicts get…’**[1]**

#### 2. Abu Hashim al-Ja’fari

Abu Hashim associated closely with Imam al-Hadi (a.s.) and Imam al-Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.). He loved them too much and composed many poems on
praising them. He said in one of his poems:

“He (Allah) gave him all signs of imamate,

like Moses, and the cleaving of the sea, the hand, and the
staff.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A’yan ash-Shia.  
 **[2]** A’lam al-Wara, p.372.

#### 3. Bakhtshu’ the physician

He was the most famous physician at the age of Imam al-Askari (a.s.) and
he was the special physician of the royal family. One day, the imam
needed a physician to phlebotomize him, and so he asked Bakhtshu’ to
send him one of his disciples. Bakhtshu’ sent for his disciple Batriq
and ordered him to go to treat the imam. He said to him, ‘The son of
ar-Redha asked me to send him someone to phlebotomize him. You go to
him. He is more knowledgeable than every one under the sky. Beware not
to object to him in all what he orders you of…’**[1]**

#### 4. Ahmad bin Ubaydillah Bin Khaqan

He was one of the famous statesmen and politicians at the time of Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.). He said about the imam,

‘I have neither seen nor known in Surra Man Ra’a a man from the Alawids
like al-Hasan bin Ali bin Muhammad bin ar-Redha, nor have I heard of
like his guidance, faith, chastity, nobility, and generosity near his
family and near the rulers among all the Hashimites who preferred him to
their important and old men, and also near the leaders, viziers, clerks,
and all classes of people…’**[2]**

#### 5. Ubayd bin Khaqan

He was one of the important politicians at that time. He said about Imam
Abu Muhammad (a.s.),

‘If the caliphate is removed from the Abbasids, no one from the
Hashimites will deserve it except this man (he meant al-Hasan bin Ali
al-Askari). He deserves it by his virtue, chastity,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50 p.261.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p.325.

guidance, gravity, asceticism, worshiping, good morals, and
righteousness…’**[1]**  

Ubayd did not believe in imamate. In fact, he was contrary to that, but
the bright reality of Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) made him declare that the
imam was the worthiest of the caliphate for the high qualities he had.

#### 6. Sheikh al-Mufid

Sheikh al-Mufid said, ‘The imam after Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad
(al-Hadi) was his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali for he had all high
qualities and virtues and he was preferred to all people of his age. He
deserved imamate and leadership for his incomparable knowledge,
asceticism, perfect mind, infallibility, courage, generosity, and the
many good deeds that took him close to Allah…’**[2]**

#### 7. Ibn as-Sabbagh

Ali bin Muhammad al-Maliki known as ibn as-Sabbagh said, ‘The qualities
of our sire Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Askari show that he is a master and
a son of a master that no one ever doubts or suspect his imamate. Know
that if a good quality was sold, the seller was other than him and he
was the buyer…He was the unique of his time with no equal, and he was
sole with no like. He was the master of the people of his time and the
imam of the people of his age. His sayings were true and his deeds were
praiseworthy. If the good people of his time were as a poem, he would be
the main verse of that poem, and if they were organized as a necklace,
he was the unique, middle pearl. He was the knight of knowledge that was
not possible to keep pace with him, and he was the explainer of
mysteries that it was not possible to argue with him. He was the
uncoverer of facts by his true thinking, and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.50, p.327.  
 **[2]** Al-Irshad.

the discloser of minutes by his sharp reason. He was the informed in
secrecy of the unseen. He was the highborn, of high soul and high
essence…’**[1]**  

#### 8. Bin Shaharshub as-Sarawi

Abu Ja’far Rasheedudeen Muhammad bin Ali bin Shahrashub as-Sarawi said
about the imam, ‘He was al-Hasan bin Ali the guide, the subjugator of
difficulties…He was pure, free from any fault, trustee with the unseen.
He was the essence of gravity with no blemish, humble with liberal hand,
modest, true to his word…of little food, of much smiling, patient, the
father of the (awaited) successor…’**[2]**

#### 9. Ibn Shadqam

Ibn Shadqam, the genealogist, said, ‘Al-Hasan al-Askari was a guiding
imam, exalted master, and a pure guardian.’**[3]**

#### 10. Ibn al-Jawzi

Ibn al-Jawzi said, ‘The highest feature and characteristic that Allah
had distinguished him (Imam al-Askari) with, and made unique to him, and
as eternal aspect that time would not wear out and tongues would not
forget reciting and repeating was that Muhammad al-Mahdi (peace be on
him) was his offspring that was created from him, and his son that was
ascribed to him…’**[4]**

#### 11. Ruknuddeen al-Husayni

Ruknuddeen al-Husayni al-Musili said, ‘Imam Abu Muhammad al-Askari…his
virtues, qualities, and charismata were uncountable…the highest quality
that Allah had

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Fusool al-Muhimmah, p.272.  
 **[2]** Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol.4 p.421.  
 **[3]** Zahrat al-Maqul…, p.63.  
 **[4]** Tathkirat al-Khawas.

distinguished him with was that al-Mahdi (peace be upon him) was his
son…’**[1]**

#### 12. Al-Yafi’iy

Al-Yafi’iy said, ‘Sharif al-Askari Abu Muhammad al-Hasan bin Ali bin
Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far as-Sadiq was one of the twelve
imams as the Shia believed and he was the father of the awaited imam
(peace be on him)…’**[2]**  

#### 13. Yousuf an-Nabahani

Yousuf bin Isma’eel an-Nabahani said, ‘Al-Hasan al-Askari was one of the
imams of our masters the great Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and one of their noble
chiefs (may Allah be pleased with them). Ash-Shabrawi mentioned him in
his book “al-Ittihaf Bihubil Ashraf” but he abbreviated his biography
and mentioned no charisma to him. However, I myself saw a charisma to
him. In the year 1296 AH I traveled to Baghdad from Kooy Sanjaq, one of
the Kurd villages, where I was a judge there but I left it before I
completed the specified period because of the high costs and
rainlessness which prevailed in Iraq in that year. I traveled by a kalak
which was a means of water transportation. When the kalak reached
Samarra’, which was the capital of the Abbasid caliphs, we liked to
visit (the shrine of) Imam al-Hasan al-Askari. When I came to his holy
tomb, something spiritual happened to me that nothing like it had ever
happened to me…it was a charisma to him. Then I recited, as possible as
I could, verses from the Qur'an, supplicated Allah with some du’as, and
left.’**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bahr al-Ansab, p.17.  
 **[2]** Mir’at al-Janan, vol.2 p.172.  
 **[3]** Jami’ Karamat al-Awliya’, vol.1 p.389.

#### 14. Al-Arbali

Allama Ali bin Eesa al-Arbali said about the imam, ‘He was the knight of
knowledge that was not possible to keep pace with him, and he was the
explainer of mysteries that it was not possible to argue with him. He
was the uncoverer of facts by his true viewing, the discloser of minutes
by his piercing insight, the knower-by the will of Allah-of the secrets
of creatures, the informer-by the will of Allah-about the unseen, the
told-by Allah-about what had happened and what would happen, the
inspired with the unseen matters, the noble in origin and soul and
essence, the man of proofs, signs, and miracles…the interpreter of
verses, the confirmer of traditions, the heir of the good masters, the
son of the imams, and the father of the awaited one. So look at the
branch and the origin and think again and be sure that they were more
brilliant than the sun, and brighter than the moon. If branches are
good, surely the fruit will be good. Their (the imams’) features and
traditions are the eyes of history, and the headlines of conducts.

By Allah, I swear that whoever deems Muhammad as grandfather, Ali as
father, Fatima as mother, the imams as fathers, and al-Mahdi as son is
worthier of reaching the heaven with his highness and honor…How can I
count his virtues and news whereas my tongue is short and my eloquence
is tired? So my tongue and eloquence come back tired from his high rank,
and dwindle because of failure and inability…’**[1]<span
style="font-size: 11.0pt; font-family: Palatino Linotype; letter-spacing: .5pt"></span>**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span style="font-size: 11.0pt; letter-spacing: .5pt"></span>

**[1]** Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.3 p.223-224.

#### 15. Al-Bustani

Al-Bustani said, ‘Al-Hasan al-Khalis bin Ali al-Hadi…they mentioned
about him many characteristics that were well-known in the people of
this house of the Talibites**[1]**… perceiving and wisdom appeared in
him since his early childhood…’**[2]**

#### 16. Khayruddeen az-Zarkali

He said, ‘Al-Hasan bin Ali al-Hadi bin Muhammad al-Jawad al-Hashimi: Abu
Muhammad the eleventh imam to the Twelver Shia…he was paid homage as the
imam after the death of his father. He was like his good ancestors in
piety, asceticism, worshipping…’**[3]** 

#### 17. Al-Abbas bin Nooruddeen

Al-Abbas bin Nooruddeen al-Mekki said, ‘Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
al-Askari…his lineage is more famous than the moon in the fourteenth
night. He and his father are known as al-Askari. As for his virtues,
tongues cannot count…’**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Derived from Abu Talib the father of Imam Ali.  
 **[2]** Encyclopedia of al-Bustani, vol.7 p.45.  
 **[3]** Al-A’lam, vol.2 p.215.  
 **[4]** Nuzhat al-Jalees, vol.2 p.184.
