Words of Light
==============

A good collection of maxims and wonderful words on different social and
educational issues were transmitted from Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) and
considered from the treasures of the Islamic literature. Here we present
to readers some of the imam’s wonderful sayings:

### The Preference Of The Ahlul Bayt (A.S)

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said,

“We have ascended the tops of facts by the feet of prophethood and
guardianship, and lit the seven ways with the banners of magnanimity. We
are lions of battles, sources of generosity. Sword and pen are among us
now, and the banner of praise and knowledge later on. Our grandsons are
the successors of religion, allies of certainty, lamps of nations, and
the keys of generosity. A generous one has put on the garment of choice
for loyalty that we have known in him, and the Holy Spirit in the
Heavens, and he tasted from our gardens early fruits. Our Shia are the
rescued party, and the pure group. They have been as dress and
protection for us, and assistance against oppressors…Springs of life
will gush out for them after flames of Fire…and all bad years…’

Sheikh al-Majlisi commented on this word by saying, ‘This is absolute
wisdom, and an ample blessing that deaf ears can

hear and high mountains shake for. Peace and blessings of Allah be on
them…’**[1]**

The imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) had a very high position near Allah
Who had endowed them with virtues and knowledge that no one of the human
beings other than them had ever been endowed with. Allah had made them
the guides to His contentment, and the leaders to His obedience. They
all were and are lamps to nations and keys of generosity in this life,
and in the afterlife they will be the intercessors and bearers of the
banner of Hamd (praise), and Allah has given them the Highest Paradise.

### His Recommendation To His Adherents

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) preached and advised his Shia by saying,

“I recommend you to fear Allah, be pious in your religion, strive for
Allah, be truthful in speaking, give deposit back to its owner good or
bad he is, increase prostration, and to be good to neighbors. By these
(principles) Muhammad (a.s.) came with his mission. Associate with your
kin, attend their funerals, visit their sick, and carry out their
rights, for if anyone of you is pious in his religion, truthful in his
speech, he gives deposit back to its owner, and treats people kindly, it
shall be said about him: “this is a Shia”, and this shall please me.

Fear Allah, be good and do not be bad! Attract every love to us, and
keep any obscenity away from us, because whatever good is said about us
we deserve it, and whatever bad is said about us is not in us. We have a
right in the Book of Allah, kinship to the messenger of Allah, and
purification from Allah that no one other than us claims but a liar.
Mention

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.78 p.338.

Allah too much and remember death! Recite the Qur'an and send peace and
blessings on the Prophet (a.s), because the sending of blessings on the
Prophet (a.s) has ten good deeds. Keep in mind what I have recommended
you! I pray Allah to protect you (I farewell you), and send peace on
you.’**[1]**

### A Valuable Advice

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said,

“Avoid begging people as long as you can tolerate, for every day has a
new goodness. Insisting on asking others deprives one of his gravity
except when a door may be opened to you for a good entrance. And how
near slapping is to a rash one! Jealousy might be a kind of the manners
of Allah the Almighty. Lucks have degrees, so do not hasten towards a
fruit that it is not ripe yet because it is got at its time! He, Who
manages your affairs, is more aware of the time that is good for you.
Trust in His experience in your affairs and do not hurry for your needs
at the beginning of your time and then your heart may be distressed and
despair may overcome you! Know that coyness has a certain extent and if
it exceeds, it shall turn to weakness, generosity has a certain extent
and if it exceeds, it shall be wasting, economy has a certain extent and
if it exceeds, it shall be stinginess, and courage has a certain extent
and if it exceeds, it shall be recklessness…’**[2]**

### Preaching

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) often and always advised his companions,
reminded them of the afterlife, and warned them against the sedition and
deception of the worldly life. Once, he said,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.78 p.372.  
 **[2]** Nuzhat an-Nadhir, p.50-51.

“You are in short lives, and few days, and death comes unexpectedly.
Whoever sows good shall harvest happiness, and whoever sows evil shall
harvest regret. Every sower shall get what he has sowed. No slow one is
preceded by his luck, and no careful one gets what has not been
determined for him. Whoever is given good, Allah has given him that, and
whoever is saved from an evil Allah has saved him from it.’**[1]**

### Pondering On Allah

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said,

“Worship is not the abundant fasting and praying, but worship is the
abundant pondering; it is the continuous thinking of Allah.’**[2]**

In his traditions, the imam established the bases of the faith in Allah,
and the most important one of which was the thinking of Allah, and
pondering on His wonderful creation because that would lead man to the
absolute faith in Allah, the Great Creator.

### Wisdom Of Fasting

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘Allah has imposed fasting so that the
wealthy might suffer hunger and be kind to the poor.’**[3]**

### Dispraising The Hypocrites

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘What a bad man he is who has two faces
and two tongues! He praises his brother when he is present and eats his
flesh (backbites him) when he is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.78 p.338.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p.373.  
 **[3]** Kashf al-Ghummah, vol.3 p.193, Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih,
vol.2 p.43.

absent. He envies him if he is given (becomes in good state), and
betrays him if he is afflicted.’**[1]** 

### Pious And Impious

Imam Abu Muhammad (a.s.) said, ‘The love of the pious to the pious is a
virtue for the pious, the hatred of the impious towards the pious is a
merit for the pious, and the hatred of the pious towards the impious is
disgrace for the impious.’**[2]**

### Wonderful Short Maxims

The following are some of the wonderful maxims transmitted from Imam Abu
Muhammad al-Askari (a.s.). He said,

1. “If fate is inevitable, then what for is the supplication (of man to
other than Allah)?”

2. “A believer is a blessing for a believer and an authority on an
unbeliever.”

3. “The heart of a fool is in his mouth, and the mouth of a wise man is
in his heart.”

4. “Anger is the key of every evil.”

5. “A spiteful one is the least comfortable.”

6. “The most pious of people is he who refrains before suspicion. The
most worshipping of people is he who keeps on obligations. The most
ascetic one is he who refrains from unlawful things. The best mujtahid
is he who refrains from sins.”

7. “Let no secure livelihood make you busy away from an obligatory
deed!’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol.78 p.373.  
 **[2]** Al-Majalis as-Saniyyah, vol.2 p.663.

8. “He, who exceeds in something, is like one who lacks that thing.”

9. “Whenever a mighty one gives up the truth, he becomes low, and
whenever a low one keeps to it, he becomes mighty.”

10. “The friend of an ignorant is always tired.”

11. “There are two qualities that no quality is over them; the faith in
Allah and the serving of brothers.”

12. “The daring of a child in childhood before father makes him
undutiful in adulthood.”

13. “It is not from politeness to show joy before a distressed person.”

14. “Better than life is that which if you lose, you shall hate life,
and worse than death is that which if comes to you, you shall love
death.”

15. “Taming an ignorant and preventing a habitual from his habits are as
a miracle.”

16. “Humbleness is a blessing that is not envied.”

17. “Do not be generous to someone with what may be heavy to
him!”**[1]**

18. “He, who advises his brother secretly, does him good, and he, who
advises him openly, does him wrong.”

19. “How bad from a faithful it is when he has a desire that degrades
him.”

20 “It suffices you to be polite that you avoid what you hate in
others.”

21. “Beware of every silent, intelligent one!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Because that someone finds that he has to answer with the same.

22. “If all people of this world are intelligent, the world would be
ruined.”

23. “The weakest of enemies in cunning, is he who shows his enmity.”

24. “The best of your brothers is he who forgets your wrong against him,
and remembers your kindness to him.”

25. “Good figure is apparent beauty, and good mind is hidden beauty.”

26. “He, who is friendly with Allah, feels aversion towards people.”

27. “He, who does not regard people, does not regard Allah.”

28. “Vices have been put in a house whose key is lying.”

29. “When hearts are active, put into them, and when they detest,
farewell them!”

30. “Following after one whom you hope is better than remaining with one
whom you do not feel safe from his evil.”

31. “Ignorance is an enemy and discernment is authority, and he, whom
patience does not make suffer agonies of anger, shall not feel the ease
of heart.”

32. “The gift of a generous one makes you beloved to him, and the gift
of a mean one makes you low to him.”

33. “Whoever piety is his habit and virtues are his garments shall win
on his enemies by good praise, and shall be fortified against defects by
good mention.”

34. “He, who praises an undeserving one, becomes as accused.”

35. “No one knows (the reality of) a blessing except the grateful, and
no one is grateful to a blessing except the knowing.”

36. “Staying up makes sleep more pleasant, and hunger makes food more
delicious.”

37. “Getting to Allah the Almighty is a travel that is not achieved
except by riding the night.”**[1]**

38. “He, who does not know how to prevent, does not know how to give.”

39. He said to al-Mutawakkil, the Abbasid caliph, “Do not expect good
will from one whom you have offended, or loyalty from one whom you have
betrayed, or sincerity from one whom you have suspected, because the
hearts of others towards you are like your heart towards them.”

40. “It is from ignorance to laugh with no reason.”

41. “The speech of Allah has preference to all speech as His preference
to His creation, and our speech has preference to the speech of people
as our preference to them.”

42. “It is from humbleness to greet everyone you pass by, and to sit in
other than the distinctive place in a meeting.”

43. “The worthiest people of (your) love are those who comfort you.”

44. “From the disasters that break one’s back is a neighbor who if sees
a good deed, he puts it out and if sees a bad deed, he spreads it.”

45. “(In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful) is closer to
the greatest Name of Allah than the iris of the eye to its white.”

46. “Do not dispute with others so that your gravity goes away, and do
not joke so that it is dared against you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Spending the night with worshipping.

47. “Whoever is satisfied to sit in other than the distinctive place in
a meeting, Allah and His angels send blessings on him until he leaves
the meeting.”

48. “Polytheism in people is hidden more than the creeping of ants on a
black cloth in a dark night.”

49. “Hearts have ideas from fancy, while minds shake and get more
knowledge out of experiments, and taking lessons leads to
reasonability.”

50. “Predominant fates are not resisted by struggle, and determined
livelihoods are not gained by greediness and requesting…submit yourself
to fates and know that you shall not get except what has been determined
for you.”
