Preface
=======

In The Name Of God

This research is about a controversial discussion in the philosophy of
religion, namely "Is there any rational argument for the existence of
God in which reason can have confidence?" There are many answers to this
question that have occupied a major part of traditional and modern
philosophies; and in the history of Islamic philosophy there is no
exception. One of the most notable answers is the Argument called
"Seddiqin Argument."

This argument has some characteristics and advantages over other
arguments. Islamic philosophers have found it a rational way to God and
have set forth new aspects in describing it. The most famous version of
this argument has been proposed by Sadr al-Din Shirazi
(980/1572-1050/1640), called also "Mulla Sadra". He set forth his
argument and its foundations in detail in his book “*Al-Asfar* ”. There
are some difficulties in understanding his argument and its foundations,
which are scattered in this and his other books. This argument is
proposed in the framework of Islamic philosophy, which differs from
Western philosophy in some aspects. In this research I am going to
simplify his argument, propose it in the framework of Western philosophy
and survey its power for answering systematic criticisms against
arguments for the existence of God.

As some readers may lack information about Islamic philosophy and the
position of Mulla Sadra in its history, at the beginning, a preparatory
chapters will provide some introductory knowledge about Mulla Sadra and
his position in the history of Islamic philosophy, but the work presents
the Seddiqin Argument as a philosophical solution to a philosophical
question, not a survey of the philosophical theory of one philosopher.
Many thanks to Ayatollah Khameneii and SIPRIn Publication to give me the
permission to use one chapter of*Mulla Sadra's Transcendent Philosophy*
for the explanation of Mulla Sadra's life and work. The book which is
written by Ayatollah Khameneii is the last and the best work written for
those who want to have introductory knowledge about Mulla Sadra.


