Part One: Mulla Sadra and His Philosophical Views
=================================================

Background
----------

### Later Developments in Islamic Philosophy

###

The Western world's interest in learning about Islamic philosophy was,
in the past, centered on the active influence of Muslim thinkers upon
the historical formation of Christian scholastic philosophy in the
Middle Ages. In order to study the philosophical ideas of such thinkers
as Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus in their historical perspectives one
must become acquainted with a detailed and accurate knowledge of the
thought of at least Avicenna (980-1037) and Averroes (1126-1198). Any
adequate history of medieval Western philosophy, in consequence, should
include an important chapter on the history of Islamic philosophy.

Quite characteristically, however, the "history" of Islamic
philosophy-viewed from the usual Western perspective-practically comes
to an end with the death of Averroes, leaving the reader with the
impression that Islamic philosophic thought itself also ceased when that
Andalusian Arab thinker died. In reality, what came to an end was only
the first phase of the whole history of Islamic philosophy. That is to
say, what ceased to exist after Averroes was simply the living influence
of Islamic philosophy upon the formative process of Western philosophy.
With the death of Averroes, Islamic philosophy ceased to be alive for
the West, but this does not mean that it ceased to be alive for the
East, as well.

It is important in this connection to remark that even those "histories"
of Islamic philosophy written not as a chapter in the history of Western
philosophy but for their own sake, have been largely dictated by the
idea that the golden age of Islamic philosophy is the period of three
centuries extending from Farabi (872-950) to Averroes, and that after
Averroes, in the ages subsequent to Mongol invasion, except for few
isolated prominent figures (like Ibn Khaldun, for example), the Muslim
world produced nothing but commentators and super-commentators-a long
series of lifeless and mechanical repetitions, without any spark of real
creativity and originality.

That this is not a true picture of the historical facts has amply been
made clear by the remarkable work done by scholars like Henri Corbin and
Seyyed Hossein Nasr concerning the intellectual activity of the Safawid
Dynasty. It is at any rate quite recently that the Orientalists in
general have begun to realize that philosophical thinking in Islam did
not fall irretrievably into decadence and fossilization after the Mongol
invasion.

In fact, the truth of the matter is that we can go to the extent of
asserting without exaggeration that a kind of philosophy which deserves
to be regarded as typically and characteristically Islamic developed not
so much before the death of Averroes as after.

This typically Islamic philosophy arose and matured in the periods
subsequent to the Mongol invasion, until in the Safawid period in Iran
it reached the apex of vigorous creativity. This peculiar type of
Islamic philosophy which grew up in Iran among the Shi'ites has come to
be known as*hikmat* or theosophy (lit. "Wisdom"). We can trace the
origin of*hikmat* back to the very beginning of the above-mentioned
second phase of the history of philosophy in Islam.

*Hikmat* is structurally a peculiar combination of rational thinking and
Gnostic intuition, or, we might say, rationalist philosophy and mystical
experience. It is a special type of scholastic philosophy based on
existential intuition of Reality, a result of philosophizing the Gnostic
ideas and visions obtained through intellectual contemplation.
Historically speaking, this tendency toward the spiritualization of
philosophy finds its origin in the metaphysical visions of Ibn 'Arabi
and Suhrawardi. In making this observation, however, we must not lose
sight of the fact that*hikmat* is also, at least in its formal make-up,
a rationalist philosophy having a solid and strictly logical structure.
And in this latter aspect, it goes beyond Ibn 'Arabi and Suhrawardi back
to Avicenna in the first phase of the history of Islamic philosophy.

*Hikmat* , having as it does these two distinctive aspects, must be
approached from two different angles, in order properly to analyze its
formative process: (1) as a purely intellectual activity, and (2) as
something based on trans-intellectual, gnostic experiencedhawq "tasting"
as the mystics call it - of the ultimate Reality.

### Mulla Sadra and the development of Islamic philosophy1

###

More than any other factor, the discovery of Sadr al-Din Shirazi (known
usually as Mulla Sadra) has been responsible for the new awareness in
the West of the continued vitality of Islamic philosophy after the
so-called medieval period. While the name Mulla Sadra (or sometimes even
Sadra) has been a household word in Persia, Afghanistan and the Indian
subcontinent during the past centuries, he remained nearly completely
unknown in the West until the beginning of this century. The only
exceptions to this were a few passing references to him by European
travelers to the East and the important pages devoted to him by Comte de
Gobineau in his now classic Les philosophies et les religions dans
l'Asie centrale.2 Then during the early decades of this century,
Muhammad Iqbal, Edward G.Browne and Max Horten3 turned the attention of
the community of Islamicists in the West to him although the students of
Islamic and medieval thought had as yet to awaken fully to the
importance of his works.

It was only the discovery of Suhrawardi and through him of Mulla Sadra
by Corbin that finally provided the key for the serious introduction of
Mulla Sadra to both the orientalists and the philosophers in the West.
When Corbin first journeyed to Persia after the Second World War in
quest of the teachings of Suhrawardi, he was not aware of the rich
philosophical tradition of the Safavid period to which the writings of
the master of the school of Illumination (ishraq) would naturally lead
him. But soon he discovered a world of metaphysics and traditional
philosophy of men such as Mir Damad and Mulla Sadra to which he devoted
most of his energy for two decades.4 Besides his numerous other studies
on Mulla Sadra, he was the only scholar up to his day to have translated
a complete work of his into a European language.5

Following Corbin, the English writings of Toshihiko Izutsu6 and the
works of Seyyed Hosein Nasr7 have further spread the interest in Mulla
Sadra. Finally, some years ago the first book in English devoted
completely to Mulla Sadra saw the light of day, written by the Pakistani
scholar, Fazlur Rahman. The book itself is the first fruit of the new
interest which over a long period the works of the authors cited above
had begun to awaken in him. This interest is now shared by other
scholars.8 Moreover, numerous

studies, translations and analyses of various aspects of the writings of
Sadr al-Din are now under way in both Europe and America, as well as in
the Islamic world, particularly in Iran where a major revival of
interest in his works is under way.

\*\*\*

The study of the writings of Mulla Sadra presents certain difficulties
which are not easy to surmount and which have driven many scholars away
into less forbidding and more familiar fields of research. There is
first of all the question of the availability of his writings. Until
about thirty years ago, only the most famous works such as the Asfar and
al-shawahid al-rububiyyah were available in lithograph editions of such
formidable character that to find the beginning of a particular chapter
or discussion itself required long periods of study. However, many of
Mulla Sadra's works remained either in manuscript form or in
unsatisfactory editions. Even his most important opus, the Asfar, does
not possess a critical edition despite the indefatigable efforts of
'Allamah Tabataba'i who over a period of nearly ten years edited nine
volumes of this vast work.

It is also important to recall the extensive nature of Mulla Sadra's
writings - over forty works covering thousands of pages and dealing with
nearly every question of metaphysics, cosmology, eschatology, theology
and related fields. As we shall see later in this study, the writings of
Mulla Sadra are devoted not only to traditional philosophy but also to
Quranic commentary, hadith, and other religious sciences. Moreover, in
the domain of traditional philosophy, they deal not only with one school
of thought, but with the whole heritage of Islamic intellectual life.
These factors, added to the innate difficulty of the doctrines involved,
have made it well nigh impossible even for scholars who are specialists
in Mulla Sadra to have well-grounded knowledge of all of his writings.
It takes nearly a lifetime to gain intimate knowledge of even one or two
of his basic works. Practically no scholar could claim to have carefully
studied and mastered all of his works. For a long time, Sadrian studies
will continue to be different glimpses of a vast mountain from different
perspectives, rather than an exhaustive survey. The more serious studies
are those which penetrate in depth into certain aspects or particular
works of the Master. One can hardly expect today a study which is at
once profound and all embracing, even by those who have spent a lifetime
in the study in Mulla Sadra.

Another major problem in the study of Mulla Sadra which would be
understandable and acceptable to the Western reader is his relation to
the whole tree of the Islamic tradition of which he is a late fruit. It
is of course possible to discuss Sadr al-Din's metaphysical ideas and
doctrines in the light of their innate truth, but by and large the
Western reader expects the author of these doctrines to be related to
the traditional background from which he rose. Mulla Sadra often quotes
from a vast spectrum of authors -from the pre-Socratics, Pythagoras,
Plato, Aristotle and Plotinus to the early Islamic philosophers, as well
as from Sufis, the Illuminationists, theologians and religious
authorities in the fields of Quran and hadith. One could and in fact
should compose a separate work on Mulla Sadra as a historian of ideas
and philosophy. But even if one is not specifically concerned with this
aspect of Mulla Sadra, one can hardly succeed in expounding the
teachings of Mulla Sadra without recourse to such figures as Ibn Sina,
Suhrawardi, Ibn Arabi and Damad. Ideally, the writings of Mulla Sadra
should be expounded in the West only after scholars have elucidated
fully the metaphysical and philosophical teachings of all of these and
many other of the earlier masters of Islamic thought, a situation which
is very far from being the case.

A final problem in presenting the teachings of Mulla Sadra is the
question of language. Because Ibn Sina and other Prepatetics were
translated into Latin, it is not difficult to develop an adequate
vocabulary to discuss their works in modern European languages. The
problem becomes more difficult with Suhrawardi and Ibn 'Arabi because
for several centuries Western languages have been little concerned with
metaphysical and gnostic doctrines of order connected with the schools
of these masters; in fact these schools have developed in quite the
opposite direction. With Mulla Sadra, the problem becomes yet more
difficult because of the total lack of precedents in expounding such
doctrines in modern languages. There is a danger of reducing, through
the use of inappropriate language, a doctrine of great metaphysical
sublimity to a bland and harmless philosophical teaching, as the word
"philosophical" is understood in its purely human and profane modern
sense. To write of Mulla Sadra's doctrines in English is to forge the
container as well as to pour the contents from one vessel into another;
and this is what I want to do with an important subject of his
philosophy in this research.

Despite all of those obstacles and problems, the teachings of Mulla
Sadra have to be and can be presented to the contemporary world.

### Notes:

###

[^1]: In these three pages I have had some benefit of one part of the
book, Sadr al-Din Shirazi and his Transcendent Theosophy, written by
Seyyed Hosein Nasr in 1978 (1357 A.H. solar) and is published secondly
in Tehran by Institute for Humanities and Cultural Studies in 1997.
However, I thank the publisher for his permission to bring briefly these
pages from the book.

[^2]: See Comte de Gobineau, Les religions et Les philosophies dans
I'Asie centrale, Paris, 1866 and 1923.

[^3]: Iqbal in his Development of Metaphysics in Persia, London, 1908,
devoted much effort to expounding the writings of Sabzawari, specially
his Asrar al-hikam, but, since Sabzawari is the commentator par
excellence of Mulla Sadra, this study naturally helped to focus
attention upon Mulla Sadra himself. Browne in the fourth volume of his
monumental A Literary History of Persia, vol. IV, Cambridge, 1924, new
edition 1969, pp. 429-32, also spoke of the sage from Shiraz and was
instrumental in spreading his name although he knew little of his actual
teachings.

Max Horten was the first European to devote a complete work to Mulla
Sadra and in fact composed two separate books on him. See Horten, Die
Gottesbeweise bei Schirazi, Bonn, 1912, and Horten, Das philosophische
System von Schirazi (1640), Strassburg, [^1914]: These works did not,
however, receive as much attention as one would have expected.

[^4]: On the intellectual life Corbin and his discovery of Mulla Sadra,
see S.H. Nasr, “The Life and Works of the Occidental Exile of Quest of
the Orient of Light”. Sophia Perennis, vol. III, no.1, 1977. pp. 88-106.
On the works of Corbin see S.H. Nasr (ed.), Melanges efforts a Henry
Corbin, Tehran, 1977, pp. iii-Xs.

[^5]: See Corbin, Le livre des penetrations metaphysiques. Tehran-Paris,
1964, which contains the French translation of Mulla Sadra's major
epitome of ontology, the Kitab al-masha'ir.

[^6]: See especially his The Concept and Reality of Existence, Tokyo,
1971

[^7]: See S.H. Nasr, Islamic Studies, Beirut, 1966. "Mulla Sadra" in the
Encyclopedia of Philosophy; and S.H. Nasr (ed.), Mulla Sadra
Commemoration Volume, Tehran, 1380/1961.

[^8]: See Fazlur Rahman, The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra, Albany (N.Y.),
1977. This book, although quite scholarly, is based completely on a more
or less "philosophical" interpretation of the writings of Mulla Sadra
without recourse to the living oral tradition connected with his school
and without consideration of the intellectual and spiritual background
from which he rose or of the gnostic and mystical elements which are
essential to his teachings.

Fazlur Rahman’s book contains three parts. Part one: “Ontology” in five
chapters:

(1)The Metaphysics of Existence; (2) Essence; (3) the Nature of
Causation; (4)God-world Relationship; and (5) Movement, Time, and
World-Order. Part two, “Theology”. (1) God’s Nature; and (2) God’s
Attributes. Part three, “Psychology: Man and His Destiny” with chapters:
(1) Nature of the Soul; (2)Theory of Knowledge: I; (3) Theory of
Knowledge: II, Perception and Imagination; (4) Theory of Knowledge III;
The Intellect, and (5) Eschatology.

### The Intellectual Background of Mulla Sadra

###

The appearance of an intellectual figure of the dimensions of Sadr
al-Din Shirazi during the Safavid period indicates the presence of a
strong living intellectual tradition whose deepest currents he was to
bring so brilliantly to the surface. Mulla Sadra (as he is usually
called) is a metaphysician and sage of outstanding stature who cannot be
taken in isolation and separated from the tradition that produced him.
The historical and philosophical research of the past twenty years has
only now begun to reveal some of the features of the intellectual
tradition to which Mulla Sadra belonged.1

The tree is, however, judged by the fruit it bears, and even if we do
not as yet know all the branches of the tree we can judge from the fruit
the nature of the long tradition that finally produced Mulla Sadra. In
order to learn something of this tradition we must go back a few
centuries to the fourth/tenth and fifth/eleventh centuries when the
early phase of Islamic intellectual life reached to its peak both in
philosophy with Ibn Sina and in Sufism and theology with such masters of
the Seljuq period as Khwajah \`Abdullah Ansari and Sana'i in Sufism and
Imam al-Haramayn Juwayni in*kalam* or theology. The teachings of these
early masters of Sufism and*kalam* have become a permanent heritage of
the Islamic world, perhaps most of all through the writings of Ghazzali.

This early period of Islamic intellectual history is mush better known
than the later epoch with which we are concerned. We know how the
Peripatetic (mashsha'i) school reached its early phase of maturity with
Ibn Sina and continued during the fifth/eleventh century with his
immediate disciples like Bahmanyar and Juzjani. We also know that at
time the political centralization brought about by the Seljuqs and the
re-strengthening of the Abbasid caliphate combined with the spread of
the Nizamiyyah madrasah system favored the study of*kalam* over
philosophy and brought into being a period of nearly two centuries
during which the center of the intellectual stage was occupied by
theologians of great stature and acumen who severely attacked
philosophy. Some, like Ghazzali, were also Sufis and others like Fakhr
al-Din Razi were first and last theologians.2

It is the later phase of the intellectual life of Islam, especially in
the eastern lands of*dar al-islam* , that is not as well known and
remains a*terra incognita* waiting to be explored. The West still
accepts the view that Ghazzali in the*Tahafut al-falasifah* (*The
Incoherence of the Philosophers* ), put an end to philosophy in Islam
except in Andalusia where it survived for some time through the
influence of Ibn Rushd.3 Unfortunately, despite all the evidence that
has been discovered during the last decades, this fallacious view
continues to be taught in both the West and in those Muslim universities
where the concept of Islamic philosophy is adopted from Occidental
sources.4

What remains much less known, however, is the revival of Islamic
intellectual life in the eastern lands of Islam, especially in Persia.
During the sixth/twelfth and seventh/thirteenth centuries, this was made
possible by the establishment of new intellectual schools by Suhrawardi
and Ibn Arabi, followed by the resurrection of Ibn Sina's teachings
during the middle decades of the seventh/thirteenth century by Khwajah
Nasir al-Din Tusi. The background of Mulla Sadra must be sought in these
schools as well as in the Sunni and shi'ite schools, of*kalam* as
developed from the seventh/thirteenth to the tenth/sixteenth centuries.

The four classical schools of the post-Mongol period, namely, the
peripatetic (*mashshai* ). the Illuminationist (*ishraqi* ), the gnostic
(*'irfani* ) and the theological (*kalam* ), with all the inner
variations contained in each of them, developed extensively during the
four centuries preceding Mulla Sadra and also approached each other,
preparing the ground for the major synthesis be brought about. To
understand the background of Mulla Sadra, it is necessary to delve into
the development of each of these schools as well as the interactions
that occurred between them during this very rich and at the same time
most neglected period of Islamic intellectual life, from the
seven/thirteenth through the tenth/sixteenth centuries.

Let us begin with the Peripatetic school. The works of the earlier
masters of this school, especially those of the outstanding spokesman of
the Muslim Peripatetic, Ibn Sina, underwent a thorough criticism and
attack at the hands of both Sufis and theologians. The Sufis such as
Sana'i and Rumi criticized in a general way the rationalistic tendencies
of the human mind and the attempt made by the philosophers to reach
Divine Knowledge with the help of the Aristotelian syllogism. Certain
theologians like Ghazzali made the attack more pointed by selecting
specific topics which they analyzed and refuted with the claim that
these views went against the tenets of religion. Or they chose specific
works of the philosophers which they likewise sought to criticize
through textual analysis. This last method was carried out by Fakhr
al-Din Razi, who chose the last masterpiece of Ibn Sina, the*al-Isharat
wa'l-tanbihat (The Book of Directives and Remarks* ) for detailed
criticism, analyzing every page and nearly every word and phrase.

During the seventh/thirteenth century, Nasir al-Din Tusi revived the
school of Ibn Sina by answering these attacks, especially in his*Sharh
al-isharat (Commentary upon the Directives and Remarks)* , which is a
landmark in the revival of mashsha'i philosophy. This monumental work
matches Ibn Sina's own writings as an authoritative source for the
doctrines of this school. Nasir al-Din also wrote many works of his own
following the teachings of Ibn Sina. Nor was he alone in this
undertaking. Nasir al-Din's own students and colleague, Qutb al-Din
Shirazi, although not only a Peripatetic philosopher, wrote the
voluminous philosophical encyclopedia*Durrat al-taj (The Jewel of the
Crown)* in Persian, following the model of the*Shifa' (The Book of
Remedy)* of Ibn Sina, while his student, Qutb al-Din Razi, wrote
his*Muhakamat (Trials)* as a "trial" between the commentaries of Fakhr
al-Din Razi and Nasir al-Din Tusi upon the Isharat.

As for the*ishraqi* school, it was founded by Shaykh al-ishraq Shihab
al-Din Suhrawardi.5 Despite a short life of thirty eight lunar years he
established a new intellectual perspective and exercised an immense
influence in the eastern lands of Islam, and especially upon Mulla
Sadra. Suhrawardi created a theosophy based on illumination, but also in
a certain sense based upon Ibn Sina's philosophy. He also created an
isthmus between discursive thought and mystical intuition. The school
founded by him soon found capable followers and commentators, although
Peripatetic in Tendency. He commented upon Suhrawardi's*Hayakil al-nur
(The Temples of Light)* , while even Nasir al-Din before him was
influenced in certain aspects of his thought by Suhrawardi. Mulla Sadra
was deeply cognizant of this tradition and in fact wrote glosses upon
Qutb al-Din's commentary of the*Hikmat al-ishraq* .

When we come to consider gnosis or*'irfan* , the seventh/thirteenth
century marks a golden age and a kind of return to the beginning of
Islam and its spiritual intensity.6 Such spiritual giants as Ibn 'Arabi,
Sadr al-Din Qunyawi, and Jalal al-Din Rumi were nearly contemporaries.
It is, however, especially the Sufism of the school of Ibn 'Arabi with
its doctrinal and highly intellectual form that was of great influence
upon Mulla Sadra.

As for*kalam* , both Sunni and Shi'ite theology underwent an important
phase of development at this time. As far as Sunni*kalam* is concerned,
the centuries immediately

preceding Mulla Sadra represent a major creative phase after Fakhr
al-Din Razi, during which the works of such men as Qadi 'Adud al-Din Iji
were produced, codifying*kalam* in a form that continued until the
twelfth/eighteenth century in the subcontinent. In fact it continues to
be taught to this day in many Sunni schools.

Shi'ite*Kalam* in its systematic form was born during this period. It
was, however, Nasir al-Din Tusi who with his Tajrid produced the first
systematic work on Shi'ite*kalam* , to be followed by his student
'Allamah Hilli and many other scholars who at this time hailed mostly
from Hillah and Jabal Amil. In fact, a very large number of commentaries
and glosses were written upon the*Tajrid* before Mulla Sadra, from that
of Hilli to glosses of Fakhri and of others who belonged to the period
one or two generations before Sadr alDin. These commentaries, still for
the most part neglected, form the border line between theology and
philosophy and contain in themselves four centuries of the history of an
important aspect of Islamic thought.

It was at this time that the four schools of thought mentioned above
were penetrating Shi'ite thinking, this very significant phenomenon
prepared the ground for the Safavid renaissance with its specifically
Shi'ite color. The foremost figure of this period is Seyyid Haydar
Amuli, who sought to harmonize Sufism and Shi'ism and to show their
essential unity, a theme which forms the basis of his major opus,
Jami'al-asrar (The Sum of Divine Mysteries). But he was also a
commentator of the*Fusus al-hikam (Bezels of Wisdom)* of Ibn 'Arabi and
represents an important instance of the remarkable process whereby the
teachings of Ibn 'Arabi became absorbed into the intellectual
perspective of Shi'ism.

Sayyed Haydar Amuli was not the only figure in this process, although he
was perhaps the most important one. Some Shi'ite theologians turned
towards*ishraqi* and mashsha'i philosophy and some tried to harmonize
them, as can be seen in the case of Sa'in al-Din ibn Turkah Isfahani,
author of*Tamhid al-qawa'id (The Preparation of Principles)* , who was
the first person to synthesize the teachings of Ibn Sina, Suhrawardi and
Ibn 'Arabi, thereby anticipating in a certain way the achievement of
Mulla Sadra.

During the period stretching from the Mongol invasion to the
establishment of the Safavid regime, we thus see, on the one hand, a
development of the classical Islamic intellectual schools and, on the
other, attempts to bring these schools together. During this period it
is possible to observe all kinds of combinations of these schools.
Through the development of each of these disciplines as well as their
interplay, the ground was prepared for the Safavid renaissance and the
synthesis brought about by Mulla Sadra.

The immediate background of Mulla Sadra is to be found in the first
generation of Safavid sages, who finally prepared the stage for his vast
intellectual synthesis. With the coming of the Safavids, the state
religion of Persia became Shi'ism, and Shi'ite scholars, brought from
many places including Bahrayn, Iraq and Jabal 'Amil in Lebanon, soon
strengthened Persian Shi'ite centers of learning and caused the
religious sciences to flourish. The revival of Shi'ism itself made
possible the renaissance of the intellectual sciences (*al-'ulum
al-'aqliyyah* ) because they had been intimately linked with the Shi'ite
dimension of Islam from the early centuries of Islamic history.8

Of course a certain amount of tension between the scholars of the
exoteric sciences and the sages (*hukama'* ) continued and is reflected
in Mulla Sadra's autobiographical treatise, the*Sih asl (The Three
Principles)* . This was an inevitable consequence of the presence of a
philosophy that had turned toward Sufism and gnosis and had gained an
esoteric color. But the revival of this theosophy, or*hikmat-i ilah* as
it has been known in Persia and the subcontinent, was not in spite of
Sihi'ism but because of it, notwithstanding the difficulties caused in
certain cases by the exoteric authorities. The connection between
this*hikmat-i ilahi* and the Shi'ite vision of the Universe is too
deeply rooted to be disregarded. There is a causal link between them,
although Shi'ism, because it possessed an exoteric as well as esoteric
aspect and had become the official state religion, reacted to a certain
extent in its exoteric aspect against some of the purely esoteric
formulations of theosophy such as the transcendent unity of being
(*wahdat al-wujud* ). This reaction was similar to that which has been
observed in Sunni circles among some of the jurisprudence (*fuqaha'* ).
But it was also Shi'ism which integrated this theosophy into the
curriculum of its madrasahs, so that to this day traditional theosophy
is taught in such schools, and the traditional masters of Islamic
philosophy are for the most part products of these schools. Moreover, to
the structure of this theosophy is linked in general in a most intimate
manner Islamic esotericism. Without the inspiration and spiritual vision
that can come only from the esoteric dimension of Islam, this theosophy
could never have come into being or been able to resuscitate in the
light of a living gnosis the sapiental doctrines of the ancients.

In the tenth/sixteenth century, within the bosom of the new Shi'ite
atmosphere of Persia, a series of outstanding philosophers and
theosophers appeared, some of whom were the teachers of Mulla Sadra. A
few of these figures have not been studied at all, until now, while
others like Mir Damad, Mir Findiriski, Shaykh Baha' al-Amili and Sayyid
Ahmad Alawi are very famous at least in the East, although most of even
their works have not been fully studied. Among these figures Mir Damad
is especially important as the founder of the "School of Isfahan" in
which Mulla Sadra was trained.9

Mir Muhammad Baqir Damad was able to light once again the torch of
traditional philosophy in Isfahan and at the same time to stave off the
possible criticism of some of the exoteric authorities. He brought to
life a Suhrawardian interpretation of Avicenna's philosophy, about which
he wrote many books and which he taught to a generation of students in
Isfahan, among them Mulla Sadra.

When the young Mulla Sadra came to Isfahan, he entered a climate where
the intellectual sciences could be pursued alongside the "transmitted"
or religious sciences (*alulum al-naqliyyah* ) and where there were in
fact masters who were authorities in both domains. This was due most of
all to Mir Damad, but the other outstanding figures of this era such as
Mir Findiriski and Shaykh Baha' al-Din 'Amili also shared this
distinction. The Isfahan of Mulla Sadra's day, and also to a large
extent his own Shiraz and other major cities of Persia, were now able to
provide a traditional education where, within the matrix of Shi'ite
religious studies,*hikmat-i ilah* i could also be studied and mastered.
Most of the teachers of this "divine science" were in Isfahan, but other
cities were not completely deprived of them, least of all Shiraz.

When, therefore, we look back upon the intellectual background of Mulla
Sadra, we observe nine centuries of Islamic theology, philosophy and
Sufism which had developed as independent disciplines in the earlier
centuries and which gradually approached each other after the
seventh/thirteenth century, becoming steadily more integrated within the
matrix of Shi'ism. Mulla Sadra was an heir to this vast intellectual
treasure and was fully conscious of its doctrines, methods and problems.
He thought and lived with questions such as the relation between faith
and reason that had occupied Muslim thinkers from the early Mu'tazilites
and al-Kindi onward. He meditated upon metaphysical and cosmological
problems within an intellectual space whose dimensions were charted by
such figures as Ibn Sina, Ghazali, Suhrawardi and Ibn 'Arabi.

Mulla Sadra studied the past fervently, not as dead past, but as
permanent intellectual perspectives that continued to be relevant within
the living tradition of Islam. Having absorbed these teachings
thoroughly, he then set about to create a synthesis and a new
intellectual dimension, the "transcendent theosophy" (*al-hikmat al-muta
'aliyah* ), which was not just an eclecticism, a putting together of
different theories and views, but a new school based upon a fresh
interpretation of the traditional verities. It was a school that was at
once new and traditional, such as can be produced only by a veritable
reviver (*mujaddid* ) of traditional teachings, who is able to renovate
a doctrine because of a new and fresh vision of the transcendent truths
which the traditional doctrines reveal and expound. Mulla Sadra was a
mujaddid; through the prism of his luminous intellect a new intellectual
perspective was born which was at once profoundly Islamic and attuned to
both the logical demands of the mind and the requisites of the spiritual
vision that made possible through the opening of the "eye of the heart"
(*al- 'ayn al-qalb or chishm-i dil* ). Mulla Sadra possessed that rare
combination of perfect religious faith, acutely logical mind and a
"heart" inclined by nature towards the contemplation of the supernal
verities that made possible the founding of a school such as that of the
"transcendent theosophy". He created a body of teachings in which the
theological, philosophical, mystical and gnostic schools in Islam were
at last harmonized after they had undergone their full elaboration. Seen
in this light, Mulla Sadra represents one of the crowning achievements
of nearly a millennium of intellectual life and restates in an explicit
and outwardly manifested form the unity that dominates the Islamic
message and has been implicit and ever present from the very beginning
of the Islamic revelation in all the true expressions of Islamic
intellectuality.

### Notes:

###

1. Foremost among scholars who have studied the few centuries preceding
Mulla Sadra is Henry Corbin, who has devoted many monographs to the
period between Suhrawardi and Mulla Sadra and has also edited a major
text (with Osman Yahia) of Sayyid Haydar Amuli which belongs to this
period. See Sayyed Haydar Amoli. La philosophie shi'ite, ed. by H.
Corbin and O. Yahia, TehranParis, 1969. This large volume contains the
Arabic text of Jami al-asrar. , which is a major document of the
intellectual tradition preceding Mulla Sadra. There is also an important
introduction on the author and his influence. Other works concerned with
the centuries preceding Mulla Sadra include Mustafa Kamil al-Shaybi.
al-Silah bayn al-tasawwuf wa'l-tashayyu, 2 vols., Baghdad, 1963-64;
al-Shavbi, al-Fakr al-shi'i wa'l-naza'at al-sufiyyah, Baghdad, 1966;
S.H. Nasr, Three Muslim Sages, Cambridge (Mass.), 1964 and Albany, 1976;
S.H. Nasr, Islamic Studies, Beirut, 1966; S.H. Nasr, "Suhrawardi" in
M.M. Sharif (ed.), A History of Muslim Philosophy, Wiesbaden, 1963, pp.
372-98; Sadr al-Din Shirazi. Risalah si asl, Tehran, 1340 (A.H. solar),
introduction by S.H. Nasr.

2. Nasr Three Muslim Sages, Chapter I.

3. Even this early period of Islamic philosophy is usually studied
without taking into consideration all its richness. See H. Corbin (with
the collaboration of S.H. Nasr and O. Yahya). Histoire de la philosophie
islamique, vol. I, Paris, 1964).

4. See S.H. Nasr, Islamic Studies, Chapters 8 and 9.

5. Concerning Suhrawardi see the three prolegomena of H. Corbin to Opera
Metaphysica et Mystica of Suhrawardi, vol. I, Tehran, 1976; vol. II,
Tehran, 1977; vol. III, Tehran, 1977, the first two volumes edited by
Corbin and the third by S.H. Nasr. These are new editions of these
volumes which had appeared earlier in Istanbul and Tehran-Paris. See
also S.H. Nasr, Three Muslim Sages, chapter II; Nasr, "Suhrawardi" in
M.M. Sharif, op. cit.; and Nasr's Persian preface to Majmu'ay-i athar-i
farsi yi Suhrawardi (Opera Metaphysica et Mystica, vol. III). See also
Corbin, En Islam iranien, vol. II, Paris 1972; and his Sohravardi,
L'Archange empourpre, Paris. 1976.

6. This important question, which concerns the "return" of a tradition
to its golden age during a particular phase of its development, which is
also a "fall" from its origin, has been discussed by F.Schuon in several
of his works. See, for example his In the Tracks of Buddhism, trans.
Marco Pallis, London, 1968, p.153; and Islam and the perennial
philosophy, trans. J.P. Habson, London, 1976, PP. 25-26. For a general
but penetrating treatment of this question see also his Light on the
Ancient Worlds, trans. by Lord Northbourne, London, 1965.

7. On Ibn 'Arabi see T. Burckhardt, La sagesse des prophetes. Paris,
1955 and 1976; Corbin, L'imagination creatrice dans le soufisme
d'Ibn'Arabi, Paris, 1977; T. Izutsu, A Comparative Study of the Key
Philosophical Concepts in Sufism and Taoism - Ibn 'Arabi and Lao-Tzu,
Chuang-Tzu, Part One, Tokyo, 1966; Nasr, Three Muslim Sages, Chapter
III.

8. On the relation between Shi'ism and the intellectual sciences see
S.H. Nasr, Science and Civilization in Islam, New York, 1970,
introduction; and S.H. Nasr. An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological
Doctrines, London, 1978, introduction.

9. Concerning Mir Damad and the school of Ispahan see H. Corbin.
"Confessions extatioues de Mir Damad". Melanges Louis Massignon.
Damascus, 1956, pp. 331-78: his "Mir Damad et l'Ecole Theologique
d'Ispahan au XVII Siecle". Etudes Carmelitaines, 1960; pp. 53-71;
Corbin. En Islam iranien, vol. IV, Paris. 1973, pp. 9-53; S.H. Nasr,
"The School of Ispahan", in M.M. Sharif (ed.), A History of Muslim
Philosophy, vol., II, Wiesbeden, pp. 904-32. We have dealt with the
general history of philosophy, theology and Sufism in the Safavid period
in a long chapter that is to appear in volume six of the Cambridge
History of Iran. No extensive monographic study has as yet been
published on Mir Damad. S. 'A i Musawi Bihbahani, S.I. Dibaji and M.
Muhaqqiq (Mohaghegh) are preparing the critical edition of his Qabasat,
which will be the first of his works to have a modern critical edition.
On the background of Mulla Sadra see also the two introductions of
Sayyid Jalal al-Din Ashtiyani to Mulla Sadra's al-Shawahid
al-rububiyyah, Mashhad, 1346 (A.H solar), Sharh risalat al-masha'ir of
Mulla Sadra by Mulla Muhammad Jafar Lahijani (Langarudi 1964/1384), and
several other studies contained in various introductions to his works
cited in the next chapter.
