Part two: The Seddiqin Argument: Its Foundations and Developments
=================================================================

Introduction
------------

It is usual assumed that the arguments for proving the existence of God
are just as Kant's classification and they are in Western tradition. The
main arguments are ontological, cosmological and design arguments. There
are also some more arguments posed after this classification like
arguments from religious experience, moral arguments and etc. But all of
them are not as important as the first three ones. Every book in
philosophy of religion has allocated an important chapter for the
arguments for the existence of God. There is also a long adventure for
these arguments: some philosophers have developed them and some others
have criticized them. All the debates centers on these three as if there
is no other attempt in this regards.

The adventure of arguments for proving the existence of God in later
development of Islamic philosophy has quite different line from Western
philosophy of religion. These philosophical works in this respect are
unknown for Western thinkers. The necessitycontingency argument has
different path in Islamic philosophy nowadays from cosmological argument
especially in Leibnizian reading of this argument that is based on
"sufficient reason".

Seddiqin argument is a notable argument for the existence of God that is
ignored by Western thinkers and is quite different from all of those
arguments in Western philosophy. Mulla Sadra has presented the most
important version of this argument. The mystical background of Mulla
Sadra prepared some important notions for him that enabled him to mature
his philosophical ideas. He studied deeply mysticism, especially Ibn
Arabi's teachings, as one of the main sources of his philosophy. He had
also a good background in philosophy, theology and Quranic studies. All
of these teachings bring about a philosophical thought that he expressed
as*Hikmat* (Wisdom). Therefore*Hikmat* is a combination of all of those
schools.

The most important teachings of mysticism in his era were on existence
instead of categorical views of philosophy. Mystics have emphasized on
intuition rather than understanding concepts philosophically. They also
taught that existence in itself, first of all, point to God then other
existent beings that have existence figuratively. But these views can be
captured only by intuition and it is not demonstrable. It was Mulla
Sadra that could bring a coherent philosophy that can have the advantage
of mystical thought along with demonstrations that satisfy logically all
who think of rational acceptance.

He achieved a changing point in philosophy in the light of importance of
existence in mysticism. This changing point was "fundamental reality of
existence" or "principality of existence" that refers to the truth of
existence not its notion. All philosophers before him had based their
ideas on the different conditions of quiddity or thing-ness which means
the anticipation of quiddity to the existence that, in their views, is
regarded after categorical explanation of all things. If we consider
truth of existence in every thing prior to its quiddity (thing-ness) as
only fundamental real, then every philosophical explanation will change.
He has argued for this important philosophically changing point then he
has examined, deeply, all other philosophical subject in the light of
this principality of existence. Therefore, all philosophical studies
like causality, change and movement, unity and multiplicity and etc.
would have new and deeper meaning by acceptance of fundamental reality
of existence.

In the light of principality of existence we will have a new
philosophical perspective of the world that is deeper and more real. In
this light we will have the vision of occupation of real world only of
existence and nothing else. All other meanings arise from this vision
and they should have their fundamental reality in this light. If we may
think in this manner we do not think of meaning of existence (like what
happened in ontological argument) but we encounter the truth of
existence. This truth is quite different from all starting point in
Western philosophy of religion for proving the existence of God. The
truth of existence, first of all, refer to its nature that is pure
existence, which is not any thing other than richness, then to other
limited existent beings, which are not any thing other than poor-ness
(not a poor existent being). This is what Seddiqin argument wants to
demonstrate.

Therefore, in the light of fundamental reality of existence not only we
may obtain a deeper idea of God and his relation to the world and a
valuable argument for proving His existence but also we may think of
other philosophical subjects in a new and deeper meaning and
demonstrations.

Although Mulla Sadra was in 17th century, contemporary philosophical
achievements nowadays show his high position in philosophy. Mulla
Sadra's philosophy anticipated in different solutions for philosophical
problems to other philosophies in the West. The examination of his
philosophical ideas in other philosophical subjects must be done in
other works. In this book I only focus on his Seddiqin argument for
proving the existence of God.

I hope the reader will try to accompany this argument with patience and
deep attention to the core of philosophical foundations of this
argument. I believe that if we may contemplate on philosophical subject
not as only empirical facts of the world but deeper contemplation in
reality it will be possible for us to capture this new vision.


