Chapter II: The Seddiqin Argument
=================================

Explanation of the argument
---------------------------

As mentioned in the beginning of this research, the Seddiqin argument in
Mulla Sadra's view has some philosophical foundations which should be
known for an understanding of this argument. In the previous chapter
these foundations were explained in detail. Now, in order to propose the
argument these foundations will be repeated in brief:

1- Existence has both a notion in the mind and a deepest reality in the
external world. The deepest reality and the truth of existence is the
most apparent, because it is not other than appearance, and others have
their appearance and reality by it. But, the essence of the reality of
existence is in the extremity of hidden-ness. Since its deepest reality
is external, it cannot be grasped by mind. In this argument the truth
and reality of existence is considered, not its notion which is
different from its reality.

2- There is only existence (its truth not its concept) in the external
world. By observing the limitations of existence and its boundaries with
non-existence1 our mind makes some concepts of things that are different
from each other which these concepts are quiddities. Therefore, what is
fundamentally real is existence; quiddity is mentally posited as that
which has existence only figuratively. The fundamental reality of
existence is the main basis of this argument.

3- The reality of existence is one in all beings; in different beings
there is not different truth, but all refer to the one truth.
Simultaneously, there are multiple beings that have multiplicity in this
reality of existence. Since there is nothing in reality other than the
truth of existence, so the unifying factor is the same as the
distinguishing factor; both are existence. The reality of existence is
"one" at the same time that it is "many"; it has unity in multiplicity
and multiplicity in unity. So, differences of existence are due to
intensity and weakness, to perfection and imperfection, or to priority
and posteriority. In fact, intensity and weakness are only about degrees
of one truth in which the unifying factor is the same as the
distinguishing factor. This view is called "analogical gradation";
therefore, the existence has analogical gradation in reality.

4- The relation of cause and caused in the light of the fundamental
reality of existence: the cause is what gives existence to the caused.
It is not only a mental ascription, but a real external relation between
cause and caused. However this does not mean that there are three things
(cause, caused and what that cause gives to the caused) and two actions
(giving by the cause and taking by the caused). The caused is not other
than what the cause brings into existence, which is just the act of
giving, nay, the act of bringing into existence. Therefore, the caused
is just what is given by the cause, what takes existence from the cause,
and the act of giving and taking. It is our mind that considers
causality in several aspects compares it with other things, and then
creates several notions within it. In fact, there is nothing in reality
but the existence of the cause and dependent existence of the caused.
That the caused is a dependent being does not mean that it is a being
that has its dependency added like an accident; rather it is not other
than dependency and need, the cause. It is just a need, so that its
relation to its cause is an illuminative one which has only one side,
not a categorical relation that is based on two sides. In the light of
the analogical gradation of existence, the caused is a weaker degree of
existence than its cause which gives existence to it continually. The
cause has some perfection that the caused does not have, because its
essential need makes it posterior to its cause. The dependent identity
of the existence of the caused that is naught but need posits it in a
situation at the boundary of existence and non- existence. As soon as
this relation is eliminated, it will be in nonexistence, nay it would
not be any thing to non-exist. Consequently, being caused produces a
kind of limitation that makes the caused tangent to non-existence; the
quiddity of the caused is what results from these limitations by the
mind.

Based on the above foundations two different interpretations have been
derived from Mulla Sadra's statements about his Seddiqin Argument.

a: Mesbah Yazdi (1931- ) has posed the rest of Argument as follow2:

a.1- The criterion of the need of the caused for the cause is just the
dependency and copulation of its existence due to the cause namely to
the weakness of its existence. As long as there is any weakness in a
being, it will be necessarily caused and will need essentially a more
complete being without any independence on a cause.

a.2- Different degrees of existence, with the exception of the highest
degree that has infinite completeness and absolutely no need and is
independent, are just dependency and relation. If that highest degree
was not a real existent and did not have truth, then the other degrees
would not exist at all; because if it is supposed that they exist
without existence of highest degree, it would imply that those degrees
one independent and have no need; whereas their existential character is
just copulation, dependency and need.

b: M. Motahhary (1921-1981) in another interpretation of the argument
has explained the rest of the argument as follow3:

b.1- The truth and reality of existence does not accept non-existence.
An existent being in so far as it is an existent being will never be
non-existence. Likewise nonexistence 4 in so far as it is non-existence
will never be existence. The truth of becoming non-existence in existent
beings is the limitation of special existences. It does not mean that
existence accepts non-existence which is its contradiction.
Non-existence is not a real thing; we comprehend the meaning of
non-existence by comparing one degree of existence or its limitations
with another degree and its limitations. This is a relative matter.

b.2- The truth of existence without any respect, relation and dependency
that may limit and condition it, is equal to perfection, absoluteness,
rich, intensity, actuality, unlimited-ness and glory. But, all of
deficiency, weakness, conditionality, poverty, possibility, limitation
and determination are not from the essence of existence, but from
non-existences that are the result of being caused. A being, in so far
as it is a limited existence and joined to non-existence, has these
qualifications, all of which arise from non existence. The pure truth of
existence is opposite to non-existence; the circumstances of
non-existence are outside the pure truth of existence and are negated by
it.

b.3- The pure truth of existence exists, because it is just existent;
non-existence is absurd for it. The truth of existence in its essence,
i.e. in being existent and in its reality, is not conditioned by any nor
does it depend on any stipulation. Pure existence exists because it is
existence, not by any other criterion or by the supposition of the
existence of any other thing. Pure existence in its essence is not
conditioned by any condition. On the other hand, completeness, glory,
intensity, richness, actuality, being unlimited and independence arise
from existence, and have no reality but existence. Therefore, the truth
of existence in its essence is equal to unconditionality in relation to
any other thing, i.e. eternal essential necessity. It is, also, equal to
completeness and independence, etc. Consequently, the truth of existence
in its essence without any external determination joined to it is equal
to the eternal existence of God. Thus, the fundamental reality of
existence guides us directly to God, not to any other thing. This does
not result in: "God exists": the result is that "truth of existence in
essence is not but God". Other realities than God, which are nothing
except His acts, effects and manifestations, must be explained by other
reasons.

Motahhary's view can be clarified by an example which in some respects
clarifies the argument, but is not similar to our subject in all
respects. If we suppose that there is only a luminous source that shines
by itself as such (note that to be luminous in essence does not require
that this source be unique), then will be a light in the world, but all
the lights that we can see do not come directly from the source. There
are many other things that have light so they can be seen, but all of
these lights that come from different things are dependent lights that
are the result of reflection and absorption of the light of the source.
Since everything has some characteristics like special shape and
quality, so its light will be limited in shining and color. Some of
these things reflect the light directly from the source, some others
reflect this first reflection, and i.e. they reflect the light of source
indirectly. Every lighted thing itself can be a source for other things
and makes them bright. When the sun shines, some things get light from
it directly and shine - like earth and the outsides of buildings. Some
other things get their light from these things which can be the cause of
the brightness of others, and so on until there may be a very weak light
in the most inner parts of a house (for example). So, some things have
light directly from the source, some others indirectly with one, two,
three or more intermediaries.

It is evident that every thing like B that has its light from other
thing like A as its cause, has a weaker degree of light than the light
of its cause. If its cause is combined of three colors, the caused can
not be combined of other colors. The color of that which is caused can
only be equal or less than its cause and certainly of a lesser
intensity. For a thing which has light in a caused manner this light
must be limited and weaker. The limitation and weakness is essential to
a caused light and indicates that it is caused as to light. However, the
source that has light as such has no limitation in its shining. In
physics every source of light shines spherically in all directions
without any differences. The philosophical demonstration of spherical
shining is that no direction has advantage over others which would make
light shine in one direction stronger than another. If it does not shine
in one direction there must be an external obstacle. If its shining is
not spherical, there must be some reason for it; but spherical shining
does not need any reason; the essence of the source of light is
unconditional in this respect.

Therefore, there are two types of lights. The first type is light in
itself and from itself, and the second is light by something else (that
is dependent light). The latter is really the light from a source; it is
a representation of the light of the source which in other things is
limited.

Now, it can be asked why a certain thing is a special degree of light
with a kind of limitation, but there is no way to ask why the source,
which is light in itself not by something else, has light. It is
unconditional light without any limitation in essence. Every one - even
blind people - that only know and believe that there is light in the
external world recognize the two kinds of light: first
light-by-something-else and second light by essence. It is evident also
that light by essence has light, nay, it is light and others have light
and appear by it. What is disputable is why a certain light is a weaker
grade of light and is limited by darkness. The answer is in the fact
that it is light, not in itself, but by something else and this light is
caused. Dependency or being caused is the essence of this light; every
light that can be supposed to be a caused light will be caused.

Light is similar to existence in some respects, with the difference that
there is nothing other than existence externally. There is no limiting
factor other than existence, while in the example of light there are
many things with their special properties that cause some limitations
for light. There are some other differences including that existence in
itself requires unity, while light does not.

The above was an interpretation of Sadra's philosophy from the point of
view of two commentators with some more explanation and example. He
himself stated the argument as follow in his famous book "*al-hikmat
al-muta aliyah fi l-asfar al-aqliyyat alarba ah* " (“The Transcendent
Wisdom Concerning the Four Intellectual Journeys of the Soul”) which is
called briefly "Asfar"5 :

*"The existence, as it was said before, is one, real and simple truth
that there is no difference between its individuals in its essence
except in completeness and deficiency and intensity and weakness or by
additional matters as in individuals of species. And ultimate of its
perfection is what does not belong to something else. Any thing more
complete than it is not conceived. Because, every deficient (thing)
belongs to something else and needs for being complete. It was explained
in anticipation that completeness anticipates to deficiency, and
actuality anticipates to potentiality, and existence anticipates to
non-existence; and it was also explained that completeness of the thing
is just the thing and what is added to it. So, the existence is either
needless to something else or need, in its essence, to something else.*

*The first one is necessary being and it is the pure existence that
there is no complete (being) rather than it; and neither non-existence
nor deficiency taints it. The second one is what is other than it (and
that is one) of its acts or effects. There is no firmness for what is
other than it except by it. This is because of what was said previously
that the truth of existence has no deficiency; and deficiency is joined
to it because of being caused. This is because of the fact that it is
not possible for caused to be in excellence of existence the same as its
cause. If the existence is not made by a forcible that bring it into
existence and make it acquired - as it requires that - it can not be
conceived that it has a kind of shortcoming (deficiency) because the
truth of existence - as you have known - is simple and unlimited, and
have no determination other than pure actuality. If it is not so, then
there will be a kind of composition in it or it will have a quiddity
other than being existence. It was said previously that if existence is
a caused one then it is made in itself as a simple making and its
essence will depend essentially on a maker; and its substance and
essence will belong to its maker. Therefore, it is proved and is made
clear that the existence is either complete in its truth and necessary
in its identity or needy in its essence to that and belongs
substantially to that. So according to each kind it is proved and
explained that the existence of necessary existence is independent
identity on every thing other than He. This is what we purposed.”*

Mulla Sadra then compared his argument's foundations with the view of
"illuminationists" (*Ishraqiyyon* ) who are a group of Islamic
philosophers; then he concludes that his argument and its foundations
has the advantages of that philosophy without suffering its
deficiencies. Then he answers the two questions of the illuminationists
explaining that such questions arise from their inability to conceive
the meaning of the analogical gradation of existence and confusion of
existence with quiddity.

Afterwards, he says that6 :

*"Oh, you that seek (the truth); light of the truth shined from horizon
of this statement that strikes your hearing (and it is the fact) that
since the truth of existence is a simple matter, without any quiddity
and there is not any thing that make it firm (or stand on it) and limit
it, it (the truth of existence) is just the Necessary that requires the
most complete perfection that does not have extremity in intensity. This
is because every other grade of existence in intensity is not the pure
truth of existence but it is existence with some shortcoming, and
shortcomings of every thing are necessarily something other than it.
Shortcomings of existence are not existence itself but it is the lack of
existence which is attendant to existence not for existence itself but
for being in the next grade and thereafter. So, shortcomings and lacks
are essential to the secondaries in so far as they are secondaries. So,
the First is in His most complete perfection that has no limitation and
nothing can be conceived to be more complete than it. The shortcoming
and dependency arise from effusion and creating, and those two will be
complete by Him because identities of secondaries belong to the First,
and its shortcoming is compensated by its completeness, and its need and
dependency is compensated by its richness and independence."*

He adds some other explanations about the results and advantages of his
argument which will be mentioned later.

The Name of Seddiqin
--------------------

There are several ways to prove the existence of God. Kant classified
these arguments in three kinds: teleological, ontological and
cosmological. The cosmological argument, also, has some variations, all
of which begin with a fact in the world that is used as a premise for
argumentation. Some of these in the view of some philosophers begin with
such premises as:

- Plato: Things move (as can be established by observation)7

- Aristotle: Things do changes (established by observing movement the
most obvious form of change)8

- Augustine: There are timeless and immutable truths9 .

- Anselm:

1- Good things exist10 .

2- Some beings are more nearly perfect than others.

3- Something exists.

- Alfarabi: There exist things whose essence is distinct from their
existence11.

- Avicenna (in one of his arguments): There are possible beings.

- Thomas Aquinas:

1- Things do move12.

2- There are efficient causes in the world.

3- There are beings that begin to exist and cease to exist.

4- There are different degrees to perfection among beings.

- Duns Scotus: Some being is produced.13

- Descartes: I am doubting14.

- Leibniz: The entire world is changing15.

- Christian Wolff: The human soul exists16.

- Taylor: The Universe as a whole does not explain its own existence.

In the teleological arguments the main premise is: "There is a great
design in the world." The ontological argument will be discussed later.

The basis of all of these arguments is that our understanding that in
fact there is a universe which is limited, incomplete and dependent
helps us reach God who is unlimited, complete and independent. How can a
weak and defective being have a complete explanation that leads us to
the highest being? We can transcend by these arguments, but it is
difficult to reach thereby a most high existence. This is the main base
for dispute between philosophers and mystics. Junayd Baqdadi, to one of
the great mystics when asked about his argument for proving the
existence of God answered: "We don't need a candle to light the day17";
the light of candle cannot make the sun clear. So, some philosophers
tried to transcend these kinds of argumentation. They are not inclined
to begin their arguments from an act or effect of God for proving His
existence. For reaching God, mystics did not like to use a rational way
of argumentation but offered intuitional knowledge possible through
refining the soul. However, some philosophers introduce a rational way
and explanation that begins from considering the essence of God which is
not other than the mere truth of existence by explanation and
argumentation that existence directs us first to God, then to other
beings which are his acts and effects.

Avicenna first used this kind of argumentation, and called it Seddiqin
Argument (borhani Seddiqin) which means the argument of the sincere men
or the truthful ones. He characterized this as a kind of argumentation
used by those who are truthful.

Since truthful persons, whose argument is pure truth with no taint of
untruthfulness in their argumentation, use this argument it is called
the argument of the truthful or Seddiqin Argument. They witness to
essence of Truth by an argument that begins from the essence of Truth.

In his book " al-Isharat wa-al-Tanbihat" he argues18:

"Consider how our statements in proving The First -almighty- and His
unity and His acquittance from all deficiencies did not need anything
other than existence itself; and there is no need to consider His
creatures and acts. Although they are, also, some reasons for His
existence, but this kind of demonstration is a stronger one and has a
higher position. This means, when we survey the mode of existence we
consider that existence, in so far as it is existence, witnesses to the
existence of God, then it witnesses to other beings."

He gives evidence from the Qur'an for this kind of demonstration: "Is it
not sufficient as regards your Lord that He is a witness over all
things?" (Surah 41, ayah 53) He called this judgment the type of the
judgment by there who one truthful.

However, Mulla Sadra did not accept Avicenna's Argument as a Seddiqin
kind of argumentation, but only that it is near to it in character.
Mulla Sadra prefers his argument which he states as follow19:

*"Oh! Know that the ways to God are numerous because He has numerous
virtues and directions... but some of them are more confident and more
honorable and more luminous than others. The strongest and most
honorable argument is one in which the intermediate is not really but
him, therefore the way toward purpose is just the purpose. This is the
way of truthful men who call witness to Him by Him, then call witness by
His essence to His attributes and by His attributes to His acts one by
one. The others, like theologians and scientists and others, resort for
having knowledge of Him and His attributes to intermediating another
matter than him, like contingency of quiddity, or coming-into-existence
of creatures or motion of bodies or something else. Those are, also,
reasons for His essence and evidences for His attributes, but this way
is firmer and more honorable. It is indicated in the Divine Book
(Qur'an) to those ways by his -almighty- words: 'We will soon show them
our signs in the Universe and in their own souls, until it will become
quite clear to them that it is the Truth.' And to this way by
His -almighty- words: 'Is it not sufficient as regards your Lord that He
is a witness over all things?' This is because those who love God regard
the existence and consider its truth and know that it is the origin of
every thing, then they conclude - by considering it- that it is, due to
the origin of its truth, Necessary Being. But possibility and need and
being caused and others join to it not because of its truth in so far as
it is truth, but because of deficiencies and lacks which are out of the
origin of His truth. Afterwards, by considering what is requirement of
necessity and possibility they conclude the unity of His essence and His
attributes. Then, they conclude from His attributes to quality of His
acts and effects. This is the way of prophets as it is in His -almighty-
words: 'say this is my way, I call (people) to God by insight.' "*

Avicenna's Seddiqin Argument:
-----------------------------

The proof for the existence of God is proposed in three of Avicenna's
famous philosophical books viz. Al-Shifa' and Al-Negat and Al-Isharat
wa-l-Tanbihat. In the first two books his argument is shaped in a
cosmological manner. Although Avicenna's argument in the first book is
brief, it depends on his previous detailed philosophical essays in the
book. In Al-Shifa', after a careful survey, he explains his argument
based on the character of necessary and contingent being and the four
kinds of cause; agent, material, final and formal. He notes that the
agent causes can not continue one after the other ad infinitum, there
must be a cause that is not caused which is necessary being. Then he
argues for the finitude of the three other causes one by one. All four
causes must end in an absolute cause that is distinct from all beings
and is the origin of the existence of all beings. These propositions
seem to be the major premise of his proof for the existence of God.
Although he does not propose directly his minor premise that there are
some beings in reality that have the character of being caused and need
formal, agent, final and material cause, it can be understood from his
writings in this book that he assumes this minor. By adding this minor
to that major he concludes the reality or existence of necessary being.
By this minor, his argument constitutes a cosmological type of proof for
the existence of God.

Afterwards, he argues that necessary being, in the rational division of
existence, does not have any cause and contingent being is a caused
being. Then he elaborates the characteristics of necessary being: unity,
simplicity and inchangability. All of these are worked out by reasoning
on the meaning of necessary being20.

Avicenna's argument in his second book, Al-Negat21, is nearer to his
Seddiqin argument. This argument begins with the minor that "there is no
doubt that there are existent beings." By this fact he attempts to prove
the existence of necessary being. Then he adds the major premise that
"every being is either necessary or possible. If it is necessary it is
just our purpose. And if it is possible we will explain that every
possible being must depend entirely in existence on a necessary being."

In this argument, Avicenna begins with a real fact in external world
that there are some beings that have existence. He does not explain how
we obtain this certainty or how we

can divide existence into necessary or possible? Is this division in the
concept of existence that we have by a universalization in our mind, or
it is in the real existent being? If this division is in the concept of
existence, then it can prove the existence of necessary being in the
mind, but it is difficult to conclude from existence that is gained from
some contingent beings and by a generalization that the real existence
may be a necessary one. If this division is in real existence we must
know firstly that there are both contingent beings and necessary being
externally by a kind of knowledge. If it is so, then there is no need
for demonstration; because we know in advance that there is a necessary
being. So, the term "if it is necessary it is just our purpose" will be
meaningless, because it proves just what we first assumed. There is no
need for the rest of the demonstration either, because the demonstration
for the existence of necessary being from contingent beings is without
any utility because it is also assumed that we know the existence of the
necessary being. The only result of this second division (viz. of real
existent beings into necessary or contingent) is, after knowing that
there are contingent being and necessary being, the reliance of all
those contingent beings on that necessary being that we are sure of
their existence.

Therefore this is not an argument for the existence of God or Necessary
Being, but for the dependence of contingent beings on Necessary Being
and it explains the kind of relation between those two kinds of
existence.

However, in another respect the argument has a more logical meaning.

Avicenna may intend to divide not existence, but our knowledge about
existence. He means that if somebody knows that there is necessary being
externally then there is no need to argue for the existence of necessary
being because it is known certainly. But how can one know directly the
existence of Necessary Being; who has this knowledge? These questions
may be answered if we do not restrict knowledge to sense and empirical
knowledge or knowledge gained indirectly in a rational manner. One can
contend that he has a direct knowledge by intuition. This is the claim
of mystics and gnosis. Some mystics believe not only in intuition and
direct knowledge of God, but also in the fact that there is nothing
externally (and internally) but God.

Avicenna, then, says that if anybody does not know the existence of
Necessary Being directly and he knows the existence of contingent being,
then he can know the existence of necessary being by a rational
argumentation that he will propose later. He has explained previously
meaning of necessary and contingent being in detail22:

*"Necessary existence is the existence that if assumed non-existent,
causes absurdity; and the contingent being is a being that if assumed
non-existent does not cause absurdity."*

As was said before, this division can be neither in the meaning of
existence nor in the reality of existence. This division must be in the
ascription of existence to a being. If we compare existence with a
being, what kinds of ascription can be set in this comparison? Some
beings can have existence essentially while others can have it
accidentally. The first is called necessary being, the second is called
possible being. For example, if you see wet clothes and say "these
clothes are wet"; you can compare wetness with the clothes. You see that
wetness is not necessary for the clothes; the clothes may or may not be
wet; wetness is not in the truth of clothes. But in the proposition "The
water is wet", if we compare wetness with the truth of water, it can be
known that water has wetness essentially; it is absurd that water may be
without wetness. Wetness is necessary for water both in reality and in
the mind. Therefore, wetness is essential for the truth of water while
it is not essential for the truth of clothes. Although wetness is not
essential for the truth of clothes, it is necessary for wet clothes to
be wet because it is wet. But this necessity differs from the previous
necessity that is ascribed to wetness of water. This wetness is
necessary for these clothes while they are not necessary for the clothes
in so far as it is clothes. This necessity does not come from
clothes-ness but from another thing that has made this wet clothes wet,
namely, water, while the necessity of wetness for the water does not
come from another thing but from the essence of water itself. Therefore,
there are two kinds of necessity, necessity by essence and necessity by
something else. If something that has necessity by something else is
considered from its essence, then that attribute (like wetness) will be
not a necessary but a possible attribute.

Existence, like wetness, can be compared and ascribed to a being; this
ascription can be either contingent or necessary and is either by
essence or by something else. If existence is compared with a being it
may have existence essentially and necessarily or contingently. For
example when existence is ascribed to a certain existent book, it has
existence possibly in so far as it is a book and the essence of book
does not require its existence. But it has existence necessarily in so
far as it is an existent book, but this necessity does not come from its
essence while another existent being can have existence both necessarily
and by essence. Therefore, possible being in one respect is just
necessary being by something else in another respect, while it differs
basically from necessary being by essence.

The division of existence either in the mind or in the reality into
necessary and possible may be accounted as arbitrary or without result.
But if we survey the kind of attribution of existence to existent being
(like wetness to wet beings), then the division will be logically true.

In "Al-Negat", Avicenna, does not refer directly to his intention in
this division. Although he distinguishes necessary by essence and by
something else after defining the necessary being and possible being,
but this precise attention to the kinds of division and his choice is
not mentioned in this book. But it can be understood indirectly that he
has attended the last division. By this explanation we want to show that
the argument for the existence of God introduced in this book is not in
a cosmological type of argumentation and it is near to the Seddiqin type
of argumentation explained directly in his third book.

In "Al-Negat", his argument continues as follow after his first
explanation:

*"There is no doubt that there is existent being, and every existence is
either necessary or possible. If it is necessary it is just our purpose.
And if it is possible we will explain that every possible being must
depend ultimately its existence on a necessary being."*

Therefore, if he wants to argue for the existence of necessary being he
must demonstrate that the existence of a possible being accepted as an
existent being depends on the existence of necessary being, and hence
that the existence of necessary being must be accepted too; the
existence of possible being refers to the existence of necessary being.
For this demonstration he first sets forth two introductory arguments23:

"*It is not possible that, in one time, for every
possible-being-in-essence to have possiblebeingin essence causes ad
infinitum.” and "It is not possible, also, that it has finitude number
causes and each of them can be possiblebeingin-essence but it is
necessary by another so that it makes a circle."*

He proves these two statements in details and demonstrates his rejection
of every assumed way for another answer to those statements. Then he
argues that every possible being must be an existent coming-into-being
or occurs in existence, that it must be conserved after coming into
being; and that it must have a conserving cause by this statement
that24:

*"The conservation of coming-into-being- existence and its existence
after coming-into-being is because of a cause that extends its
existence; and its existence in essence is unnecessary* .”

And

*"The caused beings need a cause for conservation of their existence."*

After these introductory statements he concludes that25:

*"A necessary being must exist, because possible beings, if they exist
and their existence is conserved, must have a cause for the conservation
of their existence. The cause for comingintobeing of that being can be
either the cause for conserving it in existence or another one. But all
of them must end, undoubtedly, to a necessary being, because we
explained previously that the causes can not continue ad infinitum and
can not make a circle."*

This was Avicenna's argument in "Al-Negat" that we set forth briefly,
but he does not introduce it as a "Seddiqin" kind of argumentation in
this book.

In his third book "Al-Isharat wa al-Tanbihat" he sets forth his
"Seddiqin Argument" and calls it such. He proposed his argument in the
second chapter of this book viz. Theology, in the fourth section (Namat)
"The Existence and Its Causes". In this section, first of all, he argues
that existent beings do not restrict sensible beings. Then he
distinguishes the cause of essence and the cause of existence. According
to him, sometimes, we know and understand the meaning of something like
triangle, then we doubt its existence in reality. In this case, the
cause of essence of a triangle exists, but the cause of its real
existence does not exist. He emphasizes that he wants to survey the
cause of existence. Then he proposes his argument for the existence of
Necessary Being as follow which will be explained afterwards26:

*"[1] Every existent being, when it is respected in so far as its
essence and without any other respect, is either a being whose existence
is necessary or it is not so. If it is necessary, then it will be the
Truth by its essence, and it is everlasting.*

*And if it is not necessary, it is not permitted to say it is impossible
after it is assumed as an existent being. But if, in respect to its
essence, a stipulation is allied to it, like either stipulation of
non-existence of its cause, it will become impossible, or stipulation of
existence of its cause it will become necessary. And, if it is not
allied a stipulation to it, neither presence of cause nor non-existence
of it, it will remain for it in its essence the third matter, and it is
possibility; and it is in respect of its essence, a thing that is
neither necessary nor impossible. Therefore, every being is either
necessary being in its essence or possible being due to its essence."*

*"[2] [Every thing] that its truth in itself is possible, does not
become existent being by its essence; because its existence by its
essence is not prior to its non-existence, in so far as it is possible
being. If one of those two becomes prior, then it must be because of
either presence of a thing or absence of it. Therefore, existence of
every possible being is from another one."*

*"[3] That [the need of possible being to another being] can be either
succession ad infinitum [or vicious circle that is evidently impossible,
or end to a necessary being that is our purpose; if it is an infinite
series,] then every one of this series will be possible in its essence.
And [since] the whole belongs to those [ones], therefore it is also
unnecessary, and will be necessary by another one. We must add some
explanation to this."*

*"[4] Every whole that every one of its unit, is caused, demands a cause
that is out of its units. This is because:*

*"either it does not demand any cause at all, then it will be necessary
and uncaused; and how can it be so, while it is necessitated by its
units? Or it demands a cause and this cause is all of units, then it
will be caused if its essence; because that whole and the all is one
thing. Or it demands and it is all in the meaning of every one, then the
whole does not necessitate by it. Or it demands and it is a part or one
of the units, then [it is not possible too, because] a part of units is
not prior to another part when every one of them is [also] a caused;
because its cause is prior to that [i.e. to be cause of the whole]. Only
one assumption remains: the whole demands an external cause that is out
of its units."*

*"[5] Every cause of a whole that is other than its units, is firstly
the cause of those units then [the cause of] the whole. If it is not so,
then the units do not need it. Therefore, the whole that is completed by
its units does not need it. If it is assumed that a thing [external
cause] is the cause of a part of the units [not all of them and] not
another part, then it [i.e. that external cause] will not be the cause
of the whole absolutely."*

*"[6] Every whole that is arranged from causes and causeds successively,
and contains an uncaused, will be an ultimate side; because if it is an
intermediate then it will be caused."*

*"[7] It was made clear that every series that is arranged from causes
and causeds -either finite or infinite-, when there is not except caused
beings in it, needs an external cause, but it conjoins inescapably an
ultimate side. It was also made clear that, if there is a being that is
not caused then it will be entire side and ultimate. Therefore, every
series ends at necessary being in essence."*

This was what Avicenna said in his Seddiqin Argument. It needs
explanation and more classifications in order to become clearer.

His argument runs in following titles:

(1) The division of existence into possible existence and necessary
existence.

(2) The need of possible existence for another being for its existence.

(3) This other being is either necessary or possible existence; in the
second assumption it constitutes either a vicious circle, an infinite
succession, or ends in a necessary being.

(4) The infinite succession of an existential series is not possible
because:

a) The series as a whole needs a cause.

b) This cause can not be all of those possible beings or one of them or
a part of them, therefore:

c) It must be out of series It results that:

1. this cause of the series is the cause of those possible beings one by
one before being the cause of the series.

2. This cause must be ultimate.

d) This cause can not be possible being, because it is ultimate;
therefore:

(5) Every series of cause and caused -either finite or infinite- must
end ultimately at a necessary being.

(6) The existence either is necessary or end ultimately at a necessary
existence.

**We return to each of these titles to see what can be understood from
Avicenna's intention:**

(1) As it was seen in his previous argument -in the Al-Negat-, the
division of existence in reality or mind constitutes some difficulties
for the proof of the existence of a necessary being. But the comparison
of existence to an existent being and surveying whether it is necessary
or possible, does not have those difficulties. We saw that he did not
pose his criteria of this division in his previous book, Al-Negat, but
he declared clearly his

criteria in the book, Al-Esharat wa al-Tanbihat. He said that if we
survey existence in essence of every existent being only in so far as it
is existent being -not in other respect-, it can be either necessary in
essence or possible in essence.

This is because it can not be impossible existence because it is assumed
to be an existent being; and if existence is in its essence so that it
necessitates existence in its essence like wetness for water, it will be
necessary being in and from its essence; and if it does not require in
its essence existence and non-existence it will be possible existence in
its essence which will exist by its cause and will be non-existence
without its cause.

Avicenna did not survey existence in a special existent being that has
existence certainly but he compared existence with the essence of every
existent being in so far as it is existent being, like when you survey
redness with the essence of apple in so far as it is apple. It is clear
that redness is not in the essence of apple, although a special red
apple is certainly red.

In this division he did not take account of special beings, but he
respected every being in so far as it was an existent being. Therefore,
no special being -either one or many or whole- is the base of this
argument so that this special imperfect being helps us to reach the
existence of most perfect being, viz. God. Because of this fact Avicenna
named his argument Seddiqin. He begins with existence and its kinds in
every assumed existent being without any regard to special existent
beings. He says at the end of this chapter of Al-Esharat wa al-Tanbihat
that27:

"*Consider, how our statements in proving the First -Almighty- and His
unity and his acquaintance from all deficiencies did not need anything
other than existence itself, and there is no need to consider His
creatures and acts. Although they are, also, some reasons for His
existence, but this kind of demonstration is a stronger one and have a
higher position. This means, when we survey the models of existence we
consider that existence, in so far as it is existence, calls witness to
the existence of God, then it calls witness to other beings."*

(2) Since possible being does not have its existence from its essence,
therefore, it must have it from another being; like when you say, since
clothes do not require wetness in their essence, a wet clothes must have
wetness from another source than its essence.

Avicenna argues that: 'Since the possible being, in so far as it is
possible, does not require existence, and existence is not preferred
over non-existence in its essence, therefore, if one

of them (existence or non-existence) is preferred to another, it must be
because of the presence of another being or its absence.'

(3) That other being can be either necessary or possible. If it is
necessary we will reach our purpose that there is a necessary being that
has its existence through its essence. If it is possible it will either
end at a necessary being, or will depend on another possible being in a
vicious circle, or will continue ad infinitum. Avicenna explains the
third assumption. He tries to reject infinite succession; therefore he
concludes the first assumption that there is a necessary being. Since
the rejection of the second assumption that there is a vicious circle is
clear for him, because it requires priority of a being to itself which
is absurd, therefore he does not explain it directly; his argument for
rejecting infinite succession is set up in a way that it is also an
argument for rejecting a vicious circle.

(4) For rejecting infinite succession, he demonstrates that the series
of possible beings as a whole -either finite or infinite- needs also a
cause to be a series; and this cause can not be an internal one in the
series, therefore it must be out of the series that has been gathered of
all possible beings. This outer cause can not be anything other than
necessary being because:

a: If the series does not need any cause at all, since it exists or has
existence, it must be a necessary being that is an uncaused existence.
But it is impossible that the series can be a necessary existence
because it needs its units to be a series. Therefore it needs a cause.

b: However, this cause cannot be either all of its units, or one of them
or some of them. Since all of the units is not other than the series,
therefore, it can not be its cause because it will be the cause of
itself, which is absurd because than it would be prior to itself, which
is impossible. The cause of the series cannot be, also, every one of the
units; because every one does not require the existence of all
(otherwise the series of all will exist by the existence of every one).
The cause cannot be one of the units because since we assumed that every
unit is possible and is a caused being without any difference from
another one in so far as it is possible and caused, then every one that
is assumed as cause of the series has certainly a cause and its cause
prefers to it to which would have priority in being the cause of the
series; therefore no one can be the cause of the series.

c: Since the cause of the series can be neither all of its units, nor
every one of them, nor one of them, therefore, it must be out of the
series and it must be absolutely the cause of the series therefore:

1) This cause must be, firstly, the cause of every one in the series.
For proving this statement he demonstrates by Reductio ad absurdum in
the following statement that if every one does not need this cause then
the whole that is constructed from all of those units will not need the
cause of the series because if all of them exist, the whole and the
series will exist without any need for that cause, while it is proved
that the series does need a cause. On the other hand, if some of those
do not need it, then the cause of the series will not be the cause of
the series absolutely, but it can be the cause of a part of them not of
all of them as a whole.

2) The cause of the series which is outside of the series must be on the
ultimate side of the series because were it an intermediate it would be
caused one, for an intermediate cause is one that is both the cause of a
being and at the same time caused of another being.

d: Since all possible beings are gathered in the series, the cause of
the series is not in the series but it is out of the series as its
ultimate side; therefore it can not be a possible being.

(5) Every series of cause and caused or possible beings -either finite
or infinite- needs a cause that is not in the series and which it must
be a necessary existence.

(6) Therefore, either the existence is necessary, or it ends ultimately
at a necessary being.

This was the Seddiqin Argument in Avicenna's writings. Thereafter, he
set forth some arguments for the unity of Necessary Being and proves its
attributes and acts, one after one. As he has emphasized at the end of
this chapter of the book Al-Esharat wa al-Tanbihat, in this argument he
does not use any special and incomplete fact to prove the existence of
God, but erects his argument only on the existence in an absolute sense
without pointing to any special existent being.

As seen, Avicenna's Seddiqin Argument did not depend on special finite
fact in the world. It was good to set forth an argument which leads us
first to God then to other beings as His acts. But the power of his
argument have may be doubted, especially his argument for rejecting an
infinite succession of causes, though he had proposed stronger arguments
for this rejection in other places, specially be famous "The
intermediate part and ultimate side" argument.

The Advantages of Mulla Sadra's Seddiqin Argument over Avicenna's:
------------------------------------------------------------------

First of all, it must be noted that Avicenna had two kinds of
argumentation for the existence of God, the first one is a cosmological
type of argumentation that begins with the fact that there are some
possible beings in external world. This is what has been known in
Western philosophy as Avicenna's argument for the existence of God. The
second one is a Seddiqin type of argumentation. Here he did not apply a
certain fact of beings, but analyzed existence without any
specification. Then he divided it in a rational way into necessary and
possible, and concluded that it is either necessary or possible. If the
existence is the first one it is just his purpose that there is a
necessary being, and if it is the second one it is obligated to reach a
necessary existence because of the absurdity of infinite succession in
this matter. In view of its commentators the Seddiqin Argument as posed
by Mulla Sadra has the following advantages over Avicenna's Seddiqin
Argument:

1- In Avicenna's philosophy the argument begins with the concept of
existence not in so far as it is a concept but in so far as it is a
concept about reality; but in Sadra's philosophy the discussion is about
the truth of existence that is fundamentally real, not its notion. In
the first one, the division is in concept of existence while in the
second one the division is in the reality and truth of existence.

2- Avicenna's intention of possibility is "quidditive possibility" while
Mulla Sadra differentiated between "quidditive possibility" and
"ontological poverty" and used "ontological poverty" in his argument.
The concept of existent being in the view of Avicenna is ascribed to
both necessary being and existent quiddities, while in Sadra's
philosophy the truth of existence does not include quiddities that are
only mentally posited.

The truth of the highest degree of existence is independent by essence,
in the lower degree it is a relation or dependency on Him by essence.

3- Since in Avicenna's philosophy "quidditive possibility" is discussed,
he needed to demonstrate the absurdity of infinite succession in proving
the existence of God, while in Sadra's view in which the ontological
poverty of limited beings is mentioned there is no need to demonstrate
the absurdity of infinite succession in Seddiqin Argument. After
proposing his argument Mulla Sadra himself spoke about this advantage28:

"This way that we measured is firmest and most honorable and simplest
one so that the disciple of Him does not need any intermediate thing
other than Him for having a knowledge about His essence and attributes
and acts; and there is, also, no need to annul infinite succession and
circular causality..."

Some commentators of Sadra's philosophy themselves held and ascribe this
view to him, that not only does this argument not need to rule out
infinite succession, but itself is a proof for the impossibility of
infinite succession29.

4- By the Seddiqin Argument of Mulla Sadra, the unity of Necessary Being
can be proved directly, and the argument can also be an argument for the
unity of God, while in Avicenna's argument the unity must be proved by
another argument. As Sadra demonstrated, existence is one truth that has
analogical gradation in intensity and weakness. Hence, the multiplicity
of existence arises from weakness of existence, whereas in its essence
existence has no deficiency and hence no multiplicity in its infinitude.
Mulla Sadra said at the end of his argument30:

"Therefore the existence of Necessary Being is proved by this argument.
It is also proved by this argument His unity. Because the existence is
one truth that due to its essence has no taint of deficiency, and no
multiplicity can conceived in his infinitude."

5- Sadra's Seddiqin Argument gives a better description about both the
attributes of God and the relation between Him and His creatures. His
explanation will be presented later at the end of this book.

The Development of the Seddiqin Argument
----------------------------------------

The Seddiqin Argument was defined as an argument that proves the
existence of God and His attributes by a meditation in the truth of
existence. Since this kind of argumentation has more advantages than
other kinds of reasoning, some philosophers had tried to state it in
other ways. Mehdi Ashtiani in his book "*Ta'liqah Ala Sharh al-Manzumah
fi al-Hikmat* " enumerated nineteen statements of the Seddiqin Argument
as posed by several philosophers31. However, this argument obtained a
new and promising articulation by Mulla Sadra. After him, two
philosophers developed his Seddiqin argument and posed it in a new form.
Here, we only explain its two statements by Sabzavari (17971828) and
Tabatabaii (1902-1981).

### Sabzevari

###

Sabzavari has a commentary on Sadra's famous book, Asfar. He stated his
argument in his commentary on Sadra's explanation of the Seddiqin
Argument32. He noted that all of the foundations that are used by Mulla
Sadra for his Seddiqin Argument are not necessary for proving the
existence of God, although they are useful for the result of this
argument, viz. for proving the attributes of, God and explaining the
kind of relation between God and creatures. These, however, are not
necessary in the basic argument.

Moreover these foundations also make proving the existence of God
difficult and need to be stated with great precision in order to be
understood. As was explained, the Seddiqin Argument in Sadra's
philosophy is based on some foundations like (1) the fundamental reality
of existence, (2) the analogical gradation of existence and (3) the
simplicity of existence; the argument itself is explained by a
meditation on the truth of existence.

Sabzavari posed his argument by using only the first foundation of
Sadra's argument i.e. the fundamental reality of existence. Therefore
his argument is shorter than Sadra's argument. His argument run as
follows:

After admitting fundamental reality of existence it can be said that the
truth of existence is just the external and the fundamental truth of
reality while quiddity is its function and representation. Hence
quidditive existent beings are not that truth itself, but a kind of
manifestation of it. So, the truth of existence itself is an absolute
truth, not a limited or conditioned truth. It would be absurd for this
truth, though not for its manifestations, to accept non-existence
because every thing that has a contradictory and opposite does not
accept its contradictory and opposite. So, the mere truth of existence
rejects non-existence essentially (note that this is not conditioned by
'as long as its essence remain', because if this rejection is
conditioned by the term 'as long as its essence remains' the mere truth
of existence will not be a mere and absolute fact). Therefore, the mere
truth of existence is necessary being by essence; and this necessity is
not an essential (logical) necessity, but an eternal necessity (or
essential philosophical necessity). So, that truth of existence is
essentially necessary being.

The main character of Sabzavari's argument is the distinction between
"existence" and "what has existence". We can easily have the notion of
existence by abstracting the meaning of existence from all existent
beings; but, then, what we grasp is its notion not its reality, whereas
what he referred to as the truth of existence was that of which existent
beings are representations. They are limited and bounded existences.
What is meant by the truth of existence is that reality (not notion)
that in other beings is bounded is limited. This truth in other beings
is the same while its limitations or boundaries are different. If the
reality of existence is attended in a certain existent being, its truth
will not be that other beings also represent it, but it will be a
manifestation of that truth which is represented in that being (indeed,
that being is a representation of it). If we can eliminate those
limitations (that are different in each being) then we can attend to
that truth merely and absolutely. The conception of existence in its
absolute meaning is far from the mere truth of existence. The mere truth
of existence is represented in existent beings which because of their
limitations generate quiddities in the mind. The mind abstracts from
beings the notion of existence as a concept which is different from
quiddities and adds or ascribes to quiddity in the mind; then the mind
conceives it as absolute meaning. Although this absolute meaning in some
way refers to a fact in reality, it is far from that mere truth.

It must be noted that existence is a fact that is different from other
meanings and realities.

Some problems arise from comparing existence to quiddity. If we consider
existence as a quiddity that, in some viewpoints, is the same in the
external and the internal, then it will immediately lose its truth.
Because of this fact, some Islamic philosophers have this opinion that
the problem in proving the existence of God is not in affirming His
existence, but in conceiving what is meant by God. They believe that the
existence of God is evident and does not need a proof, because it is
evident that existence exists. The difficulty is in conceiving the truth
of existence, since the mere truth of existence is not a meaning in the
mind (as are quiddities), so we should not try to bring it into our
mind, but must go toward it. Therefore, they do not view all rational
arguments for the existence of God as proofs for His existence, but as
attention and notes focusing on His existence.

Sabzavari's interpretation of Seddiqin Argument requires a profound
concentration on the mere truth of existence in order to be understood.

### Tabatabaii

###

Sabzavari's argument made Seddiqin Argument shorter than that offered by
Mulla Sadra, because there was no need for analogical gradation of
existence and its simplicity. The only foundation for Sabzavari's
argument was affirmation of the fundamental reality of existence.

However, Tabatabaii made the argument shorter even than Sabzavari, for
in Tabatabaii's argument there is no need for any philosophical
foundation even for the fundamental reality of existence. His argument
can be posed as a first subject in philosophy. He posed his argument in
his notes on Sadra's explanation of Seddiqin Argument in the Asfar33.
Tabatabaii's argument can be explained as follow:

*Before discussing about external reality (that it is existence or
quiddity), the reality is accepted. This argument begins with the truth
of reality. First of all, it is inescapable for every intellectual to
accept reality. Reality cannot be proved, because it is essentially
evident. Tabatabaii did not assert that reality is just what we
conceive, but he argues that everybody believes that there is something
real externally, whatsoever it is, regardless to its specifications or
numeral characteristics. If we try to prove the truth of reality we have
confessed previously that there are a speaker, a listener, an argument
and a relation between premises and result. All of these are realities
that are supposed in advance. Therefore, the fundamental reality - in
general - is evident and cannot be proved.*

*This truth of reality can not decline and does not accept any kind of
disappearing; and rejects essentially annulment. Because, if this
reality in every condition or stipulation or time or state declines,
then there must be really a time or state or condition that this reality
has declined in that situation. So, we must accept some other realities
by rejection of reality. Even if we do not state those conditions and
say that this reality may decline and become non-reality, we also affirm
the reality, because if it declines really and truly then there is a
reality and its declination is a reality; and if it does not decline
really and we imagine that it declines then the truth of reality will
remain and will not disappear. Therefore, it is not possible that the
truth of reality declines or accepts nihility even in supposition.
Everything that supposition of its declination requires its existence,
its nihility must be essentially absurd.*

*If its nihility is absurd then its existence and truth must be
essentially necessary. This essential necessity is a philosophical one
(not a logical one), and is just eternal necessity. Therefore, there is
an essential necessary being which is real in eternal necessity. In
studying every being, we understand that neither one of them nor all of
them are the truth of reality, because they can be supposed as
non-existence while it is not possible to suppose necessary being in
this argument as non-real. Those are not the absolute reality but they
have reality by that truth of reality. (The reality may not also be the
matter of the universe, because it is possible to suppose it as non-real
in a special situation. The truth of reality is what is real even in
case of supposing all other beings as non-existence). All beings that
have reality need it essentially for their reality. They need it to be
real and their realities or existences depend on it.*

Tabatabaii continued that it became obvious for those who concentrate on
this argument that the existence of essentially necessary being is
necessary in human belief and arguments that prove his existence are, in
fact, give special attentions and notes.

Like Sabzavari's argument, in this argument the difficulty is not in
proving the existence of God, but in perceiving the truth of the reality
which is called God, for it is difficult to separate "reality" from
"what has reality". However, Tabatabaii identifies the reality of
existence as God (not God the as reality of existence). His argument
needs a precise meditation not about his proof, but about what he
intends by the reality of existence that is different from those which
have it but are not just it.

### Notes:

###

1- We use the words 'boundaries with non-existence' in this argument,
but this is not intended to mean a real thing in such wise that
non-existence is a thing and the boundaries is a line between the two
things, i.e. existence and non-existence. This meaning is quite
rejected, because there is nothing but existence. Non-existence is
bereft of reality because it is non-existence. We use boundaries of
existence and non-existence figuratively, whereas there is only
existence with some limitations that can be grasped by comparing one
existent being with another.

2 - Mesbahi Yazdi, Amoozeshi Falsafeh II, pp. [^342]:

3 - See footnotes of M. Motahhari in Osoole Falsafeh wa Raveshe Realism
IV (The Principles of Philosophy and Method of Realism), pp. 117-[^124]:

4 - See note No. [^1]:

5 - Mulla Sadra, Asfar VI, pp.13, 14, [^15]:

6 - Ibid., pp. 23, [^24]:

7 - References to Plato are taken from Plato: the Collected Dialogues
8 - Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book XII, ch. [^8]:

9 - Augustine, On Free Will II, 1-[^15]:

10 - Anselm, Monologion, chs. 1-[^3]:

11 - See Armand Maurer, A History of Medieval Philosophy, pp. 95-[^97]:

12- Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, 1,2,[^3]:

13 - Duns Scotus, Philosophical Writings, pp. 39-[^56]:

14 - Descartes, Meditations III 15 - Gottfried Leibniz, Monadology, pp.
32-39

.

16 - See James Collins, God in Modern Philosophy, pp. 137-[^138]:

17 - Mohammad Lahiji, Sharhi Golshani Raz, p. [^69]:

18 - Avicenna, Al-Esharat wa Al-Tanbihat, vol. III P. [^66]:

19 - Mulla Sadra, Asfar VI , pp. 12-[^14]:

20 - Avicenna, Al-Shifa' (Al-Elahiyyat), pp. 37-43, ed. by Ebrahim
Madkoor, (Qom, Iran Najafi Library).

22 - Avicenna, Al-Negat, p. [^566]: "The Chapter about the Proof of
Necessary Being", ed. by Daneshpazhooh, (Tehran: University of Tehran).

23 - Ibid., p. [^546]:

24 - Ibid., p. [^567]:

25 - Ibid., p. [^571]:

26 - Avicenna, Al-Esharat wa Al-Tanbihat, vol. III, pp. 18-[^28]:

27 - Ibid., p.[^66]:

28 - Mulla Sadra, Asfar VI, pp. 25-26

29 - See A. Javadi Amoli, Sharhe Hekmat Mota'alieh Asfar Arba'ah, sec.1,
vol. IV, p. 134, and M.T. Mesbahi Yazdi Amoozeshe, Falsafeh, PP. 79-80,
[^343]:

30 - Mulla Sadra, Asfar VI, pp. 24-[^25]:

31 - Mehdi Ashtiani, "Ta'liqah Ala Sharh al-Manzumah fi al-Hikmat", pp.
488-[^497]:

32 - See footnotes of pages 16 and 17 of Asfar VI, written by Sabzavari.

33 - See footnotes of pages 14 and 15 of Asfar VI, written by
Tabatabaii.
