Chapter III: The Differences between the Ontological Argument and the Seddiqin Argument
=======================================================================================

The ontological argument has a strange history. On the one hand, it
attempts to show that the proof for the existence of God is an evident
fact which does not need to use a real fact in the external world to
help us reach to the existence of God. On the other hand, some
philosophers like Arthur Schopenhauer assert1 that the ontological
argument is a "charming joke," a kind of ontological sleight of hand,
because it assumes the existence of God and then pretends to arrive at
it in the conclusion: the rabbit was in the hat all the while. Or, to
use Schopenhauer's own illustration, the chicken was already in the egg
the theist was brooding over.

Whatsoever the ontological argument will be, it is an argument that
attempts to prove the existence of God through a scrutiny of the
meanings of existence and necessary existence without any reliance on a
special fact in the world, like motion, contingency, etc. The conclusion
is that the very meaning of necessary existence or most complete being
necessitates its real existence. Has this argument been successful or
not? The answer needs another survey that is not related to this
research, but the attempt to prove the existence of God not through a
special incomplete fact but through the meaning of God makes this
argument an attractive one. This means that the argument is so evident
that everybody, even a fool, must accept it2. Therefore, the argument
makes the bridge between faith and reason to be very short, not a bridge
which is incomplete and weak in which poor facts make us to reach to a
most complete being, nor in the least from believing in Him. St. Anselm,
himself, did not want to introduce an argument for believing in God, but
an argument for manifesting his belief. He sees his endeavor in
ontological argument as the following3:

*"I do not endeavor, O Lord, to penetrate thy sublimity, for in no wise
do I compare my understanding with that; but I long to understand in
some degree thy truth, which my heart believes and loves. For I do not
seek to understand that I may believe, but I believe in order to
understand. For this also I believe, -that unless I believed, I should
not understand."*

These beautiful words can be said only through an ontological attitude,
not through cosmological argumentation.

The Seddiqin Argument seems, firstly, to be an argument like the
ontological one and perhaps as another kind of this argument; but, in
spite of some similarities, it differs from the ontological argument.
The Seddiqin Argument is similar in that it tries not relying on
incomplete, weak, poor facts in the world to prove the existence of the
most complete being and to make the argument for proving His existence
more evident than other beings that are His effects. Yet it differs from
the ontological argument in the following ways:

1-The ontological argument begins with the meaning of existence, then
the meaning of necessary existence all of which are conceptions in the
mind; then it endeavors to make this meaning real outside the mind by
some reasons. But in the Seddiqin Argument begins with the reality of
existence, not its notion; and it continues by searching in this
reality. In other words, the pyramid of existence in the ontological
argument is built in the mind then the head of this pyramid - the
necessary existence- comes out of the mind and is projected into the
reality; in contrast in the Seddiqin Argument this pyramid is a building
in reality; stands on its head, which is also real working in the very
reality of existence rather than its notion, and its accuracy in the
distinction between the notion and the reality of existence have
vaccinated this argument against most of the criticisms that have
created troubles for the ontological arguments.

2- The problem in the ontological argument is a problem of judgment,
while in the Seddiqin Argument the problem is to some extent a problem
of presentation and perception. In all kinds of ontological argument
that have been proposed in the view of Anselm, Spinoza, Leibniz,
Hartshorn, Malkolm and Plantinga the conception and meaning of God or
the Necessary Being is assumed by a definition, and then the argument
begins to prove His existence and gives a judgment for its listener
about the reality of this meaning. But, the Seddiqin Argument tries to
provide a good presentation of God by some philosophical surveys into
the reality of existence that is important for having a good perception
from what is intended from God. If someone can have this presentation
(that may need some intuitional knowledge), then the judgment about its
reality will be clear and evident without any difficulty in proving it.
Therefore, the problem is to give a correct and suitable conception of
God through the fundamental reality of existence and its analogical
gradation and copulative and independent existences and possible poverty
in caused beings and so on. After these presentational surveys there is
no problem in having a judgment about its existence that had been made
clear through previous presentations.

That is why some Muslim philosophers believe that4 "The problem of
proving the existence of God lies at the level of presentation, not of
judgment. In other words, what is difficult is for the mind to have a
correct presentation of that conception; when it reaches this purpose
its judgment will be easy. This contrasts to in other types of knowledge
where the presentation of the meanings and conceptions is easy, but the
difficulty is in the judgment and affirmation.

In the ontological arguments the proposition that must be proved is:
"God or necessary existence exists", but in the Seddiqin Argument the
proposition to be affirmed or proved is: "The pure existence or reality
is God and others are His representations." It means a conversion in the
proposition, where the subject and the predicate have changed their
places.

3- The purpose of those scholars who developed Seddiqin Arguments was
not only to present an argument for proving the existence of God, but
also to give a suitable view of the relation between Him and His
creatures. This relation is not a "categorical one" that stands on two
sides like the relation between subject and predicate which are two
different things, but an "illuminative relation" that stands on one
side, the other side being only this relation. According to ontological
and cosmological arguments, God is a necessary existence that must exist
necessarily; other existent beings are contingent existences whose
existence depends on that necessary existence. In this view there are
two kinds of being: one of which depends on the other; this is a
categorical relation. But, In the Seddiqin Argument this relation is an
illuminative one. We explained previously in the section "the types of
existence‚Äù the difference between "independent existence" and
"copulative existence". It is said that the relation between cause (not
preparatory cause) and its caused is a copulative one, and that the
caused is not a being that needs a cause but is just need. Let me repeat
that paragraph:

It will be discussed in the section "cause and caused" that the need of
the caused to the cause is in the essence of the caused, and this
requires that the caused is nothing but need, its essence stands only by
the existence of the cause, and it has no independence in existence.
This necessitates that the existence of the caused must be copulative in
relation to its cause by attention to this relation. But, with relation
to itself and by attention to itself alone, it will be an independent
existence. So, the type of existence of the caused is due to our
attention. From one aspect it is copulative, and from another it is
independent.

In this view the relation between God and other beings is like a thing
and its shadow, or like a man and his picture, one is real and the other
is relation to that real5. In other words, other beings are
representations of God. He is the real existence and the others show Him
before showing themselves. Tabatabaii has a beautiful analogy to show
the relation of other beings to God6:

*"Suppose: you are sitting in a quiet place with a tranquil mind, and
you are focusing your attention on this moving world and regarding it
and looking at every up and down, inner and outer, small and big thing
in it and gloating this world. It is a boundless space...*

*Let's come nearer: The earth and its blue horizons, thick jungles and
roaring seas, extensive deserts, living animals and their inner
organizations, the vital relations of human beings and their
comprehensive thoughts, the elements and compositions, condensed atoms
and countless molecules, individual and social activities... To sum up,
you are looking at this strange discipline with all of its
dependencies...*

*At a single instance, you are shocked by an inner attention, and
realize that all of these that you are regarding are in the mirror not
in your last supposition that you are looking directly.*

*Now, in consequence of this circumstance how will your situation be? It
is obvious that all of that you were observing and remembering will
change; but not in a manner that all of your previous knowledge and
observations -not even one of them- change to be false or non-existence;
no, never it will be so. However, the*

*secondary transfer [the realization that all of those are in the
mirror], in spite of preserving all of those essences and their
activities that is observed, takes only the existential independency
from your first observations.*

*Each of your observations has independency before that transfer so that
it acts in its area of action; and after that transfer all of those
scattered independencies gather and focus in one place (the mirror)
without that one of those independencies disappear or a small part of
those observed activities is decreased."*

### Notes

###

[^1]: From The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason,
translated by Mme. Karl Hillebrand, revised edition. (London).

2 St. Anselm sets his argument in a title like: ‚ÄúTruly there is a God,
although the fool hath said in his heart, there is no God‚Äù. Therefore he
believes that even a fool must accept God.

3 .Anselm prefaced his ontological argument by this statement in his
Proslogion see Anselm‚Äôs Basic Writings, translated by S. N. Deanse.

4 See for example the introduction which is written by M. Motahhary on
Tabatabaii‚Äôs book, Osoole Falsafeh wa Ravishi Realism V p.[^34]:

5 See footnotes of M. Motahhary on Osoole Falsafeh wa Ravishi Realism V,
p. [^69]:

6 Ibid. pp. 68-[^74]:

Part three:

**The Replies of the Seddiqin Argument to the Systematic Criticisms
Against the Arguments for the Existence of God**

Introduction
------------

In this chapter we want to examine the Seddiqin Argument to show its
strength vis a vis the main criticisms proposal in the history of
philosophy against the arguments for proving the existence of God. Since
the most important and powerful arguments for the existence of God are
cosmological and ontological arguments with their philosophical
foundation, and since the Seddiqin argument is in some aspects like
cosmological argument and in other aspects like the ontological one, we
will study only the basic criticisms posed against these arguments.

In the history of philosophy, the most famous philosophers who attacked
and have some criticisms against these arguments are David Hume and
Immanuel Kant. These criticisms influenced deeply philosophers who came
after them until recent years. Thus these criticisms have been standard
or classical problems against proving the existence of God. This chapter
will focus on these criticisms and then examine some others. The key
criticisms can be classified as follows:

a: Objections to the ontological arguments:

I- Hume's objection1:

1- There is no being whose existence is rationally demonstrable because:

(1). Nothing is rationally demonstrable unless the contrary implies a
contradiction (for if it leaves open any other possibility, then this
position is not necessarily true).

(2). Nothing that is distinctly conceivable implies a contradiction (if
it were contradictory, it would not be distinctly conceivable; it can
not be possible).

(3). Whatever we conceive to exist we can also conceive as nonexistent
(the existence or nonexistence of things can not be ruled out
conceptually).

(4). There is no being, therefore, whose nonexistence implies a
contradiction.

(5). Consequently, there is no being whose existence is rationally
demonstrable.

II- Kant's objections2:

1- First, he objected to the fact that we have no positive concept of a
necessary being. God is defined only as that which cannot not be.

2- Necessity does not apply to existence but only to propositions.

Necessity is a logical, not an ontological, qualifier. There are no
existentially necessary propositions. Whatever is known by experience
(which is the only way existential matters are knowable) could be
otherwise.

3- No contradiction is involved in rejecting both the idea and the
existence of a necessary Being, just as there is no contradiction in
rejecting both the triangle and its three-side-ness. Contradiction
results in rejecting only one without the other.

4- Existence is not a predicate, as though it is a perfection or
property that could be affirmed of a subject or thing. Existence is not
a perfection of an essence but a positing of that perfection. Kant
implies the following argument to support this point:

(1). Whatever adds nothing to the conception of an essence is not part
of that essence.

(2). Existence adds nothing to the conception of an essence (i.e. no
characteristic is added to an essence by positing it as real rather than
as imaginary; a real dollar does not have any characteristics which an
imagined one lacks)

(3). Therefore, existence is not part of an essence (i.e. it is not a
perfection which can be predicated of something).

b: Objections to the cosmological arguments:

### I- Hume's objections3:

###

1. Only a finite cause needs be inferred from finite effects. The cause
need only be adequate to the effect. And since the effect (the world) is
finite, one need only posits a cause sufficient to explain that effect.
Hence, the best one could conclude from the cosmological argument is a
finite God.

2. No proposition about existence can be logically necessary. The
opposite of any proposition about experience is always logically
possible.

But if it is logically possible that anything known by experience could
have been otherwise, then it is not rationally inescapable that it be
the way it is. It follows that nothing based on experience is logically
demonstrable.

3. The words "necessary Being" have no consistent meaning. It is always
possible to conceive of anything, including God, as not existing. And
whatever might not exist does not need to exist. That is, if its
nonexistence is possible, its existence is not necessary. Hence, it
makes no sense to speak of something as a logically necessary Being.

4. If "necessary Being" means only "imperishable," then the universe may
be the necessary Being. If the universe cannot be a necessary being in
the sense of being imperishable, then neither can God be imperishable.
Hence, either the universe is a necessary being or else God is not
imperishable.

5. An infinite series is possible. An eternal series cannot have a cause
because cause implies priority in time. But nothing can be prior in time
to an eternal series. Therefore, an eternal series is possible.

6. There is no way to establish the principle of causality. Existence
does not provide us with the necessary connections needed to establish
the

cause/effect relationship. Events are conjoined, but never connected.
Only after constant (habitual) conjoining does the mind assume that
there is a cause/effect relationship. Hence, causality is built on
custom. We know B occurs after A, but not because of A: the sun rises
after the rooster crows, but not because the rooster crows. The
cosmological argument is built on a post hoc, ergo proper hoc, fallacy.

7. The universe as a whole does not need a cause, only the parts do.

The world as a whole does not call for a cause; only parts need a cause.
The whole is the explanation of the parts. The principle of sufficient
reason applies only to parts within the universe but not to the universe
as a whole.

The parts are contingent and the whole is necessary. And the whole
universe may be necessary in only a mathematically accidental sense,
such as the products of 9 always use 9 (e.g. 9\*41=369 and 3+6+9=18 or
2\*9)

8. Theistic arguments convince only those who like abstract reasoning.
Only those with a "metaphysical head" are convinced by theistic
arguments. Most people are too practical to be swept away with such
abstract reasoning. Even the arguments that begin in experience soon fly
into the thin air of pure and unconvincing speculation.

### II- Kant's objections4:

###

1. The cosmological argument depends on an invalid ontological argument.
In order to arrive at a logically necessary conclusion, the cosmological
argument leaves the realm of experience with which it begins and borrows
the concept of a necessary Being. Without this ontological leap from the
a posteriori to a priori, the cosmological argument cannot complete its
task. The leap is necessary but invalid. There is no way to show that it
is logically necessary to conclude a necessary Being (one which
logically cannot not be) unless one leaves experience and enters the
purely conceptual realm.

2- Existential statements are not necessary. The conclusion of the
cosmological argument purports to be an existentially necessary
statement.

But necessity is a characteristic of thought, not of being. Only
statements are necessary, not things or beings. The only necessity that
there is resides in the logical, but not in the ontological realm.

3. A noumenal cause cannot be derived from a phenomenal effect.

The cosmological argument illicitly assumes that one can move from an
effect in the realm of appearance (the phenomenal) to a cause in the
realm of reality (the noumenal). Things-to-me are not things-in-itself.
One does not know what reality is (only that it is). Causality is merely
a category of the mind that is superimposed on reality, but it is not
constitutive of reality.

Whatever necessity the causal connection has is made by the mind; it is
not found in reality.

4. What is logically necessary is not ontologically necessary.

Flowing from the former criticism is the implied objection that the
rationally inescapable is not necessarily the real. It might be
necessary to think of something as being so when in actuality it is not
so. Hence, even a logically necessary Being would not necessarily exist.

5. The cosmological argument leads to metaphysical contradictions.

If one assumes that categories of thought do apply to reality and
proceeds with cosmological argumentation, then one eventuates in
contradictions such as: there is both a first cause and there cannot be
a first cause (both of which are logically demanded by the principle of
sufficient reason).

6. The concept of a "necessary Being" is not self-clarifying. It is not
clear what the meaning of "necessary Being" actually is. The concept
does not clarify itself. Without conditions no concept of necessity is
possible. But necessary Being is conceived of as having no conditions
for its existence whatsoever. Hence, the only way it could be meaningful
is eliminated by its very definition in the theistic argument.

7. An infinite regress is logically possible. There is no contradiction
in the concept of an infinite regress of cause. Indeed the principle of
sufficient reason demands it. For it says that everything must have a
reason. If this is so, there is no reason to stop asking for a reason
when we arrive at any given cause in the series. In fact, reason demands
that we keep on asking for a reason, ad infinitum. (Of course, reason
also demands that we find a first reason, which grounds all the other
reasons. But this is precisely the contradiction one gets into when he
applies reason beyond the senses to reality.) So far as logical
possibility is concerned, an infinite regress is possible.

Some of these objections are more important than some others. I will
study firstly these objections whose solution can help to the solution
of other objections. The problems of existence posed by Kant are the
core objections and have been repeated in various shapes by some later
philosophers as Bertrand Russell and Norman Malcolm5.

Mulla Sadra's view is that these objections are not invalid in all
aspects. These objections contain some insights which are very helpful
for a good understanding of the problem. Kant's statements manifest new
philosophical awareness neglected by earlier view of philosophers this
eases the way for solving the problems, especially in the light of Mulla
Sadra's view about existence and its fundamental reality. Therefore,
have I will not reject all the criticisms posed by Kant but try to show
the strengths and weaknesses of his view. Some aspects of his views in
these criticisms are very near what had been stated in Mulla Sadra's
philosophical view about existence while others are rejected by Mulla
Sadra's view which has some extra distinctions regarding existence that
are neglected by Kant. In reply to Kant‚Äôs objections I will try to show
both the consistency and inconsistency of his viewpoint with Mulla
Sadra's in order to understand what is missed in Kant's thought.

The Rejection of both the Idea and the Existence of God
-------------------------------------------------------

One of the accurate distinctions in Kant's statements is between
existence and other properties, while in the ontological arguments there
is a confusion of predicates concerning perfection and existence.
Existence differs from every other predicate. Kant focuses his
criticisms on four forms of the ontological argument in the view of
Descartes and Anselm. Each of these philosophers has two or three forms
of this argument to which Kant objects the argument that can be stated
in summary in a logical shape as the follows:

### a: Anselm6:

###

First form of the argument:

1. Whatever can be affirmed (predicated) of the most perfect Being
possible (conceivable) must be affirmed of it (otherwise, by definition,
it would not be the most perfect Being possible)

2. It is possible to affirm a real existence (outside of the mind) of
the most perfect Being possible.

3. Hence, a real existence of the most perfect Being possible must be
affirmed.

Second form of the argument:

1. It is logically necessary to affirm of a necessary Existent what is
logically necessary for its concept of it.

2. Real existence is logically necessary for the concept of a necessary
Existent.

3. Hence, it is logically necessary to affirm that a necessary Existent
exists.

### b: Descartes7:

###

First form of the argument:

1. It is logically necessary to affirm of a concept whatever is
essential to the nature (definition) of that concept (e.g. a triangle
must have three sides).

2. Existence is a logically necessary part of a necessary existent
(otherwise it could not be defined as a necessary Existent).

3. Therefore, it is logically necessary to affirm that a necessary
Existent does exist.

Second form of Descartes' argument for Caterus:

1. Whatever is of the essence of something must be affirmed of it.

2. It is of the essence of God that He exists (for by definition His
essence is to exist).

3. Therefore, existence must be affirmed of God.

Kant objects to these formulations of the argument two main criticisms.
Firstly he tries to show that it is not necessary to affirm the
existence of a necessary existence. This means that there is no
contradiction involved in rejecting both the idea and the existence of a
necessary being. He assumes, in the beginning, the predication of
existence in a proposition but he denies that it is necessary to affirm
existence of a necessary being. His attack, in this criticism, is aimed
at this necessity. This objection paves the way for the next objection,
namely, that the existence is not a real predicate. We will survey and
analyze this latter independently in the next objection. The objection
is based on the following objection which I will analyze for it,

***Necessity does not apply to existence but only to propositions.
Necessity is a logical, not an ontological qualifier.***

To examine this objection, we must study the necessity of existence in
Kant's view. He firstly explains necessity by the fact that in analytic
propositions the predicate is ascribed to subject necessarily so that
the affirming subject with rejecting predicate constitutes a
contradiction. He says8:

*If in an identical judgment I reject the predicate and retain the
subject, there arise a contradiction, and hence, I say, that the former
belongs to the latter necessarily.*

But rejecting existence from a subject and its predicate cause no
contradiction9:

*But if I reject the subject as well as the predicate, there is no
contradiction, because there is nothing left that can be contradicted.
To accept a triangle and yet to reject its three angles is
contradictory, but there is no contradiction at all in admitting the
non-existence of the triangle and of its three angles.*

Then he extends this rule to the necessary existence10:

*The same applies to the concept of an absolutely necessary Being.
Remove its existence, and you remove the thing itself, with all its
predicates, so that a contradiction becomes impossible. There is nothing
external to which the contradiction could apply, because the thing is
not meant to be externally necessary; nor is there anything internal
that could be contradicted, for in removing the thing out of existence,
you have removed at the same time all its internal qualities. If you
say, God is almighty, that is a necessary judgment, because almightiness
cannot be removed, if you accept a deity, that is an infinite Being,
with the concept of which that other concept is identical. But if you
say, God is not, then neither his almightiness, nor any other of his
predicates is given; they are all, together with the subject, removed
out of existence, and therefore there is not the slightest contradiction
in that sentence.*

Kant tries to show that reality and "\_\_\_ exists" differ from the
concept of existence and that the concept has no power to posit reality.
He does not use existence and non-existence for understanding the
meaning of "something exists". Instead, he uses the word "admit" for
"exist" and "reject" for the word "not exist". This terminology makes
the difference between notion of existence and its reality clearer.

He has another correct accuracy in the meaning of necessity especially
in logical usage of this word. That is the conditionality of necessity
with the stipulation of "if its subject exists". The triangle has three
sides necessarily if there exists a triangle; but if there is no
triangle at all there will be nothing to have three sides necessarily,
and removing both three sides and triangle is not a contradiction. Then
he extends this matter to necessary being. Necessary existence has its
essential attributes like almightiness necessarily, but this necessity
depends on the stipulation: "if there exists externally a necessary
Being. "Were there no necessary Being, the rejection of existence from
its essence would not constitute a contradiction.

In explanation of the origination of the meaning of necessity, he
says11:

*...People have imagined that by a number of examples they had explained
this concept, at first risked at haphazard, and afterwards become quite
familiar, and that therefore all further inquiry regarding its
intelligibility were unnecessary. It was said that every proposition of
geometry, such as, for instance, that a triangle has three angles, is
absolutely necessary, and people began to talk of an object entirely
outside the sphere of our understanding, as if they understood perfectly
well what, by that concept, they wished to predicate of it.*

He continues that this necessity, that is about judgment, cannot be
extended to existence12:

*But all these pretended examples are taken without exception from
judgments only, not from things, and their existence. Now the
unconditioned necessity of judgments is not the same thing as an
absolute necessity of things. The absolute necessity of a judgment is
only a conditioned necessity of the thing, or of the predicate in the
judgment.*

then, he explains the conditionality of logical necessity by the
stipulation: "if the subject exists in reality"13:

*The above proposition did not say that three angles were absolutely
necessary, but that under the condition of the existence of a triangle,
three angles are given (in it) by necessity*

We said before in the section on necessity and possibility that all
logical essential necessity has the stipulation: "if the subject exists
or remains in existence." This necessity is in analytic propositions
that the essence or essential properties of a thing are ascribed to the
thing itself. Therefore, in the negation of subject, no contradiction
takes place. But we said that in the light of the fundamental reality of
existence, if we ascribe existence to real existence or to the truth of
existence, this will not be a logical essential necessity (that is
ascribed to quiddity and a quidditive meaning) but a philosophical
essential necessity. The difference from logical necessity is indicated
by Kant in his statement that "the unconditioned necessity of judgment
is not the same thing as an absolute necessity of things".

Kant looks at every necessity as a logical one, while this necessity is
about quiddities in so far as they are quiddities, not about real
existence in view of the fundamental reality of existence. In logical
propositions the necessity is stipulated by the existence of the
subject. But in existential propositions the reality of existence and
its truth is just its subject or a part of it- not like triangle or
another quidditive concept. The ascription of the reality of existence
to this subject (as its predicate) is undoubtedly necessary, because it
predicated of it what is essential to the subject. Therefore, the
negation of existence and reality from its subject involves a
contradiction. It is clear that, this or that existent being -in so far
as it is the reality of existence and the mind abstracts quiddity from
its existential limitations- have existence or exists necessarily,
because it is existence. Therefore, the negation of existence from this
kind of subjects causes a contradiction. Is it possible, in this case,
to reject or remove the subject -in Kant's terminology- i.e. to negate
real existence (that is the reality of existence) from this kind of
subject without involving contradiction?

The truth of existence is necessarily the truth of existence, and
removing existence from this subject constitutes a contradiction.
Therefore, in these existential propositions, there is no way to reject
the subject as well as the predicate, so no contradiction is involved.
This means that the claim of Kant ‚Äúif I reject the subject as well as
the predicate, there is no contradiction‚Äù applies only to logical
propositions, not to existential propositions.

Fortunately, Kant points to propositions whose subjects cannot be
removed, but he says that he cannot accept these kinds of subjects:14

We have seen therefore that, if I remove the predicate of a judgment
together with its subject, there can never be an internal contradiction,
whatever the predicate may be.

*The only way of evading this conclusion would be to say that there are
subjects which cannot be removed out of experience, but must always
remain. But this would be the same as to say that there exist absolutely
necessary subjects, an assumption the correctness of which I have called
in question, and the possibility of which you had undertaken to prove.
For I cannot form to myself the smallest concept of a thing which, if it
had been removed together with all its predicates, should leave behind a
contradiction; and except contradiction, I have no other test of
impossibility by pure concepts a priori.*

Why can't Kant accept a subject the removal of which constitutes a
contradiction, while we said before that the removal of existential
subjects causes a contradiction? This is because he searches his
concepts to find these propositions and as we said before, what can be
found in the mind is quiddity not reality of existence, and that
quidditive concepts can form only logical propositions not existential
ones; there is no logical proposition the removal of whose subjects
constitutes a contradiction.

Furthermore, he is in a position that cannot accept that the mere idea
of necessary Being cause it to be real, the matter whose correctness is
in question -and I agree with him. Therefore, he neglected existential
propositions that may not be constructed through conceptions like
necessary Being.

It must be noted that one should distinguish between reality of
existence and concept of existence, the matter that had made serious
trouble for the ontological arguments. The confusion of reality of
existence and its notion opens some windows for Kant to penetrate, and
to pose some correct criticisms against this argument. Although these
criticisms are not complete and neglect some other philosophical
affairs, and although Kant does not distinguish clearly between reality
and notion of existence, his statements pave the way for this
distinction.

After showing that the rejection of the concept of necessary Being with
all his attributes causes no contradiction, Kant proposes an objection
against his position, and replies. The objection is that his view may be
avoided by the most real Being. Kant states this objection with an
argument for this position as follow15:

*Against all these general arguments (which no one can object to) you
challenge me with a case, which you represent as a proof by a fact,
namely, that there is one, and this one concept only, in which the
non-existence or the removal of its object would be selfcontradictory,
namely, the concept of the most real Being (ens realissimum). You say
that it possesses all reality, and you are no doubt justified in
accepting such a Being as possible. This for the present I may admit,
though the absence of self-contradictoriness in a concept is far from
proving the possibility of its object. Now reality comprehends
existence, and therefore existence is contained in the concept of a
thing possible. If that thing is removed, the internal possibility of
the thing would be removed, and this is self-contradictory.*

This is a restatement of Leibniz' argumentation of the ontological
argument that can be formulated as follow16:

1- If it is possible for an absolutely perfect Being to exist, then it
is necessary that it exist, for, a. By definition an absolutely perfect
Being cannot lack anything.

b. But if it did not exist, it would be lacking in existence.

c. Hence, an absolutely perfect Being cannot be lacking in existence.

2- It is possible (non contradictory) for an absolutely perfect Being to
exist.

3. Therefore, it is necessary that an absolutely perfect Being exist.

In support of the crucial minor premise Leibniz gave this argument:

1. A perfection is a simple and irreducible quality without any
essential limits.

2. Whatever is simple cannot conflict with other irresolvable simple
qualities (since they differ in kind).

3. And whatever differs in kind with another cannot conflict with it
(since there is no area of similarity in which they can overlap or
conflict).

4. Therefore, it is possible for one being (God) to possess all possible
perfections.

Kant firstly argues his position that "the absence of
self-contradictoriness in a concept is far from the possibility of its
object" by these statements found in the footnote of this paper17:

*A concept is always possible, if it is not self-contradictory. This is
the logical characteristic of possibility, and by it the object of the
concept is distinguished from the nihil negativum. But it may
nevertheless be an empty concept, unless the objective reality of the
synthesis, by which the concept is generated, has been distinctly shown.
This, however, as shown above, must always rest on principles of
possible experience, and not on the principle of analysis (the principle
of contradiction). This is a warning against inferring at once from the
possibility of concepts (logical) the possibility of things (real).*

Then he begins to reply to this objection against his position by the
argument that the proposition "the most real Being exists" is either an
analytic propositions or a synthetic one. If it is analytic, there is no
more knowledge about the most real Being, while we need a new knowledge
about His existence and if it is synthetic, there can not be any
contradiction in rejecting it such a contradiction can happen only in an
analytic proposition by admitting the subject and rejecting the
predicate. He says18:

*I answer: Even in introducing into the concept of a thing, which you
wish to think in its possibility only, the concept of its existence,
under whatever disguise it may be, you have been guilty of a
contradiction. If you were allowed to do this, you would apparently have
carried your point; but in reality you have achieved nothing, but have
only committed a tautology. I simply ask you, whether the proposition,
that this or that thing (which, whatever it may be, I grant you as
possible) exists, is an analytical or a synthetical proposition? If the
former, then by its existence you add nothing to your thought of the
thing; but in that case, either the thought within you would be the
thing itself, or you have presupposed existence, as belonging to
possibility, and have according to your own showing deduced existence
from internal possibility, which is nothing but a miserable tautology.
The mere word reality, which in the concept of a thing sounds different
from existence in the concept of the predicate, can make no difference.
For if you call all accepting or positing (without determining what it
is) reality, you have placed a thing, with all its predicates, within
the concept of the subject, and accepted it as real, and you do nothing
but repeat it in the predicate. If, on the contrary, you admit, as every
sensible man must do, that every proposition involving existence does
not admit of removal without contradiction, a distinguishing property
which is peculiar to analytical propositions only, the very character of
which depends on it?*

Then Kant argues against the opinion that reality or determination
cannot be contained in a concept, because this predicate enlarges the
subject19:

*I might have hoped to put an end to this subtle argumentation, without
many words, and simply by an accurate definition of the concept of
existence, if I had not seen that the illusion, in mistaking a logical
predicate for a real one (that is the predicate which determines a
thing), resists all correction. Everything can become a logical
predicate, even the subject itself may be predicated of itself, because
logic takes no account of any contents of concepts. Determination,
however, is a predicate, added to the concept of the subject, and
enlarging it, and it must not therefore be contained in it.*

### Investigation:

###

Leibniz as well as Descartes and Anselm saw a difference between the
most real Being and all other beings. They hoped this difference would
help them to an a priori argument for the existence of God. The
characteristic that differs from all other ones that can be ascribed in
the world to every other being was so bright and important for them that
they thought they can use it as a proof for the existence of God.

We shall study this matter in the view of Mulla Sadra. He, also, differs
necessary existence from all other beings, but his position is not to
use this matter as a proof for the existence of God, but as only the
real distinction between God and other beings in the light of the
fundamental reality of existence. Based on his view, real existence is
ascribed necessarily to every real existence that has occupied reality
in every existential proposition, whereas quiddities are mentally
posited and are not fundamentally real.

Therefore, every real being, either necessary or contingent, has
existence necessarily. But, this necessity is of two kinds, one is
possible beings which have this necessity bysomethingelse, while the
other is a necessary being-by-essence. In the former the existential
necessity depends on another being, hence it need not exist in every
time. This necessity remains until that "something-else" necessitates
it, while in the latter there may not be any thing to limit this
necessity. And as this necessity does not depend on another being it can
not be removed from it in any time, situation or condition. As we said
before, this "necessity-by-essence" was named "eternal necessity"
because this kind of philosophical necessity requires the eternity of
what has this necessity. If a being has existence necessarily by
essence, and it is uncaused and is an essential existence that stands on
itself, then it must inevitably be an eternal being. Because, in any
condition, it may not even be supposed that it does not exist. The
difference between eternal necessity and logical essential necessity is
neglected in Kant's view. He does not distinguish these two kinds of
necessity. His claim that "if I remove the predicate of a judgment
together with its subject, there can never be an internal contradiction"
applies only to the logical essential necessity that does not require
eternity of subject, because the ascription in the logical essential
necessity is conditioned by preservation of subject. If the subject
disappears then the ascription of predicate to subject will cease to
remain, so there will not be such a necessity; but in eternal necessity
there is no stipulation or condition for ascription of predicate to
subject. Therefore, absolute necessity is only in eternal necessity and
others are conditioned.

Although the necessity of necessary being differs from the logical
necessity, this difference has no power to prove the real existence of
God. Mulla Sadra did not apply this difference in proving the existence
of God in the Seddiqin Argument. It is an argument for proving the
eternal necessity of God, not one for proving God through eternal
necessity. All that was said in the Seddiqin Argument was premises for
proving the Necessary Being. But those philosophers that posed this
argument intended to set forth an argument to show that the eternal
necessity of absolute existence is real, but what must be proved is the
eternal necessity of this Being, not its logical necessity.

What is wrong in the ontological argument that places its power for
proving the existence of God in question? Before answering this
question, we must study another important distinction in Mulla Sadra's
view that is as a key for solving some famous philosophical questions.
By this distinction we can analyze this Kant's objection and the next
one.

### Primary Essential Predication and Common Technical Predication

###

Predication is a kind of unification between two things, because it
means "this is that". This meaning requires, also, a kind of differing
factor between those two, as well as that union, in order to be two
things that have a kind of union. If this is not so, there will not be
two things but one, and there is no meaning for unification. Therefore,
in every predication there must be a unity from one aspect and a
difference in another aspect to make that predication true. Hence, there
can not be a predication between two completely distinct things, because
there is no union between them, nor can there be a predication between a
thing and itself, because it does not differ from itself (unless one
thing be regarded from two points of view, when there will be two things
and this unification may happen).

Now, this union is either in the meaning of two things or only in their
external reality. The former is named "primary essential predication"
and the latter is called "common technical predication" by Mulla
Sadra20. Therefore, the primary essential predication is that kind of
predication in which the subject happens to be the same as the predicate
with regard to "concept", e.g. "man is man", or as can be said in the
definition of man "man is a rational animal". The difference, in this
case, between subject and predicate is for the points of view like
compendium and detail. The common technical predication is that in which
the subject is the same as the predicate only with regard to "existence‚Äù
(mental or external existence) or concrete object, while with regard to
conception they are different from each other, e.g. "man is animal". The
meaning of "man" is different from "animal", but the existential sample
of man or its object is also an animal.

This distinction between the two kinds of predication is important in
some paradoxes be which, in the beginning, some double correct
propositions seem to be contradictory. That is, it seems that one of
them must be true and the other should be false, while both of them can
be true with regard to the two kinds of predication. I cite some of
these propositions to prepare the explanation of these two predications
in the ontological argument:

(1). preparatory example: When you say "verb is verb" this proposition
is true by a primary essential predication that means the meaning of
verb is just a meaning of verb as well as an existential sample of verb
is just a verb.

But, when you say "verb is a noun" it means the word "verb" as it is a
word for naming a kind of words is a noun. This example is not an
example for those two kinds of predication, but is only for showing the
difference of points of view for predication.

(2). Mulla Sadra sets forth in a section about "non-existence" and its
affairs21, a proposition that "the absolute non-existence may not be
informed" and that he has some demonstration for proving this
proposition, but if it were true then the predication "may not be
informed" would be an information about absolute non-existence.
Therefore this proposition would involve a self-contradiction.

Mulla Sadra replies: The absolute non-existence, in so far as it is mere
nonbeing in reality, may not be informed, while the absolute
non-existence in so far as its meaning is a kind of conception in the
mind has a mental existence, therefore it may be informed about it by
this predicate "...may not be informed."

Thus, absolute non-existence by way of common technical predication
(that refers to its existence not meaning) may not be informed, while
absolute non-existence by way of primary essential existence (that
refers to its meaning in the mind) may be informed by "may not be
informed."

(3). We can divide all beings into two kinds: "being subsistent in the
mind" and "being non-subsistent in the mind". The latter, in spite of
being non-subsistent in the mind, is subsistent in the mind, because we
know it as a meaning in the mind and ascribe something to it. It is a
rational being and mental existence. Therefore, the being non subsistent
in the mind is not subsistent in the mind by way of primary predication;
but it is subsistent in the mind by way of common technical predication.

(4). Of The "particular" by definition. It is absurd to suppose that its
truthfulness is more than one, like Brussels, this book, that man etc.
By this definition the "particular" has many samples (more than one);
therefore it is not a particular but a "universal". Based on this
matter, we say "particular is particular by way of primary essential
predication, and particular - in so far as it has a meaning in the mind
and a mental existence that involves all beings that have that
character- is not particular (but universal) by way of common technical
predication‚Äù.

(5). Our intellect has the power to recognize the impossibility of a
"partner of the creator" by saying: "a partner of the creator is
impossible" in spite of the fact that predicating something to some
other thing depends on the representation of the latter (i.e. the
subject), while whatever is established in the intellect or imagination
is an "existent‚Äù which must be judged as "possible", so it is a being
that must be created entirely by God. Therefore, a partner of the
Creator is not a partner of the Creator by way of common nonprimary
predication but it is a creature of Him. This proposition does not
involve a contradiction; while a partner of the creator is such by way
of primary essential predication.

The problem in all of these examples is the result of confusion between
"concept" and the "referent of concept". By distinguishing these two, it
can be understood that any concept which is actualized, whether in the
mind or in the external world, does not cease to be that concept, and
the boundary of its "essence" does not become transformed; nay,
"existence" brings it out just as it is.

Returning now to survey the ontological argument, the problem in this
argument is the confusion of "concept of existence" and the "referent of
the concept". With regard to distinguishing these two, or the difference
of existence by way of primary essential predication from existence by
way of common predication, the confusion and fallacy of the ontological
argument can become manifest. Because, if we negate the concept of
existence from "most perfect being" in the concept of God by way of
primary predication (that refers to its meaning) then it involves a
contradiction. But if the "most perfect being‚Äù did not exist (in
external world) by way of common predication then it would not result in
the negation of existence by way of primary predication. In the
ontological argument it is said that "existence is a logically necessary
part of the concept of a necessary Existent, therefore it is impossible
to negate that a necessary existent does exist." If, in this claim, the
existence is predicated to necessary being by way of primary
predication, then it is impossible to negate existence (its concept)
from it; but this predication does not require its external reality and
does not prove existence by way of common predication for the Necessary
Being. If the predicate, in this argument, is the referent of the
concept of existence (as in the result of the argument it is so claimed)
and it is being existence in common predication, then there is no
impossibility in rejecting existence in common predication from the
concept of necessary being or negating this perfection from its concept,
and there is no contradiction involved. If the most perfect concept that
is the concept of unlimited and infinite existent lacks the referent of
this concept, then it will not entail any contradiction. Moreover, the
contradiction happens when the same predicate is affirmed and rejected
of the same meaning at the same time, but if there are two predicates or
one from two points of view, then the affirmation and rejection of those
two will not result in any contradictions. The concept of unlimited and
most complete existence is the most complete existence by way of primary
predication. It is a mental concept in common predication that exists in
mental existence but it is not necessary that it have a referent in the
external world, for it is like what we said about "partner of the
Creator". The contradiction will happen if the predicate is the same as
the subject either both are primary or both are common.

The confusion of the concept and the referent of the concept in some
other arguments of Muslim philosophers (which they supposed to be a
Seddiqin kind of argumentation) put the validity of their argument in
question. All the problems arise when one wants to find the referent of
the concept by the concept; but if an argument begins from reality (not
from its concept) and then set forth an argument, it will not suffer
from this confusion -just as is done in the Seddiqin Argument.

That Existence Is not a Real Predication
----------------------------------------

Kant carefully distinguishes existence and all other perfections in
ontological arguments based on the sameness of these two. His attack is
aimed toward ontological arguments that use existence like other
perfections. He shows the error of this supposition by scrutinizing in
the meaning of "\_\_ exists". I set forth his view then I will compare
his view with Mulla Sadra's on the fundamental reality of existence
where the consistency and inconsistency of these two views can be
observed.

Kant's view can be formed like this22:

Existence is not a predicate, as though it were a perfection or property
that could be affirmed of a subject or thing. Existence is not a
perfection of an essence, but a positing of that perfection. Kant
implies the following argument to support this point:

(1). Whatever adds nothing to the conception of an essence is not part
of that essence.

(2). Existence adds nothing to the conception of an essence (i.e. no
characteristic is added to an essence by positing it as real rather than
as imaginary; a real dollar does not have any characteristics which an
imagined one lacks)

(3). Therefore, existence is not part of an essence (i.e. it is not a
perfection which can be predicated of something).

If Kant's last criticism is solid, it invalidates at least the first
form of the ontological argument given by Anselm. In Kant's point of
view, Anselm's argument would really amount to this:

1. All possible perfection must be predicated of an absolutely perfect
Being.

2. Existence is a possible perfection which may be predicated of an
absolutely perfect Being.

3. Therefore, existence must be predicated of an absolutely perfect
Being.

According to Kant's criticism, the minor premise is wrong. Existence is
not a perfection which may be predicated of anything. Existence is not a
predication of a characteristic but an instantiation of a characteristic
or thing. Essence gives the definition and existence provides an
exemplification of what was defined. The essence is given in the
conceptualization of something; existence does not add to this
conceptualization but merely provides a concretization of it. Hence,
existence neither adds nor detracts from the concept of an absolutely
perfect Being. This has been a standard objection to the ontological
argument since Kant.

He says23:

*Being is evidently not a predicate, nor a concept of something that can
be added to the concept of a thing. It is merely the admission of a
thing, and of certain determination in it. Logically, it is merely the
copula of a judgment. The proposition, God is almighty, contains two
concepts, each having its object, namely, God and almightiness. The
small word is, is not an additional predicate, but only serves to put
the predicate in relation to the subject. If, then, I take the subject
(God) with all its predicates (including that of almightiness), and say,
God is, or there is a God, I do not put a new predicate to the concept
of God, but I only put the subject by itself, with all its predicates,
in relation to my concept, as its object. Both must contain exactly the
same kind of thing, and nothing can have been added to the concept,
which expresses possibility only, by my thinking its object as simply
given and saying, it is. And thus the real does not contain more than
the possible. A hundred real dollars do not contain a penny more than a
hundred possible dollars. For as the latter signify the concept, the
former the object and its position by itself, it is clear that, in case
the former contained more than the latter, my concept would not express
the whole object, and would not therefore be its adequate concept. In my
financial position no doubt there exists more by one hundred real
dollars, than by their concept only (that is their possibility), because
in reality the object is not only contained analytically in my concept,
but is added to my concept (which is a determination of my state),
synthetically; but the conceived hundred dollars are not in the least
increased through the existence which is outside my concept.*

Kant, in these statements, argues for showing that "existence does not
add anything to the concept of a thing." Although this is a correct
fact, his statements must be surveyed in all of his claims that in some
other aspects are not complete. I compare his claims with Mulla Sadra's
view.

(1) Kant says: "Being is not a real predicate". Mulla Sadra and his
disciples accept that Being is not a predicate like other predicates and
that it differs from other predicates, but they do not have this opinion
that the existence cannot be a predicate.

Someone that has never seen an elephant can recognize the meaning of
elephant by its definition and its characteristics; afterwards, he asks
"does the elephant exist." Then he will have new knowledge by the answer
that "yes, the elephant exists"; therefore, the sentence "the elephant
exists" will be a proposition because it is a knowledge that may be
false or true. No one can doubt that this sentence is a proposition.
But, according to Mulla Sadra's view, these propositions differ from
other propositions in that something is ascribed to some other thing. In
this latter the structure of proposition is constructed from three
things, the subject, the predicate and the relation and ascription of
predicate to subject; while in the former, i.e. existential
propositions, the proposition is constructed from two things, the
subject and realness of this subject that is the predicate of the
proposition. Therefore, propositions are of two kinds, three-parts
propositions and two-parts propositions. In threeparts propositions
there are three things in the proposition (subject, predicate and
ascription of predicate to subject), whereas in two parts one there are
two things (subject and ascription reality to it).

This distinction solves some other philosophical problems like what is
argued against the fundamental reality of existence by Illuminative
philosophers. If quiddity, they say, is mentally posited and the
existence is fundamental real they, then in every proposition that we
ascribe existence to a quiddity like "the elephant exists", before
ascribing something to the subject there must be or exist firstly the
subject so that it will be possible to ascribe something to it. In other
words, the ascription is after the subsistence of the subject.
Therefore, before ascribing existence to a quiddity, the quiddity must
exist or have (another) existence and so on ad infinitum. That is,
according to the philosophical rule that "the subsistence of a thing for
another thing is after the subsistence of that other thing for which the
subsistence is going to be proved", the subsistence of existence for
quiddity is after the subsistence or existence of quiddity. That means
that the quiddity must be subsistent or have existence in order that
there be the possibility of predicating existence of it.

Mulla Sadra answers24 that that philosophical rule applies to the
subsistence of one thing for another thing, not to the subsistence of a
thing. Therefore, all propositions in which existence is predicated of a
quiddity differ from others in that something is predicated of some
other thing, so that in the latter the last philosophical rule applies
while in the former this rule can not apply.

I set forth this problem and Mulla Sadra's answer in order to show that
existence can be predicated to a quiddity and that there is nothing
wrong in this predication.

But those objections posed by Kant are in the supposition that
three-part propositions are the same as two-part propositions. Perhaps
the word "real" in Kant's statement "being is not a real predicate"
points to Kant's opinion that it can be a predicate but not the same as
other predicates when we assume a thing or attribute to be a predicate,
whereas existence is not an independent thing or attribute, so that it
can be an additional property.

(2) Kant writes: "It [existence] is merely the copula of a judgment"; he
continues that "the proposition, God is almighty, contains two concepts,
each having its object, namely, God and almightiness". In the light of
the fundamental reality of existence, this "having its object" is just
the real existence, that is, reality outside the mind. This existence is
not a copula but a reality; it is not for relating two parts of a
proposition but is the real existence of each of those parts. We said
before, in the section "types of existence", that in addition to
independent existence there is, also, copulative existence in reality,
that is, for example, real relation between subject and predicate (and
in the existence of a caused being). Therefore, the existence is not
only the copula of a judgment, but is either an independent existence or
a copulative existence. Mulla Sadra's philosophical view as developed in
the second part was a demonstration of those both kinds of existence25.

(3) From one point of view, Kant's view that the existence is not an
addition to a concept, is just what Mulla Sadra argues. Because the
fundamental reality of existence is that there is nothing in reality but
existence; the quiddity is its limitations grasped by the mind; and all
attributes have quidditive meanings that differ basically from
existence.

Therefore, in reality there is nothing other than existence that can be
added to it. Kant says26:

By whatever and by however many predicates I may think a thing (even in
completely determining it), nothing is really added to it, if I add that
the thing exists. Otherwise, it would not be the same that exists, but
something more than was contained in the concept, and I could not say
that the exact object of my concept existed.

But, from another point of view, the meaning of existence in the mind
(that differs from its reality) can be added to quiddity. We argued this
additionality with its demonstrations in the section "Existence and
Quiddity".

(4) Kant argues that a hundred real dollars do not contain a penny more
than a hundred possible dollars. Then he concludes that "but the
conceived hundred dollars are not in the least increased through the
existence which is outside my concept"27.

*By whatever and by however many predicates I may think a thing (even in
completely determining it), nothing is really added to it, if I add that
the thing exists. Otherwise, it would not be the same that exists, but
something more than was contained in the concept, and I could not say
that the exact object of my concept existed. Nay, even if I were to
think in a thing all reality, except one, that one missing reality would
not be supplied by my saying that so defective a thing exists, but it
would exist with the same defect with which I thought it; or what exists
would be different from what I thought...*

This opinion is compatible with Mulla Sadra's view that the quiddity, in
so far as it is quiddity, is in reality the same as in the concept. The
quiddity sometimes appears in external existence and at other times has
mental existence. Therefore, the externality of a quiddity does not make
it greater or more than its mentality. In explaining existence and
quiddity above it was noted that28: "...Here, it must be added that
existence has two aspects, one external and another mental. But even in
the mind the separation of quiddity from existence is not conceivable.
It is obtainable only by rational analysis and laboring, because what is
in the mind is a "mental existence" just as something in the external
world is an "external existence". But it is of the very nature of the
intellect to notice quiddity in abstraction, totally discarding both
modes of existence, by not taking them into consideration, not by simply
negating them. In other words, if as a result of the hard work of the
mind we separate quiddity from both kinds of existence, then quiddity
would not be existence." This means the sameness of quiddity in the mind
and in the external world.

(5) Quidditive meaning, in so far as it has the same ascription to
existence and non-existence, must be a contingent meaning in relation to
both mental and external existence. Therefore, every being that has a
quiddity (that is the result of abstraction by mind from limitations of
a real being) must be a possible being. This is also compatible with
Kant's statements29:

*If, then, I try to conceive a being, as the highest reality (without
any defect), the question still remains, whether it exist or not.*

and

*If, however we are thinking existence through the pure category alone,
we need not wonder that we cannot find any characteristic to distinguish
it from mere possibility.*

But if we are concerned with the reality of existence, the qualifier
changes to necessity. Every existent being, in so far as it is
existence, is ascribed existence necessarily; and in so far as it has a
quiddity, existence is ascribed to its quiddity contingently.

Therefore, the ascription of existence to the quiddity needs reason, and
that necessity does not make the quiddity real. Although the pure
existence exists necessarily, this necessity, according to Seddiqin
Argument, does not conclude that it exists. The Seddiqin Argument is an
argument for proving the eternal necessity of existence, not an argument
for proving the realness of the concept of a necessary being. Every
concept can be possible even the necessary being, otherwise we may not
doubt its reality. The work of the cosmological argument is to prove the
reality of this concept; and this attempt is meaningful. The difference
of the Seddiqin Argument from ontological argument is that the
ontological argument tries to prove the reality of the meaning of
necessary being through its meaning, and after constructing that
concept; while the Seddiqin Argument tries to prove the eternal
necessity of the reality of existence, which afterwards will be named
God.

Mulla Sadra, also, accepts what Kant says30:

*Whatever, therefore, our concept of an object may contain, we must
always step outside it, in order to attribute to it existence.*

and

*The concept of a Supreme Being is, in many respects, a very useful
idea, but, being an idea only, it is quite incapable of increasing, by
itself alone, our knowledge with regard to what exists* .

It must be added that possibility belongs to quidditive meanings, but if
something does not have a quiddity -grasped through limitations of
existence- then it may not be conceived as possible. This matter will be
explained afterwards.

(6) We said that the meaning of existence is an additional meaning to
quiddity, while its reality is not an addition to quidditive concept,
but just the reality of that concept.

Kant refers to this second additionality and correctly rejects it. How
do Mulla Sadra and his disciples explain this addition?

They divide propositions into two kinds: "the predicate extracted from
the subject" and the "predicate by way of adherence"31. The first is
abstracted and extracted from the bottom and depth of the reality of the
thing while the second one is a predicate whose abstraction from the
subject means that one essence or external reality adheres to the
essence and reality of subject.

The first one is more general than "analytic" in Kant's terminology,
because it contains, beside essence and the essential character of
subject, the meanings abstracted from the reality of the subject. Their
main character is that they do not have any referent distinct from the
subject, like the meaning of "oneness", "causality", "existence" and
"individuality".

It is obvious that the meaning and concept of "oneness" is different
from meaning and concept of the quiddity that is predicated of it. But
the quiddity does not need any referent and reality distinct from the
referent and reality of "oneness" in order for the quiddity to be
qualified by "oneness"; likewise "causality", "individuality" and
"existence".

Although the meaning of causality differs from that of the essence that
is cause, it has no referent and reality other than the reality of the
thing that is qualified by causality.

The predicate by way of adherence is opposite to the predicate extracted
from the bottom of subject. It is a predicate whose ascription to the
subject depends on the reality of another referent distinct from the
subject. That referent is allocated to the predicate, and at the same
time is unified with subject, like for example "white" (in referent to
bodies) and "knowing" (in referent to souls), for they cannot be
attributed to the subject as predicates except through the meditation of
"whiteness" and "knowledge" which are external and additional to the
reality of what is white and of the one who knows. Whiteness is from
category of quality, while white thing is a substance; therefore, these
predicates must be predicates by way of adherence.

Let us study existence as a predicate in Kant's terminology about
propositions which he divides into analytic and synthetic. Is the
proposition that existence is predicated of a subject analytic or
synthetic? If this predication is about reality and referent of a thing
it will not be synthetic, but analytic. If this predication concerns the
meaning of a (quidditive) subject and the concept of existence it will
be a synthetic, because the meaning of that subject is different from
that of existence. But if the meaning of subject is not a quidditive
meaning or a meaning that is not different from existence, but is the
existence

itself or something that contains the meaning of existence, then the
predication of the meaning of existence to this kind of subject will be
analytic, i.e. the predicate is abstracted from the essence of subject.

Hence, "predicate extracted from subject" that can explain also the
predication of existence, differs from "analytic" in Kant's terminology.

That the words "Necessary Being" have no consistent meaning
-----------------------------------------------------------

This objection is posed by Kant against ontological arguments that are
based on the meaning of "necessary Being"; these arguments try to
extract the reality of necessary Being from its meaning, which must be
clear in order to be a strong foundation for the rest of the argument.
Kant believes that these words are understood by a negative definition
that has not enough power to give it a consistent meaning. He says32:

*People have at all times been talking of an absolutely necessary Being,
but they have tried, not so much to understand whether and how a thing
of that kind could even be conceived, as rather to prove its existence.
No doubt a verbal definition of that concept is quite easy, if we say
that it is something the non-existence of which is impossible. This,
however, does not make us much wiser with reference to the conditions
that make it necessary to consider the non-existence of a thing as
absolutely inconceivable. It is these conditions which we want to know,
and whether by that concept we are thinking anything or not. For to use
the word unconditioned, in order to get rid of all the conditions which
the understanding always requires, when wishing to conceive something as
necessary, does not render it clear to us in the least whether, after
that, we are still thinking anything or perhaps nothing, by the concept
of the unconditionally necessary.*

This objection renewed in some statements of contemporary philosophers
like Bertrand Russell33, John Hospers34 and Mackie35. Philosophers who
work in realm of analytic and linguistic philosophy have been interested
in this question.

However, this inconsistency of the meaning of necessary Being that can
produce some difficulty for ontological argument does not apply to the
Seddiqin Argument.

Because the Seddiqin Argument is based not on the meaning of necessary
Being, but on the reality of existence that must indicate to the
richness and independence of the most real and complete existence.

But, how do we have the meaning of God as the pure, rich and most real
existence in Mulla Sadra's view? As said above, this meaning is not a
negative but a positive meaning. It may be useful for some negations to
have this meaning; but the essence of this meaning is positive and real.
Those negations do not construct this concept; the way of negation is
only a way for grasping this meaning. On the other hand, how clear is
this meaning of God? The clarity of the meaning of God, according to
Mulla Sadra, is based on the clarity of existence that we explained
previously at the beginning of the introduction of his philosophy, which
we recall here36:

According to Sadra the "notion of existence" is one of the best known
concepts.

It is self-evident and is reasonable by itself, because it is self
apparent and makes others apparent. There is no need of any other thing
to make its notion clearer. A defining term must always be immediately
known and clearer than the defined term. But nothing is more evident
than existence: all defining terms of existence are but explanations of
the word; they can be neither a "definition" nor a "description." Since
existence is absolutely simple as will be explained- it has no specific
difference or genus; hence it has no definition. It can not have any
description, because a "description" is obtainable only by an accidental
property which is part of the five universals whose division itself is
based on the thing-ness of quiddity, whereas existence and its
properties are derived from an entirely different source from
quiddity37.

But the deepest reality of existence is in the extremity of
hidden-ness38. Because its deepest reality is external; if its reality
should come to our mind this would be a refusal of reality, because in
so far as it is reality -not notion- it must be external and outside
mind. Furthermore, were its reality to be actualized in the mind -like
the reality of fire- its effects also would be actualized - and in our
example our mind must burn!

Mulla Sadra says39:

*"The truth of existence is the clearest thing in appearance and
presence; and its essence is the most hidden thing in grasping and
understanding the depth of its reality"*

And in another book under the title "On explanation of grasping the
truth of existence" he says40:

*"It is not possible to conceive the reality of existence and its depth
of truth, neither by a definition that consists of genus and differentia
nor by a definition that consists of genus and special accident nor by a
meaning equal to existence. Because, conception of the truth of external
truth of every thing is acquisition of that thing in the mind and the
transition of that meaning from the external to the mind. This action is
obtainable about every thing other than existence (i.e. quiddities), but
it is not possible about existence (because the transition of existence
from the external to the mind, cause annulment of its truth, and what is
grasped from existence by the mind is a phantom of the truth of
existence not its reality). Therefore, it is not possible to have a way
to the truth of existence, unless via intuition by inner insight not by
way of definition and limiting and demonstration and reason and
understanding by words and terms..."*

Therefore, although the referent and reality of necessary Being is
completely hidden, its notions is most clear and obvious. A. Javadi
Amoli, in explanation of this meaning says41:

*... That being whose existence is necessary and that reality
conditioned by no stipulate, although they do not have any categorical
and quidditive meaning, but are constructed from some general concepts
so that, apart from the manner of abstraction and perception, are very
evident and people understand them very clearly.*

That the Cosmological Argument Depends on an Invalid Ontological Argument
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

This criticism posed by Kant is an objection to the cosmological
argument that can destroy the cosmological argument by destroying its
foundation. In surveying this objection, I shall attempt answer some
questions each of which is sufficient to reject Kant's claim: first,
whether the cosmological argument depends on the ontological argument;
second how and in what part the ontological is based on the
cosmological? third what kind of cosmological argumentation depends on
ontological one? (should Kant's claim be true); fourth whether this
objection may be applicable to the Seddiqin Argument, that differs from
cosmological argument.

The cosmological argument appears to proceed partly a posteriori. Its
starting point is the empirical premise that something exists. It thus
appears different in kind from the ontological proof, which proceeds
entirely a priori. as Kant notes42:

*In order to lay a secure foundation for itself, this proof takes its
stand on experience, and thereby makes profession of being distinct from
the ontological proof, which puts its entire trust in pure a priori
concepts.*

But Kant goes on to claim that this is mere pretense43:

*...the so called cosmological proof really owes any cogency which it
may have to the ontological proof from mere concepts. The appeal to
experience is quite superfluous;...*

There seem to be two claims here: first, that the cosmological argument
depends on the ontological argument, and that if the latter is not
cogent then neither is the former; and second, that the appeal to
experience in the cosmological argument is superfluous, that because of
the dependence just mentioned the ontological argument alone is
sufficient to give the desired conclusion of the cosmological argument.

Kant isolates a certain proposition which he claims is assumed in the
cosmological argument. Of this proposition he says44:

*... this is the proposition maintained by the ontological proof; it is
here being assumed in the cosmological proof, and indeed made the basis
of the proof; and yet is an assumption which this latter proof has
professed to dispense.*

and a bit later45

*... this is precisely what the ontological proof has asserted and what
the cosmological proof has refused to admit, although the conclusions of
the latter are indeed covertly based on it .*

Kant characterizes the first part of the cosmological argument as
follows46:

*It runs thus: If anything exists, an absolutely necessary being must
also exist. Now I, at least, exist. Therefore an absolutely necessary
being exists. The minor premise contains an experience, the major
premise the inference from there being any experience at all to the
existence of the necessary. The proof therefore really begins with
experience, and is not wholly a priori or ontological.*

In any case, the present objection is not Kant's. The superfluousness he
has in mind does not lie in the attempt to use a posteriori means to
establish a necessary being47.

He writes48:

*... experience may perhaps lead us to the concept of absolute
necessity, but is unable to demonstrate this necessity as belonging to
any determinate thing.*

And just before that49 :

*... the cosmological proof uses this experience only for a single step
in the argument, namely, to conclude the existence of a necessary being.
What properties this being may have, the empirical premise cannot tell
us.*

In both these passages Kant seems not to object to using empirical
premises to establish the existence of a necessary being. Nothing is
claimed to be superfluous about that50.

The real problem comes later. The cosmological argument is supposed to
be a proof of God (or an ens realissimum, etc.), not just a necessary
being. How can we tell what sort of properties belong to this necessary
being? How do we get from necessary being to God? To answer this, i.e.,
to complete what we are calling the second part of the argument, we must
resort to reason alone. We can no longer rely on experience:51

*Reason therefore abandons experience altogether, and endeavors to
discover from mere concepts what properties an absolutely necessary
being must have, that is, which among all possible things contains in
itself the conditions essential to absolute necessity. Now these, it is
supposed, are nowhere to be found save in the concept of an ens
realissimum; and the conclusion is therefore drawn, that the ens
realissimum is the absolutely necessary being.*

And he continues:

*But it is evident that we are here presupposing that the concept of the
highest reality is completely adequate to the concept of absolute
necessity of existence; that is, that the latter can be inferred from
the former. Now this is the proposition maintained by the ontological
proof; it is here being assumed in the cosmological proof, and indeed
made the basis of the proof; For absolute necessity is an existence
determined from mere concepts. If I say, the concept of the ens
realissimum is a concept, and indeed the only concept, I must also admit
that necessary existence can be inferred from this concept. Thus the
so-called cosmological proof really owes any cogency which it may have
to the ontological proof from mere concepts.52*

Kant tells us how this further commitment comes about. He writes:53

*If the proposition, that every absolutely necessary being is likewise
the most real of all beings, is correct (and this is the nervus probandi
of the cosmological proof), it must, like all affirmative judgment, be
convertible, at least per accidents. It therefore follows that some
entia realissima are likewise absolutely necessary beings. But one ens
realissimum is in no respect different from another, and what is true of
some under this concept is true also of all. In this case, therefore, I
can convert the proposition simpliciter, not only per accidens, and say
that every ens realissimum is a necessary being. But since this
proposition is determined from its a priori concepts alone, the mere
concept of the ens realissimum must carry with it the absolute necessity
of that being; and this is precisely what the ontological proof has
asserted and what the cosmological proof has refused to admit, although
the conclusions of the latter are indeed covertly based on it.*

As we have seen, Kant, in this criticism, attacks the cosmological
argument offered by Leibniz and some others that begins with the meaning
of necessary being then endeavors are directed to prove that this
meaning is a real one and has reality. Whether this criticism is valid
or not, whether and the cosmological arguments are as Kant says, was the
core of some replies by some of philosophers of religion; and we shall
not introduce them at this point. However, there are some other
cosmological arguments that begin not with the meaning of necessary
being, but with the real existence of something in the world, like that
offered by Norman L. Geisler. He believes that Kant's criticism does not
apply to his restatements and another new form of the cosmological
argument.54

*... This [dependency of cosmological argument on the ontological one]
is not true of the argument given here. It begins with existence, not
thought (e.g., it begins with "something exists" not with "that than
which nothing greater can be conceived"). It proceeds with ontologically
grounded principles and not with mere rationally undeniable thought
(i.e., it proceeds with "Nothing cannot cause something" rather than
"Everything must have a sufficient reason"). Our restated cosmological
argument concludes with a real Ground of all finite being as opposed to
a logically necessary being (i.e., with "unlimited cause of existence
for all limited existence," as opposed to "a Being which logically
cannot not be"). The restated cosmological argument does not begin with
the a priori and at no point does it borrow from the purely conceptual
to complete its task. It is not based on the invalid ontological
argument.*

However, does this criticism apply to the Seddiqin Argument? Is this
argument based on ontological argument? There is no need to waste more
in response to these questions; it is sufficient to note that the
Seddiqin Argument, in spite of some similarity, is neither a
cosmological argument nor an ontological one. This argument that begins
with the "fundamental reality of existence", not with the meaning of
necessary being or with any incomplete fact in the world. Therefore,
this criticism can not apply in it.

That there is no being whose existence is rationally demonstrable
-----------------------------------------------------------------

David Hume laid down what has become a standard objection to the
ontological proof as well as to any alleged proof for God's existence.
It has the following basic logical form:55

(1). Nothing is rationally demonstrable unless the contrary implies a
contradiction (for if it leaves open any other possibility, then this
position is not necessarily true).

(2). Nothing that is distinctly conceivable implies a contradiction (if
it were contradictory, it would not be distinctly conceivable; it can
not be possible).

(3). Whatever we conceive to exist we can also conceive as non-existent
(the existence or nonexistence of things can not be ruled out
conceptually).

(4). There is no being, therefore, whose nonexistence implies a
contradiction.

(5). Consequently, there is no being whose existence is rationally
demonstrable.

It seems that there is no need to add more explanation in reply to this
criticism in view of all said above about two kinds of predication in
Mulla Sadra's view: primary essential predication and common technical
predication.56 It is sufficient to note that necessary existence as a
concept that has a mental existence is not necessary, but it is a
meaning whose existence is possible. But necessary existence (if there
is a referent for it) is necessary; indeed, every existent being exists
necessarily. But this necessity is not the result of that meaning, but
it must be concluded from an external reality that is not its meaning.

Therefore, the third premise of Hume's objection that "Whatever we
conceive to exist we can also conceive as non-existent" does not apply
to the Seddiqin Argument. A.

Javadi Amoli, one of the contemporary disciples of Mulla Sadra, says:57

*"... Existence and external reality does not come from essence and
essential characters of the meaning of necessary existence that is a
mental concept. The necessity that is considered in necessary existence
is not a necessity that is in the relation between subjects and
predicates, but it a necessity that is equal and just the external
existence; and the meaning of necessary being that indicate its reality,
has not this necessity. Although the concept of necessary existence is
necessary existence by way of primary essential predication, but it is a
mental affairs by way of common technical predication that comes into
existence in the content of perception and awareness of existence as a
possible reality..."*

There is further explanation in the reply to the next criticism.

That Existential Statements Are not Necessary.
----------------------------------------------

This objection is a very famous criticism against cosmological argument
and has been repeated in the statements of most philosophers of religion
since Hume's time.

That existential necessity and its meaning be understood in some other
way than logical necessity is important for the cosmological argument.
But this causes some other criticisms which I will note here in the
views of Hume and Kant and some other contemporary philosophers. I will
explain Mulla Sadra's view about this necessity whose correct
explanation is necessary for the cosmological argument. Afterwards, I
will note that the Seddiqin Argument is a real existential proof that
depends on a necessity different from the cosmological argument, i.e.,
necessity-by-itself. In other words, the words independent or rich
existence (as opposed to dependent and poor existences) must be used
instead of necessary existence (in the cosmological argument that can
also be true) as opposed to possible beings.

The various forms of this objection are:

Hume:

*No proposition about existence can be logically necessary. The opposite
of any proposition about experience is always logically possible. But if
it is logically possible that anything known by experience could have
been otherwise, then it is not rationally inescapable that it be the way
it is. It follows that nothing based in experience is logically
demonstrable.*

Kant:

*Existential statements are not necessary. The conclusion of the
cosmological argument purports to be an existentially necessary
statement. But necessity is a characteristic of thought, not of being.
Only statements are necessary, not things or beings. Necessity resides
only in the logical, but not in the ontological realm.*

*What is logically necessary is not ontologically necessary. Flowing
from the former criticism is the implied objection that what is
rationally inescapable is not necessarily real. It might be necessary to
think of something as being when in actuality it is not so. Hence, even
a logically necessary Being would not necessarily exist.*

To reply to this criticism (which is against the cosmological argument),
I will explain first Mulla Sadra's view about the origin of the meaning
of necessity, and then the reply from his point of view.

Mulla Sadra argues58 that "necessity" in logic and philosophy (ontology)
has the same meaning. This means that the meaning of necessity that is
applied in logic, is, also, used in philosophy and is ascribed to
external existences and realities. Nay, necessity is an evident meaning
that proves its reality and truthfulness, originally, by philosophy;
logic uses the result of that philosophical investigation as a
postulate; then it explains its thirteen kinds in the realm of concepts
and qualities of propositions like the essential, the descriptive, the
conditional, the temporal and etc.

He argues that "necessity", "possibility" and "impossibility" are some
evident meanings and do not have an actual definition. But the
investigation of their reality and the division of things into
necessary, possible and impossible or into necessary and possible is a
philosophical division because the subject of philosophy is existence
and beingness, and the comparison of every thing with existence by two
exclusive disjunctive propositions results in the division of all things
into necessary, possible, and impossible (or the division of existence
into necessary and possible by one disjunctive proposition results in
two kinds of being).

That exclusive disjunctive proposition is nothing other than the law of
non contradiction. Because, the impossibility of gathering or removing
two contradictories implies that every thing, as regards existence, has
either necessary existence or not. The first is necessary being; if it
does not have this necessity, then it will have either necessity of
non-existence or not. The former is impossible and the latter is
possible. (Likewise all existent being divides into necessary and
possible.)

Necessity is considered first in philosophy, or is recognized in
reality; then logic determines its referent in its own realm, namely
mental concepts.

Some of Muslim theologians like "Ghazi Azodi Iji"59 suppose that the
necessity in philosophical necessity differs from that in logical
necessity. If these two, they say, had the same meaning, then, in all
conditions that essential characters of a thing are ascribed to it, this
would require that the thing be a necessary being; for example, since
number four is an even number necessarily, therefore it must be
concluded that number four is a necessary being.

Mulla Sadra answers60 that the meaning of necessity is the same, but the
difference of meaning is with regard to predicates not with regard to
the meaning of necessity that is the mode of the proposition. Therefore,
that necessity requires that number four must be necessary in even-ness,
not in existence.

Logic does not utilize philosophy only in the application of necessity.
It makes use of philosophy in some other affairs, like predication as
follow: Being is divided, under the title of unity and multiplicity,
into "one" and "many", each of which divides into some other division
like specific, generic or accidental unities and also pure unity and the
unity that is ascribed to a multiple that is in identity. This identity
is predication (that is either "primary essential" or "common
technical"). Logic utilizes predication that is the result of above
philosophical divisions as a postulate, and organizes its special
matters accordingly.

Otherwise, logic cannot prove the origin of predication.

Logic depends on philosophy not only in many of its postulates but also
in the origin of its subject, that is knowledge and concept or
presentation and judgment.

Consequently, "necessity" is an evident meaning, and the judgment about
its reality is a philosophical (ontological) matter; logic applies this
philosophical meaning in the realm of relations and connection of
propositions.

"Necessity", in spite of its unitive meaning, has various orders in
different cases. The objection arises from two things:

Firstly, when "necessity" is considered merely in a logical sense its
philosophical application that refers to external realities is
neglected.

Secondly, when "logical necessity" is limited to analytic propositions
every demonstration that results in a necessary conclusion must be in
the realm of concepts.

Mulla Sadra argues against this supposition that "necessity" is not
restricted in essential property in analytic propositions. But includes
also some other essentials he calls "essentials of section of
demonstration". Those essentials are more general than essentials in
analytic propositions that come from analyzing a thing and finding its
essential properties.

"Possibility" is a meaning that is not in the essence of any quiddity.
It is abstracted only after comparing quiddity with existence and
non-existence, and then is predicated of that quiddity. The meaning of
"possibility" does not include essence or essential characters of any
quiddity to which this meaning is ascribed.

The "need" for another being is not a meaning that can be taken from
essence or essential characters of a possible being. Therefore, the
"need" as well as possibility is from the "essentials of the section on
demonstration".

The cosmological (necessity and possibility) argument (in Mulla Sadra's
view) depends not on mental analysis of meanings and quiddities which
are conceived, but on intellectual analysis of realities that exist
externally. In this argument, even the meaning of existence does not
appear in so far as it is a mental meaning, but the meaning of existence
is attended to as regards its referent and reality. The real referent of
existence is an evident judgment for any one who is not a sophist.

A possible being which exists externally (i.e., an external referent of
possible being) needs another being in external reality to remove its
need, and that being necessarily exists externally.

The external referent and reality of necessary Being does not have any
quiddity other than His reality and existence: His quiddity is just His
reality and external existence.

His necessity has no referent distinct and separate from His reality and
it is not other than intensity of existence. Consequently, the necessity
of God as necessary being is not like necessity in analytic
propositions, i.e., it is not like logical necessity (like essential or
conditional necessity) that refers to quality of connection of a
predicate to subject; rather it refers directly to the intensity of
reality that has no truth other than external-ness or reality.

Since Kant holds that necessity is a merely logical concept in the realm
of analytic propositions, he supposes that if God, as necessary Being,
has the necessity of external existence, then the external existence
must be taken in His meaning. Thus negation of its existence (i.e.,
negation of referent and external existence) requires a contradiction as
a negation of the essence and essential character of a thing.

A. Javadi Amoli, one of the contemporary disciples of Mulla Sadra
says:61

*"... Existence and external reality does not come from essence and
essential characters of the meaning of necessary existence that is a
mental concept. The necessity that is considered in necessary existence
is not a necessity that is in the relation between subjects and
predicates, but it is a necessity that is equal to and just the external
existence; and the meaning of necessary being that indicates its
reality, has not this necessity. Although the concept of necessary
existence is necessary existence by way of primary essential
predication, but it is a mental affairs by way of common technical
predication that comes into existence in the contain of perception and
awareness of existence as a possible reality..."*

The necessity-possibility argument (as a kind of cosmological argument)
in Mulla Sadra's view uses the "need" had by possible being for its
external truth to another being. Therefore, if a possible being has
reality externally, then this need has also external truth;
consequently, the other which removes this need has real referent.

Therefore, although the meaning of necessary Being can be understood
apart from its referent (even in the case that requires the supposition
of non-existence of the world) to deny Him, there is no way to deny Him
in external reality and truth. Because, if reality is not necessary
(because it possesses some characteristics inconsistent with the
character of necessary being), it must be possible being (because of the
disjunctive proposition which announces necessity or non-necessity of
existence for existent beings). But the reality of possible being
without a necessary being as cause is a contradiction.

This was Mulla Sadra's view about necessity in the words of his
contemporary commentators. All said above removes the criticisms stated
about necessity in the cosmological argument, but not in the kind of
argument posed by Leibniz but that is named as necessity-possibility
argument based on Mulla Sadra's philosophical investigations in this
argument.

However, the Seddiqin Argument differs from the necessity-possibility or
cosmological argument, because the latter is based on quidditive
possibility, while the former argues through "poverty possibility", that
is, really existential poor-ness and the word possibility is ascribed to
it figuratively. The mere truth of existence, based on the fundamental
reality of existence and its analogical gradation, etc., has some
characters like completeness, rich-ness, unlimited-ness, etc. Those poor
existences must depend on Him because they are not other than poor-ness
(not a being that have poor-ness accidentally).

Therefore, what is stated by Kant and Hume not only does not apply to
necessity-possibility argument, but also cannot penetrate in the
Seddiqin Argument.

That an Infinite Series Is Possible
-----------------------------------

In most such argumentation, the defenders of the cosmological argument,
needs to demonstrate the absurdity of an infinite succession of causes
in proving the existence of God. In all cosmological arguments which is
argued by following philosophers there is one premise that indicates
this absurdity, namely:

1- Aristotle:62

*... An infinite regress of actualizers is impossible (for the whole
series would not be actualized unless there is a first actualizer)...*

2- Alfarabi:63

*... There can not be an infinite regress of causes of existence...*

3- Avicenna:64

*... There can not be an infinite series of causes of being, but there
can be an infinite series of causes of becoming (like father begets son,
who begets son, etc.) ...*

4- Thomas Aquinas:65

a. The argument from motion: There can not be an infinite regress of
actualizers or movers. ...

b. The argument from efficient causality: There can not be an infinite
regress of (essentially related) efficient causes. ...

c. The argument from possibility and necessity: There can not be an
infinite regress of necessary beings each of which has its necessity
dependent on another. ...

5- Duns Scotus:66

*... There cannot be an infinite regress of productive beings, each
producing the being of the one following it. ...*

6- Leibniz:67

*... There cannot be an infinite regress of sufficient reasons. ...*

In all these cosmological arguments one premise that must be proved is
the impossibility of infinite regress in causes. Yet this is not
possible in the view of Hume and Kant. I am not, here, in a position to
examine all the demonstrations for proving the impossibility of an
infinite regress of causes in response to the criticisms of Hume and
Kant. Perhaps, some kinds of these demonstrations are not valid (like
demonstrations for annulling preparatory causes), and some others which
differ in kind have no trouble with those criticisms. I am, here,
examining Seddiqin Argument with this criticism. As we said before in
the section ‚Äúthe advantages of Mulla Sadra‚Äôs Seddiqin Argument over
Avicenna‚Äôs‚Äù, (and, also, in Sabzavari and Tabatabaii‚Äôs view) this
argument does not need a proof against the infinite regress of causes.
To repeat:

Since in Avicenna's philosophy "quidditive possibility" is discussed, he
needed to demonstrate the absurdity of infinite succession in proving
the existence of God, while in Sadra's Seddiqin Argument in which
existential poor-ness (poverty possibility) is mentioned there is no
need to demonstrate the absurdity of infinite succession. Mulla Sadra
himself after proposing his argument said about this advantage:68

*"This way that we measured is firmest and most honorable and simplest
one so that the disciple of Him does not need any intermediate thing
other than Him for having a knowledge about His essence and attributes
and acts; and there is, also, no need to annul infinite succession and
circular causality..."*

Some commentators of Sadra's philosophy are of the opinion, which they
ascribe to him, that this argument not only does not need to rule out
infinite succession but that it is a proof for rejecting any infinite
succession.69

### Notes

###

1 See David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion.

2 See Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, translated by Max Muller,
pp. 398-[^403]: I will refer to this book in notes which will come later
as ‚ÄúCPR‚Äù.

3 David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion.

4 CPR. p. 404-410, see notes 1-4 also Norman L. Geisler Philosophy of
Religion pp.145-147 and 181-[^185]:

5 You can find these criticisms in ‚ÄúMalkolm‚Äù in Plantinga, The
Ontological Argument, p.136

6 See Anselm‚Äôs Basic Writings, translated by S. N. Deans, or Alvin
Plantinga, The Ontological Argument, pp.3-[^27]:

7 Descartes Meditations in The Philosophical Works of Descartes, volume
I, translated by Elizabeth S.

Haldane and G. R. T. Ross.

8 CPR. p. 399

9 Ibid.

10 Ibid.

11 Ibid., p. [^398]:

12 Ibid., p. [^399]:

13 Ibid.

14 Ibid.

15 Ibid.

16 Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Philosophical Writings, translated by Mary
Morris and G. H. R. Parkinson, pp. 10-[^17]:

17 CPR, p.400

18 Ibid.

19 Ibid. p. [^401]:

20 See Mulla Sadra, Asfar I pp. 292-[^294]: Mulla Sadra carefully shows
the difference between these two kinds of predication in Islamic
philosophy. By this distinction he has a good solution for soul
important problems as mental existence and the characters of knowledge,
etc.).

21 You can see all of these examples of the two kinds of predication in
the following: Mulla Sadra, Asfar, pp. 238-240, Tabatabaii, Bedayat
al-*Hikmat* , p. 27; and Nehayat al-*Hikmat* , p. [^58]:

22 See Norman L. Geisler, Philosophy of Religion, p. [^147]:

23 CPR, pp. 401-[^402]:

24 You can find that distinction (between two parts propositions and
three parts propositions) and the illuminative philosophers‚Äô objection
against the fundamental reality of existence along with Mulla Sadra's
and his disciples‚Äô answers in: Mulla Sadra, Asfar I p. 40-47,
Al-Mashaiir, p. 135-138; Tabatabaii, Bedayat al-*Hikmat* , p. 20-[^21]:

25 See part two, chapter 1, section ‚ÄúTypes of existence‚Äù

26 CPR, p. 401

27 Ibid 28 See page [^75]:

29 CPR, p. [^403]:

30 .Ibid.

31 .See Sabzavari, Sharh al-Manzoomah, p. 29, and Javadi Amoli, Proof of
Divine Existence p. [^203]:

32 CPR, p.398

33 See ‚ÄúA Debate on the Argument from Contingency‚Äù, F. C. Coplestone and
Bertrand Russell, in Louis P.

Pojman, Philosophy of Religion, An Anthology, pp. 6-[^11]: This debate
was broadcast in 1948 on the Third Program of the British Broadcasting
Corporation and published in Why I Am Not a Christian, by Bertrand
Russell.

34 John Hospers, An Introduction to Philosophical Analysis, pp.
293-[^295]:

35 J. L. Mackie, The Miracle of Theism, pp. 82-[^86]:

36 See the beginning of the section ‚ÄúExistence‚Äù from chapter 1 of the
second part.

37 See Mulla Sadra,*¬†Al-Asfar* pp. 23-27, 68-69; Al-Shavahid
al-Robubiyyat, pp. 7, 8; Al-Masha'ir, pp 13-19; Sabzavari Mulla hadi,
Sharh al-Manzumat fi al-*Hikmat* in its translation by Mohaghegh Mehdi
and Izutsu Toshihiko, The Metaphysics of Sabzavari p.[^31]:

38 Mulla Sadra, Al-Masha'ir, p .[^12]:

39 Mulla Sadra, Al-Shavahid al Robubiyyat, pp. 7-[^8]:

40 .See Mulla Sadra, Al-Shavahid al Robubiyyat, pp.14-17, M.H.
Tabatabaii, Bedayat al*Hikmat* , p. 13; Osoole Falsafeh wa Raveshe
Realism (The Principles of Philosophy and Method of Realism) , p. 29

with footnotes by Motahhari.

41 A. Javadi Amoli, Proofs of Divine Existence, p. [^206]:

42 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith
(London, 1958), B.634

43 .B.[^636]:

44 .B.[^635]:

45 .B.636-[^637]:

46 .B.632-[^633]:

47 Russell is not the only writer on the cosmological argument who
thinks there is something superfluous about using a posteriori
considerations to prove the existence of a necessary being. See, for
example, H. J.

Paton, The Modern Predicament (London, 1955), pp. 199-200, and Patterson
Brown, ‚ÄúSt. Thomas‚Äô Doctrine of Necessary Being‚Äù, The Philosophical
Review, [^73]:1(January, 1964): 78. However, The writers, unlike
Russell, do not attribute such a claim to Kant.

48 B.[^635]:

49 B.[^634]:

50 There are many passages indicating that for Kant a necessary being
would be one whose existence can be determined a priori. (See, for
example, B631, 640, 645, [^662]:) Thus he was well-positioned to make
the objection Russell attributes to him. But he did not do so.

51 B. 634-635

52 B. 635

53 B. 636-637

54 .Norman L. Geisler, Philosophy of Religion, p. [^211]:

55 David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, and Norman L.
Geisler, Philosophy of Religion, p.

[^146]:

56 See page [^207]:

57 A. Javadi Amoli, Proofs of Divine Existence, p.163-[^164]:

58 Mulla Sadra‚Äôs statements about origin of the meaning of necessity and
possibility is scattered in his book Asfar. To explain his view I use
his commentator, A. Javadi Amoli; see A. Javadi Amoli, Proofs of Divine
Existence, p.158-[^159]:

59 Ghazi Azodi Iji, Sharhi Mavaqif, Vol. III p.[^121]:

60 Mulla Sadra Asfar, vol. I p.[^91]:

61 A. Javadi Amoli, Proofs of Divine Existence, p. [^163]:

62 Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book XII ch. 8

[^63]: Alfarabi, Oyoun al-Masa‚Äôil p. 50.

64 Avicenna, Al-Negat, p. [^210]:

65 Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, 1,2,3

66 Duns Scotus, Philosophical Writings, pp. 129ff.

67 Gottfried Leibniz, Monadology, pp. 32-[^39]:

68 Mulla Sadra, Asfar, VI, pp. 25-[^26]:

69 See A. Javadi Amoli, Sharhe Hekmat Mota'alieh Asfar Arba'ah, sec.1
from vol. IV, p.134, and M.T. Mesbahi Yazdi, Amoozeshe Falsafeh, PP.
79-80,[^343]:
