Conclusion
==========

The Seddiqin Argument, as an argument for proving the existence,
attributes and acts of God, is not much known by Western philosophy,
what assumes there are three or four important sets of arguments for the
existence of God, namely the ontological, the cosmological, the
teleological and perhaps the moral. This can be because of the
assumption in the view of Western thinkers that Islamic philosophy came
to an end with the death of Averroes and/or it ceased to exist with what
was written by Ghazzali (1058-1111) against philosophical thinking in
his important and influential book, namely Tahafut al-Falasifat. In
reality, what came to an end was only the first phase of the whole
history of Islamic philosophy. With the death of Averroes, Islamic
philosophy ceased to be alive for the West, but this does not mean that
it ceased to be alive for the East. In fact, Islamic philosophy did not
develop in all Muslim countries after Ghazzali and Averroes especially
among Sunni Muslims; and in the Arabian areas there was no longer a
large interest in developing philosophy. Since these Muslims were the
majority and had more relations to the West, the assumption that there
were no new philosophical views in Muslim countries grew in the West.
This assumption was an obstacle between Islamic philosophy and Western
philosophy and impeded active relation between their ideas.

In fact, the truth of the matter is that a kind of philosophy which
deserves to be regarded as typically and characteristically Islamic
developed not so much before the death of Averroes as after. This
typically Islamic philosophy arose and matured in the periods subsequent
to the Mongol invasion, until in the Safawid period in Iran it reached
the apex of vigorous creativity. This peculiar type of Islamic
philosophy which grew up in Iran among the Shiites has come to be known
as*hikmat* or theosophy (lit. "wisdom"). We can trace the origin of
the*hikmat* back to the very beginning of the above-mentioned second
phase of the history of philosophy in Islam.

*Hikmat* is structurally a peculiar combination of rational thinking and
Gnostic intuition, or, we might say, rationalist philosophy and mystical
experience.

The most famous and important philosophers of this second phase of
Islamic philosophy is Mulla Sadra. He had very new ideas in philosophy
(especially ontology) that made him the brightest star in Islamic
philosophy. His new ideas mark a turning-point in Islamic philosophy so
that the other philosophers after him were affected by his view points.

The Seddiqin Argument that we analyzed in this research is a more
developed argument for proving the existence of God in the light of his
philosophical views about existence, necessity, causality etc. The
fundamental reality (principality) of existence is the most important
bases of his philosophy and can change our view about more other
philosophical affairs.

Consequently, the above study is divided into three parts. The first
introduced Mulla Sadra as an Islamic philosopher to make clear his
background, life, works, views and historical relation to other schools,
etc. This was a preparatory part for introducing the one who projected
the Seddiqin Argument in the true Seddiqin manner of argumentation.

The second part was devoted to the explanation of the Seddiqin Argument.
Since this argument is based on some philosophical views of Mulla Sadra
that without which the argument can not be understood, I allocated three
chapters for this explanation about “existence”, “necessity” and
“causality” in his view. Then the Seddiqin Argument in Mulla Sadra’s
view was presented in the interpretations of two contemporary
commentators of his philosophy. There were not the final statements
about Seddiqin Argument; for the argument had some background in
Avicenna’s thought which Mulla Sadra improved, as well as developments
after Mulla Sadra by Sabzavari and Tabatabaii, which were presented
also. In the end of this part I compared the Seddiqin Argument with what
is known in the western philosophy as the ontological argument, and
enumerated three differences between these two arguments by which the
Seddiqin Argument has been vaccinated against some criticisms made
against the ontological argument.

The third part examined the Seddiqin Argument in relation to standard
criticisms that raised against the soundness of ontological and
cosmological arguments.

Since most important criticisms are taken from Hume and Kant, their
criticisms were first presented, then the Seddiqin Argument was examined
in relation to these criticisms specially those ones which refer to
existence and necessity. This part reviewed seven more important
criticisms. Since other criticisms are studied indirectly during
explanation of the foundations of Seddiqin Argument, they were not
examined later but could be part of another larger study of this
argument afterwards.

The Seddiqin Argument was not originally an attempt to prove that God,
as that which most people conceive, exists, but is an attempt to
transcend our perception to the real meaning of God that according to
Mulla Sadra is nothing but the pure truth of existence. The difficulty
in proving the existence of God is not in affirming the proposition “God
exists” but in having a good knowledge and conception about Him.

The negation of His existence is because of weakness not in the
argumentation but in the conception of His nature. Avicenna said in his
Logic: “all thanks belong to God that whoever denies Him [does not deny
Him but] of course denies what he has conceived.” When one has a good
transcendent perception from God it is equal to affirming His existence.

I think Mulla Sadra reached this view because of some hints from Islamic
thought about this matter in the Quran and some prayers quoted from the
prophet Mohammed and his relatives. In one of these prayers it is said:

*“... How can it be demonstrated for You [God] by what is not but need
in existence to You? Does any other than You have any appearance that
You do not have, so that it can make You appear? When did You disappear
so that You need a reason that denote You? And when did You go out of
sight so that some effects can be what cause us to reach to You? ...”*

Therefore, the arguments which use some effects or special facts in the
universe to reach to God do not have enough power to give us a good
conception about God who must be clearer than those effects. In the
light of this view, Mulla Sadra introduced his Seddiqin Argument which
arises from most evident facts in the world, i.e., existence (or reality
in Tabatabaii’s view).

What he did was to give not a demonstration, but a good survey of the
reality of existence that refers firstly to God then to other things. In
this survey, he founded his philosophy on the fundamental reality of
existence and its circumstances. In my research I introduced only a
brief survey of the results of this view in his philosophy. The
fundamental reality of existence has also other consequences in other
philosophical matters like the reality of time and the substantial
movement in the world. A thorough survey of the fundamental reality of
existence and its results need more research. However, I used only those
parts of his philosophy that are essential to introduce the Seddiqin
Argument. I explained, in this research, only the main purpose of the
Seddiqin Argument that is proving the existence of God in the views of
Mulla Sadra and his disciples.

This argument has also some other consequences more beyond proving the
existence of God, and Mulla Sadra’s argument is so structured that can
be useful for these results. These consequences can be used for proving
the unity (in some special meaning) of God, the quality of his
attributes and the relation between God and other beings.

Explanation of these consequences also can be done in some other
researches which can clarify the differences between his view in the
light of the fundamental reality of existence and other traditional
conceptions about these matters.

For example, he has a detailed and interesting answer to the problem of
evil by his view about attributes of God (like His power and mercy) and
the relation of God to other beings. The survey in his answer to this
problem can also be the subject of further research. He also has a term
explaining the nature of God, namely, “the simple truth all things and
not any of them”. But it can be difficult to understand what he means,
yet it is also very comprehensive explanation of the matter. The present
research could prepare other research in these fields.

The Seddiqin Argument differs from both the ontological and the
cosmological arguments both in the kind of argumentation and in the
conception of and intention from God. These two arguments have
encountered some objections. Hume and Kant criticized them
systematically and the other philosophical objections usually originate
from their criticisms. Some of these criticisms arise from analysis of
some philosophical affairs like existence, necessity etc. Some of these
standard critics created serious troubles for some kind of these
arguments (especially the ontological) so that their correctness were in
question.

Mulla Sadra based his Seddiqin Argument on such founds that they could
be protected against these criticisms. He proposed his philosophical
foundations in detail in order to protect the argument from those
attacks. Consequently, to examine the Seddiqin Argument with those
systematic criticisms, we must survey the foundations of the Seddiqin
Argument in Mulla Sadra’s view.

The third part examined, the Seddiqin argument and its foundations along
with the more important standard criticisms and tried to show that these
criticisms do not disturb the Seddiqin Argument because it provide a new
idea about God which is nothing but the pure truth of existence and a
new argumentation that strengthens this idea. These criticisms focused
on existence and necessity. Some other criticisms were enumerated, but
they were not so important that Seddiqin Argument was examined directly
with them. These criticisms were answered indirectly during explanation
of foundations of Seddiqin Argument. The position of Seddiqin Argument
against these criticisms and also some others posed by other
philosophers like Russell, Haspers, Mackie etc. can be examined in
another research that may show Mulla Sadra’s answer to these objections.
The present research can provide the main key for solving those
problems.


