Preface
=======

The original in Farsi, entitled "Jawidanegi wa akhlaq," appeared in a
memorial volume Yadnameh ye Ustad Shahid Mutahhari (Tehran: Sazman-e
Intisharat wa Amuzish-e Inqilab-e Islami, 1360 H. Sh./[^1981]).

Before entering the discussion concerning the eternity of moral values
it should be noted that according to the philosophies of \`being'
reality and knowledge as well as moral values are considered to be
permanent. Though here I will not be concerned with the permanence of
reality, but it is necessary to deal with the question as to why reality
and ethics are dealt with separately. What is the difference between
moral principles and other principles which we refer to as \`reality'?

After all moral values also constitute certain principles and that
which is said concerning scientific principles, that they are eternally
true, should also apply to moral values. However, I also think that the
right thing is to keep these two issues separate. But first of all I
must refer to a minor issue to establish that the issue of eternity of
moral values is very important for us and that it is closely related to
the eternity of Islam.

Ethics comprises certain teachings, and if we believe the moral,
humane, and social teachings of Islam to be transitory then the
conclusion will be that the teachings of Islam dealing with morality and
education are also subject to change. That is, it would imply that such
principles had a validity in their own their time, and with changes in
conditions these moral principles should also change and so should the
basic teachings of Islam.

As a result the major part of Islam would be obsolete and should be
abolished. Of course, the issue of evolution of reality is related to
this matter, but the issue of relativity of moral values has a greater
bearing on the eternity of Islam. Let us now proceed to clarify the
point as to why the issue of ethics is separated from the issue of
reality.

**Speculative Wisdom and Practical Wisdom**

Reality relates to theoretical principles and ethics deals with
practical principles. In other words, ethics is subsumed under practical
wisdom (hikmat-e \`amali) and reality is subsumed under theoretical
wisdom (hikmat-e nazari); therefore, we cannot apply the principles of
practical wisdom to reality, for theoretical wisdom deals with facts as
they are or were; whereas practical wisdom is confined to man and deals
with things as they ought to be-that is, as to how man is to conduct
himself-and hence is prescriptive (insha).

But the nature of theoretical wisdom is descriptive (ikhbar), that is,
it deals with the question as to whether a certain proposition
corresponds to facts or not, and if it is does, whether it is eternally
true. But such questions do not arise in ethics.

In our philosophical literature, theoretical reason and practical
reason are regarded as two different types of human faculties. But
Muslim philosophers did not discuss their features and differences in
sufficient detail. However, they have left useful hints concerning the
issue. They suggest that the former faculty is inherent in the soul by
means of which it tries to discover the external world; whereas the
latter consists of a series of perceptions of the soul, which
administers the body, for the body's management.

Practical reason is considered to be a natural arm of the soul and
theoretical reason as a metaphysical arm. Thus the soul possesses two
perfections: theoretical perfection and practical perfection (the
philosophers hold that the essence and nature of human being is
knowledge and its perfection lies in knowledge, whereas the mystics do
not consider knowledge as the ultimate perfection of man and are of the
view that a perfect man is one who attains to reality not one who
discovers it).

Regarding the faculty of practical reason, they hold that the soul as
the administrator of the body is subject to certain principles for
better governing the body as a prelude to its attaining perfection.

Early Muslim philosophers defined justice in terms of freedom (justice
in body). The soul stands in need of-the body and it cannot attain
theoretical perfections without it, but in order that the soul should be
able to make the best use of the body, it must establish a kind of
balance between its faculties. The faculty which establishes such a
balance between.

soul and body is an active faculty. In case this balance is
established, the soul is not dominated by the body, rather it is the
body which is subordinated to the soul. They considered justice to be a
kind of subordination of the body to the soul in which the body is
controlled by the soul. This is all that our early philosopher have said
on this issue. It seems that, relatively speaking, Ibn Sina (980-1030)
has treated the issue of theoretical and practical wisdom more
thoroughly than any other Muslim philosopher.

In the section on theology of his al-Shifa', Ibn Sinaa classifies
wisdom into practical and theoretical. In the section on logic of the
Shifa'; he treats it in more detail and probably in his Mubahathat he
discusses it in greater detail than in any other place. On the whole
these old discussions provide a good ground for study, but they have not
treated the -subject sufficiently and there even exists some ambiguity
about practical reason.

That which can be inferred from the statements of some of them is that
practical reason is a kind of cognitive faculty of the soul. That is,
they maintain that our intellect possess two kinds of cognitive
faculties, one is the faculty of cognition used in theoretical sciences
and the other is the faculty used in practical sciences.

But others like Mulla Hadi Sabzawari (1833-1910) hold that the term
\`intellect' (\`aql) is used equivocally for theoretical and practical
reason and that practical reason is not a cognitive faculty, that it is
a faculty of action and not one of cognition.

Hence their statements do not make clear whether or not practical and
theoretical reason are two cognitive faculties (regardless of whether
they are two distinct faculties or two aspects of one faculty), or if
one of these is a cognitive and the other a practical faculty. In the
later case, using the term \`reason' for practical reason is equivocal,
that is, practical reason is not reason in the sense of a cognitive
faculty.


