Third Theory
============

There is a third theory according to which it is impossible that man
should do anything which is unrelated to the domain of his self and has
no relation to his personality, being exclusively in the service of
something external and without being related to the realm of his being.
Man, however, has two selves, higher and lower.

That is, man is a being with dual aspects. In one aspect he is an
animal like other animals and in the other he has a higher reality. It
is amazing why Allamah Tabatabai did not advance such a view, for it is
consistent with his own principles including those relating to ethics.
When we speak of \`man's nature,' we mean man's reality, not merely his
physical nature.

Man has an ontological reality and his emotional being is subordinate
to that reality. The ontological being of man one plane consists of his
animal being and on a higher plane of his spiritual being.

Man completely realizes this higher self in himself or rather considers
it his more original self. When animal needs conflict with his judgement
based on reason and will and he wishes to subject his animal needs to
his reason there may be two kinds of consequences. At times he succeeds
and at other time he fails.

For instance, in the matter of food and its quantity, reason has its
own judgement whereas his appetite requires something else. When man
yields to his appetite he has a feeling of defeat, and when he overcomes
his appetite he feels victorious, while in reality he has neither been
defeated by anyone nor has he been victorious over anyone.

Here one aspect of his existence is dominated r by another aspect.
Apparently, he should feel either defeated or victorious in both cases,
for both belong to the realm of his existence. But practically we see
that it is not so. When reason dominates over appetite, he has a feeling
of victory and when appetite overcomes reason he feels defeated.

That is because his real self is the one associated with reason and
will, and his animal aspect constitutes his lower self. Actually the
lower self forms a prelude to his real self. If we believe in such a
duality in man's being then we can justify ethical principles in the
following manner.

Man has certain perfections by virtue of his spiritual self. These
perfections are real and not conventional, for man is not only body but
soul as well. Any act that is consistent with man's spiritual perfection
is valuable, and any act that is irrelevant to the higher aspect of our
soul is an ordinary and mediocre act.

I agree with the Allamah, Russell, and others that good and bad, ought
and ought-not derive from man's likes and dislikes. But the question is:
the likes or dislikes of which self are to taken as the criterion, those
of the higher self or those of the lower self? Moral value arises if it
is the higher self that likes.

This is the reason why ethics is felt to have a higher station. That
man sees one aspect of his existence and acts pertaining to it as
possessing sublimity is not a mental construct or convention. Rather,
that is because he feels that aspect to be a more perfect and stronger
aspect of his being. All his perfections derive from that aspect of his
existence and its intensity, and all defects derive from its weakness.

In accordance with this approach, virtues like honesty, truthfulness,
kindness, mercy, beneficence and the like are notions which have
affinity to the higher self. The philosophers have also said that
practical wisdom relates to voluntary acts from the viewpoint of being
more perfect and excellent.

They relate the matter ultimately to the soul, and maintain that the
human soul possesses two kind of perfections: theoretical and practical.
Theoretical perfection of soul lies in the knowledge of the realities of
the world and the higher virtues are considered practical perfection of
the soul. That is, they develop the soul practically and brings about a
harmony in its relation with the body and pave the way for the real
perfection of the soul.

Here we reach a most significant Islamic principle which has not been
discussed by the philosophers. That principle is as follows: man has an
innate nobility and sublimity which is the same as his spiritual being
and the Divine breath. Subconsciously he senses that dignity within
himself. In confrontation with actions and habits he ascertains whether
they are compatible with his innate nobility or not. When he feels that
there is a compatibility and harmony, he regards it as good and
virtuous, otherwise as evil and vicious. In the same way that animals
are guided by instinct to what is beneficial or harmful for them, the
human soul has perfections transcending nature and some actions and
habits are compatible with those perfections.

Universal values relating to good and evil, oughts and ought-hots may
be justified in the following manner: Human beings are created alike in
respect of that in which their spiritual perfection lies, with similar
and uniform likes and viewpoints. Although physically and naturally all
men live in different conditions and situations and with varying
physical needs, but they are equally situated in respect to their
spiritual perfection.

Inevitably, in that domain likes and dislikes and notions of what is
good and evil assume a uniform, universal and permanent aspect. All
moral virtues, whether individual or social, such as patience and the
like, can be explained from this viewpoint. The two theories mentioned
earlier can explain only social values like self-sacrifice, helping
others, etc., but they cannot explain values like patience, fortitude
and so on. The last theory on the contrary can explain all moral
values.

Though I agree with the view that all perceptions of good and evil
signify a thing's relation with its perfection, nevertheless such
perceptions of good and evil can be universal and permanent.


