Subjectivity of Normative Judgements
====================================

It should be noted that Allamah Tatatabais discussion of i 'tibariyat
(subjective or normative ideas) in the sixth chapter of his book Usul-e
falsafeh wa ravish-e realism (\`The Principles of Philosophy and the
Method of Realism') is undoubtedly an invaluable and original idea
(unfortunately I was not able to write complete footnotes on it).

Its only demerit is that he has himself conceived this idea and then
followed it up without relating it to the statements of his predecessors
which could help us in tracing the roots of these issues in the words of
thinkers like Ibn Sina and others on practical reason and theoretical
reason. It would have been better if he had started from their
statements.

The reason for such a gap is that his point of departure was
jurisprudence ('ilm al-usul) not philosophy. He was inspired by the
ideas of the late Shaykh Muhammad Husayn Isfahani regarding itibariyat.
Therefore, he did not relate it to the views of the philosophers.

Allamah Tabatabai maintains and this is of course my
interpretation-that whatever we ascribe to practical wisdom relates to
the world of i'tibari (subjective) notions. Thus, theoretical wisdom or
objective truth consists of objective ideas which are the real face of
things. Practical ideas are normative notions. Normative ideas comprise
of commands and prohibitions and all those notions which are dealt with
in 'ilm al-usul.

The Allamah considers all itibariyat of the type where an objective
idea is extended and applied to something else; human reason or the soul
as a cognitive faculty cannot originate or create a concept, as in its
literal and metaphorical use of words. A metaphor consists of the
application of the literal and non-metaphorical meaning in a
metaphorical sense.

Whether we agree with Sakkaki's view and hold that the word retains its
original meaning and some other thing is imagined as its instance, or
disagree with him and believe that the word is used in another meaning,
one thing is clear: that the intellect and the soul are unable to
spontaneously create concepts like ownership. On the contrary it borrows
a concept that already exists in its objective form and applies it in
its metaphorical sense.

He started from this point and followed it up opening up a very
extensive field. In this approach all moral concepts, including good and
evil and the like, are considered to be itibari concepts. He has
discussed in detail whether the notion of \`good' is derived from
\`ought' or \`ought' from \`good.' Earlier in Najaf he had written an
article in Arabic on the normative sciences ('ulum-e itibari) and the
article in Persian (i.e. the sixth chapter of his above-mentioned book)
is based on its contents.

Regarding the concept of \`ought,' he arrived at the conclusion that
all 'oughts' stem from the fact that nature in itself has some ends
towards which it moves. In all activities in the domains of inanimate
objects, plants, animals, and man, so far as they fall within the domain
of instinct and are not voluntary, it is nature that moves towards its
goal. At the human level there are certain acts which takes place by the
means of volition and thought. In such acts, too, man has certain
objectives which have to be attained voluntarily.

These ends are also the ends of nature, but it cannot achieve them
directly but only through the agency of man's will and thought. It is
here that a need for these normative notions arises and they come into
existence spontaneously.

For example, man's nature, like that of plants, needs food, but he
should obtain it by means of volition and thought, unlike plants, which
obtain food from the ground directly through their roots, and unlike
animals, which are drawn towards food by instinct (whose nature is also
not well understood). But man has to do this by conscious volition and
effort, without being aware that the system of nature uses his apparatus
of thought as its instrument in order to achieve its goals.

Man innately possesses two systems: the system of nature as well as the
system of thought and will. The latter is subordinate to the former and
it is directed to achieving nature's ends. The natural end is reflected
in the form of a need or desire in man's soul, for instance, the
inclination towards food.

Early Muslim philosophers defined the process of voluntary action as
follows: first there is conception of the action, followed by judgement
of its usefulness and inclination towards it (there were different views
of it), then the stage of resolution, which is followed by emergence of
will, after which the voluntary act takes place.

Allamah Tabataba i s agrees with this description, but he considers the
role of judgement as fundamental. However, here the judgement of the
soul is not the kind of theoretical (descriptive) judgment which earlier
MuslimÂ­ philosophers used to call \`assent of benefit,' but is a
prescriptive judgement (You ought to do this).

He stresses mainly on the point that all voluntary acts contain a kind
of command and a prescriptive and normative judgement, for example,
"This ought to be done," "This ought not to be done." It is such oughts
that cause man to be drawn towards the natural end. The Allamah probably
conceives all acts of volition as terminating in knowledge.

These ideas came to the mind of Allamah Tabatabai and he followed them
up independently without studying others' views in this regard. Once I
even asked him whether what he says in this regard is in agreement with
the ideas of the early Muslim philosopher regarding the difference
between practical and theoretical wisdom and their view about the
normative character of the notions of good and evil.

In their debates with the theologians (mutakallimin) our early
philosophers mention certain basic criteria for logical argument and
they mention good and evil as criteria that pertain to rhetoric and
dialectics, and maintain that the notions of good and evil cannot be
employed in logical arguments. They are of tile view that good and evil
derive from custom and cite the example of Indians who consider killing
of animals as immoral.

If one were to scan philosophical works one would not find a single
instance, where the notions of good and evil have been employed to
decide a theoretical issue. On the contrary the mutakallimin always base
their arguments on the notions of moral and immoral. For instance, they
hold that the rule of Divine grace is good and that such and such a
thing is unseemly for God and that such and such a thing is obligatory
for Him, and the like.

The philosophers consider these as normative issues which cannot form
the basis of rational argument. Like Allamah Tabatabai, they also
consider good and evil as normative notions. Another point which gives
further importance to his statements is that others like Bertrand
Russell, who claim to have originated a new approach in contemporary
philosophy, also. have a similar viewpoint.

Undoubtedly Allamah Tabataba i was unaware of their views, and I
myself, while writing explanatory notes on the Allamah's book Usul-e
falsafeh wa rewish-a realism, did not notice that his view of the
practical sciences and ethics is something new and identical with the
latest views about ethics. Perhaps the development of such an idea in
the Allamah's mind (about forty years ago in Najaf) was contemporaneous
with the development of this view in European thought. In any case the
Allamah was definitely unaware of their views.


