Permanence of Ethical Norms
===========================

From this point onwards we shall take up the discussion about the issue
of \`ought.' No doubt some 'oughts' are particular and related to
individuals. For instance, one person may need a certain kind of
training, and he might say, "I should take this subject," while another
who does not need it would say, "I should not take that subject."
Basically, when two persons fight each other, each of them fights for
the sake of a certain ought. There is no doubt that individual and
particular 'oughts' are relative.

For example, when I say that this food is good for me, this statement
has a theoretical and a practical aspect. My conclusion concerning the
benefit of the food constitutes its theoretical aspect and \`I .ought to
eat that food' constitutes the practical aspect. In short, these kinds
of oughts are particular and changeable.

An important question in ethics is, Are there any universal and
absolute 'oughts' shared by all human beings? In case there are such
oughts, how can such universal oughts be explained on the basis that
every \`ought' is directed towards some goal? Incidentally, we reach
some fine conclusions at this point.

Concerning the difference between theoretical wisdom and practical
wisdom it is not sufficient to say that the formers deals with \`is' and
the latter with \`ought.' This is not a sufficient explanation for
practical wisdom. After all practical wisdom is wisdom and wisdom deals
with universal issues.

Hence practical wisdom should be defined as dealing with universal
'oughts,' otherwise there are also certain 'oughts' in geometry,
industry etc., but they have nothing to do with practical wisdom. What
is to be noted here is that there are universal 'oughts' which are
familiar to every mind. Therefore, such 'oughts' must be directed
towards goals which are not particular and individual. If we could prove
such 'oughts,' we will have to accept that they are rooted in the soul
and that man is not confined to physical nature only. This will be one
of the proofs of the immaterial nature of soul.

Kant also reached the immortality of the soul through moral issues:
Man's physical nature has some needs which are limited and relative. The
needs of one person differ from those of another person. The 'oughts'
for meeting such needs are also different and often contradict one
another. There are many 'oughts' which are opposed to other \`ougths'
and so such 'oughts' are not of an ethical nature. But man, by virtue of
his soul, enjoys a station which-like man's physical nature, to which
his outward will and thought are subject-draws him towards its own
goals. Man's physical nature draws him towards its goals in order to
attain its own perfection.

It needs food, and we say we ought-to eat food. According to
Schopenhauer, we are made to feel pleasure and to be on look out for
pleasure in the world of ideas, while we are unaware of the fact that
within our inner being it is nature which seeks to achieve its ends. It
is nature that moves towards its end, but it provides pleasure for us in
order to make us serve its own purposes.

While in the world of ideas we are drawn towards pleasure, in reality
we move to fulfill the goals of nature. For example, when the baby
cries, it is nature which seeks to bring him up. When the baby cries due
to the feeling of pain, it is nature which declares its need, having
subjected the baby's feeling and mind.

Man enjoys a certain spiritual perfection and sublimity which is rooted
in his God-given nobility and dignity (some 'oughts' are meant to
achieve that spiritual perfection). When someone says, \`I ought to do
such and such a thing,' it means \`I must attain to that excellence,'
although such a goal may not be reflected in his outer consciousness.
Those excellences are common to all men, and, therefore, in this respect
all men feel the same kind of imperative. The second justification for
universal imperatives is the issue of social spirit.

It is said that man is a social creature and he has certain oughts, to
meet not his individual but his social needs. In the same kay that man
is impelled to seek the satisfaction of his individual needs he is
impelled to seek the satisfaction of his social needs. Had there been no
relations between man and his fellow men, such oughts would not have
arisen.

For instance, if I had no relations with anyone I would not make any
efforts to feed other people. Such imperatives are related to a higher
self, be it an individual higher self or a higher social self. That
higher self seeks to achieve its goals. That self causes man to perform
moral acts. Those acts which are performed for the sake of the higher
individual self or the social self have permanent principles, which are,
firstly, universal and same for all individuals and, secondly, are
permanent and not temporary.

The other point which has been raised concerns the philosophy of being
and the philosophy of becoming. According to the philosophy of being
moral values are permanent and therefore ethical principles are
eternally true. However, according to the philosophy of becoming moral
values are relative and transitory; that is, they are valid during a
certain time and invalid in other times.

This is a very important issue, for apart from ethics it touches other
judgements as well. According to the philosophy of becoming no truth is
permanent. Reality is transient and therefore prescriptions are also
transitory, for the difference between truth and morality is that the
former is descriptive and the latter is prescriptive, one is theoretical
and the other is practical. Inevitably this question also arises in the
case of all religious precepts and is not confined to what we mean by
the term \`ethics' (akhlaq). What they (i.e. Westerners) imply by
\`ethics' is a more general sense which includes all prescriptions and
the notions of good and evil.

At the outset an objection may be raised here, that the philosophy of
becoming does not necessarily imply that truth is changeable. For as we
have said the philosophy of becoming relates to external reality, and
even if one were to admit that there is nothing except becoming, it does
not imply that truth (which is related to the mind) is subject to
change. Of course, we accept the implication that should facts, which
include human thought, be subject to change, consequently truth as human
thought will also be subject to change. But they do not make such an
assertion. We believe that truth, which is the content of thought, is
inseparable from external and mental existence except in conception.

For example, the statement "Zayd was standing on Friday" is always true
This statement itself, apart from external or mental existence, is not
something that may be said to be neither in the mind nor in external
reality, a proposition that is eternally true. This proposition has
either external existence or mental existence.' But when man thinks
about it, he first abstracts it from mental existence, and after
abstracting its meaning declares it to be eternally true. We believe
that if thought itself were changeable, its content will also be
changeable, and the statement "Zayd was standing on Friday" will not be
conceived today in the mind as it was conceived yesterday. It will
change into something else.

This was in relation to the permanence of truth. The same objection can
be raised in relation to morals values. Suppose we believe in a
philosophy of becoming, and it implies that truth is changeable. But
morals and precepts are a set of prescriptions and these are normative
in nature. The changeability of truth does not necessitate the
changeability of norms. In an article, "Khatm-e Nubuwwat," ("The
Ultimacy of the Prophethood"), I have pointed out that if anybody claims
that all things are subject to change, then the ultimate prophecy and
everlasting laws become meaningless.

Our position is that if truth be mutable it does not imply that
prescriptions should also be mutable. For prescriptions derive from
convention and the law of change of facts does not apply to
prescriptions. Thus, it is wrong to assert that a philosophy of becoming
will imply mutability of moral values. However, there is another
argument that may be offered to support this view.

This other argument is that every prescription, ethical or non-ethical,
is based on certain expediencies. This view coincides with the view of
the theologians, and jurisprudents following them, who maintain that
"religious obligations are subtle instances of rational obligations,"
or, in the words of Nary, certain benefits and harms underlie the causes
of religious precepts, which are meant to achieve those benefits and are
therefore subordinate to objective benefits and harms, like an effect
subordinate to its cause.

The benefits are facts and commands and prohibitions are based on
conventions and norms. But the benefits and harms from which the
commands and prohibitions stem are not permanent, for they are facts.
Thus when the former are not permanent the latter also will not be
permanent. The objection to the eternity of moral values takes another
form in accordance with this argument.

Now we wish to make a fundamental examination of ethical criteria and
confine our discussion to ethics in our own special sense. The question
of religious precepts requires a wide-ranging study and has many
ramifications pertaining to worship, social and financial issues and
other matters.

In the sphere of ethics, one may maintain that moral values are
permanent on the basis that moral values are identical with reality, in
the sense that a moral act is good because it is essentially attributed
with the quality of goodness. The immoral act is bad because it is
attributed with the quality of badness. Hence every act is either
essentially moral or essentially immoral, although it may be said that
there are some acts which are neither essentially moral nor immoral.

It means that moral goodness and evil are objective qualities of things
inherent in their essences, and that which is essential is not mutable.
That which is morally good is good forever and that which is immoral
will always remain immoral. We should do that which is morally good and
refrain from that which is immoral, and this is a self-evident and
indisputable judgement of reason. This is one of the arguments that may
offered in favour of the permanence-of ethical values. Such an argument
is based on the essential character of good and evil which are
considered as objective attributes.

Muslim philosophers have not discussed this issue but they do not
believe in good and evil as being inherent in things. In logic, they
consider any reference to morality or immorality as reference to popular
convention which finds use only in dialectics and rhetoric. They even
point out that morals vary with nations and they cite the example of
Indians .who consider slaughter of animals as immoral. However they do
not elaborate and do not explain why the notions of moral goodness and
evil cannot be employed in rational arguments.

They do not explain why they are different from mathematical
propositions and what criterion underlies this distinction. They only
say that morality or immorality pertain to the rules of practical
reason. However it is dear that practical reason develops such notions
in order to achieve certain goals. In any case they have not elaborated
upon this matter.


