The Origins of Normative Notions
================================

Among philosophers Allamah Tabatabai has treated this issue more
thoroughly than anyone else. In the sixth chapter of his book Usul-e
falsafeh wa ravishe realism, he has discussed profoundly this issue,
which is related partly to philosophy in that it explains the process of
development of ideas by the mind. However, the greater part of this
discussion relates to jurisprudence (\`ilm al-usul). There he has
discussed the origin and character of the development of normative
ideas, and this topic deserves to studied in greater depth and
thoroughness. However, here I will give a brief summary of his ideas
relating to this discussion.

He begins by asserting that one of the functions of the mind is that it
abstracts certain ideas from external objects (an operation that does
not involve any innovation) then applies them to another reality, that
is, it applies the definition of one thing to another thing. In
technical and literary terms, it invents metaphors. A metaphor,
especially in accordance with Sakkald's view, is not simply the use of a
word in some other meaning It does not simply involve applying, for
instance. the word \`lion,' after divesting of its meaning, to a person
with a similar quality. No.

A metaphor involves a change in meaning not a change in word. Actually
what we do is that we see, for instance, Zayd as an instance of the
meaning of \`lion,' then we apply the word \`lion' to him. This is a
kind of innovation of the mind. The late Ayatullah Burujerdi would make
an interesting remark in this relation. He would say that when we say,
"I saw a lion shooting', this statement is actually composed of the two
following statements: "I saw Zayd shooting," and "Zayd is like a lion."
lie agreed with Sakkaki's conception of the metaphor.

Such is Allamah Tabataba i s notion of the mind's capacity to formulate
and invent concepts by supposing-not arbitrarily but in accordance with
a certain basis-one thing as an instance of another thing.

Another observation that he makes (though I do not agree with its
generalization) is that the difference between animals on the one hand
and plants and inanimate things on the other is that the latter move
towards their end in one predetermined direction alone. Nature, in the
course of its normal movement, is equipped with means through which it
moves inexorably towards its goal. Animals also, in respect of their
physical and natural being (not as beings possessing cognition and
mind), like plants move directly towards their end in the natural world.
But in their case, in most of their activities, the means of nature do
not suffice to direct animals towards their goals.

That is why they employ their mental and cognitive faculties to achieve
their ends and in fact there emerges a kind of harmony between physical
nature (which is unconscious) and the mind which functions in a manner
enabling nature to achieve its ends. The mind is however directed to
achieving a series of ends which are supposed to be different from the
ends of nature and one imagines that the harmony between the two is
accidental.

The cognitive nature of man and animal is such that when they perceive
and conceive an object there arises a desire and appetite for it as [an
expectation of] pleasure in attaining it and of pain in the failure to
attain it. This is followed by the motive to obtain the pleasure or to
avoid the pain. For instance, man feels hunger and with his past
experience'of the pleasure in eating food he seeks food in order to
obtain that pleasure.

But at the same time in the process of this act nature too attains its
end, for the body needs food in order to replace the materials it has
consumed. Eating serves both the ends, the conscious purpose of pleasure
is attained and at the same time nature also satisfies its need. Hence,
the question arises: Are these two acts unconnected with each other and
is their coincidence something accidental? Is it possible for the case
to be otherwise, that is, a person might feel pleasure in eating stones
while his stomach requires some other food?

Is it an accident that delicious foods which bring pleasure to one who
eats also helps satisfy the nature's needs? Or is it the case that there
is no accident involved here and there exists a kind of harmony between
the two, where one is primary and the other is secondary? In case there
is no accident involved here, is the conscious desire to obtain pleasure
and to avoid pain the primary principle which requires an apparatus that
may cooperate with it for the end of pleasure by digesting food and
absorbing nourishing substances?

Or is the case quite the inverse and it is nature which constitutes the
primary principle, having subjugated the conscious mind to its service.
Undoubtedly, there is some kind of harmony between the natural and
conscious ends. Hence every animal takes pleasure in what nature needs
and nature also needs that which brings pleasure.

For instance, a woman is equipped with organs and glands required for
child bearing and nursing and she finds pleasure in these acts. The
animal that lays eggs takes pleasure in that act, and an animal that
gives birth to a child takes pleasure in child bearing. There exists a
strong harmony between them.

It is wrong to think that purposive movement is confined to conscious
beings only When it is said that nature has certain ends, some people
may raise doubts as to whether unconscious nature may have ends. In fact
ends are related to that very unconscious nature and the conscious mind
has ends which are incidental to the ends of nature. The end of nature
is to move. towards its perfection. As remarked by Ibn Sinn, the
possession of consciousness does not make puposive a being that lacks
purpose. Purposiveness is related to the essence of a thing. Sometimes a
thing is aware of its end and sometimes it is not.

Q: There is not always a harmony between pleasure and natural need.
Many pleasures are harmful for nature and injurious to its perfection.

A: Deviant cases are not to be taken into consideration, particularly
in die case of human being who act according to reason. What I mean is
that there is a general harmony that exists to such an extent that it
cannot be accidental. Exceptional cases, like that of the sick person
who needs medicine without feeling any pleasure in taking it, arise out
of a kind of difference between two exigencies, a topic which has its
own details. An animal takes pleasure in eating its medicine because it
acts according to instinct, while the human being, who acts according to
his reason, does not take pleasure in it.

Allamah Tabataba i says that the world of normative concepts begins
here. The way he explains the issue it appears as if all animate beings
including man and animals possess such ideas. But I do not agree with
this generalization. According to him there is a necessary relation
between nature and ends, like the concrete, objective and philosophical
relation between cause and effect. Now in the world of conception man
takes the objective relation of necessity-as opposed to the relation of
contingency-between two things in nature and applies that relation to
two things between which there is no such real relation.

For example, he applies the term \`lion' to a brave man. Here, too, man
applies the term \`necessity' as found in external nature to the
relation between himself and his goal. Such necessities and oughts
created by the mind, arise out of such conceptions. The Allamah is of
the view that such oughts exist in every voluntary act and in every
conscious animal.

The earlier Muslim philosophers did not believe in such an ought or
imperative. They only held that man first conceives the benefit in
something, then there arises a desire for it, followed by a resolution.
They described its various stages stating that first there is conception
followed by a judgement of the benefit. This judgment in their view
posits something objective, that is, a certain object has a certain
benefit. The final stage is the stage of volition. However, they did not
believe that a normative judgement was involved here.

But Allamah Tabataba i holds that such a conception and imperative is
involved here and the statement that something is good has no other
meaning. When we say that it is good to do something, its \`goodness'
arises from here. There is another issue involved here as to whether
\`good" arises out of \`ought' or the case is the reverse. As the
Allamah holds that \`ought' is the first formulation (itibar), he holds
that \`good' arises from it. "It is good to do so" signifies a kind of
inclination towards something and it is as if one were attributing
objective and concrete qualities to human actions.


