The Theory of Employment
========================

Then he has some other views to which he repeatedly refers in his
exegesis of the Holy Qur'an, al-Mizan, and in other places. He holds
that one of the normative formulations is that of \`employment'
(istikhdam). To explain, man has a certain relation to his limbs and
faculties and this relation is objective, real and concrete. My hands
are at my service. All bodily organs of man are owned by man and form an
integral part of his being and are really at the service of man. He says
that every external object may-take the form of a tool in the service of
man, and in the same way that his hands belong to him he considers other
objects as his own. This kind of extension is what typical of subjective
formulations. (itibar).

Man extends the boundaries of that which is limited to his existence to
other beings. He considers such a human tendency to extend concepts as
something instinctive Then he adds that this kind of conceptual attitude
is not limited to inanimate objects, plants, etc.; rather man views even
other human beings from the viewpoint of \`employment.'

Man is created an exploiter and this is a natural tendency in him. He
accepts social and moral issues as secondary principles. However, in
this chapter he does not discuss this issue in detail but he does so in
his exegesis, al-Mizan, under verse 2:213, "Mankind were a single
nation". Perhaps there is apparently a contradiction in his statements
in different places.

At one place he says that \`employment' is a natural principle and that
social justice is at the same time natural to man but is modified by the
other natural principle. Sometimes in his exegesis he is explicit that
man is not social by nature but social by adaptation. In the sixth
chapter of his Usul-e falsafeh wa ravish-e realism, he states that man
is social by nature, but what he means is by adaptation, as mentioned by
him elsewhere. So he does not hold that man is social by nature.

His socialization is outcome of the result of equilibrium between two
opposite instincts. His statements appear in this regard to be similar
to the views of contemporary evolutionists and Darwinians who believe
the struggle for survival to be fundamental in man.

The principle of employment is a respectable form of the Darwinian
idea, for according to it struggle for survival constitutes the basis of
the human being and cooperation arises out of struggle. Man struggles
for survival, but the enemy is not always of one kind; when several men
face a common enemy and feel that they cannot defeat him individually,
cooperation is the only way to survival. Here cooperation is like
political treaties between states, meant only to deter the common enemy
In fact such cooperation arises out of struggle.

Hence when there is no more a common enemy, conflict begins among
apparent friends. Again after some dine differences arise within the
dominating group and grow into a war among them. If finally there remain
only two individuals they fight against each other until the fittest
survives. If we trace the roots of moral rules on cooperation,
friendship, and unity, they will be seen to stem from conflict.

The implication is that if you want to survive in your confrontation
with the enemy (whether it is nature or something else) you should be
honest, truthful and so on. This is the viewpoint of the evolutionists,
and the Allamah's ideas lead to such a conclusion, though he does not
say so explicitly.


**Q: Does man have a natural inclination towards evil?**

A: That is what it means. However, evil is relative, and from the
viewpoint of the individual it is good. Every individual has a natural
tendency to seek his own good, which makes him treat others as tools
(such is the Allamah's view). Man cannot refrain from treating others as
tools.

Q: Struggle for survival is not the same as \`employment.' Sometime
they may coincide and sometimes not.

A: I did not say that the two concepts are identical. What I means is
that both of them lead to the same conclusion. When we say that every
individual tries to treat others as his tools and to use them, when such
a tendency is universal it will automatically lead to conflict.

The Allamah continues his discussion on normative formulations and most
of it has greater relevance to jurisprudence than to ethical philosophy
and its relevant part was that which we have described.

He further holds that man formulates the oughts and ought nots to
attain certain ends. Since these ends are transient, precepts and laws
will also be subject to change and as long as those ends remains the
ought will remain as well, and when the end changes, the ought will also
change. Thus the Allamah holds that normative conceptions, unlike
objective conceptions, are transitory and impermanent and almost
concludes that moral values cannot be eternal. Nevertheless, it is to be
pointed out that he maintains that there are certain normative
principles which are immutable, which are five or six and these are
permanent and the rest of them are subject to change

The principles which he regards as permanent are not of much relevance
here, like the principle of necessity in general, the principle of
employment and other similar things whose discussion will be fruitless
here.


