Three Ethical Theories
======================

Bertrand Russell is one of the thinkers who arrived at the same
conclusion through his philosophy of logical analysis. In his book, A
History of Western Philosophy, while examining Plato's conception of
justice and Trasymachus's famous objection against it, that justice is
nothing but the interests of the powerful, Russell is of the view that
this is the basic problem of politics and ethics: is there any criterion
iii ethics to distinguish between good and bad except that which is
meant by those who use these terms? If there is no such criterion then
most of Trasymachus's conclusions will inescapable.

But how can one say that such a criterion exists? Elsewhere Russell
says that the difference between Plato and Trasymachus is very
important. Plato thinks that he can prove that his idea of republic is
good. A democrat who accepts the objectivity of ethics may think that he
can prove the Republic to be immoral; but anyone who agrees with
Trasymachus will say: There is no question of proving or disproving; the
only question is whether you like or not.

If you do, it is good for you; if you do not it is bad for you. It is
like matters of taste; one may like a certain kind of food and say that
this food is good and others may like another kind and say that, that
food is good. There is no absolute good to compare other goods with. He
further says that if you like it, it is good for you; if you do not, it
is bad for you.

If some like it and some don't the matter cannot be decided by reason,
but only by force. That which is said that justice belongs to the
powerful, that is because when some people like something and others
don't, those who have greater power impose their wishes on others by
force and that becomes law.

The gist of Russell's statements is that the concepts of good and bad
indicate the relation between man and the thing in question. If this
relation is one of liking it is good and if it is one of dislike then it
is bad. If it is neither liked nor disliked, then it neither good nor
evil. We have written that the answer to Russell is that first we have
to trace the roots of why man likes something and dislikes something
else.

Man likes anything that serves the purpose of life even if from a
particular aspect. In other words, nature always moves towards its
perfection and in order to impel man to carry out that which must be
accomplished through his will and choice it has placed desire, liking
and love in him in the same way that it has informed him with the
notions of good and evil.

As nature moves towards individual perfection and expediency, it also
moves towards the perfection of the species as well. Basically the
individual's perfection is not separable from the perfection of his
species. The individual's perfection lies in that of the species, and
inevitably a kind of likes equally shared by all individuals take shape
equally in all individuals. These similar, uniform, universal and
absolute likes constitute the universal criterion of morality.

Justice and other moral values are the ends towards which nature moves
for the perfection of the kind. In order to attain such ends through
voluntary action it creates a liking for these ends in all individuals.
By virtue of that liking the oughts and ought nots appear in the form of
a series of universal imperatives in die soul.

Accordingly, to have a universal criterion in ethics it is not
necessary to consider good and evil objective entities like whiteness
and blackness, roundness and squareness. Russell considers the ego in "I
like it," as an ego solely concerned with its material and physical
interests, not as an ego which is concerned with its spiritual nobility
or as an ego that is concerned with the interests of its kind.

Here we will mention two or three hypotheses and then try to
substantiate the above remarks. First we have to see whether or not
there actually exists a set of common, universal and permanent
imperatives in man's soul (this minor premise has to be derived through
experience). That is, do there exist in the human conscience any notions
commonly held by all individuals in addition to the temporary,
particular, and individual notions of good and bad? I mean those
universal imperatives that are devoid of personal preferences and tastes
in which all that is relevant is personal interest. Do such imperatives
exist according to which man makes judgements occasionally even despite
his personal preferences?

One may say I don't know the analysis of such an issue, but I know this
much that I and all people have certain universal precepts according to
which we judge, for instance, that honesty is good in itself, whatever
the basis of this judgement, or that it is good to return kindness for
kindness. This judgement transcends all personal interests, and one
cannot deny if someone says that a kindness returned for kindness a
thousand years ago is praiseworthy or that anyone who ever returned evil
for kindness is blameworthy.

Undeniably there are two kinds of acts involved here; one act is
praiseworthy and valuable for man and the other is worthless or has a
negative value. If one were to compare with a free mind two kinds of
characters, such as Abu Dharr and Mu'awiyah, in order to make a
judgement concerning them, he will see that Abu Dharr was a man to whom
Mu'awiyah was ready to give everything to buy his loyalty and to make
him relinquish his higher principles. He did not surrender to the
devices of Mu'awiyah who had made everything a means of attaining his
ambitions.

Here one naturally commends the former and condemns the latter. The
same test may be applied in case of other characters and the result will
invariably be the same. We are not concerned with the opinion that all
judgements concerning goodness and badness derive from likes or
dislikes. That may be true, but firstly we want to see whether or not
there exist common and universal judgements. Secondly, if they do, how
can we justify them? Are they justifiable according to what the A(lamah
and Russell have said?

We said that there are two kinds of ought and ought not; one kind is
particular and individual which we regularly come across in everyday
life. For instance, I ought to eat such food, I ought to wear such a
dress, and so on. The second kind of imperatives, of which examples were
cited, is universal in nature.

Now the question is what is the basis of such universal judgements? If
we do not agree with the theologians in considering goodness and badness
as objective attributes and hold that these notions ultimately pertain
to man's relation to a thing, then how can we justify universal moral
judgements?


