First Theory
============

There are three kinds of justification. According to the first, man has
certain urges which serve to fulfill his individual needs. For instance
when hungry, he feels an urge for food. Man has also another kind of
urges which are species oriented. That is, man may desire something
which is not for his individual benefit but for the sake of others. For
instance, man does like others to, go hungry in the same way that he
does not want to remain hungry himself. God has created man such. If we
accept this justification, then the Allamah's view becomes implausible
for he holds that man's motives are consonant with his natural urges.
That is, man's motives are subject to his individual nature.

He holds the principle of employment to be a universal principle and
this conflicts with the foregoing justification. For according to it a
self-seeking act is ordinary and mediocre, but when the same act is
formed for the sake of others it is considered to be sublime and sacred.
Here serving others is a criterion of sanctity and self-seeking a
criterion of its absence.

If an act is meant for one's own benefit it is for individual benefit
and if it is for others it is for mankind in general, and such an act is
moral in nature. Thus the criterion of the moral or immoral character of
an act depends in one sense on its being for one's own self or for the
sake of others, that is, in its purpose being individual or universal.
It is universality that gives value to an act although in other respects
it is no different from an act done for personal and individual
motives.

Accordingly, it is true that \`It is good' means \`I like it', but
sometimes I may like something for myself and sometime for the sake of
others. Inevitably, what I like for others and for their benefit takes a
universal aspect (for it is not for the sake of any particular persons
among others) and is permanent value. Accordingly, moral acts are also
universal and permanent. A moral act is one that stems from liking
others' good and benefit. This makes ethics universal and permanent.
This approach to ethics also justifies certain cases like lying for the
sake of some beneficial purpose. Why is truthfulness good? Because the
general good lies in truthfulness.

If truthfulness should prove to be injurious then it is immoral, for
truthfulness is not good in itself. The criterion of goodness is service
to others. In cases where truthfulness amounts to betraying others, it
becomes bad. Here ethics assumes solely asocial dimension (nowadays
\`ethics' is usually considered to mean social ethics).

Accordingly, we arrive at a conclusion that there is a universal
principle in ethics which is eternal and permanent, although. it may
have changing instances. There is a diference between the impermanence
of an ethical principle and the impermanence of its instances. The
question is whether moral principles are permanent or not. Accordingly
to our justification moral acts are reducible to one immutable
principle, that is, service to others.

Q: In fact this principle is a kind of hypothesis, that is, it is
assumed that ethics is service to others, then it is declared that it is
universal and permanent principle. However, someone may make some other
assumption and hold that ethics means self-help in which case he would
produce another immutable and universal principle.

A: You have missed the first premises. As I said there are certain
issues on which all men make the same judgement. That-is, all viewpoints
are identical about a certain act. Besides, all consider it a valuable
act. Service to others is something about which I and you have the same
feeling. Moreover, I view it as something sublime and above personal
interests in the same way that you view it.

Then we posed the question as to how such a universal principle could
exist when values like goodness and badness stem from likes and
dislikes, which are changeable. Yes, if all likes were rooted in selfish
motives, as Russell believes and as can be inferred from the Allamah's
words, then such an objection could be valid, but not if it is held that
man is created with two kinds of motives.

Q: The word \`others' in the foregoing discussion is somewhat
ambiguous. It seems that it cannot be taken in an absolute sense. For
example, a soldier who fights for the interest of foreigners, fights for
others but his act is not ethical.

A: By \`others' I mean mankind. That is, an act that is for the sake of
mankind, not for the benefit of one individual and to the detriment
another. We have an individual ego as well as a collective ego, which
includes a person's family and relations (every tyrant is a benefactor
for his family). Here the concept of the self is extended. Moral acts go
beyond the limit of the ego and sometimes transcend even the domain of
humanity (being for the sake of God). Morality begins where the confines
of the ego are transcended.

However, this theory cannot be accepted due to the objections that
arise against it on the basis of the Allamah's theory, which cannot be
set aside so simply by conceding that there is a disharmony between
man's conscious being and his individual nature. For that would mean
that individual nature moves in one direction and his conscious being in
another, solely pursuing the perfection of species without attending to
individual perfection. The result would be that man's conscious being,
which is at the service of his nature-and so it must be-will be brought
into the service of the species without any concern for the individual's
interests.


**Q: On the basis of what you have said, service to the species is also
part of man's nature?**

A: No. Service to species is not part of individual nature, but man
takes pleasure in helping others and that is not without reason. For
individual nature cannot derive pleasure without moving towards
perfection. According to Ibn Sina if man feels pleasure, it does not
mean that nafure and feeling move on different independent courses.
Rather it is nature that achieves its perfection, and when that happens
pleasure is felt if it is perceived through knowledge by presence.

That is, the very movement of nature from potentiality to perfection is
identical with pleasure when perceived through knowledge by presence.
Pleasure is nature's attainment to perfection when it is perceivable. It
is impossible for man to take pleasure without nature attaining a
perfection.

**Second Theory**

There is another theory advocated by some contemporary thinkers.
According to it, it is impossible for man to desire anything that is
unrelated to his own self. Whatever the individual enjoys doing is
ultimately related to his own self. However, man has two selves: an
individual self and a collective self. Biologically man is an
individual, but from the social point of view he has also a social
self.

The other point that Durkheim and others have made-and Allamah
Tabatabai has derived it from the Qur'an without being aware of their
ideas-is that society has also a self and personality which is real and
objective. Society is not a sum total of individuals in the sense of a
numericat totality, and it is not the case that it is individuals who
are fundamental and they merely influence society.

Rather, society is a real and unique compound of individuals (of
course, it is different from natural compounds in which individual
elements totally lose their independent identity). In this kind of
composition, individuals, who retain their separate wills and
independence, share in a single self. Every member has a feeling of
possessing two selves; sometime it is conscious of the individual self
and sometime of the social self. According to some sociologists society
reaches self-consciousness in the individual; that is, society is
conscious of its being in the individual being.

The sufis and gnostics hold a similar view. William James also has a
similar view. With certain a difference the gnostics believe in a kind
of unity among the souls and hold that the real self is the universal
self. They say that man mistakenly considers his own as a distinct self
and they ultimately reduce the real self to God, believing that the
individual self is nothing more than a manifestation of that real self.
It is as if there were a universal spirit that reveals itself in
different individuals and all these selves derive from the one Divine
self.

William James also arrived at the same conclusion through psychological
experiences. He holds that there is an inner connection between
individual selves of which they are often unaware. One who purifies his
self can get to know the contents of consciousness of other selves
through that inner connection (like wells that are connected to each
other under the ground while they are separate on the surface).

This connection stems from their union with the Divine source. But
sociologists are of the view that individuals on merging in society
develop a social self which is a real cultural entity. Sometime man is
conscious of this self which is not his individual self but a universal
social self. Accordingly man's has two kinds of activities those
motivated by individual motives and others prompted by social motives.

According to the first theory man has dual motives, one of which is
directed to serves his own self and the other to serve others. According
to the second theory man has two selves and two sets of feelings: the
individual self and feeling which serve the individual self and another
self and feeling which serve the collective self.

A moral act is one which is not motivated by the individual self but by
the collective self. The collective self is permanent and universal. The
conclusion that follows from the second theory is that every action that
stems from the collective self is a moral act and that which stems from
the individual self is not moral in nature. Of course, the instances of
this principle may vary, but in any case this can be a universal and
permanent principle.


