ABSTRACT
========

For the neo-colonized Muslim ummah1 (“nation”) without a place to fully
practice Islam since the fall of the Ottoman Empire, there is pressing
demand in the Muslim world for an Islamic pedagogy extracted from the
Qur’an and Sunnah (and the rich scholarship that exists concerning them)
that illustrates the Islamic perspective of knowledge and morality and
how it could be practiced in the various disciplines of the educational
system to promote human development (Cook 1999; Cook 2001). Re-newed
identification of the general public of Muslims with pre-colonization
identities has been particularly on the rise since the 1970s-which is
commonly known as the beginning of the “Islamic Awakening” in the Muslim
world (Cook, 2001, p.381; Haddad and Esposito, 1991, p.1). However,
similar to many other institutions in most modern day Muslim countries,
formal education mostly consists of teaching methods inherited from
previous colonizers, like rote memorization (Gesink, 2006, pgs. 328-329;
Ofori- Attah, 2008, pgs.15, 18). This dissonance of values is
perpetuated by corrupt authoritarian puppet regimes who seek to maintain
their power by supporting Western hegemony in the region; hence,
providing quality education that enhances critical thinking skills that
might challenge the status quo is not an initiative that receives much
support (Kincheloe and Steinberg, 2004, p.149).

While teachers in the Muslim world, in places like Egypt, often teach
Islamic and positivistic empirical sciences, both are taught through a
banking theory approach that does little to develop critical thinking
skills, let alone master basic conceptual knowledge. Aside from the
ineffectiveness of such methods, such a teaching philosophy spreads a
passive slave-like mentality to education which does not cultivate
active citizens who will work for social justice2 . How one teaches
reflects their values. The following exemplar of an Islamic pedagogy
hopes to offer a culturally relevant solution. The intent of this
research is to develop an Islamic pedagogy that inspires an active
approach to creating change in one’s society by changing oneself and
working to be an active contribution to societal change simultaneously.
This thesis focuses on Islamic Pedagogy as it relates to two
branches-developing caring student/teacher relationships and utilizing
these relationships to apply a case-based learning approach where
students learn how to apply knowledge directly from the educator and
from their peers. While this research is mostly theoretical and could
possibly be valid for many parts of the Muslim world, the main
geographical intent for application is Egypt.


