INTRODUCTION
============

Egypt has a population of about 82 million; it is split into 26
governorates with about 90% of the people living on the 10% of the land
around the Nile, and the currency is the Egyptian pound. Egypt is ruled
by an authoritarian regime that has ruled by marshal law since 1981.
This emergency law is the primary obstacle to change in Egypt, including
in the field of education-not to mention that 1.3 of the 1.7 billion in
American funding is spent on support of the military which upholds these
policies (Boustany, 2008; Kelly, 2006; Zuhur, 2007, pgs. 2, 18 )3 .

Egypt has the largest educational system in the Middle East (Sadik,
2006, p. 87). This is mainly due to the tremendous population explosion
over the last half a century, which has also caused a great decline in
per student expenditure (at 40 percent per five years in the 1990s) and
is getting worse (World Bank, 2009, p.12). Education in Egypt is very
centralized and controlled by the Ministry of Education- with two “sub”
ministries. The main educational system in Egypt is governed by a sub
ministry called the Ministry of Education and Learning and is divided
into two stages: the first compulsory stage, from ages six to fourteen,
is split into two cycles, five then three years (only about ten percent
of the population can afford any level of private education). At the end
of the second preparatory cycle, students take a high-stakes national
final exam which will essentially determine the rest of their life,
whether they go to general or technical secondary education (Leavitt,
1992, pgs.96-97). If admitted to general education, the second stage is
two years of general studies and one year specializing in a particular
subject. The type of certificate granted at the end of the third year
depends on the score achieved on the final national exam which will
determine potential entrance into a university, and if admitted, the
field qualified for out of the student’s list of preferences (i.e.:
Arts, Engineering, Medicine, etc.). This final exam covers every course
taken in high-school and is such a catastrophic event that some students
commit suicide every year from sheer stress (Elhakeem, 2008)! “The
Ministry of Education has repeatedly defeated efforts to change the
national exam” (Leavitt, 1992, p.97). For the other half of the student
population that get tracked into technical secondary education, about 1
percent get admitted to a university while the rest usually enter a
trade or end up unemployed (Leavitt, 1992, pgs. 96-97).

There is also the parallel Islamic educational system of Al-Azhar, which
is administered by the sub ministry Al-Awqaaf, and was established 975
CE. Al-Azhar has a four year primary stage, a three year preparatory
stage, a four year secondary stage, and higher education (Leavitt, 1992,
p. 97). Both the main educational system and the parallel Al-Azhar
system have public, private, and semi-private branches with the main
difference between these being that the size of the classroom decreases
and use of international languages such as English (for instruction)
increases as one moves down the spectrum from public to private.
Correspondingly, under both ministries public schools are free,
semi-private at varying costs, and private rarely within reach except
for the elite class-of course aside from tuition, there are

numerous indirect expenses like transportation, uniforms, books, and
other materials.

The demanding nature of the national exam at the end of secondary school
combined with the poor quality of curriculum/ instruction cause millions
of dollars to be wasted each year on private tutoring and bribes to get
around the educational system. Ethnographic research from the Culture
and Education in Egypt Working Group (CEEWG) of the Middle East Awards
Program explicated how private lessons have become a market themselves
due to the tremendous failure of the educational system. Linda Herrera’s
work with teachers allowed for discussions that highlighted the
importance of improving the regular learning experience so students
would not have to purchase their education on their own--which of course
condemns most of the poverty-stricken of Egypt. However, these
conversations also highlighted the need to motivate teachers to put
forth more effort and enthusiasm in their teaching (despite the
institutional obstacles) and acknowledge their social responsibility
towards their students (Herrera and Torres, 2006, pgs.100-118).

In regard to teaching methods and content, Egyptian education has been
reduced to rote memorization of dated textbooks. Students, from basic
through secondary education, are lambasted with facts and figures with
no guidance on how to practically apply such knowledge or its relevance
(Herrera, 2006, p. 9). During basic education, students learn manners
and some academic content (like language, communication, agriculture,
and industrial skills) in this manner (Leavitt, 1992, p.97). In
preparatory and secondary education, the curriculum changes little,
aside from an increased workload and having the opportunity to
specialize during the last year (in general secondary education). In
Al-Azhar schools, curriculum consists of the same Ministry of Education
and Learning curriculum with added Islamic sciences. The minute
percentage that can afford Western private schools either receive a
Western curriculum, usually in English or French, or a language
acquisition curriculum; there are some special education schools as well
(Leavitt, 1992, p.98).

Regarding Universities, Said laments:

“Universities in the Arab world are generally run according to some
pattern inherited from, or once directly imposed by, a former colonial
power…classes populated with hundreds of students, badly trained,
overworked, and underpaid faculty, political appointments, the almost
total absence of advanced research and of research facilities, and most
important, the lack of a single decent library in the entire region…the
few promising students who manage to make it through the system are
encouraged to come to the United States to continue their advanced
work…the patronage system in scholarship, business, and research makes
the United States a virtual hegemonic commander of affairs…the Arabic
and Islamic world remains a second-order power in terms of the
production of culture, knowledge, and scholarship” (Said, 1979, pgs.
322-323).

This is how Edward Said described Higher Education in the Middle East in
1979 and it has not particularly changed much except for the fact that
all of these issues have only gotten worse, primarily due to
authoritarian

political regimes that hinder any possible change that might put their
power at risk, lack of planning/organization in ministries of education,
widespread corruption, lack of resources, and the population boom
mentioned previously (Christina, 2003).

There are many issues that need to be addressed in Egyptian education
including curriculum (Herrera & Torres, 2006, p. 9), funding (Zuhur,
2007, p.19), teacher training (NCERD, 2000, p.7), and early childcare
education (NCERD, 2000, pgs.7-14), but what has been seen over the last
2 decades to the common observer-and of course professionals in the
field as well (AREME 2003; Birdsall, 1999, p.3; Herrera 2006; ; UNESCO,
2007)-to be the greatest problem in improving education in Egypt has
been quality. Aside from the horrible economic prospects for employment,
Egyptian education does not motivate students to intellectually grow and
it produces citizens who have merely memorized and forgotten a lot of
books. This pattern is quite ironic given that traditional4
(pre-colonization) Islamic pedagogy centers on a case-based learning
approach where students practically apply knowledge through an
apprentice-style relationship with their teachers and cooperative group
work which allows them to participate in their own moral and cognitive
growth. Due to the complexity of political constraints in improving many
institutional aspects of Egyptian education, enhancing teachers’
abilities to teach will empower them to change what they can-their
classroom.

PURPOSE
-------

The objective of this research is to develop an Islamic pedagogy that
inspires an active approach to creating change in one’s society by
changing oneself and working to be an active contribution to societal
change simultaneously. This thesis focuses on Islamic Pedagogy as it
relates to two branchesdeveloping caring student/teacher relationships
and utilizing these relationships to apply a case-based learning
approach where students learn how to apply knowledge directly from the
educator and from their peers. To stimulate such relationships, I have
focused on utilizing metaphysical (Islamic) motivation in improving
teacher effort/ability. Muslim teachers who practically live according
to the belief that teaching is an act of worship-through the way proper
education produces active citizens who improve society-are more
effective teachers. Through such relationships, I have concentrated on
utilizing case-based learning to stimulate critical thinking, which
enhances the quality of education.

Islamic pedagogy, with its high emphasis on caring apprenticeship
relationships between teacher and student allows teachers to utilize
their personal relationships with students to scaffold them to higher
concepts. When teachers draw on classroom occurrences/ disturbances to
model appropriate behavior and elaborate on various academic concepts,
they will construct live learning experiences inside the classroom. I
will provide specific examples of how to accomplish this. More generally
put, every moment in the classroom is a learning experience. This is
what I intend by case based learning.

Through the aforementioned student-teacher relationships and teaching
methods, educators set a certain example for students, thereby not only
directly guiding students’ moral/cognitive development, but also
creating “mini role models” among them to affect peer influence.
Complimentary group activities in such an environment would allow
students to help each other morally and cognitively develop. Given that
family and peers have been two of the biggest indicators of children’s
future academic and social achievement globally (Hanushek, 2007, p.277),
empirical research appears to support an approach that does not neglect
peer influence. A common theme on the parts of teachers and students I
will highlight is Ihsaan-worshipping God as if you see Him, and even
though you don’t see Him you live according to the acknowledgment that
He sees you. The potential of this concept in addressing motivation will
be elaborated on. From my research and personal experience in Egypt, I
have seen the potential for these aforementioned threads due to the very
social nature of Egyptian society.

Research questions
------------------

In order to craft a pedagogy such as what has been described above, it
will have to be asked first and foremost, what is Islam and what are the
epistemological definitions of knowledge and education within this
belief system; are there different types of the former or latter? What
is the purpose of seeking knowledge in Islam; how and with whom should
it be done? What do we intend by pedagogy and has a particular Islamic
pedagogy ever

been outlined before by scholars in the past or present? Subsequently,
these questions will lead us to a framework of what an Islamic pedagogy
might look like.
