LITERATURE REVIEW: WESTERN ANALOGUES TO ISLAMIC PEDAGOGY
========================================================

Education involves the cultural patterns that determine how a people
pass on their values and accumulated knowledge/experiences to future
generations. I have consciously used as neutral a definition as possible
for our purposes here of presenting varying conceptions of education in
the East and West. Education involves two processes, official curriculum
content and moral education; in other words while a particular subject
matter is being taught, teachers also educate and socialize students
into the accepted value system of their society either directly (through
the curriculum) or indirectly (through their behavior and how they
teach). How we teach is just as important as what we teach; undoubtedly
they are intimately linked. Pedagogy has various usages in the field of
education; a common definition used is the “study of teaching methods,
including the aims of education and the ways in which such goals may be
achieved” (Pedagogy, 2010). Accordingly, the main factors to be
addressed when discussing pedagogy are the educator, student, and
content; however, this research strives to provide a pedagogy that can
be utilized for theological or empirical knowledge (irrespective of
content). The pedagogical definition that will be used here is the
teaching methods and corresponding relationship between teacher and
student utilized to reach ones’ educational objectives.

While much of the literature in the field of education has focused on
the cognitive aspects of education, more recent research has highlighted
the importance of discussing what kind of moral education goes on in the
classroom (Lickona, 1991; Moore, 2007). In America, values are often
derived from the liberal arts public education system, citizens’ various
personal religious beliefs, or some combination of both (Moore, 2007;
pgs.1-10). The focus of this study is on developing a pedagogy
culturally relevant to one particular belief system-Islam; however, it
will be analyzed in comparison to existing literature on Islamic
pedagogy as well as some analogues from the Liberal Arts value system. I
will present existing literature on Islamic pedagogy as background in
the presentation of data section.

This literature review will focus on Western literature regarding moral
education and outline one of the closest analogues to Islamic
pedagogy-the Ethic of Care-including the specific teaching methods that
would logically accompany such a philosophy of teaching.

Theory
------

Lev Vygotsky, a psychologist by profession, was one of the earliest
academics to comment on the importance of reconnecting the link between
cognitive and affective factors when researching the human psyche
(Goldstein, 1999, pg.648).Vygotsky defined a zone of proximal
development as “the distance between the actual developmental level as
determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential
development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance
or in collaboration with more capable peers” (as cited in Goldstein,
1999, p.649 emphasis added). Therefore, using a customized
student-centered

pedagogy, an educator could scaffold a student along to higher, more
intricate concepts (building on their previous knowledge) depending on
the supportive guidance received either from the teacher or other peers
who had comprehended the concept (Goldstein, 1999, pgs.649-654).
Vygotsky realized that learning is not simply an individual activity
(otherwise not much disciplinary analysis would be needed outside of a
psychological lens), and that more insightful analysis of educational
development needs to be discussed in relation to the social interactions
that take place between the actors involved. Accordingly, by developing
deeper relationships with their students, educators can consciously care
for students in a way that provides a suitable environment for growth.

Such deliberate attention to students’ needs on the part of the educator
would also provide a role model for other students to help each other
grow in cooperative learning settings. As will be highlighted, the
quality of the student-teacher relationship is pivotal to Islamic
pedagogy as well.

Many academics5 have elaborated on the nature of this affective and
caring relationship between teacher and student (Bailey, 2000; Noddings,
1984; Rogoff, 1990). At the time that Nel Noddings wrote Caring: A
feminine approach to ethics and moral education (1984), she was
responding to a growing sentiment (as evident through the increasing
moral education literature) that more attention should be paid to
treating students like humans who need time, attention, and guidance to
intellectually and emotionally develop (Lickona, 1991). Noddings took
this concept a step further by clarifying that an educator has a moral
obligation and responsibility to actively care for their students and
embody the values they want to instill in them by virtue of the
educator’s position as a role model (Noddings, 1984).

She goes as far as to say that the one-caring (the educator) must
“receive” the cared for (the student) into themself by being “engrossed”
with their goals and needs; this motivational displacement involves
temporarily preferring the student to one’s self (Goldstein, 1999,
p.656). On the part of the cared for they are expected to somehow
acknowledge or reciprocate this care in every caring encounter
(Goldstein, 1999, p.657), but are not ordered to (Noddings, 1984, p.
72). In fact, this reciprocity could involve the teacher being directly
acknowledged or simply witnessing the cared for’s “happy growth”
Consequently, Noddings (1984) has differentiated between naturally
caring and ethically caring for one’s students; the former is not a
reliable form of care because the educator might simply not naturally
care for or be drawn to a particular student, while the latter involves
an active, professional choice to care acknowledging an ethical
obligation. Ethical caring is an action, not a quality. A
student/teacher relationship based on ethical caring is more important
because naturally caring for all of one’s students may or may not occur.
Also, people are naturally more drawn to those they are similar to in
some way, in which case natural caring would not suffice for equitable
guidance of students.

Educators should choose to care in strategic ways, irrespective of
whether natural caring develops over time or not. Ethical caring

demonstrates a sincere dedication on the part of educators to help
students grow, whether they are having a bad day or not, whether they
“like” the students or not; this choice requires a genuine belief in
children’s ability to succeed, which empowers the teacher and student
throughout the learning process. Such a practical and tailored approach
to each child helps students develop intellectually and morally. While
this caring approach seems ideal in explaining what should be done, one
question is left unanswered, how do we motivate practitioners to care?
Why should they maintain a “concern for the ethical self” (Noddings,
1984, p.75,) in the unpredictable daily hustle and bustle of
over-energized children, increasing discipline problems, and even
occasionally violent behavior? This will be developed in the discussion
of Islamic pedagogy, but first let’s look at practical examples of
Noddings’ approach in the field.

Application
-----------

Concerned about the moral state of youth in his time, Thomas Lickona
undertakes the task of outlining a detailed stratagem for the practical
application of a caring pedagogy. Lickona applies the concept of
Vygotsky’s “ZPD” to not only demonstrate the importance of teachers
taking active roles in helping their children cognitively and morally
develop, but that the teachers themselves must embody the potential
results of that development. He particularly goes a little further than
Noddings by highlighting that one’s private life affects their public
behavior (Lickona, 1991, p.49, 79). One has to become a role model of
the behavior one wants to see in students; the caring relationship that
will be developed is what will allow students to reach their potential
development intellectually and emotionally. An artificial façade played
out every time a teacher comes to class is easily seen through;

Lickona states “we are coming to see that our societal moral problems
reflect, in no small measure, our personal vices” (Lickona, 1991, p.49).
On the issue of role models one could also add to this that on a macro
level, the leaders of the nation should be the first exemplars in
demonstrating these morals on the world stage for them to really have
any effect and trickle their way down to the masses. However, the causal
direction of social change is not predetermined and teachers are also in
a decisive position to effect long-term societal change from the roots
up-through the children that will inherit their legacy.

Undoubtedly, one has to truly change oneself before one can hope to be a
role model for others.

Doing so will pragmatically show children how to identify when moral
action/judgment is needed, how to reflect on it, and then act. By using
daily occurrences, positive or negative, in the classroom as teaching
moments instead of mere disruptions, Lickona shows how educators can act
out the moral reflection process right in front of their students.
Teachers can literally “think out loud” when a teaching moment occurs,
about their primary reaction to it, the weighing of opportunities for
possible further action, and then following through assertively to
respond to the situation. This process could involve for example,
teachers modeling composure as they pause to deliberate a situation
requiring a moral decision, making value

judgments in front of students as to the particular pros and cons of a
particular course of action, and then acting (Lickona, 1991, pgs.54-57).
This process of using classroom incidents as teaching moments is often
called case-based learning. Modeling moral reflection in front of one’s
students will pragmatically show them how to consciously represent the
values they profess.

Lickona also gives examples of how the lack of role models to model
moral behavior cannot even be substituted for by any of the material
recompense that is often offered to children for “good” behavior. Role
models pass on their morals to others they interact with since moral
behavior is a social act that is enacted publically and affects everyone
involved. Ergo, the better students treat others socially, the better
they will feel about themselves internally. Accordingly, lack of such
role models leaves many students in despair, selfishness, and
loneliness. Children without role models are often left undisciplined
and only interested in material consumption (Lickona, 1991, p.50). Many
people are slowly realizing that material pleasures will never
substitute for beneficial human interaction. Given that Lickona has
shown how moral behavior should be taught, He also gives suggestions for
which values should be modeled.

Lickona advises educators to start with the core values of respect and
responsibility and then build upon these concepts a customized set of
morals (such as honesty, tolerance, fairness, prudence, self-discipline,
compassion, cooperation, and courage) according to contextual needs
(Lickona, 1991.

pgs.43-44). Lickona acknowledges that “getting agreement about shared
values does not, of course, guarantee that people will agree about how
to apply those values in every situation” (Lickona, 1991, p.47). This
potential ambiguity illustrates once again the importance of using the
case-based approach outlined above. By using the curriculum,
“disturbances”, and other opportunities in the classroom to model good
morals, ethical behavior is no longer as challenging (Lickona, 1991,
pgs.62, 69, 72).

Teachers who develop caring relationships with students can “help
students to experience the world from the perspective of others”
(Lickona, 1991, p.55), an ability essential for teaching respect.

Becky Bailey, on a similar strand of ethical care, highlights the
background disposition needed for teaching morals, the importance of
maintaining composure at all times so that one maintains control and
assertiveness no matter what the situation (Bailey, 2000, pgs.26-30). To
actually maintain composure, given the hectic bustle of life in the
classroom, one should differ between “management demands” and “moral
demands” (Kohlberg & Selman, 1972, p.39); by stressing serious moral
infractions much more than the usual spills and misunderstandings,
educators can prioritize their demand of children’s short attention
spans/ mental capabilities. Only with a composed demeanor can one act
purposely, and not off mere emotion, a temperament essential for moral
reflection. Also, the importance of acknowledging accomplishments
through praise and other methods by the educator is crucial for
encouraging students along throughout their moral growth (Bailey, 2000,
pgs.82, 85, 92).

Lickona describes the aforementioned procedure for exemplifying moral
reflection by saying that “good character consists of knowing the good,
desiring the good, and doing the good-habits of the mind, habits of the
heart, and habits of action” (Lickona, 1991, p.51). A striking parallel
will be seen to this method in Islam of how once someone has knowledge
of a virtue, they purify their intention to do it, and then carry out
the action. Some teachers even use “ethics journals” that helped
students to critically reflect on their daily actions in the process of
developing effective moral reflection skills (Lickona, 1991, p.56).

Cooperative learning activities are also opportunities to develop bonds
between students so that they can assist each other in modeling moral
behavior (Lickona, 1991, p.74), while still allowing opportunities for
teachers to interject their own moral feedback and guidance (Lickona,
1991, p.85). The feedback on behavior is recommended to be given in
private, guiding students to understand why what they did was
inappropriate, and is followed up on by the teacher to monitor progress
(Lickona, 1991, p.86). Through cooperative learning, students experience
“trial and error” opportunities with their peers to practice moral
reflection and action, and are then scaffolded to the desired objective
through caring educators’ guidance. Students’ participation in their own
moral growth empowers them to begin to act independently, raises their
self-esteem, and has longer effects on their long-term behavior.
Accordingly, Lickona has outlined a framework for developing the caring
student/teacher relationship and the process for utilizing this
relationship to teach moral education, either directly between student
and teacher or through “mini-role models” created in cooperative
learning structures.

Subsequently, Ethical Care pedagogy has been shown to focus on the
importance of educators consciously caring for their students and
developing the relationships needed to scaffold them from their existing
level of cognitive/affective ability to the next. This process is
accomplished through a casebased learning approach that takes advantage
of every opportunity in the classroom as a teaching moment to apply
knowledge practically. Such an approach creates transformative learning
experiences in the classroom that help students grow. There are many
such academics that use some version or another of what we could label
Ethical Care pedagogy in Western literature (such as Gloria
Ladson-Billings for example; see Dreamkeepers), but I have highlighted
these particular authors to preserve space while simultaneously
providing an in-depth analysis of such work. The aspects of Ethical Care
mentioned here will be compared to similar traits found in Islamic
pedagogy.


