METHODOLOGY
===========

I have defined education and pedagogy thus far; therefore, we should
define some other essential terms to be utilized before proceeding.
Islam, as used in this paper, refers to Sunni Orthodox Islam (more
specifically Ahl Al Sunnah wal Jamaa’a, ASWJ; lit: “the people of the
Sunnah and the Community”); ASWJ Islam makes up roughly 90% of the
Muslim world and includes the four major jurisprudence schools of
thought: Hanafi, Maaliki, Shaafii, and Hanbali. ASWJ works are known for
their clear reliance on the actual revelation as evidence when they
write about anything regarding Islam; this is opposite of the
methodology of Sunni Ahl Al-Kalaam (lit: “the people of talk”) who
sometimes prefer their own personal reasoning over textual evidence by
default and minimally cite Islamic scripture when theorizing about Islam
(Ashqar, 2003; Phillips, 2006). Ironically, Ahl Al-Kalaam, who represent
about 5% or less of Islamic scholarship and Muslims throughout history,
are the sole perspectives formally acknowledged in Western discourses
about Islam (except for minute exceptions sometimes in Islamic Studies
departments)6 . The other ten percent of the Muslim world consists of a
mixture of various sects (Shiism, varieties of Sunni like Sufism, etc.)
which generally have some different fundamental beliefs. Sunni Muslims
follow the Qur’an (believed to be the literal word of God revealed to
prophet Muhammad) and the Sunnah (the teachings, sayings, and way of
prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him7 , on how to practice the Qur’an).

There is a lot of literature on Islam in general concerning almost every
disciplinary lens; however, relatively little has been written on the
development of a specific Islamic pedagogy. One must preface such a
statement by clarifying that the author has had limited time to research
in a Muslim country-where Islamic literature is expectedly much more
accessible. There is particularly much more literature in Arab Muslim
countries since Arabic is the language that the Qur’an and Sunnah were
revealed in, and therefore the language used in most serious theological
works written about them. This being said, one would normally be left
with the limited English scholarship that exists on Islamic Education as
a whole here in America. However, I have had the opportunity to research
for a small period of time in Egypt searching for Arabic works on
Islamic pedagogy. These combined with the Arabic Qur’an and Hadeeth (the
individual narrations of the Sunnah; pl. ahadeeth) exegesis available
here in America have been the primary sources for this research. For
exegesis, I have relied the most heavily on those of Ibn Kathir (the
most widely known exegesis in the Muslim world, compiled by the named
13th century alim), Al-Ashqar (which is an abridged version of the
famous 18th century Al- Shawkaanee’s exegesis), and Arkahdaan (which is
an abridged version of the widely respected Al-12th century Qaasimi
exegesis). In regard to the Sunnah, I have relied mostly on the two most
authentic collections of ahadeeth (the compilations of Al-Bukhari and
Muslim). Other than my own scriptural reflections, I have also
highlighted the educational perspectives of two of the most
knowledgeable ulamaa in the past half century, Shaykhs Bin

Baz and Uthaymeen, as well as educational specialist Dr. Ahmad
Mutawalee.

Qur’an and Hadeeth exegesis ulamaa have frequently highlighted
pedagogical issues in their works although they did not usually dedicate
specific treatises to the topic. The works that have been found
specifically described as “Islamic pedagogy” actually dealt more with
outlining a specific curriculum of Islamic values that promote social,
psychological, academic, and moral development, but less on how to teach
them. Paradoxically, what would normally be viewed as a dearth in the
literature has a lot to do with what exactly Islamic pedagogy is as will
be explicated. There are over 6,000 verses in the Qur’an and more than
20, 000 authentic ahadeeth; accordingly, to knowledgably speak about the
Islamic stance on a topic is not just to mention one verse of the Qur’an
or one hadeeth from the Sunnah as proof, but rather to present all
pertinent revelation with the appropriate corresponding analysis.

Understandably, such a task is more appropriate for an entire lifetime’s
work than a Master’s thesis; ergo, what is presented here is a
survey-natured textual analysis of the Qur’anic method of teaching in
the Qur’an itself, the pedagogical wisdoms behind the fashion in which
scripture was revealed, and the pedagogical techniques that prophet
Muhammad used with his companions. Glimpses of how this pedagogy was
utilized historically will be brought to light as well.

Evaluating Our Lenses
---------------------

Given the overtly politicized nature of scholarship related to Islam in
Academia (see Orientalism and Covering Islam among others by Edward
Said), a note of caution must be heeded. Most academic scholarship-here
I do not intend the quality of the work, but merely that which is
produced within the ivory tower of Western universities and other
learning institutions)-on Islam is taught from a Modernistic lens-a
belief system promoted through our Liberal Arts educational system that
preaches that the only ultimate Truth is that there are no fixed Truths
or constants, but rather everything is variable and based on opinion.
This seems self-defeatist if pondered; but in any case this is a belief
system that was borne out of the European Enlightenment of the 18th and
19th centuries mostly due to perceived contradictions between various
aspects of Christianity and empirical science as well as the centuries
old religious based conflicts between France and Britain. This
rationalist school of thought could really be traced as far back as the
Greek philosophy of scholars such as Plato, Socrates, and Aristotle, but
its current day revivers were European philosophers such as Descartes,
Nietche, and Kant (Kayum, 2010; Zarabozo (2), 2010).

Christian theologians called for “higher criticism” of the Bible and
came to the conclusion that not all aspects were appropriate for all
time; hence, followers of the faith could choose the aspects of the
faith they personally deemed appropriate for their particular time and
location. Such action was justified by a belief that religion is an
evolutionary process (Zarabozo (2), 2010). Bible scholars acknowledged
(then and now) that the Bible was written by more than 40 authors many
years after the time Jesus is believed

to have died in Christianity (Dirks, 2010); accordingly, the Bible was
no longer treated as an ultimate Truth in official discourse. Some
fruits of this movement were the reform movements that occurred, like
various Christian reformations, and corresponding alternative belief
systems being constructed to take the place of religion in many public
institutions, like Darwinism.

Due to the aforementioned reasons, many academics and politicians
concluded that the ideal solution was to secularize society and simply
accept the parts of religion that not only did not contradict existing
scientific theories, but that which also didn’t contradict their own
cultural preferences. Not only were human-based empirical sciences taken
as a universal Truth-which has its human faults/biases (see Cuvier’s
work on the “Hottentot Venus” and The Origin of Species by Darwin for
example)-but so were any Western philosophical theories that gained
widespread acceptance…essentially those that agreed with Western
European culture. Philosophers’ individual personal reasoning/opinions
became a post-hoc response to justify society’s changing religious
attitudes and new liberal culture in Western Europe (Zarabozo 2, 2010).
Anything that was Western was presented as “Human” and “Universal”
objective Truth, and everything else was subjective uncivilized notions
of culture, bias, and savageness (Moore, 2007, pgs.36, 57-58,;
Willinsky, 1998). One wonders if the maps of Chaucer’s time with Western
Europe shown, and the rest of the globe shaded black are not still
relevant.

Ironically however, this culturally relativist belief system of
Modernism was intolerantly forcefully spread throughout much of the
Muslim world-either through formal colonization or neocolonization
through media and education-as the solution to the intolerance of
certain peoples during the Medieval period (Zarabozo (2), 2010).
Westernization of Muslim countries’ educational systems imposed not only
epistemological frameworks, but entire Western value systems that were
inconsistent with local values for the sake of cultural/political
hegemony. Post colonization, many countries were trying to unyoke
themselves of colonial cultural hegemony (imposed through remaining
transplanted educational systems), while simultaneously trying to
redesign relevant aspects of these systems to improve the perceived
weaknesses that led to their colonization-mainly military and industrial
expertise (Hussein, 2008, pgs.16, 21). Native attempts at such a task in
the 20th century were Modernists such as Jamal Al-Din Al-Afghani of
Iran, Namik Kemal of Turkey, Sayyid Ahmad Khan of India, and Muhammad
Abduh of Egypt (Spring, 2006, p.155,). While some of these Modernists
had questionable intentions to begin with, most of them wanted to import
the scientific and military expertise of the West while preserving the
Islamic belief system; as Muhammad Abduh noted for example, “If one
seeks to educate and improve the Egyptian nation without religion, it is
as if a farmer would try to sow seed in unsuitable soil…his efforts will
be in vain” (Spring, 2006, p.155). Later however, ulamaa like Abduh,
particularly after traveling to study in Western educational
institutions, soon tried to replicate Western culture as a whole
(Hussein, 2008, pgs.19-20; Kincheloe and Steinberg, 2004, pgs.142-144).

Modernism spread through the academic circles (and the elite sectors) of
major centers of Islamic culture like Turkey, Egypt, and the
sub-continent; however, particularly with the decreasing trust that
laymen had in theologians connected to the authoritarian regimes
controlling most of the Muslim world post-colonization, Modernism did
not widely spread among the masses (Hussein, 2008, pgs.20-50). Many of
these Modernists were viewed as foreign implants connected to the puppet
regimes that were ruling the Muslim world at the time since many of them
not only promoted the idea that Muslims’ only salvation after
colonization was to Europeanize completely, but many even rejected the
notion of fighting colonial armies8 (Hefner and Zaman, 2007, pgs. 108,
118; Hussein, pgs.22-24, 106, 2008; Kincehloe and Steinberg, 2004, pgs.
128, 149; Zarabozo 1, 2010). In short, Modernist philosophy was (and is
today) to ‘reform’ the parts of Islam that were/are not compatible with
Western culture/interests: the most popular being the criminal code,
polygamy, belief in miracles/universal Truths, prohibition of interest
in business transactions, prohibition on women being head of state,
women wearing hijab, and much of the Sunnah in general since it
specifies Qur’anic legislation (Modernists prefer to go by the  “spirit”
of the faith and not the specific commandments)9 ,10 (Hussein, 2008;
Kayum, 2010; Zarabozo, 1, 2010). I merely highlight this phenomena lest
readers presume that authors with “Islamic sounding” names necessarily
offer a “native” perspective because usually only people with the
cultural capital of a Modernistic worldview are admitted into
Western-oriented academic institutions in Muslim or non- Muslim
countries-I hope to be one of the few exceptions to this screening
process. The Modernist movement, and it’s later sub-branches of
post-modernism and the like, was not widely accepted among much of
Western European laity in places like Britain, just officially conformed
to in academia and government circles for purposes of promoting
secularism and similar ideologies that served economic among other
interests (Zarabozo 1, 2010). Part of the reason for this trend might be
Western Europe’s long historical ties to religion as a source of
identity and the fact that Darwinism as an alternative perspective on
life has been arguably disproved by many scientists, particularly
European ones-much of the evidence used to support the theory has even
been found to be forged (Yahya, 2001). What concerns us however is that
Modernism spread much wider among laity in America and is the lens
through which knowledge is produced, particularly that concerning
religion (Zarabozo 1, 2010).

The Modernistic lens is antithetical to religion because it portrays
religion as “tales of the ancients” (Qur’an, 16:24) (Wheeler, 2003,
pgs.22-23), irrational, and uncivilized (by European Enlightenment
definitions) and Modernism as the opposite objective alternative-an us
vs. them demonization of the “other” (Moore, 2007, pgs.36, 57-58).
Modernism dons a cloak of supposed “scientific” precepts, which are much
more based on culture than empirical proof, to try to promote a myth in
academia that the “advancement of civilization” itself depends on
Modernism as educational theorist James Carper has demonstrated (Moore,
2007, p. 57). However, it has been realized that it was never so much
the empirical sciences advanced in the West, such as Chemistry and
Biology (or even the technology), that

were at odds with Islamic values as some have posited (Talbani, 1996,
p.70), as much as it was the culture and value system (especially of
Western philosophy) being transplanted along with them (Cook, 1999,
p.11).

As has been mentioned, Modernism views everything as a matter of
opinion; religion does not have any constants but is merely a product of
its environment and therefore inherently variable in all aspects. Due to
Modernism’s secular nature, notions of providential guidance are not
entertained.

Subsequently, most American academics when speaking about Islam take
their own prerogative on, and present their own opinions on what should
be the “real” True interpretation of Islam since it coordinates with
Western culture (despite the fact that it might contradict the belief
and practice of millions of Muslims). Accordingly one finds a “wide
diversity of opinions” (Moore, 2007, pgs. 35, 127-128,) as Moore and
others (Sheridan and North, 2004, p.149; Barazangi; Bonakdarian 1998;
Anscombe 2007;

Sells 1999; Abou el-Fadl 2002; and Esposito 1999) have mentioned, but
they are all from the default Modernistic perspective11 mistakenly
applied as a universal Truth that all humans must follow. Many such
authors often write about very advanced theological issues with little
or no experience/knowledge of the Islamic sciences-like ilm Al rijaal
(the science of authentication for chains of narrators of ahadeeth-the
teachings and sayings of Prophet Muhammadthe science of Naskh (which
verses or ahadeeth have been abrogated by others and how), which
verses/ahadeeth are general and which are specific to the context they
were revealed in or one similar to it, and many other fundamental
principles which are inherently connected to the directives of the
Qur’an and Sunnah12 (Kincheloe and Steinberg, 2004, p.165; Phillips,
2005). As Nasr notes, very few of these academics “with advanced degrees
are actually able to read classical Arabic texts with full in-depth
comprehension of their meaning” (Nasr, 2009, p. 21). Accordingly such
academics would not be considered “Islamic scholars” as is usually
understood when this term is translated into the language of many Muslim
majority countries-usually alim, someone who has been deeply immersed in
Islamic scholarship over 20-50 years. This is pivotal to keep in mind
when discussing literature written on Islamic topics in the West and
will be relevant to our discussion of “Modern” perspectives of Islamic
pedagogy.

Contrary to Modernist claims, the ulamaa of the Islamic sciences in the
Muslim world have always taken the context of revelation into
consideration when discussing scripture; hence, the emphasis on the
Sunnah and Seerah (essentially the biography of prophet Muhammad which
gives the context that he and his companions lived in while the Qur’an
was being revealed) which are their own sciences (with sub branches
within them) (Nadwi, 2005, p.115). But since the Qur’an commands Muslims
to take prophet Muhammad’s interpretation of the Qur’an that he taught
to his companions over anyone else’s (Phillips, 2005; Qadhi, 1999),
there is no way to realistically force Islam to coincide with most
current Western cultural practices despite the “wide diversity” of
arguments that may be made. The aforementioned factors all contribute to
the noteworthy disparity

found between how lay Muslims in Muslim countries practice Islam and how
Islam is “re-presented” in much of Western literature.

One can see examples of this imposition of values explicitly in the bias
representation of Middle Eastern educational systems of the Middle Ages
and how most non-religious education that occurred in fields ranging
from Medicine to Architecture is glossed over (in Western
post-enlightenment literature); the result has been the confection of a
revisionist history where the religious sphere of society was somehow
divorced from the rest (Kincheloe and Steinberg, 2004, p.130), a
re-written “secular” history of the Muslim world13 . What academia has
been silent about has been just as telling as what has been said. Such
selective memory leads to an easily consumed myth for a
progressive-minded audience: that such people, who supposedly have
nothing but theological knowledge, would either be particularly
unsuitable for the modern world, or –an even more extreme presumption
–that maybe the Medieval Muslim world was even secular all along. Even
with Harvard’s “international character”, they teach little about Islam
as a religion aside from Sufi mysticism in India and Africa; “Sufis are
to Islam what Quakers are to Christianity” (Kavulla, 2007, p. 56).
Nonetheless, Modernist, extreme Sufi(there’s nothing wrong with moderate
asceticism in Islam that is not related to actions of polytheism, but
then it would not be considered Sufism as the term is used today) or
“Mutazilite” (deviant philosophical sect that rationalizes not believing
in destiny and many other parts of Islam) “versions” of Islam are what
the American government promotes with added notions of no hijab, sharia,
or any remotely social aspects of Islam (see Rand Report on “Civil
Democratic Islam” and the works of John Esposito, Hamza Yusef, Fazlur
Rahman, and Khaled Abou Al-Fadl). Only groups with Modernist related
precepts are regarded as “normal” like the Murji’i (who believe faith is
only in the heart)14 (Wheeler, 2003, p.114). A wellread Muslim can
differentiate between these Sunni sects, who are only about 5% of the
world population of Muslims, but the average reader in the West cannot,
hence the long digress on this issue. The deliberate disregard to much
of mainstream Islamic scholarship in the theological sciences and blind
eye turned towards achievements in the empirical sciences have been
integral factors of the Modernist discourse and the main causes behind
the very distorted image of Islamic education as a whole in the West.

“Why have certain orientalists wasted so many precious years of their
lives trying to disprove the Qur’an and Sunnah? Such programs of
research are not merely an offense to the consciences of millions of
Muslims, but are also misleading and thus unworthy to be considered as
scholarship” as Martin affirms (Martin, 1985, p.187). The politically
charged attempts to forcefully re-write Islam into conformity with
Western ideals merely serves to alienate and dehumanize the vast
majority of Muslims on the planet15 , while deliberately or not,
selectively humanizing the elite authoritarian classes (with Western
cultural capital) that dominate most Muslim countries (thereby
implicitly justifying violence against “the other” as can be seen on the
world stage). While such wishful thinking on the part of Western
academics may fool the majority of Americans in the U.S. who are rarely

exposed to the “average” experiences and perspectives of humans in the
East, they don’t even pragmatically effect any change in the
cultures/practices of the majority in the Muslim world aside from
increasing a consciousness that their way of life is being
attacked…hardly a platform for dialogue. Empirical evidence that the
cultural invasion has had the opposite effect of its original intention
is that recent studies of Muslim majority countries confirm that “the
university experience actually engenders religious attachment; [for
example], the growth of secular education in Egypt has encouraged rather
than discouraged attachment to Islamic culture” (Cook, 2001, p.382). As
Noam Chomsky often musingly argues, “democracy”, as it’s now practiced,
only works if the people are persuaded to agree with what the people in
power had already decided (Chomsky, 2002). If we truly wish to see
coexistence between East and West, we must learn to be tolerant of
others’ differences, even when they really are different.


