PRESENTATION OF DATA
====================

Knowledge in Islam
------------------

What is knowledge (‘ilm in Arabic) in Islam? The first words revealed of
the Qur’an to Prophet Muhammad in the seventh century C.E. were, what
means16 , Read/Recite! In the name of your Lord, who has created all
that exists…” (Qur’an, 96:1). The word ilm is mentioned 750 times in the
Qur’an, ranking it third behind ‘Allah’ (2,800 references), and Rubb
(which is usually translated as “Lord”, but has wider pedagogical
connotations as will be explained) at 950 references (Boyle, 2006,
p.484).This is the essence of Islam, knowledge; but what kind and for
what purpose?

Knowledge has been defined by Arab linguists as “the opposite of
ignorance…anything that can be conceived of or known... [and] more
obvious than to need to be defined” (Mutawalee, 2005, p.177).

There are two types of knowledge in Islam, “that which is known”-what
humans have the ability to comprehend in this worldly life-and “that
which is hidden” (Al-Ghayb). Regarding both types there are also two
subdivisions, that which benefits (helps one to worship God better) and
that which does not (Uthaymeen, 2004, p.33). Regarding knowledge that
which is hidden but mentioned by name in revelation, either in the
Qur’an or Sunnah, (i.e.: the true nature of God, the angels, heaven,
hellfire, etc.), Muslims are still obligated to believe in it-the first
characteristic mentioned of the characteristics of the believers in the
beginning of the Qur’an is that they believe in the hidden (Qur’an,
2:2). Some knowledge might be unbeneficial or could even harm humans.
For example, when some polytheists from prophet Muhammad’s tribe came to
ask him about when the “Final Hour” (Judgment day) would be, Allah
(Arabic for God) told him to “say the knowledge thereof is with my Lord
(alone). None but He can reveal as to when it will occur”-Allah goes on
to explain that humans knowing when judgment day would be would be a
huge burden on them (Qur’an, 7:187). Allah kept this knowledge hidden so
that humans would keep competing in righteousness till death, because in
reality it is unbeneficial knowledge since a person’s opportunity to
perform good deeds will end at death and they won’t be resurrected till
judgment day. Similar in meaning is when prophet Muhammad was asked by a
Bedouin about the appointment of judgment day saying,” When will The
Hour be ?" The prophet replied to him, "What have you prepared for it?”
The man said, "The love of Allah and His Messenger." The Prophet
replied, "You will be with those whom you love"" (Al-Qarnee, 2000,
pgs.19-22). We’ll mention three points of benefit from this hadeeth: one
of prophet Muhammad’s teaching techniques when responding to questions,
was to direct the questioner to the more beneficial question they should
be asking as seen here (Al-Shareef, 2010). The second point that the
ulamaa have commented on, is that knowing how to ask the appropriate
question at the appropriate time is “half of all knowledge” (not
literally, but just to emphasize the point) (Mekki, personal
correspondence, April 10, 2010). The third benefit that the ulamaa have
highlighted is the importance of good company since one will be with
those whom he loves in the afterlife, for good or bad (Mekki,

personal correspondence, April 10, 2010); this is of importance for the
discussion on peer influence to come. Nonetheless, the Islamic
perspective of knowledge is that Allah has made available the two types
of knowledge that can be of benefit to us (if we use them to improve
society), revelation and the ability to use our senses to gain empirical
knowledge. I’ll elaborate on the former, then the latter.

In Islam, acquisition of knowledge (‘ilm)-the two types that can be
known being that gained through revelation and that gained through the
senses-is justified and directed by the provision that all knowledge
gained be used in worship of the creator (Halstead, 2004, p.520)
(worship being widely defined as anything that pleases God as outlined
in the Qur’an and Sunnah, from fasting to sexual relations with one’s
wife (Muslim vol. 2A, p.187). As God commands in the Qur’an, “Say (Oh
Muhammad) undoubtedly, my Salat (prayer), my sacrifice, my living, and
my dying are for Allah, the Lord of the 'Alamin (mankind, jinns and all
that exists) (Qur’an, 6:162). Accordingly, the most important type of
knowledge in Islam is theological, meaning understanding the will and
nature of Allah through the Qur’an and Sunnah so that one may live by it
(Uthaymeen, 2004). Only after a theological foundation would an
individual know how to live their life Islamically (meaning proper moral
conduct) no matter what field or practice they went into professionally.
Proper character ensures knowledge is used for the benefit of society; a
chemical scientist with the intention to build the most dangerous
weapons for the highest bidder (as has been often the case for some
while)…doesn’t benefit us with his/her academic knowledge. Hence,
character education in Islam is analogous to the role played by civic
education in Western secular societies. Emphasizing the importance of
moral education, prophet Muhammad said “I have only been sent to correct
people’s manners” (Al-Shareef, 2010). In fact, it is through these
proper “manners” (understood broadly from the original Arabic khuluq to
mean proper interaction with one’s Lord, family, society, etc.), that
God would teach humans that which would benefit them (Qur’an, 2:282).

On the virtue of theological knowledge, Allah mentions in the Qur’an,
“Allah and the angels, and those with knowledge bear witness that none
has the right to be worshipped but He and that He always sustains his
creation in justice (Qur’an, 3:18). According to Arabic Balaagha (study
of eloquent Arabic speech, particularly in the Qur’an), the subjects
mentioned in such a verse are listed in descending order of importance
(wa or “and” has different meanings depending on the context) (Umm
Qataadah; personal communication, April 3, 2010). Therefore, Allah has
placed the testimony of faith of those that have knowledge of Him,
meaning his nature, will, and names and attributes, after that of the
Testimony of Allah Himself and the angels. So great is having true faith
in Allah, meaning with one’s heart, speech, and actions, that Allah
chose the best of his creation, the angels, and then the best of
mankind, the most knowledgeable of his worshippers, to testify to the
most amazing thing possible, the whole reason that Allah created the
universe…to be worshipped alone without any partners (Al-Khattaabi,
2006, p.142; Mutawalee 2005, p.179). Al-Jawziyyah-a 13th

century Hadeeth/Exegesis alim-commented on this verse saying,
“undoubtedly this is a testimony to the uprightness of those with true
knowledge because Allah will not use as a witness except those who are
trustworthy” (Mutawalee 2005, p.179). Allah even commands his own
prophet, considered the best of mankind, in the Qur'an, to ask Allah for
even more knowledge (Qur’an, 20:114). Ibn Abbas, the companion of
prophet Muhammad who prophet Muhammad named Turjamaan (“the explainer”)
of the Qur’an for the entire ummah (Al-Bukhari, vol. 1, 1997,
p.100-102), narrated that when theological knowledge is mentioned in the
Qur'an, that it refers to “beneficial knowledge of Islam”, meaning that
which is lived by, and righteous deeds (Al-Jawziyyah, 2004, p. 58). In
support of this, one will not find a verse in the Qur’an of those that
start with “those who have true belief…” not immediately followed by the
phrase “and do righteous good deeds” before delving into descriptions
about them (going to paradise, etc.). Subsequently, prophet Muhammad
described the “circles of knowledge” (this was the structure of the
gatherings) as gardens of paradise (Al-Bukhari, vol. 4B, pgs.233-235).

Regarding a hierarchy of importance for the individual, there are two
broad categories of theological knowledge. The first type is that which
is obligatory on every individual (fard ayn), the bare minimum of
understanding one’s obligations as a Muslim: basically the 6 articles of
faith, rights of Allah, then others’ rights over a person (like their
family and community), and the 5 pillars of Islam so that he or she can
worship Allah properly. This knowledge is obligatory and a person would
sin by not learning it. The 2nd type of knowledge is that which is
recommended but not obligatory as long as someone in the community
attains it (fard kifaaya), like inheritance and business laws, where if
some do it, then it is not required of the rest of the community-except
if they specifically deal with the issue (like a family lawyer knowing
inheritance laws for example). In sum, whatever knowledge one has, they
should use it to please Allah by acting upon it, in which case it would
be a proof that attests to their faith on judgment day; and if they did
not act by it, then it would be a proof against them. As some ulamaa
have commented, “Knowledge is the roots [of the tree of ‘truthfulness’17
], its branches are truthfulness, and its fruits are righteous actions”
(Mutawalee 2005, p.181).

The references to the virtue of theological knowledge, due to its
positive relationship with faith, in the Qur’an are numerous (Al-Zumur:
9, Al-Ra’d:19, Al-An’am:114, Al-Israa’:106-108, Al-Ankaboot: 49,
Al-Room: 55-56, etc.); in the Sunnah, we also have numerous examples
like the following:

“Whoever treads a path to seek theological knowledge, Allah will make
him18 tread one of the paths towards Paradise. The angels lower their
wings out of contentment for the seeker of theological knowledge; the
inhabitants of the heavens and the Earth, even the fish in the depths of
the sea ask forgiveness for the learned person. The superiority of the
alim over the worshipper is like the virtue of the moon on the night
when it is full, over all of the stars. Indeed, the ulamaa are the
inheritors of the Prophets, and the prophets do not leave behind dinar
nor dirham [currency that was used in

the Arabian peninsula], but rather, they leave behind knowledge. So
whoever takes it, has acquired an abundant portion" (Al-Bukhari, vol. 1,
1997, pgs.103-104; Muslim, vol. 1B, 1990, pgs. 708-7110).

This hadeeth alone has the essence for teachers to promote a culture of
knowledge in their classrooms. The first benefit of seeking Islamic
knowledge is that it has the highest reward, paradise.

The second is that the angels themselves acknowledge this human being
and lower their wings in approval of his/her actions. The third fruit of
seeking knowledge is that everything between the heavens and earth, even
the fish in the sea, are asking forgiveness for this person seeking
Islamic knowledge; and if the reader has noticed, all of this has not
been just specifically for major ulamaa of Islam. This is simply a
person trying their best with a sincere intention to please God by
learning more about their Lord and messenger and what they have
commanded from him or her so that they can live by it. Only the fifth
and sixth characteristics mentioned in the hadeeth are in regard to the
tremendously high status of one who actually becomes a alim of Islam,
their status over the average worshipper; the alim who has gained this
tremendous wisdom and God-consciousness in his actions due to his
knowledge and teaches it to others, is like the moon compared to the
rest of the stars. This is an analogy that prophet Muhammad uses (use of
analogies will be elaborated on); we know how amazing the moon is
because PM has mentioned in another hadeeth (Muslim, vol.1B, 1990,
p.708-710) that the people of paradise are going to see Allah as clear
as we see the moon in this life. He specifically highlighted the moon
because of its high status compared to the rest of the stars. Then he
said that the ulamaa are the inheritors of the prophets, and the
prophets did not leave behind dirham nor dinar, but rather they left
behind knowledge, so whomever obtains it, has surely obtained a
tremendous thing. This is a tremendous status as Abdullah ibn Mas'ud,
the companion of prophet Muhammad, explained whoever attains Islamic
knowledge, it is as if he has acquired prophethood between his
shoulders, except that he was not directly revealed to (Al- Jawziyya,
2004, p.58). It should be noticed here also, that Ibn Mas'ud described
the knowledge being between the shoulders, referring to the heart, and
not the mind like some would assume, because the heart is the king of
the body and soul (Al-Ghazali, 2009, p. 36).The focus on utilizing
knowledge to purify the heart is particularly because it is what
motivates a person to be the best or worst of people irrespective of
what empirical knowledge one has. If students and teachers view seeking
knowledge as an act of worship, then this is a powerful motivation given
the harsh socio-economic conditions in Muslim countries. Once, teachers
and students have this appropriate intention, then it becomes obvious
that once one has theological knowledge they will need other types of
knowledge (like empirical knowledge) to develop the institutions needed
to develop their society. This is not anything particularly innovative
to state, since as will be shown this was how most of Islamic Higher
Education functioned historically.

In any case, it is suffice to mention that Allah declared that having
true knowledge of the testimony of faith is one of the seven conditions
for its

acceptance19 ; that is how extremely critical theological knowledge is
in Islam. As mentioned in chapter Muhammad, Allah commands “know, have
true knowledge, that no one has the right to be worshipped except Allah
and seek forgiveness for your sins” (Qur’an, 47:19). The ulamaa have
highlighted here how true knowledge was presented as a command before
the command of doing actions (seeking forgiveness) (Al-Bukhari, vol. 1,
1997, pgs.96-97; Al-Qarnee, 2000, p.6)-this affirms what was mentioned
shortly regarding the importance of knowledge for doing actions. In
Modernist discourse, belief is an opinion or point of view, but in
Islam, Allah describes true belief as having certain knowledge of
something, just as certain as one would be of any other knowledge
attained by the senses (if not more). Because if one knows there is a
paradise and hellfire for example, they will act correspondingly; as
Allah commands the family of prophet David, He says “Do [not say]
thanks/ praise (Qur’an, 34:13). If teachers can relay to students that
knowledge is to be lived by, then they will carry this belief on to the
study of empirical knowledge as well and both types of knowledge would
engage students to participate in their education, creating
transformative learning experiences in the classroom.

The Qur’an has also praised knowledge that is attained through the
senses, empirical knowledge.

Allah has made this type of knowledge even capable of raising the status
of animals; Allah says, “Lawful for you is what is caught by those
animals and birds which you have taught and trained as Allah has
commanded you, so eat from what they catch for you, but pronounce the
name of Allah as you command them, and be conscious of Allah. Most
definitely, Allah is swift in holding accountable” (Qur’an, 5: 4.).
Accordingly, Tafseer ulamaa20 have highlighted how this verse shows the
valuable status of knowledge. The prey that this trained and taught
animal catches for a person is permissible to eat; but if it were
untaught and had just killed the prey on its own, this meat would be
impermissible to eat. The only difference between the two cases here was
that the animal has been taught and trained to catch prey in a specific
way (Ibn Kathir, vol. 3, 2000, pgs.97-101). We can add here that this
knowledge was knowledge gained through the senses, since this animal was
taught by a human to perform a certain task in a specific manner. This
knowledge is not directly related to paradise and hellfire for example,
but this knowledge has made a certain type of human activity more easily
accessible, attaining food. As long as this human utilizes this food for
some beneficial reason, like to feed himself or someone else so that
they can fulfill their daily responsibilities, then this has been a
positive use of empirical knowledge. On the other hand, if this
knowledge was used to simply hunt for sport, killing animals with no
pragmatic need to, then this knowledge would be blameworthy.
Subsequently, Allah has made permissible the use of empirical
knowledge-the dog using its senses to learn from the human-to facilitate
permissible human needs.

However, the most obvious example on the importance of empirical
knowledge in Islam is that in the Qur’an, Allah describes things that
are supposed to prove God’s existence to humans as ayaat.

These ayaat (lit: signs, proofs, verses [of the Qur’an], evidences) that
are mentioned in the Qur’an and are supposed to lead humans to
acknowledge God are of two types: things that can be sensed (i.e.:
empirical science) and textual revelation itself. The Qur’an that exists
today, and matches all known manuscripts around the world dating as far
back as the seventh century, describes with intricate detail:

human embryonic development (stage by stage), how the mountains serve as
pegs in the earth so that it doesn’t shake, the origins of the universe,
functions of the cerebrum, the “zone of separation” between fresh and
salt water in the pacific ocean, the “internal waves” of the ocean, and
the precipitation process-details and processes that we did not discover
or fully comprehend until the modern science of the 20th century
(Ibrahim, 1997, pgs. 5-27). This raises an important question; why would
such things be mentioned which no one would be able to prove till
hundreds of years later? At the same time, there are countless Qur’anic
injunctions rhetorically questioning humans, after mentions of Allah’s
signs, “do they not listen/ ponder/see/reflect” (yasma’oon,
yatafakuroon, yubsiroon, yatadabbaroon) on these signs? One cannot go
more than five pages without coming across such verses. In one chapter,
Allah mentions that some of his signs are in Al-Afaaq (depths of space)
(Qur’an, 41:53), which we haven’t been able to even get a glimpse of
till modern technology was developed. Without a doubt, if humans were
not to use their senses to discover the world around them, they would
never have realized these amazing miracles/signs all around them.
Throughout most of history since the Qur’an’s revelation, most of the
aforementioned scientific phenomena would have been taken at face value
to be true as part of believing in the Qur’an, but not empirically
“proven” until the work of various Muslim scientists much later. No one
would have benefited from these particular signs of God’s existence (and
for Muslims, additional scientific evidence of the Qur’an’s divine
origin) without empirical research. Evidence that Muslim ulamaa
responded to the aforementioned exhortations to research, inquire, and
examine the universe is seen in the many scientific contributions in
Muslim societies throughout history.

Empirical science was never a shunned endeavor in the Muslim world. One
could cite numerous cases in the fields of History like that of Ibn
Athir and Ibn Kathir, in Ophthalmology like Ibn Al-Haytham, in Sociology
like Ibn Khaldun (who is considered the founder of modern Sociology), in
Medicine, like Al-Nafisi, or Al-Jabbar, who invented Algebra. In fact,
ulamaa would rarely specialize in just one field of the empirical
sciences, but rather many, unlike the “Renaissance Man” of the
Renaissance. A perfect example is Abu Biruni who specialized in
Chemistry, Physics, and Astronomy (and was one of the leading ulamaa to
invent the scientific method)-Muslim ulamaa even constructed the first
public hospitals during the Baghdad caliphate (Berkey 1992; Najeebabadi,
vol.1, 2000).

However, in general, the Qur’an and Sunnah are not particularly worried
with ensuring humans seek empirical knowledge because it is taken for
granted that humans will not forget or neglect worldly issues since they
are all around them. As prophet Muhammad mentioned, I don’t fear for you

poverty, but rather I fear for you that worldly issues would overwhelm
you (Muslim, vol.4B, 1990, pgs. 738-740). Hence, the Qur’an and Sunnah
focus on teaching proper moral conduct as a universal constant, so that
humans will use any other types of knowledge they acquire throughout
time for societal benefit.

As supportive evidence to the aforementioned perspective toward the
empirical and scriptural forms of knowledge is the principle in Islamic
Fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence) known as maa laa ya tim Al waajib illaa
bihi fahuwa waajib (lit: “whatever obligatory deed cannot be
accomplished except through a particular method, then that method also
becomes obligatory”21 There is no way to establish rule of law and the
social services that Islam guarantees to people in Muslim societies-like
for example free education and healthcare, Zakah (an obligatory form of
charity for the poor), etc.-without Muslims who care about these moral
issues and then take the means to develop them. This would not
contradict the research previously cited on Higher Education today in
the Muslim world which showed that students become more Islamically
oriented upon entering Higher education (which is almost universally
secular), the complete opposite pattern of what happens in the West
(Cook, 2001, p. 382). One hypothesizes that the deliberate and obvious
removal of Islamic theology and any other related material by most
authoritarian regimes in the Muslim world, particularly over the last 20
years, forces students to have to learn Islam on their own, while still
pursuing the societal capital of a university education to achieve their
professional objectives and social reform efforts. It would seem
cognizance of the inherent complimentary nature between theological and
empirical knowledge in Islam is already evident to many youth in the
Muslim world, and accordingly would not be difficult to employ in
motivating students to utilize both in working towards social reform in
Muslim countries.

While we are on the point of motivations for seeking knowledge in Islam,
it would be opportune to highlight to teachers and students the
importance that Islam puts on “Commanding the Good and Forbidding the
Evil”-the Islamic analogue to “social activism.” Allah says “You Muslims
are the best of peoples ever raised up for mankind; you enjoin goodness
and forbid evil, and you believe in Allah” (Qur’an, 3:110).
Linguistically, according to the science of Balaagha mentioned earlier,
by citing the commanding of good and forbidding of evil as the first
characteristics of such Muslims, these become the defining
characteristics of Muslims who can earn the title of “best of peoples
ever raised up for mankind.” God doesn’t have a chosen people according
to Islam by virtue of the mere name they ascribe to themselves, color or
ethnicity (Qur’an, 49:13). Muslims only earn the mercy of God, which
allows them to enter paradise, through their actions. For example, even
Muslims can be punished through billions of years in hellfire to be
purified of their sins before eventually entering paradise, if they
sincerely believed in the testimony of faith (the belief that no one has
the right to be worshipped except Allah and Muhammad is His messenger).
Proving one’s sincerity to God requires action. Exegesis ulamaa have
highlighted how this characteristic is so important that Allah has

mentioned it before faith itself, not because it is more important, but
because Allah structures some verses like this in the Qur’an to stress a
particular concept. In another verse, Allah specifically commands “Let
there arise out of you a group of people inviting to all that is good,
enjoining goodness, and forbidding all evil. And it is they who are
successful” (Qur’an, 3:104). But as we have discussed, there is no
beneficial action without proper knowledge. It is not hard for some
people to be saalihoon (righteous people; sg. saalih), but Allah praises
even more in the Qur’an the Muslihoon (those who call to righteousness
in the society; sg. Muslih). In many verses Allah enumerates accounts of
evil and righteous people in the past and how they received their due
recompense; however, despite the existence of large amounts of evil
people at a particular time, Allah vows to not destroy an area as long
as there are still some Muslihoon among them (Qur’an, 11:117). Once we
have established the importance of both types of knowledge and how they
must be used to meet Muslims’ societal objectives, who are the ones that
will teach the power of education to our youth? The Muslihoon in the
field of education are the teachers. Through the motivation that they
are engaging in a tremendous act of worship such as commanding the good
and forbidding the evil as Muslihoon, teachers will be able to engage
their students to participate in actively working for social justice.
Spiritual motivation is a powerful stimulus in causing social change,
particularly if it already exists as a visible force in the society. One
last example of the active nature of Islamic pedagogy can be brought to
light in the story of Maryam.

Even Jesus’s own mother, Maryam (Mary), who is considered one of the
best four women in Islam and has a chapter named after her in the
Qur’an, was not merely provided relief and sustenance by asking Allah
for it. When Mary was forging through the pains of child birth (and was
horrified of what people might assume of her pregnancy, since she was
not wed), she did not lose hope. After wearily collapsing under a palm
tree for shade, Mary supplicated to her Lord, but God did not help her
immediately. Rather, God told Mary, at the apex of her pain, to stand up
and shake the palm tree for it to bring down dates for her sustenance.
Only then did God cause the fruits to fall down (Qur’an, 19:16-26). This
is a very powerful event, because even if one gathered a whole crowd of
people they would not be able to manually budge a palm tree. This event
exemplifies the principle that God only helps those who help themselves.
Allah says, “Allah will not change a people’s condition until they
change that which is within themselves” (Qur’an, 13:11). Islamic
pedagogy stresses an assiduous work ethic of doing one’s part and then
relying on God for the results.

Who will teach our children proper moral conduct and how to effectively
contribute to society? Who can cultivate children’s critical thinking
skills so that they can grow up to develop innovative local solutions
for local problems except teachers? Parents spend limited time with
their children globally. Egypt is an excellent case study for discussing
educational issues of the Middle East since it provides a motley of the
North African and Gulf socio-economic/ cultural contexts. After school,
most students in Egypt for example, spend the rest of their day with
private tutors. During school,

children spend the most time with teachers and peers at school. We are
lacking role models and leaders all around the world, and as is being
argued here, teachers are one of the most direct opportunities to
establish such role models who will offer students practical examples of
not only academic content and morals, but how to utilize them to be an
active participant in society. Muslim societies will not change by
themselves, and teachers are in a pivotal position to be Muslihoon and
create others who will change society through their education as well.
Now that we have discussed the different types of knowledge in Islam and
their purpose, let’s see how some scholars have proposed to teach that
knowledge; what is Islamic pedagogy?

Islamic Education: Content or Pedagogy?
---------------------------------------

I have actually discovered very different findings on Islamic pedagogy
dependent on whether the language of publication was English or Arabic,
so I’ll start with the English literature since this would be more
likely to be familiar to the reader. When Islamic pedagogy is mentioned
in the West, the most common research recalled is usually the work of
The International Institute for Islamic Thought. The International
Institute of Islamic Thought (IIIT) was established in 1981 as a
private, non-profit, academic and cultural institution dedicated to
promoting research related to Islamic thought and contemporary social
sciences; it has branches all around the world. The International
Institute for Islamic Thought started the Islamization of Knowledge
project during the 1980s with two main objectives: to “reconcile the
Muslim identity through Islamization of the Social Sciences and thought”
[and] rejuvenate the study of Islamic history as a legacy” and
foundation for developing Islamic thought and methodology” (IIIT, 1989,
pg. xiv). The founders yearned a system that enlightens students with
practical “knowledge in light of Islamic values” (IIIT, 1989, pg. xiii),
suggesting reconciliation of the secular and Islamic branches of
education in the Muslim world as one of the pivotal steps in
constructing such a system; they even made some suggestions on how to go
about obtaining such funding (IIIT, 1989, pg.14). But what does it mean
to Islamize knowledge? Can all knowledge be Islamized and if so, what
would be the pragmatic benefits of doing so? And lastly, what concerns
us the most; does such a system include specific teaching methods
derived from the Qur’an and Sunnah?

In attempting to answer these questions, Ishaq Farhan provides a typical
IIIT response (Al-Attas, 1980; IIIT, 1989; IIIT, 2000) to these
questions: secularization is responsible for the decline of Islamic
thought in the Muslim world since the fall of the Khilafa (caliphate) at
WWI and the holistic (which doesn’t differentiate between revelation and
empirical knowledge) Islamic perspective of life must be revived by
being superimposed on the content of all academic disciplines
(particularly the social sciences, which are highly based on Western
philosophy) to tackle intellectual stagnation (in a culturally relevant
manner) (Farhan, 1989).

First of all we must address the incompleteness of the above
presuppositions. If we analyze the quality of scholarship in the Islamic
as well as empirical sciences in the Muslim world, they have been on the
decline since at least the initial political decline of the Islamic
empire, which

we could roughly date as starting way before colonization in the early
15th century-with major setbacks occurring at pivotal moments like the
loss of the final part of Spain in 1492 and the colonization of most
parts of the Muslim world in the 18th and 19th centuries (particularly
cultural/political centers like the subcontinent and Egypt), by Western
European powers. Although the Ottoman caliphate still preserved some
remnants of Muslim identity up until the formal collapse at WWI, the
power and influence of the Islamic world was waning much before this.
With the loss of political and military power in the region (for various
reasons outside the scope of this paper), the Muslim empire had also
long since begun to decline in academic scholarship (Daly, 1998).
However, Farhan is correct in asserting that the more official
secularization process that took hold after WWI severely intensified
this process. There’s no concept of secularism in Islam; the longest
verse in the Qur’an for example (an entire page long), details the
conditions for conducting business transactions (Qur’an, 2:282).
Secularism did add an identity crisis to an already worsening situation.
As Al-Ghazali notes, education starts at “home-with the mother at its
foundation-the school, the mosque, the street, and the state…”
(Al-Ghazali, 2010, p.44). Contemporary ulamaa such as Shaykh Bin Baz
have outlined similar visions of Islamic pedagogy (Al-Khattaabi, 2006,
p.229).

Regarding the notion of Islamizing the “discipline of education” Farhan
understandably stresses the importance of the Islamic belief that
seeking knowledge is an act of worship and a responsibility placed on
intellectuals to use it for societal good as is mentioned in the Qur’an
(Qur’an, 33:72), but he does not specifically define what Islamic
education is (Farhan, 1989, p.308). Farhan’s suggestion of providing all
students with a minimum basic working knowledge of the various branches
of Islamic theology (Farhan, 1989, p.312) is commendable and integral to
the vision of Islamic pedagogy in this paper as well. In fact, such has
already been in practice throughout most of Islamic history, raising
practicing Muslims who can employ whatever knowledge they gain for the
advancement of society no matter what their field. Throughout Islamic
history, once students mastered foundational texts in theology, they
would either specialize in a particular branch of the Islamic sciences
or delve into the empirical sciences and become full-fledged ulamaa so
that they could contribute to the development of entire sciences that
pragmatically corresponded to their local needs (thereby fulfilling the
communal obligation, fard kifaaya, in knowledge production). There was
never an artificial barrier constructed between empirical sciences and
revelation because Islam legislates that two Truths cannot contradict
each other-and that Tawheed (the belief that no one has the right to be
worshipped but Allah) implies a certain unity and intrinsic harmony in
the universe due to the oneness of the creator (Halstead, 2004, p.526).
Subsequently, in this sense I would agree with Farhan on this aspect of
his definition of Islamic education.

However regarding Farhan’s suggestion of Islamizing disciplines, then
for most fields, this has no practical or theological justification.
What would be Islamic biology, chemistry, or nuclear physics?

There is no such thing as a non-Islamic biological cell for there to be
an Islamic one. True empirical findings void of cultural bias/baggage
are just as valid whether they’re developed in the East or West. If we
are not trying to copy and paste Western academic solutions to the East,
then this is not an issue in the first place. However, similar to much
of the work from IIIT (Al-Attas, 1980; IIIT, 1989; IIIT, 2000), all
anxious laments and frustration at the condition of Education in the
Muslim world end with general recommendations about how the ultimate
solution is to provide Islamic points of view, Islamic curriculums,
Islamic educational models etc….but like what specifically? A majority
of IIIT publications are so theoretical that even the analytic framework
that is being suggested does not have very clear components aside from
being “Islamic” (Halstead, 2004, p. 522; Panjwani 2004).

Paradoxically, one could go through entire IIIT works and be hard
pressed to find more than one Qur’anic verse or Hadeeth.

Lack of socio-political order and rule of law are the main obstacles
(among the others mentioned in the Said quote above) in Muslim countries
that hinder the development of successful research institutions. The
fundamentals of the empirical sciences for example can be learned
anywhere, but will always need to be supplemented by critical thinking
skills, “how to” knowledge; the World Bank has recently acknowledged
this point suggesting more emphasis on procedural knowledge in the
Middle East (how to learn/research, evaluate, and ideas for improving
pedagogy) as opposed to “declarative knowledge” (facts and numbers)
(Galal, 2008, pgs. 91-92,). The nostalgic emotional plea to Islamize
everything is emblematic of the early stage of the Islamic Awakening
starting in the 1970s where many people flocked to anything that might
remotely embody Islamic identity. Unfortunately however, due to the
neo-colonized inferiority complex that was present in much of the Muslim
world (and still somewhat exists to an extent) toward anything Western,
IIIT (similar to their Ahl-Al Kalaam counterparts throughout history)
tried to impose the Western philosophical framework of Modernism on the
study of Islam to prove to the world that Islam could be Modern. All
specific examples of what an Islamic curriculum might look like for
example are identical to Western ones, just with the word “Islamic”
before them, with no perceived contradictions or dilemmas with titling
something Islamic philosophy or ideology (Farhan, 1989, pgs.313-314;
Halstead, 2004). In order for empirical knowledge to be utilized for
Islamically sanctioned objectives, one merely needs intellectual
practicing Muslims as teachers/researchers in a socio-political context
that appreciates/supports such efforts, not Islamized empirical content.

Nonetheless, the IIIT objective mentioned above of reconciling “the
Muslim identity through Islamization of the “Social Sciences…”, then
this does have some potential since the social sciences are heavily
based on Western philosophy, and as has been mentioned, Western
philosophy on a very fundamental level is usually an attempt to grapple
with societal problems as they exist in the West.

There is plenty of historical precedence for producing Islamic
perspectives in the social sciences that have been derived from the
Qur’an and Sunnah on Sociology or Medicine and History for example (see
Ibn Khaldun or Ibn Al-Jawziyyah respectively), but what I have stressed
repeatedly here is that the Qur’an and Sunnah acknowledge two forms of
knowledge: revelation and an emphasis on using the senses as a form of
acquiring knowledge (i.e.: empirical knowledge). Ergo, it is no
disservice to or weakness of Islam that the Qur’an and Sunnah don’t
contain the cure to Cancer or Aids, etc. As has been discussed, and as
many activists have been struggling to understand for some time,
although the Qur’an and Sunnah do contain scientific miracles, the
Qur’an is primarily a book of “signs”, not science (Ibrahim, 1997). The
Qur’an and Sunnah, for all practical purposes, are guidance on proper
moral behavior. While many other advanced concepts no doubt exist, it
would be disingenuous to contradict the obvious concepts therein for the
sake of superimposing every new Western idea that comes up onto the
texts.

Yes; the Qur’an and Sunnah are the foundation for a Muslim, and moral
character in general is the foundation for any society’s long term
stability and development, but revelation encourages Adl (lit:
justice/fairness in judgment) in everything one pursues (Halstead, 2004,
p.523). Accordingly, there is nothing un-Islamic about unbiased
methodological inquiry free of cultural baggage/assumptions (a task much
easier in the natural sciences than in the social ones as IIIT
acknowledges), even if it is produced in a non-Muslim context. What
revelation does admonish is using philosophical sophistry to circumvent
God’s commands for the sake of personal interests/desires. Islam to
Muslims is the parallel of Modernism to the Western world, a way of
life, but both can cooperate on empirical endeavors that don’t
contradict each others’ belief systems and societal objectives. This is
the appropriate non selfdefeatist way that Muslims can attain IIIT’s
second goal to “rejuvenate the study of Islamic history as a ‘legacy’
and foundation for developing Islamic thought and methodology” without
being stuck in the past. IIIT has not given us a particular Islamic
pedagogy with specific teaching methods for teachers, but it has
highlighted the pre-requisite of knowledgeable practicing Muslims (those
with a working knowledge of Islam) as teachers who can effectively
utilize Islamic pedagogy. At the core of Islamic pedagogy is Muslim
character. As will be demonstrated, many of the characteristics of
Islamic pedagogy fall under the general moral code of Muslims. The
centrality of the role-model in Islamic pedagogy makes the character of
the educator key; it is only through such moral character that caring
relationships between teacher and student can be developed and then
utilized to construct pragmatic learning experiences in the classroom.

Basis for Islamic Pedagogy in the English Sources
-------------------------------------------------

### Medieval Methods

###

Prophet Muhammad did not leave behind any particular academic
institutions, but he left behind his companions who had learned how to
embody Qur’anic values and manners in their lives wherever they went so

that they would contribute to society for the pleasure of God (not fame,
material wealth, etc.) in whatever they undertook. The pedagogy used
throughout most of Islamic civilization was that of prophet Muhammad,
one of a caring teacher leading by example and teaching a customized
curriculum – in a dialectical manner. This curriculum emphasized a
foundation of moral character and application of knowledge in one’s
behavior for the benefit of society (Berkey, 1992, pgs. 1-38,).
Similarly throughout Islamic history, quality Islamic education was a
communal activity that hinged less on books or institutions than on who
one actually learned and received an ijaza from (“authorization to pass
on their knowledge”); education was a very personal experience (Neill,
2006, pgs.484-485) (Berkey, 1992, pgs. 16, 18). Students of Islamic
knowledge used to spend their whole lives traveling to sit with the
greatest of ulamaa and learn from them how to live by what they learned
and practically apply it to become more God conscious (Berkey, 1992,
pgs.22-38,). Such a pedagogy was necessary because possessing true
Islamic knowledge meant living by it; after all, what good is knowledge
that doesn’t benefit? Allah says, “Do you enjoin Al-birr (piety and
righteousness) on people while you forget to practice it yourselves,
despite that you are of those who recite the scripture; have you then no
sense?” (Qur’an, 2:44). Hence, when students received an ijaza from
ulamaa, it was for how much they knew and applied. This was only earned
after years of this apprenticeship type relationship where ulamaa had
watched them grow and assessed their behavior in various communal
settings (i.e.: with the general public and fellow students) (Neill,
2006, pgs. 484-485). As Islamic ulamaa modeled the moral behavior they
wanted to develop in their students, education became an active
reflective process. The ulamaa are the “inheritors of the prophets”,
meaning they acquired proper moral conduct through their knowledge of
the scriptures, but more importantly through daily practice with their
mentors (Uthaymeen, 2004, p.3). In the Qur’an, this is actually the
reason that messengers were sent, to bring their respective books of
revelation, and set the example of how to apply them, thereby purifying
people from lowly behavior (in Arabic tazkiyah) (Qur’an, 2:151). Allah
mentions in the Qur’an “and We have sent down to you (O Muhammad) The
Remembrance, so that you may clearly explain to mankind what has been
revealed to them, and so that they may give thought” (Qur’an, 16:44) and
“Indeed in the Messenger of Allah (Muhammad) you have a good example to
follow” (Qur’an, 33:21). Those who learn Islamic knowledge after them
continue this legacy by acquiring proper morals from righteous people
who model them.

Actions speak louder than books. This is the importance of modeling the
values one aims to teach in Islamic pedagogy and it applies whether this
content is theological or empirical. Application allows for deeper
processing of content as is well known; therefore, Islamic pedagogy must
consistently allow application of knowledge in the classroom.

Given the importance of the alim in Islamic education historically, a
student was often expected to take up to two months in choosing a
teacher, choosing on the basis of the alim’s own teachers’ reputation,
age, and character. The centrality of the teacher was evident in the
fact that

biographical dictionaries of medieval ulamaa for example listed all the
ulamaa an alim had learned from and usually nothing about where the
learning actually took place, except maybe just the region (which you
could often just tell from the alim’s last name) (Berkey, 1992, pgs.
22-24). Needless to say, simply learning from a book was considered
illegitimate knowledge, and books themselves were just used for
reference.

Accordingly as we will notice, concepts like “how to teach” fell under
the general content of Islamic manners and behavior; if a person was
well versed in Islam and they were living by it, then there was no need
to write books about the topic22 . Students would learn how to teach and
learn through practical application on a daily basis as they learned
Islamic theology, and this did not mean mere memorization of virtuous
qualities lest we be deceived by modern propaganda that could indicate
otherwise.

As guardians of the spiritual well-being of the society, ulamaa
constructed intricate measures to preserve Islamic knowledge as seen for
example in the details of the ijaza or “degree” system that was
developed. Al Tusi, a medieval alim, explained how, “memorizing two
words is better than hearing two pages, but understanding two words is
better than memorizing two pages”, which highlights that ulamaa
differentiated between riwaya, the ability to memorize and transmit
knowledge, and diraya, the ability to critically analyze it and apply it
contextually (a fact often overlooked in discussions of the role of
memorization in Islamic education-often politically motivated to portray
a zombie-like system with no critical thought…one more reason to
modernize and progress from traditional methods). This differentiation
of types of cognitive processing was reflected in what type of
authorization one had to teach; ijazas ranged in degrees, from general
transmission of knowledge (tadrees) to issuing legal fatwas using that
knowledge (iftaa’), corresponding to the level of comprehension attained
(Berkey, 1992, pgs.30-31). This latter level was the highest because as
has been highlighted, Islamic knowledge focused on application to the
extent that Allah punishes those who don’t apply the theological
knowledge they have learned, saying “have you seen he who has taken his
own opinions/desires as his Lord, so Allah has let him go astray despite
his knowledge and has placed a seal over his ears and heart, and placed
a seal over his sight” (Qur’an, 45: 23). Despite this person’s knowledge
of Allah’s majesty and mercy, paradise and hellfire, the person in this
verse chose to submit to their own lowly desires/opinions instead of
submitting to Allah’s commands (Islam, lit: submission); therefore,
their knowledge has not benefitted them and has become the cause of them
losing any beneficial use of their senses to comprehend God’s signs.
Allah also says, “oh you who believe, why do you say that which you do
not do; undoubtedly it is a grave thing in the sight of Allah that you
say that which you do not do (Qur’an, 61: 2-3). Once again we see that
applying theological and empirical knowledge for the right purposes are
intimately connected in Islamic pedagogy. The importance of teachers as
role models that construct teaching opportunities in the classroom will
be further developed in the comparison between Ethical Care pedagogy and
Islamic pedagogy at the end of this paper.

Knowledge is believed to be a blessing that increases a person in faith
if it is applied, but can also be a proof against a person on judgment
day if neglected. Aside from what one would assume to be the pragmatic
time consuming effort of writing long books by hand (without a printing
press), such a focus on applying knowledge as a lifestyle could also
explain the relative lack of interest in writing books about topics
which were viewed as requiring experience (i.e.: teaching). The
revelation contained the universals, but how to apply some of these
aspects-that did not have specific commandments-could change from time
and place; for example scaffolding will be shown to be a general theme
of Islamic pedagogy, but how to appropriately do that depending on the
content, context, and audience requires hands-on practical experience
and practice. Despite all this, there have been some ulamaa who did
write works dedicated to specific teaching methods after attaining such
experience and practice in the field.

Often cited as the first Muslim alim “to write a ‘handbook’ for
teachers” is the ninth century Ahl Al-Sunnah jurist (faqeeh) and judge
(qaadi), Muhammad ibn Sahnun (Gunther, 2006, p.369). From the
intellectual center of Al-Qayrawaan in Tunisia he wrote Adab
Al-mu’allimin (Rules of Conduct for Teachers). The first four chapters
focus on the merits of teaching and learning theological knowledge and
treating students fairly, and the remainder of the work is a collection
of specific questions he asked his father on curriculum, discipline, and
organizational issues. This alim’s reliance on his father’s expertise in
writing about teaching and learning is significant considering one of
the main stories about teaching in the Qur’an is the story of an
Ethiopian slave and how he raises his child (the chapter is named after
him, Lukman). Again, most of the manners of teaching mentioned in this
work are based on general Islamic manners, but Ibn Sahnun does advise
teachers specifically to not only encourage students to study
individually and cooperatively, but also to create situations or cases
in the classroom that would challenge their minds and allow them to
practically apply knowledge (Gunther, 2006, pgs. 370-371).

Shams Al-Din, a contemporary academic who focuses on Ibn Sina’s (a
Muslim23 philosopher) educational theory highlights how using the study
of Qur’an is an excellent way to holistically teach various disciplines
due to the many themes contained therein (Gunther, 2006, p.379). This is
in accordance with the historical custom of ulamaa focusing on one verse
or hadeeth at a time and explaining it from various angles (points of
grammar, historically, the laws to be derived from it, etc.).Such a
multi-disciplinary approach to teaching is in dire need given the
over-compartmentalization of academia at the moment. Life is a
multi-disciplinary venture that requires multi-disciplinary people to
grapple with it and offer pragmatic solutions to pragmatic problems.
Well-balanced holistic teaching creates well-balanced people who are not
confined to the narrow interests of their department or discipline.

Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali is undoubtedly one of the most quoted theologians
in Western literature due to his Ahl Al-Kalaam background; however, he
suggests rules of conduct for teachers that are very much in line with
Ahl Al-Sunnah when it comes to pedagogy: teachers being particularly

caring with children, having a sincere intention to only please God,
scaffolding students by building on their previous knowledge gradually
as to not damage their love for learning, advising them on their bad
behavior in private, and practicing what one preaches (Gunther 2006,
pgs. 384-385). Aptly, Gunther has titled his article “Be Masters in that
you teach and continue to learn…” referring to 3:79 in the Qur’an; what
he has translated as “masters” (lit: rabbaniyoon) also has the deeper
connotation of someone who practices what they learn (Al-Qarnee, 2000,
p.46).

Aside from the aforementioned works there remains (from the literature
available in English) those who have identified Islamic education and
pedagogy as memorizing the Qur’an. Helen Boyle has done empirical
research in modern day Qur’anic schools, mostly in Morocco (but some in
Nigeria and Yemen) which she defines as “Islamic schools” (Boyle 2002,
2006). The differences between Islamic schools past and present needs a
little bit of fleshing out.

The Historical Context of Islamic Pedagogy
------------------------------------------

During the early Middle Ages, roughly the first 400 years of Islam (7th
century-11th century), education in the Muslim World revolved around the
mosque, which is actually the center of most social activity in Islam
(Szyliowicz, 1973, p.53,). Not only a place for ritual worship, the
mosque was where Muslims irrespective of ethnicity, origin, age, or
gender24 gathered to learn knowledge of various types-proper recitation
of Qur’an, Tafseer (exegesis of the Qur’an), Hadeeth (the narrations of
the Sunnah and their sub sciences), Fiqh (jurisprudence, meaning the
various rulings derived from the Qur’an and Sunnah), Arabic language and
poetry, History, Medicine, and many others. It would not be uncommon to
find a student population of a very sundry composition, from students
who were ulamaa themselves to laymen, in the thousands in one gathering
called a halaqah (a circle of people around a alim giving a
lecture)-there were even “teaching assistants” such as musamlis, mufids,
and mu’ids who were advanced students of the shaykh and would repeat in
a loud voice the lecture to others far away in the halaqah, explain
various ideas, and highlight points of benefit to those they were
responsible for.

Islamic education in a mosque was very informal with most
decision-making regarding everything from curriculum to schedules
determined by the individual ulamaa offering the lectures (Berkey, 1992,
pgs. 7, 20, 40, 42).

Specifically for children, a system of elementary education schools also
existed (Kuttabs) which varied according to the degree of emphasis on
memorization of Qur’an. Kuttabs socialized students into a Muslim
identity by memorizing the Qur’an by the time they were 8-9 years old,
and taught them general skills like learning how to read and write,
basic Geography, and Math. Teachers at these schools were expected to
maintain high moral character as role models, have memorized the Qur’an,
and know the basics of non-theological subjects (Szyliowicz, 1973, pgs.
54, 57). Discipline was a pivotal moral principle taught in schools and
teachers would not hesitate to beat their students for moral
infractions, as theological knowledge was learned to be applied;
however, discipline would be relaxed as one matured,

advanced in their education, and fully comprehended the importance of
their studies (Berkey, 1992, p. 37). Upon completing the kuttabs,
students could either enter directly into various trades and professions
or continue onto madaaris for higher education which consisted of a
foundation of theologically-based sciences. Thereafter, students could
choose to either specialize within this general theological base or
build upon it and delve into other forms of positivistic natural or
social sciences (Gesink, 2006, p. 327).

The Madrasa (pl.madaaris, lit: “a place of study”) was the central
formal educational institution throughout roughly the second half of the
Medieval period (11th century to 16th century). Madaaris were places of
higher education usually attached to a mosque, and were funded by awqaaf
(sg. Waqf)-religious endowments from charity contributions, usually in
the form of a building or piece of land preserved to be used for
religious purposes. Awqaaf were protected from taxes and state seizure
(Gesink, 2006, p. 326). The term “madrasa” was used interchangeably with
“mosque” since in reality a formal location was irrelevant to the
learning process as has been mentioned; hence, madaaris still provided
the same de-centralized structure as mosques. Decision-making regarding
the structure and components of Islamic Higher Education was still made
locally by the (usually unpaid) ulamaa who taught in the Madaaris.
Accordingly, madaaris were only as good as their teachers, the ulamaa;
ergo, after students had memorized the Qur’an and a certain amount of
ahadeeth they would start studying various treatises/books with their
Shaykh (more or less a synonym for alim). Preferably, texts were
memorized as they were learned in depth-for example a hadeeth might be
explained in regard to its place in seerah (the prophet’s history),
jurisprudence rulings, grammar, points of benefit, etc.

As it has probably been noticed, there was no “high school” stage of
education between elementary school and higher education mentioned here;
this is because there was no concept of “teenage hood” in most
pre-modern societies. Therefore, graduates of kuttabs and others around
the age of puberty either entered directly into madaaris/mosques or into
the “working world”, but both would experience live application either
through their apprenticeship to an alim or to a tradesmen. Nowadays
however, only a handful of institutions exist where one can study
Islamic higher education in the manner that has been described above;
most of what has been leftover post-colonization has been Qur’anic
schools. These are really kuttabs, but due to the wide dearth of places
available to do in-depth Islamic study in the Muslim world today, many
Western academics refer to these as “Islamic schooling”… which is a
tremendous disservice to the true Islamic scholarship that does still go
on till this day. In sum however, it can be seen that “Islamic
schooling” or pedagogy, with the exception of the last 100-200 years,
was far from revolving around memorization.


-

“Modern” Perspectives of Islamic Pedagogy
To return to Dr. Boyle’s research, she runs through the usual modernist
discourse of attempting to re-write “reason” onto scripture. Taking
Al-Ghazali’s classical differentiation of knowledge (revealed and
empirical) one step further, she attempts to redefine empirical
knowledge as “reason”,

claiming it is the second form of knowledge after revelation. She
continues, “humans need knowledge derived from human reason to
understand and interpret revealed knowledge. The Qur’an emphasizes the
importance of reasoning in confirming and expanding existing knowledge”
(Boyle, 2006, p.485). This is somewhat misleading. First of all,
Al-Ghazali’s differentiation of knowledge into empirical and revealed
knowledge is in fact also ASWJ’s differentiation of knowledge as well
since it is based on numerous proofs from Qur’an and Sunnah. Regarding
interpretation and comprehension, most issues in the Qur’an and Sunnah
are very straightforward commands. As Allah says, these clear verses are
“the foundation of the Book” (Qur’an, 3:7) and that they are put forth
in “simple, plain Arabic” (Qur’an, 41:3); He affirms that it is upon Him
to explain the entire revelation (Qur’an, 75: 19), and He does by
detailing aspects that are mentioned in passing in some places of the
Qur’an, in other places of the Qur’an or through the Sunnah (where
prophet Muhammad specifically teaches what the verses mean). The
prophets were sent to explain their books as has been mentioned.
Subsequently, rarely do Muslims need to reason out what the revelation
means. No doubt, the Qur’an praises the use of reason and the senses to
acquire knowledge, but always posits revelation as superior.

A classic example of the Qur’an’s praise of revelation over human
reasoning is that of the first sin committed on earth. Allah commands
Satan to bow to Adam, and Satan refuses, reasoning “why should I bow to
a creature you’ve made from clay, when you have created me from fire”
(Qur’an, 17:61). Satan’s reasons with an a priori supposition based on
his own opinion, that fire is superior to clay in the first place, when
in fact as the Ulamaa have highlighted (Arkahdaan, 1993, p. 287-288)
clay is a soft, supple element often associated with building and
creating things, while fire is often initially associated with
destroying and burning things. Even if fire were superior to clay,
Satan’s disobedience to Allah is the reason that he is regarded as
cursed and doomed to eternal hellfire throughout the Qur’an; hence, any
reasoning that directs someone to disobey Allah is viewed as flawed
logic.

Another example is that of the son of Noah. Noah warns his son that
Allah is going to flood the whole earth, but his son disregards his
father’s warning. He reasons that he will probably be safe atop a
gigantic mountain since in his limited human experience and knowledge,
he has never seen a flood reach that high. According to his limited
mental capacity, he’s wrong. Again, by placing his reasoning above
Allah’s commands and underestimating Allah’s ability to do as he
pleases, Noah’s son drowns in the flood while Noah and the rest of his
family who obeyed Allah’s commandments, are protected in the boat Allah
commanded them to build (Qur’an, 11:25-49). Human reasoning will always
differ from person to person, so how do we know whose to follow? Do we
wander aimlessly without any foundation, jumping from theory to theory?
This is where Islam differs from the Dewey-ish Western foundation of
“doubt first and then ask questions.” Muslims have a theological
foundation whose primary belief is to not doubt in it, but rather to
follow it. Then within these guidelines that

they hold as divine, they utilize their faculties (the senses and
personal reasoning that Allah has given them) to ascertain how best to
apply Allah’s commandments (not whether or not to) and expand on
existing empirical knowledge….but not to put themselves “ahead of Allah
and His messenger”, meaning obeying oneself instead of God (Qur’an,
49:1). This is how Islam prioritizes revelation in comparison to
personal reasoning and the senses.

Getting past the politics of Boyle’s initial argument about knowledge in
Islam, she proceeds to strangely champion memorization as a learning
method as it relates to the Qur’an, countering those who claim
memorizing the Qur’an indoctrinates children since most children don’t
understand what they’re memorizing at such an age. She even cites how it
acts as a moral compass later on for those who do understand it (Boyle,
2006, p. 486-494). This first argument is quite correct; most Muslims
are not Arabs, and therefore wouldn’t understand what they’re
memorizing25 . Subsequently, this makes Boyle’s claim that “Qur’anic
memorization is conceived of as a manifestation of reason” (Boyle, 2006,
p. 489) unlikely. While such an argument attempts to defend what Boyle
perceives to be Islamic pedagogy, it seems very antithetical to her
argument to claim that memorizing unknown words and phrases is a method
for youth in the Muslim world to “reason” with the world.

This second argument however is suspect. Due to the political situation
in the world, many Western governments are trying to promote
institutions where the Qur’an is memorized to satisfy increasing local
demand for Islamic knowledge-based services (as a concession to Islamic
identity), while simultaneously continuing to increase government
control/closure of institutions that actually discuss what the Qur’an
and Sunnah means. Quite bluntly, rising demand for Sharia, the
application of the political and socio-economic aspects of Islam, has
the potential to be very detrimental to Western economic interests in
the Muslim world (IIIT, 1989, ix). This is because the values that would
be propagated would be very much in contention with those of modern day
Western Capitalism like boundary-less consumerism (which is
disproportionately of Western services and products due to structure
adjustment policies which are pre-requisites for Western funding26 ).
The Western “cultural invasion” needs to have a very culturally pliable
consumer population to adapt to the ever-changing demands of Western
products. When Muslims are Islamically conscious and are living Islam
publically and privately, there are limits to the cultural changes
available due to the implementation of Sharia as a way of life (IIIT,
1989, x)-not to mention the natural resources that would be re-directed
to the needs of native populations instead of exported at drastic losses
to their owners (Blum, 2000) (Chomsky, 2002).

Nonetheless, to not be too cynical and entertain the second argument,
that Boyle is defending memorization of the Qur’an for its moral
virtues, then yes…Allah says, and whosoever is Godconscious, then Allah
will make for them a furqan (a criterion to judge/distinguish between
things (Qur’an, 8:29). And most certainly having over 6,000 verses of
God’s words always with a person, would act as a moral compass and
divine guidance to

refer back to (if they understand them), as if it is engraved on the
heart; when one considers the Muslim belief that the Qur’an is the
literal word of God, then this is not surprising. Also, according to the
story of creation in the Qur’an, there could be precedence for
memorizing as a preliminary method of teaching. Allah says to the
angels, “Undoubtedly, I am going to place (mankind) generations after
generations on earth.” They said, “Will you place therein those who will
make mischief therein and shed blood, while we glorify You with praises
and thanks and sanctify You.” He (Allah) said, “I know that which you do
not know.” Exegesis commentators commented on these verses explaining
that despite the fact that there would be such people who would cause
mischief, Allah would also create the prophets, Muslihoon (whose
importance has been highlighted), righteous, etc. and that they would
both keep each other in check as is explained in other verses (Qur’an,
2:251 and 4:69).27 Allah continues “And He taught Adam all the names (of
everything), then He showed them to the angels and said, Tell me the
names of these if you are truthful.” The angels reply, “Glory is to You,
we have no knowledge except what You have taught us.

Undoubtedly, you are the All-Knower, All-Wise” (Qur’an, 2: 30-32). To be
brief, humans and jinn28 are the only creatures that have free will and
reason and are thus held accountable for their actions. Allah
specifically commands them in the Qur’an saying “I have not created the
jinn and human beings except to worship me” (Qur’an, 51:56) (the wider
definition of living according to the Qur’an and Sunnah as we have
explicated). Everything else in the universe worships God in its own
way. Angels have a certain amount of knowledge that cannot increase or
decrease, but they have no free will for that to affect anything; they
must worship God. Animals and other creatures have free will, but no
real intelligence and analytical skills which are required for
discipline. Humans have free will to follow their random desires or be
disciplined; in accordance with this ability, they have the unique
ability to acquire higher forms of analytical knowledge and make
conscious decisions. If humans use their intelligence to obey God and
discipline themselves through proper moral conduct, then they can reach
a status above that of the angels, but if they cause evil and harm in
society without any regard for moral bindings, (despite the reason and
knowledge that God has blessed them with), then they become worse than
the animals who don’t know any better. Critical conscience morality is
not developed through memorizing anything alone without comprehending
and applying it. Accordingly, we realize that memorization alone would
not be enough to be the ultimate end of Islamic pedagogy. Even if one
were teaching non-theological knowledge, memorizing the components of a
car would not teach someone how to build one.

Here Adam is taught the ‘names’ of everything; one cannot identify
something without names which entail certain attributes/ characteristics
that describe them. One might learn more about these attributes later
on, but the first step is to be able to differentiate things from one
another. Memorization is the first step in seeking Islamic knowledge and
even more pragmatically, children can handle little more than this at
the pre-school to elementary stage (which is the primary time this
method is used) as Ibn Khaldun notes

(Boyle, 2006, p.488). Boyle cites Al-Ghazali as explaining, “First is
the committing to memory; then understanding; then belief and certainty
and acceptance” (Boyle, 2006, p.488). The importance of immediate
application of knowledge when teaching can be seen in how prophet
Muhammad would sometimes not even specifically say how to do something,
but merely delve into application; for example he told his companions,
“pray as you see me pray” and got up and showed them (Al-Qarnee, 2000,
p. 51).

Memorizing the Qur’an teaches children to differentiate God’s speech
from human speech; the former is taken as a foundation of absolute Truth
to build upon, and the latter human knowledge is to be employed for the
objectives of the former. One of the benefits of Qur’an is that it
teaches Muslims the nature of God and His creation, and the general laws
of the universe that they can learn more about on their own. However,
after memorization-which is mostly an individual endeavor to begin with,
aside from periodically checking one’s recitation with their Shaykh for
accuracy-comes the real beginning of true Islamic pedagogy…application
as we’ve discussed here. Similarly, at any level of education of
empirical sciences, but even more so at younger ages, students must
always be able to identify and classify things before analyzing and
discussing them. We can’t discuss reading till we know what letters look
and sound like, math till we know what numbers are and their properties,
history till we know what countries and continents there are and so
forth. Particularly for younger children, when everything is still
fairly new to them in the world, they must be taught “the names of
things” before they can begin to comprehend them. Scaffolding starts
with the basics and builds upon them, but educators will have to learn
how to accurately assess their children’s capabilities and knowledge so
that they are given enough to challenge them, without overwhelming them
(Kohlberg and Selman, 1972, p.29). Memorization is a start, but an
education that transforms requires more than that. Islamic pedagogy
requires being a witness to education being applied and then taking part
in it.

So far, I have interwoven the primary characteristic of Islamic
pedagogy: the emphasis on the apprentice-ship relationship between
teacher and student and the importance of the former as a rolemodel
throughout this paper, as well as the importance of holistic education.
The world is multidisciplinary by nature. Humanity cannot hope to enjoy
and maintain a stable way of life if we consistently sacrifice the
environment and animals for humans, human interaction for the sake of
technology, humans’ needs for other humans’ luxuries, and heartless
politics for human compassion.

Our “knowledge” age is really just an age of information, little of
which actually enriches the soul or offers human solutions for human
problems. We can no longer sustain producing robot-like graduates who
will only bring the solutions that are specifically relevant to their
academic department and are covered by their grant. Holistic education
that teaches children the power of education in causing social change
can create active citizens who will contribute to their society for the
societal good and not just their own.

I have also discussed the importance of providing students with in-depth
knowledge and cultivating their critical thinking skills as part and
parcel of Islamic pedagogy, because without comprehension there can be
no application. As we have seen however, Islamic pedagogy’s stance
towards social change is not necessarily asking participants to question
all their presuppositions to work for social justice, so it does differ
from a Freirean Critical Pedagogy in this respect. The problem in Muslim
countries is not so much the material being taught as it is the fact
that it is not being taught; rather Islamic pedagogy takes advantage of
the Islamic inclinations that already exist in a Muslim society and
transforms them into tools of motivation for social change. Plainly,
Islamic pedagogy seeks to highlight the beliefs that are already
believed in on at least a sentimental level and utilize them to act out
pragmatic social change.

As we have noticed however, the little bit of English literature that
exists on Islamic pedagogy addresses how Muslims taught throughout
history, but doesn’t directly engage an even more fundamental approach
to determining what Islamic pedagogy is; how does Allah himself rubbi,
or raise, humankind in the Qur’an? We’ve already illustrated that He did
not give humans a book to just memorize. According to Islamic belief the
Qur’an is the word of God meant to teach people how to live until the
Day of Judgment, so how are these moral lessons taught by the ultimate
Murubbi (educator), Allah.

Islamic Pedagogy Directly from the Qur’an, Sunnah, and Contemporary Arabic Works on the Topic
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tarbiyya, the closest parallel to “education” in Arabic comes from the
root rubbaa which means to educate, discipline, cultivate, and raise
caringly to maturity in stages (Al-Khattaabi, 2006, p.226). The
difference between Tarbiyya and Ta’leem (learning) in Islam is that
Tarbiyya is a planned, organized holistic cultivation (theological,
psychological, intellectual, physical), while Ta’leem is simply learning
some sort of new information; it could happen in a structured fashion
with certain objectives, or by mere coincidence (Al-Khattaabi, 2006,
pgs.227-229). Interestingly, the term rubbaaniyoon mentioned previously
(translated as “masters”)-that described people with knowledge who
applied it for societal benefit-in Gunther’s research, also comes from
the word rubbaan. Rubban were people, among the few sea-faring Arabs
there were, that used to not only take care of the ships and prepare
them for seafaring, but also ride onboard as maintenance-type people
(Al-Khattaabi, 2006, p.227). The symbolism here is striking as it
implies a humble sort of educator who not only takes responsibility for
the welfare of a large group of people, but one who also is not merely
on the seashore waiting to see “if things work out.” The educator is a
leader, but also one of the ‘normal’ approachable people that others
feel comfortable with. This theme is multiplied by the fact that the
Arabs were not traditionally sea faring people to begin with; hence,
someone involved in such a position is participating in an endeavour
that is known to be challenging, but they know that it is a job that
must be done. Teachers are pivotal to the safety of the ship carrying
the next generation of youth and without them onboard, the ship will not
complete its journey.

Rubbaa is also the same root used to describe bringing a plant to
fruition, hence the many metaphors in the Qur’an about revelation being
like the life found in water that rains from the sky to bring the dead
earth to life with plants (Qur’an, 6:99, 13:17, 22:5). This is the ethic
of care that is needed in the relationship between educator and student.
This metaphor combined with the fact that Tarbiyya also comes from the
same root as rub (which is usually translated as Lord or master)
highlights that despite having the connotation of authority (Neil
483-485, 2006), Allah caringly cultivates humans in a state of dignity
“teaching them that which they did not know” (Qur’an, 96:6). This is the
type of relationship between teacher and student promoted in Islamic
pedagogy. This theme can be highlighted in several ways; first of which
is the way Allah describes Himself.

Whenever Allah mentions punishing anyone in some way, He usually
describes it as an action that He is capable of, but not an attribute
directly ascribed to Himself. Allah describes Himself with about 99
names/ attributes in the Qur’an and Sunnah and only two to three names
have a connotation related to punishment or some similar theme. Positive
aspects are directly ascribed to Himself: Al Hayy (2:255), Al Qayoom
(2:255), Al Khaaliq (6:102), Al Raheem (2:163), Al Rahmaan (1:3), Al
Kareem (27:40), Al Wahhab, Al Ghaffar (20:82), etc. (The Ever-Living,
The One who sustains and protects all that exists, The Creator, The Most
Merciful, The Most Gracious, The Most Generous, The Bestower).

Whenever Allah mentions an act involving pain, punishment, hellfire,
etc., He describes them as actions He is capable of doing as recompense
for those who deserve it (Qur’an, 4:10, 4:37, 10:8, 10:13, 10: 27,
25:13, 25:19, 89:13). This is significant because in the Arabic language
actions that are directly described as characteristics have a much more
powerful meaning. If we contemplate this, a lesson we can derive is that
by default, an educator is compassionate and forgiving; but he or she
can discipline when necessary. This concept will be seen in prophet
Muhammad’s teaching methods as well. In fact, every single chapter in
the Qur’an except one starts with the words “In the name of the Most
Beneficent, Most Merciful.” Another perspective on this issue is the
nature of how the Qur’an was revealed.

Scaffolding in Islam
--------------------

One of the main reasons that the Qur’an was revealed piecemeal over 23
years is specifically because changing human behavior is a gradual
process; Allah was very compassionate in His wisdom of gradually
scaffolding the Arabs at the time, not placing a burden on them larger
than they could handle as Allah promises humankind (Qur’an, 2:286). The
Arabs in pre-Islamic Arabia were living in complete savagery; they would
bury their children and sell women as property, have random sexual
relations, drink extremely heavily, and other crude behavior
(Al-Fawzaan, 2005). They were not spiritual people and people do not
generally dramatically change overnight. Therefore, Islamic legislation
took them step by step scaffolding them through moral refinement. Verses
revealed in Mecca when Muslims were still oppressed and persecuted
focused on attaching people’s hearts to the fundamental beliefs of Islam
and contained little legislation of specific duties and laws. Verses
discussed Tawheed-that since there is only one God, only He has the
right to be worshipped and God’s attributes-and the Day of Judgment,
when humans would be held accountable for their deeds and accordingly
granted paradise or hellfire. As Muslims developed deeper knowledge of
the faith and corresponding conviction, they increased in numbers and
emigrated to Medina, establishing a society there. During this process,
verses were revealed which increased acts of worship to their final
amounts and outlined the laws for the finer details of day to day
societal interaction (like political, social, and economic legislation).
A comparative analysis of the Meccan and Medinan verses will highlight
this gradual pattern to the reader. The order of revelation was best
described by Aisha, the wife of prophet Muhammad, who said “If the first
verses to be revealed were regarding prohibition of zinaa
(adultery/fornication) and alcohol, they would have swore ‘By Allah, we
will never stop committing zinaa and drinking alcohol’; but the first
verses that were revealed were about Tawheed, paradise, and hellfire. It
was not until the hearts were firmly attached to and loving their Lord
that came down the verses with the commandments about the permissible
and prohibited” (Al-Bukhari, vol. 1, 1997, pgs.45-50). The issue of
scaffolding has been touched on repeatedly throughout this paper so
we’ll transition to how we do that.

### Case-based learning, but what do we mean by cases?

###

Regarding the structure of the Qur’an; the Qur’an is not compiled in the
order it was revealed in since different verses were revealed at
different times throughout prophet Muhammad’s life; rarely were entire
chapters revealed all at once. This concept is expressed in the way the
Qur’an is described as being revealed: nazzalnaa or nazzala (“meaning
piece by piece”) as opposed to the other divine books of the past which
are described as being anzalnaa or anzala (“all at once”) (Qur’an,
3:3-4). Each time a verse or set of verses were revealed, this was a
real live case scenario opportunity for prophet Muhammad to explain
these verses; this is why the entire Qur’an can be thought of as an
entire collection of case scenarios where practical application of
verses was taught live, on the spot. The details of these cases are
found in the Sunnah or Seerah (biography of prophet Muhammad). Each time
a concept would be revealed, the context and teachings/sayings of
prophet Muhammad in response to it would explain it, An example of this
teaching method in practice can be seen in the first chapter in the
Qur’an, Al-Fatiha (“the opening”).

Abu Sa’id bin Al-Mu’alla, a companion of prophet Muhammad, was once
praying in the mosque, and Allah’s messenger called him to come, but he
didn’t respond (Muslims are not suppose to turn away from or interrupt
their prayer once they enter into a mode of prayer, except for an
emergency).

Later Abu Sa’id told prophet Muhammad why he had not responded, since he
was praying. Prophet Muhammad responded “Didn’t Allah say, ‘Answer Allah
(by obeying Him) and His messenger when one of them calls you to that
which will give you life’ (Qur’an, 8:24)?” Prophet Muhammad then told
him, I will teach you a chapter, which is the greatest chapter in the
Qur’an before you leave the mosque.

Prophet Muhammad later on took hold of his hand, and headed to leave the
mosque, so Abu Sa’id asked him, “didn’t you say to me, ‘I will teach you
a chapter which is the greatest chapter in the Qur’an?” So, prophet
Muhammad taught him the beginning of the first chapter starting with
“All praises and thanks be to Allah, the Rub (Lord) of the A’lameen
(lit: “anything that is possible to be known”, the universe) (Ibn
Kathir, vol. 1, 2000, pgs. 41-58).

There are a couple of points of benefit here. First is that prophet
Muhammad, by purposely calling Abu Sa’id during his prayer, a time when
normally one would not respond, has used the opportunity to teach him
the meaning of another verse (8:24), which has an even wider concept
behind it mentioned in verse 150 of chapter four, “do not differentiate
between Allah and His messengers when it comes to obedience.”The one you
are praying to right now, is the same one that has commanded you to obey
the messenger. Allah says in another verse, “Say oh Muhammad to mankind,
if you really love Allah, then follow me (follow the Qur’an and Sunnah)
and Allah will love you and forgive you your sins” (Qur’an, 3: 31). Then
prophet Muhammad proceeds to caringly take him by the hand and teach him
a new chapter of the Qur’an. Prophet Muhammad has accordingly, not only
re-emphasized and explained to Abu Sa’id the extent to which a person
“responds” to the messenger, but that the implementation of the
knowledge

he had of a previous verse would lead him to more beneficial knowledge,
the new chapter he learned. On a more macro level, prophet Muhammad has
taught Abu Sa’id that acting upon what one knows will honor a person
with more knowledge. Also, prophet Muhammad has reiterated the analogy
of revelation to something that gives life to creation. This is just one
case from the numerous ones in the Qur’an of a concept being presented
in a verse or set of verses, and subsequently being applied and
demonstrated or explained. Prophet Muhammad has captured the interest of
Abu Sa’id with his initial promise to teach him something amazing at a
later time, and then taught him several subsequent intimately tied
concepts (those mentioned above) using one main case scenario as a
vehicle (the creation of a scenario that would teach the companion the
extent of obedience to the messenger). Such multi-layered learning
allows deeper processing as various concepts are brought together in one
situation that defines their relationship to one another. Furthermore,
cases like this not only serve to teach the person directly experiencing
them, but also the bystanders who witness these events as other
companions at the mosque at the time would have learned from this
incident as well. The stories in the Qur’an which usually take up
significant portions of every chapter also serve as case scenarios by
which to learn a lesson and give a person live examples of a particular
concept as it is being applied.

Pertaining to the Content of the Qur’an, Allah has a specific preference
of how He teaches concepts in the Qur’an. Roughly half of the verses in
the Qur’an are related to the past: stories about (mostly) prophets, but
also righteous and evil people/nations that existed and the lessons that
can be derived from their stories for people who “contemplate/ponder”
them. These stories can be thought of as case studies, as well as the
specific snapshots of events that happen within these stories. These
stories provide role models, especially in the stories of the prophets,
for people to emulate, and describe the various thought processes,
reasoning, and behavior that cause people to do actions that lead them
to either paradise or hell. Many chapters for example describe the
various conversations and dialogues that will occur between the people
of paradise and the people of hellfire. I have tried to implement the
use of stories myself as much as possible throughout this paper (i.e.;
Adam, Satan, Noah, etc.) as examples of the concepts being presented.

Stories in the Qur'an are drawn from actual historical events and are
sometimes presented in a summarized version in one part and then in
intricate detail in others. An example of this can be seen in the
stories of the prophets in chapter Hud which are repeated again in
chapter Al-Qamar, but with a different style and manner as if one is
reading them from anew. With the stories of the prophets for example, a
theme in chapter Hud is that the mission of all the prophets was one;
all of them called their people towards Tawheed, singling out Allah in
all their acts of worship without associating any partners with Him.
There are numerous examples of this in the Qur'an like chapters
Al-Anbiya', Maryam, and Al-A'raf. Allah says for example, "Before your
time We never sent any Messenger without having revealed to him that
none has the right to be worshipped but I, so worship Me alone,"

(Qur’an, 21:25). "And to the people of 'Ad, We sent their brother Hud.
He said, ‘O my people, worship Allah Alone, you have no deity other than
Him. Will you not, then, fear Him?'" (Qur’an, 7:65). This is not only a
comfort to prophet Muhamamad as God is essentially telling him that he’s
merely one in a long chain of prophets, whose people also put them
through trials and sometimes never believed in them: "Therefore, be
patient oh Muhammad as did the Messengers endowed with firmness of heart
before you bore themselves with patience. And be in no haste about the
disbelievers" (Qur'an, 46:35); but these stories are also recalling the
memory of these widely known tribes of the past in the minds of the
Arabs prophet Muhammad was speaking to. The verses are igniting the
previous knowledge that the Arabs had of these peoples that came before
them and using the fact that they all called to the same thing that
prophet Muhammad is calling to as rapport to scaffold them into
following him. Allah says, “undoubtedly, in the stories of the prophets
there are lessons for those with sound intelligence and comprehension”
and He commands prophet Muhammad and everyone who reads the Qur’an after
him, “tell these stories so that perhaps they would ponder and reflect”
(Qur’an, 12:111, 11:176).The lesson is not just for those present during
these events, but also to those witnessing them by reading/hearing about
them in the chapter. This is even more obvious in the story of Moses and
Pharaoh when the pronoun changes from addressing Moses and Pharaoh
specifically to a general one that addresses all of humanity (Qur’an,
7:103-156). As Shaykh Bin Baz notes, “the use of stories is one of the
most effective methods for teaching because it causes the listener to
commit until its resolution and maintains their attention…because
phrases (or pieces of information) are forgotten, but powerful events
that have happened are rarely forgotten” (Al- Khattaabi, 2006, p.292).
Shaykh Bin Baz even explicitly recommends using stories of current
events as opportunities by which concepts can be taught (Al-Khattaabi,
2006, p.302). Again, conceiving of stories as cases and opportunities
for learning, are an excellent way that the Qur’an utilizes real life
experiences to teach certain concepts. Such case studies and examples in
the classroom will flesh out the concepts being taught. This has been in
regard to the method of stories as a teaching technique in Islamic
pedagogy.

The other half of the Qur’an is about the future-descriptions of the Day
of Judgment and the events that happen on it, paradise and hellfire,
etc. In both the stories and descriptions about the events of the
future, there is countless use of debate and dialogue between God,
angels, humans, and others.

Rarely are things merely summarized; rather the various actors are
actively expressing their thoughts to the reader so that one can
envision the scene of events that are taking place clearly. Dr.
Afsaruddin has highlighted how debate and dialogue (munaazara) was a
core teaching method used among Jurisprudence ulamaa for sharpening
students’ analytical skills (Afsaruddin, 2005, pgs. 148, 151). This
competitive aspect of Islamic pedagogy will be highlighted in a later
hadeeth. Allah commands prophet Muhammad many times to use questioning
while calling people to Islam, saying “say to them [the polytheists] oh
Muhammad, who is the Rub of the

heavens and the earth? Say it is Allah. Say Have you then taken for
worship Auliyaa’(protectors/guardians) other than Him that have no power
either to benefit or harm themselves” (Qur’an, 13:16)? Such questions
were meant to make the idol worshippers ponder and question the logic of
worshipping their statues. Challenging students to participate in their
education ensures that teachers and students are ‘on the same page’.
Questions get students involved and engaged in the learning process.

Other than these two broad strands of content regarding the past and
future (about 6,000 verses total), there are also about 500 or so verses
of direct laws in the Qur’an.

There are also some pedagogical methods to be derived from the order
that the Qur’an was compiled into. Accordingly one finds that the first
chapter in the Qur’an, Al-Fatiha, is called the “opening chapter” and
essentially summarizes Tawheed (that no one has the right to be
worshipped except Allah-the central belief in Islam) and the
relationship between God and humankind as an introduction of sorts (Ibn
Kathir, 2000, vol.1, pgs. 41-58). The second chapter, which we could
consider the first main chapter, is considered by Tafseer (exegesis)
ulamaa as the summary of the Qur’an; for example it is the only chapter
to contain all five pillars of Islam in one chapter, the ‘best’ verse,
and the longest verse in the Qur’an (Ibn Kathir, 2000, vols.1 and 2).
The last three chapters of the Qur’an (Al-

Ikhlaas, Al-Falaq, and Al-Naas) all also deal specifically with Tawheed
in a very simple fashion (they are three of the shortest chapters in the
Qur’an). Usually when we listen to a lecture or read a book, we might
doze off throughout the middle, but we usually remember the main points
that were mentioned in the beginning and the end; this is not
necessarily due to lack of interest on the part of the reader, but could
just be a natural human reaction to absorbing large amounts of
information at one time. On the next level down, at the level of the
chapter, the structure of individual Qur’anic chapters also reveals that
they usually begin and end with pivotal moral lessons related to the
chapter. This is seen in the end of chapter “Al-Furqaan” which describes
the ideal Muslim, or in the fact that the vast majority of chapters
start with a specific statement about the veracity, authenticity or
greatness of the Qur’an, Tawheed, and occasionally
paradise/hellfire-essentially the main aspects of Islam. The details of
what belief entails will be explained throughout the chapter, but the
reader is given an overall ‘abstract’ of what is to come or how it
should affect them. Similarly, when teachers are giving lectures or
talks, they should make sure that they do not dwell too long on
explanations or examples without recalling the audiences’ attention to
the main topic and purpose of the study. While on the theme of the
ordering of the Qur’an, we will present a case study of the first verses
revealed of the Qur’an.

As was mentioned, the first words revealed of the Qur’an to Prophet
Muhammad in the seventh century C.E. were, what means, Read/Recite! In
the name of your Lord, who has created all that exists…” (Qur’an, 96:1).
Out of all the different words that Allah chose to begin his last
revelation for mankind, (and Arabic is a vast language) Allah chose the
word “Iqra’”, which can be translated as “read” or “recite” in English
and actually comes

from the same root as Qur’an (lit: something which is recited, which
highlights the importance of oral transmission of knowledge and not just
books in Islamic pedagogy). This first chapter is titled Iqra or
Al-'Alaq (many chapters have more than one name depending on the
content). The first word as we have mentioned means to read or recite,
while the second “the 'alaq” (lit: blood clot) actually refers to the
“external appearance of the embryo and its sacs during embryonic
development” when the presence of large amounts of blood in the embryo
prevent blood flow29 (Ibrahim, 1997, p.8). The context for this first
revelation is that prophet Muhammad (in Mecca), prior to receiving
revelation at the age of 40, would have many dreams that would come true
so he would travel to the Hira’ cave and spend many days at a time in
seclusion to worship God30 In these first verses of the Qur'an, Allah
sends angel Gabriel to command prophet Muhammad to read, but prophet
Muhammad was illiterate31 so he replies that he is not of those who
read. Also significant, is that there is no tablet or anything for him
to read, so how can he read? The exegesis ulamaa said regarding this,
that it is as if he is telling him to read in the ayaat of Allah’s
creation since the word ayah has multiple meanings of proofs, evidences,
signs, and verses (Al-Qarnee, 2000, pgs. 114-115). Allah is determined
to show prophet Muhammad that the One who created him is capable of
anything, so three times Gabriel commands him to read, and squeezes him
tightly; every time prophet Muhammad says he can’t. The fourth time,
Gabriel says to him to read in the name of your Rub who created you. If
your Rub can create you, then if you say “In the name of God”, believing
in God’s ability to help you do what seems impossible, and try your best
out of obedience to Him, He will make you able to read. Allah emphasizes
this point about His power, commanding prophet Muhammad to read “in the
name of the One who created humankind from a mere 'alaq. Read/recite and
your Rub is the most generous. He is the one who has taught with the
pen, has taught mankind that which they did not know” (Qur’an, 97:1-5).

Unquestionably, the one who created man and his speech can make them
compatible at His will. This is an excellent example of how teachers
should similarly teach their students to do their best, and then rely on
God for the results. Furthermore, Allah specifically mentions teaching
mankind with the pen here; as the exegesis ulamaa have mentioned, this
is the main way knowledge has been passed down throughout history, even
though it was not so much during prophet Muhammad’s time. Writing traps
knowledge onto a material substance so that it can be built upon and
developed over the ages (Al- Bukhari, vol.1, 1997, pgs. 118-122). Allah
is teaching prophet Muhammad that any knowledge we have is ultimately
from Allah and proof of his majesty. Allah says “and of all things He
hath perfect knowledge” (Qur’an, 2:29). This helps one maintain humility
since as is mentioned a couple verses later, humankind gets arrogant and
transgresses the bounds when they feel self-sufficient (Qur’an, 97:6-7).

The importance of being humble as an educator is seen even in the
example of the prophets, who were all shepherds without any royal or
kinglike status in society; even after their prophethood, they still
maintained these simple lifestyles. This aspect of humbleness was
highlighted in the

linguistic analysis of a murubbi; one cannot hope to change society
without living amongst the people dealing and cooperating with them. If
teachers are far removed from “the field” of their expertise and merely
swimming in theories and not the practical problems of their societies,
then education becomes a mere intellectual exercise and not a
transformative experience for the teacher or student. Within case-based
learning we have discussed the use of stories and debate to stimulate
scaffolding, and the next most common pedagogical technique utilized in
the Qur’an and Sunnah is the mathal.

Again, as has become obvious, there is nothing outrageous or necessarily
peculiar about Islamic pedagogy, merely practical methods for simple
instruction. The mathal (“analogy/example”) according to Arab linguists
is “something that has some things in common with another and some
things not…used to draw a similitude of a similar image32 by building on
previous knowledge to bring the comprehension of something more
apparent…usually using a structure/format that is common among people”
(Al-Majeed, 1992, p.79-81). “Drawing analogies” is literally translated
“hitting analogies” in Arabic (darb Al-amthaal) because they are
popularly known for being spread very easily in Arab culture due to its
oral nature; something that travels wide through the land is known to
have received the action of darb or being “hit.” Many linguists
considered amthaal the highest eloquence of speech because they are
concise in achieving the intended meaning and comparison, commenting
that the “person is made comfortable by familiar concepts and objects
and generally veers away from the strange and new” (Al- Majeed, 1992,
p.79-81). In other words, analogies are widely recognized/used verbal
expressions that facilitate quickly scaffolding listeners/readers to a
particular idea or understanding.

As analogies are utilized in Islamic pedagogy, then the Qur’an and
Sunnah are profuse with analogies. Allah even describes that one of the
signs of the believers is that they comprehend Allah’s
examples/analogies because He has guided their hearts and senses to
understand them (Qur’an, 2: 26).

In the Sunnah, prophet Muhammad uses them noticeably, particularly while
questioning his companions. For example, to explain the purification
that the 5 daily prayers offer from sins, he asked his companions, “If
one of you had a river in front of their house that they bathed in five
times per day, would they ever be dirty?” The companions replied no.
Prophet Muhammad said, “this is the analogy of sins to the five daily
prayers; each prayer wipes away all the minor sins since the prayer
before it” (Al- Qarnee, 2000, p.51). This is an example of the use of
analogies combined with the method of interactive dialogue in teaching.

Another analogy is when prophet Muhammad said: "the example of the
guidance and knowledge with which Allah has sent me is like the abundant
rain which strikes the earth. Some of it is fertile and accepts the
water and brings forth plants and grass in abundance. Some of it is hard
and holds the water so Allah people to use it. They drink from it, water
their animals and irrigate. Some of the land it strikes is level and
barren and does not retain the water nor produce plants. The first is
the example of someone who understands the deen (“way of life”33 ) of
Allah and benefits from that with

which Allah has sent me and learns and teaches it to others. The last is
the 36 Many ulamaa have also discussed how to properly use modern
technology such as projectors and computers to use images (Al-Khattaabi,
2006, p.161) as prophet Muhammad use to use drawings and and diagrams to
explain concepts to his companions (Al-Shareef, 2010) example of the
person who pays no attention to it and does not accept the guidance with
which I have been sent" (Al-Majeed, 1992, p.124).

Here the prophet has drawn a similitude between people’s hearts and
their response to Allah’s revelation and different types of ground, with
the revelation being like the water that rains down from the sky to
bring the earth to life. The first type of person is one who
comprehended the revelation, lived by it, and taught it to others. They
don’t only “hold” the knowledge but teach others and help them to
benefit from it and “grow” as well (Al-Majeed, 1992, p.126). The second
type of person is one who merely memorizes the knowledge, but maybe
doesn’t quite understand it; nonetheless, they are able to pass on this
knowledge to someone who will benefit from it. Prophet Muhammad has
still commended such people as well in another hadeeth saying, “May
Allah illuminate the person who hears a hadeeth from me and memorizes it
until he conveys it. Perhaps a person who has memorized a hadeeth (lit:

“fiqh”) conveys it to someone with more Fiqh than themselves [so that
the latter would comprehend it and benefit from it], even though the
[original] carrier of this hadeeth was not a Faqeeh [someone who
understood it]” (Al-Majeed, 1992, p.127). Imam Al-Nawawi, a
Hadeeth/Exegesis alim, comments on this hadeeth saying “this first type
of soil does not benefit from the rain directly, but holds it and its
benefits for someone else (human or creature). This is similar to the
second type of human who memorizes the hadeeth in their heart even
though they don’t fully comprehend it themselves and don’t have the
critical thinking skills to derive the various rulings and full meanings
from it. Nonetheless, when this person comes across a thirsty searcher
[sic], they will benefit the latter with this knowledge” (Al-Majeed,
1992, p.128). The third type of person is one who does not respond to
the revelation at all nor do they relay the message to others and this
type is portrayed as barren land which does not benefit themselves or
others. Such a person might even theoretically believe in the revelation
through their lips, but not actually live by it (Al-Majeed, 1992,
p.128-129).

Interestingly, the first two types of people are presented as those with
some type of understanding, be that as it may at different levels; even
the one who merely memorized at least comprehended that the material was
important enough to concern oneself with to begin with. There was some
benefit to memorization since here it was something considered an
unquestionable Truth of life: revelation. However, the third type of
person is the one that is presented as blameworthy since they had none
of these qualities. An analogy could be drawn between this and some
empirical knowledge as well; some empirical knowledge is necessary to
know within and of itself. As was discussed earlier, there are some
types of basic knowledge that simply must be memorized as they are
fundamental to being

a productive part of society like memorizing the continents of the
planet, numbers, an alphabet of some sort, the elements of nature,
essentially main concepts that a person cannot do without. The names of
the continents or even countries could change, but in the meantime, they
are basic terms that need to be known so that one may learn more about
them. What concerns us here is that the analogy above is providing
deeper, more specific explanation for concepts being taught (the purpose
of amthaal) like those in verses such as 13:17and 22:5; for example
Allah says:

Allah says:“He sends down water (rain) from the sky, and the valleys
flow according to their measure, but the flood bears away the foam that
mounts up to the surface…;thus does Allah (through parables) distinguish
Truth from falsehood Then, as for the foam it passes away as scum upon
the banks, while that which is for the good of humankind remains in the
earth. Thus Allah sets forth parables (for the Truth and falsehood, i.e.
Belief and disbelief)” (Qur’an, 13:17 ). Essentially, Allah is saying
that other ideologies associated with disbelief will eventually fade
away because they are not sustainable ways of life like the one He has
chosen for humankind (Al-Majeed, 1992, pgs.126-127). In this case,
prophet Muhammad has used one analogy to describe others that are
similar in theme, but maybe more difficult to grasp. This is the primary
use of analogies, to clarify the concept at hand. There are numerous
analogies mentioned in the Qur’an and Sunnah, and the ones mentioned in
the Sunnah tend to generally be a little more direct and of a
explanatory nature, fitting for the Sunnah’s role in regard to the
Qur’an.

In sum, analogies play a role similar to stories of elaborating on a
concept that is being taught by scaffolding a student from their current
level of comprehension to a higher one. Consequently, we have now
outlined how Islamic pedagogy utilizes the vitally significant caring
relationship between teacher and student to stimulate motivation between
the former and latter to utilize education to work towards social change
and reform. Metaphysical motivation is employed as an impetus to spark
active learning in the classroom which transforms individuals. Through
such an apprenticeship relationship between teacher and student,
case-based learning is utilized in the classroom to construct live
learning experiences using analogies, debate, and stories as vehicles
with which to scaffold students. This is Islamic pedagogy.
