ANALYSIS OF DATA
================

Islamic Pedagogy as it Relates to the Western Analogue of Ethical Caring
Correcting Mistakes and Offering Advice on the Path to Acquiring Wisdom
It should be mentioned upfront that the following comparison between
elements of Islamic pedagogy and elements of Ethical Care are not
presented with the intention to demonstrate that the use of one teaching
method in the former or latter justifies or proves the effectiveness of
the other. Rarely, the following analysis is meant to merely highlight
parallels between the two pedagogical approaches- particularly regarding
the nature of the caring student/teacher relationship-for the sake of
drawing connections between ideas that have been perceived as
pedagogically effective in the East and West.

As has been discussed, the nature of Qur’anic revelation was conducive
to scaffolding a people from practically non-existent moral standards to
very high ones. Similarly, children are like blank slates;

we cannot assume that they should know better, because for many things
they do not and have not been taught, so one must take their time and
caringly show them appropriate behavior. When done at a young age, such
caring instruction is like etching these values into the child’s memory
as an old Arab proverb goes. A young boy, Anas, was once eating with
prophet Muhammad, but he was not doing so according to Islamic
etiquette; he was not eating from his side of the plate, but rather
sticking his hand all over it.

The prophet said to him “Oh, young boy (a term of endearment in the
Arabic yaa bunay!)! Say Bismillah (in the name of God), eat with your
right hand, and eat from what is directly in front of you.”

The boy commented later, “This remained my way of eating from that time
on” (Bukhari, 5376 in USC).

Prophet Muhammad did not scold him for what he was doing wrong, but
rather immediately proceeded to simply instruct him what the correct way
was, an approach to correcting mistakes that has also been promoted by
Bailey. The effect of how Anas was taught is what made the new knowledge
“stick” with him and change his future behavior.

Bailey also suggests not focusing on what children are doing wrong as to
damage their selfesteem, but to rather simply tell them how they can do
it correctly. This is a much more positive approach to correcting
mistakes. Don’t just say “don’t do this or that”, but rather educate
children on the important part, what they should be doing (Bailey, 2000,
pgs.55-73). Ethical Care and the Islamic pedagogy being outlined here
have promoted a forgiving, optimistic approach to teaching children.

Prophet Muhammad is quoted as saying “he is not of us who does not show
mercy to our younger ones”

(Abu Dawud 764 in USC). Children are very sensitive in their early years
and need sympathetic guidance that corresponds to their mental and
emotional capabilities.

The expression “yaa bunay!” used above is actually the same expression
that Lukman (an Abyssinian slave) uses with his son in the chapter of
the Qur’an named after him. Lukman’s classic advice to his son combines
scaffolding/prioritizing knowledge and presenting it in a caring manner
as

part of Islamic pedagogy. Lukman is praised in the Qur’an as having been
given great wisdom and religious understanding because he gives thanks
to God. And from the fruits of this wisdom is how he teaches his son how
to prioritize in order, Tawheed, righteousness to the parents, keeping
good company, ihsaan, prayers, commanding the good and forbidding the
evil, and then being patient if that brings him suffering. Also if one
notices, Allah mentions people’s rights over his son right after
Tawheed, the bare minimum acknowledgement of Allah needed for his
actions to be accepted, and right before even mentioning prayers and
commanding good/forbidding evil, which are two of the best acts of
worship a person could practice. This organization is beneficial in
teaching students the importance of their community’s rights over them
as Allah mentioned them early in the list of actions to highlight their
significance. After performing such virtues, then there is the fear of
becoming haughty so there is the advice on how to maintain humility-good
character in sum. Allah begins the story with Lukman telling his son: "O
my son! Join not in worship others with Allah. Verily! Joining others in
worship with Allah is a great dhulm (wrong) indeed. And We have enjoined
on humankind to be dutiful and good to their parents. His mother bore
him in weakness and hardship upon weakness and hardship, and his weaning
is in two years; give thanks to Me and then to your parents, unto Me is
the final destination. But if they (the parents) strive against you to
make you associate partners with Me in worship (which you have no
knowledge of), then do not obey them, but treat them in this world
kindly, and follow the path of he who turns to Me in repentance and in
obedience. Then to Me will be your return, and I shall inform you of
what you used to do. O my son! If there be (anything) equal to the
weight of a grain of mustard seed, and though it be in a rock, or in the
heavens or in the earth, Allah will bring it forth. Verily, Allah is
Subtle (in bringing out that grain), Well-Aware (of its place).O my son!
Aqim-is-Salat (perform the prayers on time and correctly), call people
to Al-Ma'ruf (Islamic Monotheism and all that is good), and warn people
from Al-Munkar (polytheism of all kinds and all that is evil and bad),
and bear with patience whatever befalls you. Verily! These are some of
the important commandments ordered by Allah with no exemption. And turn
not your face away from men with pride, nor walk in insolence through
the earth.

Verily, Allah likes not each arrogant boaster. And be moderate (or show
no insolence) in your walking, and lower your voice. Verily, the
harshest of all voices is the voice (braying) of the donkey" (Qur’an,
31:13-19).

To return to our topic of caring Tarbiyya, maintaining a positive
environment for a child serves to not damage their self esteem and
maintain the loving relationship between teacher and student. Also, the
importance of keeping children motivated through a caring environment
seems to be timeless because even nowadays academics such as Deborah
Stipek and Allan Wigfield have highlighted how important the classroom
environment is for maintaining motivation34 (2010, February).

On correcting mistakes in general, there are numerous cases where
prophet Muhammad stressed on explaining to people the reason why what
they were doing is wrong, and not hastening to condemn them (Bukhari,

717, 4992 & Al-Nisaa’i, 4999 in USC), many times offering them more
appropriate alternatives (Al-Nisaa’i, 1119 in USC). One bedouin man had
once urinated in a mosque, because he had not realized that it was a
sacred place and the companions of prophet Muhammad were outraged and
were going to grab him, but prophet Muhammad amazingly commanded his
companions to not even interrupt him, nor yell at him, but to simply let
him finish. Acknowledging the bedouins’ unrefined habits compared to the
city folk at the time, prophet Muhammad explained to him that it was
inappropriate to urinate in a mosque and had the area cleaned. After
this the Bedouin was so impressed by the prophet’s caring attitude to a
complete stranger that he supplicated “oh God, forgive me and Muhammad
and no one else”-the Bedouin made such a ‘exclusionary’ prayer as a
slight ‘jab’ at the companions for how they were about to react to his
behavior (Zino, 1995, p.75). Prophet Muhammad customized his response in
dealing with someone who would have been at a much lower level of moral
refinement (as was Bedouins’ reputation) then someone from the average
population in the city. Similar to Lickona (1991, pgs.55-67), prophet
Muhammad has taught that admonishment by itself is not a true learning
experience; how proper moral conduct is taught is the essence of the
message. The companions would be seen later throughout their lives
imitating these methods from their role-model, the prophet, with their
own students.

Once when some young girls were eulogizing the deaths of their fathers
in a recent battle, they started praising prophet Muhammad in a way that
was not befitting of him by saying that he knew the future. Prophet
Muhammad did not prohibit them from mourning their dead fathers, but
told them to simply remove the part which exaggerated his position. In
this way, he removed the mistake they were making, but allowed them to
continue with their eulogy (Umm Qatadah, personal correspondence, April,
2, 2010). Accordingly, teachers should not focus on the faults of
students, but be balanced in celebrating their good behavior. Educating
students on how to do things correctly instead of complaining about what
they are doing incorrectly is an approach Bailey has suggested as well
(Bailey, 2000, pgs.55-73).Compassion is key.

One of the primary goals of case based learning as it relates to moral
education, as discussed by Lickona above (Lickona, 1991, p.47), is for
students to realize when a situation requires moral action, reflect on
it, and then act upon it. By revealing the doctrines of Islam piece by
piece, there was live explanation/application of the verses by prophet
Muhammad in front of his companions so that they could see what it
actually looked like to uphold one’s covenants, maintain ties of
kinship, help the poor, be humble, etc in practice. Morals as general
themes always sound wonderful, but the true task is developing the
wisdom to know how to prioritize values and contextualize them to one’s
situation. Most would agree that lying is wrong for example, but would
also agree that it could be commendable if it was going to save
someone’s life.

In Islam, developing such a discerning nature is called having (“deep
understanding”) of the faith, not simply knowing the “dos and don’ts”,
but truly comprehending the principles and value system of Islam to the
extent

that one is able to do the best most beloved act to God contextual to
the time and place. Prophet Muhammad described this when he stated that
“whoever Allah desires good for, he gives him deep understanding of
Islam and the insight of how to apply it properly” (Al-Bukhari, vol. 1,
pgs.98-100). Another hadeeth states that “One faqih (one with fiqh) is
more powerful against the devil than a thousand worshippers” (Berkey,
1992, p.4). The word hikma (wisdom) could also be used as a synonym for
fiqh, since prophet Muhammad said “do not envy anyone, except in two
cases: a person whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it righteously
and a person whom Allah has given hikma (deep comprehension of the
Qur’an and Sunnah), acts according to it, and teaches it to others”
(Al-Bukhari, vol. 1 pgs.98-100). Interestingly, the word hikma when
combined with reference to the Qur’an in a verse, is used to refer to
the Sunnah in the Qur’an. This is an importance of case based learning
that modernist and Islamic approaches to moral education would agree
on-developing critically conscience morality. This theme applies to all
knowledge, many Muslim students in Muslim countries memorize basic
content material, but knowing when and how to apply it is the only way
such information has any benefit. Students merely memorizing the names
of virtues or how many elements are in water will not benefit them in
this life or the hereafter.

Reciprocity and Maintaining a Sincere Intention
-----------------------------------------------

As has been mentioned, the term Tarbiyya literally has this agricultural
connotation of caring as if one is caring for a tender plant. Herein
lies the motivation for an educator to care about their students in
Islam; it is their spiritual Islamic obligation. This motivation for
caring is different from Noddings’ concept of reciprocity (1984, p.74)
which expects some form of human motivation or reward for caring.

In Islam, all good deeds must be done for the pleasure of God. Prophet
Muhammad said, “the reward of deeds depends upon the intentions”
(Al-Bukhari, vol. 1, 1997, pgs. 85-86). Accordingly, the attitude
towards Noddings’ “reciprocity” (1984, p.74,) in Islamic pedagogy would
depend on the form it takes. If it was initiated on the part of the
student in the sense of applying the knowledge (and the educator happens
to witness this “happy growth”), then this might be praiseworthy as this
could be indicative of the student’s sincerity (one of the two
conditions for good deeds to be accepted in Islam) in learning to become
more God-conscious (assuming there’s no worldly pretentiousness about
desiring to be looked up to by others or fame involved). In this sense,
the educator sees the fruits of his/her labor, which is a possible sign
of God’s acceptance of his/her deeds in Islam. The educator can then
take satisfaction in the fact that the child has not merely memorized
the content, but has rather processed it deeply and been affected by it
in some way. If this content was moral in nature, then the child has
learned to identify when moral action is needed, purified their
intention to do it, and then proceeded to consciously make a moral
decision. To a teacher that views teaching as an act of worship, this
offers tremendous intrinsic reward that they have participated in social
reform as a Muslih. On the other hand, if their reciprocity takes the
form of gifts or praise for the teacher, then this could cause possible
harm to the teacher by inflating his/her’s ego if he/she

attributes the outcome to themselves (and not to the mercy of God for
allowing them to achieve the good they did), possibly nullifying their
deeds. Furthermore, if the educator expects such reciprocity from the
student, then this makes their sincerity questionable from the
beginning, because a Muslim expects his reward solely from God.

In Islam, God has created humankind to worship Him and blessed them with
innumerable blessings, foremost of which is creating them; therefore,
they are obligated to reciprocate this bounty with obedience, and though
He is not required to, He has chosen to reciprocate to them paradise for
their obedience. This issue of maintaining sincerity is so crucial in
Islam that one is expected to choose their company on the basis of those
who they believe to be sincere (Qur’an, 18:28). If one ponders this,
what would happen if classes and schools in the Muslim world were
constructed with the explicit intention of providing environments
conducive to good moral character and not merely sorting the population
into schools by their various socio-economic brackets? This would have a
profound effect on inequality if teachers can group students together on
this basis of being sincerely committed to social change and yet
everyone in the classroom comes from all degrees of SES. This is why the
teacher’s function as a role model is so important. As Ibn Khaldun
affirms students will often emulate their teacher as part of learning
(Halstead, 2004, p.525); hence, students can also serve as peer role
models in cooperative group tasks with other students. Creating good
company and a moral environment in the classroom minimizes the need for
repetition of the teacher’s efforts. An assertion Vygotsky would
wholeheartedly agree with since he acknowledges the contagious nature of
behavior between people (Goldstein, 1999, pgs.648-654). Education is a
broad endeavour, and as is being realized, it cannot be narrowly viewed
from a psychological lens. Humans are social creatures.

The aforementioned modeling of moral behavior in Islamic pedagogy is
what Lickona focused on as the first step to teachers teaching morals,
embodying them first, ridding themselves of their “personal vices.”
Seeing moral behavior, students can visualize what proper behavior looks
like, intend to live by it, and then actually start trying their best to
do so. The apprenticeship relationship that illustrates to students how
to go through this process is analogous to the case based learning
methods that might be utilized by Lickona-inspired educators in the
classroom as mentioned above-using daily incidents of life as
teaching/learning opportunities.

Prioritizing Values Through One’s Demeanor and Composure
--------------------------------------------------------

In regards to values, Islam legislates very similar moral values to the
Modernist framework of Ethical Care, like honesty, cooperation,
responsibility, forgiveness, courage, self sacrifice, and discipline
(Qur’an, 2:177). Prophet Muhammad was described by his wife Aisha as a
“walking Qur’an” (Al-Ashqar, 1985, pgs.814-815). when she was asked
about his character. He embodied a caring approach to dealing with
people since Allah had advised him about how to go about teaching people
about Islam, saying “Had you been harsh and hard of heart, they would
have dispersed

from around you, so pardon them for their faults, and ask Allah’s
forgiveness for them, and consult with them in affairs. Then when you
have reached a decision, place your trust in Allah; surely, Allah loves
those who put their trust in Him” (Qur’an, 3:159). Prophet Muhammad
would advise his students, the companions, similarly, saying, “Allah
will not show compassion to those who do not show compassion to people”
(Al-Bukhari, 1997, p.59). If one understands this, then they will see
why the caring student-teacher relationship is so important to
productive educational experiences in the classroom from an Islamic
perspective.

Concerning the demeanor of an educator, the aspects most repeated even
in modern day Islamic encyclopedias on ‘raising children’, are exactly
the manners and character the teacher is supposed to be teaching. Good
character is the cornerstone of Islamic pedagogy. For example in Ahmed
Mustafa Mutawalee’s Maosoo’at Al Umm fee Tarbiyyat Al Awlaad fil Islam
(Encyclopedia of Raising Children in Islam”), meticulous care is taken
to highlight all the specific references in Qur’an and Sunnah that refer
to the ideal character of a Muslim in general for the parent/educator
and child/student: social competence (brotherhood, righteousness to the
parents, maintaining ties of kinship, righteousness to neighbors,
visiting the sick, compassion, mercy, fairness, forgiveness, generosity,
and leniency) (2005, pgs.65-168), etiquettes of seeking in-depth Islamic
theological knowledge (2005, pgs. 217-231) (interestingly shorter since
pragmatic basic khuluq are what is required, while in-depth knowledge is
recommended), psychological well-being (courage, chastity, discipline,
accountability, and love) (pgs.315-375), emotional well-being (love,
compassion, general tips for how to deal with children (pgs. 376- 387),
health/sexual well-being/relationships (marriage, chastity, patience,
God-consciousness, good companionship, etiquettes for maintaining love
between spouses) (pgs. 393-442), and healthy living (exercise,
nutritious diets, medical issues, etc.) (pgs. 449-591).

A crucial disposition that Bailey also highlights for educators (2000,
pgs.26-30,) is the importance of maintaining composure throughout the
daily opportunities for modeling morals; this is the backbone of Islamic
pedagogy. Numerous ahadeeth (pl. of hadeeth) of Prophet Muhammad mention
the importance of maintaining one’s wakaar (composure) (not to mention
being from the most often repeated characteristics of the ideal believer
at the end of chapters Lukman and Al-Furqan in the Qur’an). One of the
most famous examples of wakaar is when a man had come to prophet
Muhammad and kept asking him to give him an invaluable piece of advice
(expecting some long complicated response) and prophet Muhammad kept
simply telling him to not get angry in two words (Muslim, 1077 in USC ).
The man had traveled a far distance to obtain some profound wisdom from
this prophet he had heard about, and the prophet told him to not get
angry. Virtue should not necessarily be judged/valued for its
complexity. Truly, how many learning opportunities are lost when
educators cannot calmly morally reflect on a situation before acting?

In order to practically maintain one’s composure, one needs to always
maintain an upbeat optimistic disposition and not be flustered easily,

thereby being able to be lenient with minor occurrences of misconduct,
but able to clamp down with major infractions. Modeling prioritization
of values was seen in prophet Muhammad’s interaction with children like
Anas. Anas stated "I served the Prophet Mohammad (and his family) for
ten years. (During these 10 years) he never got angry with me nor asked
why I did this or didn't do that” (Bukhari 418 in USC). This was the
tolerance and compassion prophet Muhammad displayed towards children
since they are still developing and learning. On many occasions prophet
Muhammad would joke caringly with Anas for example, saying “you with the
two ears” (Zino, 1995, p. 98). However, this was all regarding issues
that were offenses to one’s person, but when it came to important
matters, like insults to the faith or religious infractions he would say
things like “teach your kids to perform their prayers by the age of 7,
and beat them for it (Muslims are not allowed to hit other humans in the
face or hard enough to leave a mark unless in combat or a government
official administering punishment for a crime, etc. as explained in
other ahadeeth) if they are not performing them by the age of ten35 ”
(Bukhari 677 in USC). Hence, the teacher is expected to be “naturally”
caring as part of his/her Islamic personality by default, but has the
ability to be discipline when needed.

The aforementioned is the parallel in Islam to differentiating between
moral and management demands as was expressed by Kohlberg and Selman
above (Kohlberg & Selman, 1972, p.20). One must be very lenient while
trying to help their students learn proper moral behavior-because if
they pounce on every mistake a child makes throughout the day, they’ll
never get through a lesson-but they can save their emphasis for the
fundamental values they are trying to instill. Even with regular
academic content, as present day ulamaa have argued, overwhelming
students with any type of knowledge will bore them and diminish their
desire to learn (Al-Shareef).

The last example I will present is regarding Lickona’s use of
cooperative work to teach children how to teach and learn from each
other (Lickona, 1991, p.74). Prophet Muhammad would often put up a
question for discussion when intending to teach something (Al-Bukhari,
vol. 1, 1997, p. 90). There would normally be a group of companions with
prophet Muhammad throughout the day (Arabs were/are very social
historically).Once prophet Muhammad was with some companions and asked
“Indeed there is a tree that does not shed its leaves, and resembles a
Muslim. So tell me, which is it?”So people started discussing the trees
of the country side. Abdullah ibn ‘Umar said “I thought to myself that
it was the date palm tree, but I was shy and did not speak up” (this is
because he was very young and did not want to interrupt the elders). So
they asked the messenger, “tell us what it is Oh messenger of Allah.” He
said “it is the date palm tree.” Ibn ‘Umar mentioned to his father how
he had known the answer, who replied ”It would have been more beloved to
me than ‘such and such’ had you said it was the date palm
tree”(Al-Bukhari, vol.4B, 1997, pgs.299-301).

To not go into too much detail on why the Muslim was most like the palm
tree, the general reason the ideal Muslim should resemble a date palm
tree is because all parts of it are beneficial for some use, compared to
most trees that would have been found in the Middle East at the time.
What concerns us in this comparison is that prophet Muhammad questioned
them to test their general understanding of how a Muslim should be (to
get them thinking), gave them time to discuss the issue among themselves
collectively36 , and then come up with answers. He also used an
illustrative analogy to convey his point. By having different ages of
people within a group, the experience was one that highlighted the
importance of developing assertiveness in children so that they feel
comfortable voicing their opinions and feel intellectually safe to make
mistakes. Independent critical thinking followed by cooperative
discussion is an excellent strategy in the cooperative aspects of
Islamic pedagogy that allows students to practice with peers similar to
them in ability and then have an educator highlight the points of
benefit that they understood or maybe missed at the end.


