CONCLUSION
==========

I will end this discussion on Islamic pedagogy with an ideal case study
that represents the concept of Ihsaan in Islam. If teachers and the
students they teach can begin to live life according to the
acknowledgement that whatever social contributions they are putting
forth are an act of worship, and they live with the sincere intention
that their efforts are solely for Allah’s pleasure, they can begin to
develop Ihsaan-worshipping Allah as if they see Him, and even though
they don’t see Him, they live according to the acknowledgement that He
sees them. The following is known as “hadeeth Jibreel” (the hadeeth of
angel Gabriel); Umar ibn Al-Khattab, the companion, narrates:

“While we were sitting with the Messenger of Allah one day, a man
[Jibreel in human form] came to our gathering whose clothes were
extremely white, whose hair was extremely black, upon whom traces of
travelling could not be seen, and whom none of us knew, until he sat
down close to the Prophet, may Allah bless with him and grant him peace,
so that he rested his knees upon his knees and placed his two hands upon
his thighs and said, 'Muhammad, tell me about Islam?' The Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, 'Islam is that you
witness that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, and you establish the prayer, and you give the Zakat
[obligatory charity on assets], and you fast Ramadan [a month of the
Islamic lunar calendar], and you perform the hajj [pilgrimage] of the
House if you are physically and financially able to.' He said, 'You have
told the truth,' and we were amazed at him asking the prophet and [then]
telling him that he told the truth. The man said, 'Tell me about iman.'
He said, 'That you affirm Allah, His angels, His books, His messengers,
and the Last Day, and that you affirm the Decree, the good of it and the
bad of it.' He said, 'You have told the truth.' He said, 'Tell me about
ihsaan.' He said, 'That you worship Allah as if you see Him, for if you
don't see Him then truly He sees you.' … the prophet asked, 'Umar, do
you know who the questioner was?' I said, 'Allah and His Messenger know
best.' He said, 'He was Jibreel who came to you to teach you your deen37
'." (Al-Bukhari, vol. 1, 1997, pgs.80-81)).

There are entire books dedicated to this hadeeth, so we will focus
specifically on the concepts dedicated to Ihsaan and the
demeanor/appearance of an educator. Ibn Rajab Al-Hanbalee, a Medieval
alim, highlighted how, by stating that angel Jibreel had just taught
them their “deen”, then this hadeeth is essentially inclusive of all the
individual obligatory acts a Muslim must do, citing that Islam is more
directly defined as the physical “submission” of a person, Iman
(faith/belief) is more directly defined as the articles of faith with
the 7 conditions mentioned previously, and Ihsaan is the highest level
of worship of a person consistently always behaving under the
acknowledgement that Allah sees them, even though they don’t see
Him-this last level is impossible for regular humans to maintain
indefinitely, but they are supposed to try their best to reach this high
standard (Ibn Rajab, 2007, p. 41-69). Ihsaan is actually mentioned even
as the first chapter in ‘raising children’ encyclopedias like the one
mentioned above (Mutawalee, 2005, p.11) and it is one of the behaviors
that

needs to be modeled the most. Ihsaan linguistically means “to make
something better”; one way it is used in the Qur’an for example is to
return bad behavior from someone with a ‘better’ response (Qur’an,
13:22) or to even make someone ‘better’ by for example feeding them or
doing some other beneficial service for them (Mutawalee, 2005, p.11).
These points recall the image of the humble educator that was
highlighted before in the Rubbaan. In short, the ulamaa described Ihsaan
as sublime manners, increasing in importance as one goes from a broad
social network that goes all the way from the likes of plants and
animals to the poor, wayfarers, orphans, visitors, and neighbors, to
one’s most inner circle of spouses, children, parents, and then of
course one’s relationship to Allah38 (Mutawalee 2005, pgs. 13-20). If we
can raise students to live according to such a set of priorities, then
we will certainly as educators have taught them a practical application
of how to manage one’s life, which is essentially the key to success:
time management. How humans use their time and prioritize is what
differentiates between the leaders and the followers, the active and the
passive, those who transform their society or are transformed by it.

Moral education is a timeless, necessary aspect of any educational
system that values social justice and coherence. By living our values,
not only do we change society individually, but as teachers we also
prove to our students that we believe in what we are teaching. In
regards to how we do that from an Islamic perspective, as has been shown
here, the vehicle for Islamic pedagogy (whether one is teaching morals
or positivistic sciences) has been the caring apprenticeship
relationship between teacher and student which presupposes the former as
a role-model figure. Islamic character, or moral education, is the focus
of Islamic pedagogy upon which the student-teacher relationship is
built. Moral character and the caring relationships that stem from it
are pivotal in teaching any type of knowledge. Teachers are who they are
inside and outside of school, because experiences change people and they
do not shed these experiences, for good or bad, when they come to
school. Only from these understandings can any specific teaching methods
be productive.

Through case-based learning-cases being defined as stories, analogies,
or any other ‘clips’ of material-students are scaffolded through the
construction of live application opportunities (for example through
group debate/dialogue) in the classroom. But as has been highlighted,
for holistic education, the teacher as a role model is pivotal. If we
don’t live by what we say, then who will care? Through such an
interactive pedagogy, any form of content knowledge being taught,
theological or otherwise, can be a transformative experience. Such a
pedagogy is in dire need in the Muslim world given the passive rote
memorization methods left over from colonization. For the Muslim world,
looking far back enough in the past, past oppressive colonial systems of
education, can reveal dynamic teaching methods that change people.

In conclusion, we have highlighted the importance of empirical and
theological knowledge in Islam and their potential for motivating
educators and students to work towards social justice. In order for
teachers in Muslim countries (like Egypt) to scaffold their students to
such concepts as they

teach them a curriculum, they should teach through a culturally relevant
pedagogy. The one outlined above hopes to not only use existing
analytical frameworks to improve the quality of education, but to also
employ Islamic frames of reference to motivate an active approach to
education. In this exemplar of Islamic pedagogy, Islamic pedagogy has
been shown to stress the importance of an apprenticeship style
relationship between teacher and student. Through such a relationship,
teachers can utilize Case-Based learning to scaffold their students to
higher concepts using methods such as stories, analogies, and live
application in the classroom to construct transformative learning
experiences. This concept of Islamic pedagogy has also been found to
have analogues in Western literature as well known as Ethical Caring.

By using socio-culturally relevant frameworks in the field to apply this
concept, some form of “Ethical Caring” pedagogy could be promoted
globally to teach teachers how to develop pragmatic caring relationships
with their students that help both parties to grow--morally and
intellectually. Opportunities for further research within Islamic
pedagogy might include a comparison between prophet Muhammad’s teaching
techniques with men as opposed to women or delving more into detail in
any of the concepts that have been discussed in this paper.

The way students learn affects how they view their position in effecting
change in the world. If education becomes a mere intellectual exercise
with no pragmatic connection to real world problems, then such is a
fruitless venture. Education all over the world has massive potential to
create raw social change in society, but first we must realize it is not
just what we teach, but how it is taught.


