Notes
=====

1-      The Muslim ummah refers to the Islamic belief that all humans
born after prophet Muhammad’s birth are considered from the ummah of
Muhammad in general (ummat “Al dawa” or invitation), but those who
choose to believe and follow him are the more specific ummat Al ijaaba
(ummah of those who responded), who we would call Muslims today. Muslims
believe in all the prophets (ie: Adam, Abraham, Jesus, Muhammad, etc.)
in the sense that they all originally came with the same central message
of Tawheed (worshipping only One God), but different branches/details
(how to pray, etc.) contextual to their time/location; each prophet had
their own “branches” for their particular ummah (the ummah of the Jews,
of the Christians, etc.). Prophet Muhammad is believed to be the seal of
the prophets from his time till judgment day for the entire world.
Differences between the three monotheistic religions over even the
central meaning of Tawheed today (the status of Jesus being more than a
prophet, etc.) are believed to be due to tampering/alterations of the
older scriptures by various theologians and others throughout history.
For a fuller discussion, see Dr. Umar Ashqar’s Belief in Allah.

2-      See Paulo Friere’s Pedagogy of the Oppressed (2003)

3-      For the often underplayed details of U.S foreign policy see
Howard Zinn’s People’s History of the World or William Blum’s Rogue
State: A Guide to the World’s Only Superpower.

4-      Some academics label the 18th and 19th centuries the traditional
period of the Muslim world, thereby, dismissing much of pre-Western
Enlightenment history as of negligible significance (Bray, 2007).
(Noddings, 1984, p.74).

5-      I am purposely using “academics” to refer to Western scholars
affiliated with universities and academia to differentiate them from
Islamic Studies scholars/theologians (university related or otherwise)
in the Muslim world who will be referred to as ulamaa (sg: alim).

6-      These ulamaa who tried to incorporate Greek philosophy into
Islam as early as the 9th century, are known for placing their own
reasoning over textual proofs. They include scholars such as
Al-Ghazaali, Al-Razi, and Ibn Rushd; some of them took on W. philosophy
as their own substitute belief system, such as Ibn Sina and Ibn Arabi.
Ahl Al-Kalaam, philosophers, and Sufis are usually the few ulamaa deemed
worthy of mention in Western academia) for obvious reasons (Halstead,
2004). Fazlur Rahman and others (Afsaruddin, 2005) go as far as to
translate Mutakallimun (derivative of Ahl Al-Kalaam) and Kalaam as
Muslim theologians and theology respectively, thereby delegitimizing all
mainstream academic scholarship of Ahl Al-Sunnah over the last roughly
1400 years.

7-      Muslims are encouraged to say “peace be upon him” at least once
the first time they mention prophet Muhammad’s name in a gathering or
paper, etc.

8-      Modern Modernists include Egypt’s Syed Tantawi who considered
building a gigantic wall on the Egyptian border to effectively imprison
Palestinians in Gaza and cut off their aid supplies… a “religious
obligation” (Suleiman, 2010).

9-      The most common strategy of Westernizing Islam has been a
conscious attempt, particularly over the last half century, to
delegitimize the Sunnah of prophet Muhammad and his companions by
various methods, like portraying it as a sort of cultural baggage left
over from the pre-Islamic era. An example is seen in Hallaq’s The
Origins and Evolution of Islamic Law. Hallaq ignores any reference to
tens of early works on Hadeeth, Fiqh, and Rijaal to purportedly claim
that a Qadi (lit: “judge” who rules by Qur’an and Sunnah) in early Islam
did not have to know the Qur’an and Sunnah or that Qur’anic legislation
‘evolved’ since the prohibition/punishment on/for drinking alcohol was
not applied to Tila’a (a Middle Eastern fruit drink)-which is not
technically alcohol (khamr) according to Islamic jurisprudence (Nadwi,
2005).

10-    Even Seyyed Hossein Nasr (a Sufi Modernist affiliate himself of
IIIT, which is a mildly Modernist institution) notes, “the prejudices
that have marred the study of Islam in the West since the time of Peter
the Venerable, when the Qur’an was first rendered into Latin and even
beforehand, must finally be overcome if in-depth

11-    The a priori suppositions of the Modernistic lens are at least
acknowledged in some of the work of academics such as Mohammad Akram
Nadwi, Sherman Jackson, Talal Asad and Sabaa’ Mahmood. Mahmood praises
how Asad for example highlights “how the

power of Western forms of knowledge lies not only in their ability to
re-present social reality but also to intervene and remake non-Western
traditions, practices, and institutions, [hoping to transform] what it
means to live as a Muslim subject in the modern world” (Nyang, Ahmed,
and Bukhari, 2009, p.11).

12-    Nasr ironically notes, “in many of the major centers of Middle
Eastern studies, everything is taught seriously except Islam itself. One
sees often in such centers numerous courses on history, anthropology,
languages, sociology, political science, and similar subjects pertaining
to the Islamic world, but little in-depth study of Islam as the
religion… There is no greater source of distortion than applying the
secularist perspective of the past few centuries in the West to a
religion and civilization where it does not apply.” (Nasr, 2009, pgs.19,
23).

13-    Such political initiatives are highly motivated by modern
attempts to spread Western culture in the Muslim world through various
methods like increasing secularization of Muslim societies and
advocating Western gender roles (Kincheloe and Steinberg,, 2004,
pgs.44-47, 161-163). One author went so far as to twist the words
(relying on an average reader’s ignorance of Arabic syntax and
morphology) of 18th century Islamic revivalist Muhammad bin Abdul Wahhab
to re-present some of his statements regarding the rights of women as
supportive of current Western conceptions of female gender roles. Many
references link to page numbers that don’t even exist in the original
work (see Delong-bas’s Wahhabi Islam: From Revival to Reform, 2004)!

14-    A common myth, which depends on absolute ignorance of the
existence of Arabic resources to refer back to, but nonetheless is
mind-numbingly recycled (either explicitly or implicitly by ignoring
roughly 1400 years of Islamic scholarship that entails otherwise) is
that these aforementioned sects were the most important in Islamic
history and then somehow magically with the advent of Muslims like Abdul
Wahhab in the 18th century and Sayyid Qutb in the 20th, Islam evolved
“political/economic” aspects. In reality, Islam has always been
practiced as a social way of life in the Muslim world up until
colonization when most aspects were effectively secularized (see History
of Islam by Akbar Shah Najeebabadi). The false notion that such revivers
or reformers were bringing something new is simply because they tried to
reincorporate such aspects during/after colonization, blasphemy to
Western academia which believes that the world was created in the
European Enlightenment.

15-    By no means do I intend here that Islam is now, or was ever in
the past, something with absolutely no variables. Islam, since the
Qur’an’s first verses were revealed had variables like the different
forms of recitation revealed to prophet Muhammad according to the
different dialects spoken in Arabia at the time (Martin 34, 1985).
Sharia, or Islamic Law- which is mostly a guideline for a set of
objectives-only has certain constants that don’t change with time; Fiqh
however, or Islamic jurisprudence, can vary depending on the context (it
gives very specific commands/prohibitions, etc.) But, a macro level
analysis of Islamic theology will reveal about 70% of jurisprudence
issues are agreed upon (and minor issues like where to place one’s hands
during prayer or whether hijab should include the face and hands or not
are not pillars of Islam in the first place), because they are all due
to slightly different understandings of the Qur’an and Sunnah based on
proof, not mere opinion (see The Evolution of Fiqh by Abu Ameenah Bilal
Philips). On the other hand, the Modernist movements’ attempts to
“reform” Islam, attack fundamental principles and constants of the faith
derived from the Qur’an and Sunnah that don’t change with time and are
supported by about 1400 years of scholarship based on sciences which
Modernists don’t even acknowledge. Without

16-    The Qur’an is believed to be the literal speech of Allah which
can not be literally translated due to its divine origin (something will
always be lost in translation); hence, any translation is a human
attempt to convey the meaning as closely as possible (Ibrahim, 1997, p.
54). This is why I, in agreement with mainstream Islamic scholarship,
have referred to “translated” verses as “what means…” here, to highlight
this issue, but will refrain from doing so the rest of the paper for
space.

17-    What it means to be “truthful” (sideeq) to Allah is a wide topic,
but it can most simply be explained as steadfastness in being sincere to
Allah in all one’s actions by consistently doing the most pleasing thing
to Allah particular to a time and location (see Al-Afani’s Al-Ikhlaas:
Ta’teer Al-anfaas min hadeethil Ikhlaas).

18-    Masculine pronouns such as ‘him’ or ‘he’ used in revelation are
the default gender used but applies to both men and women unless there
is evidence to the contrary on the issue in the Qur’an or Sunnah.

19-    Knowledge of the testimony of faith (or shahada) is 1 of the 7
conditions mentioned in the Qur'an needed for this shahada to be
accepted, like absolute certainty in it, sincerity to it in 1's actions,
being truthful to it, love, meaning not loving any of creation more than
Allah and his messenger, full submission, and complete acceptance of
every part of the religion as it was revealed (Al-Jabiri, 1995).

20-    Tafsir (exegesis) ulamaa are essentially the companions of
prophet Muhammad (since they had the Qur’an directly taught to them from
prophet Muhammad), so all later Tafsir Ulamaa essentially did was to use
their narrations as a basis and expound upon them in regard to whatever
aspect of Tafsir they were elaborating on in their work (ie:
grammatical, historical, derivation of laws, etc.).

21-    See Al Wajiz fi Sharh Al Qawaid Al Fiqhiyah by Abdul Karim Zaidan
for a concise summary of the principles of Islamic jurisprudence (Usool
Al-Fiqh).

22-    Interestingly however, there were many books on how to “seek
knowledge” in treatises often called something to the effect of “The
Book of Knowledge”(Zaid, p.75).

23-    Although excellent in medicine and other empirical sciences, his
writings, which challenged the Qur’an and claimed it had to be verified
with reason (like some of his counterparts, Al-Farabi, Al-Arabi,etc.)
have caused some ulamaa to declare such philosophers outside the fold of
Islam. It is ironic that many of the ulamaa acknowledged and celebrated
in the West were not technically considered Muslim in much of the Muslim
world (Halstead, 2004, p. 518).

24-    Women had a tremendous role as ulamaa in Islamic history, but
within the guidelines of Islamic gender roles and appropriate conduct
between the sexes (segregation, etc.) (Nadwi, 2007), contrary to the
revisionist history of “Modern women” imposed by some Western academics
(Afsaruddin, 2005, pgs.164-165). Nadwi’s work is actually just the
preface to an Arabic 40 volume biographical dictionary of women ulamaa).

25-    Plus the Qur’an uses classical Arabic vocabulary, syntax, and
morphology, different from those of Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), which
are needed to grasp the deeper meanings of Qur’an…which are rarely
taught outside of Arabic Studies departments these days.

26-    For the effects of this in Egypt see Civil Society Exposed: The
Politics of NGOs in Egypt (Abdelrahman, 2004, pgs. 17, 85, 102-107).

27-    Allah explains many times in the Qur’an, that from His wisdom is
that He created everything in pairs-male/female, day/night, good/bad,
etc. For example as will be seen in chapter Iqraa’, if humans, even the
pious, begin to feel selfsufficient, then they will transgress the
bounds, oppressing themselves and others.

28-    creatures made from a gaseous substance, from the Ghayb; the
species that Satan comes from, but they can choose obedience or
disobedience like humans.

29-    The Qur’an describes the stages of the embryonic process in
certain places (like 23:12-14) which describes how the embryo matures
from a nutfa (drop of semen) to the described alaqah stage above to the
mudghah (“chewed substance” appearance referring to the somites at the
back of the embryo (when it becomes like

30-    Before revelation there was no formal form of prayer revealed yet
for the Muslim ummah so prophet Muhammad would seclude himself in the
cave to meditate about the greatness of Allah (Al-Ashqar, 1985,
pgs.814-815).

31-    The Qur’an mentions that one of the wisdoms behind choosing an
unlettered prophet for the revelation was so no one could accuse him of
writing it himself (Qarnee, 2000, p. 115). In fact if he were to write
it himself, it wouldn’t be in his interest to write a verse saying that
God teaches with the pen since it was common knowledge among prophet
Muhammad’s tribe that he was illiterate (Al-Ashqar, 1985, pgs.814-815).

32-    Deen is the closet word to “religion” in the Qur’an. With
secularism in the Arab world, the word has also taken on the meaning of
“religion” in Modern Standard Arabic.

33-    They cite how children are overconfident about themselves from
the ages of 4-7, when key characteristics of classroom environment are
flexible grouping, evaluation through skill mastery on report cards not
grades, work is displayed, small group instruction,

differentiated tasks, and mistakes are valued. All of this disappears as
they grow, and so does motivation.

34-    Not praying the 5 daily prayers is disbelief in Islam, hence the
more severe tone; there is some difference of opinion among theologians
if one is considered a disbeliever by abandoning them in general or out
of laziness while still believing in their obligatory nature (Ibn Rajab,
2007).

35-    Ibn Sina has highly stressed the importance of students having
good company in their learning experiences as well (Gunther, 2006,
p.380).

36-    As a side note, the ulamaa have commented how this hadeeth shows
the desirability of creating opportunities for students to experience
live dialogues (through for example guest speakers), the importance of
an educator maintaining a pleasing appearance,(similar to how Jibreel
came in this hadeeth), the close proximity in which the learning took
place between Jibreel and the prophet, and how a group of students (the
companions) should be as a family who miss each other upon each others’
absence and stay abreast of each others’ affairs (Ibn Rajab, 2007, p.
41-69).

37-    For an interesting glimpse at how the concept of Ihsaan would
work in developing grassroots educational initiatives through what Iqbal
Quadir would describe as a “network effect” (of the people, by the
people and for the people) (Quadir, 2005), see the story of Dhul Qarnain
in the Qur’an, a powerful righteous ruler who historically ruled most of
the earth and his assistance of the weak in giving them greater than
what they needed, but making them assist in the effort themselves
(Qur’an, 18:83-98; Ibn Kathir, vol. 6, 2000, pgs. 203-209). People
maintain what they work and sweat to accomplish.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

*Mohammed Sabrin is 25 years old at the age of this work. He was born in
Cairo, Egypt to Egyptian parents and has lived in the U.S since about
the age of six. He completed his undergraduate education at The
University of Delaware majoring in English with a concentration in
Ethnic and Cultural Studies. It is during this time that he developed
his deeper interest in education and how it relates to social change due
to his experience with postcolonial literature. He is now completing his
Master’s in Educational Leadership and Policy Studies with a focus of
Socio-cultural International Development Education Studies (SIDES) at
Florida State University. He hopes to continue his graduate studies
during his PhD focusing on the empirical side of pedagogy with an intent
to be an Education professor in Egypt. He also aims to develop Early
Childhood Education institutions corresponding with his immediate
interest of improving the quality of ECE in Egypt. His professional
teaching experience includes working with various underprivileged Latin
American and African-American communities’ academic enrichment programs
in the U.S. and being a Graduate Assistant for the SIDES program at
Florida State University. He is a stern believer in holistic education
that transforms individuals and offers pragmatic solutions to societal
dilemmas.*

And Allah Is The Most High And Knows Best.
