Section 4: Disbelievers Shall Be Disappointed – Truth Shall Be Established
==========================================================================

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 22
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الشَّيْطَانُ لَمَّا قُضِيَ الأَمْرُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَعَدَكُمْ
وَعْدَ الْحَقّ‌ِ وَوَعَدتُّكُمْ فَاَخْلَفْتُكُمْ وَمَا كَانَ لِيَ
عَلَيْكُم مِن سُلْطَانٍ إِلآَّ أَن دَعَوْتُكُمْ فَاسْتَجَبْتُمْ لِي
فَلاَ تَلُومُونِي وَلُومُوا أَنفُسَكُم مَّآ أَنَاْ بِمُصْرِخِكُمْ
وَمَآ أَنتُم بِمُصْرِخِيَّ إِنّـِي كَفَرْتُ بِمَآ أَشْرَكْتُمُونِ مِن
قَبْلُ إِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “And Satan says, when the affair is decided: ‘Verily Allah
promised you the promise of truth; I also promised you but I failed to
keep them to you, and I did not have any authority over you except that
I called you and you responded me. Therefore, do not blame me, but blame
yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. Verily I disbelieved
in your associating me with Allah from before. Verily the unjust, for
them shall be a painful chastisement’.”***

In the Hereafter, sinners seek to get others involved in their sins and
they try to find fellow-conspirators so as to put the whole blame on
them for the wrong they have committed. Sometimes the sinner will say:
“*Friends seduced me!*”

At other times he says: “*Corrupt leaders made me corrupt*”. Some other
times, he blames the Satan and regards him as the cause of his own
seduction.

But, the Satan answers:

*Do not put the blame on me, I did not have any role to play except
wavering your opinion and calling you to it. It was you who decided to
deviate and to become deviant.*

The verse says:

***“And Satan says, when the affair is decided: ‘Verily Allah promised
you the promise of truth; I also promised you but I failed to keep them
to you, and I did not have any authority over you except that I called
you and you responded me…”***

The fact that the Satan has no domination over man, not only is verified
by Allah but also the Satan himself confesses it.

Addressing Satan, Allah says:

***“Verily (as regards) My (devoted) servants, there is not for you over
them any authority…”***[^1]

and in this verse, Satan says:

***“…and I did not have any authority over you…”***

However, in the continuation of the above verse, the Holy Qur’an says:

***“…Therefore, do not blame me, but blame yourselves. I cannot help
you, nor can you help me. Verily I disbelieved in your associating me
with Allah from before. Verily the unjust, for them shall be a painful
chastisement’.”***

Anyway, the Divine promises are all true and they are identical with the
reality.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 23
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاُدْخِلَ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ
تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِها الاَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا بِإِذْنِ رَبّـِهِمْ
تَحِيَّتُهُمْ فِيهَا سَلاَمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “And those who believed and did righteous deeds will be admitted
to Gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein shall they abide for ever
by their Lord’s permission; their greetings therein is: ‘Peace!’.”***

In the day of resurrection, the people of Paradise will hear the word
‘Peace’ from every direction. ‘Peace’ from Allah to those whose
residence is Paradise.

***“Peace: a word from a Merciful Lord.”***[^2]

Peace from the part of the angels to the faithful:

***“…Peace be on you, you shall be happy; therefore enter it to
abide.”***[^3]

‘Peace’ from the residents of Paradise to one another:

***“…their greetings therein is: ‘Peace’.”***[^4]

Sometime one goes somewhere by his own will, and at other times, it
happens that others come along and take him to a place with some respect
and particular ceremonies.

Allah, the Almighty, remarks in this noble verse: /wa ’udxila/, that is,
those who are dwelling in Paradise do not enter the Paradise in a simple
and usual manner. On the contrary, they will be admitted to Paradise
with particular respect and ceremonial gestures.

The verse says:

***“And those who believed and did righteous deeds will be admitted to
Gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein shall they abide forever by
their Lord’s permission; their greetings therein is: ‘Peace!’.”***

In the noble verse 73 of the blissful Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, the Qur’an
He also declares:

***“And those who are in awe of their Lord shall be conveyed to the
Garden in companies until when they come to it, and its doors shall be
opened, and the keepers of it shall say to them: ‘Peace be on you, you
shall be happy; therefore enter it to abide’.”***

As for those who are residents of Hell, we read that they direct them
towards the chastisement while they are being tortured:

***“Lay hold on him, then put a chain on him.”***[^5]

There are various streams running in Paradise:

A- Streams of water

***“...In it are rivers of water incorruptible…”***[^6]

B- Streams of milk

***“…rivers of milk of which the taste never changes…”***[^7]

C- Streams of wines with the nature of Paradise:

***“…rivers of wine, a joy for the drinkers…”***[^8]

D- Streams of honey:

***“…a river of honey, pure and clear…”*** [^9]

The dwellers of Hell resent and detest one another and curse each other,
while the dwellers of Paradise greet one another and will remain
constantly in the Paradise. Those paradise-dwellers are sincere and
cordial with one another and they always say ‘Peace’ to each other. They
are never involved in quarrelling nor in estrangement and ill terms.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 24
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلاً كَلِمَةً طَيّـِبَةً
كَشَجَرَةٍ طَيّـِبَةٍ أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ وَفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّمَآءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “Have you not seen how Allah sets forth a parable? A good word is
like a good tree, the roots of which are fixed and its branches are in
heaven,”***

A good tree and a tidy noble one has got several ensuing outcomes like:
growing, bearing fruits abundantly, casting shadows and sustaining
itself, and bearing fruits under all kinds of circumstances.

A monotheistic person is never stagnant and the signs of his faith
constantly reveal themselves in his speech and his acts. His faith is
continuous and not seasonal, and he always calls others to the faith,
persuading them to act according what is allowed.

The verse says:

***“Have you not seen how Allah sets forth a parable? A good word is
like a good tree…”***

In some Islamic quotations and in the commentaries of the Qur’an,
several things as the examples of the Qur’anic term /tayyibah/ are
referred to. Monotheism, faith, correct and sound ideas, heavenly
leaders and their companions are among them. Of course, monotheism is a
constantly- fixed principle which is inherently embedded in human
nature.

***“…the roots of which are fixed…”***

It affects all the deeds and words as well as the thinking of man.

One can enjoy the fruits of faith at any time, anywhere, and in all of
one’s ups and downs.

The verse says:

***“…and its branches are in heaven,”***

The tree of monotheism has got fixed roots. No threats, or conspiracies,
no instigators and blame as well as the despots can uproot or eradicate
it.

If we find that in quotations this tree has been rendered to the Prophet
(S) and his Ahl-ul-Bayt (as), it is because of this very reason that the
religion of Muhammad (S) and the path of his household widens ever more
as against the background of all those enemies, and it will globalize
one day.

### Some Traditions

[^10]

Mul a ‘Abd-ur-Rahman-ibn-‘Ūf has been quoted as saying: take from me the
correct traditions of the Prophet (S) before they are distorted and
mixed with lies. I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) who said:

*‘I am the tree (of prophecy) (Tūb a) and Fatimah is its trunk, Ali is
its seed, Hassan and Hussayn are its fruits. The Shi‘ites of us (our
followers) are its leaves. The grass root of this tree is in the Garden
of Eden, and the rest of it is in other Gardens (of Paradise).’* [^11]

The Prophet (S) said:

*“People are from different (roots of) a tree, and Ali and I are from
(the roots of) a single tree.”* [^12]

The blissful Prophet (S) remarked:

*“My Ahl-ul-Bayt and I are a tree in Paradise, the branches of which are
in the world and whoever attached to us (took the tree by the branch),
has taken a way unto his Lord.”* [^13]

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 25
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُؤْتِي اُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ بإِذْنِ رَبّـِهَا وَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ
الأَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “(The good tree) yields its fruits at all times by the permission
of its Lord, and Allah sets forth parables for the people that they may
reflect.”***

The tree of faith always bears good fruits and there are no seasons for
the faithful as autumn and winter.

The verse says:

***“(The good tree) yields its fruits at all times by the permission of
its Lord…”***

The use of allegories, similes and parables are methods of the Holy
Qur’an for calling the attention of the people and of reminding them.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and Allah sets forth parables for the people that they may
reflect.”***

Therefore, all is mortal except Allah and the faith in Him. And whatever
is mortal cannot bear fruits forever. However, whatever is godly by
nature is eternal.[^14] Of course, the colour of Allah is constant and
other colours will vanish.

***“…and who can give a better hue than Allah?…”***[^15]

The tree of faith always bears fruits and a believer is under all
circumstances remembering Allah (s.w.t.) and is seeking to perform his
duties, whether be it in welfare or in hardship, in happiness or in
disaster, in poverty or in wealth, and in time of the threat of the
oppressors he will resist until the end.

At the time of propagating religion, he does not expect any returns from
others. When he is adamant, he will control himself for gaining Allah’s
consent.[^16] At the time of marriage, he trusts in Him.[^17]

At the time of worship and obedience, he has intention with divine
motive.[^18] At the time of poverty, he does not go to the rich and is
not of the flattering lot.[^19] In time of conquest or defeat, he is
happy throughout his campaign for he is busy performing his duties.[^20]

Of course, faith in Allah, the Almighty, is like a tree the fruits of
which satisfies man both in the world, and in the intermediate world,
and in the Hereafter.

However, man’s property and position and his children as well as other
blessings of this life are like a tree which bears fruits only for a few
days and in a limited way, if such property, position, etc. might even
bear no fruits at all, and, therefore, they become merely his own source
of spiritual torture.

Surah Al-Taubah, No. 9, verse 55 says:

***“So let not their possessions and their issues astonish you; verily
Allah only desires thereby to chastise them in the life of (this)
world…”***

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 26
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَثَلُ كَلِمَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ كَشَجَرَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ اجْتُثَّتْ مِن فَوْقِ
الأَرْضِ مَالَهَا مِن قَرَارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. “And the parable of an evil word is like an evil tree rooted upon
the surface of the earth; it has naught of stability.”***

The Arabic word /’ijti a/ mostly signifies uprooting and eradication.
The words, ideas and deviant individuals have neither got any roots, nor
do they possess any fruits, flowers, beauty, perfume, perseverance,
shade, and development. On the contrary, they are just thorns in the
eyes of others.

At any rate, as comparative studies present one of the best ways for
understanding problems, the opposite of the ‘good tree’, pops up in ones
mind soon and is discussed as: ‘the word evil and unclean’ is like the
evil and unclean tree which is without any roots which is up-rooted from
the earth and which is thrown to one side when standing in the stormy
weather and has got no stability.

It is interesting to note that the Qur’an speaks in detail about ‘the
good tree’ while, when talking about ‘the evil tree’, it describes it in
one short sentence and passes by it.

The verse says:

***“And the parable of an evil word is like an evil tree rooted upon the
surface of the earth; it has naught of stability.”***

This method presents a delicate way of expression which encourages man
to describe all qualification of the person once he is talking about the
beloved one, whereas, when talking about the detested individual, he
discusses it in a very concise manner.

Imam Baqir (as) is quoted as saying that the objective in mind with
regard to /šajaratin xabiah/ (the evil tree) is the Umayyads. [^21]

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 27
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُثَبّـِتُ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا بِالْقَوْلِ الثَّابِتِ فِي
الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَفِي الأَخِرَةِ وَيُضِلُّ اللَّهُ الظَّالِمِينَ
وَيَفْعَلُ اللَّهُ مَا يَشَآءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “Allah confirms those who believe by a firm saying in the life of
the world and in the Hereafter, and Allah leaves the unjust to stray;
and Allah does what He pleases.”***

That is, Allah provides stability for the believers, in this worldly
life, because of their belief in the word monotheism and its sanctuary,
so that they do not deviate and be misled from the path of the truth,
making them staunch proponents lest they shall deviate from the right
path in their worldly affairs which will also result in Hereafter.

Some commentators suggest: It means that Allah provides them with a
living and settlement on earth, and He assists them to overcome their
enemies and will place them in the Paradise in the Hereafter.

Ibn-i-‘Abb as and Ibn-i-Mass‘ūd and the majority of the commentators are
of the belief that: This verse has been revealed to the question asked
in the grave and the objective in mind is the grave once talking about
the hereafter. That is, concerning the question of the grave, He fixes
them over the issue of faith. Our dear Immaculate Imams have also been
quoted as such.

Therefore, we read in various Islamic quotations that Allah keeps the
believer stable on the line of faith once entering the grave at the time
when angels ask questions regarding his identity.

This is the meaning of:

***“Allah confirms those who believe by a firm saying in the life of the
world and in the Hereafter…”***

In some of these quotations, we have it explicitly stated the word
/qabr/ (grave), while in some other quotations we read that the Satan
calls on the faithful at the time of death and tries to seduce him from
every direction and any side by his temptations. However, Allah does not
permit him to mislead the faithful and this is the meaning of the
abovementioned Qur’anic sentence.

Most of the commentators have accepted this commentary according to the
quotation of the great commentator, Tabarsi, in Majma‘-ul-Bayan.
Perhaps, their reason is that the hereafter is no place for erroneous
behaviour, nor is it a place for practice, but it is only a place for
attaining the results.

However, at the time of the arrival of death, and even in the state of
purgatory, which is the world that exists between this world and the
Hereafter, there is the possibility of deviation more or less. It is in
this circumstance that Allah’s favour comes to the assistance of man in
order to protect him and make him straightforward.

Anyway, in two explanatory examples in the previous verses, the state of
‘faith’ ‘disbelief’ ‘a believer’, ‘a disbeliever’ and, in general, the
state of every ‘clean’ and ‘untidy’ were visualized. In this verse, the
consequence of the job and the ultimate destiny of man are referred to.

First, it implies that Allah straightens and strengthens those who are
believers, for their belief, their words and their ideas.

He confirms them and protects them in this world, in the purgatory where
there is a possibility of deviation, and in the Hereafter, for their
belief has not been a superficial one and a shaky one, and their
personality has not been a hypocritical and a versatile one.

They will remain constant in their confrontation with difficulties and
whims, and they will be kept clean of all scandalous flaws of character
in here. Allah’s endless blessings will be bestowed on them in the
eternal life there.

Then, dealing with the opposite point, it says:

***“…and Allah leaves the unjust to stray; and Allah does what He
pleases.”***

We have repeatedly asserted that wherever, in the Qur’an, there is the
question of leading and misleading and it is attributed to Allah, its
first steps have been taken by man himself.

Allah’s job is that very impact that has been created in every act, and
also Allah’s job is bestowal of blessings or withdrawal of blessings
that are designated by Him as a consequence of a person’s suitability or
his lack of worth.

[^1]: Surah Al-Hijr, No. 15, verse 42

[^2]: Surah Yasin, No. 36, verse 58

[^3]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 73

[^4]: The verse under discussion

[^5]: Surah Alhaqah, No. 69, verse 30

[^6]: Surah Muhammad, No. 47, verse 15

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Ibid

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Fad a’il-ul-Khamsah, vol. 1 p. 172 from the
Mustadrak-us-Sahihaynn, vol. p. 760

[^11]: Fada’il-ul-Khamsah, vol. 1, p. 172 take from
Mustadrak-us-Sahihayn, vol. 3, p. 160

[^12]: Fad a’il-ul-Khamsah, vol. 1, p. 172, taken from Kanz-ul-Hagh
a’igh, p. 155

[^13]: Fad a’il-ul-Khamsah, vol. 1, p. 172, taken from Thakh
a’ir-ul-‘Uqb a, p. 16

[^14]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 96

[^15]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 138

[^16]: Surah ’ Al-i-‘Imr an, No. 3, verse 134

[^17]: Surah An-Nūr, No. 24, verse 32

[^18]: Surah Al-’An‘ am, No. 6, verse 162

[^19]: Surah Al-Qasas, No. 28, verse 24

[^20]: Surah Al-Taubah, No. 9, verse 52

[^21]: Tafsir Majma‘-ul-Bayan


