Section 5: The Ingratitude of Men to Allah’s Bounties
=====================================================

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verses 28 - 29
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَي الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ كُفْراً
وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلَوْنَهَا وَبِئْسَ الْقَرَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. “Have you not seen those who changed Allah’s favour for
ingratitude, and caused their people to alight into the abode of
perdition?”***  
***29. “Hell! They shall enter into it; and (what) a bad place it
is!”***

It is the Prophet (S) who is being addressed in this verse and, in fact,
it is a depiction of one of the aspects of ‘evil tree’ pointed out here.

At first, the Qur’an implies whether you did not see those who converted
Allah’s blessings and gratitude into ingratitude and sent themselves
ultimately to the land of annihilation. Such people are the roots of the
‘evil tree’ and are the pioneers of paganism and deviation.

The verse says:

***“Have you not seen those who changed Allah’s favour for ingratitude,
and caused their people to alight into the abode of perdition?”***

Commentators have sometimes commented this blessing as the existence of
the Prophet (S) and, at other times, they have considered it to be
Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) and the ungrateful ones of this blessing to Umayyads,
or to Bani Muqayrah and, at times, they have introduced all the
unbelievers who were contemporaries of the Prophet (S).

Yet, definitely, the meaning of the verse is extensive and covers a wide
range, thus one cannot confine it to a certain group. It embraces all of
those who have been ungrateful with respect to one of the blessings of
Allah and have misused it.

The pagans and the unbelievers converted the great blessings of Allah
into a matter of ingratitude.

A- They took the option of paganism instead of the blessing of
monotheism.

B- They abandoned the blessing of the clean and pure inherent nature and
imitated their seduced ancestors.

C- They preferred superstitions to the Divine revelation.

D- They expressed their lack of gratitude in face of the blessing of the
Divine leaders and followed the despots.

Many quotations indicate that the Imams (as) of Shi‘ites have remarked:

*“By Allah, we are the blessing of Allah that He bestowed upon His
servants.”* [^1]

In other words, it means: Swearing to Allah: the blessings which were
converted were our existence. The folks abandoned us and went in search
of other leaders. Thus, they changed the blessing of Allah.

The Qur’an, later, comments on the Qur’anic phrase: /d ar-ul-baw ar/ (a
bad place) as: It is Hell in the flames of which they will immerse, and
it is the worst of all places for someone to settle, for its ultimate
end is annihilation.

In other word, they invite their people to oppose against the Prophet
(S), throwing them into the Hell Fire, and what an evil abode is Hell.

The verse says:

***“Hell! They shall enter into it; and (what) a bad place it is!”***

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 30
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلُوا لِلَّهِ أَندَاداً لّـِيُضِلُّوا عَن سَبِيلِهِ قُلْ
تَمَتَّعُوا فَإِنَّ مَصِيرَكُمْ إِلَي النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “And they set up (idols as) equals to Allah that they might
mislead (the people) from His path. Say: ‘Enjoy yourselves, for verily
your journey’s end will be the Fire’.”***

Some consider equal partners for Allah in the course of the creation of
the world. Others consider equal partners for Allah in connection with
His blessings. Such people consider enjoying good health, knowledge,
power, splendour, and property as of the outcome of their own ability,
and or as the result of different powers. Nonetheless, they soon find
out that they have gone astray.

Therefore, the Qur’an alludes to one of the worst cases of ingratitude
in this verse, and says:

***“And they set up (idols as) equals to Allah that they might mislead
(the people) from His path…”***

They do all these things so as to make the people deviate from thinking
about the true path and, as a result, they enjoy their material life,
and presiding over and governing the people also for a few days.

Then the verse, addressing the Prophet (S), implies that he should tell
them to enjoy themselves out of this worldly life which is worthless.
However, they must know that the ultimate objective of their job will
direct them towards the hell-fire.

The verse says:

***“…Say: ‘Enjoy yourselves, for verily your journey’s end will be the
Fire’.”***

Notwithstanding such a life is not a true life; it is rather a misery,
and such a presidency and governorship is of no value, but, in its real
sense, it is deceit, disaster, and affliction.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 31
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لّـِعِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا يُقِيمُوا الصَّلاةَ وَيُنفِقُوا
مِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ سِرّاً وَعَلاَنِيَةً مِن قَبْلِ أَن يَأْتِيَ
يَوْمٌ لاَّ بَيْعٌ فِيهِ وَلا خِلالٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “O’ Prophet! Say to My servants who have believed, to perform the
prayers and to spend (in charity) out of what We have provided them,
secretly and openly, before the coming of a Day in which there shall be
neither bartering nor befriending.”***

Openly spending out of the wealth may encourage the present generation,
and cause the encouragement of others, and self-acquittal from all
accusations, while secretly spending out of the wealth is the cause of
development and sincerity.

Some commentators, of course, have claimed that overt spend relates to
the obligatory giving away of the wealth, like Khoms (one fifth) and
alms, while secretly giving away of it relates to the recommended cases,
such as: charity.

Although each of the open and in secret giving away of the wealth exerts
some impacts on others, nonetheless, one can perhaps say that to give
away part of the wealth in secret is better, for the Qur’anic term
/sirran/ (secretly) precedes the word /‘al anyatan/ (openly) in this
verse.

### Explanations

1- In order to command others, respect their personalities first.
Serving as subservient to Allah provides the believers with a medal of
honour.

The verse says:

***“O’ Prophet! Say to My servants…”***

2- Having mere faith in the bottom of one’s heart is not sufficient.
Prayers, giving away of one’s wealth, and good deeds are also necessary.

The verse says:

***“…who have believed, to perform the prayers and to spend (in charity)
out of what We have provided them…”***

3- Islam is a comprehensive religion. One’s relationship with Allah
(s.w.t.), along with one’s assistance to the deprived, are coupled with
each other and are required for the acceptance of both.

***“…to perform the prayers and to spend (in charity) out of what We
have provided them…”***

4- Spending out is not only confined to wealth alone. One must often
share whatever he has with others, whether they are knowledge and
wealth, or prestige and power.

5- Giving away of the wealth must be out of one’s allowed earnings and
wealth, and not out of whatever wealth we have.

Allah said:

***“We have provided them”***

and He did not say: “*with you*”

6- The act of spending out of the wealth must sometimes be done in
secret and sometimes openly.

It says:

***“…secretly and openly…”***

7- One must take the opportunity.

The Qur’an remarks:

***“…before the coming of a Day…”***

8- If you wish to have good trade, try to barter and have transactions
with Allah, for there will be no transactions carried out in the Day of
Resurrection.

It continues saying:

***“…in which there shall be neither bartering…”***

9- One cannot get away from the punishment with bribing and his special
relationships on in the Day of Resurrection.

The verse remarks:

***“…there shall be neither bartering nor befriending.”***

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 32
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ وَأَنزَلَ مِنَ
السَّمَآءِ مَآءً فَاَخْرَجَ بِهِ مِنَ الثَّـمَرَاتِ رِزْقاً لَّكُمْ
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الْفُلْكَ لِتَجْرِيَ فِي الْبَحْرِ بِأَمْرِهِ
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الاَنْهَارَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down
water from the sky; then brought forth fruits with it to be sustenance
for you; and He has made the ships subservient to you that they might
run through the sea by His command; and He has made the rivers
subservient to you.”***

The issue of ‘water’ is being discussed in this noble verse from three
dimensions:

1- Rain-water by which irrigation of the plants, source of their life,
and purification of the weather are provided.

2- Sea-water which provides the water required for the life of the sea
animals, and which also provides water ways for the passage of ships,
and is the source of clouds and rain.

3- Canal waters which provide an irrigation system for regions lacking
water.

In the previous verse, the Qur’an made allusions to prayers and sharing
of one’s wealth with others. In this verse, it asserts: Why are you so
neglectful in connection with spend despite the fact that Allah has
provided you with everything?

The holy verse says:

***“Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down
water from the sky; then brought forth fruits with it to be sustenance
for you; and He has made the ships subservient to you that they might
run through the sea by His command; and He has made the rivers
subservient to you.”***

The Arabic term /tasxir/ denotes both utilization of all interests, such
as the making subservient of the sun and the moon, and in the sense of
man’s full domination, such as making the ships and canals subservient
to him.

In the end, cognition of Allah’s blessings is the best method for
theology which is coupled with general understanding and the public
love, motives and worship. Among entire blessings of Allah, water is one
of the most important of them.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 33
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ دَآئِبَيْنِ وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ
اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. “And He has made the constantly moving sun and the moon
subservient to you, and He has made the night and the day subservient to
you.”***

The Qur’anic term /d a’ibin/ is derived from the word /da’b/ which means
a ‘continuous habit’. Maraghi has mentioned in his commentary that /d
a’ibin/ means ‘those continues in moving’.

Certainly, the sun is a great power house which functions constantly, as
contrary to the man-made power plants which require repair every now and
then and close down at times. Once the sun disappears for sometime, what
will then happen?

How will man’s life and the life of the plants and animals terminate or
come to an end? In face of the existence of numerous microbes and lack
of heat and steam, what kind of catastrophe would await the world?

Allah not only conquered and made the existing beings subservient to you
but He also made the constantly moving sun and moon subservient to you.

The verse says:

***“And He has made the constantly moving sun and the moon subservient
to you…”***

Allah not only made the existing beings of this world subservient to you
but He also made their accidental states as submissive to you in the
same way He did with the day and night.

From the Qur’an’s point of view, man is so splendid that all these
beings are made submissive to him by the command of Allah. That is,
either they are directly at the service of man’s interest, or they are
running by man’s control.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 34
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وءَاتَاكُم مِن كُلّ‌ِ مَا سَاَلْتُـمُوهُ وَإِن تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَتَ
اللَّهِ لاَ تُحْصُوهَآ إِنَّ الإِنسَانَ لَظَلُومٌ كَفَّارٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. “And He has given you whatever you have asked Him; and if you
count Allah’s blessings, you are unable to number them. Verily, man is
very unjust, very ungrateful.”***

We read in verse 18 from Surah An-Nahl

***“And if you count Allah’s blessings, you are unable to number them.
Verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

In the previous verses, we read that the corrupt leaders direct and lead
people towards persons or objects other than Allah:

***“And they set up (idols as) equals to Allah…”***[^2]

This verse proclaims: despite the fact that the ones other than Allah
are unable to do anything, and whatever one possesses belongs to Allah
alone, but man is usually heedless in these respects and is ungrateful
in these connections.

In the meantime, the Arabic term /‘add/ signifies counting, and the term
/’ihs a’/ means ‘to count accurately in such a way that nothing is left
over in the process’. Anyway, if one decides to count Allah’s blessings,
he can never do that, for the material and spiritual blessings provided
by Allah are so widespread throughout our lives, and our environment
which can never be counted.

The verse says:

***“And He has given you whatever you have asked Him; and if you count
Allah’s blessings, you are unable to number them. Verily, man is very
unjust, very ungrateful.”***

Nonetheless, despite all those favours and Divine grace, mankind is
still oppressive and ungrateful for Allah’s blessings. The blessings
which if utilized properly can turn the entire world into a
paradise-like garden.

In fact the Qur’an implies: O’ man! Everything is at your disposal in
sufficient quantities but on condition that you are not ungrateful and
oppressive, while you should try to remain content with your lot and
with your own rights and do not violate the rights of other people.

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^2]: The current Surah, verse 30


