Section 7: The Respite and the End
==================================

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 42
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تَحْسَبَنَّ اللَّهَ غَافِلاً عَمَّا يَعْمَلُ الظَّالِمُونَ
إِنَّمَا يُؤَخّـِرُهُمْ لِيَوْمٍ تَشْخَصُ فِيهِ الأَبْصَارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. “And do not regard Allah to be heedless of what the unjust do. He
only respite them (their punishment) to a day on which the eyes shall
stare (of terror),”***

The previous verses dealt with the issue of the day for settlement of
accounts. For this reason, the Qur’an points out the case of the plight
of the oppressors and the tyrants in this verse.

Incidentally, by means of the Qur’anic statement of this part of the
discussions of resurrection, the sections on the issue of monotheism of
the previous discussions are complemented.

At first, with a threatening tone of voice while addressing the
oppressors and the tyrants, the Qur’an begins implying that the Prophet
(S) should not rest assured that Allah is ignorant of whatever the
oppressors do.

The verse says:

***“And do not regard Allah to be heedless of what the unjust do…”***

These are the words, in fact, uttered in answer to the query of those
who say: If this world has got a Lord, a just Lord, so why the
oppressors are left to themselves? The Qur’an answers this question by
saying that Allah is never ignorant.

If He does not punish them instantly, it is for the fact that this world
is a trial ground only and it is meant for the development of human
beings, and achieving this objective is impossible without freedom.

Then the Qur’an implies that Allah postpones their punishment for one
day when on that day all are stunned with their eyes amazed because of
intensive fear and terror, and are fixed to one points remaining
motionless.

The verse says:

***“…He only respite them (their punishment) to a day on which the eyes
shall stare (of terror),”***

Moreover, He declares in other verses as such:

***“And whoever turns away from My remembrance verily for him is a life
straitened…”***[^1]

It is besides that Allah in another verse adds that such people will be
afflicted in this world, too, where he says:

***“And whatever affliction befalls you, it is on account of what your
hands have wrought…”*** [^2]

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 43
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُهْطِعِينَ مُقْنِعِي رُءُوسِهِمْ لاَ يَرْتَدُّ إِلَيْهِمْ طَرْفُهُمْ
وَأَفْئِدَتُهُمْ هَوَآءٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***43. “Hastening forward, their heads upraised, their eyes (and
eyelids) not blinking and their hearts void.”***

There are several meanings proposed for the Arabic term /muhti‘in/ which
is derived from /’iht a‘/ in the sense of: upraising the head, to speed
up, looking pleasurably, all of which meanings can be implied in this
verse.

The chastisements of the Resurrection Day are so horrifying that these
oppressors stiffen their necks, raising their heads towards the sky,
they even may fix their eye-lids in a state of motionlessness, while
their hearts are becoming void because of their intensive fear,
distress, anxiety and despair.

The verse says:

***“Hastening forward, their heads upraised, their eyes (and eyelids)
not blinking and their hearts void.”***

Those persons who considered themselves as think tanks and considered
others as stupid will lose their reasoning in such a way that their
looks resemble not the lunatics but that of the dead. Their looks will
be ‘empty’, indifferent, motionless and full of fear and horror.

Truly speaking, once the Qur’an decides to depict a scenario or a
landscape, it depicts every thing in the most concise manner and
provides the most comprehensive picture of everything, an example of
which is shown in the above short verse.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 44
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنذِرِ النَّاسَ يَوْمَ يَأْتِيهِمُ الْعَذَابُ فَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ
ظَلَمُوا رَبَّنَآ أَخّـِرْنَآ إِلَي أَجَلٍ قَرِيبٍ نُّجِبْ دَعْوَتَكَ
وَنَتَّبِعِ الرُّسُلَ أَوَلَمْ تَكُونُوا أَقْسَمْتُم مِن قَبْلُ مَا
لَكُم مِن زَوَالٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. “And warn the people as to the day when the chastisement comes to
them; then those who did injustice will say: ‘Our Lord, defer us to a
near term, (that) we will answer Your call and follow the messengers’.
(They will be told:) ‘Did you not swear before that there would be no
end for you?’”***

The Qur’anic term /’inŏar/ (warning) is the antonym of /biš arat/ (glad
tidings) both of which were the mission of the prophets who were the
bearers of the good news as well as the warners.

They were bearer of the good news regarding faith, righteous acts,
virtue, and being characterized by attributes which lead one to
salvation, happiness, Divine blessings, and ushering one to Paradise.

And they were warners as to the cases of paganism, ingratitude,
darkness, sins, and evil attributes and characteristics which lead one
to wretchedness misery, Divine Wrath, and awful consequences and
punishments in this world and in the Hereafter.

Then, in order not to give impression that the Divine punishments are
confined to a specific group, as a general rule He commands His prophet
to warn all people about the day when the painful chastisement of Allah
will call on them.

The verse says:

***“And warn the people as to the day when the chastisement comes to
them…”***

That is, when the tyrants notice the terrible consequences of their
behaviour, they may regret and think of compensating for it.

The verse continues saying:

***“…then those who did injustice will say: ‘Our Lord, defer us to a
near term, (that) we will answer Your call and follow the
messengers’…”***

The objective of this day is the day when some calamities and worldly
chastisements will be descended, just like the punishments which were
inflicted on the peoples of Lūt, and on ‘ Ad, and Thamūd people as well
as on the Pharaoh people which exterminated them.

However, they are instantly held back and this shaking message is
delivered to them that such a thing is impossible to happen. The course
of action has come to an end. Were you not the ones who swore that there
would be no end and perishing of your life and power?

The verse says:

***“…(They will be told:) ‘Did you not swear before that there would be
no end for you?’”***

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 45
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَكَنتُمْ فِي مَسَاكِنِ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ وَتَبَيَّنَ
لَكُمْ كَيْفَ فَعَلْنَا بِهِمْ وَضَرَبْنَا لَكُمُ الأَمْثَالَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. “And you dwelt in the abodes of those who did injustice to
themselves oppression on yourself in the houses of those who preceded
you, and it became clear for you how we did with them, and We set forth
(may) parables for you.”***

Many people do not take examples and instructions from those who
preceded them and neglected everything though they are seating
themselves in their seats.

Therefore, to warn and to blame them further, the Qur’an addresses them
implying that you were such people who settled down in the lands of
those who refuted the prophets and you knew as to how Allah had
inflicted catastrophes on them and had exterminated them.

The verse says:

***“And you dwelt in the abodes of those who did injustice to themselves
oppression on yourself in the houses of those who preceded you, and it
became clear for you how we did with them…”***

Some are of the opinion that they were the people of ‘ Ad, and Thamūd,
while others claim that they were those who were killed in the Battle of
the Badr.

We provided you examples and made you acquainted with the
characteristics of your predecessors so as to enable you to take
example, but you did not draw lessons, and admonitions did not have any
impacts on you.

The verse says:

***“…and We set forth (may) parables for you.”***

Some suggest that the objective of the parables which are mentioned is
those matters which are dealt with in the Qur’an and demonstrate that
Allah is Omnipotent in the world of creation as before, and is able to
re-enliven all after their death, and to reckon their accounts.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 46
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ مَكَرُوا مَكْرَهُمْ وَعِندَ اللَّهِ مَكْرُهُمْ وَإِن كَانَ
مَكْرُهُمْ لِتَزُولَ مِنْهُ الْجِبَالُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. “And indeed they have devised their devising, and their devising
is with Allah, though their devising were such as to remove the
mountains thereby.”***

Allah is both aware of their devices and tricks, and is all-powerful
over them, and He shall provide all conspirators with commensurate
chastisement. He can also diffuse and expel their tricks or return those
tricks to themselves.

At any rate, do not worry, such conspiracies and plans will have no
effect on you even if their strategies are such that enable them to
remove mountains. For, no matter how powerful and forceful they may be,
the oppressors will eventually be perished by Allah.

The verse says:

***“And indeed they have devised their devising, and their devising is
with Allah, though their devising were such as to remove the mountains
thereby.”***

Some commentators have claimed that the objective in mind of ‘the
mountains’ has been the Islamic religion and the Prophet (S) that have
withstood all sorts of conspiracies and tricks of the enemies.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 47
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلا تَحْسَبَنَّ اللَّهَ مُخْلِفَ وَعْدِهِ رُسُلَه إِنَّ اللَّهَ
عَزِيزٌ ذُو انتِقَامٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “So do not think that Allah will fail in His promise to His
messengers. Verily Allah is Mighty, the Lord of Retribution.”***

As a man takes revenge, he does it along with hatred and instinctive
satisfaction. Nevertheless, what Allah does is based on justice and
wisdom.

Therefore, addressing the prophet (S) once again, as to warn the
oppressors and evildoers with a threatening voice, it implies that they
should not imagine that Allah opposes His earlier promise and pledge
which He has kept with the prophets.

For, that kind of person violates his promise who is either not able to
keep his promise or he has not included such words in his vocabulary as
punishment or vengeance. However, Allah is both able and can take
vengeance.

The verse says:

***“So do not think that Allah will fail in His promise to His
messengers. Verily Allah is Mighty, the Lord of Retribution.”***

This noble verse is in fact complementary to the verse which we already
cited, saying:

***“And do not regard Allah to be heedless of what the unjust
do…”***[^3]

That is, if you notice that the oppressors have got a respite, it is not
because of Allah’s negligence and overlooking of their acts, and it is
not for that Allah may violate His promise. Rather, all of their
accounts will be settled and cleared in a day and their just
chastisement will be given to them.

Incidentally, the respite given to the pagans and the oppressors is
based on a practice and on wisdom, and it is not because of negligence
and of going back on one’s promises.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 48
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تُبَدَّلُ الأَرْضُ غَيْرَ الأَرْضِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ وَبَرَزُوا
لِلَّهِ الْوَاحِدِ الْقَهَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. “On the day when the earth shall be changed into other than the
earth and (so will be) the heavens, and (all men) shall come forth
before Allah, the One, the All-Dominant.”***

The changing and the transformation of the earth on the Hereafter Day
has been explained in a number of verses of the Qur’an. On that Day, a
strong earthquake will take place; the mountains will be displaced and
start moving and they will be softened like wool and cotton. It refers
to the day when the earth will be turned into a soft piece of plain
which is even.

As the Qur’an says:

***“And they ask you (O Apostle) about the mountains (on that Day). Say:
‘My Lord will uproot them and scatter them (as dust),’”***

***“Then He will leave them as a plain, smooth level;”***[^4]

But, the transformation of the skies will take place with the setting
off the sun and the rolling over of the skies. However, this existing
system of existence has got a culmination point.

Anyway, after destruction, everything will be reborn and renewed on that
Day and man will step forward with some new conditions of the world, the
conditions of which differ from these of this world, as regards its
vastness, its blessings, its chastisements.

And it is on that Day that one appears with all of his existence and
with all of his possessions before the Allah Who is unique and Almighty.

The verse says:

***“On the day when the earth shall be changed into other than the earth
and (so will be) the heavens, and (all men) shall come forth before
Allah, the One, the All-Dominant.”***

Therefore, the attribute of Allah as ‘the All-Dominant’ signifies His
domination over everything and His authority over what is inside and
what exists in the outside of every single being.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verses 49 - 50
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَي الْمُـجْرِمِينَ يَوْمَئِذٍ مُقَرَّنِينَ فِي الأَصْفَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَرَابِيلُهُم مِن قَطِرَانٍ وَتَغْشَي وُجُوهَهُمُ النَّارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “And you will see the guilty on that day bound together in
chains.”***  
***50. “Their robes (shall be) of pitch, and their faces covered with
Fire,”***

The person who is experiencing punishment and trouble will be ever more
suffering if he hears other people crying, as the case is with those who
are happy and rejoicing and their happiness and rejoicing will double if
they find themselves beside others who are happy as well.

It is for this reason that the Qur’an declares that: Allah will bring
together all those individuals who resemble one another in their line of
thinking: the culprits in Hell and the good ones in Paradise.

And we also find that the Qur’an depicts the conditions of the offenders
in a different way in this verse.

It says:

***“And you will see the guilty on that day bound together in
chains.”***

These chains and yokes represent the mental and practical connections of
the sinners who joined together and who were interwoven as in a line to
help each other in this world.

Then, the Qur’an describes their dressing pattern which is in itself a
great disaster for them. Their robes and dresses are made of tar (a
stinking, malodorous, and inflammable material) and their faces are
covered by flames of fire.

The verse says:

***“Their robes (shall be) of pitch, and their faces covered with
Fire,”***

As such is the case, instead of proper clothing, their bodies are
wrapped up in a kind of material which has four distinct awful defects
as they are stinking, black, inflammable and burnable, for robes are put
on for protection as well as for ornamental and cosmetic purposes. They
are meant to protect one against heat and cold. Such robes, contrast all
garments, are both ugly and inflammable.

The Arabic term /’asf ad/ is the plural form of /sufūd/ which means ‘the
bone of a tree’, it was also used for attaching to the feet of
prisoners.

The Arabic term /qatr an/ is a kind of material which is extracted from
some trees after the boiling of which and after its solidification. It
is used for curing the skin diseases of camels for its intensive
burning. It is extremely stinking and inflammable.

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 51
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَجْزِيَ اللَّهُ كُلَّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَرِيعُ
الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. “That Allah may requite everyone what he has earned, verily Allah
is swift at reckoning.”***

None of the people will remain without compensation. And no action in
the world will be left without any reactions. Thus, the Divine
punishment and reward have their origin in our own practices.

The verse says:

***“That Allah may requite everyone what he has earned…”***

This means that Allah rewards or punishes everyone according to His own
discretion for whatever he has done.

At the end of the verse, the Qur’an implies that Allah is quick to
discern and settle accounts.

The verse continues to say:

***“…verily Allah is swift at reckoning.”***

Surah ‘Ibrahim – Verse 52
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَا بَلاَغٌ لِلنَّاسِ وَلِيُنذَرُوا بِهِ وَلِيَعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا
هُوَ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ وَلِيَذَّكَّرَ اُوْلُواْ الأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. “This is a clear message for mankind and that they may be warned
by it, and that they may know that He is God (the only) One, and that
those possessors of intellects may take admonition.”***

As we already noted, Surah ‘Ibrahim began with depicting the sensitive
role of the Qur’an in bringing out man from utter darkness of ignorance
and paganism into the enlightenment of knowledge and of monotheism.

It ends by providing an exposition of the role of the Qur’an in warning
all human kind and instruction of monotheism and that the possessors of
intellects may take admonition.

The verse says:

***“This is a clear message for mankind and that they may be warned by
it, and that they may know that He is God (the only) One, and that those
possessors of intellects may take admonition.”***

Such a beginning and such an end provide us with clues to the reality as
to the fact that whatever we read about is already mentioned in the
Qur’an, and as Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) says:

*“The sources of all knowledge and the delight of the heart are in the
Qur’an.”*[^5]

One also has to look for the remedies of mental, ethical, social and
political illnesses in the Qur’an. It has been said:

*“Seek from it for the treatment of your diseases.”*[^6]

This exposition provides us with sufficient reasons to believe that the
Holy Qur’an is a Book which contains instructions for everyone
throughout his life.

And ‘finally’ it is a Book which provides the learned man as well as the
masses of people with the required instructions as they need. Once the
Muslims have set aside this great celestial Book and turned to the
deviant schools of thought of the east and west, they must be on the
look out for the reasons of their weakness and their backwardness in
here.

### Explanations

1- The holy Qur’an provides the substance for religious propagation and
the preachers must look to the Qur’an for the main substance of their
propagation.

***“This is a clear message…”***

2- The Qur’an is the Book of monotheism and one must educate
monotheistic people by it.

***“…and that He is God (the only) One…”***

3- It is not enough to communicate only, warning is also necessary. It
does not suffice to know paying attention, and admonition is also
required.

4- Association with the Qur’an provides us with both knowledge,
cognition, and outlook as well as with admonitions which urge us to
perform decent acts.

5- The Qur’an provides the general public with a mandate though only the
men of wisdom take advice and instruction from it.

***“…and that those possessors of intellects may take admonition.”***

Certainly, if we pay attention to the guidelines of the Qur’an heartily,
we will become truly monotheistic individuals. Allah willing.

**The End of Surah ‘Ibrahim**

You can read the biography of Hadrat-i-’Ibrahim in the following pages.

[^1]: Surah T a H a, No. 20, verse 124

[^2]: Surah Ash-Shur a, No. 42, verse 30

[^3]: This Surah, verse 42

[^4]: Surah T a H a, No. 20, verses 105-106

[^5]: Nahj-ul-Bal aqah, sermon 176

[^6]: Ibid


