Section 5: Lot and Shu‘ayb’s people
===================================

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 61 - 62
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا جَآءَ ءَالَ لُوطٍ الْمُرْسَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنَّكُمْ قَومٌ مُّنكَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “So when the (Divine) messengers came unto the family of
Lot.”***  
***62. “He said: ‘Verily you are an unknown people’.”***

As the angels called upon the household of Lot, the situation was such
that Lot was busy with his agriculture in the land outside the town. He
wanted to give them a reception. At the same time, he was terrified of
his people, therefore, he brought them secretly and by night to the
house.

The wife of Lot, on their arrival, went up on the top of the roof and,
by burning fire, informed the people about what was going on. Those
people, who were thus informed, assembled in that house and determined
to commit that heinous and hideous act with them in which case
Hadrat-i-Lot (as) was disturbed.

Hadrat-i-Lot told the angels that they were an unknown group of
individuals to him as they had not been met before.

The Qur’an says:

***“So when the (Divine) messengers came unto the family of Lot.”***

***“He said: ‘Verily you are an unknown people’.”***

The angels introduced themselves saying that they were angels coming
from Allah’s side to exterminate the nation and to save the household of
Lot.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 63 - 64
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا بَلْ جِئْنَاكَ بِمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ يَمْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأَتَيْنَاكَ بِالْحَقّ‌ِ وَإِنَّا لَصَادِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***63. “They said: ‘Nay, but we have come to you with that in which they
have been doubting’.”***  
***64. “And we have come to you with the truth, and we are certainly
truthful.”***

The Qur’an has repeatedly raised this issue that the pagans used to
request the prophets to accelerate the Divine outrage and punishment and
used to say:

***‘… then bring us what you promise us to, if you are of the truthful
ones”.***[^1]

Meaning that if you are honest, show us the outrage and they used to
ridicule and mock all the warnings. As for the Divine outrage, they were
skeptic as to its occurrence whether in this world or in the next. Allah
explains in these verses that the outrage, which is the object of
skepticism of the pagans, will definitely come.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘Nay, but we have come to you with that in which they
have been doubting’.”***

Anyway, the angels did not leave Lot in expectation for a long time and
they explicitly stated that they had brought him something which his
people were in doubt about. That is, they were commissioned to inflict a
painful and severe chastisement against them which Lot had repeatedly
warned them about and they had never taken it seriously.

To emphasize, they implied that they had brought Lot an unequivocal and
an obvious reality for him. That is, a certain and decisive chastisement
for those unbelieving and deviant group.

The verse says:

***“And we have come to you with the truth…”***

To stress further, they added:

***“…and we are certainly truthful.”***

That is, this group has destroyed all the bridges behind them and there
is no room left for any type of mediation or discussion about them. They
said such so as Lot would stop thinking about any mediation efforts and
become aware of the fact that they were not in the least worthy of such
steps to be taken for them.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 65 - 66
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَسْرِ بِاَهْلِكَ بِقِطْعٍ مّـِنَ الَّيْلِ وَاتَّبِعْ أَدْبَارَهُمْ
وَلاَ يَلْتَفِتْ مِنكُمْ أَحَدٌ وَامْضُوا حَيْثُ تُؤْمَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَضَيْنَآ إِلَيْهِ ذَلِكَ الاَمْرَ أَنَّ دَابِرَ هَؤُلآءِ مَقْطُوعٌ
مُّصْبِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “So set forth, you with your family, in a part of the night and
do you go behind them and let not any one of you turn back, and go
whither you are ordered.”***  
***66. “And We made known this decree to him that the roots of those
(sinners) should be cut off by the morning.”***

Do not take the Divine warnings and threats as a joke, for the Divine
punishments are always based on justice, the truth and what the culprits
deserve.

And at the time of war or of exodus, the leader must move keeping
abreast with the weakest of the people so as no believer would be left
behind and no foes or pagans could join, and rest assured of Allah’s
grace in important circumstances, which will be herded down moment by
moment and will be of assistance to him once he is in dire need.

The verse says:

***“So set forth, you with your family…”***

It will be shown to him as to when the exodus must take place, and with
whom, by what means, and finally, towards what destination.

The verse continues saying:

***“…in a part of the night and do you go behind them and let not any
one of you turn back, and go whither you are ordered.”***

And as the small group of believers (the household of Lot except his
wife) was to be rescued from such a campaign safely, Lot was provided
with the necessary instructions.

He should take his family out of the town late at night when the sinners
were in deep asleep or they were drunk or engaged in gratifying their
sexual desires. However, he should move behind them so that he might be
sure that no one was left behind. In the meantime, none of them was
allowed to look or turn back.

Then, the tone of the statement changes, where Allah says:

***“And We made known this decree to him that the roots of those
(sinners) should be cut off by the morning.”***

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 67 - 69
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَآءَ أَهْلُ الْمَدِينَةِ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنَّ هؤُلآءِ ضَيْفِي فَلاَ تَفْضَحُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَلاَ تُخْزُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***67. “And the inhabitants of the town came rejoicing.”***  
***68. “He said: ‘Verily these are my guests, therefore do not disgrace
me’.”***  
***69. “And be in awe of Allah and do not put me to shame.”***

Some authentic quotations indicate that the wife of Lot informed the
sinners that there are guests arrived for Lot with beautiful faces and,
following their evil intention, they headed for the Lot’s house while
giving one another the good news. However, Allah exterminated them all
before proceeding to undertake any action. [^2]

Anyway, they were busy thinking about their misleading and shameful
acts, and they intended to commit as to the fact that they had then an
easy prey at their disposal; beautiful and good-looking youths and at
the Lot’s house.

The verse says:

***“And the inhabitants of the town came rejoicing.”***

Lot (as), who heard their fuss, got terrified in a state of astonishing
terror and feared for his guests.

Therefore, he stood up against them, as the verse says:

***“He said: ‘Verily these are my guests, therefore do not disgrace
me’.”***

Then he adds, implying: Fear Allah and do not make me shameful in front
of my guests.

***“And be in awe of Allah and do not put me to shame.”***

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 70 - 71
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا أَوَلَمْ نَنْهَكَ عَنِ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هَؤُلآءِ بَنَاتِي إِن كُنتُمْ فَاعِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***70. “They said: ‘Did we not dissuade you from (entertaining)
people?”***  
***71. “He (Lot) said: ‘These are my daughters, (you may wed them) if
you desire to do so.”***

The prophets’ school of thought does not recommend the forbidding of
pleasures and repressing of instincts. On the contrary, it offers
guidance and mostly provides ways for their control. Therefore,
Hadrat-i-Lot (as) offered them guidance and persuaded them to act
decently.

Nonetheless, they were so rude and vulgar that they did not have any
feelings of shame. On the contrary, they felt that Lot had also to be
indebted to them as if he had committed a crime they went on raising
objections.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘Did we not dissuade you from (entertaining) people?”***

Anyway, Lot, who noticed such rudeness and vulgarity, tried a different
method so as to perhaps be able to awaken them from their state of
negligence, drunkenness, deviation and scandal. Turning to them, he
advised them:

Why do you take a deviant path? If your objective in mind is
gratification of your sexual instincts why is it that you do not take
the legitimate path and the correct marriage path? These are my
daughters; (I am ready to give my consent for them marrying you). In
case you decide to perform a correct and decent act, this is the right
path.

The verse says:

***“He (Lot) said: ‘These are my daughters, (you may wed them) if you
desire to do so.”***

Lot’s aim was to complete the argument to them, saying that he was ready
to preserve the prestige of his guests and to save them from the abyss
of corruption by offering his daughters in marriage to them.

**Question:** Was Lot (as) able to offer his daughters in marriage to
the pagans, when he offered such a proposal?

**Answer:** It may be that the aim of proposing the marriage issue was
to make believers out of them; or that, among them, marriage with
unbelievers was not legally prohibited at that time.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 72 - 73
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَعَمْرُكَ إِنَّهُمْ لَفِي سْكْرَتِهِمْ يَعْمَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ مُشْرِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***72. “By your life (O’ Prophet), verily they were wandering on in
their intoxication.”***  
***73. “So the (violent) blast overtook them at the sunrise.”***

The Arabic words /‘umr/ and /‘amr/ both have got an identical meaning,
but, at the time of swearing, the term /‘amr/ is employed. [^3]

The Qur’anic term /ya‘mahūn/ is derived from /‘amaha/ which signifies
‘astonishment’; and the Arabic word /mušriqin/ means ‘entering into the
illumination and the light which appears at dawn or sunrise.’

Nevertheless, woe unto those who are intoxicated by their passions,
deviations, arrogance, and obstinacy.

If there were the slightest of human ethical values or human emotions
embedded in them, it would be adequate to make them feel ashamed for
having such a logic to return from the Lot’s house at least and feel
shameful. But, they were not only unaffected by that, but they became
also more rude and tried to violate and rape Lot’s guests as well.

It is why Allah, addressing the Prophet of Islam (S), says:

***“By your life (O’ Prophet), verily they were wandering on in their
intoxication.”***

Finally, we find the Divine words and speech, concerning this nation,
reaches its climax. Allah states in two concise, compact and short
following verses the evil destiny of those people in a decisive and
pounding form here which is also instructive as well.

The Qur’an says:

***“So the (violent) blast overtook them at the sunrise.”***

Such a blast might have been caused by a huge thunderbolt or by a
terrible earthquake.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verse 74
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَجَعَلْنَا عَالِيَهَا سَافِلَهَا وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ حِجَارَةً
مِن سِجّـِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***74. “Thus We turned that city upside down and rained upon them stones
of hard clay.”***

Raining stones was probably for the extermination of those who had
survived at the moment of the turning upside down of the town and were
still alive, or for the total annihilation of the town.

Certainly, Allah’s Will knows no limits for as He descends His blessings
from the sky in the form of rain, He is also able to rain stones, and
chastisement as well.

However, Allah did not stop at that, but He turned their cities entirely
upside down, overthrowing all its upper part downwards and the lower
part upwards.

The verse says:

***“Thus We turned that city upside down…”***

Such a chastisement was not enough for them either.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and rained upon them stones of hard clay.”***

The descending of the three-fold kind of punishments (terrible blast,
turning everything upside down, and raining stones) each was sufficient
by itself to wipe out every nation.

However, for the intensity of the sin and in their submission to
sinfulness and ill fame, and that others may take an example, Allah
multiplied their punishment.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verse 75
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَاتٍ لِلْمُتَوَسّـِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. “Verily, in this there are signs for those who by tokens do
understand.”***

The blissful Qur’an, here, draws ethical and educational conclusions. It
implies that there are various signs for the wise in this didactic
biography, for those who wisely draw their own conclusions from every
single symbol, collect facts from every allusion made, and learn from
every note what is to be learnt.

The Qur’an says:

***“Verily, in this there are signs for those who by tokens do
understand.”***

The Qur’anic term /mutawassimin/, mentioned in the verse, is derived
from /wasama/ which means ‘to affect’ and it is applied to a person who
is smart and sharp in drawing conclusions once he has the tiniest clues
at his disposal he comprehends the facts.

That is, he is clever and wise. Some Islamic quotations indicate that
the objective of applying the term /mutawassimin/ is the Prophet (S) and
his Ahl-ul-Bayt (as). [^4]

Somebody told Imam Sadiq (as) that he had got a question. The Imam
answered:

*“Do you want me to tell you what your question is before you ask your
question?”*

That person asked with astonishment:

*“How do you know what is in my mind?”*

The Imam answered:

*“/bil-tawassum/ (by affection).”*

Then he recited this verse. [^5]

We are informed from the Immaculate Imams (as) who have said:

*“We are the /mutavassimin/.”*

It is clear that the purpose here ‘is the most complete denotation
expansion’, otherwise, there are a lot of intelligent people among the
believers. Therefore, there are reliable information from the blissful
Prophet (S) who stated:

*“Be in virtue with the intelligence of the faithful, since he looks by
the light of Allah.”*

He also reaffirmed:

*“Verily Allah has some servants who recognize people by /tawassum/.”*
[^6]

This is the same light of faith which leaves its effect as a sign on a
believer’s heart; so it is said:

*“Knowledge is a light (that) Allah casts it inside the heart of
whomever He wills.”* [^7]

And the Arabic term /wasm/ means the same sign, symbol, and emblem which
is being forged on the Arabian horses. Man’s soul also has got a special
mark of ‘belief’ or ‘disbelief’, or of ‘obedience’ and of ‘disobedience’
toward Allah, each of which appears from his front view.

Thus, /mutawassimin/, those who by tokens do understand can observe or
feel it and, therefore, know everyone.

And again, the Prophet of Islam (S) has said:

*“There are certain Allah’s servants who know people by tokens.”* [^8]

Imam Sadiq (as) remarked:

*“We are those who think and take instructive lessons. The path towards
happiness has been designated and embedded in us. This path is the way
towards Paradise.”* [^9]

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 76 - 77
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِنَّهَا لَبِسَبِيلٍ مُّقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لاَيَةً لّـِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***76. “And verily it is on a way (yet) remaining.”***  
***77. “Verily, in this there is a sign for the believers.”***

The preservation of the monuments and relics of the past provide
instructive lessons for the future generations.

Therefore, He implies in this noble verse: Do not presume that all their
relics have been vanished. It is not so. Their relics and monuments have
remained constant and fixed on the roads for caravans and those who pass
over there.

As the city of Lot is located on the people’s path and when they pass by
them for meeting their daily needs, they draw lessons from them. For,
the relics, which become focus of attention of the people there, are
always constant, fixed and sustaining.

The verse says:

***“And verily it is on a way (yet) remaining.”***

This city is called ‘Sudūm’. Qatt adah says: The villages of the people
of Lot are situated between Medina and Sham (Damascus).

As the author of Tafsir-i-Atyab-ul-Bayan says: Perhaps, the meaning of
the above verse is that the Divine outrage is not confined to the people
of Lot only; rather, it is the method and the tradition which is
constant and holds true for all the criminals of the history. It is also
a warning for all those who commit such heinous and hideous acts that
the people of Lot used to do.

Some Islamic traditions denote that he who commits the act committed by
the people of Lot, will be suffering from the utmost punishment at the
time when his soul is being taken out of his body. Further, some
quotations indicate that this act has been rendered into the disbelief
in Allah and the punishment of which is ‘execution’.

As a further emphasis, and in order to call the faithful to meditate
more over this instructive story, the Qur’an implies that there is a
sign in this story for those who are believers, as the true believers
are always full of insight and are quite intelligent.

The verse says:

***“Verily, in this there is a sign for the believers.”***

How may one be a believer and yet reads this shaking biography and still
does not draw instructive lessons from it?

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 78 - 79
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَانَ أَصْحَابُ الاَيْكَةِ لَظَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ وإِنَّهُمَا لَبِاِمَامٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***78. “And verily, the inhabitants of ’Aykah were certainly
unjust.”***  
***79. “So We inflicted retribution on them and they are both, indeed,
on a roadway manifest (in front of your eyes).”***

The Arabic word /’aykah/ means a small thick forest in which trees and
their branches are often intertwined with one another. The objective of
‘the inhabitants of ’Aykah’ is the people of Hadrat Shu‘ayb, who used to
live in a region with moderate weather and full of trees, somewhere
between Hij az and Sham (Syria).

A quotation from the blissful Prophet (S) indicates that ‘the people of
Madyan’ and ‘the people of ’Aykah’ were two nations whose prophet was
Shu‘ayb and both of them disbelieved.

The verse says:

***“And verily, the inhabitants of ’Aykah were certainly unjust.”***

However, each of these two nations received a different kind of Divine
punishment.

The former was entangled in the punishment of ‘the Day of Shadow’ and
the latter received ‘the punishment of Blast’.[^10]

Incidentally, as Allah owes nothing to anyone, whatever we receive from
Him must be considered as a gift. But, in case of the Divine punishment,
as His chastisement is the consequence of our own faults and sins and
what we deserve, the word retribution is usually employed.

The verse says:

***“So We inflicted retribution on them and they are both, indeed, on a
roadway manifest (in front of your eyes).”***

The oppressors must know that their vice and tyranny will be depicted
for others throughout history. Hence, we must design and plan roads in
such a way as to try to expose historical sites within the reach of the
eye-sight of the passengers.

[^1]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 70

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Maraghi

[^3]: Al-Mizan. The commentary

[^4]: Tafsir-i-Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn

[^5]: Tafsir-Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn

[^6]: Tafsir-i-Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 23

[^7]: Tafsir-i-Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 23

[^8]: Tafsir-us-Safi, the details of the verse

[^9]: Tafsir-ul-Burhan and Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^10]: Tafsir-ul-Furqan, taken from Durr-ul-Manthūr, vol. 4, p. 103


