Section 6: The People of the Rock
=================================

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 80 - 81
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ الْحِجْرِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وءَاتَيْنَاهُمْ ءَايَاتِنَا فَكَانُوا عَنْهَا مُعْرِضِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***80. “And indeed the inhabitants of Hijr (also) rejected the
messengers.”***  
***81. “And We presented Our signs to them, but they turned away from
them.”***

The Arabic word ‘Al-Hijr’ is the name of a town in which the nation of
Thamūd used to live. It also generally refers to a dwelling place as
well. The term /hijr/ also refers to the lap of the mother and Arabic
phrase Hijr-i-’Ism a’il and /hujrah/ are the derivatives of the same
word. [^1]

Thus, the name of this Surah has been taken from this verse.

The verse says:

***“And indeed the inhabitants of Hijr (also) rejected the
messengers.”***

One can conclude from the Qur’anic term /mursalin/ (messengers) that
‘the inhabitants of Hijr’ had also some prophets other than
Hadrat-i-Salih. Some commentators say as the rejection of one prophet
is, in fact, the rejection of all prophets, hence the term /mursalin/
has been mentioned here in this verse.

Anyway, the Qur’an continues regarding ‘the inhabitants of Hijr’ by
saying:

***“And We presented Our signs to them, but they turned away from
them.”***

The application of the sense ‘turning away’ in this verse indicates that
they were not even ready to listen to the verses of Allah or to look at
them.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 82 - 84
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَانُوا يَنْحِتُونَ مِنَ الْجِبَالِ بُيُوتاً ءَامِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَخَذَتْهُمُ الصَّيْحَةُ مُصْبِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَآ أَغْنَي عَنْهُم مَّا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***82. “And they used to hew secure houses in the mountains.”***  
***83. “So the (violent) blast overtook them in the morning.”***  
***84. “And what they used to earn did not avail them.”***

Those people were quite heedless of theological issues and of religious
matters, and paid no attention to such things. On the contrary,
regarding their worldly life and livelihood, they were so earnest that
they maximized the security of their houses by building and setting them
up through cutting stones and rocks within the mountains.

The verse says:

***“And they used to hew secure houses in the mountains.”***

It is astonishing that man maximized the security and whatever belongs
to his fleeting worldly life so much, while he is extremely so negligent
for his eternal and immortal life in the Hereafter that he sometimes is
not even ready to listen to Allah’s speech and is not predisposed to
even to glance at His signs of communication.

After all, what can one expect from such a people? Expect for the
‘Divine law of the survival of the fittest’ and except for the
abstinence from providing the right of continuing with one’s life for
those nations who are entirely corrupt and incite corruption. An
exterminating catastrophe must be inflicted upon them and annihilate
them altogether.

Therefore, the Holy Qur’an asserts:

***“So the (violent) blast overtook them in the morning.”***

This blast was a death threatening thunderbolt which came down upon
their houses and annihilated them. While they were inside those secured
built houses.

The verse says:

***“And what they used to earn did not avail them.”***

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 85 - 86
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَآ إِلاَّ
بِالْحَقّ‌ِ وإِنَّ السَّاعَةَ لاَتِيَةٌ فَاصْفَحِ الصَّفْحَ الْجَمِيلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ الْخَلاَّقُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. “And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is
between them two but with truth; and verily the Hour (of resurrection)
is surely coming; then pardon you, with a gracious pardoning.”***  
***86. “Verily your Lord, He is the Creator, the All-Knowing.”***

The Arabic term /safh/ is derived from /safhah/ which means ‘face’. The
Arabic phrase /fasfah-is-safh/ signifies ‘turning one’s face away from
someone but not out of one’s outrage but to do that for forgiving and
overlooking in case of one’s compassion and out of one’s affections’.

Imam Rida (as) has commented upon the Qur’anic phrase /safh-in-jamil/ as
‘forgiving without inquisition, or with no taking to task’.

As man’s everlasting troubles and entanglements have their roots in his
lack of ideology and correct system of beliefs and, briefly speaking, in
his disbelief in the origin of existence and in the Resurrection Day,
the Qur’an returns to the issues of ‘monotheism’ and of ‘resurrection’
after describing the situation of nations such as the people of Lot and
the people of Shu‘ayb and that of Salih, those who were entangled in all
of those afflictions.

It has referred to the issues of monotheism and resurrection both in a
single verse, saying:

***“And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between
them two but with truth…”***

This, He has said about monotheism; then He proclaims in connection with
resurrection that everybody will be given his reward therein.

The verse says:

***“…and verily the Hour (of resurrection) is surely coming…”***

In pursuit of this goal, He commands His prophet to be lenient towards
them when facing their obstinacies, ignorance, fanaticism, meddling and
their intensive oppositions, and to overlook their sins and forgive them
with a beautiful forgiveness which is not even coupled with any blame.

As you will not be in any need or require any violence in spite of the
fact that you have got clear evidence for your call and messengership to
which you are given mission to accomplish. Moreover, violence against
the ignorant people will usually lead to further violence and their
further fanatic behavior. Therefore, leniency and forgiveness is the
best.

The verse continues saying:

***“…then pardon you, with a gracious pardoning.”***

In the end, in the following verse the Qur’an proclaims that He Who
commands as to the forgiving, is the Lord Who is Educator, creative, and
knowing.

He is aware that amnesty and forgiveness have a very great impact on the
soul of the individuals and of the society, and have a tremendous impact
on the attraction as well as on the development of the people.
Therefore, putting into practice the commandment of /safh/ (remittal)
should not appear as a burden to you.

It says:

***“Verily your Lord, He is the Creator, the All-Knowing.”***

Surah Al-Hijr – Verse 87
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَاكَ سَبْعاً مِنَ الْمَثَانِي وَالْقُرْءَانَ
الْعَظِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. “And indeed We have given you seven of the oft-repeated (verses)
(Surah Al-Hamd) and the Grand Qur’an.”***

The Islamic quotations narrated by both Shi‘ite and Sunni scholars
indicate that the objective of the Qur’anic phrase /sab‘an minal- ma
ani/ (seven of the oft-repeated (verses)) is Surah Al-Hamd.

For this Surah is to be recited twice in every prayer, and it has been
twice revealed. There has been mentioned in a quotation that Allah
(s.w.t.) says He has separated Surah Al-Hamd into two parts between
Himself and His servants. One part is in connection with Him, while the
other part concerns His servants.

From the holy phrase /bismillah/ as far as /malik i yaumiddin/ is in
connection with Allah, and from /’iyy aka na‘bud/, which is the
expression of obedience in worshipping, seeking assistance, and
invocation, relates to the servants.

Also, some have claimed that the objective in mind in /ma ani/ is the
Qur’an itself. In this case, the above mentioned Qur’anic phrase means
‘seven verses from the Qur’an’ which is necessarily the same Surah
Al-Hamd.

The reason for this idea is the verse which says:

***“Allah has revealed the most beautiful Message in the form of a Book,
consistent with itself (yet) repeating…”***[^2]

The Book the verses of which are similar, harmonious and repetitive.

The blissful Prophet (S) proclaimed:

*“Whoever, upon whom Allah bestows the Qur’an, imagines such that
another one has been bestowed something better than that, he has
downgraded the magnificent (Qur’an) and has magnified a tiny
(thing).”*[^3]

Anyway, Allah seeks to condole the Prophet (S) not to be terrified by
the enemy’s violence, their density of population and the immense
capabilities which are at their disposal, for Allah has made some
blessings available to him with which nothing will match equally.

The verse says:

***“And indeed We have given you seven of the oft-repeated (verses)
(Surah Al-Hamd) and the Grand Qur’an.”***

Allah explains to His Prophet (S) this reality that he possesses a great
capital, a capital such as the Qur’an which is as great as the entire
world of existence, in particular, the Surah Al-Hamd which embodies such
magnificent content that it joins man with Allah instantly and makes his
soul bow and submit before Him, as well as invoking Him for help.

In Tafsir-i-Borhan, under this noble verse there is cited a quotation
from Imam Muhammad-i-Baqir (as) who said: We are the objective of /ma
ani/ which Allah has bestowed on our prophet, and we are Allah’s
countenance on the earth known among the people and the Shi’ah
followers.

He who has known us, he is certain to believe in the origin of
existence, resurrection and paradise, and he who is ignorant as regards
us, he will surely face the Hell and Divine chastisement.

### Explanations

Legislation is solely the prerogative of the Creator, and the laws of
religious edicts must be based on ‘creation’.

The principle of repetition in educational issues is a fundamental
matter.

The word ‘Oft-repeated’ refers to the repetition of the revelation of
the verses, the repetition of words, the repetition of stories, the
repetition of Divine attributes, the repetition of verses of
chastisement and of resurrection, the repetition of the fate of nations,
the repetition of Divine blessings, the repetition of commandments, and
the repetition of reciting the Qur’an.

Surah Al-Hamd is equivalent with the Qur’an, though the number of its
verses amounts to seven.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verse 88
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إِلَي مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجاً
مّـِنْهُمْ وَلاَ تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَاخْفِضْ جَنَاحَكَ
لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “(O’ prophet!) Do not strain your eyes after what we have given
certain classes of them to enjoy, and do not grieve for them, and lower
your wing (of affection) unto the believers.”***

Warnings always do not follow the course of action. Rather, they
sometimes precede and form as warning and preventive measures. The
blissful Prophet (S) was never interested in the world of the
unbelievers. Hence, Allah’s dissuasion signifies warnings and serves as
such, which causes dissuasion among other believers so as not to focus
their eyes on the world of the pagans.

The blissful Prophet (S) has stated:

*“He who focuses on what others hold or possess, his troubles increase
and his distress will not be treated.”* [^4]

One of the strict recommendations of the Qur’an to the Prophet (S) and
the believers consists of recommendation as to leniency, mercifulness,
and patience towards the faithful believers, among which one may name
the instance when they should be patience with those who always call on
their Lord and be modest and affectionate unto the believers.

Incidentally, the Arabic word /’azwaj/ includes both men and women. Some
claim that this word means /’asn af/ (classes). That is, do not focus on
the blessings which we have provided the classes of pagans with and do
not consider them great while thinking about them.

For, the blessings which We have bestowed upon you and your followers,
namely, your prophetic mission, the Qur’an, Islam, the conquest etc, are
so far more in quantity and worth that they exceed all their blessings.

The verse says:

***“(O’ prophet!) Do not strain your eyes after what we have given
certain classes of them to enjoy…”***

And if the Quraysh pagans do not become believers and, as a consequence,
will receive chastisement, do not grieve for them.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and do not grieve for them…”***

At the end of the verse, He issues His third command to the prophet
about modesty, humbleness, and leniency towards those who are believers,
when He says:

***“…and lower your wing (of affection) unto the believers.”***

This sense is a beautiful ambiguous metaphorical allusion to modesty,
affection, and friendliness as in the case of birds when they want to
show their affection towards their chickens they cover them under their
wings, where they provide us with the most existing emotional scene as
they try to protect them against all sorts of accidents and enemies.

Therefore, all these are intended to show that leaders and prophets must
be modest and humble with regard to the believers so that they follow
him.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 89 - 91
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْ إِنّـِي أَنَا النَّذِيرُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَآ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَي الْمُقْتَسِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ جَعَلُوا الْقُرْءَانَ عِضِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***89. “And say: ‘Verily I am the manifest Warner’.”***  
***90. “(We shall send them chastisement) as We sent down on the
dividers.”***  
***91. “Those who made the Qur’an into shreds.”***

Similar to the case that leniency and affection with the believers and
friends are necessary, being decisive against the opponents is also
required, and decisiveness, threats and warnings are a necessity when
one faces paganism.

Allah commanded the Prophet (S) to say if he warns them Allah has
asserted the fact that He will send them that kind of chastisement which
was sent to ‘those who divided’, the same ones who divided the Qur’an
and the Divine verses into acceptable and none acceptable parts.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“And say: ‘Verily I am the manifest Warner’.”***

***“(We shall send them chastisement) as We sent down on the
dividers.”***

They took up the Qur’an and accepted from it whatever was to their
advantage and discarded whatever was to their disadvantage. But the true
believers do not impose any kind of analysis, divisions or
discrimination as regards the Divine commandments.

The verse says:

***“Those who made the Qur’an into shreds.”***

There are three meanings mentioned in the commentaries for the Qur’anic
term /muqtasimin/:

There were some chiefs of the unbelievers who during the days of Hajj
pilgrimage used to divide forces at the crossroads and entrance gates of
Mecca in order to tell the travelers that a person called Muhammad (S)
has got certain claims and they should not listen to him. They
introduced him as a soothsayer, a sorcerer, and a lunatic.

The second meaning points to those who divided the Holy Qur’an among
themselves so as to produce each a simulation form of the Qur’an.

The third meaning refers to those persons who took certain parts of the
Qur’an for practice while leaving the other parts as unpractical.

The Arabic word /‘idin/ is either the plural of /‘idah/ in the sense of
‘quarrel and disputation’, or it is derived from the word /‘udw/ which
means ‘cutting into pieces’.

Incidentally, the retribution of those who divide the Holy Book in that
form is the Divine punishment. A believer is the one who accepts the
Qur’an in its entirely, saying that whatever has been revealed has come
from the side of Allah.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 92 - 93
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَرَبّـِكَ لَنَسْاَلَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَمَّا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***92. “So, by your Lord, We shall surely question them all (in the
Hereafter),”***  
***93. “As to what they used to do.”***

Following their state of unbelief as to the Qur’an and their dividing
it, the Qur’an implies that they shall see the punishment for this evil
act of theirs and will be questioned about it.

O’ Mohammad (S) by your Lord We shall question them about it and We mean
by interrogating them warning and blaming of them, that is, to convey to
them this message as to why they committed sin. What proofs have they
got to offer for having committed sins? They will then be target of all
scandals.

The Qur’an says:

***“So, by your Lord, We shall surely question them all (in the
Hereafter),”***

In this verse, Allah swears to Himself, presenting Himself as the Lord
of Muhammad so as to prove his splendid position to the people.

Then it continues saying:

***“As to what they used to do.”***

Incidentally, the subject in question in this verse is: We ask them what
they worshipped and what answer they would have to offer the prophets!
They will have no answer!

And in general, the fact that attention is focused on interrogation and
auditing of accounts in resurrection day and the fact that everybody is
going to be asked questions regarding everything is itself one of the
factors in the awakening process.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 94 - 96
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْدَعْ بِمَا تُؤْمَرُ وَأَعْرِضْ عَنِ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا كَفَيْنَاكَ الْمُسْتَهْزِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَجْعَلُونَ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَهاً ءَاخَرَ فَسَوْفَ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***94. “Therefore, declare openly what you are bidden and turn you away
from the polytheists.”***  
***95. “Verily We will suffice you against the scoffers,”***  
***96. “Those who set up another god with Allah, so they will soon know
(the truth).”***

The Arabic term /sad‘/ signifies splitting and exposing or exhibiting.

The blissful Prophet (S) engaged in propagation for three years in
secret, and as the Qur’anic clause:

“***Therefore, declare openly what you are bidden***”

was revealed, he openly went on his invitation and he told the people if
they accepted his call, their administrative government, and the
splendor of this world and the world hereafter would be all theirs.

The verse says:

***“Therefore, declare openly what you are bidden and turn you away from
the polytheists.”***

However, they decided to be engaged in ridiculing and mocking that
Divine Prophet and went to Abū-Talib , the uncle of the Prophet (S), to
present their complaint.

They complained that Muhammad was seducing their youths. If Muhammad was
after wealth, wife and high position, they were ready to provide him
with them all. The Prophet (S) told his uncle:

*“Dear uncle! My words are the Divine messages and I shall never give up
preaching.”*

The pagans requested Abu-Talib to surrender Muhammad to them, but he did
not condescend to the request. [^5]

Anyway, Allah issues a decisive decree to the Prophet (S) in this noble
verse, implying: you are here by instruction not only to stop letting
any weakness, fear and numbness overtake you when facing the fuss and
ado of the pagans, but you are also advised to openly declare your
mission and what you are up to do, revealing the facts of the religion
explicitly and turn away from the polytheists and remain headless with
regard to them.

Afterwards, to provide reinforcement for the heart of the Prophet (S),
Allah reassures him that He will back him up as against those who
ridicule him. Allah implies: We shall remove the evil of those who
ridicule you and We shall perish them.

The verse says:

***“Verily We will suffice you against the scoffers,”***

Allah then describes /mustahzi’in/ (those who ridicule), as: They are
the ones who designate counterparts for Allah, but they will soon face
the consequence of their evil behavior.

The verse says:

***“Those who set up another god with Allah, so they will soon know (the
truth).”***

It may be that this meaning alludes to the fact that these are the ones
whose thoughts and deeds are ridiculous by themselves, for they are so
ignorant that they create god-like figures out of stones and wood as
against Allah Who is the Creator of the world of existence, despite all
of which they want to make an object of ridicule out of you.

Surah Al-Hijr – Verses 97 - 99
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ يَضِيقُ صَدْرُكَ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَبّـِحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبّـِكَ وَكُن مّـِنَ السَّاجِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّي يَأْتِيَكَ الْيَقِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***97. “And (O’ prophet!) We certainly know your breast is straitened by
what they say.”***  
***98. “Therefore, (to reinforce yourself), celebrate the praise of your
Lord, and be of those who make prostration (unto Him).”***  
***99. “And worship your Lord until the Certain comes to you.”***

Among the commentators it is well-known that the aim in mentioning
/yaqin/ (certainty), in these verses, is the most certain of all that
takes place with regard to man, that is, death. As it is also quoted
from the tongue of the pagans in verses 46-47 of Surah Al-Muddaththir
No. 74 saying that they used to reject the Day of Judgment till death
overtook them.

The meaning of the Arabic word /yaqin/ is not death, of course, but
death prepares the grounds for arriving at certainty, for at the time
when death is forth coming, all curtains are drawn and man becomes
certain of the realities.

Some deviants have made a pretext out of the verse and claim: if one
arrives at the state of certainty, there is no more any need for
worshipping, little knowing that it is the Prophet (S) who is being
addressed and who had arrived at certainty from the earliest day and
used to declare in face of inciting greed and threats of the pagans:

*“If you place the moon into my one hand and the sun into another one, I
shall not be stopped from performing my duty.”*

However, despite such a state of certainty, he used to worship till the
last moments of his life.

Anyway, Allah adds as a console and as a reinforcement for elevating the
spirit of the holy Prophet (S) in the noble verse:

***“And (O’ prophet!) We certainly know your breast is straitened by
what they say.”***

Your delicate spirit and your very sensitive heart cannot withstand all
those ill-intentioned words and blasphemous sentences, thus making you
deeply depressed.

However, do not be disturbed; to remove the ill-effects of their nasty
and inappropriate words, worship and praise your Lord, and remain one of
those who prostrate.

The verse says:

***“Therefore, (to reinforce yourself), celebrate the praise of your
Lord, and be of those who make prostration (unto Him).”***

For, such a gratitude shown towards Allah will remove the ill-effects of
their words from the minds of the lovers of Allah. Moreover, it provides
you with energy, ability, illumination and sincerity as well.

Some Islamic traditions denote that whenever the Prophet (S) became sad,
he used to establish prayer by which he would wipe out the effects of
that grief from his mind.

Therefore, The Lord gives him His last commandment in connection with
this matter that he must not give up worshipping Allah throughout his
life and he (S) must keep on worshipping and serving Him till his
certain death occurs.

The holy verse says:

***“And worship your Lord until the Certain comes to you.”***

It is cited in Majma‘-ul-Bayan that if Allah would say only: ‘worship
the Lord’ and would not confine it to a certain limit in time, it was
sufficient for man to worship Allah once and prove his servitude to Him.
However, with this meaning, He convinces man to worship Allah as long as
he is alive.

In conclusion, worshipping Him is the highest level of education; it
provokes one’s thought and calls one’s way of thinking towards the
endless boundaries.

It wipes out and washes away all the dust of sinfulness and negligence
from one’s heart and soul, while inculcating supreme human values within
him. It strengthens one’s faith and awareness, and makes one responsible
in his affairs.

It is for this reason that it would be impossible to imagine that man
might be needless of this great educational school for even one moment.
Those who think man may reach a stage where he will be no more in need
of worshipping, either have regarded man’s development as a limited
process, or they have not grasped the full meaning of worshipping.

[^1]: Tafsir Majma‘-ul Bayan

[^2]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 23

[^3]: Tafsir-i-Kanz-ud-Daqh ayegh

[^4]: Tafsir-us-Safi

[^5]: Tafsir-Kanz-ud-Daqayiq


