Section 1: The Existence of Allah Proved by Nature
==================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 1
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَي أَمْرُ اللَّهِ فَلاَ تَسْتَعْجِلُوهُ سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَي
عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Allah’s commandment has come, hence do not seek to hasten it.
Glory be to Him and Exalted is He above every thing with which they
associate Him.”***

A considerable part of the commencing verses of this Surah have been
revealed in Mecca, during which time the Prophet (S) was intensively
entangled with the pagans and idol-worshippers who used various pretexts
every day for the liberating and life-saving call of Islam.

Among such pretexts one might name the Divine chastisement, which,
whenever the Prophet (S) warned them against, some obstinate folks would
declare.

*“Why would such a chastisement which you claim, if truly said, do not
come to be inflicted on us?”*

They might sometimes add that if supposedly there was such a case
impending, they should take recourse to their idols to serve as
mediators with Allah (s.w.t.) to be rescued from punishment.

The first verse of this Surah drew an obliterating line over such
imaginary claims by implying that they should stop making haste in that
connection for Allah’s commandment had definitely been issued already.

It says:

***“Allah’s commandment has come, hence do not seek to hasten it…”***

If you think that the idols will be involved as mediators with Him, you
are seriously mistaken, as Allah is far more intact and superior to
being attached with associates.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Glory be to Him and Exalted is He above every thing with which they
associate Him.”***

### Explanation

Notwithstanding the case in question in this verse is the pagans’
impatience in their receiving of the Divine punishment, but the
beginning sentence of the verse is not confined to the Divine
punishment.

Rather, it includes all the Divine commandments such as that relating to
waging of the Holy war, the commandment concerning the reappearance of
the contemporary Imam (a.j.), the Return of the Immaculate Imams (as),
and the commandment for the stepping up and staging of the resurrection
day about which one must not make haste.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 2
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُنَزّ‌ِلُ الْمَلآئِكَةَ بِالرُّوحِ مِنْ أَمْرِهِ عَلَي مَن يَشَآءُ
مِنْ عِبَادِهِ أَنْ أَنذِرُوا اَنَّهُ لآ إلَهَ إِلآَّ أَنَاْ
فَاتَّقُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. “He sends down the angels with the inspiration of His commandment
upon whomever of His servants He wills as to warn (people) that there is
no God but I, so be in awe of Me.”***

The Arabic term /rūh/ refers to one of the Divine near-stationed angels
the name of which is mentioned separately in the Qur’an and has come
beside the word ‘the angels’:

***“The Day (on which) the spirit (Rūh) and the angels shall stand
arrayed…”***[^1]

However, in the verse under discussion the letter /b/ (with) is employed
between the two words used instead of the conjunction /wa/ (and).
Perhaps, the meaning intended in this verse is not ‘that angel’ when
dealing with /rūh/, but it may mean the literal sense of the word which
is the spiritual life.

In this case the verse signifies: Allah sends down the angels along with
the means of life to those servants whom He pleases; as is the case in
verse 50 from Surah Ash-Shour a, where the word /rūh/ denotes the Qur’an
which is the source of spiritual life.[^2]

In any case, as no punishment and retribution will be inflicted on
anyone without adequate explanation and without delivering a just
ultimatum, the Qur’an implies that Allah sends down angels with the
Divine spirit to those of His servants whom He wants, ordering them to
awaken the people to the fact that there is no other one to be
worshipped except Him.

Therefore, they should avoid any opposition to His commandments and feel
responsible when confronting Him.

The verse says:

***“He sends down the angels with the inspiration of His commandment
upon whomever of His servants He wills as to warn (people) that there is
no God but I, so be in awe of Me.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 3
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ السَّماوَاتِ وَالاَرْضَ بِالْحَقّ‌ِ تَعَالَي عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. “He created the skies and the earth with the truth; Exalted is He
above everything with which they associate Him.”***

Here, the Qur’an selects two ways for dealing with the issue of the
eradication of paganism and focusing all people’s attention on the One
God.

First, He tackles the issue with rational reasoning regarding the
magnificent order of creation and its system. Secondly, He tackles the
issue through emotional ways and the explanation of the various
blessings towards man and by instigating man’s sense of gratitude.

At first, it says:

***“He created the skies and the earth with the truth…”***

The rightfulness of creation of the skies and the earth is evident both
when one considers the amazing system of well-regulated creation, and
the goal and the various interests which exist in it.

Are those idols whom they associate with Him able to bring about such a
creation process, or can they create a small mosquito or create a
particle of dust?

The verse says:

***“…Exalted is He above everything with which they associate Him.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 4
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ الإِنسَانَ مِن نُّطْفَةٍ فَإِذَا هُوَ خَصِيمٌ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. “He created man out of semen, yet behold! He is an open
adversary.”***

After allusions made to the issue of the creation of the skies and the
earth and their endless mysteries, He enters into the discussion of man
himself; the man who is closer to Him than any other one.

The Qur’an in regard to man implies that: And eventually when he was a
worthless sperm with no soul, he was made into a rational being as well
as defendant, expressive of his own interior, and engaging in
disputations with foes. (This meaning refers to the different stages of
man’s development process!)

The other meaning attributed to this verse is that man eventually turned
into Allah’s enemy, rejecting his own Creator. (This alludes to the
retrogression and meanness of the sinful ones.)

The verse says:

***“He created man out of semen, yet behold! He is an open
adversary.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 5
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالاَنْعَامَ خَلَقَهَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا دِفْءٌ وَمَنَافِعُ وَمِنْهَا
تَأْكُلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. “And He created the cattle for you, therein is warmth and (other)
advantages, and of them you eat.”***

There are many advantages in animals for man. Their meat and milk serve
for his food; their skin and wool serve for making shoes and clothing;
their back serves for loading, their feet are utilized for cultivation,
and even their feces are used for fertilization. In spite of all the
above advantages, they cause the least trouble for man.

The verse says:

***“And He created the cattle for you, therein is warmth and (other)
advantages, and of them you eat.”***

In Islamic quotations, next to agriculture, the best job proposed is
breeding live-stock. This has been mentioned on condition that the job
is coupled with the payment of one’s religious dues of Zakat and with an
eye on the deprived people.

Incidentally, focusing one’s attention on the divine blessings enlivens
the love unto the Creator as well as the spirit of His servitude in man.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 6
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا جَمَالٌ حِينَ تُرِيحُونَ وَحِينَ تَسْرَحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. “And there is beauty in them for you when you drive them (home in
the evening), and when you send them forth to pasture (in the
morning).”***

The Qur’anic term /tasrahūn/ is derived from /saraha/ which signifies
sending livestock to the pastureland; and the Arabic term /turihūn/,
which is derived from /rauh/, means the time when the cattle return to
their stable.

Allah, the Gracious, does not confine Himself to the mentioning of the
ordinary advantages provided by the useful animals, but He also insists
on the psychological benefits which can be drown out of them.

The verse says:

***“And there is beauty in them for you when you drive them (home in the
evening), and when you send them forth to pasture (in the morning).”***

This, in fact, provides the beauty of the self-sufficiency for the
society, as this is a way of the provision for the needs by a society
which are to be fulfilled. In other words this provides a picture for
the beauty laid out in the process for achieving economic independence
as well as the stoppage of all source of dependence.

### Explanations

The four-footed animals are (just like other creatures,) created for the
sake of man.

Vegetarianism is not a value in itself. Allah recounts the eating of the
meat of lawful animals as one of their advantages:

***“…of them you eat.”***

Certainly, indulgence in consumption of meat is not recommended.

The perfection of the glory of a society resides in its independence,
self-sufficiency, production and expanding of its livestock breeding
industry.

‘Beauty and decoration’ is one of the natural needs of the individual
and society.

The perfection in beauty of a society rests with the struggle, and not
with stagnation and impasse; the struggle which is achieved through mass
movement, and not through individualistic achievements.

Beauty in perfection requires being of service to the people; it is not
attained through only filling up of one’s own stomach.

That kind of beauty makes perfect in case of being under the umbrella of
a shepherd which is coupled with one’s own wisdom, and not being left
alone and to oneself.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 7
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَحْمِلُ أَثْقَالَكُمْ إِلَي بَلَدٍ لَّمْ تَكُونُوا بَالِغِيهِ
إِلاَّ بِشِقّ‌ِ الاَنفُسِ إِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ لَرَؤُوفٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. “And they carry your heavy loads unto a land that you could not
reach except with distress of (your) self. Verily your Lord is
Compassionate, Merciful.”***

The Qur’an points out to another of the advantages of animals in this
noble verse. It implies that animals carry your heavy loads on their
back, going towards towns and regions which you could not reach without
undergoing tremendous troubles.

The verse says:

***“And they carry your heavy loads unto a land that you could not reach
except with distress of (your) self…”***

This is a sign of Mercy and compassion of Allah Who has created these
four-footed animals with such tremendous strength, and has made them
tamed and submissive to you.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Verily your Lord is Compassionate, Merciful.”***

As one may note, these four-footed animals, firstly, provide man with
means for covering him against cold and heat. In the second place, their
milk products are used and, then, their meat. And, finally, they provide
those psychological effects which leave an impact on man’s heart, and
their use as a means of transportation.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 8
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْخَيْلَ وَالْبِغَالَ وَالْحَمِيرَ لِتَرْكَبُوهَا وَزِينَةً
وَيَخْلُقُ مَا لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. “And (He created) horses, and mules and donkeys that you may ride
upon them, and for ornament, and He creates what you do not know.”***

The Qur’anic term /xayl/ means: ‘pride, arrogance’, but here, in this
verse, the objective is ‘horse’, as if man feels a kind of pride and
arrogance in horse riding.

The Arabic word /biq al/ signifies ‘mule’ which comes to being by a
horse and a donkey; and the word /hamir/ is the plural from of /himar/
in the sense of ‘ass’.

In this holy verse, the Qur’an points to some other animals which man
uses for riding.

The verse says:

***“And (He created) horses, and mules and donkeys that you may ride
upon them, and for ornament…”***

In conclusion, Allah points out to a more important issue and calls
everybody’s attention to the various means of transportation and mounts
which will be made available to man in the future, and, which he can
make better use of them.

And Allah will create other things that you know nothing about them,
like the modern various means of transportation, whether be it cars,
trains, or airplanes which are indeed Allah’s creatures, not those of
men.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and He creates what you do not know.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 9
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَي اللَّهِ قَصْدُ السَّبِيلِ وَمِنْهَا جَآئِرٌ وَلَوْ شَآءَ
لَهَدَاكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. “And upon Allah is to show the right way, and of them (the ways)
are the deviating ones; and if He had willed He could have guided all of
you.”***

From among the affairs which Allah regards them as His Own obligations
is leading people and providing them with proper guidance, as He
remarks:

***“Verily We take upon Ourselves to guide,”***[^3]

and again in this verse the Holy Qur’an states:

***“And upon Allah is to show the right way…”***

Here, the Qur’anic term /qasd/ signifies moderation, and the aim in
referring to /qasd-us-sabil/ is the in-between way or the ‘straight
way’.

Anyway, in pursuing the various blessings, which were discussed in the
previous verses, the Qur’an points out here to one of the most important
spiritual blessings of them, when it implies that it is up to Allah to
show the right and straight path to the people, a path which has no
deviation found in it.

The verse says:

***“And upon Allah is to show the right way…”***

As for this ‘straight path’ which alludes to either the ‘genetic’ or the
‘religious’ dimension, the commentators have offered various
interpretations. However, their ideas are not incompatible with each
other if they include both cases.

On the other hand, Allah has sent the prophets equipping them with
revelations, adequate instructions and regulations required by man, so
that, from the religious laws point of view be able to discriminate the
good from the evil and, by means of kind of statements, to persuade man
to cover the straight way and refrain him from the deviate paths.

Afterwards, as there are many deviating paths, He warns human beings,
implying that some of these paths are deviating and have dead ends.

The verse says:

***“…and of them (the ways) are the deviating ones…”***

And since the blessings of freedom of choice and free will are among the
most important factors in man’s perfection, the Qur’an refers to them
with a short sentence and remarks in implication that if Allah wanted,
He would lead all of you by compulsion to the straight path in such a
way as you would not be able to deviate in the least from that path.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and if He had willed He could have guided all of you.”***

But, He did not do that, for compulsory guidance is neither something
which makes one proud; nor is it a development for him.

Anyway, Allah has not deemed it appropriate to make people believers by
compulsion; on the contrary, He has left man free to choose his own
path.

[^1]: Surah An-Naba’, No. 78, verse 38

[^2]: “And thus did We reveal to you an inspired book by Our command.”

[^3]: Surah Al-Layl, No. 92, verse 12


