Section 3: God of all is only One
=================================

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 22
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ فَالَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالاَخِرَةِ
قُلُوبُهُم مُنكِرَةٌ وَهُم مُسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “Your God is One God. Hence, those who do not believe in the
Hereafter, their hearts are repulsive, and they are arrogant.”***

Your Lord is One God, unique and no one else is able to be the creator
of the blessings. Therefore, stick to the rules of His worship.

The verse says:

***“Your God is One God…”***

Those who disbelieve in the Hereafter, their hearts deny the truth and
they refrain from accepting admonitions and advices. Such ones are those
who are arrogant and refrain from submission to the truth. They go on
disobeying it without having any grounds for what they do.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…Hence, those who do not believe in the Hereafter, their hearts are
repulsive, and they are arrogant.”***

### Explanations

The previous verses dealt with the ability of Allah and the inability of
all others relating to the act of creation and lack of their awareness
about the future. This verse stresses the fact that your real Lord is
Allah, One God.

The Arabic term /kibr/ signifies ‘megalomania’ or regarding of one’s own
self as greater than what one is. The word /takabbur/ means putting into
practice or implementation of the attributes of being megalomaniac.

The Arabic word /’istikb ar/ also denotes that one is not great in
itself but wants to create and prove his grandeur and splendor by
whatever means which are usually at his disposal.

Some Islamic quotations indicate that Imam Husayn (as) once was passing
by a group of impoverished needy people who were having their meals.
They invited him to join them.

The Imam (as) accepted their invitation and sat down next to them,
engaging in eating, then he said:

*“Allah does not love the arrogant.”*[^1]

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 23
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ جَرَمَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا يُسِرُّونَ وَمَا يُعْلِنُونَ
إِنَّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الْمُسْتَكْبِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. “Undoubtedly Allah does know that which they conceal and that
which they reveal. Verily He does not love the arrogant.”***

The Arabic word /jarama/ means ‘picking of and cutting fruits from the
trees’. The term /l ajarama/ signifies that the issue in question is not
to be ‘cut’, ‘taken away’ or such that one can be skeptic about.
Conversely, it is something certain and decisive.

This verse serves two functions: It threatens the pagans warning them
all as to the awareness of Allah of their performances, and, at the same
time, it carries the good news unto the believers about the fact that
Allah is aware of the situation of their enemies and can punish them as
well.

This noble verse also stresses once again on Allah’s knowledge of the
invisible and His intuition of what is open and hidden, saying that
Allah is definitely aware of what they make manifest as well as what
they hide away. This sentence is in fact a threat against the pagans and
the foes of the Truth about which Allah is never unaware.

The verse says:

***“Undoubtedly Allah does know that which they conceal and that which
they reveal…”***

They are arrogant and Allah does not love the arrogant, for arrogance,
when facing the Truth, is considered as the first sign of one’s
alienation from Allah.

The verse says:

***“…Verily He does not love the arrogant.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 24
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُم مَّاذَآ أَنزَلَ رَبُّكُمْ قَالُوا أَسَاطِيرُ
الاَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “And when they are asked: ‘What has your Lord sent down?’ They
say: ‘The legends of the ancients’.”***

The Arabic term /’as atir/ is the plural form of /’ustūrah/ which
signifies the stories and superstitious fables which have been turned
into written forms.

Or, it may be the plural form of /’ast ar/ which means lines that have
been copied in duplicated forms from the previous books. This word has
been quoted nine times in the Qur’an from the pagan’s tongue in all
cases of which they have been accompanied by the word /’awwalin/ meaning
the ‘first one’s’. That is, they would say:

*“These words are nothing new; they are contrarily, those expressed or
rather fabricated by the predecessors.”*

In the previous verse, the discussion concentrated on those who were
arrogant. The usual logic of these disbelievers is reflected in this
verse which implies that when they are asked as to what their Lord has
revealed, they answer that these are not the Divine revelations; they
are the same false stories of the predecessors.

The verse says:

***“And when they are asked: ‘What has your Lord sent down?’ They say:
‘The legends of the ancients’.”***

It is interesting to note that the arrogant today usually mischievously
appeal to this way of escaping the truth in order to mislead others. In
some books concerning sociology, they have turned to even putting their
deceptive ideas into a scientific framework and claim that ‘religion’ is
the product of man’s ignorance and religious interpretations are
confined to ‘fables’ only.

However, they do not organize any campaigns against the superstitious
and fabricated religions. Their opposition is only concentrated around
true religions which seek to awaken people’s minds, breaking up of the
policies of colonialism and of obstructing the way of the expansionists
and colonialists.

In conclusion, the sending of the prophets (as) and of the Celestial
Books are among the Lordly acts for the education and guidance of the
people.

But, the habit of the arrogant people is to despise and humiliate
whether be it sometimes the school, at other times the leader, or the
entire nation.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 25
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَحْمِلُوا أَوْزَارَهُمْ كَامِلَةً يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَمِنْ
أَوْزَارِ الَّذِينَ يُضِلُّونَهُم بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ أَلاَ سَآءَ مَا
يَزِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. “That they must bear their burdens entirely on the Day of
Resurrection and (also) some of the burdens of those whom they lead
astray without knowledge. Beware! Evil is it what they bear!”***

This verse deals with the pioneers of paganism who, in this life, lead
the people astray with their falsified propaganda. Therefore, in the
Hereafter they must shoulder the burden of their own sins as well as
those whom they have seduced and caused to deviate from the straight
path.

As some Islamic quotations indicate: He who founds a deviating path,
must share the punishment of all those who are deviants in it; and he
who leads others in the right direction will also share in the rewards
accorded to those who are seeking the truth without being at a
disadvantage as far as his own share is concerned; and beware that the
former are shouldering the worst kind of responsibilities.

The holy verse says:

***“That they must bear their burdens entirely on the Day of
Resurrection and (also) some of the burdens of those whom they lead
astray without knowledge. Beware! Evil is it what they bear!”***

The reason why this case happens is that their word will sometimes
seduce thousands of people. How difficult it is that one adds to his own
punishment by suffering not only for his own sins but also sharing in
the sins of thousands of others.

Moreover, when their misleading words stay and serve as sources of the
seduction of future generations, they will also have to suffer for their
sins which are extra to those of their own.

Incidentally, the cause of most deviations is ignorance, and the enemy
utilizes that ignorance to achieve his own goals. Nevertheless,
ignorance cannot serve as an excuse and does not acquit one from the
punishment for his guilt.

[^1]: Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, the commentary, vol. 3, p. 47


