Section 5: Every People Had the Guidance through an Apostle from Allah
======================================================================

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 35
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا لَوْ شَآءَ اللَّهُ مَا عَبَدْنَا مِن
دُونِهِ مِن شَيْءٍ نَحْنُ وَلآ ءَابَآؤُنَا وَلاَ حَرَّمْنَا مِن
دُونِهِ مِن شَيْءٍ كَذَلِكَ فَعَلَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ فَهَلْ
عَلَي الرُّسُلِ إِلاَّ الْبَلاَغُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***35. “And those who associate (other gods with Allah) say: ‘If Allah
had willed, we would not have worshipped aught besides Him, neither we
nor our fathers, nor would we have prohibited anything without (command
from) Him.’ Thus did those before them. Is aught for the Messengers, but
to deliver the manifest message?”***

The issue of determinism and fatalism is one of the unsound
justifications of the polytheists who claimed that Allah has
predetermined us to worship other than Him. Had He determined otherwise
we would not have been pagans.

This issue has been discussed in verse 148 of Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6 and
verse 2 of Surah Az-Zukhruf, No. 43, also quoted from the pagans.

The verse says:

***“And those who associate (other gods with Allah) say: ‘If Allah had
willed, we would not have worshipped aught besides Him, neither we nor
our fathers, nor would we have prohibited anything without (command
from) Him.’…”***

**Question:** Does it not reflect Allah’s condescending and consent to
and with the matter, as He does not obstruct people from deviation?

**Answer:** Definitely not, for Allah has simultaneously made adequate
means for the guidance of the people. He has sent prophets and Books.
Therefore, He has not decided that any one should deviate. At the same
time, He has not compelled any one to embrace the faith, for compulsory
faith is of no use.

However, what is more dangerous than paganism and disbelief is the
justification provided for it and its ascription to Allah.

It is like the case with the deviants who tend to provide justification
not only for their deeds but they also seek to justify those wrong acts
of their ancestors as well as their collaborators. Such a mode of
behavior, that is, providing justification, is the task incumbent upon
all those who have been deviants throughout history.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Thus did those before them. Is aught for the Messengers, but to
deliver the manifest message?”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 36
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلّ‌ِ اُمَّةٍ رَسُولاً أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ فَمِنْهُم مَّنْ هَدَي اللَّهُ وَمِنْهُم مَنْ
حَقَّتْ عَلَيْهِ الضَّلاَلَةُ فَسِيرُوا فِي الاَرْضِ فَانظُرُوا كَيْفَ
كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ الْمُكَذّ‌ِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. “And verily We have appointed a messenger in every nation (to
say): ‘Serve Allah and shun false gods.’ Then, of them were some whom
Allah guided, and there were others against whom error was due. Hence,
travel in the earth, then see what was the end of the rejecters.”***

The Arabic term /’ummah/ is a derivative of the word /’umm/ which
signifies something which takes up something else on itself. Every group
of people who has got something in common and are unified in a sense is
called, /’ummah/.

The Arabic term /taqūt/ (dictator or despot) is employed when someone
wants to exaggerate or overstress the act of ‘unruliness’. In the Holy
Qur’an, the Satan, the oppressors, the tyrants and the idols, who are
unruly and disobedient in face of Allah’s commandments, are called
/taqūt/. This word has got no plural form; it is used both as singular,
like:

***“…whoever rejects false deity (taghūt)…”,***[^1]

which is used as singular, and like:

***“…their guardians are false deities (taghūt)…”***[^2]

which is used in plural meaning.

Allah has provided means of guidance for all the people.

The above verse says:

***“And verily We have appointed a messenger in every nation (to say):
‘Serve Allah and shun false gods.’…”***

Nevertheless, some groups accept the fact of the matter and will be
guided aright, while others deny or reject it and, therefore, are
misled. Thus, it is He Who guides us though it is us who are misled.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Then, of them were some whom Allah guided, and there were others
against whom error was due…”***

An interesting example of this case might be the example of the earth
which rotates around the sun during the rotation of which part of it
faces the sun and is being enlightened while the other part of it, which
is in behind, is darkened. Hence, one can say that every light beam
which the earth possesses comes from the sun while every dark spot it
has is of its own position.

Anyway, Allah does not ascribe misguidance to Himself, unless man
personally paves the grounds for it.

In conclusion, at the end of the holy verse, He issues this general
command for awakening of those who are misled and for the reinforcement
of those who are already guided, where He implies that you may travel
through the earth and examine the remains and relics of your
predecessors which are on the surface of the earth or are buried under
the earth and note for yourselves the ultimate destiny of those who have
rejected Allah and their eventual fate.

The verse says:

***“…Hence, travel in the earth, then see what was the end of the
rejecters.”***

This meaning serves as a clear evidence for man’s free will, for in case
that the guidance and being misled were compulsory matters, there would
certainly be no reasons for His commendation of traveling through the
earth and the examination of the circumstances of the predecessors which
would all be in vain.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 37
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن تَحْرِصْ عَلَي هُدَاهُمْ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يَهْدِي مَن يُضِلُّ
وَمَا لَهُم مّـِن نَّاصِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. “(O’ Prophet!) Even if you desire for their guidance, yet verily
Allah does not guide those whom He leads astray, nor shall they have any
helpers.”***

In pursuance of the previous verse which ascertained that the deviation
of a certain group is an irrevocable and an unequivocal matter owing to
their paganism and rejection, this verse, addressing the Prophet (S),
implies that he should not sympathize with them for his sympathy is
ineffective as Allah has sealed their hearts because of their deviation
and they would be no more having the capacity to be guided.

The verse says:

***“(O’ Prophet!) Even if you desire for their guidance, yet verily
Allah does not guide those whom He leads astray, nor shall they have any
helpers.”***

Sometimes, there is difficulty in people’s eligibility for guidance
which must not be attributed to the preacher. The Divine prophet is
immaculate and he shows no weak-points while he has best quality ethics
and is compassionate as well, yet some people do not approve.

Certainly, man sometimes reaches a point where he neither will be
eligible to be guided in this world; nor will he have the capacity of
being interceded and assisted in the next world.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 38
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقْسَمُوا بِاللَّهِ جَهْدَ أَيْمَانِهِمْ لاَ يَبْعَثُ اللَّهُ مَن
يَمُوتُ بَلَي وَعْداً عَلَيْهِ حَقّاً وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. “And they swore by Allah with their most earnest oaths (that)
Allah will not raise up him who dies. Yea! It (raising the dead) is a
promise binding on Him in truth, but most people do not know.”***

It is quoted that a Muslim man, who was indebted to by a pagan, went to
him to claim his due. The pagan acted evasively which made the Muslim
man infuriated and made this oath in his speech:

“*I swear to whatever I expect after death*”

He meant the resurrection and Allah’s account, to which the pagan
replied: “*I swear to God that He will raise no one from the dead.*”
Upon this, the verse was revealed which embodied an answer to him and to
the ones like him.

Allah, the Almighty, deals with another type of their deviation and ill
ways of thinking, indicating that they swear to the Lord vehemently,
exaggerating with utmost insistence that He does not raise any one from
the dead, and meaning that generally no one will be enlivened and
revived after death.

The holy verse says:

***“And they swore by Allah with their most earnest oaths (that) Allah
will not raise up him who dies…”***

Here, Allah, rejecting their speech, implies that: of course, Allah will
revive them and will reappoint them.

This is the unequivocal promise which Allah has given them, and it is
incumbent on Him to fulfill all His promises because of His wisdom, for
His promise is truthful and is irrevocable, as were there no
Resurrection Day to be held, duties of men would be meaningless.

In other words, once duties are correctly in place that there are
punishment and rewards designated for one’s actions.

However, most people do not draw proper conclusions from this fact
because of their paganism and rejection of the prophets. Some claim that
those who do not follow the philosophy of the resurrection and rebirth
of the dead, therefore they reject.

### Two Points

One of the capital sins is swearing for false causes especially when the
issue in question begins with the terms: /wallah/, /billah/ and
/tallah/, which are the three terms for swearing.

According to the quotations which have been mentioned in the books of
Roudah-Kafi, Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, and Tafsir-i-Burhan from Imam Sadiq (as)
and Hadrat-i-Imam Baqir (as), it has been quoted that one of the
examples of this verse is ‘regression’ or ‘return’ during the course of
which, in this world, Allah enlivens some groups during the era of the
revolution or uprising of Imam-i-Zaman (as) though the opponents of
Shi‘ites refute that.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 39
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُبَيّـِنَ لَهُمُ الَّذِي يَخْتَلِفُونَ فِيهِ وَلِيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا أَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا كَاذِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***39. “(They will be raised up) so that He may make clear to them that
which they differed about, and that those who disbelieved might know
that they (themselves) were liars.”***

The pagans were hesitant and disagreed on such issues as monotheism,
legitimacy and authenticity of the prophets’ mission, resurrection day,
and the accountability of one’s deeds.

This holy verse proclaims that all these issues will be clarified for
them in the resurrection day and they will discover as to what untrue
and unacceptable beliefs they were holding in the world. But to what
effect will it be?

It is for this reason that Allah raises them from the dead so as to
enable them to see for them what they rejected and disagreed on, for the
doomsday makes them acquire positively decisive knowledge.

Another point is that the pagans become aware that they were lairs in
this world and their claim as to the fact that Allah will not make the
dead rise up after death was utter nonsense and groundless.

The verse says:

***“(They will be raised up) so that He may make clear to them that
which they differed about, and that those who disbelieved might know
that they (themselves) were liars.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 40
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا قَوْلُنَا لِشَيْءٍ إِذَآ أَرَدْنَاهُ أَن نَّقُولَ لَهُ كُن
فَيَكُونُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***40. “Verily, only Our word for a thing, when We intend it, is that We
say: ‘Be!’, and it is.”***

Allah has remarked in this verse

“***Verily, only Our word***”

and in verse 82 of Surah Yasin No. 36, He has stated:

“***Verily only His command***”

while we find in verse 59 of ‘Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, concerning the
creation of Hadrat-i-‘Issa, He says:

***“…He said to him ‘Be’ and he ‘was’.”***,

all of which lead us to the conclusion that His command and His speech
are identical with His Will.

The Qur’anic word /kun/ signifies ‘be’ which is used for promoting our
understanding of the proximity in our frame of mind. Otherwise, Allah
does not require that either.

As man can imagine anything in his own mind whenever he intends to,
which he can do without him needing anything. He can create everything.
To excuse the similitude expressed here, Allah can also create
everything though His creation is real and it is done only if He so
wills.

Therefore, He takes up the issue in this verse that if they consider the
return of man to life impossible, they must know that Allah’s power is
above everything else. Whenever He intends something to exist, He only
says ‘Be it’, following which it will immediately exist.

The verse says:

***“Verily, only Our word for a thing, when We intend it, is that We
say: ‘Be!’, and it is.”***

Despite this all-embracing power which Allah possesses in creation every
thing by intending it, how could one still be skeptical as to the
Allah’s power in matters regarding resurrection of the dead after their
death?

The expression of /kun/ (Be) which is the imperative form of ‘to be’ is
also due to the scarcity of the words and their lack of capacity for
better expression, in which case there is no need even for uttering such
a word either. His Will is more than adequate for the actualization of
everything.

Therefore, how can one doubt as to the issue of resurrection despite the
fact that Allah’s Will is utterly sufficient to bring everything into
existence.

[^1]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 256

[^2]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 257


