Section 10: The Faithful and the Unfaithful Ones Compared
=========================================================

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 71
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ فَضَّلَ بَعْضَكُمْ عَلَي بَعْضٍ فِي الرّ‌ِزْقِ فَمَا
الَّذِينَ فُضّـِلُوا بِرَادّ‌ِي رِزْقِهِمْ عَلَي مَا مَلَكَتْ
أَيْمَانُهُمْ فَهُمْ فِيهِ سَوَآءٌ أَفَبِنِعْمَةِ اللَّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “And Allah has made some of you excel others in the (means of)
sustenance. So those who have been made to excel do not give their
(means of) sustenance to those whom their right hands possess, so that
they may be equal therein. Do they then deny Allah’s bounty?”***

And Allah has made some of you excel in means of sustenance over others.
This blessing is allocated to man by Allah and through one’s own effort,
either because of his purity of soul, or for testing of others by him
being made an example such as the cases of knowledge, health, and
security.

However, those who have been made to excel, (owing to their own
narrow-sightedness and narrow vision) are not predisposed to part with a
portion of their share for the sake of their subjects so as to enable
them to be on equal footing with them.

The verse says:

***“And Allah has made some of you excel others in the (means of)
sustenance. So those who have been made to excel do not give their
(means of) sustenance to those whom their right hands possess, so that
they may be equal therein…”***

One may conclude that Muslims must not feel privileged or at an
advantage when facing those who are in an inferior position with respect
to them in their families.

Such differences in the amount of incomes have their origin in the
abilities and talents of individuals which in turn are also from Allah’s
gifts. In certain cases, they may be acquired in some aspects, though in
other cases they are definitely not acquired.

Therefore, even in a healthy sound environment from the economics point
of view, one finds widespread gaps in incomes, which is undeniable. At
any rate and despite all this, what lays the main foundations of one’s
successes is one’s own struggle.

People’s differences in their means of sustenance is one of the Divine
wise programs, for if all people were to enjoy equal benefits, their
spiritual peaks of perfection would not be demonstrated. For instance,
generosity, perseverance, self-sacrifice, protection, compassion,
modesty and the like usually exhibit their significance whenever there
are some differences among men.

Certainly, justice does not prevail only when Allah sets up all on an
equal footing from the point of view of their abilities and conditions,
for if all were to enjoy an equal amount of blessings, the issues of
employment and cooperation, which are required for social life, would
lose sense.

Nevertheless, individual differences in talents, abilities and incomes
should not result in misuse of the potentialities with regard to the
social strata.

It is for this reason that He proclaims at the end of the verse that:

***“…Do they then deny Allah’s bounty?”***

Here, He makes an allusion to the fact that such differences in their
original natural forms (and not in their artificial and oppressive
sense) are also among Allah’s blessings which have been brought forth to
protect the human society and for the development of their different
potentialities.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 72
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ جَعَلَ لَكُم مّـِنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجاً وَجَعَلَ لَكُم
مّـِنْ أَزْوَاجِكُم بَنِينَ وَحَفَدَةً وَرَزَقَكُم مّـِنَ
الطَّيّـِبَاتِ أَفَبِالْبَاطِلِ يُؤْمِنُونَ وَبِنِعْمَتِ اللَّهِ هُمْ
يَكْفُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***72. “And Allah has designated wives for you from among your own
selves and has designated children and grandchildren for you from your
wives and sustained you of clean means. Do they (still) believe in the
falsehood and they disbelieve in the bounty of Allah?”***

We read in Tafsir-i-Tabari that the Arabic term /hafadah/ refers to the
son-in-law, child, grandchild and even the companions and servants, as
well as the children who are born to the wife from a different husband.
In Tafsir-i-Al-Mizan, it is cited that /hafadah/ is the plural form of
/h afid/ and means ‘rapidity in action’ and as those near-of-kin are
quicker in assisting the parents, they are called /hafadah/.

Anyway, this verse, which like the above two verses, begins with the
term ‘Allah’ and discusses Allah’s blessings, makes allusions to the
graces from the humanitarian point of view, the aids, as well as to the
social workers and clean means of sustenance. This verse complements the
three-fold circle of blessings which are mentioned in these three
verses.

That is, it begins with the life and death system, then it explains the
‘variety in life style’ by referring to the differences in means of
sustenance and their abilities. The verse in question, which
superintends the reproductive system of mankind, ends with clean means
of sustenance.

It says:

***“And Allah has designated wives for you from among your own
selves…”***

He has designated for you such wives who are the sources of both comfort
for your soul and body, and the survival of generations.

Therefore, He hastens to add:

***“…and has designated children and grandchildren for you from your
wives…”***

Then the Qur’an says:

***“…and sustained you of clean means…”***

And at the end of the discussion, the Qur’an declares this as a general
conclusion: Do they still call on the idols despite all the splendor and
power which they observe and despite all these graces which have been
made available to them by Allah? Do they embrace the wrong and believe
in it, and neglect the blessings of Allah?

The verse says:

***“…Do they (still) believe in the falsehood and they disbelieve in the
bounty of Allah?”***

What a judgment is it? And what a wrong and an untrue schedule this
consists of that man has forgotten about the source of all blessings and
has taken to those beings which lack even the least of all effects and
which serve as an example of all the ‘untruth’ in all its dimensions.

### Explanations

One’s spouse and children are all among the Divine blessings. One’s
spouse is the source of comfort and one’s children are the sources of
hope.

Matching between husband and wife is one of the favors of Allah and of
the Divine wisdom, and marriage is a deliberate Divine program for man.

***“And Allah has designated wives for you from your own selves…”***

Allah makes provisions for both one’s spiritual needs and one’s material
needs.

Separation of oneself from matrimonial links, preventing oneself from
having children and abstaining oneself from what is allowed by Allah are
all the examples of adhering to wrong principles and are signs of
ingratitude for Allah’s blessings.

To fornicate or to commit adultery despite having wives and having
allowed means of sustenance, present cases of disregarding Allah’s
favours.

Tafsir-i-Safi and Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘ indicate that the objective of
‘Allah’s favours’, mentioned in the verse, is the blissful Prophet (S),
the Qur’an, and Islam which the unbelievers used to reject.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 73
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لاَ يَمْلِكُ لَهُمْ رِزْقاً مِنَ
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالاَرْضِ شَيْئاً وَلاَ يَسْتَطِيعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. “And they worship other than Allah that has no power to provide
them, of sustenance, anything from the heavens and the earth and can do
nothing.”***

Following the previous discussions on monotheism, this verse deals with
the issue of paganism and, taking a stern and blaming tone, declares
that they worship idols other than Allah which do not have at their
disposal any means of sustenance in the skies and on the earth.

They are not only the proprietors of anything in this regard, but they
also have no capabilities to create and have access to the means of
sustenance.

The verses says:

***“And they worship other than Allah that has no power to provide them,
of sustenance, anything from the heavens and the earth and can do
nothing.”***

This style of meaning makes allusion to the matter that the pagans
believed in and worshipped idols for they considered them as an impact
in their destiny, their profits and their losses, while the worshipped
one must be both provider of means of sustenance and mighty.

However, the partners whom they designate for Allah are neither able to
make provisions now nor in the future.

Their imaginary objects of worship are neither able to pour rains from
the sky nor are they able to grow plants on the earth.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 74
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلاَ تَضْرِبُوا لِلَّهِ الاَمْثَالَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ وَأَنتُمْ
لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***74. “Therefore do not coin any similitudes for Allah. Verily, Allah
knows and you do not know.”***

The pagans regarded Allah as a king and considered idols as His
ministers. This holy verse declares that an end must be put to such
similes, and you should not designate equals for Him when worshipping
Allah for He has not got any equals or counterparts who may deserve
being worshipped.

The verse says:

***“Therefore do not coin any similitudes for Allah. Verily, Allah knows
and you do not know.”***

Some commentators have claimed that the first sentence of the verse
which says:

***“Therefore do not coin any similitudes for Allah…”***

refers to the logic of the pagans during the ‘Age of Ignorance’, (the
exact replica of which can also be found among some of contemporary
pagans).

They used to claim that the reason why they would call on the idols was
that they were not worthy for worshipping Allah, so they had to take
idols because these were the near-stationed ones to the Lord. Allah is
like a great king who grants audience only to ministers and his
exclusive entourage.

However, the masses of the people who cannot have access to Him, will
call on those who are exclusively received by Him.

Such groundless and unjustified kinds of logic which are sometimes
depicted in the form of a deviating parable, are the most dangerous of
all kinds of logic.

To answer such a claim, the Qur’an asserts that you should not use
allegories in case of Allah; that is, allegories which suit limited
scopes of thought and fit in the category of those whose existence is
probable and which is full of defects and flaws.

If you were aware of the All-Encompassing attribute of Allah with regard
to all beings and you knew about His grace and favour which is
unlimited, and His proximity towards yourself, in which case makes Him
approach you closer than your own ‘self’, you would never turn to other
means for securing Allah’s attention.

That Lord Who has invited you to be in direct touch with Him in prayers,
and has left the doors of His house wide-open to you day and night, He
must not be likened to an oppressive king who has slipped into his
palace and does not let anyone in there, except a few.

In our discussion of concerning Allah’s attributes, we have particularly
pointed out the fact that one of the sliding slopes which exists in the
way of understanding the attributes of Allah is that of the land-slide
of using similes.

That is, comparing Allah’s attributes with those of man and considering
them as similarities, because Allah is an infinite and boundless being
in every respect and other beings are the ones which are finite and
within limits and any comparison made in here causes one to remain aloof
from knowing Him.

Even in cases where we are bound to do so, and to compare His Holy
Essence to light and the like, we must note that such similes and
metaphorical applications have got shortcomings and fail to achieve our
purpose, and they might be only acceptable in part and not as a whole.

While most people are heedless of this fact, they are often thrown down
the bottom of the slopes of the valley seemingly of simile and
syllogism, when making their comparisons. They are then distanced from
the truth of monotheism.

Thus, the Qur’an warns us repeatedly and attracts our attention to this
fact; sometimes with the sentence:

***“And there is none like unto Him.”***[^1]

and sometimes it also uses the sentence:

***“Nothing is similar to Him.”***[^2]

At other times, the Qur’an calls our attention by using the first
sentence of the abovementioned verse.

And, perhaps, the last sentence of the verse, by saying:

***“Verily, Allah knows and you do not know”***

explains this same subject that usually people are unaware of the
secrets of the attributes of Allah.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 75
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلاً عَبْداً مَّمْلُوكاً لاَ يَقْدِرُ عَلَي شَيْءٍ
وَمَن رَّزَقْنَاهُ مِنَّا رِزْقاً حَسَناً فَهُوَ يُنفِقُ مِنْهُ سِرّاً
وَجَهْراً هَلْ يَسْتَوُونَ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لاَ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. “Allah sets forth a parable of a bonded slave, having no power
over anything, and one whom We have provided with good means of
sustenance from Us, then he spends from it secretly and openly. Are they
equal? Praise belongs to Allah! But most of them do not know.”***

Allah has discussed the fact as to how the pagans are being misled,
saying:

***“Allah sets forth a parable of a bonded slave, having no power over
anything…”***

Allah here sets forth a parable to clarify His intention by it and
thereby approaches the concept to the audience. The parable is: ‘the
slave who is a bonded one and has authority over nothing;’ that is, he
has got no options.

And a free man whom Allah has provided with means of sustenance,
possesses property and blessings, gives away out of his belongings
openly and in secret and without any fear.

The verse says:

***“…and one whom We have provided with good means of sustenance from
Us, then he spends from it secretly and openly…”***

As for the sentence: /hal yastawūn/ signifies:

“***Are they equal?***”,

some commentators claim that this allegory relates to the believers and
the disbelievers, since a disbeliever has not got involved in anything
‘good ‘, while a believer acquires the ‘good’.

Thus Allah has explained the difference between the believer and the
disbeliever, hence, He has persuaded people to choose the path of the
believers and dissuade them from taking the path of the disbelievers.

The holy phrase:

“***Praise belongs to Allah!***”

signifies that one must thank Allah for His blessings. This meaning
refers to all of Allah’s blessings. That is, say that the act of worship
only deserves Him Who leads us towards monotheism, theology (the
sciences of Divinities), and gratitude, and shows us the road to
Paradise.

However, most people, that is the pagans, do not know that it is He Who
deserves being worshipped, and all blessings belong to Him.

The verse says:

***“…Are they equal? Praise belongs to Allah! But most of them do not
know.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 76
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلاً رَجُلَيْنِ أَحَدُهُمَآ أَبْكَمُ لاَ يَقْدِرُ
عَلَي شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ كَلٌّ عَلَي مَوْلاَهُ أَيْنَمَا يُوَجّـِهْهُ لاَ
يَأْتِ بِخَيرٍ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي هُوَ وَمَن يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَهُوَ
عَلَي صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***76. “And Allah sets forth a parable of two men, one of whom is dumb
having authority over nothing, and he is a burden upon his master,
wherever he sends him he brings no good. Is he then equal to him who
enjoins justice and he (himself) is on the straight path?”***

You who do not consider the master and the slave as equals, how can you
equalize the creator with the creature?

Thus, we find Him using another parable for the slaves of the idols and
the true believers, likening them to a deaf-mute born person who is at
the same time a disabled slave, and a free man who is always engaged in
calling the people to be just and fair and who is on the right path.

The Qur’an says:

***“And Allah sets forth a parable of two men, one of whom is dumb
having authority over nothing, and he is a burden upon his master…”***

That is why he usually does not perform well whatever he is sent to. In
this manner, this man has got four negative attributes: being a dumb by
birth, absolute disability, being a burden to his lord, and, finally,
procuring no useful outcome for whatever is referred to him.

Is such a man equal to the one who is eloquent in his speech, always
calling people to be just, and following the right path? Of course, it
is not so.

The verse says:

***“…wherever he sends him he brings no good. Is he then equal to him
who enjoins justice and he (himself) is on the straight path?”***

Allah has set two allegories in this holy verse and in the previous
verse inciting the people to condescend to the fact that all know that
neither of these two groups are equal.

That is, as the two sides of either of these two parables can not be
considered as equal, Allah can not be considered equal to the inanimate
idols (which are incapable of doing any harm or benefit) despite all His
favours and graces as well as all the religious blessings of this world
and of the next which He has accorded to mankind.

Some have claimed that this allegory has been used by Allah to
differentiate the believer from the unbeliever. The goal in using a dumb
man is the pagan while the aim in mind in the case of mentioning he who
resorts to preaching justice, is a believer who are not equal.

[^1]: Surah Tauhid, No. 112, verse 4

[^2]: Surah Shura, No. 42, verse 11


