Section 12: Apostle Muhammad a Witness Over All Witnesses
=========================================================

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 84
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ نَبْعَثُ مِن كُلّ‌ِ اُمَّةٍ شَهِيداً ثُمَّ لاَ يُؤْذَنُ
لِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَلاَ هُمْ يُسْتَعْتَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***84. “And (remember) the Day We will raise up a witness from every
nation. Then, shall no permission be given to those who disbelieved, nor
shall they be allowed to make amends.”***

The issue of the witnesses of the Day of Resurrection has been
repeatedly propoused in the Qur’an. The prophets, angles, Allah’s
saints, the earth as well as one’s bodily organs are among the witnesses
on that Day.

Imam Sadiq (as) has remarked:

*“There is an ‘Imam’ a ‘leader’ for every nation and for every period
with whom people will be mustered.”*

Imam Baqir (as) has mentioned concerning the verse:

*“We are verily the witnesses of this nation.”*

Although the Almighty is Omnipresent and Omniscient as to everything,
the fact that numerous witnesses are there to testify and bear witness
will lead to the emergence of men of virtue and abstinence for the
faithful, and will lead to the exposing of the scandals of the culprits.

The necessary pre-requisite for bearing witness is one’s knowledge.
Therefore, Allah’s saints, who will bear testimony for us in the day of
resurrection, must have an observation over our performances in this
world.

This is in line with our belief which, according to numerous Islamic
quotations, and in accordance with the noble verse that says:

***“…Allah will see your work and (so will) His Messengers and the
believers…”***[^1]***,***

all records of our performances are being reported to Imam-i-Zaman (as)
every week. If we exclude this belief, the verses about the issue of
bearing witness on the Day of Resurrection are not justifiable. How can
one who is not aware of our performances or is not just, bear witness as
to our acts on the Day of Resurrection?

The Arabic term /’isti’tab/ is derived from //itab/ which means a guilty
person asks the owner of the right to blame him so as to quell his anger
thereby and then condescend as to his forgiveness.

One is able both to repent of his sins, and apologize for his guilts,
and compensate for his wrongdoings in this world. However, in the
Resurrection Day, there is no room for justification; nor would any
apologies be accepted; nor one can compensate.

Yet, the act of justification is to be dismissed, for when some
hell-dwellers tell others:

***“…Had it not been for you, we would certainly have been
believers”***[^2]***,***

they will be addressed in this way:

***“…Nay, you (yourselves) were not believers.”***[^3]

However, to make up for a sin is out of the question, for when they ask
Allah, saying:

***“…therefore send us back, we will do good…”***[^4]***,***

this will be the answer:

***“…By no means! it is a (mere) word that he speaks…”*** [^5]

which signifies: The case is not so for he utters such words verbally
but he will be acting just in the same way if he be returned to his
previous position in the world.

As for offering apologies it is also out of the question, for the Qur’an
says:

***“They will not be allowed to put forth excuses.”***[^6]

As the issues involved in the Divine Court are keeping account and
record of everything, as well as bearing testimony and witnesses, there
will be no rooms left for apologizing, rationalizing or securing the
other side’s consent.

The verse says:

***“And (remember) the Day We will raise up a witness from every nation.
Then, shall no permission be given to those who disbelieved, nor shall
they be allowed to make amends.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 85
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا رَأَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا الْعَذَابَ فَلَا يُخَفَّفُ عَنْهُمْ
وَلَا هُمْ يُنظَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. “And when those who were unjust behold the chastisement, it shall
not be lightened for them nor will they be respited.”***

We had it in the previous verse that in the Hereafter there will be no
permission for rationalization; nor any possibility securing the consent
of others. However, He proclaims in this holy verse that the Divine
punishment on that day recognizes no alleviation nor postponement.

Therefore, as soon as the pagans noticed the Hell Fire, and were
subjected to the Divine punishment, there would be no alleviation
involved for their chastisement, and no respite will be given to them,
and their torment will be perpetual, because the time of regretting and
repenting has passed.

The noble verse says:

***“And when those who were unjust behold the chastisement, it shall not
be lightened for them nor will they be respited.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 86
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا رَأَي الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا شُرَكَآءَهُمْ قَالُوا رَبَّنَا
هَؤُلآءِ شُرَكَآؤُنَا الَّذِينَ كُنَّا نَدْعُواْ مِن دُونِكَ
فَاَلْقَوْا إِلَيْهِمُ الْقَوْلَ إِنَّكُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***86. “And when those who associated (others with Allah) behold their
associates, they shall say: ‘Our Lord! these are our associates whom we
called besides You;’ But they (the gods) throwing back the saying at
them, (will answer) ‘Verily you are truly lairs!’”***

According to the Islamic quotations received, there are several stages
in Hereafter in some of which lips remain closed when hands and foot
bear witness. In other stages one hears crying and supplications. In
another stage, one does his best to put all blames for his sins on
others. For instance, he would say to the Satan:

It is you who made me pagan, to which the Satan answers:

***“…verily I disbelieved in your associating me with Allah from
before…”***[^7]

Sometimes, they hold the idols responsible, while the idols, too, acquit
themselves.[^8]

Even, Allah, addressing Issa, says:

***“…O’ Jesus, son of Mary! Did you say to the people: ‘Take me and my
mother for two gods besides Allah?’ He (Jesus) says: ‘Glory be to You!
It was not mine to utter what I had no right to (say)…”***[^9]

And, in the verse in question, those beings which have been objects of
worship along with Allah seek self-acquittal, denying them, telling the
idol-worshippers: You were in fact worshipping your own imagination.

The verse says:

***“And when those who associated (others with Allah) behold their
associates, for Allah they shall say: ‘Our Lord! these are our
associates whom we called besides You;’ But they (the gods) throwing
back the saying at them, (will answer) ‘Verily you are truly,
lairs!’”***

In the meantime, the resurrection terror causes one to put blame on
other’s shoulders for delivering himself, but to no good effects.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 87
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلْقَوْا إِلَي اللَّهِ يَوْمَئِذٍ السَّلَمَ وَضَلَّ عَنْهُم مَّا
كَانُوا يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. “And they will tender submission to Allah on that day, and what
they used to forge shall depart from them.”***

If we do not surrender today we shall surrender tomorrow, on the Day of
Resurrection.

However, to what avail can it be? All fantasies will come to an end on
that Day, and all attempts to find mediators, reconciliation efforts,
and hoping for glory and seeking support from any one but Allah will be
out of question.

Some commentators claim that the pagans will lose their arrogance of the
Age of Ignorance and will present their submission before Allah, the
Almighty, without any deliberation, and whatever they rejected regarding
monotheism will disappear from their minds, and those false and empty
desires which they cherished regarding the idols will be obliterated
altogether, enabling them to understand that the idols are of no use.

On the contrary, they themselves become pillars of Hell Fire, attacking
their own worshippers.

The verse says:

***“And they will tender submission to Allah on that day, and what they
used to forge shall depart from them.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 88
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوا عَن سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ زِدْنَاهُمْ عَذَاباً
فَوْقَ الْعَذَابِ بِمَا كَانُوا يُفْسِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “Those who disbelieved and hindered (people) from the path of
Allah, We added punishment to punishment for that they used to spread
mischief.”***

All corruptions have their origin in paganism, as is the case with all
decent acts which take their roots from Faith. Those pioneers of
paganism, who obstruct the people from the path of Allah by their pen,
expression and other means, will have to settle a different kind of
account from those of ordinary people.

Up till now, we were involved in our discussion of those misled pagans
who were caught in their paganism and deviation without calling others
to their path. Later, the cases of those are exposed who are not only
misled themselves but they also seek to mislead others as well.

The verse says:

***“Those who disbelieved and hindered (people) from the path of Allah,
We added punishment to punishment for that they used to spread
mischief.”***

A well known tradition says:

*“Everyone who establishes a good practice, will be rewarded the reward
of those who do it accordingly, without diminishing anything from their
reward; and he who lays the foundation of an* *evil act, will be held
responsible for the sin of all those who commit that sin, without
decreasing anything from their sin.”*

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 89
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ نَبْعَثُ فِي كُلّ‌ِ اُمَّةٍ شَهِيداً عَلَيْهِم مِنْ
أَنفُسِهِمْ وَجِئْنَا بِكَ شَهِيداً عَلَي هَؤُلآءِ وَنَزَّلْنَا
عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ تِبْيَاناً لِكُلّ‌ِ شَيْءٍ وَهُدًي وَرَحْمَةً
وَبُشْرَي لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***89. “And (remember) the day when We raise up a witness from every
people against them from among themselves, and We shall bring you as a
witness against these. And We have sent down the Book to you explaining
clearly everything, and as a guidance, and glad tidings for Muslims.”***

The objective of ‘a witness’, is the prophet who has been sent to them,
or their ‘contemporary leader’ who serves as the proof of Allah, and We
appoint you as a witness of the people, O’ Muhammad! This Book, the
Qur’an, is an explicit and eloquent Book for all religious affairs.

The verse says:

***“And (remember) the day when We raise up a witness from every people
against them from among themselves, and We shall bring you as a witness
against these. And We have sent down the Book to you explaining clearly
everything, and as a guidance, and glad tidings for Muslims.”***

There are no religious matters which are not concerned within the Qur’an
or not explicitly expressed in it or which are not leading man to the
sources of knowledge, i.e., to the blissful Prophet (S) and to his true
successors or to the consensus of the Ummah.

Therefore, all religious edicts are direct inferences from the Qur’an,
as was explained in the foregoing fifth verse which revealed allusions
made to the witnesses of the nations.

This is one of our decisive beliefs that every nation will have a
witness on the Day of Resurrection and the Prophet of Islam (S) will
bear witness over this nation as well as over the witnesses of other
nations.

The important point in here is that the testimony of men of Allah must
be based on the senses, seeing and knowledge, and they must be innocent
of any error or falsehood so as their testimony should be regarded as a
kind of ultimatum on that sensitive occasion upon all people.

It is evident that there is no one to be aware of the deeds of people
whether present or absent, apparent or hidden, and whose words will be
accepted by all nations and Allah in Hereafter, except for prophets and
those ‘Immaculate Imams’ who have full command of the deeds, words, and
behavior as well as the minds of all people owing to their invisible
lines of communication.

It has been narrated in Tafsir-i-Safi from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*“By Allah! we are knowledgeable about everything which is in the skies
and on the earth, and whatever is between them, as well as what is in
Paradise or in Hell.”*

Then the Imam (as) recited the above verse three times.

Imam Baqir (as) remarked:

*“Whatever is needed by the Ummah has already been mentioned in the
Qur’an, and whatever you hear from me, I shall provide its Qur’anic
documentation if you ask.”* [^10]

Hadrat Ali (as) said:

*“Whatever news about you, as well as the history of the past nations,
the future generations, the skies and the earth all have been stated in
the Qur’an.”* [^11]

Imam Rida (as) said to the chief men of some religions in a session that
among the miracles of the Messenger of Islam is one which reveals a poor
orphan who has been an illiterate shepherd, being in possession of a
Book ‘the explanation of every thing’ and that all news of the past and
future until the Hereafter be recorded in it. [^12]

Imam Sadiq (as) has said:

*“In Allah’s Book, there is a solution for every dispute between two
parties though the people’s wisdom may not catch it.”* [^13]

The Qur’an expresses everything though everyone may not understand.
Hadrat Ali (as) says: For the common people, the Qur’an provides
apparent sentences; for some sophisticated individuals, it provides
mysterious allusions; and for the saints of Allah, it reveals delicate
divine nuances, while for the prophets it presents ‘facts’.

Such a trait of being ‘explanatory of everything’ is either in a direct
manner or by means of verses which contain some principles that are
leading for us, such as in the Qur’an it says:

***“…and whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever
he forbids you, keep back…”***[^14]

And as in the verse which says:

***“…That you may make clear to mankind what has been sent down to
them…”***[^15]

[^1]: Surah Al-Taubah, No. 9, verse 105

[^2]: Surah Saba, No. 34, verse 31

[^3]: Surah As-S af at, No. 37, verse 29

[^4]: Surah As-Sajdah, No. 34, verse 12

[^5]: Surah Al-Mu’minūn, No. 23, verse 100

[^6]: Surah Al-Mursal at, No. 77, verse 36

[^7]: Surah ‘Ibrahim, No. 14, verse 22

[^8]: Surah Fatir, No. 35, verse 14

[^9]: Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 116

[^10]: Kanz-ud-Daqa’iq, under the verse

[^11]: Kanz-ud-Daqa’iq, under the verse

[^12]: Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, under the verse

[^13]: Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 75

[^14]: Surah Al-Hashr, No. 59, verse 7

[^15]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 44


