Section 13: To Keep up Covenants and Promises
=============================================

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 90
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالإِحْسَانِ وَإِيتَآءِ ذِي
الْقُرْبَي وَيَنْهَي عَنِ الْفَحْشَآءِ وَالْمُنكَرِ وَالْبَغْيِ
يَعِظُكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***90. “Verily, Allah enjoins justice and kindness (to others) and
giving (the right of) the kindred, and forbids lewdness, and evil and
insolence; He admonishes you so that you might remember.”***

This verse provides a thorough explanation and the most comprehensive
picture of the Islamic teachings in the spheres of social problems, the
humanitarian issues, and the ethical matters. At first, the Qur’an
implies that Allah commands all to involve themselves in justice and to
be generous and forgiving with regard to one’s family members and those
who are around them.

The verse says:

***“Verily, Allah enjoins justice and kindness (to others) and giving
(the right of) the kindred…”***

Justice is that universal law around the axis of which the totality of
the system of creation runs. In the true sense of the word, it implies
that everything takes its own proper place. Therefore, whatever
deviation, excess and defect, extremism to the right or left, and
violation of other people’s rights run contrary to the principle of
justice.

However, as justice, despite all its splendour, power, and its deep
impact is not workable in times of crises and in exceptional
circumstances, the Qur’an brings the command of kindness with regard to
generosity and forgiveness immediately next to it.

In a tradition, Ali (as) says:

*“Justice is achieved once you provide people with their due rights, and
kindness is applied when you do them a favour.”* [^1]

After completing these three positive principles, the Qur’an refers to
three negative principles which the people must be dissuaded from. It
says:

***“…and forbids lewdness, and evil and insolence…”***

‘Lewdness’ alludes to latent and secret sins, /munkar/ (abominable acts)
refers to overt and open sinful acts, and /baqy/ (insolence) refers to
whatever violation of one’s own rights, and oppression and
self-admiration with regards to others.

At the end of the verse, to re-emphasize once again the above six
principles, the Qur’an says:

***“…He admonishes you so that you might remember.”***

The revival and revitalization of the three principles of: justice,
generosity and provision of the due rights of one’s next of kinds, as
well as campaigning against the three-fold deviations of lewdness,
forbidden matters, and oppression, at the world level, provide
sufficient grounds for creating a well-developed kind of world quiet and
devoid of all calamities and corruption.

Once we find the famous Companion, Ibn-i-Mas‘ūd, has been quoted as
saying:

*“This verse is the most comprehensive of all the Qur’anic verses
regarding the good and the evil,” it is not to be regarded as an
exaggeration.*

### Explanations

This verse is the universal investiture charter of Islam and the bill of
rights which Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) used to recite in his sermons
during the Friday Prayer rituals; and according to Tafsir-us-Safi:

*Were there only this single verse to be found in the Qur’an we had
sufficient grounds to declare that the Qur’an is explanatory Book for
everything. The commandments as well as the forbidden matters of this
verse have been included in all religions and have never been
abrogated.*

Walid-Ibn-Muqayrah was so attracted and magnetized by this verse that he
declared: The sweetness, beauty, and the content of this verse is such
that it can not be regarded as an expression uttered by any human being.

Othman Ibn Maz‘ūn says:

*“Upon hearing this verse, Islam exerted such a deep impact on me that I
embraced it whole-heartedly.”*

‘Justice’ /‘adl/, refers to the cases where the concerning equalization
process is comprehended with insight, while /‘idl/ signifies that case
during which its equalization process is perceived through the senses.

The concept of /‘adl/ (justice) indicates ‘equality which exists in
parts’, while /’ihsan/ (kindness or ‘generosity’) refers to
multiplication or ‘increase’ in the amount of reward.

The Arabic term /‘adl/ also implies distancing oneself from both excess
and defect with regard to creeds as well as to the personal behavior and
the social ones. Thus, the recommendation of this verse encompasses both
the individuals as well as governments.

Justice, in the realm of creation, is the secret of its resistance,
while in the realm of religious affairs it crowns itself on top of all
the prophets’ mission.

The Arabic term /’ihsan/ (benevolence) refers to a blessed word which
includes financial, mental, cultural, and emotional services rendered
generously. The Qur’anic term /fahša’/ (lewdness) refers to a sin which
is a capital one and is coupled with a scandal.

The term /munkar/ ‘forbidden’ signifies that act which is rejected by
reason, runs contrary to inherent human nature and is refused by
religious laws.

According to ‘Tafsir-Fi-Zalal’, once the despotic rulers, introducing
corrupt procedures of propaganda, seek to present sinful acts as
insignificant in the eyes of the people thus make people insensitive
regarding sins, the ultimate criterion for differentiating ‘right’ from
‘wrong’ are religious laws.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 91
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْفُوا بِعَهْدِ اللَّهِ إِذَا عَاهَدتُّمْ وَلاَ تَنقُضُوا
الأَيْمَانَ بَعْدَ تَوْكِيدِهَا وَقَدْ جَعَلْتُمُ اللَّهَ عَلَيْكُمْ
كَفِيلاً إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَاتَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***91. “And fulfill you the covenant of Allah, when you make covenant,
and do not break the oaths after making them fast, for you have
appointed Allah over you a surety. Verily, Allah knows what you do.”***

In Islamic quotations that the term /‘ahd/ (covenant), mentioned in the
verse, has been regarded as the covenant of people made with the Divine
leaders.

If people stick to their pledges faithfully, Allah will also fulfill the
promises which He has made, as the Qur’an says:

***“…fulfill My covenant and I shall fulfill your covenant…”***[^2]

In those days of the advent of Islam when the population of the Muslims
was scanty and they had numerous enemies, and there was a strong
possibility that because of this very fact, some believers might break
their pledges which they had made with the Prophet (S) thus backing him
down and withholding their support for him, the verse was thus revealed
and they were, hence, warned about the dire consequences of their
behavior.

They were told that the strength of their oaths was the proof of their
faith.

Thus, the Qur’an has dealt with another one of the most important
teachings of Islam in this verse, when it says:

***“And fulfill you the covenant of Allah, when you make covenant, and
do not break the oaths after making them fast…”***

You have sworn in the name of Allah and you have designated Allah as
your surety and sponsor for your oath, it is because He is aware of all
your acts.

The verse continues saying:

***“…for you have appointed Allah over you a surety. Verily, Allah knows
what you do.”***

The issue of /’aym an/, the plural of /yamin/ meaning oath, which is
mentioned in the above holy verse, has got a comprehensive meaning which
includes, both the pledges made by man with Allah as well as those oaths
which he makes in the name of Allah with the people.

In other words, every kind of commitment which is made under the name of
Allah and by swearing His name, is included in this statement.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 92
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَكُونُوا كَالَّتِي نَقَضَتْ غَزْلَهَا مِن بَعْدِ قُوَّةٍ
أَنكَاثاً تَتَّخِذُونَ أَيْمَانَكُمْ دَخَلاً بَيْنَكُمْ أَن تَكُونَ
اُمَّةٌ هِيَ أَرْبَي مِنْ اُمَّةٍ إِنَّما يَبْلُوكُمُ اللَّهُ بِهِ
وَلَيُبَيّـِنَنَّ لَكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ مَا كُنتُمْ فِيهِ
تَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***92. “And do not be like the woman who unravels her yarn,
disintegrating it into pieces after having spun it tightly, by taking
your oaths to be means of deceit between you, (imagining that)*** ***one
group is more numerous than (another) group. Verily Allah only puts you
on trial thereby and He will most certainly make clear to you on the Day
of Resurrection that wherein you differed.”***

As the issue of keeping to ones words and pledges is one of the main
backbones of the perseverance of any society, the Qur’an, in this verse,
pursues the discussion concerning the subject in question with a tone of
voice coupled with some kind of blame and scorn, saying:

***“And do not be like the woman who unravels her yarn, disintegrating
it into pieces after having spun it tightly…”***

The allusion here refers to a woman from the Quraysh tribe called
‘Ra’itih’ during the age of Ignorance, who used to weave the wool and
the yarn which she had at her disposal along with her woman slaves. She
would then order all to be disintegrated into pieces after having been
spun. It was for this reason that she was known as the ‘stupid woman’,
among the Arabs.

Then, the Qur’an adds implying that you use your oath and pledges as a
means of deceit and corruption, imagining one group exceeds another one
in number, thus using the increase in number of the enemies as a pretext
for breaking pledges of support which you had with the Prophet (S).

The verse says:

***“…by taking your oaths to be means of deceit between you, (imagining
that) one group is more numerous than (another) group…”***

Beware you! That Allah is thus putting you in a trial situation in this
way, and, anyway, Allah will reveal to you the consequences of such a
trial in the Day of Resurrection, unveiling the secrets in the bottom of
all people’s hearts, and hence, everyone will reap what he has sown.

The verse says:

***“…Verily Allah only puts you on trial thereby and He will most
certainly make clear to you on the Day of Resurrection that wherein you
differed.”***

There has been cited in Tafsir-i-Furqan that: Hadrat-i-Fatimah Zahra
(as) in her sermon gave in Medina Mosque against her contemporary
rulers, recited this verse, indicating that they resembled that woman
who disintegrated what she had spun for their breaking of pledges which
they had kept with Ali-Ibn-i-’Abi Talib (as) at Ghadir Khumm.

The allegories, parables, and the proverbs of the Qur’an are such that
they hold their natural entity, their freshness, and transparency
everywhere and at all times, and from the primary school kid upward as
far as the philosophers of the world will quench their thirst by it.

One of the means for experiments is keeping to one’s commitments, and
the recall of the resurrection and the dooms day are the factors which
lead one to be virtuous and pay attention to whatever he has pledged.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 93
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ شَآءَ اللَّهُ لَجَعَلَكُمْ اُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً وَلَكِن يُضِلُّ
مَن يَشَآءُ وَيَهْدِي مَن يَشَآءُ وَلَتُسْاَلُنَّ عَمَّا كُنتُم
تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***93. “And if Allah had willed, He would have made you (all) one
nation; but He leaves straying whom He pleases, and He guides whom He
pleases; and you will definitely be questioned of what you used to
do.”***

Allah leads all people inherently. However, the people, based on their
authority and will, are mainly divided into two categories: The ones who
select the wrong path contrary to their inherent nature and intellect
and are not repenting.

Allah leaves such people to themselves. However, another category select
what is inherently embedded of goodness in their nature. Allah then
assists them and leads them. Therefore, what is meant through leading
and misleading by Allah comes a stage after the man’s selection.

For instance, a teacher intends, from the first day of his teaching, to
cover all students in his instruction, though some struggle to
understand to whom the teacher also allocates extra time for teaching,
while the mischievous child is often left to himself by the teacher.

Incidentally, if the issue of leading man and of his being misled were
not voluntary matters, Allah would not proclaim:

***“You will definitely be questioned”.***

Therefore, Allah’s question in this connection is a sign of our free
will, for the man under compulsion, would not be held responsible.

Anyway, Allah is free in imposing obligations on people, though His way
of treatment and programs only include leaving people free.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 94
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَتَّخِذُوا أَيْمَانَكُمْ دَخَلاً بَيْنَكُمْ فَتَزِلَّ قَدَمٌ
بَعْدَ ثُبُوتِهَا وَتَذُوقُوا السُّوءَ بِمَا صَدَدتُّمْ عَن سَبِيلِ
اللَّهِ وَلَكُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***94. “And do not make your oaths a means of deceit among you, lest any
foot might slip after its stability and you should taste evil for that
you hindered (people) from the path of Allah, and for you there will be
a great torment.”***

According to Raqib, the Qur’anic term /sadadtum/ signifies both ‘being
kept away from’ and ‘keeping others away’, and the Arabic word /daxal/
equates in rhyming and meaning as /daqal/ which means ‘deceit’.

A sinful act certainly leads to other sins, paving the way for them.
Breaking of one’s words paves the ground for evil ending which itself
would make preparation for being kept away and keeping others away from
the path of Allah.

Anyway, to stress the importance of keeping one’s words and of standing
up to performing one’s pledges, which are important in social stability,
He declares:

***“And do not make your oaths a means of deceit among you…”***

The reason of it is that there are two main disadvantages attached to
it: Firstly, it causes your firm steps in Faith to be shaky, for once
you pledge to do something, and make an oath, while you do not intend to
keep to it, and you repeat such a cycle, people’s confidence will be
eroded and some believers may become weak in their faith.

Such circumstances lead them to believe that they have stood on firm
grounds at first but they have found the grounds slippery afterwards.

Another disadvantage stated is that you will feel the dire consequences
of such an act, which is hindering people from the path of Allah, in
this world while the Great Divine Chastisement awaits you in the
Hereafter.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…lest any foot might slip after its stability and you should taste
evil for that you hindered (people) from the path of Allah…”***

In fact, breaking of one’s promises and violation of swearing for
pledges, on the one hand, would lead people to be pessimistic and would
cause people to abhor the way of the truth.

It will also disintegrate the united front of the people and would lead
to the loss of confidence among them as far as making people lose their
interest in embracing Islam and in case they have made a commitment with
you, they would not feel obligated or obliged to fulfill their promise,
which would in turn lead to numerous complications, defeat and failures
in the world.

On the other hand, it would bring forth the Divine punishment for you in
the Hereafter.

The verse concludes:

***“…and for you there will be a great torment.”***

Incidentally, Hadrat Imam Baqir (as) and Hadrat Imam Sadiq (as) have
been quoted in the following commentaries as saying:

*“This noble verse is about the ‘mastership’ of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen (as),
and allegiance with him, and when it was revealed, the Prophet (S)
addressing the people, declared: “Convey your greetings to Ali (as) as
the leader of the believers.”*[^3]

### The Philosophy of Respect for Pledges

We know that the most important capital of a society is the reciprocal
confidence of the individuals with respect to one another.

Principally, what causes firm coherence among the members of a society,
who are in a disintegrated and separate group of individuals, thus
making them into coherent unity, is this same mutual confidence which
backs up and supports the harmonious activities and cooperation at a
broader level in the society.

Pledging, committing and swearing all stress upon the preservation of
this solidarity and mutual confidence. However, the day when promises
are broken one after another, there will be nothing left out of such
public confidence which is a great investment by itself, and the
seemingly-integrated society will be disintegrated into individual units
which lacks power.

It is for this reason that we find repeated and wide-spread talk of
keeping of one’s promises in the Qur’an as well as in traditions of
Islam, the breaking up of which is considered as once of the capital
sins.

Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) has made allusions in his command to
‘Malik-i-’Ashtar’ as to the importance of such issue in Islam and during
‘the Age of Ignorance’, regarding it as one of the prime importance and
the most general issues, emphasizing that even the pagans had been aware
of its significance, sticking to it for they had found out about the
painful consequences of breaking of promises. [^4]

We have it in the Islamic War Commandments that when even one ordinary
soldier gives respite of security to one or a group of the enemy army it
must be observed by all Muslims.

Historians and commentators are of the opinion that among reasons which
caused groups of people to embrace the Great Divine way, was the
Muslims’ keeping to their promises and having regards for their oaths.

This went as far as we read in quotations from Salman-i-Farsi (R.A.) who
said:

*“The extermination of this nation might be only brought about because
of their breach of treaties.”*[^5]

That is, as keeping of one’s promise will bring about power, splendor
and progress, breaking of one’s promises will also result in his
weakness, inability and his self-annihilation.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 95
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَشْتَرُوا بِعَهْدِ اللَّهِ ثَمَناً قَلِيلاً إِنَّمَا عِندَ
اللَّهِ هُوَ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***95. “And do not sell Allah’s covenant for a meagre price; for verily
that which is with Allah is better for you, if you only know.”***

### The Occasion of the Revelation

As for the occasion of the revelation of this noble verse and the two
consecutive verses, it has been reported that: a man from among the
inhabitants of ‘Hadar-Maut’ came up to the Prophet (S) and said:

*O’ Messenger of Allah! I have got a neighbour called ’Imra’-ul-Qays who
has usurped part of my land.*

Summoning ’Imra’-ul-Qays, the Prophet (S) questioned him about the
subject and made him go through the process of oath taking when he
denied everything.

As soon as he stood up to deliver his oath, the Prophet (S), respiting
him, reminded him of thinking about the oath at first and then swearing.
The two then returned and it was then that the verse was revealed.

He warned them against the dire consequences of the wrong and false
taking of oaths. When the Prophet (S) recited these two verses for them,
’Imra’-ul-Qays said:

*“It is true. I have usurped part of his land though I do not know the
exact scale of usurpation. Such being the case, he can have it back, and
besides that he may take the equal of it for the use I have made during
the period of usurpation.*

*It was at this time that verse 97 was revealed and gave good tidings of
/hay at-i-tayyibah/ (good life) for those whose good acts are coupled
with their faith.”*

Following the previous verses in connection with the nasty and evil act
of breaking one’s promise and of lying by oath, this verse stresses the
same subject.

The only difference being that the motive for breaking promise and
swearing falsely was being threatened as against the majority in terms
of numerical matters, while, in here, the issue is the motive of
insignificant and scanty material benefits.

Therefore, the Holy Qur’an implies that you should not exchange Allah’s
covenant for an insignificant price; that is, whatever of pricing you
name is unmatched and insignificant in comparison with the worth of one
moment in fulfilling the pledges which you have made with Allah even if
all the world were to be given to you.

The verse says:

***“And do not sell Allah’s covenant for a meagre price…”***

To offer further proofs, the Qur’an adds implying that whatever is with
Allah, is best for you if you know, that is, if you are aware of the
difference between what is right and what is wrong.

The verse continues saying:

***“…for verily that which is with Allah is better for you, if you only
know.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 96
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عِندَكُمْ يَنفَدُ وَمَا عِندَ اللَّهِ بَاقٍ وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّ
الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا أَجْرَهُم بِاَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُو يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***96. “What is with you comes to an end, and what is with Allah will
endure, and certainly We will pay those who were (patiently) steadfast a
recompense in proportion to the best they used to do.”***

In this noble verse, the Qur’an explains the reason for the superiority
as such: what is with you is perishable, but what is with Allah is
everlasting and enduring; and those who keep their perseverance would be
rewarded with the best of what they did.

The Qur’an offers the criterion for the excellence in this verse,
saying: What is with you is ultimately mortal and would perish, whereas
what is with Allah will be everlasting and eternal.

Therefore, come and put to use all your capital for Allah and in His
path and for the sake of attaining His consent so that it becomes an
example and a symbol of ‘***with Allah***’ and consonant with.

‘***Whatever is with Allah will last***’.

The verse says:

***“What is with you comes to an end, and what is with Allah will
endure…”***

Then the holy verse implies that Allah shall reward them as the best of
their acts, all those who keep their patience and resistance in the
process of realization of His commandments in the face of oaths and
promises.

The verse says:

***“…and certainly We will pay those who were (patiently) steadfast a
recompense in proportion to the best they used to do.”***

The reason why the term ‘best’ is used in this connection, is that all
of a person’s good deeds are not identical; some are good; some others
are better, nevertheless Allah places all as the best and rewards them
accordingly which case is the utmost kind of generosity on His part.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 97
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحاً مِن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ اُنثَي وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيّـِبَةً وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُم
بِاَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***97. “Whoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female, and is a
believer, We shall certainly give him to live a goodly pure life and,
definitely, We will pay them a recompense in proportion to the reward
for the best of what they used to do.”***

‘A goodly pure life’ is that a person has a restful heart, and a
faithful spirit. Such a believer whose insight is furnished by the light
of Allah, he will be in composed by the prayers of the angels, and he
will receive the favours of Allah. The people of this kind will have
neither fear nor grieve.

This verse states, as a general rule, that the result of the righteous
deeds of every believer and in any form that they be performed will be
rewarded with the best scale of good deeds.

The verse says:

***“Whoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female, and is a
believer, We shall certainly give him to live a goodly pure life and,
definitely, We will pay them a recompense in proportion to the reward
for the best of what they used to do.”***

Thus, the criterion here is ‘faith’ and the righteous acts emerged from
it, and, therefore, there is no other condition for it from any point of
view: neither from the point of race, gender, nor from the point of
position, and social rank.

The Qur’anic phrase /hay at-i-tayyibah/ meaning ‘a goodly pure life’
signifies a ‘clean’ life from every point of view; clean from all
pollutions, cruelties, treasons, hostilities, capturing meanness and all
sorts of anxieties including all of those things which turn the
wholesome length of one’s life into a disagreeable one.

In the end, one infers from this verse that a man without faith and
without good deeds is just regarded as dead.

***“…and We shall certainly give him to live a goodly pure life…”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 98
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْءَانَ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
الرَّجِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***98. “So when you recite the Qur’an, seek refuge with Allah from (the
vices of) the Satan, the accursed.”***

This noble verse explains the ways for making use of the Glorious Qur’an
and that how it ought to be recited, for the fact that the Qur’an has
got a rich content is not adequate by itself; the obstacles must also be
removed from our entire existence, as well as form the thought and
environment of our thought and entity, if we are to discover the true
meaning of that rich content.

Therefore, at first it says:

***“So when you recite the Qur’an, seek refuge with Allah from (the
vices of) the Satan, the accursed.”***

Certainly, the aim is not merely to recite the sentence “*I* *refuge
with Allah from (the vices of) the Satan, the accursed*”, but one must
turn the term ‘mentioning’ into ‘thinking’ so that this thinking becomes
a pre-requisite for the realization of that state in the self and soul
within which man turns to Allah and distances himself from the whims and
violent passions which hinder man’s correct understanding, thus seeking
refuge with Allah at the time of reciting every single verse.

This makes it possible for us to be kept away from the satanical
temptations which stand between us and Allah’s enlivening words. Unless
such a state of mind is not achieved, one cannot have a true
understanding of the facts of the Holy Qur’an.

A Persian poem says:

*The beauty of our sweetheart is not veiled and covered all over; dust
off yourself so as you may be able to see it. Unless one’s self-hood is
not kept intact from all of what is forbidden; one’s heart will not be
turned into a mirror for reflecting the Divine rays of light.*

### Explanations

Every good deed might also be accompanied by certain defects, as is the
case with ‘glory’ the counter-acting agent of which might be ‘pride’;
and ‘serving people’ the counter-acting of which might be indebtedness.

The reciting of the Qur’an may also have certain counter-acting factors
attached to it, such as exposing of oneself and exhibitionism, the
acquisition of wealth, negative competitions, deceiving people, wrong
understanding, and interpreting it according to one’s own criterion
which serves one’s own purpose against all of which one must safe-guard
himself by seeking refuge with Allah.

Imam Sadiq (as) has remarked:

*“The recitation of the Qur’an requires three pre-conditions to be
fulfilled: a humble heart, a void body, a vacant situation, which refers
to a state of mind in which there is no prejudice involved.”*[^6]

Were the Qur’an to be accompanied by an interpretation, the views of the
Immaculate Imams (as), and were it to be presented to the tender minds,
it would serve as a means of guidance and one’s development, and
increasing of one’s faith and knowledge.

As the Qur’an proclaims:

***“(O’ Prophet!) And when you recite the Qur’an, We place between you
and those who do not believe in the Hereafter a hidden barrier.”***[^7]

The Islamic quotations indicate that the blessed Prophet (S) at time of
reciting the Qur’an, used to recite the sentence:

“*I seek refuge with Allah from (the vices of) the Satan, the
accursed.*” [^8]

At the end, seeking refuge with Allah implies that a lower-ranking
person seeks refuge with a person of higher echelon to refuge him and to
defend him against the enemy. In the meantime, this process is coupled
with expression of humbleness, that is, one must seek refuge with Allah
while reciting the Qur’an from the satanic temptations so that one can
remain immune from all errors.

The process of seeking refuge in Allah is a recommended act while one is
reciting the Qur’an, whether be it at the prayer times or at other
times.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 99
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَي الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَلَي
رَبّـِهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***99. “Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and
rely on their Lord.”***

One’s faith serves as a citadel which protects man from all kinds of
vulnerabilities. Therefore, the Satan has no control over those who
believe in Allah and trust Him. That is, he cannot compel them to be
pagans and to commit sins.

The verse says:

***“Verily, there is no authority for him over those who believe and
rely on their Lord.”***

### Traditions

1. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“Rely on Allah, Glory be to Him, since He has guaranteed the
sufficiency of those who rely (on Him).”*

2. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“He who trusts in Allah, He will suffice him and make him
independent.”*[^9]

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 100
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا سُلْطَانُهُ عَلَي الَّذِينَ يَتَوَلَّوْنَهُ وَالَّذِينَ هُم
بِهِ مُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***100. “His authority is only over those who befriend him, (following
him), and those who associate others with Him.”***

Real monotheists are insured. However, he who looks for other than Allah
can receive and is liable to receive wrong influences. Thus, in this
noble verse, the Qur’an declares that the Satan’s domination extends
over only all those who admire him and his leadership, and they have
selected him as to supervise and guide them.

The Satan also has a domineering role for those who have placed him as a
partner for Allah in obeying and in serving him, and those who consider
his commandments as a ‘must’ instead of the commandments of Allah.

The holy verse says:

***“His authority is only over those who befriend him, (following him),
and those who associate others with Him.”***

Thus, the Satanically domination over men is not a compulsory and an
unconscious matter. On the other hand, it is human beings who pave the
way for Satan’s entry into their realm of life.

[^1]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, sermon 231; and Mizan-al-Hikmah, p. 3496

[^2]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 40

[^3]: The commentaries: Furqan, Burhan, Majma‘-ul-Bayan and
Atyab-ul-Bayan

[^4]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, letter No. 53

[^5]: See Majma‘-ul-Bayan, under the verse in question

[^6]: Tafsir-i-Furqan

[^7]: Surah Al-’Isra’, No. 17, verse 45

[^8]: Tafsir-i-Kanz-ud-Daqa’iq

[^9]: Mu‘jam Qurar, vol. 3, p. 3167


