Section 16: Abraham Praised – His Faith Made an Ideal
=====================================================

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 120
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ كَانَ اُمَّةً قَانِتاً لِلَّهِ حَنِيفاً وَلَمْ يَكُ
مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***120. “Verily, Abraham was a nation (by himself) obedient to Allah,
upright, and he was not of the polytheists,”***

Allah has taken ‘Ibrahim to be an entire nation by himself in this holy
verse and each and every commentator has presented his own version and
interpretation for this sentence, among them we may select the
following:

As ‘Ibrahim belonged to a school to which no one else belonged,
therefore, he was an entire nation by himself[^1].

He possessed the good qualities and the perfection which one may expect
all the individuals of a nation to possess; that is, in him alone one
might find the good traits which might belong to each of the diverse
righteous individuals[^2].

The Arabic term /’ummat/ sometimes signifies the instructor of the good;
thus it signifies that he was the instructor of all the good things[^3].

The Arabic term /’ummat/ sometimes means, ‘leader’ and hence, it targets
the leading figure, ‘the Imam’ of all the worshippers of Allah[^4].

The personality and the spectrum of his unique existence measured up to
the scope of a nation, as he was one of the pillars of the strength of
the whole nation[^5].

As he (as) was knowledgeable, he would lead an entire nation, as he is
required to do so.

As he initiated a movement, he did what an entire nation was supposed to
do, without having any companions, he rose alone and all by himself.

It is certain that the number and the quantity is not so important;
rather it is the quality which counts and the initiation of the movement
is what matters.

Therefore, this holy verse deals with a perfect example of a thankful
servant of Allah, i.e. ‘Ibr ahim’ who is the champion of monotheism.
This is particularly important for the Muslims, in general, and for the
Arabs, in particular, and it is also inspiring for them who regard him
to be their leader and their earliest object of identification figure.

From among the outstanding characteristics of this great man, one may
cite four attributes in this verse:

At first, the Qur’an says:

***“Verily Abraham was a nation (by himself)…”***

Certainly, ‘Ibrahim was ‘a nation’, a great leader, a nation-building
man; and in those days when no one spoke of monotheism, he was the
champion of monotheism.

Another attribute of ‘Ibrahim was that he was the obedient servant of
Allah.

***“…obedient to Allah…”***

He was constantly following the ‘straight path of Allah’ and the ‘path
of the truth’:

***“…Upright…”***

He was never in the path of the polytheists, and his entire existence
and all points of his heart were filled only with the light of Allah.

***“…and he was not of the polytheists,”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verses 121 - 122
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَاكِراً لاَنْعُمِهِ اجْتَبَاهُ وَهَدَاهُ إِلَي صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَءَاتَيْنَاهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَإِنَّهُ فِي الاَخِرَةِ لَمِنَ
الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***121. “(He was) thankful for His blessings; He selected him and He
guided him to a straight way.”***  
***122. “And We gave him good in this world, and in the Hereafter he
will definitely be among the righteous.”***

Allah has cited five types of perfection for ‘Ibrahim in these verses,
and then He offers him five favours and positions:

He was a ‘nation’.

He was obedient (to the Lord).

He was not among the polytheists.

He was ‘upright’ and was clear of all involvements in deviation matters.

He was grateful.

As for the five kinds of grace and positions which Allah had accorded
him, they were as follows:

Allah selected ‘Ibrahim for His prophetic mission and for the conveying
of His message.

***“(He was) thankful for His blessings; He selected Him…”***

Allah led him to the right path and protected him from all types of
misdemeanor and deviation.

***“…and He guided him to a straight way.”***

***“And We gave him good in this world…”***

which in its broadest sense signifies all of what is good, including a
wide range of meaning in connection with the prophetic mission as far as
the ‘House of Ka‘bah and a long-lasting life, alongside the acceptance
of his call by Allah, enormous wealth, decent sons, as well as a host of
other blessings.

***“…and in the Hereafter he will definitely be among the righteous.”***

The Prophet of Islam (S) was ordered to follow his way of life.

The Arabic term /’ijtaba/ is derived from /jababah/, which signifies
‘collecting’ and ‘assembling’. ‘Allah’s collecting’ means that Allah
assembles individuals from a diversified range of different approaches,
protecting and purifying them for Himself.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 123
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَيْكَ أَنِ اتَّبِعْ مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفاً
وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***123. “So We revealed to you that you follow the creed of Abraham, the
upright one, and he was not of the polytheists.”***

Certainly the methods and the conditions of the prophets have not been
identical, yet the path of the prophets has been similar and they were
commissioned to follow the foregoing prophets and to preach monotheism.

The frequent praising and eulogizing with the same interpretations
alongside verses aligned with one another, reflect the utmost sincerity
and the position of ‘Ibrahim.

Thus, in this last verse, the latest privilege which was accorded to
‘Ibrahim by Allah because of those prominent attributes, was the fact
that his school was not only to be set up and flourishing during his own
time but also it was destined to be for people at all times, especially
for the nation of Islam as an inspiring school, as the Qur’an says:

***“So We revealed to you that you follow the creed of Abraham, the
upright one…”***

In this noble verse, He again reemphasizes that:

‘Ibrahim was not from among the polytheists.

***“…and he was not of the polytheists.”***

This refutation sentence is meant mostly for the ‘Quraysh polytheists’
who used to trace back their ancestral line to ‘Ibrahim despite their
paganism and worshipping of the idols.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 124
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا جُعِلَ السَّبْتُ عَلَي الَّذِينَ اخْتَلَفُوا فِيهِ وَإِنَّ
رَبَّكَ لَيَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***124. “The Sabbath was appointed only for those who differed about it,
and verily your Lord definitely will judge between them on the Day of
Judgment in what they used to differ about.”***

The Jews were repeatedly punished for their obstinacy and hostility by
Allah, one of which was proclaimed in verse 118 of this Surah, stating:

***“And for those who were Jews, We prohibited what We have already
related to you…”***

The designation of the Sabbath as a holiday, which is explained in this
verse, is also another punishment, in which case, certainly, some groups
have expressed their appreciation and others have been ungrateful,
resorting to dirty tricks, for which they got entangled to harsh cases
of punishment.

The verse says:

***“The Sabbath was appointed only for those who differed about it…”***

Considering the previous verse, the meaning of this verse might be: O’
Prophet! Follow the path of the nation of ‘Ibrahim; holidays on the
Sabbath were designated as exclusive to the Jews, which was a type of
punishment for them. Nonetheless, the Jews even differed on this day
which was selected by themselves.

Therefore, at the end of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“…and verily your Lord definitely will judge between them on the Day
of Judgment in what they used to differ about.”***

However, there are some Islamic traditions which denote Friday is a
great day for Muslims, and it is also a festival and holiday for them.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 125
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْعُ إِلَي سَبِيلِ رَبّـِكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ الْحَسَنَةِ
وَجَادِلْهُم بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَن
ضَلَّ عَن سَبِيلِهِ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***125. “(O’ Prophet!) Call (mankind) to the path of your Lord with
wisdom and good admonition, and dispute with them in the better way.
Verily your Lord knows better of him who has gone astray from His path,
and He knows best those who are guided.”***

There are ten interesting ethical decrees issued from this verse to the
end of the Surah for social association with others.

This holy verse provides a comprehensive order for all those responsible
instructors, professors as well as religious scholars, which calls them
to be well-equipped with the various methods to be successful when
confronting their different audiences, for one can not invite all those
addressed with a single method.

Every body has got a delicate way which must be addressed with a certain
capacity through the medium of which he must be communicated with.

The elect ones, who require exclusive ways of handling and reasoning,
must be dealt with in their own way, while the common folks should be
addressed with some acceptable exhortations. The dissidents should also
be addressed with more convenient ways of disputations.

A good advice is the one that the preacher acts and practices according
to what he says, and acceptable disputations are those ones in which
wrong provocation of feelings and insulting do not permeate:

Therefore, the first duty of the prophets is their ‘Calling’.

***“(O’ Prophet!) call (mankind)…”***

### All Callings Must Be Divinely-Orientated

***“…to the path of your Lord…”***

Every single invitation has got a hierarchy. (Wisdom, preaching, and
acceptable disputation, in which case wisdom provides the rational
method and preaching paves the emotional way.)

***“…with wisdom and good admonition…”***

Preaching must be done in a friendly manner; however, disputation must
be carried out in a friendlier manner, that is, it must be friendly both
in its content and form as well as in its methods of expression.

***“…and dispute with them in the better way…”***

The exposition of the impacts and blessings of what is good, as well as
the statement of the pathological effects and dangers of whatever is
evil, are included as methods of the calling. (Wisdom signifies being
acquainted with the good and the evil of matters by the means of
knowledge and reasoning.)

You are liable to perform your duties and you are not responsible for
the consequences of whatever happens.

Wisdom and demonstration are always decent means for convincing other
people. Nevertheless, preaching and disputation might be done either
with the good method or with the bad one. (The terms ‘good’ and ‘better’
are not used in case of wisdom.)

Islam offers its followers both mental nourishment (with wisdom), and
‘spiritual enrichment’ (good admonition) while it entertains logical
methods when encountering the opponents.

‘Virtue’, in its broadest sense, including facing the opponents, means
when one is facing the enemy he must observe the principles of the
Islamic ethics.

***“…and dispute with them in the better way…”***

Generosity and goodness are the two basic methods in all campaigns if
shown at the right time and proper place.

In conclusion, these ten-fold duties and important ethical and rational
decrees can be employed as tactical principles in every campaign against
the opponents of Islam, and may be used as a general rule in whatever
kind of circumstances and under whatever conditions and times.

Were Muslims to implement such programs which are comprehensive, we
should probably witness the glory of Islam as widespread throughout the
world today, or at least in the main parts of it.

The verse concludes:

***“…Verily your Lord knows better of him who has gone astray from His
path, and He knows best those who are guided.”***

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 126
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِنْ عَاقَبْتُمْ فَعَاقِبُوا بِمِثْلِ مَا عُوقِبْتُم بِهِ وَلَئِن
صَبَرْتُمْ لَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لِلصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***126. “And if you punish then punish as you were punished with; but if
you are patient, decisively, it will be best for the patient ones.”***

Up till now, the issue in question dealt with the matter as to how one
must engage in a logical dialogue or an emotional or rational
disputation with the opponents.

Nonetheless, if the worst comes to worst and there is an entanglement
involved, and they take up arms and invade, the Holy Qur’an orders in
implication that If you are supposed to retaliate, your retaliation must
be with what you have suffered and not more than that.

However, if you do not lose patience and have a forgiving attitude, this
would be best for those who are patient.

The verse says:

***“And if you punish then punish as you were punished with; but if you
are patient, decisively, it will be best for the patient ones.”***

In some quotations, we have it that this verse was revealed during the
’Uhud Battle’ when the Prophet (S) witnessed the painful plight of the
martyrdom of his uncle Hamzat-ibn-Abdul-Muttalib, in which case, the
enemy was not content with killing him.

They tore up apart his chest and side with utmost atrocity, taking out
his liver or heart, and cut off his nose and ears, which made him (S)
quite upset.

Then he said:

*“O’ My Lord! You are worthy of praise and I take up my case to you and
you are my help and of assistance in whatever I notice.”*

According to the comments made in Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘,
Burhan, Safi etc, the Muslims, witnessing the scenario, declared:

*“If we get access to them, we shall amputate them all.”*

Nonetheless, in other commentaries like: ‘Ayyashi, Durr-ul-manthūr, and
other commentaries, this quotation has been attributed to the Prophet
(S) himself. At this moment the revelation of the above verse took
place, upon which occasion, the Prophet (S) declared:

*“O’ Lord! I shall be patient, I shall be patient.”*

This was, perhaps, the most painful moments in the life of the prophet,
he controlled his nerves once again, selecting the second way which
consisted of “forgiving.”

And as we note in the history of the conquest of Mecca, the day when the
Prophet (S) overcame those stone-hearted people, he declared a general
amnesty to them and kept to his words in the Battle of ’Uhud.

Truly speaking, if one wants to witness superior examples of manhood and
those of humane affections, he should try to put the story of ’Uhud
alongside that of the Conquest of Mecca and make a comparative study of
the two.

It is probable that no other nations in a conquering position, has ever
treated the conquered one which the Prophet (S) did after the Muslims
conquest of the pagans of Mecca considering the situation where
retaliation and hatred were the rule of the game within the fabrics of
the society and of the social order.

In such a situation, hatred and hostilities were passed down from one
generation to the next and a stop to the will to taking revenge was
considered as a great defect.

As a result of all this magnanimity in character, amnesty and
forgiveness, such a backwardly illiterate and obstinate nation was so
moved and then awakened where, according to the Qur’an, groups after
groups embraced Islam, the religion of Allah.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 127
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْبِرْ وَمَا صَبْرُكَ إِلاَّ بِاللَّهِ وَلاَ تَحْزَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ
وَلاَ تَكُ فِي ضَيْقٍ مّـِمَّا يَمْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***127. “And (O’ Prophet!) be you patient and your patience is not but
by (the assistant of) Allah, nor grieve over them and do not distress
yourself at what they devise.”***

Such an amnesty, forgiveness, and patience will only take effect
decisively when no returns are expected.

That is, they are all done for Allah’s sake, and, therefore, the Qur’an
adds:

***“And (O’ Prophet!) be you patient and your patience is not but by
(the assistant of) Allah…”***

Can man indeed resist when confronting all such heart-breaking
scenarios, which dominate him all over, without having the Divine
assistance and without benefiting from a spiritual motive while
entertaining within himself all the discomfort and pain and yet not lose
his patience? It is, of course, possible in case that all is done for
Allah and with the benefit of His succour.

Once all efforts in the domain of the propagation of faith and calling
towards Him in connection with forgiveness and perseverance did not take
effect, one should not yet feel depressed, losing patience with a far
outcry. On the contrary, the process of propagation must go on patiently
and in a state of calmness.

Therefore, towards the end of the holy verse, He declares:

***“…nor grieve over them and do not distress yourself at what they
devise.”***

Such a sorrow and grief are due to their lack of faith and can cause one
of the following two phenomena to occur: either it makes one depressed
for ever and altogether, or it may make one impatient and cry all the
time.

Therefore, to dissuade one from having grief and getting depressed or
feeling in distress has its origin in both cases; that is, once you are
calling towards Allah, you should neither be upset nor should you feel
hopeless.

Despite all the foregoing qualifications, the obstinate enemy might yet
not stop planning his conspiracies and might go on with his dangerous
strategies.

In such cases, the true strategy to be adopted is what the Qur’an
proclaims:

***“Do not distress yourself at what they devise.”***

No matter how well calculated and widespread such conspiracies might be
while being dangerous, you must not let yourself down and be driven out.

Do not imagine you are cornered and surrounded or entrenched, for your
support is Allah, in which case, you are able to counteract and nullify
all the conspiracies and undo them altogether by provoking the forces of
Faith, persistence, wisdom and insight.

Surah An-Nahl – Verse 128
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا وَالَّذِينَ هُم مُحْسِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***128. “Verily Allah is with those who keep from evil, and those who
are good-doers.”***

Allah is with those who lead a life of virtue. “Virtue” here signifies
the performance of one’s obligatory rituals and the distancing one-self
from all those which are prohibited by the religious laws.

Nonetheless, the Qur’anic term ‘virtue’, in all its dimensions and in
its broadest sense, includes in the sense of being of virtuous even when
one is confronting the opponents.

This means that even against one’s enemies, one must adopt the Islamic
ethics; treat with the prisoners and captives according to the rites of
Islam; do justice with those who are deviants and in a polite manner; to
abstain oneself from lying and falsely accusing of others.

Even in wartime situations and in battlefields, one must observe the
principles of wartime, instructions available in Islam and Islamic
criteria.

One must avoid attacking the defenseless ones; one must not engage in
violating the children and disabled old people; even the four-footed
animals must not be hurt, while fields of agriculture must not be
destroyed; water supply must not be cut off from the enemy and, in the
final analysis, virtue must be observed and principles of justice must
be applied to both the friends and enemies in general.

The verse says:

***“Verily Allah is with those who keep from evil…”***

As the Qur’an says in other verses, at times, one must return and show a
positive reaction in exchange for an evil act, by which one can make the
enemy shameful about what he has done. This procedure may turn the most
hostile of the enemies into kind friends.

Generosity and kindness can serve as the best techniques for conducting
a warfare campaign if achieved correctly, and the Islamic history
provides plenty of examples in this connection.

The conduct of the Prophet (S) with the pagans of Mecca after its
conquest, the way he dealt with Wahshi, the murderer of Hamzah; his
conduct with the prisoners of the Battle of Badr, his ways of dealing
with those Jews who hurt him in all kinds of way, as well as similar
treatments in the biographies of Ali (as) and other religious leader
reflect the methods included in the Islamic commandments with regard to
this.

Interestingly, we read in Nahj-ul-Balaqah, through the famous sermon of
‘Hammam’ who was a pious, devout, and intelligent man, asking
Amir-ul-Mu’mineen (as) for a comprehensive decree with regard to the
attributes of the devout people, the Imam confined himself to citing
only this verse, saying:

*Lead a life of virtue, and act in a decent way for Allah is with those
who are pious and act decently.*

Although this interrogator was such a truth-loving that was not fully
satisfied with this short answer and the Imam was necessarily required
to provide a more detailed account and offered the most comprehensive
speech concerning the attributes of the pious people, which exceeds a
hundred qualities, one may infer from the Imam’s first short answer that
this verse reflects, in fact, all the attributes of the pious people.

In conclusion, we know that the calling through wisdom, preaching, and
good disputation is no easy matter, for some are being obstinate and do
not accept the call, while others engage in conspiracies, and a third
group get involved in the counter activities, and, to achieve their
vicious goals they do not stop doing any thing short of false
accusations, ridiculing, threatening, fabricating rival factions,
economic embargo, wars, as well as all kinds of torture and hurt.

Thus, these two verses provide a kind of comfort, compassion and
guidelines which the blissful Prophet (S) had so as not to be obstructed
by any obstacles in his mission.

### Last Words and Remarks on Surah An-Nahl

As we pointed out from the beginning of the Surah, what stands
outstanding from among all the verses of the Surah is the explanation of
the various blessings, irrespective of the material and spiritual ones;
the apparent and the latent ones; and those which are individual and
social. The fact that the name of the Surah is selected as the ‘Surah of
blessings’ is for this very reason.

A careful study of the verses of the Surah indicates that approximately
forty blessings, including the great and the small ones, as well as the
spiritual and material ones, have been cited throughout the verses of
this Surah.

The objectives of this Surah have been: first, to provide instructions
concerning lessons on monotheism and the splendor of the Creator.
Secondly, to reinforce the love of the human beings with regard to the
Creator of such blessings and the provocation of their sense of
gratitude towards Him.

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Safi

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Mar aghi

[^3]: Tafsir-i-Tabari

[^4]: Tafsir-i-Forq an

[^5]: Tafsir-i-Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘ and Majma‘-ul-Bayan


