Surah ‘Isra’, Chapter 17
========================

**Surah ‘Isra’ or Surah Bani-’Israel (The Children of Israel), No. 17**

**(Revealed in Mecca)**

**111 verses in 12 sections**

The Content of Surah ‘Isra’
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

Surah ‘Isra’ contains 111 verses, and it is widely known to be a Meccan
Surah. However, some are of the opinion that verses 26, 32, 33, 57, and
58 of it were originally revealed in Medina.

This Surah has been named as ‘Subhan’ for its first word; it has also
been named Surah ‘Isra’ for the sake of referring to the adventure of
ascension of the Prophet (S), and has also been named ‘Surah Bani
‘Isra’il’ for recounting of the story of Bani-Israel.

As in the case of other ‘Meccan Suras’, this Surah deals with such
issues as ‘monotheism’ ‘resurrection’ beneficial pieces of advice, and
struggle against all sorts of paganism, injustice and deviation,
traditions and rules, whether individual and social in historical
perspective, the story of Adam and ’Iblis, the Prophet of Islam (S) and
his position in Mecca.

The main point in question in this Holy Surah is the ‘Ascension of the
Messenger (S)’.

The Surah starts with ‘Glorification of Allah’ and ends up with Praising
and worshipping Him.

The Virtues of the Recitation of the Surah
------------------------------------------

There are numerous rewards mentioned in various Islamic quotations for
those who recite or read this Surah among which one may name the
quotation from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*“Whoever reads Surah Bani Israel on each night preceding Fridays will
unequivocally grasp the presence of Hadrat-i-Qa’im (as), before his
death and will be included among his companions.”*

We have reiterated over and again that such rewards and gains are not to
be attained merely just by reading; on the contrary, they will be
brought about when the recitation is coupled with and backed up by
meditation, reflection and, consequently, by the obtaining of clues for
practical purposes.


