Section 1: The Apostle Muhammad’s Visit
=======================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 1
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي أَسْرَي بِعَبْدِهِ لَيْلاً مِنَ الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ إِلَي الْمَسْجِدِ الاَقْصَا الَّذِي بَارَكْنَا حَوْلَهُ
لِنُرِيَهُ مِنْ ءَايَاتِنَآ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Glory be to Him Who took his servant by night from Masjid-ul-Har
am to Masjid-ul-’Aqsa the precincts of which We have blessed that We
show him (some) of Our signs. Verily, He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.”***

The ascension of the Prophet (S) to Heavens is the most sacred of the
journeys throughout history.

The first verse of this Surah discusses the issue of the journey by
night of the Prophet (S) from Masjid-ul-Haram (The Sacred Mosque) to
Masjid-ul-’Aqsa (Bayt-ul-Muqaddas) which has been a precursor for
/Mi‘raj/, the most sacred trip.

This trip took place within one night and for a short time. Such a trip
could have never been in the least possible given the conditions of the
time and through ordinary means which were available in those days, in
which case, the miraculous and extraordinary nature of it was obvious.

At first, the verse says:

***“Glory be to Him Who took his servant by night from Masjid-ul-Har am
to Masjid-ul-’Aqsa the precincts of which We have blessed…”***

By using the phrase /masjidul’Aqsa/ here meant Bayt-ul-Muqaddas which is
the farthest Mosque, for, at that time, no other mosque existed farther
than that. We had blessed its entire surroundings with material,
spiritual, worldly, and religious blessings.

For, that was the place of worship of the highly-esteemed prophets as
well as the place for the descending of the revelation which was a
sacred point, with flowing streams surrounded by fully fruit-bearing
trees.

Nonetheless, it is with deepest regret that as a result of the crimes of
Israel and America as well as the entire over-oppressive enemies of
Islam and their betraying mercenaries, demolitions have been carried out
around that sacred place and deadly fire-arms cause thousands of crimes
everyday there.

Their beautiful landscapes, which are natural, are turned into
semi-burned ruins and heaps of corpses of oppressed human beings, who
are killed in cold blood, are to be found there everywhere.

The Holy Qur’an implies that Allah’s objective in this extraordinary
night trip was to expose to him His sings of power, and wonders of
creation.

His sight-seeing tour from Mecca to Masjid-ul-’Aqsa during a single
night, as well as his elevation to the skies and his witnessing of the
prophets and, finally, his eventual access to the Bayt-ul-Ma‘mūr, and
Sidrat-ul-Muntah a, as well as a host of other things are all the signs
of Allah’s Omnipotence.

The Prophet (S) had formerly acquired full knowledge of Allah’s
magnitude, yet this tour of the skies tended to widen the scope of his
observation as to those explicit signs which, in turn, enabled him
further to guide human beings.

The verse says:

***“…that We show him (some) of Our signs…”***

Definitely, it is widely known in the Islamic circle of scholars that
the Prophet (S), while in Mecca, was taken by the power of Allah on a
night from Masjid-ul-Har am to Masjid-ul-’Aqsa in Bayt-ul-Muqaddas from
where he ascended to the skies to note the signs of the magnitude of
Allah in the wide open spaces, and then he returned to Mecca on the same
night.

It is also widely believed among the Muslim scholars that he performed
such a sightseeing tour of the earth and the skies with both body and
soul coupled with each other.

We shall, Allah willing, discuss further the issue of “Mi‘raj” following
our discussion of Surah An-Najm.

In the end of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“…Verily, He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.”***

Allusion is here made to the fact that if Allah selected His prophet for
such a glorification, it was not undue, for his words and deeds were so
decent and deserving that such a mission was well in line with his
aptitude. The Almighty had thus seen and heard him and approved him for
such an assignment.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 2
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَءَاتَيْنَا مُوسَي الْكِتَابَ وَجَعَلْنَاهُ هُدًي لّـِبَني
إِسْرَآئِيلَ أَلاَّ تَتَّخِذُوا مِن دُونِي وَكِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***2. “And We gave Moses the Book, and made him a Guide for the Children
of Israel, (saying:) ‘Do not take other than Me a guardian’.”***

As the first verse of this Surah dealt with the grandeur of the Prophet
(S), and as such issues were rejected mainly by pagans and dissidents
basing their argument on the subject that how might it be possible for a
prophet to be selected from among us with so many distinctions, thus the
Qur’an alludes here to the call of Moses (as) and his Divine Book so as
to make it clear that such a prophetic mission is not new and entirely a
novelty.

Moreover, such an obstinate type of opposition and biased dissidence of
the pagans against the Prophet of Islam (S) had not been unprecedented
throughout history in general and throughout the history of The Children
of Israel in particular.

The verse declares:

***“And We gave Moses the Book, and made him a Guide for the Children of
Israel…”***

It is unequivocal that the objective of naming of the ‘Book’ in this
verse is the ‘Torah’ which Allah provided Moses (as) for the guidance of
the Children of Israel.

Afterwards, the Qur’an refers to the main objective of the mission of
the prophets, including Musa, to whom He has commanded:

***“…(saying:) ‘Do not take other than Me a guardian’.”***

This issue raises one of the main branches of monotheism, that is,
‘practical monotheism’ which in turn indicates to ‘monotheism in
ideology’. He, who considers the ‘Prime Cause’ of the entire world of
existence to be only Allah, will necessarily not rely on anyone else.
And those who rely on and count on others do so because of their
weakness in their monotheistic ideology.

The supreme outcome of the illumination by celestial Books is the
enlightenment of the light of monotheism which they bring about in
people’s hearts and will consequently lead to one’s cutting off of all,
and his eventual reliance on Him.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 3
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذُرّ‌ِيَّةَ مَنْ حَمَلْنَا مَعَ نُوحٍ إِنَّهُ كَانَ عَبْداً شَكُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. “(O’ you!) the offspring of those whom We embarked along with Noah
(on the Ark). Verily, he was a grateful servant.”***

Noah (as) has been called as the ‘second father’ of man, for, in the
Storm of Noah, all people were drowned except those who were in the ship
alongside Noah. It is for this reason that the meaning of the first
phrase of the verse:

***“(O’ you!) The offspring of those whom We embarked”***

is identical with the phrase

***‘O’ Children of Adam!’***.[^1]

The verse says:

***“(O’ you!) the offspring of those whom We embarked along with Noah
(on the Ark). Verily, he was a grateful servant.”***

Noah (as) lived longer than all of the prophets and remained always the
target of attack and teasing of the pagans, unbelievers, and the
obstinate.

Nevertheless, he was a grateful servant of Allah and thus he enjoyed a
differential treatment, to whom Allah conveys His particular greetings,
by saying:

***“Peace be on Noah in (all) the Worlds!”***[^2]

Surah Isra’ – Verse 4
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَضَيْنَآ إِلَي بَنِي إِسْرَآئِيلَ فِي الْكِتَابِ لَتُفْسِدُنَّ فِي
الاَرْضِ مَرَّتَيْنِ وَلَتَعْلُنَّ عُلُوّاً كَبِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. “And We declared unto the Children of Israel in the Book (the
Torah, saying): “Certainly you will make mischief on the earth twice,
and certainly you will seek self-superiority with great arrogance’.”***

Alluding to parts of the adventurous history of the Children of Israel
in this verse, He says:

***“And We declared unto the Children of Israel in the Book (the Torah,
saying): “Certainly you will make mischief on the earth twice, and
certainly you will seek self-superiority with great arrogance’.”***

The Qur’anic word, /’al ’ard/ (the land), symmetrical to the subsequent
verse, is meant the Holy land of Palestine where Masjid-ul-’Aqsa is
located.

The issue of ‘making mischief on the earth twice’ might probably be
related to the two occasions of the Children of Israel: Once to the
martyrdom of Sho’aia and the opposition of Armia, and the second
occasion is concerned with the murder of Zakaryya and Yahya.

There are, of cause, other possibilities also mentioned in connection
with the subject which will be referred to in the discussions following
the ensuing verses.

Paradise will belong to those who abstain from arrogance, and distance
themselves from every kind of insolence; it does not pertain to the ones
who regard themselves as superior to others.

Surah Al-Qasas, No. 28, verse 83 says:

***“That is the abode of the Hereafter…”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 5
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِذَا جَآءَ وَعْدُ اُولاَهُمَا بَعَثْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ عِبَاداً لَنَآ
اُوْلِي بَأْسٍ شَدِيدٍ فَجَاسُوا خِلاَلَ الدّ‌ِيَارِ وَكَانَ وَعْداً
مَّفْعُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. “So when the promise for the first of the two came to pass, We
raised against you some of powerful servants of Ours, given to terrible
warfare, so it was they searched inside the houses thoroughly; and a
promise to be fulfilled.”***

The extermination of the unruly oppressors is one of Allah’s ways of
treatment.

The Qur’an says:

***“So when the promise for the first of the two came to pass, We raised
against you some of powerful servants of Ours…”***

Certainly, there is always somebody who has the upper hand. The Children
of Israel initiated a rebellion; the Almighty made other groups dominate
them who were superior to them.

To provide power to put down the unruly ones and the rebellions, as well
as the withdrawal of security from them, is a decent performance even if
a house-to-house search might be required. Thus, all the Divine
prophecies will definitely be accomplished fully.

The verse says:

***“…given to terrible warfare, so it was they searched inside the
houses thoroughly; and a promise to be fulfilled.”***

Therefore, dealing in the previous noble verse with these two great
vices and the ensuing happenings which are the consequences of them as
the Divine chastisement, He proclaims:

When the occasion for the first promise arrives and you engage in
corruption, bloodshed, tyranny and crime, We shall send over to you a
powerful group, combatant, and belligerent so as to pound you, hence,
punishing you for your behavior.

This belligerent people invade you in such a manner that for finding
even a single one of you, they undertake a house-to-house search
mission. And this promise is a decisive one which would be unavoidable
and not to be broken.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 6
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم
بِاَمْوالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. “Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them, and We
assisted you with wealth and children and We made you a numerous
host.”***

Providing sinful people with a respite and re-examination through
procurement of their capital and children is one of Allah’s ways of
treatment. Allah’s grace will cover both those sinners who are
repentant, and the sinful people who have already been punished.
Therefore, Allah’s favours will be forthcoming once again and He will
enable you to dominate that invading nation.

The verse says:

***“Then We gave you back the turn to prevail against them…”***

And Allah shall assist you by providing you with wealth, and affluent
belongings as well as with children and He shall outnumber you as
against your enemy.

The verse says:

***“…and We assisted you with wealth and children and We made you a
numerous host.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 7
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ أَحْسَنتُمْ أَحْسَنتُمْ لاَنفُسِكُمْ وَإِنْ أَسَأْتُمْ فَلَهَا
فَإِذَا جَآءَ وَعْدُ الاَخِرَةِ لِيَسوءُوا وُجُوهَكُمْ وَلِيَدْخُلُوا
الْمَسْجِدَ كَمَا دَخَلُوهُ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ وَلِيُتَبّـِرُوا مَا
عَلَوْا تَتْبِيرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. “If you do good, you do it for your own selves; and if you commit
evil, it is (in like manner) for your own selves. Hence, when the
promise of the second came to pass, (We permitted the mighty fighters)
to disfigure your (military) faces, and that they may enter the Mosque
as they entered it the first time, and to destroy extensively whatever
they conquered.”***

Such Divine favours will cover you. Maybe, you will once discover your
own selves and try to reform yourselves, thus distancing yourselves from
all evil acts, you may turn to good ones, for when one does good, he has
done it to his own self and if he commits evil, it will eventually turn
to him, too.

The verse says:

***“If you do good, you do it for your own selves; and if you commit
evil, it is (in like manner) for your own selves…”***

This is a general and everlasting rule that all good and evil will
eventually return to one’s own self.

However, it is with deep regret that neither that punishment of Allah
may awaken you, nor this favour and renewed Divine grace, for you turn
to rebellion once again, following the path of tyranny, oppression and
violation, inciting a grave corruption on the earth and exceeding the
limits in arrogance and self superiority.

Then, there comes the second Divine promise, and when it arrives, some
warriors and combatants overcome you in such a way that the pains and
calamities inflicted upon you by them make you grieve to the extent that
signs of sorrow and despair appear on your faces.

The verse says:

***“…Hence, when the promise of the second came to pass, (We permitted
the mighty fighters) to disfigure your (military) faces…”***

They even capture your great temple of Bayt-ul-Muqaddas (Jerusalem),
then they enter Masjid-ul-’Aqsa in much the same way that they did in
the first instance.

The verse says:

***“…and that they may enter the Mosque as they entered it the first
time…”***

They do not even suffice to this matter and they devastate whatever they
dominate and capture.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and to destroy extensively whatever they conquered.”***

In the end, whatever is of importance in historical events, which leads
to development, can be their didactic lessons derived from them, and not
the details of the incidents.

The adventures of the wandering of the oppressive Jews, which were
brought about by the godly believing people, and which have been dealt
with in the last two verses, are meant to demonstrate the fact that
oppression and paganism will not be left unanswered.

Since this very general and educative fact has been targeted, therefore,
the verse has not dealt with the issues of the details of the
entanglement, number, and weaponry.

The case is just in the same way that in the biography of Hadrat-i-Yusuf
(as), details of the story and even the name of Zulaykh a has not been
even mentioned because of the educational nature of the objectives and
instructions with regard to the matters of chastity.

In the meantime, some commentaries have pointed out the corruption of
the Jews and their eradication on two occasions by individuals in
distant past or recent past, and Masjid-ul-Aqsa has born witness to many
bitter memories during several thousand years, yet, according to some
verses and Islamic quotations, perhaps we must be expecting further
violations and oppressions from the side of the Israelis and their
eventual extermination by the righteous servants of Allah.

As it is understood from the apparent of verses 5 and 6, there has not
come yet such a widespread corruption on the earth to be brought about
by the Children of Israel and such an important devastation and
extermination has not been fulfilled by men of Allah.

Nowadays, we are witnessing, on the one hand, the widespread violation
by Israel and its plot for the conquest of the lands from the Nile to
the Euphrates as well as the expulsion of the Muslims from their
homeland, the bringing of espionage networks into existence in the
world, taking over of the propaganda machinery, assembling of manpower
from the east and the west, and other measures which are conducive to
corruption.

On the other hand, we are also watching the emergence of the Islamic
Revolution and the appearance of the godly sincere youths in Palestine
who invade Israel and try to recapture and repossess Masjid-ul-’Aqsa, in
which case, maybe the noble verse alludes to these aspects. Only Allah
is the Most Aware.

Incidentally, according to the numerous Islamic quotations, which are
recorded under this verse in various commentaries, some consider the
occurrence of the extermination of the violating Jews by the faithful
revolutionaries before the uprising of Hadrat-i-Mahdi (as), those who
take up their swords (arms) and who go forth as far as their martyrdom.

They will in turn pave the way for the universal government of
Hadrat-e-Mahdi (a.j.). Some regard this occurrence to take place within
the period of the reappearance of Imam-i-Zaman, in which case the
invading Jews will be exterminated.

Concluding this statement, we must keep in mind that the Mosques have
constantly been the bases for the force of the religions and as a symbol
of power. Hence, liberating the mosques from the domination of pagans
has constantly been the duty of the believers.

To combat the violating Jews, men of Allah will enter Bayt-ul-Muqaddas
in the same way that the Muslims did in entering Masjid-ul-Har am at the
time of the conquest of Mecca.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 8
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَسَي رَبُّكُمْ أَن يَرْحَمَكُمْ وَاِنْ عُدتُّمْ عُدْنَا وَجَعَلْنَا
جَهَنَّمَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ حَصِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. “It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you, but if you
revert (to your sins), We shall (also) revert (to Our punishment), and
We have made Hell a prison for the unbelievers.”***

The Arabic term /hasir/ is derived from the term /hasr/ which signifies
being entrenched and surrounded in an awful place. Carpets made out of
straws are called by this name /hasir/ as they are interwoven in like
manner.

It is not permissible for anyone to be desperate from the grace of Allah
and to lose hope, as Allah has also left the way of return open even for
those who are corrupt.

Incidentally, in methods of guidance, we first must start everything
with a compassionate tone of voice.

Afterwards, we should employ other means as threats or warnings, similar
to the noble verse which, at first, begins with “***mercy on you,***”
and then it uses warning and threat in the case of corruption and
concludes the statement, when it implies that the gates for repentance
and return to Him are not closed; hopefully, your Lord will have mercy
on you; but in the case of returning to sin, His punishment is intensive
for what you do.

The verse says:

***“It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you, but if you revert
(to your sins), We shall (also) revert (to Our punishment), and We have
made Hell a prison for the unbelievers.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 9
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَذَا الْقُرْءَانَ يَهْدِي لِلَّتِي هِيَ أَقْوَمُ وَيُبَشّـِرُ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ الَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ الصَّالِحَاتِ اَنَّ لَهُمْ
أَجْراً كَبِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. “Verily, this Qur’an guides to that which is the most upright, and
gives good tidings to the believers who do righteous deeds that they
shall have a great reward.”***

The Holy Qur’an is the only Book which contains constant and eternal
laws.

In the previous noble verses our discussion was about the Children of
Israel and their celestial Book, the Torah, as well as their deviation
from this Divine program and their various punishments with respect to
the matter. Parts of this discussion have been transferred to the
‘Glorious Qur’an’ which is the Holy Book of the Muslims, the last ring
in the chain of the circle of the celestial Books.

It says:

***“Verily, this Qur’an guides to that which is the most upright…”***

That is, the Qur’an leads the people to the most upright, to the purest
and the most sustainable of the ways. The purest and the most direct way
in here applies to the ideas it presents. It implies the fact that it
has achieved coherence between the overt and the hidden, the idea and
practice, and thinking and scheduling, all of which eventually invites
and leads one to ‘Allah’.

Once reference is made to the point meaning, ‘the purest and the most
direct’, it implies that from the point of view of social, economic, and
political organization, which is governing human societies, it offers
the purest and the most direct codes of humane conduct with respect to
these and, eventually, it encompasses administrative system of
government which establishes justice while pounding on the tyrants and
the oppressors.

Then, as the stands taken by people in face of this direct Divine
program are different, it refers to two distinguished positions and
their consequences, implying that this Qur’an bears good tidings for
those believers who perform good deeds, which constitute great rewards
for them.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and gives good tidings to the believers who do righteous deeds that
they shall have a great reward.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 10
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاَنَّ الَّذِينَ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالاَخِرَةِ أَعْتَدْنَا لَهُمْ
عَذَاباً أَلِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. “And that (as for) those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We
have prepared for them a painful chastisement.”***

The Divine punishment all depends on our own deeds, and, hence, that
kind of corruption which is not followed by repenting, will lead to
disbelief.

Therefore, the Qur’an in this verse indicates that those who do not
believe in the Hereafter and its great court of justice, and thus may
not engage in performing decent and righteous acts, it unveils the fact
that a painful chastisement has been prepared for them.

The verse says:

***“And that (as for) those who do not believe in the Hereafter, We have
prepared for them a painful chastisement.”***

[^1]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verses 26, 27, 31, 35 and Surah Yasin, No.
36, verse 60

[^2]: Surah As-Saffat, No. 37, verse 79


