Section 2: None Shall Bear the Burden of Others
===============================================

Surah Isra’ – Verse 11
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَدْعُ الإِنسَانُ بِالشَّرّ‌ِ دُعَآءَهُ بِالْخَيْرِ وَكَانَ
الإِنْسَانُ عَجُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. “And man prays for evil as he prays for the good; and man is ever
hasty.”***

There are frequent references made to the haste by man and his
aspiration for the evil in the Qur’an.

The Prophet (S) is addressed in a verse:

***“And they ask you to hasten on the evil (the Chastisement) before the
good…”***[^1]

The verse signifies that: They expect quick punishment to be
administered from him.

In another verse, quoting the unbelievers, it says:

***“…then rain down upon us stones from the sky, or bring us a painful
punishment.”***[^2]

This kind of ‘haste’ has its origin in ignorance, hostility, and
fanaticism.

At any rate, we find in this noble verse and in line with the previous
discussions that one of the main causes of disbelief is lack of adequate
study into the matters, and it is so because man is instinctively hasty.

Alluding to the matter, it declares:

***“And man prays for evil as he prays for the good; and man is ever
hasty.”***

In fact, the man’s haste has its origin in his aspiration for acquiring
greater amounts of benefits, and his haste for the acquisition of the
‘good’ and the ‘benefits’ causes him not to take into consideration the
entire perspective and dimensions of the issues.

It so happens that such haste does not lead him to the point where he
would be able to differentiate what is truly ‘good’ and ‘beneficial’ for
him. On the other hand, his passions and low desires will turn and
expose differently the true face of reality in his eyes, therefore, he
paves the way to aspire and follow what is evil.

It is in this case that man aspires for the evil much in the same way
that he aspires for the good, and it is owing to his misconception about
what is good and what is evil.

It also applies in the same manner that one struggles to obtain what is
evil and to follow what is evil as if he struggles to attain what is
good. It is a foregone conclusion that such a great calamity exists for
humankind and it is an amazing obstacle which obstructs the path of
happiness which in turn results in regret and in damages.

In an Islamic tradition quoted from the Messenger of Allah (S), he says:

*“Haste brings forth the people’s destruction; if the people did their
jobs with deliberation, no one would annihilate.”*

Certainly, in Islamic quotations, we have a chapter on the issue of
‘speed’ and ‘agility’ with respect to the good deeds, among which one
can cite a tradition by the blissful Prophet (S) saying:

***“Allah admires that good act which is hastened to be performed.”***

At any rate, ‘haste’ is a demising attribute when one might engage in
his study and verification of the dimension of a certain thing.
Nevertheless, speedy action is required in case the necessary process of
decision-making has been achieved, and any sort of delays in that case
is detrimental. Therefore, it is for this reason that we read in Islamic
quotations:

*“Speed up in doing decent jobs.”*

That is, once it is certain and proven that a task is good to be
performed, there is no room left for any delays.

Generally speaking, haste is inherent in human nature, but one must
first recognize where to use it properly.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 12
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا اللَّيْلَ وَالنَّهَارَ ءَايَتَيْنِ فَمَحَوْنَآ ءَايَةَ
اللَّيْلِ وَجَعَلْنَآ ءَايَةَ النَّهَارِ مُبْصِرَةً لّـِتَبْتَغُوا
فَضْلاً مِن رَبّـِكُمْ وَلِتَعْلَمُوا عَدَدَ السّـِنِينَ وَالْحِسَابَ
وَكُلَّ شَيْءٍ فَصَّلْنَاهُ تَفْصِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. “And We have appointed the night and the day two signs (of Our
power); then We took away the sign of the night (the moon light), and We
made the sign of the day sight-giving that you may*** ***seek grace from
your Lord and that you may know the number of the years and the
reckoning and We have explained everything very distinctly.”***

The underlying reason behind why the term night has usually preceded the
term ‘day’ in the Qur’an might be due to the fact that the ‘darkness’ of
the earth emanates from itself while its ‘light’ has its origin in the
sun.

The revolving movement of the earth around itself and the emergence of
the day and the night and their alterations go according to the Divine
providence and will, and they are not circumstantial or accidental.

The verse says:

***“And We have appointed the night and the day two signs (of Our
power); then We took away the sign of the night (the moon light), and We
made the sign of the day sight-giving that you may seek grace from your
Lord…”***

Paving the ground for the acquisition of the means of sustenance is the
function of the Divine providence. However, despite the fact that His
grace and favor are both in action, we must also go on with our
struggle, never to take pride in our cleverness or audacity.

***“…you may seek grace from your Lord…”***

The night and the day form a natural calendar which is perennial,
universal, easy to use, understandable, means of establishing order, and
planning, knowing the number of years and keeping account of the
affairs.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…and that you may know the number of the years and the
reckoning…”***

Incidentally, the measures for the organization of the system of
creation are not unintended or without due causes. They are all having
man as their main axis.

In the hierarchy of existence, everything is well organized, based on
universal laws, and distinctly separated so as to avoid any collision,
interference, and collapse.

The verse, in this regard, says:

***“…and We have explained everything very distinctly.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 13
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُلَّ إِنسَانٍ أَلْزَمْنَاهُ طَآئِرَهُ فِي عُنُقِهِ وَنُخْرِجُ لَهُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ كِتَاباً يَلْقَاهُ مَنشُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. “And every man’s record of action have We fastened to his neck;
and on the Day of Judgment, We shall bring out for him a book which he
will find wide open.”***

The Arabic term /t a’ir/, mentioned in this holy verse, alludes
metaphorically to man’s action, for man’s actions are like birds which
fly in order to reach man himself. Everybody’s record of action, whether
good or bad, will be hung up around his neck.

We have frequent references made in the Qur’an to man’s record of action
and there are various points dealt with in different verses, among which
are the followings:

1) Man’s record of action is universal.

The above verse says:

***“And every man’s record of action have We fastened to his neck…”***

2) Nothing is left out of that record.

***“…it leaves out nothing, small or great…”***[^3]

3) The culprits are intimidated by it.

***“…and you see the guilty fearful at what is in it…”*** [^4]

4) Man himself is in a position to arbitrate about his own course of
action.

***“Read your book, your own self suffices today…”***[^5]

5) Those who are salvaged will be given their books to their right hand
and the ones who are supposed to go to Hell will be given their books to
their left hand.

***“Then as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he will
say: ‘Lo! Read my book.” “And as for him who is given his book in his
left hand he shall say: ‘O would that my book had never been given
me’.”***[^6]

Accounts are kept for all and there are no exceptions. And, finally, all
human beings will attend in the gathering place of Resurrection with
their record of actions.

All people’s actions are evident for Allah; the hanging up of the record
of one’s actions upon the neck is destined for his own understanding.

The registration of one’s record of actions is not a tangible process
for man in this world, yet everything will be made transparent and clear
for him in the Hereafter.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 14
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْرَأْ كِتَابَكَ كَفَي بِنَفْسِكَ الْيَوْمَ عَلَيْكَ حَسِيباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. “(It will be said to him): ‘Read your book; your own self
suffices today as a reckoner against you’.”***

Man will be told to read his own book of records on the Day of the
Hereafter. Those people, who did not know how to read in this world,
will be enabled to read then and there.

The verse says:

***“(It will be said to him): ‘Read your book; your own self suffices
today as a reckoner against you’.”***

In a tradition, Imam Sadiq (as) is quoted as saying:

*“On that day, will one remember all of what he has done and is
registered in his record. It seems as if he has done all those in just
the same moment. Therefore, the culprits, voice is being heard loud and
clear as to what type of letter of record it is in which no minor
offences are missed just in the same way that the major ones are not
missed.”*

Fakhre-Razi is of the opinion that the objective by ‘the book of record’
is here the ‘spiritual scroll’ on which man’s acts leave an impact, and
by ‘reading’ is here meant the comprehension and understanding of
it[^7]. In Tafsir Al-Mizan, ‘book’ has been commented upon as ‘the acts
in themselves’.

In numerous quotations, man is recommended that before the Resurrection
he had better see to his own accounts and records.

For example:

***“Reckon your own account before you will be reckoned.”***[^8]

Such calculations pave the ground for man’s awakening, and the lack of
them are often signs of his own negligence. An Islamic tradition
indicates that he who keeps record of his own deeds in this world will
be at ease with his records in the Hereafter.

Therefore, one must read his own record of actions in this world in
order to reform, amend, wipe out his weaknesses or compensate for them,
repent and add up to his scroll of decent acts.[^9]

Surah Isra’ – Verse 15
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّنِ اهْتَدَي فإِنَّمَا يَهْتَدِي لِنَفْسِهِ وَمَن ضَلَّ فإِنَّما
يَضِلُّ عَلَيْهَا وَلاَ تَزِرُ وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ اُخْرَي وَمَا كُنَّا
مُعَذّ‌ِبِينَ حَتَّي نَبْعَثَ رَسُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. “Whoever gets guided aright, has only got guided aright to his
own gain, and whoever goes astray, it is only to his own loss; and no
one laden bears the burden of another, nor do We punish (anyone) until
We raise a messenger.”***

Keeping the contents of verses 25 of Al-An‘am, 13 of Al-‘Ankabūt, as
well as Islamic quotations under consideration, one may conclude that
the main pioneers of paganism and seduction must shoulder the burden of
the mounting guilt of their followers as well as that of their own
without decreasing anything from the guilt of the followers, for they
have provided their means of seduction.

Man is free to select his own way. Accepting guidance, of course, is to
his own advantage, while infidelity and rejection are to his own
detriment. They are of no benefits or losses to Allah.

At any rate, this noble verse provides four fundamental and principal
commandments in connection with Reckoning and compensations for one’s
performances:

1) At first, it implies that he who is led straight on, has been guided
to his own advantage and the consequences of his actions will benefit
his own self solely.

***“Whoever gets guided aright, has only got guided aright to his own
gain…”***

2) He who is misled, is seduced to his own detriment, and will
eventually suffer the consequences of his own actions.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and whoever goes astray, it is only to his own loss…”***

3) And no one will ever shoulder the burden of the guilt of someone else
and no one will be held responsible for the crime or the offences which
are committed by another person.

The verse says:

***“…and no one laden bears the burden of another…”***

Certainly, this general rule, which states that no one will shoulder the
burden of the guilt of someone else, has got no discrepancy with the
verse in Surah An-Nahl which indicates that the seducers will also have
to bear the burden of the responsibility of those whom they have
misled,[^10] for their act of seduction of others will frame them as the
performers of those evil acts and, in fact, it is their own sins which
they are shouldering.

4) The fourth commandment is eventually stated that Allah shall not
punish any person or any nation unless He has sent a prophet to them so
as to explain to them their duties in detail and to complete the
argument.

The verse says:

***“…nor do We punish (anyone) until We raise a messenger.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 16
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا أَرَدْنَآ أَن نُّهْلِكَ قَرْيَةً أَمَرْنَا مُتْرَفِيهَا
فَفَسَقُوا فِيهَا فَحَقَّ عَلَيْهَا الْقَوْلُ فَدَمَّرْنَاهَا
تَدْمِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. “And once We determine to exterminate a town, We command its
luxurious people (to obey Us), but they transgress therein, thus the
word proves true against it, then We destroy it with utter
destruction.”***

The Qur’anic sentence: /’amran a mutrafih a/ signifies that Allah
commands the great men of the nation to obey orders, for We must keep in
mind the fact that the Almighty will never issue orders as for the
commitment of sins and offences.

On the contrary, He always issues orders for the establishment of
justice and benevolent acts. Allah’s way of extermination consists of
issuing orders for obedience. The affluent, who lack conscience, will
oppose and the common people also follow them. It is then that the
Divine wrath will be decisively actualized and the Divine chastisement
and furry will be incumbent.

The verse says:

***“And once We determine to exterminate a town, We command its
luxurious people (to obey Us), but they transgress therein, thus the
word proves true against it, then We destroy it with utter
destruction.”***

The will to execute by the All-Knowing Allah is based upon the sinful
grounds which we provide and the negative attributes which we exhibit,
otherwise the compassionate Allah will never seek to exterminate any
nation unduely. According to a statement issued by Imam Rida (as), the
Divine Will in this verse is conditional upon our sin.[^11]

### Explanations

One of the manners by which the Divine chastisement and Wrath is
achieved is ‘affluence’ and being immersed in Allah’s blessings.

The existence of a luxurious class in every society paves the ground for
the Divine Wrath.

The moral and social decadence of every society is initiated by and is
mainly on the hands of that society’s luxurious chiefs.

The affluent who are indifferent stand up to the call of the prophets
before all others, for corruption usually has its origins in affluence.

Let us take the Divine threats seriously and reform us, for the
executive force behind the Divine threats has its roots in our own
performances, and the Divine outrage and chastisement are utterly
severe.

***“…then we destroy it with utter destruction.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 17
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا مِنَ الْقُرُونِ مِن بَعْدِ نُوحٍ وَكَفَي بِرَبّـِكَ
بِذُنُوبِ عِبَادِهِ خَبِيراً بَصِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “And what a great number (of people) We did exterminate after
Noah! And your Lord is sufficient as Knowing and Seeing with regard to
the sins of His servants.”***

This noble verse, which recounts the extermination of a generation of
mankind and the beginning of a new world order in human life, depicts
the fact that the era of Noah (as) has been recorded as a turning point
in the history of mankind.

The life preceding Noah (as) had been an extremely simple life in nature
with a very limited population and was lacking in an adventurous type of
history. Moreover, the continuity of the generation of human kind had
been made possible with the few believers who were inside the ship with
Noah (as).

The verse, while warning the ignorant and the negligent and while being
instructive for the people, provides a source of comfort for the Prophet
(S), exclaiming that if the pagans do not stop hurting and teasing him,
they will face the Divine Wrath.

After Noah’s people, the nations of ‘Ad, Thamūd, Lūt, as well as the
companions of Madyan, Pharaoh, Haman, Karun, and the companions of Phil
also were entangled with the Divine Wrath.

The verse says:

***“And what a great number (of people) We did exterminate after
Noah!…”***

The nations who throughout history were entangled with the Divine Wrath
and fury are numerous, and the Divine Wrath is not exclusive to the Day
of Judgment only. It also may take place in this world as well.

This noble verse presents examples of the above issues as a general
principle, stating that: What a numerous groups of people who lived
after Noah who, according to this way of treatment, were annihilated by
Allah.

Then, The Qur’an adds that such is not the case that oppressions and
tyranny, or sinfulness of an individual or a group remain hidden from
the sharp sight of Allah. This much is adequate that Allah is well aware
of the sins of His servants and He has got careful eyes on them.

The verse says:

***“…And your Lord is sufficient as Knowing and Seeing with regard to
the sins of His servants.”***

The fact that the era succeeding Noah has been stressed here, might
probably be for the sake that man’s life before Noah had been very
simple and so many differences were usually non-existent, in particular
the division of the society into the ‘affluent’ and the ‘oppressed’ and,
therefore, the people in those societies were hardly entangled with the
Divine punishment.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 18
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّن كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعَاجِلَةَ عَجَّلْنَا لَهُ فِيهَا مَا نَشَآءُ
لِمَن نُّرِيدُ ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَا لَهُ جَهَنَّمَ يَصْلاَهَا مَذْمُوماً
مَّدْحُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. “Whoever desires this (transient worldly) life, We hasten for him
therein what We please for whomever We desire; then We appoint Hell for
him into which he will enter disgraced, rejected.”***

As the previous holy verses dealt with the opposition by the
still-necked dissidents in face of the Divine orders and their later
extermination, this verse alludes to the true causes of such a
disobedience and unruliness which is brought about by the love of the
world, saying:

***“Whoever desires this (transient worldly) life, We hasten for him
therein what We please for whomever We desire…”***

It is worthy to note that the Qur’an does not say that he, who seeks
after the world, will obtain what he wishes. But, it sets two conditions
for it: the first refers to that He bestows upon him only part of what
he wants, or, in other words, he reaches the very extent to which We
will.

The second one refers to the matter that all individuals do not obtain
access to this much either.

On the contrary, only some of them will be provided with access to part
of the worldly goods; those people whom We deem right:

***“…for whomever We desire…”***

Therefore, neither do all worldly lovers attain to their wishes, nor
those who have their aspirations fulfilled will reach the whole of what
they desire completely.

Our daily life also explicitly unveils the truth regarding this matter.
How large is the number of those people who seek after wealth day and
night successively and reach nowhere, obtaining very little for their
tremendous effort, and what a large number of people exist there who
have great ambitions in this world and who attain a limited number of
their wishes.

Here is an important point of view revealing itself in that, this group,
while having been designated to burn in Hell-Fire, are also qualified
with two attributes of ‘disgraced’ and ‘rejected’ which being applied in
their case, each of which is separately being stressed.

The verse continues saying:

***“…then We appoint Hell for him into which he will enter disgraced,
rejected.”***

In fact, the Hell-Fire will be their physical punishment designated, and
being blamed and distanced are their spiritual punishment which are
allocated for them, for one must keep in mind that Resurrection is both
‘physical’ as well as ‘spiritual’ and its reward and punishment also
encompass both.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 19
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَرَادَ الاَخِرَةَ وَسَعَي لَهَا سَعْيَهَا وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَاُوْلَئِكَ كَانَ سَعْيُهُم مَّشْكُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. “And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it as he ought
to strive, and he is a believer, (as for) these, their striving shall be
thanked.”***

He who desires for the good of Hereafter and the blessing of Paradise,
and struggles along these lines; that is, he who obeys Allah (s.w.t.)
and distances himself from the sins while believing in monotheism and
the prophetic mission of the prophets, his struggle will be acknowledged
and his worship will be acceptable.

The verse says:

***“And whoever desires the Hereafter and strives for it as he ought to
strive, and he is a believer, (as for) these, their striving shall be
thanked.”***

Therefore, in order to achieve eternal happiness, there are three
conditions pending:

1) Man’s will, that is, the kind of will which relates to the eternal
life, and does not appertain to the passing whims, pleasures, blessings
and purely material gains and goals.

2) Such a ‘will’ must not be in a weak form and lack in strength in the
spheres of thinking and spirit. Contrarily, it must call on all the
particles of human existence and set them in motion and employ all his
means and struggles to this end.

3) All of these must be coupled with faith; that kind of faith which is
constant and steady, for one’s decision and his struggle will yield
results only when they have got their roots in correct and proper
motives and those kinds of motives can not be anything other than faith
to Allah.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 20
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلاًّ نُّمِدُّ هَؤُلآءِ وَهَؤُلآءِ مِنْ عَطَآءِ رَبّـِكَ وَمَا كَانَ
عَطَآءُ رَبّـِكَ مَحْظُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. “All We succour, these and those, from the bounty of your Lord;
and the bounty of your Lord is not closed (to anyone).”***

Allah has created all men free and, by placing at their disposal all the
means, He has put them to the test so that their way of acting and
choice becomes evident, in a manner that those who deal with Allah are
parted from the rest. It is just like ‘the organization of water and
electricity, which makes these two blessings available to all houses so
that the individuals, by their own choice, use them in a good or a bad
way.

Therefore, it is Allah’s way of treatment to make all the blessings and
helps available to all so that every body can exhibit his positive and
negative attributes.

The verse says:

***“All We succour, these and those, from the bounty of your Lord…”***

Certainly, having faith in Allah and seeking the Hereafter have not any
discrepancy with enjoying the material means.

Incidentally, Allah’s favours cover us and are encompassing us owing to
His Lordship and His Own benevolence; otherwise, He does not owe us
anything.

The verse says:

***“…and the bounty of your Lord is not closed (to anyone).”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 21
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انظُرْ كَيْفَ فَضَّلْنا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَي بَعْضٍ وَلَلاَخِرَةُ أَكْبَرُ
دَرَجَاتٍ وَأَكْبَرُ تَفْضِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “Behold how We have preferred some of them over others; and,
definitely, the Hereafter is greater in ranks and greater in
excellence.”***

The superiority of individuals over one another consists of two types:
At times, man is endowed over his equals in his aptitude, interest,
thinking, family conditions, geographical conditions etc, in which case
all are Allah’s grace and are for one’s testing and are coupled with
responsibilities.

This verse alludes to these kinds of superiorities. At other times, such
superiorities have their bases in oppression, exploitation and in
colonization, which must be considered separately.

The Prophet (S) said:

*“The hierarchy of Paradise is accorded to each individuals according to
the reasoning and power of wisdom of the dwellers of Paradise.”* [^12]

Therefore, the Qur’an recounts this very basic principle in this verse.
As differences in struggles in this world result in differential reaping
of the results, this rule also applies in all the transactions in the
Hereafter as well. The only difference is that this world is limited and
its differences also are confined, whereas the Hereafter is unlimited
and its variations also are unlimited.

The verse says:

***“Behold how We have preferred some of them over others…”***

Note as to how, We made some excel others because of the differences in
their struggle: however, the hierarchical order of the here-after excels
others and is far more precious.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and, definitely, the Hereafter is greater in ranks and greater in
excellence.”***

### Are World and Hereafter Contrary to Each Other?

In numerous verses, there are great appraisals made for the world along
with its material benefits. However, inspire of the entire importance
given to the material merits and blessings, one finds numerous meanings
with regard to the humiliation and demising of those blessings of the
world in the Qur’anic verses. Such dual meanings are also objectively
found in Islamic quotations as well.

The answer to this query can be found in the Qur’an itself that the
blessings of the material world, which are also the favours of Allah,
and certainly are regarded as necessary in the system of creation, if
used as a means for the spiritual development and happiness of man, they
are to be appreciated as well and by all means.

However, if they are used only as a goal and as an end in themselves,
aloof from humane and spiritual values, they naturally lead to the man’s
arrogance, negligence, unruliness, tyranny and oppression, and, hence,
they are to be regarded as a curse and worthy of all kinds of
condemnation.

How beautifully has this been stated by Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) in
that speech of his which is concise and expressive:

*“He who looks at it with insight, (regarding it as a means of vision),
it will bestow him sight; and he who regards it as an end in itself,
then it will blind him.”* [^13]

In fact, the difference between the blamed world and the admired world
is the same thing which is understood from the Qur’anic terms /’ilayh a/
which denotes to the ‘aim’ and /bih a/ which refers to the ‘means’.

Ali (as), regarding this world and the Reckoning Day, says:

*“Beware! Surely this world is a place from which protection cannot be
sought except (while one is) in it.”*[^14]

Surah Isra’ – Verse 22
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَجْعَلْ مَعَ اللَّهِ إِلَهاً ءَاخَرَ فَتَقْعُدَ مَذْمُوماً
مَّخْذُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “Do not associate with Allah any other god, lest you will sit
reproved, despised.”***

The blissful Prophet (S) is being addressed in this verse, but the verse
is meant for the public who are under the leadership of him.

Man’s flourishing nature as well as his glory, rest with monotheism and
his paganism and worship of any other being is degradation to him and
makes him despised and mean.

Therefore, this noble verse begins with the statement of the issue of
monotheism and faith, that kind of monotheism which is the core of all
positive activities and good deeds of man as well as his constructive
deeds.

At first, the Qur’an says:

***“Do not associate with Allah any other god…”***

It does not state do not worship any other god along with Allah, but it
says: ‘Do not associate’, so as to present a wider scope of meaning;
that is, neither in ideas, nor in practice, nor in prayers, desires, nor
in worshipping associate any other god along with Allah.

Then, alluding to the devastating effect of paganism, the verse implies
that if you associate with Him any other god, you will be demised,
despised and will be neglected (isolated).

It says:

***“…lest you will sit reproved, despised.”***

One can conclude from the above sentence that paganism has got three
formidable disgraceful effects on man:

1) Paganism leads to, and is a source of, weakness, disability, and
humiliation.

2) Paganism is the source of demise and blame, for it depicts a
deviating line and method in face of logic, rationality, and it is an
obvious neglect of Allah’s blessings.

3) Paganism will cause Allah to abandon the pagan to his self-made gods
and stop protecting him.

Consequently, the ‘neglected one’ is he who has got no helpful
companions and is blamed by Allah, the angels, the believers, and the
awakened conscience of the enlightened people as well as the wise men of
the world.

[^1]: Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 6

[^2]: Surah Al-’Anf al, No. 6, verse 32

[^3]: Surah Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 49

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: The current Surah, verse 14

[^6]: Surah Al-Haqqah, No. 69, verses 19 and 25

[^7]: Tafsir-ul-Kabir

[^8]: Bih ar, vol. 7, p. 73

[^9]: Tafsir-i-Kashf-ul-’Asr ar

[^10]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 25

[^11]: Tafsir-i-Kanz-ud-Daqayiq

[^12]: Tafsir-i-Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn

[^13]: Nahj-ul-Balaghah, sermon 82

[^14]: Nahj-ul-Balaghah, sermon 62


