Surah Ar-Ra‘d, Chapter 13
=========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

(The Thunder, No. 13)  
 (Revealed in Mecca)  
 43 verses in 6 sections

The Content of Surah Ar-Ra‘d
----------------------------

As was mentioned aforetime, Meccan suras were revealed at the beginning
of the call of the Prophet of Islam (S), when the hostile pagans
seriously opposed to accept the Faith. Then these suras are mostly upon
the issues of belief, specially invitation to Monotheism, struggling
against idolatry, and proving the Resurrection.

While the Medinite suras, which were reveled after the expansion of
Islam and the formation of the Islamic government, explain the Divine
ordinances and religious social rules, according to the needs of the
society.

This Surah, which is among the Meccan suras, also follows the same line.
After making allusions to the legitimacy and greatness of the Qur’an, it
refers to monotheism and states the secrets of creation which are the
signs of the existence of the Pure Essence of Allah.

Then the Qur’an, in this Surah, discusses about Resurrection and the new
life of mankind in Hereafter, as well as the Divine Court of Justice on
the Reckoning Day. It completes this introduction of Monotheism and
Resurrection by pointing to the responsibilities and duties of people.

Once again, it returns to the issue of Monotheism. Then it gives
examples in order to make the right and wrong known. They are some
manifest and sensible examples which are understandable for all.

In view of the fact that the ultimate worldly fruit of belief in
Monotheism and Resurrection is the very constructive and practical
programs, following these discussions, it invites people to; fulfilling
the promise, union of kindred, patience and perseverance, spending out
in charity secretly and openly, and leaving revenge.

And, finally, the content of this Surah guides people to search the
depths of events in history through showing them the painful end of the
disobedient nations in the past.

Thus, Surah Ar-Ra‘d begins with some verses concerning Faith and
convictions, and ends with introducing the deeds and activities which
are helpful in the formation of human character.


