Section 7: Satan’s Pride against Man
====================================

Surah Isra’ – Verse 61
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلآئِكَةِ اسْجُدُوا لاَدَمَ فَسَجَدُوا إِلآَّ
إِبْلِيسَ قَالَ ءَأَسْجُدُ لِمَنْ خَلَقْتَ طِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “And (remember) when We said to the angels: ‘Prostrate unto
Adam’; so they (all) did prostrate except ’Iblis who said: ‘Am I to
prostrate to the one You have created of clay?’”***

Here, the Qur’an alludes to the unruliness of ’Iblis with regard to the
Allah’s command, concerning the issue of prostration to Adam, and the
viscous fate awaiting him, sums up the story.

Dealing with this issue, following the previous discussions about the
obstinate pagans, indeed, reveals the fact that the complete and the
total picture of arrogance, paganism, and unruliness has been the Satan.
The Qur’an points out as to how his fate ended; hence, the followers of
the Satan will meet their doom in just the same way.

At first, He says:

***“And (remember) when We said to the angels: ‘Prostrate unto Adam’; so
they (all) did prostrate except ’Iblis…”***

This prostration is some kind of modesty and humbleness for the sake of
the glorification of the creation of man and his excellence over other
beings or else it has been of the sort that has been performed, facing
Allah for the creation of such an amazing creature.

The Satan which had been overwhelmed by arrogance and pride, and his
egotism and conceit had covered a curtain over his intelligence, and
thinking that ‘the earth’, which is the source of all blessings and the
origin of all beings, is inferior to fire, addressing his objections to
the Lord, the verse says about him:

***“…who said: ‘Am I to prostrate to the one You have created of
clay?’”***

Therefore, we repeatedly face the issue of the prostration of the angels
in the Qur’an, and the unruliness of the Satan in this connection.

’Iblis is of the ‘Jinn’ lot,

***“…he was of the jinn…”***[^1]

and has got an army:

***“And the host of ’Iblis, all.”***[^2]

and has also got infantry battalions as well as a mounting army:

***“…and collect your cavalry and infantry against them…”***[^3]

and is the cause of all deviations and, finally, his abstinence from
prostration, provides a comparison between the earth and fire, where he
said:

***“…You created me of fire while you created him of clay’.”***[^4]

Surah Isra’ – Verse 62
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَرَأَيْتَكَ هذَا الَّذِي كَرَّمْتَ عَلَيَّ لَئِنْ أَخَّرْتَنِ
إِلَي يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لاَحْتَنِكَنَّ ذُرّ‌ِيَّتَهُ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. “He (the Satan) said: ‘Tell me, is this he whom you have honoured
above me? If You respite me till the Day of Resurrection, I will
certainly master his progeny, save a few.”***

When the Satan noticed that, as a consequence of his arrogance and
unruliness in face of the Lord’s command, he has become an outcast from
the Lord’s holy sanctuary for ever, said humbly:

*Were I to be given a respite till the resurrection day by You, I shall
seduce all the progenitors of this human being, make them perish
altogether starting from the scratch, seducing them all except a few of
them.*

The verse says:

***“He (the Satan) said: ‘Tell me, is this he whom you have honoured
above me? If You respite me till the Day of Resurrection, I will
certainly master his progeny, save a few.”***

The Arabic term /’ahtanikanna/ which is derived from the term /’ihtin
ak/ means ‘eradicating’ something or ‘uprooting’. Thus, when locusts
perish an entire agricultural land, the Arabs say: “*locusts eradicated
the farming.*” This Qur’anic expression, therefore, refers to the point
that: I will uproot all of the children of Adam from the path of
obedience, except a few of them.

There is the possibility that the Arabic term /’ihtanikanna/ is a
derivation of /hanak/, meaning: ‘beneath the throat’.

When the rope or the bridle is placed around the neck of an animal, the
Arabs often use the expression /hanatk-ad-dabbah/, meaning that ‘the
animal was bridled’. In fact, the Satan wants to claim that he will put
the bridle of temptation around the neck of all human beings thus
leading them toward the wrong path.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 63
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ اذْهَبْ فَمَن تَبِعَكَ مِنْهُمْ فَإِنَّ جَهَنَّمَ جَزَآؤُكُمْ
جَزَآءً مَّوْفُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***63. “(Addressing the Satan), He said: ‘Depart! But whoever of them
follows you, then verily Hell will be your recompense, a recompense in
full!’”***

Man is free in his acceptance of the path of the Lord and/or in pursuing
the Satan.

The Lord’s punishment is all-encompassing; the guilty will be provided
with both the divine chastisement which is due to their own sins, and
the punishment for misleading others in their entirety either.

Incidentally, in order to realize an experimental field for all, and
proper means for the education of the true devout believers, which all
tend to shape man in the melting pot, and in order to become strong
against the enemy, the Satan was provided with the means for survival
and activities:

the verse says:

***“(Addressing the Satan), He said: ‘Depart! But whoever of them
follows you, then verily Hell will be your recompense, a recompense in
full!’”***

It is by means of this nature that He declares the method of testing and
explains the ultimate aim of victory and defeat in this grand Divine
trial.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 64
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَفْزِزْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتَ مِنْهُم بِصَوْتِكَ وَأَجْلِبْ
عَلَيْهِمْ بِخَيْلِكَ وَرَجِلِكَ وَشَارِكْهُمْ فِي الاَمْوَالِ
وَالاَوْلاَدِ وَعِدْهُمْ وَمَايَعِدُهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ إِلاَّ غُرُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***64. “And startle whomever of them you can with your voice, and
collect your cavalry and infantry against them; and share with them in
wealth and children and make promises to them; and the Satan makes no
promises to them except delusion.”***

The Satan, at first, removes man’s instinct for monotheism by means of
persuasion. Later, he seeks to invade him with his ammunitions and
armies.

The Arabic term /’istifz az/ here signifies ‘stumbling’ or ‘slipping’
with speed and adeptness as well as by way of pushing.

The Satan does not just select one way for deceiving man. On the
contrary, he usually entrenches man from all sides, accompanied by a
number of other ways using all forms of persuasions, dissuasions,
promises, aspirations, temptations, and enticements, which are as its
mounting forces and its foot-soldiers, and in this course some people
follow him.

We have it in quotations that he who has no fear of anyone in what he
says and in what he does, or what he is said about; committing sins or
back-biting openly, is a partner to the Satan.[^5]

Other cases of forming partnership with the Satan, consist of: having
forbidden sources of income, living on illegal money, adultery, raising
corrupt and deviant offspring [^6]

And he who regards the Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) of the Prophet (S) as enemies,
has allowed the Satan to enter into partnership with him.[^7]

Unhealthy production and consumption, hoarding wealth, investment of
foreign companies and foreign corporations, creation of scientific,
cultural, and artistic centers as well as international games, which are
colonial, are kinds of partnership with the Satan.

Anyway, explaining in an interesting and explicit fashion, He exposes
the ways and means through which the Satan employs in his temptations.
The Qur’an, addressing him, implies: you can provoke them each with your
voice, and you can dispatch your mounting and infantry army units
against them.

The verse says:

***“And startle whomever of them you can with your voice, and collect
your cavalry and infantry against them…”***

The Satan possesses numerous aids and assistants who are of his own kind
as well as from among mankind who help the Satan in seducing people.
Some who are more powerful and speedier in act just like the mounting
army; others are weaker and slower in action and behave just like
infantry.

The verse, addressing the Satan, continues saying:

***“…and share with them in wealth and children and make promises to
them…”***

Then the Qur’an warns that the Satan does not do anything else except
deceiving them.

The verse says:

***“…and the Satan makes no promises to them except delusion.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 65
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عِبَادي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ وَكَفَي بِرَبّـِكَ
وَكِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. “Verily (as for) My servants, you have not any authority over
them; and your Lord suffices (as their) Guardian.”***

Notwithstanding the fact that all people are the servants of Allah, the
Lord, out of respect, has ascribed some to Himself by saying “***My
servants***”, as He has also used such a term for proximity concerning
the inanimate objects as well as in the case of /bayti/ (My house).

‘The servants of Allah’, have also been introduced with specifications
of ‘faith’ and ‘trust’ in another verse, those who are by no means
dominated by the Satan. [^8]

Certainly, the Satan carries out its temptation; establishes contacts,
but they become constantly mindful and go on with their resistance. [^9]

We have it in quotations that ‘prayer call’ and ‘prayers’ are two ways
of expelling the Satan. [^10]

Therefore, serving and worshipping the Lord provides one with insurance
against satanic persuasions, temptations and Satanic deployments, for he
who joins the Infinite Power, will become impenetrable.

The verse says:

***“Verily (as for) My servants, you have not any authority over them;
and your Lord suffices (as their) Guardian.”***

Anyway, he who becomes the servant of Allah, He will take care of him as
his advocate, as his guardian, and as his superintendent.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 66
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبُّكُمُ الَّذِي يُزْجِي لَكُمُ الْفُلْكَ فِي الْبَحْرِ لِتَبْتَغُوا
مِن فَضْلِهِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِكُمْ رَحِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***66. “Your Lord is He Who makes the ship go for you through the sea
that you may seek of His grace; verily He is ever Merciful to you.”***

This verse pursues the discussions which we had before about monotheism
and about the campaigns against paganism. It enters this discussion
through two different ways: by reasoning, and through the way of
conscience and the inside or internal system.

At first, the Holy Qur’an alludes to the monotheism through reasoning,
saying:

***“Your Lord is He Who makes the ship go for you through the sea…”***

Obviously, there are numerous benefits for transportation available by
sea-routes, including cheapness of traveling, their suitability for
being used at all the times by all the general public and for
transportation of goods passengers and fishing.

The role of the seas in the field of providing oxygen, production of
water vapor, clouds, and rain; developing beds for fishery industries
and wanders of material, plants and animals are remarkable. The amazing
surprises they present in matters relating to the inanimate objects,
plant and animal life are abundant.

We read in the ‘Joushan Kabir’ supplication:

*“O! The One Whose wonders of creation are found in abundance at sea!”*

Then the Qur’an adds that the aim of all these preparations are that you
benefit from His blessings in matters relating to your travels, to the
transportation of your goods, merchandise, and to whatever else which is
of help to your religion as well as to your worldly life, for the Lord
is kind to you.

The holy verse says:

***“…that you may seek of His grace; verily He is ever Merciful to
you.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 67
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذَا مَسَّكُمُ الضُّرُّ فِي الْبَحْرِ ضَلَّ مَن تَدْعُونَ إِلآَّ
إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاكُمْ إِلَي الْبَرّ‌ِ أَعْرَضْتُمْ وَكَانَ
الإِنسَانُ كَفُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***67. “And when affliction touches you in the sea, away will go those
on whom you call except him; but as He delivers you to the land, you
turn away (from Him); and man is very ungrateful.”***

One of the reasons as to why monotheism is inherent in human nature is
the fact that man turns to an invisible point to save him when he is
caught in distress and despair.

A man, who was an atheist, once asked Imam Sadiq (as) to provide him
with a proof for proving the existence of the Lord.

The Imam asked him:

*“Have you ever embarked a ship which has been wrecked?”*

*“Yes,”*

He answered:

*“Only once. We were once ship wrecked and I used a piece of wood.”*

The Imam (as) then asked:

*“Were you then focusing on a power to save you?”*

He answered:

*“Yes,”*

He (as) continued:

*“That very invisible power is the Lord, the Almighty.”*

Therefore, when at loss in a sea and winds stop blowing or the sea waves
threaten you, etc, all your objects of worship will be forgotten, except
the only Lord. in such a circumstance, it is Allah Who can save you, to
Whom you appeal and you call on no one else.

However, as you were saved by Him from drowning; and felt safe, you will
turn away from Him and refuse to believe in Him and to obey Him being
ungrateful, and man does this too often.

The verse says:

***“And when affliction touches you in the sea, away will go those on
whom you call except him; but as He delivers you to the land, you turn
away (from Him)…”***

Certainly, worldly interests are so enticing that man tends to forget
everything shortly, after being saved of the affliction and neglecting
Allah after being saved is an explicit example of ungratefulness.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and man is very ungrateful.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 68
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَاَمِنتُمْ أَن يَخْسِفَ بِكُمْ جَانِبَ الْبَرّ‌ِ أَوْ يُرْسِلَ
عَلَيْكُمْ حَاصِباً ثُمَّ لاَ تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ وَكِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***68. “Do you then feel secure that He will not cause the shore to
swallow you up, or send on you squall of pebbles? Then, you will not
find protector for yourselves.”***

The annihilation of the former nations has been completed in various
ways. The Lord has made the earth bury some of the violators and
enemies, while He has made others drown at sea. Some have been stoned in
landslip, and others have been perished in thunderbolts.

Therefore, the Lord is evermore capable of annihilation of the pagans.
If today you are saved from a ship-wreck at sea, landing safely, do not
feel to be safe in other circumstances, or that you are secure from
future punishments.

This same feeling of security from chastisement provides grounds for our
negligence and unruliness. Man is at Allah’s power whenever and wherever
he is; whether be it at sea or on a dry land; makes no difference for
Allah.

The verse says:

***“Do you then feel secure that He will not cause the shore to swallow
you up, or send on you squall of pebbles?…”***

Therefore, Do you think that Allah is unable to inflict severe
punishment on you, whether at sea or on land? Do you then feel safe if
there is a tornado in which you get caught, stoning you to death? Such a
chastisement is harsher than being drowned at sea.

Thus, why do you not look out for a protector to guard you off all
dangers?

The verse concludes:

***“…Then, you will not find protector for yourselves.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 69
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ أَمِنتُمْ أَن يُعِيدَكُمْ فِيهِ تَارَةً اُخْرَي فَيُرْسِلَ
عَلَيْكُمْ قَاصِفاً مِنَ الرّ‌ِيحِ فَيُغْرِقَكُم بِمَا كَفَرْتُمْ
ثُمَّ لاَ تَجِدُوا لَكُمْ عَلَيْنَا بِهِ تَبِيعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***69. “Or do you feel secure that He will (not) send you back into it
(the sea) another time, and then send on you a fierce gale then drown
you for your disbelief; then you will find no prosecutor for you against
Us?”***

The Arabic term /hasib/ refers to a storm in land and the Qur’anic word
/q asif/ here refers to a sea-hurricane, and it is a tornado with a
severe sound as if the things are broken up.

The Qur’anic term /tabi‘/ which is a derivative of /taba‘/, refers to
the person who seeks for blood-price and retribution, and follows up his
appeal processes for lawsuit. Thus, He implies in this noble verse that:

You the oblivious! Are you of the opinion that this was the last time
that you went on a sea journey? Or do you feel safe and secure if going
on such a journey next time and a pounding tornado will not be sent to
you to inflict punishment on you for your lack of gratefulness? Then,
you shall find no savior facing Us?

The verse says:

***“Or do you feel secure that He will (not) send you back into it (the
sea) another time, and then send on you a fierce gale then drown you for
your disbelief; then you will find no prosecutor for you against Us?”***

Thus, we must not feel proud when having temporary comfort. The danger
is always near us. By being saved from an affliction, the danger is not
done with for good forever. Neglecting Allah after being saved serves as
a good example of ungratefulness towards Him. No power can face the
Lord, and Allah is not responsible to anyone.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 70
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي ءَادَمَ وَحَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرّ‌ِ
وَالْبَحْرِ وَرَزَقْنَاهُم مِنَ الطَّيّـِبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَي
كَثِيرٍ مِمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***70. “And, indeed, We have honored the children of Adam, and We
carried them on the land and the sea; and We provided them with
sustenance of the good things; and We preferred them greatly over many
of those We created.”***

As attaching importance to the personality of individuals is one way of
educating and guiding them, following its discussion concerning pagans
and deviants in the previous verses, here the glorious Qur’an deals with
the highly valued personality of humankind and Allah’s blessings
regarding them.

So that, noting this extraordinary high value, he should, not spoil such
a precious material easily, selling it at a cheap rate.

The noble verse says:

***“And, indeed, We have honored the children of Adam…”***

Afterwards, the Holy Qur’an refers to the three aspects of Allah’s
blessings to man, implying that He transported them at sea and on land
by the different means of transportation which He made available to
them.

The verse says:

***“…and We carries them on the land and sea…”***

And, the other one is that:

***“…and We provided them with sustenance of the good things…”***

It continues saying:

***“…and We preferred them greatly over many of those We created.”***

### Why Man Is the Most Superior of Allah’s Creatures

The answer is not very complicated for we know that man is the only
being that is formed of different potentialities, whether material and
spiritual, bodily and mentally, and he can grow up within
contradictions. Man is unlimited from the point of capacity and
development.

There is a famous tradition quoted from Hadrat Ali (as) which is a clear
evidence for this claim, where he says:

*“Allah has created all creatures into 3 different categories: Angels,
Animals and Human Beings. The angels have got reasoning without any
passion or fury but without intellect. The animals are collections of
passions and fury. But, man is a collection unity of both; one of which
must prevail. If his reason overcomes his passion, he will be superior
to the angels, and if his passions dominate his reason, he will be just
inferior to animals.”*[^11]

As for the human dignity, which is at times spiritual and acquired and
is with Allah, such as that kind of dignity (or honour) which is
exclusive to the men of virtue.

The Qur’an says:

***“Verily the most honourable of you with Allah is the most virtuous
one.”***[^12]

At other times, human dignity (or honour) is found in the process of
creation, like:

***“…in the best make.”***[^13]

which has been mentioned about the creation of man.

The objective of /karramn a/ in this verse, perhaps, is the second
aspect of it. Man’s dignity is both in his creation, intelligence,
intellect, and talents, and in having the Divine laws, the leadership of
the ‘immaculate’ and of being prostrated to by the angels.

Incidentally, though man has been excelled to all creatures by Allah,
even to the angels, his failure in selecting the right path, and his
indecent acts bring him down to the lowest possible positions:

***“…the lowest of the low”***[^14]***,***

which equates those of the animals and even lower than them.

***“…is as the likeness of the donkey…”***[^15]

The examples are:

***“…so his parable is like the parable of a dog…”***[^16]

and

***“…they are as cattle, rather they are more astray…”***[^17]***,***

or

***“…as stone or even worse…”***[^18]

This verse refers to both dignity (or honour) and virtues. The
differences of the two may consist of:

Honour: can be considered as advantages which are lacking in others,
while, virtues, consist of positive points which are also found in
others.

Honour refers to the Allah-given blessings which exist within man with
no struggles, while, virtues concern the blessings which have been
gained by the effort of man accompanied with the Divine succor.

Honour concerns the material blessings, while virtue relates to
spiritual blessings.

In conclusion, traveling is one of the necessities of human life for
meeting his needs and acquiring of experiences, which the Lord has
provided for man in land and at sea, calling it as one of His graces.

Then, there are the ‘good things’ which are of several kinds: The ‘clean
life’, the ‘clean offspring’, the ‘clean sustenance’.

Imam Baqir (as) says:

*“The clean sustenance is the same useful knowledge.”* [^19]

[^1]: Surah Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 50

[^2]: Surah Ash-Shu‘ar a, No. 26, verse 95

[^3]: Surah ’Isr a’, No. 17, verse 64

[^4]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 18, verse 12

[^5]: Tafsir-Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn

[^6]: Bihar, vol. 101, p. 136

[^7]: Kafi, vol. 5, p. 502

[^8]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 99

[^9]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 201

[^10]: Bihar, vol. 63, p. 268

[^11]: Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 188

[^12]: Surah Al-Hujur at, No. 49, verse 13

[^13]: Surah At-Teen, No. 99, verse 4

[^14]: Surah Al-Hujur at, No. 95, verse 5

[^15]: Surah Al-Jumu‘ah, No. 62, verse 5

[^16]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 176

[^17]: Ibid, verse 179

[^18]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 74

[^19]: Tafsir-Kanz-uld-Daqayiq


