Section 8: Every People Will Be Summoned with Their Own Imam
============================================================

Surah Isra’ – Verse 71
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَدْعُواْ كُلَّ اُنَاسٍ بإِمَامِهِمْ فَمَنْ اُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ
بِيَمِينِهِ فَاُوْلَئِكَ يَقْرَءُونَ كِتَابَهُمْ وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ
فَتِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “On the Day We shall call every people with their Imam (leader);
then whoever is given his book in his right hand; then these will read
their book (joyfully); and they will not be treated unjustly in the
least.***

This holy verse makes allusions to one of the other Divine blessings
given to man, and then it refers to the heavy responsibilities which run
parallel to these blessings and are upon him. At first, the Holy Qur’an
points to the ‘issue of leadership’ and its role in the course of human
destiny, implying that on the Hereafter Day He shall call each people
along with their ‘Imams’ ‘Leaders’.

The verse says:

***“On the Day We shall call every people with their Imam (leader)…”***

That is, those people who, in any age, accepted the call of their
contemporary prophets and their emissaries, will be with their leaders,
while those who bowed to the leadership of the Satan or the Imams of
aberration or tyrannical rulers and pioneers, will be accompanied by
them.

This exposition, while reflecting one of the means of the development of
man, serves as a dire warning to all the human beings that they should
show maximum vigilance in the course of the selection of leaders, not
allowing just anyone to take their lead.

### The Role of Leadership in Islam

It is narrated in a famous quotation from Imam Baqir (as), that whenever
he discussed upon the ‘principal pillars’ of Islam, he used to place the
‘leadership issue’ (Wilayah) as the fifth, and the most important of the
pillars, while, placing the ‘daily prayers’, which is meant to establish
one’s personal relationship with the Creator, and ‘fasting’, which is
the secret of campaign against passions, and paying of the poor-dues
(Zakat), which is a relationship of people with people, and, finally,
‘Hajj’, which relates to the social aspects of Islam, consist of the
other four pillars.

The ‘Imam’ (as), then, goes on to say:

*“Nothing is as important as the issue of leadership (Wilayah)”,*

for the execution of other four principles depends, entirely, on the
issue of leadership and can be realized solely in the light of this
principle.

It is also for this reason that we have in another famous quotation from
the Prophet (S) in a famous traditions he said:

*“He who passes away without having an ‘Imam’, a ‘leader’, his death
belongs to the category of ‘paganism’.”*

There are numerous examples throughout history when a nation has gained
the first row in the world in rank and position under the guidance of a
great and an eligible leader, while, the same nation has suffered a
devastating blow, and its eventual down fall has been brought about as a
result of a weak and incapable leadership that may be beyond
recognition.

In interpretation of this verse in Islamic sources, there are numerous
quotations introduced, all of which enlighten thoroughly the meaning of
the verse, indicating that the purpose of this verse is ‘Imamat’,
‘leadership’, as follows:

1) In an authentic documented tradition, quoted from Imam
Ali-Ibn-MūsarRida (as) by Shi‘ah as well as Sunni sources, we read that,
the ‘Imam’ (as), quoting from the prophet (S), narrated by his
forefathers, upon the commentary of this verse, said:

*“On that Day, every nation will be called along with its contemporary
Imam, ‘leader’, and the Book of their Lord, as well as the course of
practice of their prophet.”* [^1]

2) And, we have it also quoted by Imam Sadiq (as) saying:

*“Do you not express your praise and gratitude to Allah? When the
resurrection day comes, the Lord will call every nation along with the
one whose leadership it has accepted. We will be called* *along with the
Prophet (S) and you will be along with us. Where do you think you will
be taken to then? By the Lord of Ka‘bah to Paradise.”*

The Imam reiterated the last sentence three times.

3) Hadrat-i-Rida has said in a detailed tradition:

*“The issue of ‘Imamat’ (leadership) exhibits the position of the
prophets and is a heritage of the forerunners. It tackles with the issue
of substitution of Allah and the prophetic mission of the Prophet (S) as
well as the position of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen (as) along with the
replacement by Imam Hassan, as well as Imam Hussayn (as).”*

Then he said:

*“The Imam introduces those issues which are as ‘allowed’ by Allah as
they are, and the ones which are regarded ‘forbidden’ by the Lord as
such.*

*The Imam seeks to establish the limits which are ordained by Allah and
he defends the Lord’s religion, and invites (the people) to the path of
Allah through wisdom, good admonitions, and self-explanatory proofs.
And, finally, the Imam is the rein and head of the religion, order of
Muslims, the benefit to the believers in the world and their glory.”*

Again, he remarked:

*“The ‘Imam’ is the flourishing root of Islam and the ‘prime branch’ of
it. The ‘Imam’ is an honest friend, a kind and friendly father, a
truly-loyal brother and a companion, just like an affectionate and
honest mother towards her young child, and a refuge for Allah’s
servants.”*

 Then, he said:

*“The ‘Imam’ is the Lord’s trustee on the earth and among His people. He
is the Lord’s proof for His servants and is His substitute in the
cities. He calls (the people) to Allah and defends His sanctuaries.”*
[^2]

4) Quoting Ibn Abbas, Muj ahid says:

*“The Messenger of Allah (S) has remarked: ‘As the day of resurrection
comes about, the Lord commands Gabriel to sit down at the gate of the
Paradise, and do not let any one in unless he possesses the admission
card and passage of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (as)’.”*[^3]

There are two types of leaders mentioned in the Qur’an. The first one
includes the leaders of ‘light’ and ‘guidance’; while the latter
comprises of leaders who lead to the Fire and misguidance. The second
group compel people to follow their lead by force, threats, allurement,
and humiliation.

5) Abū Basir once told Imam Sadiq (as):

*“I witness that verily you are my Imam.”*

 The Imam replied:

*“Every group will be mustered with their own Imam in the
Hereafter.”*[^4]

6) And, again, the same Imam remarked:

*“He who rejects or refuses to accept one of the living ‘Imams’, he has
certainly rejected the ‘Imams’ (and ‘leaders’) of the past.”* [^5]

Incidentally, the issue of ‘Imamat’, (leadership) and ‘Wilayat’
(mastership) are the subject-core of life, and are within the context of
one’s very life, and it is not to be regarded as a marginal or merely an
ideological issue side-lined by others.

The issue of ‘leadership’ may make people either happy or wretched.
Therefore, the result of selection of a leader and obedience to him is a
burning one till the threshold of the Hereafter.

The Hereafter is not only the tribunal for individuals, but it is also
the great court set-up for nations, peoples, parties, schools of
thought, and for governments.

Then, the verse implies that the people will be categorized into two
different groups in the doomsday. Those whose record of deeds is
delivered to their right hand, and this is done with their pride, joy,
and pleasure when they read it joyfully, and no cruelty is done to them.

And, he, who has not found a way to be saved in the world and who has
not been led well, he will not seek his way out into the Paradise in the
hereafter.

The verse says:

***“…then whoever is given his book in his right hand; then these will
read their book (joyfully)…”***

In conclusion, it is worth noting that the Arabic term /fati/ signifies
a thin noodle which is spilt within a date-stone and which here implies
an ‘insignificant’ amount.

Therefore, the chastisement in the resurrection day is a hundred percent
just and fair, for, on that Day one receives punishment and reward
commensurate with his amount of sin or decent act he has undertaken to
perform, even it is very insignificant.

The verse says:

***“…and they will not be treated unjustly in the least.”***

Surah Isra’ – Verse 72
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن كَانَ فِي هذِهِ أَعْمَي فَهُوَ فِي الاَخِرَةِ أَعْمَي وَأَضَلُّ
سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***72. “And, whoever is blind in this (life), he will (also) be blind in
the Hereafter and (even) more erring from the way.”***

Those who have turned a blind eye to the face of the truth in this
world, will be likewise and even more misled in the Hereafter.

They will neither be led in this world to the way of guidance, nor do
they find the way to Heaven and prosperity in Hereafter, for they have
turned a blind eye to all the realities, thus they have deprived
themselves from all of the blessings which the Lord had bestowed upon
them.

As the world Hereafter is a grand reflection of this world, it would by
no means be astonishing to find that such blind-folded people enter the
doomsday scene in their like manner.

The verse says:

***“And, whoever is blind in this (life), he will (also) be blind in the
Hereafter and (even) more erring from the way.”***

### Explanations

In addition to those who rise up from death as deaf and dumb in the
resurrection day, there will also be seen scenes where people are as
blind, which case has its roots in their ‘ inwardly blindness’ in this
world.

Some Islamic quotations denote that whoever is required to go on a ‘Hajj
pilgrimage’ but he does not perform the ceremonies on site, or he who
reads the Qur’an but he does not practice accordingly, will be mustered
blind in Hereafter.[^6]

Being inwardly blind is a worse situation than being a really blind by
eyes. As Hadrat Ali (as) remarks:

*“The worst kind of blindness, is the blindness at heart.”*

He (as) has also stated:

*“The worst (and the hardest form) of blindness is (when) someone is
blind unto our excellence.”*[^7]

Cases of blindness on the resurrection day, have also been reiterated in
other verses as well, among which one may refer to verse 97, of the
Surah ‘Isra’ which says:

***“We shall muster them on the Day of Resurrection upon their faces,
blind, dumb, and deaf whose dwelling shall be Hell…”.***

And again verse 125 of Surah TaHa, No. 20, indicates the rising blind
from the dead on the resurrection day as the consequence of being
inwardly blind and neglectful to the Divine verses in this world and
turning away form accepting the truth.

Imam Baqir (as) remarks:

*“Whoever does not acquire the true spiritual benefit by witnessing the
creation, is far worse blinded in the Hereafter which he has not
witnessed.”* [^8]

**Question:** We have it in some verses that on Hereafter Day the
sinners are commanded to read their record. How would that be feasible
and compatible despite such verses with regard to their conditions of
blindness?

**Answer:** Their case of blindness is confined to one of the passing
stages of the resurrection day; they will regain their eye-sight in
other phases, witnessing clearly those cases and facts which they have
failed to grasp in the world.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 73
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَادُوا لَيَفْتِنُونَكَ عَنِ الَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَيْكَ
لِتَفْتَرِيَ عَلَيْنَا غَيْرَهُ وَإِذاً لاَتَّخَذُوكَ خَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. “And verily they were about to tempt you away from what We
revealed to you so that you would ascribe against Us other than that,
and then they would certainly have taken you as a friend.”***

Referring to the issues involved in previous holy verses regarding
paganism and the pagans, here, He issues a dire warning to the blissful
Prophet (S) to be on his guard against this group and their temptations,
lest the slightest weakness permeates his beliefs in his campaign
against paganism and idolatry, which are to be ensued decisively to the
end.

The verse says:

***“And verily they were about to tempt you away from what We revealed
to you so that you would ascribe against Us other than that, and then
they would certainly have taken you as a friend.”***

In some quotations, we read that the pagans wanted the Prophet (S) to
pay his respect to the idols or they asked for a one-year respite for
their pursuit of their worship of the idols, in which case, the prophet
(S) was about to condescend to their request.

However, the Almighty protected him. Nevertheless, such quotations are
discarded and they are incompatible with the principle of infallibility
and decisiveness of the Prophet (S) which has been mentioned in other
verses of the Qur’an and which is his usual course in his life.[^9]

The author of Tafsir Atyab-ul-Bayan states that: As we have it in the
verse: /‘an-il-laŏi ’auhayn a/

“***…from what We revealed…***”

instead of /‘amm a ’auhayn a/, this indicates that attempts made by the
pagans for changing the view of the Prophet (S), relates to his
diversion of attention from a particular person and not to the revealed
matters. However, who has it been the fellow whom Allah has sent His
revelations about?

There is a tradition narrated from Imam Baqir and Imam Kazim (as)
concerning the issue of ‘Wilayat’ (Succession) of Hadrat Ali (as), in
which, the Lord has made certain recommendations to the Prophet (S)
through revelations.

The Lord has revealed this verse in order to make the Prophet (S) remain
heedless of the jealousy of the people and their rejection as well as
their intolerant attitudes, and to invalidate the attempts of the pagans
for making the Prophet (S) exceed the limits.

Surah Isra’ – Verses 74 - 75
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلآ أَن ثَبَّتْنَاكَ لَقَدْ كِدتَّ تَرْكَنُ إِلَيْهِمْ شَيْئاً
قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذاً لاََذَقْنَاكَ ضِعْفَ الْحَيَاةِ وَضِعْفَ الْمَمَاتِ ثُمَّ لاَ
تَجِدُ لَكَ عَلَيْنَا نَصِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***74. “And had it not been that We had established you already, you
would certainly have been near to incline towards them a little.”***  
***75. “In that case, We would certainly have made you taste a double
(punishment) in this life and a double (punishment) after death, then
you would not have found any helper for you against Us.”***

If such were not the case that We had protected you by bestowing upon
you the power of infallibility and of Our grace, you were almost about
to approach them, showing your inclination, thus putting into practice
some of their wishes.

The verse says:

***“And had it not been that We had established you already, you would
certainly have been near to incline towards them a little.”***

In such a case, We would make you taste twice the penalty of the world
and the Hereafter. That is, whatever amount of punishment We have
procured for the sinners in this world and in the hereafter, and after
their death, We would similarly double it for you.

This statement provides justifications for the evil and grand nature of
the sin as well as that of the position of the sinner. That is, the
greater the position of the sinner, the greater the sin and, hence, the
greater its punishment would be.

The verse says:

***“In that case, We would certainly have made you taste a double
(punishment) in this life and a double (punishment) after death, then
you would not have found any helper for you against Us.”***

Imam Rida (as) and Ibn Abbas have both been quoted as saying that the
Messenger of Allah (S) enjoyed the ‘*position of infallibility*’ and was
*‘immune against all sins’*[^10].

Nevertheless, this verse, which is addressed to the Prophet (S), aims at
dissuading the faithful from showing the slightest inclination towards
the pagans in all commandments of Allah.

In the meantime, this verse is not incompatible in any way with the
Prophet’s (S) infallibility.

The sentence,

***“you would certainly have been near to incline toward them”***

does not imply committing sin.

Moreover, the sentence:

***“…Had We not established…”***,

is conditional. That is, if We had not provided protection, perhaps you
were going to be inclined. However, as that protection was provided that
inclination was non-existent.

In other cases also conditionality ‘if’ does not imply decisiveness in
fulfilling the action, as in verses 44 to 46 of Surah Al-Haqqah which
mean if he falsely attributes, We cut off his main vein.

Other similar case includes verse 65 of Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39 which
says:

***“…surely if you associate (with Allah), your work will certainly come
to naught…”***

which implies that the act has not been performed.

Thus, the slightest backing down from divine principals and values is
not allowed, since that will be regarded as a victory for the enemies.

In Islamic sources, we read:

*“When the above three verses were revealed, the Prophet (S) invoked:*

*“O’ Lord! Do not leave me on my own even within the space of one
blinking of eyes!”*

This very meaningful prayer of the Prophet (S) provides an important
lesson for all of us, showing that all must seek refuge to Allah and
rely on His grace while one notes that even ‘Immaculate prophets’ have
not been able to resist slipping and stumbling, much less in our case in
face of all satanical temptations.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 76
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَادُوا لَيَسْتَفِزُّونَكَ مِنَ الاَرْضِ لِيُخْرِجُوكَ مِنْهَا
وإِذاً لاَّ يَلْبَثُونَ خِلاَفَكَ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***76. “And verily they were about to startling you from the land so as
to expel you from it; and then, they would not have tarried after you
but a little.”***

It is said that this verse and the following one have been revealed
about the people of Mecca who gathered and decided to expel the Prophet
(S) from Mecca.

After that, this decision was seconded and changed into the verdict for
the execution of the Prophet (S) in Mecca, then the house of the Prophet
(S) was surrounded in all directions. As we know the Prophet (S) was
miraculously saved and started to Medina, which marks the beginning of
Hijrah (the Exodus).

In the previous verses, of course, we noted that the pagans wanted to
influence the prophet (S), making him deviate from the right path, when
Allah’s grace came to his help, disrupting their plans.

But, following that, they embraced on a new plan to thwart his call.
They planned to oust him to a distant spot which was out of reach. This
plan was also thwarted.

The verse says:

***“And verily they were about to startling you from the land so as to
expel you from it…”***

The noble verse implies that you were about to be ousted skillfully
according to their well-calculated plan from this land.

Then the Qur’an issues a dire warning to them meaning that if they
succeeded they would have entangled themselves in a severe Divine
punishment. Thus, they would not remain there much longer after you.

The verse says:

***“…and then, they would not have tarried after you but a little.”***

For this was a very great sin, whereby people might seek to oust and
expel their compassionate leader and their savior from their city,
thereby, showing their ungratefulness towards the greatest blessing of
Allah.

Such a people are not entitled to live and a devastating penalty would,
therefore, call on them. This event happened for soon, after a short
time, in the ‘Battle of Badr’, many of them were killed, while a few of
them were able to escape or to embrace the faith.

Thus, one notes that the mere presence of the Prophet (S) among the
people may obstruct the Divine punishment. In case they oust him from
amongst themselves, or distance him, they are certain to perish
instantly.

The blissful Qur’an does two things simultaneously. While it informs us
about the invisible world, it also provides the Prophet (S) with
information with respect to the frustrations and failures of the
conspiracies of his enemies, hence, condoling him.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 77
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُنَّةَ مَن قَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا قَبْلَكَ مِن رُّسُلِنَا وَلاَ تَجِدُ
لِسُنَّتِنَا تَحْوِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***77. “(This was Our) way with those of Our messengers whom We sent
before you, and you shall not find any change in Our way.”***

Providing support for the prophets as well as extermination of the
pagans and oppressors, have been among the courses of treatment of the
Lord.

It has been mentioned in verse 13, of Surah ‘Ibrahim, saying:

***“And those who disbelieved told their Messengers: ‘We will certainly
expel you from our land, or else you return to our creed.’ Then their
Lord revealed to them: ‘Certainly We will perish the unjust’.”***

Therefore, He announces that this punishment is not solely exclusive to
the Arab pagans; this procedure of Ours has been in action with regard
to the prophets who were sent before you as well, and no changes have
taken place with regard to this course of action.

The verse says:

***“(This was Our) way with those of Our messengers whom We sent before
you, and you shall not find any change in Our way.”***

This course of action stems from a clear source of logic, whereby, such
an ungrateful people who break up their source of guiding light they, in
fact, ruin their own safeguard fortresses.

Certainly such a nation is not worthy of the Divine grace, and they will
be encompassed by the due chastisement. We know that the Lord does not
discriminate unjustly between his servants, and He gives similar
punishments for equal set of acts in equal conditions. And, such is the
significance of unchanged ability of Allah’s way of treatment.

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan and Safi

[^2]: Tuhaf-ul-‘Uqul, and ‘Athar-ul-Sadiqin, Harf-ul-Alaf

[^3]: Manaqib Ibn Maqazili, p. 131

[^4]: Tafsir Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn

[^5]: Bihar, vol. 23, p. 95 and ’Ikm al-ud-Din

[^6]: Tafsir Kanz-ud-Daqayiq

[^7]: Tafsir Kanz-ud-Daqayiq

[^8]: Tauhid Sadūq

[^9]: Tafsir Al-Mizan

[^10]: Jamaul Jam’a, Tafsir Safi


