Section 12: Those Gifted with Knowledge – The Ministry of Moses
===============================================================

Surah Isra’ – Verses 101 - 102
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ءَاتَيْنَا مُوسَي تِسْعَ ءَايَاتٍ بَيّـِنَاتِ فَسْأَلْ بَنِي
إِسْرآئِيلَ إِذْ جَآءَهُمْ فَقَالَ لَهُ فِرْعَوْنُ إِنّـِي لاَظُنُّكَ
يَا مُوسَي مَسْحُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لَقَدْ عَلِمْتَ مَآ أَنزَلَ هؤُلآءِ إِلاَّ رَبُّ السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالاَرْضِ بَصَآئِرَ وإِنّـِي لاَظنُّكَ يَا فِرْعَوْنُ مَثْبُوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***101. “And indeed We give Moses nine clear signs, so ask the Children
of Israel when he came to them, and, Pharaoh said to him: ‘O’ Mūsa!
Verily I think you are bewitched’.”***  
***102. “He said: ‘Indeed you know that none has sent these (miracles)
down save the Lord of the heavens and the earth (as) clear proofs, and I
think you lost, O’ Pharaoh!’”***

In several of the foregoing verses, we noted as to what peculiar demands
the pagans used to put to the Prophet (S). We, here, find Him, in fact,
exposing one of the examples of such scenes in preceding generations as
to how they witnessed extraordinary events and miracles and they, yet,
looked for pretexts, rejecting everything.

At first, He says:

***“And indeed We give Moses nine clear signs…”***

These divine signs consist of: The stick, the white hand, the storm,
locusts, one kind of plant-pest called /qummal/, the over-increase in
the number of frogs, blood, drought, and deficiencies.

Later, in order to stress this point further, He adds in implication to
Moses that if your opponents even reject this matter outright, in order
to deliver an ultimatum to them, tell them to ask the sons of Israel as
to how they were when these verses came down to them.

Notwithstanding these, not only they did not subject themselves to the
acceptance of the fact, but also they accused Moses of being a sorcerer,
and of being crazy.

The verse continues saying:

***“…so ask the Children of Israel when he came to them, and, Pharaoh
said to him: ‘O’ Mūsa! Verily I think you are bewitched’.”***

This is the case with all the arrogant people who used to accuse the
godly men of sorcery or insanity for their innovations and their
movement against the treatment of corrupt communities and their
exhibition of extraordinary behaviour, so as to be able to influence
naive people, scattering them from around the prophets.

Thus verse 102 shows Moses (as) did not keep quiet in face of all this
under accusation, affirming categorically, where it declares:

***“He said: ‘Indeed you know that none has sent these (miracles) down
save the Lord of the heavens and the earth (as) clear proofs, and I
think you lost, O’ Pharaoh!’”***

Therefore, O pharaoh!, you reject the facts while having full knowledge
of the facts and while you are cognizant of them. I believe you,
Pharaoh, will eventually perish.

### Two Points in Conclusion

**The first point:** In the Glorious Qur’an, there are numerous verses
and miracles mentioned concerning Moses, among which one might refer to
the following:

1. Conversion of the stick into a giant snake and the act of swallowing
of the tools of the sorcerers.[^1]

2. The white hand or the shining of the hands of Mūsa (as) like a source
of light.[^2]

3. The pounding storms.[^3]

4. ‘Locusts’ which dominated their farms and their trees, and served as
a nuisance for their flourishing agriculture. [^4]

5. One plant-pest agent which exterminates cereals, called /qummal/[^5]

6. The frogs which emerged from the Nile River and reproduced to such an
extent that they made people’s lives miserable and full of
difficulties.[^6]

7. ‘Nose-bleeding’ or ‘blood’ which signifies the universal
counteraction of nose bleeding or the turning of the Nile into the
colour of the blood which made the river water neither good for drinking
nor fit for agriculture. [^7]

8. The splitting of the sea in such a way that the Children of Israel
could pass through it.[^8]

9. The descending of /mann/ and /salwa/ which was explained under verse
57, of Surah Al-Baqarah.

10. The gushing of the springs from stone.[^9]

11. The splitting away of part of the mountain and its placement as a
canopy over them.[^10]

12) Famine and draught as well as shortage of fruits.[^11]

13. Returning to life of a murdered individual whose death instigated
intensive opposition among the Children of Israel.[^12]

14. Use of the cloud shadows as canopy which protected them in a
miraculous way in intense desert heat. [^13]

The issue in question in here is: What is the objective of ‘the nine
verses’, which have been alluded to in the verses under discussion?

The expressions utilized in these verses reveal the fact that they
signify miracles which were mentioned in connection with Pharaoh and the
adherents of Pharaoh, and not the ones which were involved with the
Children of Israel themselves, like the descending of ‘Mann and Salwa’,
and the emergence of the spring from a stone, and the like.

Considering this point, one can claim that the five topics which are
dealt with in verse 133 of Surah Al-’A‘raf, are among these nine signs:
Storm, plant-pest, locusts, over reproduction of frogs, and blood.

Undoubtedly, the two famous miracles of Mūsa (as), that is, the issue of
the ‘stick’, and the ‘white hand’ are among the nine signs, specially,
it is noteworthy that we find verses 10 to 12 of Surah An-Nahl the same
expression of the ‘nine signs’, which are mentioned after the statement
of these two great miracles.

These all make up the seven supernatural or ‘extraordinary events’. Now,
let us turn to the other two verses. Undoubtedly, the drowning of the
people of Pharaoh, and the like, cannot be included among these signs,
for the goal of explaining of the signs is to guide the people of the
Pharaoh and not those which caused their destruction and extermination.

Concentrating on Surah Al-’A‘raf, in which we find many of these verses,
exhibits the fact that the objective in mind of the other two signs have
been the ‘draught’ and ‘the shortage of all kinds of fruits’, for after
the miracle of the stick and the ‘white hand’ and before the mentioning
of the five signs of the storm and the locust, the holy verse says:

***“And certainly We afflicted the clan of Pharaoh with drought and
scarcity of fruits, so that they may take admonition.”***[^14]

**The second point:** who is the one questioning the Prophet (S)?

Apparently, the verses show that the Prophet (S) was commissioned to
investigate from the Children of Israel about the nine signs which were
revealed to Moses (as), asking them about how the people of the Pharaoh
rejected the authenticity of the call of Moses (as) despite all those
clear signs under so many different pretexts.

But, as such a person like the Prophet (S) did not require putting to
them such a query despite all his knowledge and wisdom; some
commentators have still regarded other addressees as the agents who have
put the question to them.

However, taking into consideration that the question raised was not the
one put by the Prophet (S) for himself, rather, it was put for the
acceptance by the pagans, it does not matter that the investigator be
the Prophet (S) himself so that the pagans should know that if the
Prophet (S) did not accept to give in the various proposals of the
pagans, it was because such proposals did not have any motives for the
sake of seeking the truth.

On the contrary, their attitude was based on obstinacy, fanaticism and
hostility, and their story was like the one we read about in the story
of Moses (as) and Pharaoh.

Surah Isra’ – Verses 103 - 104
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَرَادَ أَن يَسْتَفِزَّهُم مِنَ الاَرْضِ فَاَغْرَقْناهُ وَمَن مَعَهُ
جَمِيعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْنَا مِن بَعْدِهِ لِبَنِي إِسْرآئِيلَ اسْكُنُوا الاَرْضَ فإِذَا
جَآءَ وَعْدُ الاَخِرَةِ جِئْنَا بِكُمْ لَفِيفاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***103. “So he (Pharaoh) decided to scare them from that land; but We
drowned him and those with him, all together.”***

***104. “And, after that, We said to the Children of Israel: ‘Settle in
the land and when the promise of the Hereafter comes to pass, We shall
bring you (all) assemble together.”***

The Arabic term /’istifz az/ signifies ‘expelling by force’. The Qur’an
has repeatedly made allusions to these methods of oppression towards the
men of Allah and their eventual frustration. They put ‘Ibrahim within
fire, the Lord turned the fire cold.

They threw Yusuf down the well, the Lord elevated him to the rank of
‘Aziz in Egypt. They expelled the Prophet (S) from Mecca, Allah bestowed
on him the government of the entire world of Islam. Such is the Divine
way of treatment and the rule of Allah, Who has got suitable contrivance
against the dirty tricks of the evildoers.

Therefore, the Qur’an implies in this verse that since the Pharaoh was
not able to resist against the pounding reasoning and rationales of
Mūsa, he took recourse to the same tricks employed by all oppressors who
are illogical throughout the ages, as the verse says:

***“So he (Pharaoh) decided to scare them from that land; but We drowned
him and those with him, all together.”***

And, thus, He implies: We told the Children of Israel, to settle down in
the lands of Egypt, Damascus and Bayt-ul-Muqaddas.

However, when the time of after-life arrives, We shall make you
assemble, appearing in the Court of Justice altogether.

The verse says:

***“And, after that, We said to the Children of Israel: ‘Settle in the
land and when the promise of the Hereafter comes to pass, We shall bring
you (all) assemble together.”***

The Arabic term /lafif/ means interrelated large groups.

### What Land is the Objective of /’ard/ In These Verses?

We read in the previous verses that the Lord told the Children of Israel
that now that you have conquered the enemy, you must settle down in the
‘promised land’. Does this signify the land of Egypt?

(This same word, which has been stated in the previous verse that says
Pharaoh wanted to expel them from that land, is mentioned in this sense
with the same meaning; other verses of the Qur’an also affirm the fact
that the Children of Israel became the heirs and the inheritors of them)

Or else, this is an allusion made to the ‘Holy Land’ of Palestine, for
the Children of Israel went to the land of Palestine after this event
and were commissioned to enter it.

However, we do not consider it as a remote possibility that both lands
have been the objective of it, for the Children of Israel became both
the inheritors of the lands of the Pharaohs, as testified by the Qur’an,
and they became the proprietors of the land of Palestine.

In the meantime, does the Qur’anic phrase /wa‘d-ul-’ axirah/ signify the
Hereafter? The answer to this question is apparently positive, for the
sentence:

***“…We shall bring you (all) assemble together”***

provides us with the corresponding meaning. Some commentators have also
voiced another possibility.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 105
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِالْحَقّ‌ِ أَنزَلْنَاهُ وَبالْحَقّ‌ِ نَزَلَ وَمَآ أَرْسَلْنَاكَ
إِلاَّ مُبَشّـِراً وَنَذِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***105. “And, with the truth have We sent it (the Qur’an) down and with
the truth it has come down; and We have not sent you except as a Bearer
of glad tidings and as a warner.”***

The authenticity of the Qur’an has been guaranteed from distortions. The
Qur’an has been verily revealed in truth, and the Divine revelation has
also been received its destination safely, while, at the same time, the
Satans have been unable to do it any harm.

Therefore, once again, the Qur’an calls on the grandeur and glory of
this heavenly Book, providing answers to the objections and pretexts of
the dissidents.

At first, it says:

***“And, with the truth have We sent it (the Qur’an) down…”***

At times, one may start doing something, but, because he is limited in
his power, he may not be able to finish it up to the end.

However, one who has knowledge of everything, and is capable to fulfill
everything he does while he is correctly positioned and ends everything
in the right fashion, thus actualizing it to the fullest. For instance,
man might sometimes let water out of a spring while it is pure though it
might reach the consumption point quite impure for he is unable to
preserve it through.

However, he who has command of his job quite well in all respects, he
can fill everyone’s jar who is thirsty with pure water.

The Qur’an is just such a Book which has been descended with the truth
from the Lord, and He has guarded and protected it in its courses from
any point of view, whether be it the stage that Gabriel was the means of
revelation and where the recipient has been the Prophet (S) and has been
preserved quite well in such a way that the passage of time has even not
caused any distortions in it, and will never be distorted, for the Lord
has undertaken Himself its preservation.

Thus, this source of ‘pure water’ of the Divine revelation, will remain
untouched through to the end of the world.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and with the truth it has come down…”***

Concluding His statement, He says:

***“…and We have not sent you except as a Bearer of glad tidings and as
a warner.”***

And you have got no right to introduce any changes in the context of the
Qur’an.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 106
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُرْءَاناً فَرَقْنَاهُ لِتَقْرَأَهُ عَلَي النَّاسِ عَلَي مُكْثٍ
وَنَزَّلْنَاهُ تَنْزِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***106. “And (it is) Qur’an which We have divided (in sections) so that
you may read it to the people at a slow pace and We have sent it down
gradually in portions.”***

One of the objections of the pagans related to the fact as to why the
Qur’an has not been revealed as a whole in one part, when they said:

***“…why has not the Qur’an been revealed to him all at once?…”***[^15]

The verse under discussion is in response to their objection.

As the verses of the Qur’an relate to different events, and they are
meant to meet the requirements of all classes of the people throughout
history, they are revealed in sections so as to correspond to the
various events, thus becoming more pleasant for the audience.

Would that ever be possible to collect all the events of 23 years in one
single day so that the problems raised therein be revealed in the Qur’an
instantly?

The verses says:

***“And (it is) Qur’an which We have divided (in sections) so that you
may read it to the people at a slow pace and We have sent it down
gradually in portions.”***

Incidentally, the gradual revelation implies the continuous relationship
of the holy Prophet (S) with the source of revelation. However, instant
revelation would not guarantee such a relationship more than once.

Moreover, an instructor and a reformer must have a long term program in
mind and must not be unaware of the new needs.

Thus, the Holy Qur’an does not contain only instructive aspects but it
also possesses some practical aspects as well, which must be gradually
implemented, and such an implementation of hundreds of commandments in a
society which has got hundreds of sorts of corruption, at once, is an
impossibility.

Surah Isra’ – Verses 107 - 109
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ ءَامِنُوا بِهِ أَوْ لاَ تُؤْمِنُوا إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اُوتُوا
الْعِلْمَ مِن قَبْلِهِ إِذَا يُتْلَي عَلَيْهِمْ يَخِرُّونَ
لِلاَذْقَانِ سُجَّداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُونَ سُبْحَانَ رَبّـِنَآ إِن كَانَ وَعْدُ رَبّـِنَا
لَمَفْعُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَخِرُّونَ لِلاَذْقَانِ يَبْكُونَ وَيَزِيدُهُمْ خُشُوعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***107. “Say: ‘Believe in it or believe not, (it makes no difference to
Allah), verily, those who were given knowledge before it, when it is
read to them, they fall down prostrate on their faces, adoring.”***

***108. “And they say: “Glory be to our Lord! Verily, our Lord’s promise
is to be fulfilled.”***

***109. “And they fall down (in prostration) weeping and it adds up to
their humility.”***

In this noble verse, and in the following one, the Lord has commanded
His prophet to remain rather heedless of such people who are companions
of paganism and ‘Ignorance’.

Whether they embrace the faith or they reject it altogether it does not
matter, for a better stock which includes those who are knowledgeable
and who have studied the heavenly Books, and have practiced according to
the Divine religions, have asserted their belief, confirming that he is
the prophet who has been promised to emerge in their authentic religious
books, and whenever the Lord’s verses are read to them, they fall to the
ground, prostrating in face of all the Lord’s glory and for implementing
what is promised in their Divine Books that He appoints Muhammad (S) as
His Prophet and sends down the Book to him.

The verse says:

***“Say: ‘Believe in it or believe not, (it makes no difference to
Allah), verily, those who were given knowledge before it, when it is
read to them, they fall down prostrate on their faces, adoring.”***

This is what is intended by the promise mentioned in the verse which
says:

***“And they say: “Glory be to our Lord! Verily, our Lord’s promise is
to be fulfilled.”***

By this, they mean: Our Lord’s promise is to be fulfilled. They express
this way their utmost commitment and faith towards the Divinity of the
Lord and His pure Attributes as well as to the promises He has kept.

This is a speech within which, both, faith in monotheism as well as the
attributes of the Lord and His justice are included while the prophecy
of the Prophet (S) and belief in resurrection are contained. Thus, they
assemble all the religious principles in one concise sentence.

Again in verse 109, to stress further the point, and the impact of those
Divine verses as well as of this loving prostration, the Qur’an implies
that they fall into a state of prostration (involuntarily) and start
crying, and the reading of these verses always adds up to their modesty.

They never stay in one state or mood, rather they try to climb up toward
the peak of development, and continuously their modesty increases.
‘Modesty’, is the state of humbleness and the physical and spiritual
politeness, in which case one bows to the command of Allah and His
obedience.

The verse says:

***“And they fall down (in prostration) weeping and it adds up to their
humility.”***

Incidentally, the Qur’anic term / yaxirrūna/ is derived from /xarir/ in
the sense of the whispering of the sound of water which is flowing
downward from up. This also refers to those who, losing their control,
fall into a state of prostration before Allah, worship Him in their
fairly loud voices.

The Arabic term /’aŏq an/ is the plural form of /ŏaqan/ which means
‘chin’, it signifies having absolute modesty, in which case, not only
one’s forehead but his face and chin also touch the floor as well.

In conclusion, another clear lesson drawn from the above verses relates
to the interrelationship of science with Faith.

The Qur’an implies whether you accept these Divine verses or not, men of
knowledge will not only accept them believing in them but they also tend
to fall into a state of prostration for the love of Allah which is like
a burning desire within them, letting their tears be shed in abundance
from their eyes.

Their modesty and humbleness is then being augmented while, at the same
time, their polite behaviour and their respect increases unto these
verses.

It is only those ignorant mean individuals who sometimes disregard
heedlessly, and at times ridicule, when confronting the facts: and even
if such individuals happen to be attracted to the faith, their belief
would be weak, fleeting, and void of love, activity and of any warmth.

Moreover, this meaning reflects a further emphasis on the obliteration
of the empty hypothesis of those who believe that religion has got a
correlation with the ignorance of mankind.

The glorious Qur’an, in contradiction with this claim, repeatedly
stresses the fact that science and religion are always associated with
each other in various circumstances. A deep and sustaining devotion in
faith can only be attained in having a deep knowledge, and knowledge
borrows its weight in higher echelons from faith. ‘Remember’

Surah Isra’ – Verse 110
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ ادْعُوا اللَّهَ أَوِ ادْعُوا الرَّحْمَانَ أَيّاً مَا تَدْعُواْ
فَلَهُ الاَسْمآءُ الْحُسْنَي وَلاَ تَجْهَرْ بِصَلاَتِكَ وَلاَ
تُخَافِتْ بِهَا وَابْتَغِ بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ سَبيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***110. “Say: ‘Call upon Allah, or call upon the Beneficent; whichever
you call upon; then the best names belong to Him; and do not utter your
prayer too aloud nor be silent with regard to it, and seek a way between
that’.”***

In some of the commentaries, we have it that once the holy Prophet (S)
was praying in Masjid-ul-Haram, and was saying:

*“O’ Allah! O’ Rahman!”*

Some people thought he was calling two Gods one of whom was ‘Allah’ and
the other one was (Rahman’ (Compassionate). The verse was revealed and
wiped out that paradox.[^16]

In other words, the pagans and the polytheists used to ask as to why the
prophet called the Lord by various names while he was claiming to be
monotheist.

The Qur’an, answering them, says:

***“Say: ‘Call upon Allah, or call upon the Beneficent; whichever you
call upon…”***

Whichever you choose, it makes no difference; He has got to have various
good names:

***“…then the best names belong to Him…”***

Those blindfolded individuals, at times, call a person or a place by
different names, each of which presents one part or a portion of its
existence.

Is it, therefore, surprising that the Lord, whose Essence is infinite in
every respect and Who is the source of all perfections, bounties, and
goodness, be called by one specific name for whatever He does with
respect to that job and whatever virtue His Holy Essence Possesses?

At the end of the holy verse, calling the attention to the discussion of
the pagans in Mecca who used to ask with regard to the prayers of the
Prophet (S) as to why he used to recite his prayers with a loud voice,
disturbing them, He commands the Prophet (S):

***“…and do not utter your prayer too aloud nor be silent with regard to
it, and seek between, that’.”***

The noble verse implies: Neither recite it with a loud voice, shouting
it; nor in a state of whispering it, in which case your lips might be
moving and no voice heard.

Incidentally, we have it in the Shi‘ah and Sunni quotations that; The
Lord has got 99 names, and whoever calls Him by one of them, will
succeed and will be saved. [^17]

However, we must know that when speaking of numerating of these names,
it does not mean that we utter them so as to enter the Paradise or
become the one whose prayers are accepted.

On the contrary, they are intended for us to be inculcated with the
values attached to them and implementing of those values relating to the
names such as: Wise, Compassionate, Merciful, Generous, and Blissful in
ourselves so as to make us both worthy of the Paradise and make our
prayers acceptable in all cases.

Surah Isra’ – Verse 111
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلِ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي لَمْ يَتَّخِذْ وَلَداً وَلَمْ يَكُن
لَّهُ شَرِيكٌ فِي الْمُلْكِ وَلَمْ يَكُن لَهُ وَلِيٌّ مّـِنَ الذُّلّ‌ِ
وَكَبّـِرْهُ تَكْبِيرَاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***111. “And say: ‘(All) Praise is Allah’s, Who has not taken unto Him a
son; nor has He got any partner in the Sovereignty; and there is not for
Him any helper out of humbleness.’ And magnify Him with all
magnificence.”***

We finally arrive at the last verse of this Surah, the verse which ends
with the praise of Allah just as it started with the praising of His
pure existence. In fact, this holy verse is a conclusion, culminating
all of the monotheistic issues of this Surah and the content of all
those monotheistic concepts.

Addressing the Prophet (S), He says:

***“And say: ‘(All) Praise is Allah’s, Who has not taken unto Him a son;
nor has He got any partner in the Sovereignty; and there is not for Him
any helper out of humbleness.’…”***

Such a Lord, with those attributes, stands far too superior to whatever
you conjecture. Thus, glorify Him and get to know His immensely
boundless magnitude.

The verse concludes:

***“…And magnify Him with all magnificence.”***

The above verse negates all assistance and generic like being for Allah
whether be it of a lower grade (like a son) or some counterpart for Him,
(like a partner), or that one who stands as superior, (like a guardian).

The Late Tabarsi quotes from some commentators (in Majma‘-ul-Bayan) that
this verse provides the refutation of the belief of three groups:

First, that of the Christians and the Jews who regarded Allah as having
a son; the secondly that of the Arab pagans who regarded Him as having a
partner; thirdly, that of those star-worshippers and the Zoroastrians
who regarded Allah as having a guardian and an assistant.

### In Conclusion: What is ‘Takbir’, or Glorification of Allah?

Here, the blissful Qur’an commands the Prophet (S) emphatically to
glorify Allah. This does not merely imply that one must believe in the
glory of the Lord just by saying the words ‘Allah is the greatest’.

This point is also worth considering that the belief in the glory of the
Lord does not imply that we regard Him as greater when comparing Him to
other beings. Such a comparison is by far irrelevant in principle and by
definition.

We must regard Him as greater than in comparative terms, as Imam Sadiq
(as) has said in a concise and meaningful speech. An Islamic tradition
declares: Someone called on that Imam, saying:

*‘Allah is the greatest!’*

The Imam asked him:

*“Of what is He greater or the greatest?*

 He answered:

*“Of all things.”*

The Imam (as) explained:

*“You confined Allah by saying that, as you made a comparison between
Him and other beings, then considering Him as superior.”*

That man asked:

*“Then, what must I say?”*

He answered:

*“Say: Allah is far too superior to what one can characterize.”*[^18]

A Persian poet declares:

*O’ You Who are superior to all imaginations, comparisons, conjectures,
and hallucinations:*

And also excelling in whatever we have seen, written, or heard.

Our audience came to an end and our life is over, nevertheless, we are
stuck in the first phases of our attempt at our depicting of your
profile.

Incidentally, some quotations from Ahl-ul-Bayt (as) indicates that the
reading of this verse has been considered as effective in removing of
one’s dues, removing of passing whims and passions, discarding of
poverty, and expelling of diseases.[^19]

O’ Lord! Replenish our heart and soul with the illumination of the
lights of knowledge and faith so that we can remain humble before Your
grandeur, staying faithful to Your promises and obeying fully Your
commands, worshipping no one but You and relying on no one except on
You.

O’ Lord! Bestow upon us the means of success not to violate the
frontiers of justice and moderation, avoiding all sorts of extremism.

O’ Lord! We thank You; consider You as One; glorify You beyond what can
be explicable. You, too, provide us with forgiveness, make our
determination ever stronger and help us prevail over the enemies who
have surrounded us from interior and from exterior.

Help us to join our victories to those ultimate victories of the
uprising of the promised Mahdi (as), and provide us with the means for
completing this commentary as it would be pleasing to You.

***Our Lord! Let not our hearts deviate after You have guided us, and
bestow on us from Your mercy, for You are, indeed, the Ever-Bestower.***
[^20]

[^1]: TaHa, 20

[^2]: TaHa, 22

[^3]: Al-’A‘raf, 133

[^4]: Al-’A‘raf, 133

[^5]: Al-’A‘raf, 133

[^6]: Al-’A‘raf, 133

[^7]: Al-’A‘raf, 133

[^8]: Al-’A‘raf, 133

[^9]: Al-Baqarah, verse 60

[^10]: Al-’A‘raf, 171

[^11]: Al-’A‘raf, 130

[^12]: Al-Baqarah, 73

[^13]: Al-Baqarah, 57

[^14]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 130

[^15]: Surah Al-Furqan, No. 25, verse 32

[^16]: Tafsir-Tibyan and Forqan

[^17]: Tafsir-i-Tabari, Al-Mizan, and Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^18]: Tafsir-Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn vol. 3, p. 239

[^19]: Tafsir Borhan

[^20]: ‘Al-i-‘Imran, verse 8


