Section 4: Remembrance of Allah Sets Hearts at Rest
===================================================

Surah Ar-Ra‘d – Verse 27
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَقُولُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَوْلآ اُنزِلَ عَلَيْهِ ءَايَةٌ مِن
رَّبّـِهِ قُلْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُضِلُّ مَن يَشَآءُ وَيَهْدِي إِلَيْهِ
مَنْ أَنَابَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “And those who disbelieve say: ‘Why has a sign not been sent down
upon him from his Lord?’ Say: ‘Verily Allah leaves to stray whomever He
wills and guides unto Himself whomever turns (to Him in
repentance)’.”***

As there are so many topics of discussion concerning monotheism,
resurrection and the mission of prophecy of the Prophet (S) included in
this Surah, this verse deals once again with the Prophet of Islam’s
call, discussing one of the criticisms of those obstinate dissidents,
saying that the pagans claim why it is that no miracle has been bestowed
upon him from his Lord as they demanded.

The verse says:

***“And those who disbelieve say: ‘Why has a sign not been sent down
upon him from his Lord?’…”***

They expect that the Prophet (S) sits in isolation as an extraordinary
being while each one of them calls on him and asks him to perform a
miracle he must bring it on their request. No sooner they ask for the
miracle than he has performed. Even, not withstanding that, they do not
accept the faith if they are willing to do so!

Responding them, the Qur’an answers that the Prophet should tell them
that Allah lets whomever He wants go astray, and whoever returns to Him
will be led by Him.

The verse continues saying:

***“…Say: ‘Verily Allah leaves to stray whomever He wills and guides
unto Himself whomever turns (to Him in repentance)’.”***

Allusion is made to the fact that their deficiency is not a matter of
miracles; rather that their deficiency is from within themselves. Their
obstinacy, fanaticism, ignorance, and the sins which hinder and obstruct
the road to success, cause them to disbelieve.

Anyway, every prophet must have a sign from his Lord to prove his claim
of his prophetic mission, which is called ‘miracle’. This miracle is
naturally in some particular and identical affairs.

But those obstinate persons who did not intend to accept the truth,
asked the Prophet (S) for miracles on their own request based upon their
whims. Were they to stop being obstinate, the Qur’an by itself would
provide them with the greatest miracle.

Sometimes, food and water is detrimental to the sick. However, this harm
does not imply that there is anything wrong with the food or water. On
the contrary, it is for the sake of their illness.

Certainly, those who are mentally sick, in accepting the Divine and pure
verses are upset like the ones whose body is ill, for they will be
provoked as soon as they are confronting the truth, and they become
obstinate immediately following its presentation, then they turn away
from the Truth. And this is the very meaning of /yudill/ (leaves to
stray) mentioned in the verse.

### A Discussion on Leading and Misleading

Divine leadership is of two kinds: the primary leadership and the
supplementary leadership.

The Divine leadership concerns all mankind.

The Qur’an says:

***“Verily We showed him the Way…”***[^1]

However, supplementary leadership only concerns those who have already
accepted the former general guidance. For instance, take the case of a
teacher who offers his course in an identical and monotonous way to all
his students. After sometime, he tends to do more favor to those of his
students who are more strenuous and hard-working.

The Qur’an says:

***“And (as for) those who follow the right direction, He increases them
in guidance…”***[^2]

And there are those who refuse to accept all the Divine verses as the
Qur’an says about them.

***“And there never came unto them any sign from the signs of their Lord
but they turned away from it…”***[^3]

***“And had We sent down unto you a book, written on a paper, so that
they touched it with their own hands, certainly (still) the disbelievers
would have said: ‘That is naught but a manifest sorcery’.”***[^4]

***“…And (even) if they witness a miracle, they will not believe in
it…”***[^5]

Would there be any other way of dealing with them except restraining
them from favors and stamping them with the discarding seal?

Anyway, Allah is Wise and Just and He does all according to:

***“…He guides whomever He pleases…”***[^6]

and

***“…leaves to stray whomever He wills…”***[^7]

and

***“…Allah provides with sustenance for whomever He wills…”***[^8]

and

***“He will forgive him whom He wills”***

and

***“He will punish whom He wills…”***[^9]

and

***“He creates whatever He pleases…”***[^10]

All the above are to be rendered into the basis of His Justice, Wisdom,
Grace, and Favour.

That is, once He says:

***“…He guides whomever He pleases…”***

it does not imply that He leads, regardless of all criteria, whomever He
wants.

As one can conclude, from other verses, on one occasion He considers
‘Faith’ as the condition for being led, saying:

***“…and whomever believes in Allah, He guides aright his
heart…”***[^11]

Elsewhere, securing of consent of Allah along with taking the right path
are deemed necessary for being led.

It says:

***“With it Allah guides whomever follows His pleasure into the ways of
safety…”***[^12]

Or once He says:

***“…He leaves to stray whomever He wills…”***[^13]***,***

in another verse, He considers immoderation, hesitation and skepticism
as factors for such a case of being misled.

It says:

***“…Allah misleads him who is extravagant, a doubter.”***[^14]

Anyway, if the opening of a container faces the sky the rain will enter
into it, but if the opening of it faces the earth, it will not be filled
with any rain and snow. So is the case with the man whose soul aspires
towards material things. It is obvious that such a person will not
benefit from the Divine spirituality.

The Qur’an says:

***“That (Divine wrath) is because they have preferred the worldly life
over the Hereafter, and definitely Allah does not guide the infidel
people.”***[^15]

### Explanations

The obstinate pagans often demand new miracles every moment. The issue
in question is not an outstanding miracle. Rather, it is their inherent
enmity.

***“…Why has a sign not been sent down upon him…”***

Allah’s way of treatment is concerned with leading all people:

***“Verily, it is incumbent on Us to lead (them).”***[^16]

However, if someone took to the deviant path, Allah would ascribe to him
his punishment in the form of being misled.

***“…Allah leaves to stray whomever He wills…”.***

Submission and humility in face of Allah is the key to one’s salvation
and guidance

***“…and guides unto Himself whomever turns (to Him in repentance).”***

Leading people is up to Allah, yet His leading will be confined to those
who show their preparedness already for His leadership.

Surah Ar-Ra‘d – Verse 28
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُم بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ أَلاَ
بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. “(The guided are) those who believe and their hearts are set at
rest by the remembrance of Allah. Behold! By Allah’s remembrance (only)
the hearts are set at rest.”***

Those who acknowledge the unity of Allah and accept His attributes and
the prophetic mission of His Prophet (S) and embrace whatever has been
revealed from Him, and their hearts are set at rest by the remembrance
of Allah, allow Allah to soothe their hearts regarding His blessings and
rewards with the thought of Him, and of His grace and favors, for
Allah’s promise is decisive and nothing will soothe the anxious hearts
better than his Divine truthful promises.

To remember Allah does not mean merely paying lip service to Him, though
it is one of the clear examples of thinking of Him. For what counts is
thinking of Allah in all circumstances, in particular, at the time of
committing sin.

Thinking of Allah brings with it numerous blessings, including:

The remembrance of His blessings leads one to show his gratitude for
Him.

The remembrance of His Power causes one of putting his trust in Him.

The remembrance of His favours serves as the source of our love for Him.

The remembrance of His Wrath and fury inspires awe of Him in us.

The remembrance of His magnitude and greatness causes one’s humility and
submission towards Him.

The remembrance of His Omniscience in the open and hidden serves as an
impetus for our chastity.

The remembrance of His forgiveness and generosity serves as our source
of hope and repentance.

The remembrance of His justice serves as an impetus for our austerity
and piety.

Man is searching the extremes and he wants absolute perfection. However,
as everything, except Allah, is finite and is accidental in itself, it
cannot leave one’s heart in rest. In contrast to those whose hearts are
set at rest by the remembrance of Allah, there are also some ones whose
scope of mind and vision are limited and are content with so little in
this world.

The prayers consist of the remembrance of Allah and are the source of
one’s comfort.

The Qur’an says:

***“…establish prayer for My remembrance.”***[^17]

The holy phrase:

***“Behold! By Allah’s remembrance (only) the hearts are set at
rest.”***

might mean that by Allah’s remembering you, your hearts will be at
peace. That is, once we know that Allah is remembering us and we are in
His presence, our hearts will be at peace.

As Hadrat Noah (as) found peace of heart by means of the Divine words:

***“And make you the Ark under Our eyes…”***[^18]

And, Imam Hussayn (as) found peace of mind while uttered it at the time
of martyrdom of his son Ali Asqar, by expressing:

*“It is easy over me for verily it is before Allah.”*

Or, it is cited in ‘Arafah supplication:

*“O Reminder of the reminders.”*

**Query:** This verse remarks that all minds, and that of a believer in
particular, find their peace by the remembrance of Allah, but some other
verses denote that whenever the faithful believer remembers Allah, his
heart trembles.

Surah Al-’Anfal, No. 8, verse 2 says:

***“Verily believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned, their
hearts quake…”***

Can this kind of trembling be compatible with one’s peace of mind? What
is the justification for that?

**Answer:** To imagine how the two incompatibles, that is the peace of
mind and trembling of one’s heart, can be present at the same time in
one person, the following examples can be leading.

**Firstly:** Sometimes, one has peace of mind when he has made all kinds
of preparations while, at the same time, he is anxious and fears the
consequences as well. The example of it is a specialized surgeon who is
confident of his knowledge and job though at the time of operation of a
VIP he still has his anxieties.

**Secondly:** the children find their peace of mind once they are with
their parents, while at the same time, they fear them too.

**Thirdly:** Sometimes, one is happy and has his peace of mind since he
knows that whatever unpleasant happens is for his trial, development and
promotion. However, he is going to be anxious for not being sure whether
he will succeed in his duties or not.

**Fourthly:** Once the believers go on reading the Qur’anic verses of
punishment, Hell or of the Divine outrage, they start trembling all
over. However, once they read the holy verses concerning blessings,
garden of Eden and paradise, they find a sweet kind of peace of mind
which brings them warm feelings.

Imam Sajjad (as) says in Abu Hamzah Supplication:

*“Whenever, I remember my sins (and Your justice and Your wrath), I cry,
but when I consider Your grace and Your forgiveness, I regain hope.”*

As an evidence for this meaning, the writer of Al-Mizan, the Late,
quotes the Qur’an to be its documentation:

***“…whereat do shudder the skins of those who fear their Lord, then
their skins and their hearts become pliant to the remembrance of
Allah…”***[^19]

That is, one is anxious at first though he finds peace of mind
gradually.

**Fifthly:** He who ignores the remembrance of Allah, does not have
peace of mind, in which case life becomes troublesome for him.

The Qur’an says:

***“And whoever turns away from My remembrance, verily for him is a life
straitened…”***[^20]

### Factors of Encourage and Peace of Mind

There may be many different causes for one’s certainty and peace of
mind. However, at the top of all those factors stands specifically one’s
awareness and knowledge.

He who is aware of the fact that his slightest piece of work will be
accounted for he is hopeful on his job properly and has peace of mind
thereby.

Surah Az-Zilz al, No. 99, verse 7 says:

***“So, whoever has done an atom’s weight of good shall behold it.”***

He who knows that he is created out of the Divine favor, wisdom, and
blessings, he is calm and hopes for and confident of Allah’s
bounteousness.

The Qur’an says:

***“(It will be said to some) O’ you serene soul!”***

***“Come back to your Lord well-pleased (with Him) and well-pleasing
(Him),”***[^21]

This means that the addressing of the Beneficent comes, saying:

*O’ Heavenly confident and peaceful self, ‘always remembering Allah’!
Return, now, to your Lord as you are pleased with His eternal blessings
and He is content with your good deeds. Return and stay in line
alongside My particular servants and enter My Paradise and Garden of
Eden.*

It is for this reason and following His remarks in this noble verse that
the faithful and intimate believers are always hopeful. As an example,
one finds the Late Ayatullah-ul-’Uzma Imam Khomayni, (may he rest in
peace in Paradise), remarks at the end of his very important will that:

*“I am departing from you while having peace of mind, and I am confident
in heart, while I am happy from within and while I am hopeful in spirit
for Allah’s grace and forgiveness.”*

He who knows that Allah is All-Wise and Omniscience, and He has not
created anyone in vain, is optimistic.

He who knows that his leader and his Imam is a perfect man, elected by
Allah, and is innocent of every deviance and error, will be having peace
of mind.

***“…Verily I have appointed you an Imam (leader) for mankind…”***[^22]

He who knows that his way of life is obvious and his future is going to
be better than before, is confident in his soul.

***“While the world to come is better and more lasting.”***[^23]

He who knows that Allah loves the righteous has warm feelings with
regard to his righteous deed.

### Factors Which Generate Anxiety and Worries

One of the most common diseases of the present century is worries and
anxieties, for which various reasons have been mentioned. The symptoms
of this disease include, isolation, depression, inferiority complexes
and purposelessness.

A depressed person becomes so because of finding that nothing is in line
with his wishes, while the one must not abandon altogether those few
instances which might be in keeping with his wishes for the sake of not
having obtained all that he has desired.

A depressed person thinks as to why all people do not love him while
such a thing is impossible in the case that even Allah and Gabriel also
have got enemies. Therefore, one must not expect that all love him.

A depressed person thinks that all people are bad, while it is not so,
and Allah, addressing the angels who thought so, answered them
negatively.

A depressed person thinks that all the unpleasant things come from
outside his self, while the main causes of frustration have their origin
in reactions generating from within ourselves.

An anxious person is worried at the onset of every activity and thus he
feels lonely and scared.

For repelling such a mood, Hadrat Ali (as) says:

*“When you are afraid of something, cast yourself in it.”*[^24]

This means that you may make yourself involved in whatever you are
scared of, for fear of everything exceeds its own limits.

An anxious person worries as what will occur in future. This case may be
treated by trusting Allah and by one’s own perseverance.

As one has been frustrated in some of his affairs, he may worry as to be
frustrated in all circumstances.

As one relies on individuals and some powers which are not sustaining,
one will be anxious and worried once those sources of power are shaken.

Briefly, and concisely, such cases as lack of gratitude for one’s
services by the people, feelings of guilt, fear of death, being
brain-washed by the family as to the lack of one’s power to cope with
problems and his lack of knowledge of those things, and jumping to
conclusions are some of the factors which cause anxieties and can be
adequately dealt with by Allah’s remembrance, His power, His amnesty,
and His favor which all bring one’s peace of mind.

The verse says:

***“(The guided are) those who believe and their hearts are set at rest
by the remembrance of Allah. Behold! By Allah’s remembrance (only) the
hearts are set at rest.”***

Surah Ar-Ra‘d – Verse 29
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ طُوبَي لَهُمْ وَحُسْنُ
مَأَبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “‏‏Those who believe and do righteous deeds; joy is for them, and
a goodly (final) return.”***

People are in four categories:

Believers:

Those who both believe and their acts are righteous.

Pagans:

Those who are neither believers nor their acts are decent.

The evil-doers:

Those who are believers but their acts are not righteous and decent.

The hypocrites:

Those who are not believers but their apparent acts are decent.

The Arabic term /tūb a/ is either an infinitive, or it is the feminine
gender of /’atyab/ which means ‘the best’. We have not got any example
specific to this meaning in the verse to include all the utmost good
ones.

Perhaps, we have it in a quotation that /tūb a/ is a tree which has its
roots in the house of the Prophet (S) and that of Ali (as), and its
branches cast their shadow over the faithful[^25], in which case this
serves as an allegory that all the good have their origin in pledge of
and are somehow connected to the celestial leaders.

When some short-sighted persons criticized the Prophet (S) as to:

 *“Why you kiss Fatimah Zahra (as) so much?”*

He (S) said:

*“When I was taken to Paradise at the night of Mi‘raj, I ate from the
fruit of the ‘Tūb a tree’ out of which Fatimah (as) has been originated
and appeared, and whenever I desire the scent of Paradise, I smell my
daughter, Fatimah”*[^26].

The success of the unbelievers and those who are distanced from good
acts is not profound.

As Hadrat Ali (as) says:

*“There is no good in pleasures which are ensued by the Fire of Hell”*
[^27]

### Explanations

1. The sweet worldly life as well as the happy ending of the life in
Hereafter will only be procured with faith and decent righteous
behaviour.

2. Success in this world makes sense and is of value when coupled with
happy ending of the life Hereafter. How happy they are and what a good
happy ending awaits them.

The verse says:

***“‏‏Those who believe and do righteous deeds; joy is for them, and a
goodly (final) return.”***

Surah Ar-Ra‘d – Verse 30
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَلِكَ أَرْسَلْنَاكَ فِي اُمَّةٍ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِهَآ اُمَمٌ
لّـِتَتْلُوَا عَلَيْهِمُ الَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَيْكَ وَهُمْ
يَكْفُرُونَ بِالرَّحْمَنِ قُلْ هُوَ رَبّـِي لآ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ
عَلَيْهِ تَوَكَّلْتُ وَإِلَيْهِ مَتَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. “‏‏Thus did We send you among a nation before whom (other)
nations have (come and) passed away, in order that you might recite to
them whatever We have revealed to you, whereas they reject the
Beneficent (Allah). Say: ‘He is my Lord, there is no god but He; on Him
only I rely, and unto Him is my return.”***

We have already discussed about the Divine blessings which are conferred
upon the people who are believers and the righteous and the rewards they
deserve.

Now, Allah (s.w.t.) deals with the blessing of the prophetic mission
bestowed on the highly-esteemed Prophet of Islam (S), implying that as
We provided the believers and the righteous with the blessings of
reward, We designated your Ummat with the utmost blessing of your
celestial prophetic mission.

Some commentators have argued that this signifies that: As We
commissioned prophets for previous nations, We thus also sent you for
the nation of Islam. Your nation is not the first one. Before this
nation, there have also been other nations and tribes as well.

The verse says:

***“‏‏Thus did We send you among a nation before whom (other) nations
have (come and) passed away…”***

The main purpose and objective of your heavenly mission is to read to
them the Qur’an, which is Our revelation revealed to you, so as to
enable them to engage in meditation about its instructive contents and
topics and learn admonitions and draw lessons from them.

However, the tribe of Quraysh are blasphemous about ‘Rahman’ (the
Beneficent) and say that they know ‘Allah’, but they do not know Rahman
(The Beneficent). The Prophet (S) was commanded to tell them that
‘Rahman’ (The Beneficent) is his Lord, the One Whom they deny and
ignore, and Who is unique and peerless.

The Beneficent is his Creator and his administrator to whom he has left
all his affairs to administer, and he has made allegiance to His
obedience and submit to His verdict. And his return is towards Him and
his repentance involves Him alone.

The verse continues saying:

***“…in order that you might recite to them whatever We have revealed to
you, whereas they reject the Beneficent (Allah). Say: ‘He is my Lord,
there is no god but He; on Him only I rely, and unto Him is my
return.”***

### Explanations

1- The prophetic mission of the blissful Prophet (S) has occurred among
the nation of Arabs, yet other verses of the Qur’an are explicit in
declaring that he is the prophet of all nations.

***“And We have not sent you but to all mankind…”***[^28]

2- The prophetic mission of the godly prophets is a Divine tradition and
it is based on His grace and His blessings. And the duty which is
incumbent on the prophets is conveying the Divine revelations and
ordinances to the people.

3- Reasons and rationale for our faith in Allah and the issues involved
are: His Lordship (my Lord), His Unitarianism (there is no god but He),
His provision of asylum for all (I rely only on Him), and our return is
to Him (unto Him is my return).

Surah Ar-Ra‘d – Verse 31
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّ قُرءَاناً سُيّـِرَتْ بِهِ الْجِبَالُ أَوْ قُطّـِعَتْ بِهِ
الأَرْضُ أَوْ كُلّـِمَ بِهِ الْمَوْتَي بِل لِلَّهِ الأَمْرُ جَمِيعاً
أَفَلَمْ يَيْأْسِ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا أَن لَوْ يَشَآءُ اللَّهُ لَهَدَي
النَّاسَ جَمِيعاً وَلاَ يَزَالُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا تُصِيبُهُم بِمَا
صَنَعُوا قَارِعَةٌ أَوْ تَحُلُّ قَرِيباً مِن دَارِهِمْ حَتي يَأْتِيَ
وَعْدُ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لاَ يُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “And if there were a Qur’an by which the mountains were moved or
the earth were cloven asunder with it, or the dead were made to speak
thereby, (still they would not believe). But the affair is Allah’s
altogether. Have not those who believe yet known that if Allah had
willed He would certainly have guided all the people? And (as for) those
who disbelieve, there will not cause to afflict them because of what
they do a calamity, or it will alight close to their habitation, until
Allah’s promise comes. Verily Allah will not fail the tryst.”***

### The Occasion of the Revelation

Some great commentators have claimed that this holy verse has been
revealed in response to a group of pagans of Mecca who were sitting next
to the door of Ka‘bah and had sent after the Prophet (S) who hoping to
lead them, came to them.

They said that if he wanted them to follow him, he should remove back
the mountains of Mecca by his Qur’an so that the tight and limited land
there would become vast.

They told the Prophet (S) that he considered himself no less in rank
than Dawūd for whose sake Allah had conquered the mountains; or he
should conquer wind for them as it was over dominated by Sulayman; or he
should enliven his grandfather ‘Qasiy’ (the grandfather of Quraysh)
because Jesus (as) used to make the dead alive, and he was no less than
him.

At this time, the verse was revealed implying that what they said was
because of their obstinacy and not for embracing the Faith.

As was already mentioned in the discussion of the occasion of
revelation, this verse was revealed in response to the pagans’ pretexts
which were raised owing to their obstinacy and not for the sake of
embracing the faith. They asked for performing extemporarily miracles
from the Prophet (S).

Allah says:

***“And if there were a Qur’an by which the mountains were moved or the
earth were cloven asunder with it, or the dead were made to speak
thereby, (still they would not believe). But the affair is Allah’s
altogether…”***

However, all of these are at His disposal and thus He does whatever He
deems fit.

Nevertheless, you are not seeking the truth and if you were, you could
be content with the signs which have already been exposed to you by the
Prophet (S).

Then, the Qur’an adds:

***“…Have not those who believe yet known that if Allah had willed He
would certainly have guided all the people?…”***

But, He will never do so, because such a compulsory faith lacks any
value and is devoid of all kinds of spirituality and development which
man needs.

Then the verse implies that the pagans are always at the stake and mercy
of the invasion from pounding calamities for their deeds, which are
damaging and devastating to them in the form of the fights of the
Islamic warriors.

The verse continues saying:

***“…And (as for) those who disbelieve, there will not cause to afflict
them because of what they do a calamity…”***

And in case that such disasters are not inflicted upon them within their
houses, they enter near their houses so as to provide lessons for them
and be shaken in order to return to Allah.

The verse says:

***“…or it will alight close to their habitation…”***

And such warnings will continue ever more till the ultimate decree of
Allah will be issued.

Such an order might concern and be an allusion to death or reference to
the Day of Judgment, or, as some claim, it may be a hint to the
‘Conquest of Mecca’ which devastated the last bastion of the enemies.

The verse adds:

***“…until Allah’s promise comes…”***

Anyway, Allah’s promise is decisive and He will never break His promise
or deviate from its conditions.

The verse concludes:

***“…Verily Allah will not fail the tryst.”***

### Explanations

This holy verse explains the utmost climax of the hostility and
obstinacy of the pagans, just like verse 111 of Surah Al-’An‘am which
says:

***“And even if We sent down the angels to them, and the dead spoke to
them and We mustered all things before them, (even then) they would not
believe…”***

The Qur’an is a Book which has shaken what has been firmer than
mountains and has enlivened those who have been deadlier than the
mortally dead. It has provided life for the dead mind and souls and the
stone-hearted ignorant Arab people, and if there were a Book to be able
to move mountains, and rise the dead, it is this same Qur’an.

One may conclude from remarks made by Imam Kazim (as) that there are
clues and secrets in the Qur’an by which one can conquer nature.

Incidentally, do not expect all to accept the Faith as hostility and
obstinacy are both inherent incurable diseases of human societies. If
one is seeking after the Truth, one miracle is more than enough for him
to accept the Faith. But, if someone is obstinate, he may ignore even
the most explicit miracle.

Miracles are under Allah’s control and not to be incited on proposals
and whims of obstinate people. In the meantime, Allah’s Will is toward
voluntary guidance of man, and it is not based on their compulsion and
toward forceful scrutiny.

Pagans must expect strikes from Allah on their country and on their
borders and the Divine warnings sometimes come to us directly and are
directed toward us and sometimes they come indirectly and are directed
to others and the regions in our neighboring.

***“…And (as for) those who disbelieve, there will not cause to afflict
them because of what they do a calamity…”***

The pagan people are always in the course of devastating and pounding
catastrophes and extensive accidents because of their paganism and their
heinous deeds, namely wars, famine, massacre, entanglement, etc., so
that they may witness the punishment of their evil and viscous deeds and
be therefore warned against them.

[^1]: Surah Al-’Ins an, No. 76, verse 3

[^2]: Surah Muhammad, No. 47, verse 17

[^3]: Surah Al-’An’ am, No. 6, verse 4

[^4]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 7

[^5]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 25

[^6]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 142

[^7]: verse under discussion

[^8]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 212

[^9]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 284

[^10]: Surah ‘Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 47

[^11]: Surah At-Taqabun, No. 64, verse 11

[^12]: Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 16

[^13]: The verse under discussion

[^14]: Surah Al-Mu’min, No. 40, verse 34

[^15]: Surah An-Nahl, No. 16, verse 107

[^16]: Surah Al-Layl, No. 92, verse 12

[^17]: Surah TaHa, No. 20, verse 14

[^18]: Surah Hūd, No. 11, verse 37

[^19]: Surah Az-Zumar, No. 39, verse 23

[^20]: Surah TaHa, No. 20, verse 124

[^21]: Surah Al-Fajr, No. 89, verses 27 and 28

[^22]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 124

[^23]: Surah ‘A‘la, No. 87, verse 17

[^24]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 362

[^25]: Bih ar, vol. 8, p. 117, 120

[^26]: Bihar, vol. 8, p. 188

[^27]: Bihar, vol. 41, p. 104

[^28]: Surah Saba, No. 34, verse 28


