Lecture Three: Defence, The Quiddity of Jihad
=============================================

One of the points that now come into question is the Islamic view of the
essence and quiddity of jihad. On this point there is complete agreement
amongst researchers; the essence of jihad is defense, meaning that not
one of them even suspects jihad, or any kind of fighting, that is
motivated by aggression, by lust for the wealth and riches and other
resources of the other side, for an aggressor's harnessing of a people's
economic or human resources, to be in any way permissible in the view of
Islam.

In Islam, fighting based on such motives are types of zulm, types of
tyranny and oppression. Jihad is only for the sake of defense, and in
truth, it is resistance against transgression, and can certainly be
lawful. Of course, there is also the third possibility that one fights
not for the sake of aggression, nor in defense of oneself or of a human
value, but for the expansion of a human value, and this will be
discussed later.

Leaving this point aside, however, we see that in the basic definition
of jihad, there is no difference of opinion and all the researchers are
agreed that jihad and war must be for the sake of defense. The
differences of opinion that do exist are minor ones, and concern the
question of what it is that has to be defended.

A- Types of Defense
-------------------

The opinions of some on this matter are limited. They say that defense
means self-defense; that war is lawful for an individual, a tribe or a
nation in defense of itself and its life. According to this, if the
lives of a people are exposed to danger from another region, then
fighting in defense of their lives is lawful for that people. In the
same way, if their property is subject to aggression, then from the
point of view of human rights, they have the right to defend that
property which is their right.

Likewise, if a nation is faced with the aggression of another nation
that wants to take possession of its wealth and perhaps carry it away,
then that nation has the right to defend its wealth, even by force.

“Al-maqtulu duna ahlihi wa 'iyalihi shahidun.”

Islam tells us that whoever is killed for his property or chastity is a
martyr.[^1] So, in Islam, defending one's chastity, is like defending
one's life and property. In fact it is superior. It is the defense of
one's honor. For a nation, to defend its independence, is undeniably
lawful. So when a group wants to take away the independence of a nation
and place that nation under its own mandate, if the people of that
nation decide to defend themselves and pick up the gun, this action is
lawful. It is, in fact, laudable and worthy of admiration.

So, defense of life, defense of wealth, property and lands, defense of
independence, defense of chastity, all these are lawful defenses. No one
doubts the fact that in these cases, defense is permissible and as we
have said, the view that some Christians put forth about religion having
to advocate peace and not war, and that war is absolutely bad and peace
is absolutely good, has no logical or reasonable basis to support it.
Not only is fighting for the sake of defense not wrong, but it is
extremely correct in this case to fight and one of the necessities of
human life. This is what is meant in the Holy Qur’an when we are told:

***«*** ***And did not Allah Check one set of people by means of
another, the earth would indeed be full of mischief.» (2:251)***

or again:

***«*** ***Did not Allah check one set of people by means of another,
there would surely have been pulled down monasteries, churches,
synagogues, and mosques, in which the name of Allah is commemorated in
abundant measure. » (22:40)***

Up to this point all the scholars are more or less in agreement.

B- Human Rights
---------------

There exists the question, however, of whether the things we are allowed
to defend are only these enumerated, i.e. individual, group and national
rights, or whether it is legitimate for us to defend other things as
well. Are there other things such that the defense of them is also
necessary and obligatory, things that do not pertain merely to the
rights of the individual, tribe or nation but pertain literally to the
rights of humanity as a whole? If somewhere a right of humanity is
somehow encroached upon, is it legitimate to fight it? Is war fought for
the sake of humanity lawful or not?

Perhaps someone will ask: “What does fighting for the sake of humanity
mean?” “I do not have to fight for any rights except my own personal
rights, or, at the most, the rights of my nation.” “What have I to do
with the rights of humanity?” This mode of thinking, however, is in no
way valid.

There exist certain things that are superior to the rights of the
individual or nation. These things are more holy and more sacred, and
the defense of them in accordance to the human conscience is higher than
the defense of individual rights. And these are the sacred values of
humanity. In other words, the sacredness of fighting in defense lies not
in defending one's self, but in defending “the right.” When the cause
and criteria is “the right,” what difference does it make whether it is
an individual right or a general right of humanity? In fact, defense of
the rights of humanity is holier, and although no one says so, it is
freely admitted in actions.

For example, freedom is reckoned as one of the sacred values of
humanity. Freedom is not limited to an individual or a nation.

Now, if it is not our freedom and not the freedom of our country, but
freedom in another corner of the world that pertains to the right of
humanity which is being infringed upon, is the defense of that right of
humanity, simply for the sake of defending a human right, lawful for us
or not? If it is lawful, then defense is not limited to the actual
individual whose freedom is in danger, but it is lawful, even obligatory
for other individuals and other nations to rush to the aid of freedom,
and fight against the negator and repressor of freedom. Now, what is
your answer? I do not think anyone has any doubt that the holiest form
of jihad and the holiest form of war is that which is fought in defense
of humanity and humanity's rights.

When the Algerians were at war with the French colonialists, a group of
Europeans helped them in the war - either in the form of actually
fighting alongside the Algerians, or in other ways. Do you think that
only the fighting of the Algerians was lawful because their rights were
transgressed, and that the people who came from the farthest corners of
Europe to take part in the battle to help the Algerian nation were no
more than oppressors and aggressors, who should have been told: “Stop
your interference, what business is it of yours?

No one has transgressed your rights, why are you fighting here?” Or is
it that the jihad of such people was holier than the jihad of the
Algerians, because the Algerians were defending the cause of their own
rights, while the cause of the others was more ethical and more sacred
than that of the Algerians. Obviously what holds valid is the second
assumption.

Freedom lovers - both those who are in reality freedom lovers, and those
who only pretend to be - have earned general respect: a respect from the
different nations, due to their having presented themselves as defenders
of human rights, not the defenders of their own individual rights or the
rights of their own nation or even their own continent.

If they were ever to go beyond the use of the tongue, the pen, their
letters, and lectures, and actually go to the battlefield and fight, for
the Palestinians for example, or the Viet Cong, then the world would
consider them to be even more holy. It would not attack them saying:
“Why are you interfering? It is none of your business. No one is
interfering in your affairs.”

The world considers war, whenever it is for the sake of defense, to be
holy. If it is in self-defense, it is holy. If it is for the defense of
one's nation, it is more holy, for the cause has grown from a personal
one to a national one, and the individual is not simply defending
himself but is also defending the other individuals that make up his
society. And if the defense shifts from a national to a humanitarian
cause, it again becomes a degree more holy.

C- The Minor Dispute
--------------------

Here then is the nature of the dispute about jihad; not a major dispute
but a minor one. The dispute is not about whether jihad is only lawful
in defense or is also lawful for defense. The dispute is over the
definition of defense. This minor dispute is about whether the meaning
of defense is limited to whether the defense of humanity can be
contained in a broader category that also includes self-defense, and
within that category, the defense of one’s nation.

Some say, and they are right, that the defense of humanity is also a
legitimate defense. Thus, the cause of those who rise to “command that
which is recognized and forbid what is rejected” is a holy one. It is
possible that someone's actual being is not transgressed; he may even be
highly respected and all the facilities of life may be available to him,
and the same may apply to the material rights of his nation.

But, from the point of view of human ideals, a basic human right is
being transgressed. Meaning that within his society, although neither
the material rights of that society nor his own individual rights have
been transgressed, there yet exists a task awaiting to be performed in
the best interest of humanity. Namely, when good and evil exist in
society, the former must be enjoined and fashioned into the social order
while the latter must be uprooted.

Now, under these conditions, if such a person sees that the good, the
recognized, the accepted, has been relegated to the place of the bad and
rejected, and that the rejected has taken the place of the recognized,
and he stands up for the sake of commanding what is recognized and
prohibiting what is rejected, then what is he defending? Is he defending
his own personal rights? No. Is he defending the rights, i.e. the
material rights, of his individual society?

Again, the answer is no. His defense is not related to material rights.
What he is defending is a spiritual right that belongs to no single
person or nation. He is defending a spiritual right related to all the
world's human beings. Are we to condemn the jihad of that man, or are we
to consider it sacred? Obviously, we are to consider it sacred, for it
is in the defense of a right of humanity.

On the question of freedom, you see today that the very people who are
combating freedom, in order to give themselves an air of respectability,
claim to be the defenders of freedom. This is so because they know that
defense of freedom is tacitly understood as being sacred. If they were
really fighting for the defense of freedom, this would be valid, but
they are falsely attributing their transgressions to the defense of
freedom. Yet even in this is their acknowledgment of the fact that the
rights of humanity are worthy of defense, and that war for the sake of
those rights is legitimate and beneficial.

D- Tawhid: A Personal Right or a General Right?
-----------------------------------------------

Now, an important matter must be looked at about tawhid, “La ilaha
illallah” (“There is no god but (except) God (Allah)).” Does tawhid
pertain to the rights of humanity, or to the rights of the individual?
Here it is possible for a Muslim to say that tawhid does not pertain to
the rights of humanity but pertains only to the affairs of the
individual, or at most, to the internal affairs of a nation; that he
himself can be “muwahid,”[^2] he has the choice of being “muwahid” if he
wants to be, or a mushrak (polytheist), if he wants to be, and now that
he has become muwahid, no one has the right to trouble him for it; it is
his personal right, and, if someone else becomes a mushrik, then that is
the right of that person.

Any single nation in its laws can choose one of the following three
positions: One is that it chooses tawhid and adopts it as the official
religion and officially rejects any other religion. Another is that a
form of shirk, of polytheism is established as the official religion,
and the other is that the nation allows freedom of worship whereby one
can choose whatever religion or creed one desires.

If tawhid is embodied in the law of a nation then it is one of the
rights of that nation and if not, it is not one of its rights. This is
one way of looking at things. There is another view, however, which
regards tawhid as being like freedom and pertaining to the rights of
humanity.

When discussing freedom we said the right of freedom is not simply the
right of the individual to be free from threats from any quarter, for it
is possible it may be threatened by the very individual. So, if a people
fight for tawhid to combat shirk (polytheism), their fight is motivated
by defense, not by subjugation, tyranny and transgression. This, then,
is the nature of the minor difference in question.

Even amongst the learned of Islam there are two views. According to some
of them, tawhid pertains to the general rights of humanity. Then,
fighting for the sake of tawhid is lawful, for it is the defense of a
human right and is like fighting for another nation's freedom. Another
group argues that tawhid pertains to individual rights and perhaps to
national rights, but has nothing to do with the rights of humanity.
Accordingly, no one has the right to trouble anyone else for the sake of
tawhid.

Which of the two views is correct?

I intend to state my own view on this subject. But before doing so, I
would like to speak about another issue, and perhaps on reaching a
conclusion, the two issues will be seen as a single one. The point is
that some affairs may be accepted under duress, i.e. accepted under
compulsion, whereas some others as per their nature, must be freely
selected.

Imagine an individual becomes infected with a deadly disease and has to
accept taking an injection. In such a case, the infected individual can
be forced to take the injection. If he refuses it, others can come and
his hands and feet can be forcefully tied so that he takes it. If he
continues to resist, the injection can be administered while he is
unconscious. This scenario is acceptable under duress.

The acceptance of other things, however, cannot be forced through
compulsion, for other than by free choice, there is no way they can be
accepted. Among such things we find the purification of the self, for
example, and the refinement of one's behavior. If we want to refine
people so that they come to recognize and accept virtues as virtues and
evils as evils and refrain from faulty human behavior so that they
eventually reject falsehood and embrace the truth, we cannot do so by
the whip; we cannot do so by force.

With a whip, it is possible to prevent someone from stealing, but it is
not effective in making an honest individual out of someone. For if such
things were possible, then, for example, if the self of a person was in
need of purification and his personal behavior was sadly lacking in good
morals and ethics, a hundred lashes meted to him would make of that
person somebody with good morals and ethics.

Instead of a good education, the teachers would simply use the whip and
say: “So that this person throughout his life, always tells the truth
and finds lies repulsive, he is to be given a hundred lashes, and
thereafter he will never tell a lie.” The same thing applies to love.
Can one force a person to love another by the whip? Love and affection
cannot be forced upon someone. No forces in the world, even if taken
together, cannot force love upon somebody nor take away his love for
somebody.

Having made clear this point, I wish to say that faith, regardless of
whether it is a basic right of humanity or not, is, by its very nature,
not something that can be imposed by force. If we want to create faith,
we should know that it is not possible to create it by force. Faith
means belief and inclination. Faith means being attracted to and
accepting a set of beliefs, and attraction to a belief calls for two
conditions. One condition is that the matter must accord with the
intellect: this is the scientific aspect of faith.

The other is the emotional aspect; the human heart should be attracted
to faith. Neither of these comes within the realm of force. Not the
first condition, because thinking is subject to logic - if it is desired
that a child be taught the solution of a mathematical problem, he must
be taught in a logical way so that he finds credence in it. He cannot be
taught by the whip. His intellect will not accept a matter through
force, and beating. The same applies to the second condition, the
emotional quality that stimulates inclination, attraction and sentiment.

According to this, there is a huge difference between tawhid as a right
of humanity and things other than tawhid, such as freedom. Freedom is
something that can be imposed on a people by force, because
transgression and oppression can be prevented by force. But living
freely and the freedom-loving spirit cannot be imposed by force. It is
not possible to force a person to accept a belief or to forcibly create
faith in a certain thing within his heart. This is the meaning of “La
ikraha fid-din. Qat-tabayanar-rushdo min al-ghayy,” meaning there is no
compulsion in religion.

When the Qur’an says that there is no compulsion in religion, it does
not mean that, though it is possible for religion to be imposed by
force, we must not impose it and must leave people to adopt any religion
they want. No. What the Qur’an is saying is that religion cannot
possibly be imposed.

That which can be imposed under compulsion is not religion. To the
Bedouin Arabs, who had recently accepted Islam without having perceived
the nature of its essence and without Islam having influenced their
hearts, who were claiming to have “faith,” the Qur’an gave this reply:

***«*** ***The desert Arabs say, "We believe." Say, "Ye have no faith;
but ye (only)say, 'We have submitted our wills to Allah,' For not yet
has Faith entered your hearts.» (49:14)***

In Qur’anic terms, “the desert Arabs” refers to the Bedouin desert
nomads. The nomads came to the Holy Prophet Muhammad (May Allah’s
benedictions be upon him and his noble Household) claiming to have
faith. The Holy Prophet was instructed to tell them that they did not
have true belief. Only that when they had said they had become Muslims,
i.e. had made the verbal declaration, had done that which entitled them
to be superficially rated as Muslims, had recited “La ilaha illallah,
Muhammadan rasulullah,” could they avail themselves of the same rights
that belong to a Muslim. The Prophet was to tell them, however, that
that which is called faith had not yet entered their hearts.

***«...*** ***For not yet has Faith entered your hearts..» (49:14)***

This tells us that faith is related to the heart.

Another factor that supports our claim is that Islam does not permit
taqleed (imitation) in the fundamental beliefs of religion and counts
independent research as essential. The fundamental beliefs of religion
are of course related to belief and faith. So it becomes clear that, in
Islam, faith is a product of free thought. The faith and belief which
Islam calls for cannot be acquired through non-free thoughts subject to
“taqleed,” force and compulsion.

So now we realize the two views of the Islamic researchers to be quite
close. One group argues that tawhid pertains to the universal rights of
humanity and as it is undeniably legitimate to defend the rights of
humanity, so it is legitimate to defend tawhid and fight against others
for its sake. The other group claims that there is absolutely no
legitimate way that tawhid can be defended, and, if a nation is
polytheistic, we are not permitted to fight it on that account.

Now, the proximity of both views lies in the fact that, even if we
consider tawhid to be a human right, we cannot fight another nation to
impose the belief in tawhid upon them. This is because, as we have seen,
by the very nature of its essence, tawhid is not something that can be
imposed. There is another point also. If we reckon tawhid as a right of
humanity and if we see that it is in the best interests of humanity and
if tawhid demands, then it is possible for us to fight a nation of
polytheists. But, we cannot fight them to impose tawhid and faith, for
we know that tawhid and faith cannot be imposed.

We can, however, fight the polytheists in order to uproot evil from
their society. Ridding a society of evil, polytheistic beliefs is one
thing, while imposing the belief of tawhid is another.

According to the view of those who consider tawhid to pertain to the
rights of the individual or at most to the rights of a nation, this is
not permissible. The predominant line of thought in the West, which has
also penetrated the ranks of us Muslims, is exactly this.

The Europeans regard issues such as tawhid as personal issues
unimportant to life, and perceive it as more or less a custom from which
each nation has the right to choose. On this basis, it is held that even
for the sake of uprooting evil, no one has the right to combat
polytheism, because polytheism is not iniquity, and tawhid is a purely
personal issue.

If, on the other hand, we consider tawhid to be a universal issue, one
pertaining to the rights of humanity and one of the conditions for
humanity's general welfare and prosperity, then we see it as permissible
to commence war with the mushrikin for the sake of the demands and
defense of tawhid. Such war is justifiable in order to uproot
corruption, even though war for the sake of imposing the tawhidic[^3]
belief is itself not permissible.

Here we are entering upon a different issue, namely whether fighting for
the freedom of the “call” is permissible or not. What does it mean -
fighting for the freedom of the call? It means that we must have the
freedom to propagate a certain faith and belief to any nation. Not the
generally current propagation which aims solely at propaganda, but
propagation in the sense that we just explained. Nothing more.

And now, whether we consider freedom to be a universal human right, or
tawhid to be so, or both of them to be universal human rights, to do
this is definitely lawful. Now, if a barrier arises against our calls,
like some power, say, presenting itself as an obstacle, denying us
permission, saying that we will impair the mind of its nation - and we
know that most governments consider as impairing all thinking which may
encourage the people to revolt against them - if such a regime sets
itself up as a barrier to the call of truth, is it permissible to fight
against it until it falls and the barrier against the call broken down,
or is this not permissible?

Yes, this is also permissible. This would be for the cause of defense.
This would be one of those jihads, the actual nature of which is
defense.

E- The Measure of Rights - Individual and Universal
---------------------------------------------------

So far we have seen that the essence of jihad is defense. There is now
just one issue that remains, which is whether, in our view, tawhid
pertains to the universal rights of humanity, or to the personal rights
of an individual, or at the most, to the rights of a nation. What we
have to do is look at the criteria for personal rights, universal rights
of humanity and see what they are. In some things human beings are all
the same, while in some other, they are different.

Human beings differ in so many ways that no two persons are exactly the
same in every detail. Just as there are no two persons having the same
physical characteristics, so there are no two persons with the same
spiritual characteristics. Universal rights concern the command demands
and needs of all human beings, and the universal interest in this.
Freedom means the absence of obstacles against the flowering of the
individual’s natural potentials, and relates to all of humanity.

Freedom for me has exactly the same value as it has for you. It has the
same value for you as it has for others. Between you and me, however,
there exist many differences, and these pertain to the “personality,”
because they are personal differences. Just as color and physique differ
among human beings, so too do personalities differ. I may like clothes
of a certain color, while you like those of a different color. I may
like to live in one town, while you prefer another one. I may arrange
and decorate my home in one way, while you choose a different way. I may
select one subject for study, while you select another.

These are all personal issues, for which, no one can be bothered. Thus
no one has the right to compel someone to marry a particular person, for
marriage is a personal issue and in choosing a marriage partner,
everyone has his own taste to suit. Islam says that no one must be
compelled in choosing his or her partner because this choice is one's
personal right. The Europeans who say that no one must be bothered for
the sake of tawhid or faith, say so because they think that these two
concepts are amongst the personal concerns of the individual, are issues
of the personality, individual matters of taste. To them, religion is
something which brings entertainment to all human beings.

In their view, it is like art; one person likes Hafiz, another likes
Sa'adi, another likes Maulavi, another likes Khayam, another
Ferdowsi[^4] and no one must bother the one who likes Sa'adi saying:
“Why do you like Sa'adi? I like Hafiz. You also have to like Hafiz.” To
them religion is just this. One person chooses Islam, while another
chooses Christianity, another chooses Zoroastrianism, while yet another,
cannot be bothered about any of them.

No one must be troubled. Religion in the view of these Europeans is not
related to the core of life, to the path of human life. This is their
basic supposition, and between their line of thought and ours, there
exists a world of difference. Religions like their own religions must be
as they say, but to us, religion means the “siratul-mustaqim,” the
“straight path” of humanity. Being indifferent to religion means being
indifferent to the straight path, to the real path of progress, of
humanity.

We say that tawhid is the pillar of well-being, prosperity and happiness
of mankind, and is not merely the personal concern of the individual or
the sole concern of this or that group. Accordingly, the truth lies with
those who believe tawhid pertains to the rights of humanity. If, at the
same time, we say that war for the imposition of tawhid is not
permissible, it is not because tawhid pertains to those affairs which
must not be defended and not to humanity's general rights. Rather, it is
because the very nature of tawhid does not allow it to be imposed, as
the Qur’an confirms: “la ikraha fid-din.”

F- Freedom of Thought or Freedom of Belief
------------------------------------------

Another point which should be stressed here is that there exists a
difference between “freedom of thought” and “freedom of belief.” Human
beings are endowed with the faculty of thought which enables them to
make decisions on the basis of thought, logic and reason. But belief
entails a strong tie to the object of belief. And, by the way, numerous
are the beliefs that are not based on thought, but are sheer imitation,
a result of upbringing and habits, and which even molest human freedom.
What we say, looking at things from the point of view of freedom, is
that what mankind must have, is freedom of thought.

Yet there are some beliefs which are not in the least degree rooted in
thought. They have their root in the mere dormancy and stagnation of the
spirit, handed down from generation to generation; they are the essence
of bondage, so that war fought for the sake of eliminating such beliefs
is war fought for the freedom of humanity, not war fought against it. If
a man prays for his needs to a self-made idol, then, in the words of the
Qur’an, that man is lower than an animal.

This means that the act of this man is not based at all on thought. A
little bit of thinking would not allow him to engage in such an act.
What he does is merely a reflection of the stagnation and dormancy which
have appeared in his heart and in his soul, and which are rooted in
blind imitation. This person must be forcibly freed from the internal
chains which shackle him, to enable him to think. So, those who
recommend the freedom of imitation and apparent freedoms which in fact
enchain the soul’s freedom of belief are in error. What we advocate, in
accordance to the verse “la ikraha fid-din,” is the freedom of thought.

[^1]: “Shahid,” i.e. martyr, one of the highest stations a Muslim can
attain. The statement is a tradition of the Holy Prophet.

[^2]: A “Muwahid” is a person who accepts the reality of Tawhid.

[^3]: “Tawhidic,” which the translator has noticed in English texts,
seems to be an anglicized noun from the Arabic word “tawhid” and
meaning, pertaining to tawhid.

[^4]: All notable Muslim poets.


