Lecture Four: The Question of Abrogation
========================================

A- Abrogation
-------------

Our discussions have been about Islamic jihad. Tonight, there are three
issues that I wish to speak about, one of which is based on Qur’an, the
other based on reason, and the third, based on both Qur’an and history.

The issue with the Qur’anic basis is in connection with the verses about
jihad. Before, we had said that some of the verses about jihad are
unconditional while others are conditional. Unconditional verses are
those where the command to fight the polytheists or the People of the
Book has been issued without any conditions and conditional verses are
those which have given the command accompanied by special conditions.

For example, it has been stated that we must fight them if they are
fighting us, or if they are in a state of war with us, or if we have
reason to fear an imminent attack from them. To the question as to which
verses should be observed, the conditional or the unconditional, we say
that in the view of the ulama’, there exists no difference of opinion to
leave us in doubt, for, if we are aware of the rule and we study both
types of verses, we will realize that the conditional verses are
explanations of the unconditional ones. So, according to this, we must
get the meaning of jihad from what is explained by the conditional
verses, which means that the Qur’anic verses do not recognize any verse
about jihad as being obligatory.

Yet, some commentators have brought up this issue of abrogation. They
agree that many verses of the Qur’an set conditions for fighting against
the non-Muslims, but they say that other verses have been revealed that
abrogate all those instructions and conditions. Thus, we come to the
issue of abrogations, about that which abrogates and that which is
abrogated.

Some think that the first verse of Surah at-Tawba - which issues the
complete command of jihad and immunity to the polytheists, fixing a
period for them to stay in Mecca after which they had to leave and the
Muslims were to besiege them in their fortifications and hiding places
and kill them, and which, furthermore, was revealed in the ninth year of
the Hejira - has in one blow abrogated all the instructions about jihad
that were previously revealed. Is this the correct view?

No, this view is incorrect. Why? For two reasons. One is that we can
only consider a verse to have abrogated another when it is incompatible
with it. Imagine a verse being revealed commanding not to fight the
polytheists at all followed by another allowing for fight. Good. This
would mean that God has canceled the previous instruction.

This is the meaning of abrogation, that the first instruction is
annulled and replaced by another. So the second instruction must be such
that it is fully incompatible with the first. However, if collectively,
the contents of the first verse and the second one are compatible, so
that one clarifies the other, then there is no further question of one
being an abrogator and the other being abrogated.

The verses of Surah at-Tawba are not such that they can be said to have
been revealed so as to nullify the previously revealed ones, which
attached conditions to jihad. Why not? Because, when we consider all the
verses of Surah at-Tawba collectively, we see that they tell us to fight
the polytheists because they do not observe one of the essential
principles of humanity - keeping one's promises - which one and all
know, must be kept, even if the law of one's particular nation does not
stress this duty or heed it at all.

Thus the verses tell us to fight, because if we conclude an agreement
with them, whenever they see the opportunity to violate it, they would
do so and strive to destroy and annihilate us. Here, what does reason
tell us? If we know for sure that a nation intends to destroy us on the
first opportunity, does reason tell us to wait for them to do so before
we do anything about it? If we wait, they will destroy us. In today's
world, we may see a nation attacking another because of clear evidence
that the other nation has made the decision to attack them, and when
that nation attacks, the whole world will say that it is permissible,
that they did the right thing.

No one would say that although they knew and had clear evidence that,
for example, the enemy had the intention of attacking on a certain day,
that they had no right to attack the enemy today, that they should have
waited with folded arms for the enemy to attack and only then, should
they have gone into action themselves.

The Qur’an in those same verses of Surah Bara'at (Tawbah), the most
strict verses of the Qur’an, tells us:

***«*** ***How (can there be such a league), seeing that if they get an
advantage over you, they respect not in you the ties either of kinship
or of covenant? With (fair words from) their mouths they entice you, but
their hearts are averse from you; and most of them are rebellious and
wicked.» (9:8)***

It tells us that, if they find the opportunity, they observe no promise
or treaty, and whatever they say comes only from their tongues, while
their hearts are in opposition. So, these verses are not as
unconditional as had been previously thought.

What they actually say is that, on sensing danger from the enemy, for us
to fold our arms and delay would be a mistake. Thus we must not think
that these verses are completely out of accord with the other verses and
they should not be considered as abrogators. This is the first reason
why these verses are not abrogative.

B- No Generality without an Exception
-------------------------------------

The second reason was given by the ulama’ of usul ul-fiqh - and if I can
explain it to you, then the meaning concerning this verse will become
clear.

The ulama’ say: “Maa min 'amman illa waqad khussa” “There is no
generality that is without an exception.”

And this is absolutely right. We are told to fast, but we are excused if
we are travelling, or too sick (according to what is appropriate in the
rulings). There are similarly generalities that have no exceptions.
There are some generalities that really have no exceptions and admit
none. So, even this very rule has exceptions.

The point of this is that some issues refuse to be abrogated, refuse all
exceptions. The tone of these generalities is that they can admit no
exceptions. For example, in the Qur’an we are told:

***«…*** ***if ye are grateful, He is pleased with you.» (39:7)***

This verse does not admit any exceptions. It is not possible that there
will come a time when a person will be sincerely grateful to God, and
God will not be pleased. No. This is not something that in certain
circumstances will be any different, unless that person becomes
ungrateful.

Similarly, concerning abrogation, some verses are such that
fundamentally abrogation is not applicable to them, because the meaning
of abrogation is that the abrogated order was a temporary order. This
means that certain things do not admit being temporary. If they be, they
must always be. Why? Now, I will give you an example.

For example, let's take the verse of the Qur’an which tells us:

***«*** ***…do not transgress limits; for Allah loveth not
transgressors.» (2:190)***

This has a generality in regard to individuals and continuity in regard
to time. Is it possible for us to maintain exceptions to this
generality? Can we say that God does not like oppressors with the
exception of a few? The holiness of divinity on the one hand and the
filth of zulm, of injustice and oppression on the other are not two
things that go together for us to be able to say that God does not love
transgressors with the exception of so and so.

This is a generality that admits no exception. This is not like fasting
where we say that we must fast unless we are in such and such a
condition. In the case of fasting, it is possible that in a certain
state a person must not fast, but zulm is not a thing whereby we can say
that in one instance we must be unjust and in another we must not.
Wherever there is injustice and oppression, it is wrong and a crime,
irrespective of who has committed it.

Even if it were the prophets of God who committed it, it would still be
blameworthy, and regarded as sin and disobedience. God does not love
anyone who is disobedient. We cannot say “except the injustice of His
prophets.” Even this is unacceptable. Even if the prophets, (may God
spare me for the thought) committed sins, they would not be loved by
God. The difference between a prophet and others is not that he
committed sins and God loves him nevertheless; but that he never commits
any sin while others do. This, then, is a generality which admits no
exceptions.

Concerning the time factor also, the same thing applies. Can it be said
that a certain fact pertains to a certain time? That God loves
transgressors for a while, but then changes His mind, cancels His
original position, and says that thereafter, He loves transgressors? No,
this is a thing that admits no abrogation.

We can see how in one of the verses about jihad the Qur’an says:

***«Fight in the cause of Allah those who fight you, but do not
transgress limits; for Allah loveth not transgressors.» (2:190)***

We are to fight with those who fight against us, with those who have
commenced some type of aggression against us. But we are not ourselves
to be aggressors. Fighting against aggression is not aggression. But
fighting against other than aggression is aggression and not lawful.

We are to fight against aggression so as to eliminate aggression; but if
we fight against other than aggression then we ourselves become
aggressors. This is not something that admits abrogation.

It is possible, for example, that permission for jihad and self-defense
could be withheld for a while in our own best interests, for us to
endure and persevere for a while and then, later, the call for jihad is
given. Thus, the command for patience would be canceled because it was
meant for a specified time period only; this cancellation of the initial
command is so because it was meant to be only temporary from the
beginning.

C- Defense of Human Values
--------------------------

According to this, the Qur’an limits jihad strictly to a type of defense
and only permits it in the face of aggression. But in our last lecture,
we said that jihad for the expansion of human values, even if they are
not threatened, cannot be condemned. We also said that the meaning of
aggression is a general one, meaning that it is not necessary for
aggression to be against life, against property, against chastity,
against land - it is not even necessary for it to be against
independence, against freedom - if a group transgresses against values
that are counted as human values, then this is aggression.

I wish to cite a simple example. In our age, huge efforts are being
directed at uprooting various diseases. So far the primary causes of
some diseases like cancer have not been discovered, and their cure is
likewise still not known. But at present, there exist medicines which
can temporarily delay the effect of these diseases.

Supposing that some institution discovers the cure to one of these
diseases, and that those other institutions which profit from the very
presence of that disease, those factories which manufacture the
medicines that can be used to postpone the effects of that disease, in
order to prevent their market from collapsing - in which case millions,
billions of dollars would be lost - destroy that newly discovered cure
which for humanity is so beneficial; destroy those who are connected
with it; destroy the newly discovered formula so that no one would know
about it.

Now, is such a human value to be defended or not? Can we say that no one
has attacked our lives or our property; no one has interfered with our
chastity, our independence or our territory? Can we see that in one of
the corners of the world, somebody has made a discovery and someone else
is trying to destroy it, and ask, what has it got to do with us? No.
This is not the place for such a question. Here a human value is being
threatened. In such a case, if we take the stance of resistance and war,
are we to be called aggressors? No, we have risen to oppose aggression,
and to fight the aggressors.

So, when we say that the basis of jihad is defense, we do not mean
defense in the limited sense of having to defend oneself when one is
attacked with the sword, gun or artillery shell. No; we mean that if
one's being, one's material or spiritual values are aggressed or in
fact, if something that mankind on the whole values and respects and
which is necessary for mankind's prosperity and happiness, is aggressed,
then we are to defend it.

Here, we come again to our previous discussion about whether tawhid is a
personal issue or whether it is one of the values of humanity. If it is
the latter that must be defended, so that if amongst a set of laws there
is one which dictates that tawhid must be defended on the principle of
it being a basic human value (as in Islam, for example), this does not
mean that aggression is considered lawful. It means that tawhid is a
spiritual value and the meaning of defense is so wide that it includes
the defense of spiritual values.

Nevertheless, I will again repeat that Islam does not say we must fight
to impose tawhid, for tawhid is something that cannot be imposed because
it is faith. Faith is built on discernment and choice, and discernment
is not influenced by force. The same applies to choice. “La ikraha
fid-din” means we must not compel anyone for faith is not something that
can be forced upon someone. However, “La ikraha fid- din,” does not
imply that we are not to defend the rights of tawhid. It does not mean
that, if we see “La ilaha illallah,” “No god but Allah,” being
threatened from some direction, we are not to defend it. No, not at all.

D- Freedom of Belief, or of Thought?
------------------------------------

That religion must not be imposed on the individual and that people must
be free in their choice of religion is one matter. That belief, in the
current phraseology, must be free, is quite another matter. In other
words, whereas freedom of thought and choice is one thing, freedom of
belief is quite another. Many beliefs have “thought” for a foundation,
meaning that many beliefs have been discerned and found to be true and
have been freely chosen.

The alignment and commitment of an individual's heart to his beliefs in
many cases is built on discernment and selection, but are all human
beliefs built on thought, discernment and selection? Or are the majority
of mankind's beliefs no more than alignments and commitments of the
human soul that have not the slightest relationship to thought at all,
and have merely a sentimental basis? An example the Qur’an cites on the
subject of imitation by one generation of the previous generation is:

***«Just in the same way, whenever We sent a Warner before thee to any
people, the wealthy ones among them said: "We found our fathers
following a certain religion, and we will certainly follow in their
footsteps» (43:23)***

The Qur’an puts great stress on this point, and the same applies to a
belief that is formed by the imitation of the patricians of society. In
such places, the phrase “freedom of belief” is completely without
meaning. Freedom means the absence of obstacles to the activities of an
active and advancing force, whereas this type of belief is a kind of
constriction and stagnation.

Freedom in constriction is equal to the freedom of a prisoner condemned
to eternal imprisonment, or of a man chained in heavy chains, and the
only difference is that he who is physically enchained senses his
condition, while he whose spirit is in chains is unaware of it. This is
what we mean when we say that freedom of belief based on imitation and
environmental influences, rather than on freedom of thought, is totally
meaningless.

E- “Jiziyah”
------------

The final issue to be discussed is jiziyah, i.e. tribute. In one of the
Qur’anic verses, it has been revealed that we are to fight the People of
the Book, or those who do not have real faith, unconditionally, or until
they pay jiziyah. What is jiziyah? Is the meaning of jiziyah some kind
of “protection money” or “dangled?” Were the Muslims who took jiziyah in
the past taking protection money?

Protection money, seen from any angle, is injustice and oppression and
the Qur’an itself negates injustice in all its forms. Jezyah finds its
root in the word jaza. Jaza in the Arabic language is used both for
reward and for punishment. If jiziyah in this context means recompense
or punishment, then it can be claimed that its meaning is “protection
money” or “danegeld,” but if it means a reward, which it does, then the
matter changes.

Previously we said that some have claimed that jiziyah is fundamentally
a non-Arabic word. They say that it is originally Persian, that it is
the Arabicized form of the Persian word “gaziyeh,” the name of a
head-tax which was first introduced by the Persian king, Anoushiravan,
and that when this word reached the Arabs, the “gaf” (“G”) was changed
into a “jim” (“J”) in accordance with the normal rule. So, the Arabs,
instead of saying “gaziyeh”, called it “jiziyah.”

Thus, jiziyah means a tax, and paying taxes is not the same as extorting
protection money. The Muslims too must pay taxes and the only difference
is between the actual types of taxes that the Muslims have to pay and
those the People of the Book have to pay. There is no proof however, for
this view, that the origin of the word is not Arabic.

Furthermore, we have no immediate interest in this word. Whatever the
root of the word may be, what we must do is find out the nature of
jiziyah from the laws that Islam has introduced for it, and by which it
is defined practically.

To put it in a different way, we must look to see whether Islam
considers jiziyah to be a reward or a punishment. If in return for the
jiziyah, Islam makes certain undertakings, gives us certain services,
then the payment of the jiziyah is its reward. If, however, it takes the
jiziyah without giving anything in return, then it is a kind of
protection money.

If there is a time when Islam tells us to take jiziyah from the People
of the Book without giving anything in return, tells us just to take
money from them or otherwise fight them, then it ought to be considered
protection money. Taking protection money means taking the right to use
force. It means that the strong tell those who are weaker to give a sum
of money if they want to be left alone and if they do not want
interference or their security be destroyed.

If, on the other hand, Islam says that it places an undertaking before
the People of the Book and in return for that undertaking they are to
pay jiziyah to Islam, then in this case, the meaning of jiziyah is as a
reward, whether it is an Arabic word or a Persian word. What we must pay
attention to is the nature of the law, not the nature of the word.

When we perceive the essence of this law, we notice that jiziyah is for
that group of the People of the Book who live under the protection of
the Islamic state, who are subject to the Islamic state. The Islamic
state has certain duties towards its nation and likewise, the latter has
its respective duties towards the Islamic state, and the first of these
is to pay taxes to maintain the state budget.

These taxes include that which is taken as zakat and that which is taken
as other than zakat in the form of various taxes that the Islamic
government introduces in accordance to the best Islamic interests. All
these must be paid by the people. In case they do not, then the Islamic
government would automatically not be able to function. There is no
governmental budget which is not fully or partly financed by the people.
All governmental budgets are sustained directly or indirectly by taxes.

The second duty of the citizens is to provide soldiers and undertake
sacrifices for the sake of the state. There may be future dangers when
the citizens of the state must help in its defense. If the People of the
Book are living under the protection of the Islamic state they are not
bound to pay those Islamic taxes and are not bound to take part in
jihad, even though any advantages resulting from the jihad will also
benefit them.

Accordingly, when the Islamic government secures the safety of a people,
whether they are their own people or not, and places them under its
protection, it requires something in return. This may be financial or
other than financial. Instead of zakat and the other taxes, and even
instead of soldiers, the Islamc government requires jiziyah from the
People of the Book.

In early Islam, it was such that whenever the People of the Book
volunteered to come and fight in the ranks of the Muslims in the
interests of the Islamic state and the Muslims, the latter didn't
collect the jiziyah. Since they were not bound to provide soldiers, but
had come forward and volunteered to fight, the money they were due to
pay, the jiziyah, was theirs, and the Islamic state could not rightfully
take it.

In the commentary on the Qur’an called “Tafsir al-Menar,” there are many
accounts from various history books of how the early Muslims took
jiziyah instead of soldiers, and how the People of the Book used to be
told that since they were living under the protection of the Islamic
state and of the Muslims, but sent no soldiers (the Muslims would
themselves not accept them), then instead of sending soldiers, they had
to pay the jiziyah. And if once in a while the Muslims in certain
instances found confidence in them and accepted their soldiers, they no
longer took jiziyah from them.

According to this, whether or not jiziyah is Arabic or Persian, whether
it is from jaza or from gaziyah, this much is clear: from its legal
meaning it is a reward to the Islamic government from its non-Muslim
citizens from the People of the Book, in return for the services that it
performs for them and in return for them not having to provide the state
with soldiers and not having to pay taxes.

Now the first problem of how and why Islam stops its jihad for the sake
of jiziyah becomes clear. The answer is provided by the question, “Why
does Islam want jihad?” It does not want jihad for the sake of the
imposition of belief. It wants jihad for the removal of barriers. When
the other side tells us that it has no wish to fight us, and that it
will not create a barrier to the call of tawhid, and keeps to its word,
it is to be ruled in accordance with this verse:

***«But if the enemy incline towards peace, do thou (also) incline
towards peace» (8:61)***

If they have been humbled, and manifest a mind and heart of peace and
compromise, then we are not to be severe anymore.

We are not to say, “Oh no. We do not want peace, we are going to fight.”
Now that they have come forward to live in peace and concord, we too
must announce the same thing. Of course, now that they want to live with
us under our protection, but do not have to pay any of the Islamic
taxes, nor provide any soldiers, and neither do we have any confidence
in their soldiers, then, in return for our services and protection, we
take a simple tax from them called jiziyah.

Some Christian historians like Gustav Le Bon and George Zaydun have
discussed this issue in detail. Will Durant in Vol. II of his series
“The History of Civilization” has also discussed the Islamic jiziyah and
tells us that the Islamic jiziyah was so trivial an amount that it was
even less than the taxes the Muslims themselves paid and thus there was
never any question of exaction.


