Foreword
========

The first question that may occur to the reader as to the reason the
author (of the present book) has undertaken writing a commemorative
volume about the perfect Gnostic, the pious servant, and the reverend
"Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat"-particularly if the reader has been one of
his disciples, would probably be: Why has a writer, who has never met
with the Shaykh and whose field of work and research is not writing
commemorative biographies, made such an attempt like this?

The Charisma of the Shaykh's Sayings
------------------------------------

Imam Ali (a) has been quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان على كلّ حقِّ حقيقة، وعلى كل صواب نوراُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Together with every righteous affair there is a truth, and with every
correct matter, a light"[^1]

Once at early youth when I accidentally encountered in Masjid-i Jamkaran
in Qum with one of the devotees of Shaykh Rajab Ali*,* I became
devotedly attached to the latter despite having never met him in person.
I found in his words such truthfulness, radiance and charisma that
scented of the fragrance of the friends of God.

For years, I eagerly longed for the life-story and words of that
"unschooled beloved" and instructor of ethics at whose feet many
professors from Universities and Hawza (Islamic Seminaries) had knelt in
devotion, to be compiled, published and presented to the public,
especially the youth-who are in dire need of it at the outset of their
life.

If one of disciples of the Shaykh, who is given to writing, had made
this valuable and instructive endeavor, there would have undoubtedly
been compiled a more comprehensive collection than the present volume.
For some reason, however, this was not accomplished, mainly due to the
fact that most of the Shaykh's disciples and companions, who potentially
could have played a helpful part in compilation of such work, have
already departed from this world.

Several years ago I began to feel that the chance for accomplishing this
task was gradually being lost, and if the memories of those devotees of
the Shaykh who are still alive were not complied by now, perhaps it
would never be possible to write his didactic biography, and
truth-seekers would be deprived for ever of knowing the truths that this
man of God had been able to discover. Thus, I brought up the issue with
a brother-in-faith and asked him to arrange interviews with the Shaykh's
devotees and record their memories on the basis of the topics that I had
gathered about him.

This was carried out and the memories were written down. It was, then,
prepared and edited by The Islamic Research Foundation and in June, 1997
was published by Dar al-Hadith Publication by the name of Tandis-i
Ikhlas (A Figure of Sincerity).

**In spite of all its inefficiencies, the book was highly acclaimed by
the readers, especially the young generation, to the extent that in a
short while it sold out over a hundred thousand copies in eleven
reprints.**

By further research, more valuable points about the Shaykh's spiritual
wayfaring and self-enrichment were revealed. This time, despite all my
busy occupations, for some reasons I decided to reorganize the book in a
way that the spiritual character of that devoted gnostic, secrets of his
spiritual achievements, and his method of self-improvement can be
rewritten. The present book is, by Grace of Allah, the product of that
decision. In this new edition, renamed 'The Elixir of Love', some
considerable remarks have been made.

The Style of Writing
--------------------

In authoring this book, all the interviews made with Shaykh Rajab Ali's
devotees were revised and catalogued. Afterwards, the significant and
instructive points were extracted from among the dialogues and
categorized in four parts: Traits, A Leap Forward, Self-Building; and
Passing Away. In the end, the main task of chaptering and editing began.
The significant distinction between the biography of the reverend Shaykh
and other biographies is the utilization of Islamic texts to
authenticate his guidelines or some of his miraculous acts. Remarks on
some relevant prophecies and miracles that occurred to other friends of
God were also included.

Another point is that, brief quotations from Islamic texts brought up on
each topic are referred to more as examples. For further details,
however, the interested reader may refer to the newly published Persian
translation of Mizan al-Hikmah by the same author as specified at the
footnotes.

Beyond a Commemorative Volume
-----------------------------

This way, the volume on the late Shaykh turned out to go beyond a mere
commemoration. It not only indicates the path to the sublime destination
for humanity, but also serves as an impetus to self-improvement, guiding
the spiritual seeker toward the status of the righteous and the
truth-seekers by means of the Holy Qur'an and traditions of the
Infallible Imams (a). In an introduction to his commentary on the Hadith
of the Armies of Intellect and Ignorance, Imam Khomeini (ra) asserts the
inefficiency of books written about ethics from scientific and
philosophical points of view, and emphasizes the society's need for
books on ethics such as the present one. He further comments:

"To my humble opinion, scientific and historical ethics as well as
literal and scientific interpretation (of the Qur'an) and commentary on
*hadiths* in like manner, divert one from their destination and goal and
is distancing rather than approximating. It is my contention that in
ethics and commentary on the related *hadiths* or interpretation of the
noble verses referring to it (ethics), it is important that the writer
should instill his purposes in the souls (of his audience) by means of
warning and giving glad tidings, preaching and admonishing, and
reminding.

In other words, a book on ethics should be of a practical preaching
nature, curing maladies and defects by itself, rather than showing how
to cure.

Explaining the roots of morals and indicating the way to remedy (of
immorality) does not drive one near to destination, does not enlighten a
darkened heart, and does not rectify a corrupt disposition. A book on
ethics is one that by reading it a hard (and unfeeling) soul turns
tender, the impure becomes purified, and the darkened gets radiant; and
that is achievable only if the scholar (preacher) is a leader while
instructing, a therapist while presenting (ways of) therapy, and if his
book itself is the medicine for the ailment rather than a prescription
exposing medications. The words of a spiritual physician should serve as
medicine, not prescriptions; and the above mentioned books are
prescriptions rather than medications; though if I dared I would say
that some of them (even) seem doubtful to be (considered as)
prescriptions -this topic, however had better be dispensed with."

The reader will find out by experience that the present Commemorative
Volume is not prescription revealing medications; rather, it is indeed a
medicine that heals diseases of the heart, makes the hearts tender and
radiant, and takes the spiritual seeker closer to his destination and
goal.

Authenticity of the Sources
---------------------------

As mentioned before, the sources of the Shaykh's Commemorative Volume
comprises interviews made with his disciples and devotees; and except in
few cases, all narrations are directly quoted from the Shaykh. And all
the narrators -both the ones whose names are given and those who for
some reason preferred not to be named-are reliable and I am confident
that what they have said is nothing but truth.

What is remarkable is that all the things said about the reverend Shaykh
here is what his disciples have said about him without referring to them
in details.

Another point worth mentioning is that in quoting from the interviews
great care has been taken to mention the exact words and make the least
literal and editorial corrections as far as possible.

Stations of the People possessing Divine Knowledge
--------------------------------------------------

The greatest art of the reverend Shaykh is his attaining the elixir of
love of God. He was actually an expert in such alchemy[^2]; and the book
was, accordingly, named, The Elixir of Love. Exploiting this elixir, the
reverend Shaykh attained the truth of Unity (of God). In chapter three
of part three of the present volume you will read the Shaykh's words in
this respect:

"The truth of elixir (alchemy) is to attain God Himself.... Love of God
is the final sttion of servitude. ...The standard for evaluation of
deeds is the standard by which the doer loves God Almighty."

I presume whoever reads the Shaykh's biography, they will confirm that
he had perceived the truth of the elixir of loving God; that through
loving his Creator he had attained such perfection and high stations
that is so baffling-if not impossible-for us even to imagme.

Many a time it happens that some ignorant individuals will deny the high
stations of those possessed of Divine knowledge, merely out of their own
disability and failure in comprehending those stations. That was why the
late Imam Khomeini (ra)-the founder of The Islamic Revolution, strongly
cautioned his beloved son, Haj Ahmad Agha, of such attitude. He wrote:

"My son! What I first and foremost recommend to you is not to deny the
stations of those endowed with Divine knowledge, which is the manner of
the ignorant; and beware of those denying the status of the friends of
God, as they are highway robbers of Truth."[^3]

And in his advice to Haj Ahmad Agha's wife, he states: "I would not like
to exonerate the pretenders; 'for many a cloak deserve to be burnt'.
Rather I want you not to negate the essence of spirituality, which the
book (the Qur'an) and the *Sunnah* (of Rasul Allah (s)) have alluded to
and its opponents have either ignored it or have engaged themselves in
the monotheism of the masses. I enjoin you (to know) that the first step
is to get out of the thick veil of negation, which is an obstacle to any
development and any positive step. This (first) step is not perfection
(in itself); rather it opens up the path to perfection."

"In any case, one cannot find a way toward Divine knowledge with a
negating attitude. As being selfish and egotistic, those who negate the
stations of the gnostics and the positions of spiritual seekers would
not attribute to their own ignorance whatever they do not comprehend,
and negate it lest their selfishness and egotism would not be
marred."[^4]

The Human Beings who cannot be perceived
----------------------------------------

The stations of those endowed with Divine Knowledge are virtues that
cannot be explained and described to most of the people. In this
respect, a beautiful *hadith* is quoted from Imam al-Sadiq (a) as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لايقدر الخلائق على كنه صفة الله عز وجل، فكما لايُقدر على كنه صفة الله
عز وجل فكذلك لايقدر على كنه صفة رسول الله –صلى الله عليه وآله- وكما
لايقدر على كنه صفة الرسول –ص- فكذلك لايقدر على كنه صفة الامام – عليه
السلام- وكما لايقدر على كنه صفة الامام -ع- كذلك لايقدر على كنه صفة
المؤمن"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Masses are unable of perceiving the innermost core of Almighty Allah's
(s) Attributes, and as they are unable of accessing the essence of
Allah's (s) Attributes, they are likewise unable to perceive the depth
of the attributes of His Apostle (s); and as they are unable to find out
about the innermost attributes of his Apostle, they are likewise unable
to fathom the attributes of the Imams (a); and as they cannot know the
Imams as they should be known, they are likewise unable to recognize the
truth of the faithful as they should."[^5]

When reached the stage of annihilation in Allah, man becomes His
vicegerent and representative in the world of existence. It is at this
stage that analysis and description of his virtues, like that of God
Almighty, would be impossible for the ordinary people. In this,
characteristic, as it was noticed in the words of Imam al-Sadiq (a),
there is no difference between the Prophet (s), the Imam (a), and the
Faithful. Thus, it is not surprising to say that the spiritual stations
and virtues of individuals like the reverend Shaykh are indescribable.

A disciple of the Shaykh, to whom the present author has for years been
devoted and quoted various accounts on the Shaykh's spiritual stations
from, said that Once the Shaykh had told him:

"O such and such! No one knew me in the world, but I will be known on
two occasions; once when the twelfth Imam (aj) will have returned, and
once on the Resurrection Day."

Accordingly, introducing the spiritual virtues and perfection of the
reverend Shaykh in itself is a task that cannot be carried out by such
books as the present volume and the like. The deepest impact that
writing his radiant biography can leave would be by illuminating the
general features of the reverend Shaykh's life, secret of his attaining
the high spiritual stations of those endowed with Divine Knowledge, and
his way in education and self-building. This, in itself, is a great and
valuable task that has, by the Grace of Bounteous Allah, been
undertaken. We are grateful to Him for such great achievement. Perhaps
this writing is going to be a beginning step toward the actualization of
the Shaykh's prophecy of his being briefly known after his death. As his
son has quoted him saying: "No one gets to know me and after my death, I
will be known."

> Muhammadi Rayshahri April 1, 1999

[^1]: Al-Kafi, II, 54: 4; Mizan al-Hikmah, XIII, 6520: 20838

[^2]: See "The Shaykh's Greatest Art", chapter three, part three.

[^3]: Sahifeh Noor, XXII, 371.

[^4]: Ibid, XXII, 348.

[^5]: Mizan al-Hikmah, I, 390: 1400.


