Politics
========

The Shaykh was not involved in politics; however, he was strongly
opposed to the detested Pahlavi regime and the ruling statesmen. He was
not only opposed to the Shah, but also disapproved Musaddeq. He praised,
however, Ayatollah Kashani (ra) and said: "His inward aspect was similar
to a fountainhead."

Two Political Predictions
-------------------------

One of the Shaykh's sons said: 'On 30th of Tir, 1330 S.H. (July 21,
1951) when the Shaykh arrived in the house, he burst into tears and
said':

"Hadrat-i Sayyid al- Shuhada put out this fire and prevented this
affliction; many people were intended to be massacred on this day.
Ayatollah Kashani will not be successful (victorious), but there will
come a Sayyid who will succeed."

Later on his prediction turned out to be about Imam Khomeini (ra).

The Future of the Islamic Revolution
------------------------------------

Speaking of Imam Khomeini (ra), it is interesting to know his foresight
concerning the future of the Islamic Revolution.

Mr. Ali Muhammad Bisharati-- former interior minister-- related that in
the summer of 1358/1979, when he was in charge of the Intelligence
Department of sipah-i pasdaran (Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps), he
received a report on Mr. Shari'atmadari (a then dissident cleric) who
had said in Mashhad: 'I will eventually declare war against Imam
Khomeini (ra).'

Mr. Bisharati said: 'I went to see Imam Khomeini (ra) and among other
reports I informed him of what was said about him by Mr. Shari'atmadari.
The Imam (ra) listened with bowed head, and when I ended my talk, he
raised his head and said:

"What are they saying? Our victory is guaranteed by Allah. We will be
successful, and set up an Islamic government and hand over the banner to
the rightful banner-bearer (Imam Mahdi (a))."

I asked: 'Yourself (will hand it over)?'

Imam (ra) kept silent and did not answer.'

Nasir al-Din Shah Qajar in the Purgatory World
----------------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples related the following from him about the
condition of Nasir al-Din Shah Qajar in the Purgatory State:

"His soul was set free on Friday, the evening of which he was being
forced back to his previous station. He was crying and begging the
agents (who were escorting) him not to take him back. When he saw me he
said: If I knew my place would be such as this I would never even
imagine of having joy and pleasure in the world!"

Praising the Tyrannical Monarch
-------------------------------

The reverend Shaykh would restrain his friends and disciples from
collaborating with the ruling government (i.e., Pahlavi) particularly
from praising and admiring them (the officials).

A disciple of the Shaykh quotes him as saying:

"I saw the soul of one of the pious people being tried in the Purgatory
state, and all the indecent actions perpetrated by his contemporary
despotic ruler were being ascribed to him. The man being tried
protested:

'I have not done any of these crimes. He was replied: 'Did you not say
in praise of him that he provided the country with such wonderful
security?'

He answered: 'Yes.'

He was told then: 'You were satisfied with his actions; he made all
these crimes to secure his kingdom'."

In Nahjul-Balagha, Imam Ali (a) is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الراضي بفعل قوم كالداخل فيه معهم، وعلى كل داخل في باطل أثمان: أثم
العمل به، وأثم الرضا به
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Whoever is content with conducts of some other people, he is like the
one who has collaborated with them in those actions; and whoever
perpetrates a falsehood two sins are recorded for him: One for doing it,
and the other for being content with it."[^1]

Cooperation with the American Military Attaches
-----------------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's friends whose son was working with American attaches
said: 'On a trip to Mashhad I was in the company of the Shaykh. Together
with him we went to the Holy Shrine for a pilgrimage. He stood in a
corner to recite the *Ziyarat,* talking to Imam al-Reza (a) the same way
as I talk to you. After finishing the *Ziyarat,* he made a *sajdah*
(prostration). When he raised up his head from *sajdah,* he called me
(near himself) and said:

"His Holiness (Imam al-Reza (a)) says: ' Prevent your son from pursuing
that job, otherwise he will place a heavy burden on your back!"

'We did not know that he had made arrangements with the Americans to go
to the U.S.A. About twenty five years ago,[^2] one day my son came to me
and said: 'I am going abroad and I have made -all the arrangements and
even obtained my visa.' Whatever we did we could not avert his decision.
When he finally left for the U.S.A., he wrote to us some time later that
his wife was barren and that he was divorcing her. Since then we have
gone through much trouble because of him.

[^1]: Mizan al-Hikmah, VIII, 3714: 12748.

[^2]: This interview took place on July I, 1996.


