Spiritual Perfections
=====================

There is a renowned *hadith* that the experts call *"hadith-i qurb-i
nawafil"* (the *hadith* of proximity in supererogation).

Both Shi'a and Sunni scholars of *hadith* quoted, with a slight
difference, the Holy Prophet (s) as saying:[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قال الله عز وجل: ... ما تقرب إلي عبد بشيء أحب الي مما افترضت عليه،
وانه ليتقرب الي بالنافلة حتى أحبه، فاذا أحببته كنت سمعه الذي يسمع به،
وبصره الذي يبصر به، ولسانه الذي ينطق به، ويده التي يبطش بها، ان دعاني
أجبته، وإن سألني أعطيته"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The Almighty Allah said: No servant is drawn nigh to Me except by means
of what is more favorable to Me than what I have made obligatory to
them. Verily, he approaches to Me by *nafila* (supererogatory prayers)
to the extent that I get to love him; in that case, I will become his
ears to hear with, his eyes to see with and his tongue to speak with,
and his hand to strike with. If he calls Me, I will answer him and if he
makes a request from Me I will grant him"[^2]

What is meant by *"nafila"* in the *ahadith-i qurb-i nawafil,* which
follow the obligatory prayers, consist of good and righteous deeds,
which expedite man's flight toward absolute perfection and the Sublime
Destination of humanity.

One can, accordingly, through performance of good deeds for God's sake
get closer and closer to absolute perfection; and at the peak of
servitude, his eyes would not see except for the sake of God, his ears
would not hear except for the sake of God, his tongue would not talk
except for the sake of God, and his heart would not yearn except for the
sake of God.

In other words, by submerging your will in the Will of Allah (swt)--as
put in the *ahadith-i qurb-i nawafil--*God will become your eyes, ears,
tongue and heart; and you will eventually attain the essence of
servitude and Divinity.

According to the reverend Shaykh:

"If the eye works for God, it becomes **Eye of Allah**, if the ear works
for God it becomes **Ear of Allah**, if the hand works for God, it
becomes **Hand of Allah**, and so forth to the heart of man, which is
God's place; as narrated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"قلب المؤمن من عرش الرحمن"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The heart of a believer is the Throne of Allah, the compassionate.[^3]"

And as Imam Husayn (a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"جعلتَ قلوبَ أوليائكَ مسكناً لمشيتك"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O Lord! You made Your lover's hearts the station of Your Will and
Providence.[^4]"

Accurate and fair probing into the Shaykh's spiritual states indicates
that, after the enormous leap he made in his youth as a result of
rejecting the lustful temptation; and as an outcome of Divine training
and the inspirations and assistance granted to him from the Unseen, he
achieved such high levels of spiritual virtues. Perhaps, this was the
secret of his great interest in the following poems which he frequently
whispered:

"In the school of Eternity, it was Your Beauty that guided me; Your
Grace aided me to be trapped in your (Divine) Snare."

"My vile carnal soul yearned for any falsehood; Your Gracious Emanation
liberated me from its grips."

Absorbed in Monotheism
----------------------

One of the Shaykh's close disciples who had been associating with him
for about thirty years said: 'On the recommendation of the Shaykh I went
to visit Ayatollah Kuhistani?[^5]

The late Ayatollah Kuhistani once said about the Shaykh: 'Whatever the
late Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat was granted (spiritually), was due to his
fine monotheism; he was absorbed in monotheism.

The Station of Fana (Annihilation)
----------------------------------

Dr. Hamid Farzam who has enjoyed the reverend Shaykh's sessions,
described him as follows: 'His reverence Shaykh Rajab Ali Nikuguyan (May
God's Mercy be upon him) was a detached ascetic who had achieved union
with God. He had, out of purification of *nafs* and inward purity,
attained the status of *fana fi Allah,* and *baqa bi Allah* (subsistence
in Allah); and by means of acting according to legal ordinances and
spiritual path-faring through stations and states of spiritual
discipiine, he joined the origin of Truth, graced with the Blessing from
Almighty God.'

The Lover of God
----------------

Another of the Shaykh's disciples had the following description about
him: 'The late Shaykh was from among those whose beings are captivated
by God. He was literally unable to see anything except God; whatever he
saw was God; whatever he said was about God. His first and last word was
God, for he was in love with God. He was in love both with God and Ahl
al-Bayt (a); whatever he said was about them. Being sacred is apart from
being a lover. Shaykh Rajab 'Ali was a lover. His art was the Love of
God and work for God. Those who are Divinely in love; their eyes display
that love; his eyes were not like ordinary ones, he seemed to see
nothing but God.'

The reverend Shaykh considered as sinful taking pleasure in anything
except in God. Once in a very hot summer day, the Shaykh blew (some air
onto his face with) a manual straw fan to cool off a little. As soon as
he felt cool, he said at once:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وأستغفرك من كل لذة بغيرك ذِكرك ومن كل راحة بغير أنسك ومن كل سرور بغير
قربك ومن كل شغل بغير طاعتك."
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O God! I pray forgiveness from Thee for every pleasure but remembering
Thee, every ease but proximity with Thee, every happiness but nearness
to Thee every occupation but obeying Thee![^6]"

Another of his disciples, described the Shaykh's love of God as follows:
'The Shaykh was so enamored of God that in his presence nothing but
talking about his beloved would be allowed to come up, except of course
for some necessary subjects of daily matters. Sometimes he referred to
the story of **Layli and Majnun**, in which Majnun was never interested
to hear anything but about Layli. It was related that someone asked
Majnun: Is Ali (a) rightful or 'Umar?

To which he answered: ' Layli is rightful! , He (the Shaykh) would say:

"Even if this story is not real, it may be fitting to drive home the
(latent) reality in it."

The Greatest Status
-------------------

The young tailor, in his intense love of God and perfection of
sincerity, was granted the Supreme Status and the Sublime Destiny. Thus,
as asserted by the Ahl al-Bayt (a), he achieved the virtues and stations
of people of cognition (those endowed with Divine Knowledge) through a
way other than the common ways. Imam al-Sadiq (a) is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ان أولي الألباب الذين عملوا بالفكرة حتى ورثوا منه حب الله – الى ان
قال – فاذا بلغ هذه المنزلة جعل شهوته ومحبته في خالقه، فاذا فعل ذلك نزل
المنزلة الكبرى فعاين ربه في قلبه، وورث الحكمة بغير ما ورثه الحكماء،
وورث العلم بغير ما ورثه العلماء، وورث الصدق بغير ما ورثه الصديقون. ان
الحكماء ورثوا الحكمة بالصمت، وان العلماء ورثوا العلم بالطلب، وان
الصديقين ورثوا الصدق بالخشوع وطول العبادة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The wise people are those who put their thought in work by means of
which to acquire Love of God. When they reach this status--the holy Imam
(a) went on to say--they set their desire and love toward their Creator,
and thereby they reach the highest status, find their Lord in their
hearts, and obtain wisdom not through the way the sages obtained, and
find knowledge not through the way the scholars found, and achieve
*Sidq* (sincerity) not through the way the pious achieved. The sages
found sagacity by silence, the scholars found knowledge by seeking, and
the pious attained piety and sincerity through humility and long-term
worship.[^7]

Finding Way into all Worlds
---------------------------

One of the Shaykh's devotees who had been closely asociating with him
for so many years wrote about the Shaykh's spiritual achievements: 'As a
result of his great love in Almighty God and the Ahl al-Bayt (a), there
remained no veil between him and God. He had access to all "worlds". He
would talk to all the souls residing in *Barzakh* (Purgatory World)
since the beginning of creation up to the present. He would "see", by
his own will, whatever anyone had done in their whole life and would
tell the signs,[^8] and would reveal what he willed and would be allowed
to.  
**Visiting the** ***Malakut*** **(the Celestial Kingdom)!**

Visiting the *Malakut* of the heavens and the earth with the eye of the
heart is a prologue to attaining the high status of intuition of
certitude.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكذلك نري ابراهيم ملكوت السموت والأرض وليكون من الموقنين))
  </p>
</blockquote>

(So also We show Abraham the power and the laws of the heavens and the
earth, that he might (with understanding) have certitude.) (Al An'am:
75)

The Holy Prophet (s) is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لولا ان الشياطين يحومون على قلوب بني آدم لنظروا الى الملكوت"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If it were not that devils are dominant over the hearts of human
beings, they would be witnessing the *Malakut.*[^9]"

All those who have been delivered from the snares of *nafs* and Satan,
by tearing apart the heart's veils, are able to observe the *Malakut* of
the heavens and the earth, and to bear witness to the Oneness of the
Sacred Essence of God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(شهد الله أنه لآ اله الا هو والملئكة وأولوا العلم)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(There is no God but He: That is the witness of Allah, His angels, and
those endowed with knowledge...) (Ale Imran: 18)

One of the Shaykh's disciples related: 'I asked the late Haj
Muqaddas[^10] whether the following *hadith* attributed to the Holy
Prophet (s) is correct:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لولا ان الشياطين يحومون على قلوب بني آدم لنظروا الى الملكوت"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If it were not that devils are dominant over the hearts of human
beings, they would be witnessing the Malakut."

He answered: 'Yes.'

I asked: 'Do you see the *Malakut* of the heavens and the earth?

'No, but Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat does!' He replied.

The Shaykh at the Age of Sixty
------------------------------

It is related by the late Shaykh ' Abdul Karim Hamid that the Shaykh
(Rajab Ali) was in such a state of mind at the age of sixty that
whenever he willed he would understand what he wished to.[^11]

The great Difference Between our Knowledge and his
--------------------------------------------------

Dr. Hamid Farzam said: 'I usually visited the reverend Shaykh on
Thursday evenings and attended his public sessions for prayers and
supplications. Until I found I had questions that I needed to put to him
privately, so it crossed my mind to have audience with him in the middle
of the week.

A Monday afternoon I went to see him to ask some questions. It was a
very nice day, as the late Hujj. Dr. Muhammad Muhaqqiqi, a university
professor and the representative to Ayatollah Burujirdi was also present
in his session. He was a brilliant figure whom I had not met or known
till then. Anyway, I asked for permission, sat down, and enjoyed a lot
the scholarly discussions of those two noble characters. Earlier in the
evening at the end of the session, Dr. Muhaqqiqi said goodbye and left
and I bid farewell too and followed him out of the house. In the alley,
I said to him that I liked to get more acquainted with him. He said: "I
am (Mr.) Muhaqqiqi and I am a teacher." I said I came to see the Shaykh
to benefit from his presence (and knowledge), and I see you are, thanks
God, very learned--intending to see what he had to say. He said: "No,
sir. My knowledge is of the bookish kind and all memorized. You should
see for yourself what a high position the Shaykh has attained; he sees
many things and knows many things that are incomparable to what I know."
I asked: 'How come?' He said:  
 "The first time I had an audience with him, the first thing he asked me
after greetings was about my job. I said: I am a teacher. He asked:
"Apart from teaching?" I replied: "I am a university professor and
teach." He said: "No, I see you deal with a global object!" I was
shocked to hear that and answered: "Yes, I do make geographical globes
for livelihood and nobody knows about that."

Confirming Dr. Muhaqqiq's views, Dr. Farzam goes on with his memories
about the reverend Shaykh: 'There are lots of things to say that if I
were to count it would come to many volumes. The reverend Shaykh, due to
his purified soul and inner sincerity, would simply see things and would
plainly state them without needing-as the Sufis put it-"to be emerged in
the sea of revelations", so that he has often said explicitly in the
presence of his disciples:

"Friends! God has graced me with the blessing of seeing the *Barzakhi*
(of intermediate world) body of people."

I have some other memories of the same nature to tell:

Helping out the Hard-Working Laborer
------------------------------------

A) There was an industrious and honest worker named Ali Qudati from
Azerbaijan who used to work for the neighbors and sometimes worked in
our house as well and got paid for it. Both in summer and winter he
would wear a long military coat. Having not ever seen him, the Shaykh
once told me unprecedentedly:

"That tall man who wears military coat and comes to your house sometimes
to help, is poor and has a large family, you should help him more!"

"You Lose Temper too quickly!"
------------------------------

B) One Thursday morning I left home sulkily. In the evening, I went to
the Shaykh's house for evening Prayer; all the friends were gathered
waiting for the *adhan* (call to prayer) and the Shaykh was sitting in a
corner. As soon as he saw me, he faced me and said: "You lose temper too
quickly!" Then, shaking his head in contempt and surprise, recited the
following couplet by Hafiz:

'Under His sword of sorrow, you ought to go on dancing (cheerfully)!

For the one who was killed by Him, would be granted a happy ending'

And I immediately found out my own fault!

"I See the Hair on his Head and Face is Growing Grey!"
------------------------------------------------------

C) About forty years ago I had some heart trouble and I got somewhat
scared. I told Dr. Goya that my heart was not in a good condition and
would possibly. ...

It seemed that he told the reverend Shaykh about my heart condition and
he had commented:

"He should not be worried, I see the hair on his head and face is
growing white."

And he had apparently proceeded to say:

"He will live on well through his seventies."

Now, thanks God, I am over seventy years old. Such accounts are too many
to bring up here; however, I further point out very briefly some
accounts that rate much higher than intuitive vision of state of
affairs:

Contact with the Souls of Dr. Farzam's Parents
----------------------------------------------

D) It was around 1958, i. e., later in the blessed life of the Shaykh,
and I was appointed to go to Punjab University in Lahore Pakistan to
teach Persian language and literature. One afternoon I went to see him
for consultation. Speaking by conjecture, I said: Your reverence! I have
come to you to consult with you whether to go to Pakistan; and request
you, if possible, to consult my parents in this respect, too.

The reverend Shaykh said: "Send Three Salawat!"

Then he began talking to them, and at the end, he was driven to tears.
Getting upset, I said: ' If I had known you would get disturbed and
wept, I would not have asked you to contact my parents.

He said:

"No sir! I asked them about the reappearance of Hazrat Hujjat Imam Mahdi
(aj), and my weeping was in that relation."

Then he gave me some evidence of my father's countenance and went on to
say:

"Your mother was wearing a *chador* (Islamic modest covering) and was
talking in Kermani dialect some of which I did not understand."

I confirmed: 'that's right your reverence! If they speak in Kermani
accent, some of their words cannot be recognized by you.'

The Shaykh said:

"All in all, their last word was that you should not go to Pakistan; and
why should you go anyway?!"

And, of course, I did not happen to go; their words and those of the
reverend Shaykh came true.'

How a Relation was established between Dr. Shaykh and Shaykh Rajab Ali
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The reverend Shaykh's son quoted the late Dr. Abul Hasan Shaykh[^12]
talking about his first acquaintance with the reverend Shaykh as
follows: 'The reason for my getting familiar with the late Shaykh Rajab
Ali Khayyat was the event of my wife having gotten lost for a couple of
months. The more we looked for her the less we found a sign of her; we
even visited some spiritualists, but to no effect. In our utmost
despair, someone gave me the Shaykh's home address, and that was the
first time that I had an audience with him. When he saw me, he pondered
for a while and then said:

"Your wife is in America and she will return in two weeks do not worry."

He was quite right. My wife was in America and returned in due time.

After this event, most of the days after work at the university; I would
call on the Shaykh, and then went home

The late Dr Shaykh said in an interview made with him on August 2, 1996
concerning (compilation of) this volume 'Once we went to "Pass Qal'a" in
his company We had hired a donkey for him to ride on and I was walking
in front leading the donkey I was thinking to myself 'What do I want
professorship of university for? If I want to become a full Professor
all I need is to walk in his shadow (follow him) to become like him When
I went to Karbala with him, we had gone to a bathhouse with him and I
rubbed his back with a Turkish rubbing glove How pleasurable it was to
be with him!'

"The Automobile is All Right, Move on!"
---------------------------------------

Dr Thubati said 'One day the reverend Shaykh together with Mr. Mirza
Sayyid ' Ali and Agha Akrami were waiting in the bus station to go to
mount "Bibi Shahrbanu[^13]" There were too many passengers waiting
there. The first bus arrived and the reverend Shaykh said:

"We are not destined to get on this one"

The bus filled up and left. The second bus came and the Shaykh said the
same again. The passengers rushed to the bus and got on, but tbe Shaykh
and his friends were left behind. The third bus arrived, but this time
too the crowd rushed on and the Shaykh and his companions did not happen
to get on. The bus driver tried to get the bus started up, but whatever
he tried the bus failed to start! Finally, the driver told the
passengers to get off as the bus had stalled; and they did so.

The reverend Shaykh said to his companions: "Get on the bus now!" And
they got on the bus; the driver said: 'The bus is stalled and it does
not get started sir!'

The Shaykh said:

"Nothing is wrong with it let's set off."

The driver sat behind the wheel, started and the bus got started up. At
this moment, the other passengers got on and we set off. On the way the
bus conductor began collecting the fares and when he reached us, he
refused to get fare from us three, but we disagreed. At last the
conductor said: ' I will not get fare from that one-pointing to the
Shaykh!'

Your Request is granted
-----------------------

Agha Haj Sayyid Ibrahim Musawi Zanjani[^14] said: 'In February 1956, I
traveled to Baghdad together with my family, on a mission as the Deputy
of the Iranian Passport Office. Two days before the coup d'etat in Iraq
my family and I returned to Iran but my mother and son stayed on in
Kazmayn. Two days later, the news about the coup d'etat in Iraq spread
around and the borders were closed, making me extremely upset about my
mother and son who were left behind in Iraq. I frequented the Iraqi
Embassy to get the latest news, while applying for a visa to go back to
Iraq. There were many others who were in the same situation as I was,
and would refer to the embassy but to no effect.

Hearing the bothering news (about the situation in Iraq) made me more
deeply tense and worried. Those days coincided with the month of
Muharram; so I went to Qum for *Ziyarat.* It was already dark when I got
into the Holy shrine of Hadrat Ma'suma (a). I went right to the upper
part of the *zarih* and began to supplicate importunately and lament
while reciting the "Special Salawat" dedicated to Holy Imam Musa bin
Ja'far (a) and entreating that noble Imam (a) to help my getting visa. I
returned to Tehran two days later. One of my colleagues, the late Ahmad
Fayd Mahdawi, wanted to make an arrangement for his cousin named (the
late) Hujj. Haj Agha Ziya'uddin Fayd Mahdawi to meet with the reverend
Shaykh. Together with him (Haj Agha Ziya'uddin), we went to the Shaykh's
house. When we got there, we were guided into a room that was half
carpeted and was very simply furnished. The Shaykh asked us to recite
the Sura of Tawhid seven times. He believed in the number seven very
strongly. Then, he started to speak; and while busy giving guidance and
advising, suddenly and unprecedentedly he faced me and said:

"You had a very good pilgrimage and your request had been granted; the
effects are evident. Pray for me too!!"

I asked the Shaykh which pilgrimage he was talking about. He said: "The
pilgrimage to Qum." And then went on with his advice.  
**Cursing Causes Darkness** **(of the Heart)**

In the meantime, he said to the late Haj Agha Ziya'uddin Fayd Mahdawi:

"Do not curse so much! Cursing so much causes darkness; pray, instead!!"

And the latter replied: 'Obeyed!'

This admonition, obviously irrelevant to the discussion going on, was
ambiguous to me. The next day, I brought up the subject with my
colleague, Agha Ahmad Fayd Mahdawi, and asked him: 'What was the story
of the cursing by Haj Agha Ziya'uddin?'

He explained: 'My cousin, i.e., Haj Agha Ziya'uddin, has a son who has
got atheistic ideas; and he curses him (his son) after every prayer!'

As for my request having been granted as mentioned by the Shaykh, when I
referred to the Iraqi Embassy two days later, as soon as the related
officer saw me he said: Give me your passport to stamp it for a visa!
Then he stamped my passport with a stamp having old Royal logo on it and
then crossed out the word "Malik" (Imperial) and wrote "Jumhuri"
(Republic) above it. This sounded very surprising to the other clients
who where applying for a visa too.

Having received the visa, I left for Baghdad; and later on it turned out
that before me only an American journalist had been admitted into
Baghdad.

The Effect of Humility toward People for God's Sake
---------------------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples related (quoting a friend): The late Agha
Murtada Zahid was being laid in his grave pit, the reverend Shaykh said:

"The *Nakirayn* (the two angels interrogating the dead persons in their
tombs) were immediately addressed by God Almighty: Leave that servant
(of Mine) to Me; do not bother him... He has all his life been humble
with people for My sake; he did not feel any vanity."

Talking to Plants
-----------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples quoted him as saying:

"The plants are alive too and they talk. I speak to them and they tell
me about their properties."

The Reward for the Inventor of Electric Fan
-------------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples quoted him as saying:

"Once a small electric fan was brought to me as a gift; I saw
(intuitively) there was a fan placed before its inventor in the Hell--
(actually he meant) *Barzakh."*

This intuition is confined by the *hadith* that suggests that although
the unbelievers do not go to paradise, but if they had done good things
they would be rewarded. In a *hadith* by the Holy Prophet (s) we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ما أحسن محسن من مسلم ولا كافر الا أثابه الله. قيل: ما إثابة الكافر؟
قال: ان كان قد وصل رحماً، او تصدق بصدقة، او عمل حسنة، أثابه الله تعالى
المال والولد والصحة وأشباه ذلك. قيل: وما إثابته في الآخرة؟ قال: عذاب
دون العذاب، وقرأ: (أدخلوا ءال فرعون أشد العذاب)"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Whoever does good, whether a Muslim or an unbeliever, God will reward
him." His Holiness (s) was asked: 'What is rewarding an unbeliever
like?' The Holy Prophet (s) replied: "If they have had regard for
kinship or given alms or done any good, God Almighty would grant them
wealth, children, and health in reward to their good deeds.[^15] " He
was (further) asked: 'How will they be rewarded in the Hereafter?' The
Holy Prophet (s) replied: "They will receive less severe punishment.
Then he recited this verse from the Holy Qur'an: (Cast the people of
Pharaoh into the severest burning fire!) (Al Nur: 46)

Conditional Fulfillment of Supplication
---------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's friends related: 'A disciple of the Shaykh could not
have children. Whatever he did was to no effect, until in a session-in
which I was present too-he asked the Shaykh for a solution, saying: 'I
want a child to bequeath from me after my death.

The Shaykh responded:

"I will reply to you later on"

Some time elapsed and I was not informed of what answer the Shaykh gave
to him. Until one day he invited me to a banquet. I asked him the
occasion for the banquet. He replied that he had been granted a
daughter. Recalling that session with the Shaykh, I asked him: 'Was the
Shaykh's prayer answered?' He said: 'On some condition of course.' I
asked: 'How come?' He explained: 'He (the Saykh) made me commit myself
to take a calf to the village "Imam Zadeh Hasan" - a village near
Shahr-i Ray -on the birthday of my daughter and slaughter it (as a
sacrifice) to be distributed among the people there. And now is the
first year of that commitment.

This continued for seven years. In the eighth year, however, the father
was abroad and he could not fulfill his commitment. The same year the
child died.

After this event, he was very frustrated. I intended to go to the
Shaykh's house and asked him if he would like to go there too. He
agreed, and I went a little earlier and told the Shaykh that such and
such is upset for the death of his daughter. The Shaykh said:

"What shall I do? Is not the fulfillment of commitment one of the first
conditions for being a Muslim? He did not fulfill his commitment."

Then our friend arrived, and the Shaykh made a little joking with him,
saying:

"Do not be sad! God has granted you several palaces in paradise,
instead; just be careful not to ruin them!"

Helping the One Who Had Lost his Properties
-------------------------------------------

After the Shaykh's death, someone related to one of his sons: 'I had
sold my house and planned to deposit the money in the bank, but it was
closed. So I took the money home, and it was stolen in the nighttime. I
pursued the matter at the Crime Investigation Department, but they could
not help me there. I pleaded with Imam al ' Asr (aj). On the fortieth
night of my pleading, I was given in a dream the address to the Shaykh's
house. I went to the Shaykh's house early in the morning and told him my
problem. He said:

"I am not a soothsayer or a fortune teller; you have been wrongly
informed!"

I said: I swear to my forefather (meaning a Holy Imam (a), for he was a
Sayyid) that I will not leave you. The Shaykh hesitated for a while,
took me inside his house, and then said: "Go to Varamin (a city near
Tehran), to such-and-such a village in such-and-such a house in which
there are two rooms. Your money, wrapped intact in a red silk
handkerchief, is placed beside an oven. Take the money and leave the
house. They (i.e., the people in the house) will offer you to have tea,
but (do not accept and) rush back immediately!"

I went to the same address--which was that of my own servant--the
landlord assumed that I was accompanied by an agent from the C.I.D. I
went right into the room and took the money from exactly where the
Shaykh had described to me. When I was leaving, the landlord offered me
tea, but I shouted at him and left the house.

The money was a sum of one hundred *tomans* in all. I took half of that
money to the Shaykh and placed it with much gratitude before him,
imploring him to accept it as my gift. He did not accept it. After my
insistence and to my greatest pleasure, he agreed to pick twenty
*tomans,* but not for himself; rather, he gave it back to me and said:

"I introduce to you some poor family whose daughters are in need of
dowries; you should not leave it to anybody else but yourself do it. Go
ahead and buy whatever they require and deliver them to their houses."

He did not take even a penny for himself!

The Scent of Red Apples
-----------------------

One of the Shaykh's friends gave the following account: 'Together with
the Shaykh we went to Kashan. The Shaykh had the habit that wherever he
traveled, he would visit the cemetery of that place. As we entered the
cemetery in Kashan, he said:

"Assalamu ' Alayk ya 'Aba 'Abd Allah (a)" ("Salutations be on you O Imam
Husayn (a)") We walked a few steps further on, and then he said:

"Do you not smell anything?"

'No, what smell?' We asked. Then he asked:

"The smell (scent) of red apples?"

Our answer was 'no' again. We went further on and met the man in charge
of the cemetery

The Shaykh asked him:

"Has anyone been buried here today?"

The man answered: ' Just before you arrived someone was buried', and
then he took us to a newly covered tomb. There it was! We all smelled
the scent of red apples. We asked the Shaykh about the scent, to which
he answered:

"When this person was buried here, His Holiness Hadrat Sayyid al-
Shuhada Imam Husayn (a) came here and for the sake of this person (and
by the blessed visit of Sayyid al-Shuhada (a)) the punishment was
removed from those buried in this cemetery."

The Reward for Abstaining from Unlawful Look
--------------------------------------------

Another disciple said: 'I was driving a taxi down the (newly named)
Sipah Square, when I saw a tall, good-looking lady in a *chador* who was
standing along the street waiting for a taxi. I pulled up and let her
get in, while keeping my look away from her and asking God for
forgiveness, and drove her to her destination.

The next day when I had an audience with the Shaykh, he said- as if he
had witnessed the event in person:

"Who was that tall lady you looked at and turned away your look from and
asked God for forgiveness? The Almighty and Exalted God has reserved a
palace in the Paradise for you as well as a *houri* similar to that…….."

The Fire within the Unlawful Property
-------------------------------------

In a session, someone was practicing witchcraft and the Shaykh's son was
also present. He stated: 'I tried to hamper him, so whatever he did
ended in failure. At last, he found out that I was interfering in his
business and implored me not to "cut off his daily bread". Then, he gave
me a precious rug as a gift. I took the rug home. As soon as my father
saw it he said:

"Who has given this rug to you? (I see) fire and smoke is rising out of
it! Take it back to its owner right away!"

And I did so.'

How the Gramophone Stopped Working
----------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's sons said: 'My father and I went to a wedding
ceremony of one of our relatives. When the host noticed the Shaykh's
arrival, he asked the young men around to turn off the gramophone. As we
entered, the young men came over to see who is coming that because of
him they should not listen to music. When the Shaykh was shown to them,
they said: 'Come on! Shall we turn off the gramophone for him?!' And
went back and turned it on again.

I had eaten half of my ice cream when my father patted on my arm
beckoning to leave. Not knowing what the matter was, I said:' I have not
finished eating my ice cream yet. He said: "That's all right, let's go!"

I heard (later on) that as soon as we left, the gramophone broke down.
They had to bring in another one, and that one burned up too. This event
made the host to that ceremony turn into a devotee of the Shaykh.

The Appeal by the Youth in Love
-------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's friends said: 'I went on a trip to Mashhad with the
Shaykh. In the Holy Shrine of Imam al-Reza (a), we saw a young man
beside the steel window in Sahn-i Inqilab crying and lamenting bitterly
and swearing the Holy Imam (a) to his mother.

The reverend Shaykh said to me:

"Go and tell him it got heard, and tell him to leave."

I went ahead and told it to the young man; he thanked and left. I asked
the Shaykh what it was all about.

He explained:

"This young man is in love with a girl and wants to get married to her,
but they (her patents) do not agree; he has come here to entreat Imam
al-Reza (a) to help him. His Holiness (a) said: It got answered, he may
go."

"Do not get Furious!"
---------------------

One of the Shaykh's students said: 'One day I was discussing in the
market with a person about the religious matters. He would not accept
any of the evidence I brought up. I got a little angry. An hour later, I
went to visit the Shaykh. As soon as he saw me, he said:

"Did you have a row with someone?"

I told him what happened. He said:

"In such situations do not get angry, follow the way of the Holy Ahl
al-Bayt (a); if you see they do not accept, discontinue the argument.

"His Beard is of no Concern to You!"
------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples is quoted as saying: 'One evening I
arrived in the session and I was a little late, as the Shaykh was
already reciting the *munajat* (whispering prayer). When I looked at the
audience, I saw someone with a shaved beard. I got upset in my heart and
felt sorry why this person had shaved. The reverend Shaykh who was
standing behind me and facing the *qibla,* stopped his praying all of a
sudden and said:

"His beard is of no concern to you! See what his deeds are like; he may
have some good in him which you are lacking."

Responding Satan's Temptation
-----------------------------

The Shaykh's son related: 'Once I was going somewhere with my father, I
saw two women with made up faces and without *hijab* were each walking
on either side of my father. Each one of them was holding a top in her
hand and spinning it. They said to my father: 'Hey fellow! Look! Which
of our tops is spinning prettier?'

I was too little to say anything, and my father was ignoring them while
he was holding his head down and smiling. They came along with us a few
steps and suddenly disappeared! I asked my father who they were. He
answered: "They were both Satan."

[^1]: See Mizan al- Hikmah, X, 4856: 3330.

[^2]: Al-Kafi, II, 352: 7; Mizan al-Hikmah, X, 4858: 16627.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, LVIII, 39.

[^4]: Muhaj al-Da'wat, 68; Bihar al- Anwar, LXXXV, 214.

[^5]: One of the eminent scholars that the Shaykh frequently visited was
Ayatollah Kuhistani about whom the Shaykh said: "From Agha Kuhistani a
light is emitted that rises into the heaven." In one of the visits, the
late Ayatollah Kuhistani accompanied the Shaykh to the side of the
road --about a kilometer away from his residence --in order to see him
off. Some years later when the Shaykh's words about Ayatollah Kuhistani
was related to him, he humbly said: Those days we had (various kinds of)
dhikrs (remembrances of God). It is worthwhile here to read a miraculous
act about Ayatollah Kuhistani. Hujjat al-Islam. Agha Sayyid Qasim
Shuja'i, an eloquent preacher, told me (the author): 'Agha Sadra'i
Ishkiwari, a preacher in Rasht, was afflicted with a heart disease. He
was transferred from Rasht to Tehran and hospitalized in Aban Hospital.
One day the late Agha Falsafi called me and asked me to visit him
together in the hospital. When we got there and after greeting, Agha
Falsafi asked him: 'What is your (financial) condition like?' "The
bounty from Sayyid al-Shuhada Imam Husayn (a) is running us (providing
for our livelihood)." He answered. 'We all enjoy Sayyid al-Shuhada's
bestowal', said Agha Falsafi. To which Agha Sadra'i replied: 'Ours is a
different account!' Mr. Falsafi curiously inquired more. Agha Sadra'i
explained: 'I have got a piece of tea growing garden bestowed on me by
Sayyid al-Shuhada and the yield provide for my old age and retirement.'
Agha Falsafi asked: 'How do you know it is bestowed on you by Sayyid
al-Shuhada?' He answered: 'I had made a preliminary agreement to sell
this garden. Two days later I paid a visit to Ayatollah Kuhistani. When
I entered he said: 'Sadra'i! Why are you selling the 'atiyyeh Mulukaneh
(regal bestowal)?' I said to him: 'Agha I have nothing to do with the
Shah! 'He said: 'I do not mean that, I am talking about our Imam Sayyid
al-Shuhada; these (dynasty of Pahlavi) have stolen the term ('atiyye
Mulukaneh). Do you remember when as a youth you visited the holy shrine
of Sayyid al-Shuhada and whispered to him through the grits of his
Zarih, saying: 'O Imam Sayyid al Shuhada! Do me a favor so that at my
retirement I'll be living on your bestowal'? This garden is the answer
to that request, why did you deal it?" I kissed his (Ayatollah
Kuhistani's) hand, got out of his house, took a car back to Rasht, and
tore up the document of preliminary agreement; and my livelihood has
been sustained with by this garden up until the present.' I (Shuja'i)
got deeply impressed (by that account). I decided to meet with him (but
I didn't manage). It was time for Hajj and I was appointed as the
clergyman of the Hajj caravan. There was a doctor in our caravan named
Dr. Tahmasbi. I told him how I had in mind visiting Agha Kuhistani but I
could not until then. He said that he was his physician. I got very glad
and asked him to promise to take me to him as soon as we get back to
Iran. He said when we left Iran he (Ayatollah Kuhistani) had been
seriously ill. I was very worried until we went from Makka to' Arafat,
where I began to quietly recite the supplication of 'Arafa, pondering on
the content and the meanings. When I reached the phrase, "'amiat 'aynun
la tarak" (may the eye that does not see You be blind!), my heart broke
and tears rolled down my cheeks. I said: 'O God! I know I have nothing
of value to offer, but one thmg I sure have and that is my siyadat
(being a Sayyid). I leave it to you in pledge: I swear You to the rights
and dignity of our forefathers to grace this servant of Yours--Ayatollah
Kuhistani-- with healing. When we returned to Iran, I didn't happen to
visit Ayatollah Kuhistani. I went to Mashhad. It was 11: 30 p.m. when in
Dar al-Siyada (porch of the holy shrine of Imam al-Reza (a)) I saw an
old man coming in being supported by two other men holding him by his
arms. I asked who he was, and they said: 'Agha Kuhistani." I had not
seen him before. I approached him, greeted him, and bowed to kiss his
hand. As I bowed down, he laid his hand on my right shoulder and said:
"Shuja'i, may God grant you a blessed long life! Your supplication in'
Arafat reached (saved) me!" I broke out in a sweat just as I heard that.
I sat down right there. My wife asked: 'What happened? I said: Nothing
just let me sit down for a while. And I sat for about half on hour. Agha
Ray Shahri! Only God was witnessing in Arafat and nobody else was there
when I prayed to God for him. This was a miraculous act I remember from
him. I prayed for him in ' Arafat in total solitude as a drop of tear
rolled down my face on the book I was holding in my hand, and he said to
me in the Holy shrine of Imam al-Reza (a) that he received my du'a (that
I made for him) in Arafat. It was a strange memory in my life.

[^6]: Mafatih al-Jinan, Munajat al-Dhakirin, Munajat No.15. English
translation adopted from: The Psalms of Islam (al-Sahifah
al-Sajjadiyya), The Whispered Prayer of the Remembers, part XIII, 256.

[^7]: Mizan al-Hikmah, II, 960: 3159.

[^8]: An example of such accounts is related to my (the narrator's)
first trip to the Holy City of Makkah. See "The Only Place Where they
Displayed Affection to You", chapter Nine, Part 3.

[^9]: Mizan al-Hikmah, X, 4988: 16945.

[^10]: One of the famous preachers in Tehran who was rightfully a man of
piety and sanctity.

[^11]: The author of "Two Treatises on the Recent History of the
Mysticism in Iran" (Du risalih Dar tarikh Jadid tasawwuf-i Iran),
(Manuchehr Saduqi) writes on page 103 under the title "A Note": The
compiler said pertinently: 'I heard from Mr. Mudarrisi saying that
earlier in his studying at faculty of science (of Tehran University) he
and several of the professors there sometimes attended the weekly
sessions of the late Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat (ra). He (Mr. Mudarrisi)
would ask him some difficult questions on physics such as magnetic
field, etc., and the Shaykh would say: "I will ask and answer (you)."
Then he would lower his head in deliberation and a while later would
raise his head and give the right answer to his questions.

[^12]: He is known as "The Father of Chemistry in Iran."

[^13]: A mountain near Shahr-i Ray,

[^14]: Son-in-law to the late Ayatollah Sayyid Mahmud, Friday prayer
leader of Zanjan.

[^15]: Mizan al-Hikmah, II, 662: 2213.


