The Ways of Self-Building
=========================

The reverend Shaykh was highly capable of influencing talented souls
with his charismatic power in training and self-building them. One of
the Shaykh's disciples said: 'Once I was accompanying the Shaykh and the
late Ayatollah Muhammad Shahabadi (ra)[^1] in Tajrish square. The Shaykh
was very fond of Ayatollah Shahabadi; someone came to us and asked the
latter.

"Do you say the truth or this man (pointing to the Shaykh)?

The late Shahabadi (ra) replied: "What truth are you talking about?

What do you mean?"

The man said again: "Which one of you say the right thing?"

Ayatollah Shahabadi said: "I teach and they (the students) learn; he
(meaning the Shaykh) constructs and builds human beings."

Although this suggested how extremely humble and self-negating this
divine man and ascetic was, it represented the efficacy of the Shaykh's
speech and his enriching and training power as well.

"For Sixty Years I Treaded the Wrong Path"
------------------------------------------

Dr. Hamid Farzam describes the Shaykh's charisma and verbal influence as
follows: 'Professor Jalaluddin Huma'i, a leading Professor of literature
at Tehran University, was a renowned expert in *ma'arif* (Divine
knowledge), Persian literature, and Islamic Mysticism, and was my own
professor. He had audience with the reverend Shaykh at the age of
sixty.  
 When I was at the age of seventeen, studying with the Prof. Huma'i, he
had already edited Abu Rihan al-Biruni's *Al-Tafhimu li Awa'il Sana'at
al-Tanjim* and 'Izzuddin Mahmud Kashani's *Misbba al-Hidaya wa
Miftahu'l* *Kifaya.* He had also authored very scholarly such volumes as
*Ghazali Namah,* a collection on Imam Muhammad Ghazali's life and works.
His comprehensive introduction on *Misbba al-Hidaya* is by itself a
perfect course of theoretical and practical mysticism.

Anyway, this mystic was my teacher in his early sixties. One day, as
usual, when I went to have an audience with the.Shaykh, he said:

"Your professor Mr. Jalaluddin Huma'i came to me. I said some sentences
to him; he was so deeply touched that he struck his forehead (as a sign
of deep regret an repentance) and said: Strange!! I have fared the wrong
path for sixty years!!"

It was actually the impact of the revernd Shaykh's words and personality
that so deeply moved Professor Huma'i with such high scholarly and
mystical status. May God bless their souls.

In some sessions of supplication and prayer, when the Shaykh began to
talk in his absorption, he would say:

"Friends! Such words that I tell you are of the final class (advanced
level) of mysticism."

And it was indeed so.

Another disciple of the Shaykh said: 'The Shaykh's lessons would
transform copper into gold. Thus, the prime point in expounding the
Shaykh's self -building power is the secret of his efficacy on the
audience and his style of teaching and training as well as the method of
(moral and spiritual) construction this divine man applied to his
disciples.

Self-Building by One's Manners
------------------------------

From the viewpoint of Islamic traditions, the major condition for the
efficacy of teaching and training by instructors of ethics is their
obligation to act according to their own teachings and guidelines. In
this respect Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"من نصَبَ نفسه للناس اماما فعليه أن يبدأ بتعليم نفسه قبل تعليم غيره،
وليكن تأديبه بسيرته، قبل تأديبه بلسانه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Whoever undertakes leading people should, before teaching others,
attempt to teach himself (sufficiently) and before training others for
good manners by speech should do the same by his own good manners."[^2]

The most outstanding feature of the Shaykh's efficacy of discourse and
his enriching power was his application of the above instruction of Amir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a) and calling people to God by means of his good
manner prior to his (use of) speech and preaching.

If the Shaykh called people to monotheism, he had already shattered
(أرباب متفرقون) (Many lords differing among themselves) (Yusuf: 39) and
on top of all his idol of *nafs* (carnal desire). If he called people to
sincerity in all deeds, his deeds and gestures were all sincerely for
God. If he ever fell negligent, God's Grace would come to his aid, in
such a manner that he once said:

"Every needle that I drive in the cloth for the sake of other than God,
it would stick into my finger."

And if he called others to love of God, he himself was burning fervently
in the fire of love of God. If he called people to benevolence and
self-sacrifice to others and serving them, he was himself a pioneer in
this way. When he referred to the "world" as "the hag" and bewared
others of liking it, his own ascetic life was clear evidence of his
unwillingness to such "hag". And finally, if he called others to
struggle against whims of *nafs* for the sake of God, he was himself on
the forefront of this struggle and was triumphant like Yusuf (a) from a
hard trial.

Educational Methods
-------------------

The method used by the reverend Shaykh in self-building and training his
disciples can be divided into two parts: 1) his educational method in
public sessions and 2) His educational method in his private encounters.

1. Public Sessions
------------------

The Shaykh's public sessions were usually held in his house once a week.
Similarly, in most occasions such as Islamic festive days, birth and
martyrdom anniversaries of the Infallible Imams (a), he would hold
sessions in his own house. In the months of Muharram and Safar[^3] and
the holy month of Ramadhan, he would also hold preaching sessions. These
sessions that were occasionally held in his friend's houses on a regular
basis would last for two years.

Weekly sessions were usually held after performing evening and night
prayers on Thursday nights with the Shaykh as prayer leader. After
prayers, he would recite some couplets of the late Fayz[^4] containing
*istighfir* (asking Allah's forgiveness with an attractive and
impressive voice:

'I seek Allah's forgiveness for whatever (I have done for) other than
the Beloved,

I seek Allah's forgiveness for my fictitious existence.

If a moment elapses without remembering his (beautiful) countenance,

I seek Allah's forgiveness myriad of times for that moment.

The tongue that is not engaged in remembering the Friend,

Beware of its evil and seek Allah's forgiveness. Life came to its end
and due to negligence

I was not conscious for a single hour, I seek Allah's forgiveness (for
that negligence).

The youth gone by and the old age drawn near to its end,

I did nothing (worthwhile), I seek Allah's forgiveness.'

One of the Shaykh's disciples says: 'He would sing these poems in a way
that we could not help crying. In the end he would read in an
indescribably charming spiritual state one of the fifteen whispered
prayers[^5] attributed to Imam Zayn al-'Abidin (a).'

Another disciple said: 'In his supplication sessions I did not see
anybody else shedding tears like him; his weeping was really heart-
rending.

At the end of the supplication and serving tea, the reverend Shaykh
would begin to talk and preach. He was very eloquent; in his lectures he
would try to impart to others what he had found through the Qur'an and
the Islamic traditions as well as the facts about which he had himself
attained certitude.

The keyword he frequently used when addressing those present in his
session was *rufaqa* (friends); and the main topics of his lectures
included: monotheism, sincerity, love of God, consistent presence of
heart, proximity to God, rendering service to people, pleading with the
Ahl al-Bayt (a), awaiting *faraj,* warning against love of *dunya*
(worldly-mindedness), egotism, and whims of carnal soul *(nafs).* In the
next chapters the above topics will be discussed in details.

Dr. Thubati said about the beginning of his acquaintance with the
reverend Shaykh and what his sessions were like: 'In the last years of
high school, I was introduced to the reverend Shaykh by the late Dr.
Abdul 'Ali Goya-holding Ph.D. in Nuclear Physics from France -and
attended his sessions around ten years. His sessions were brief and
private, attended by very few people. Whenever the sessions got too
crowded and some strangers attended, he would temporarily call the
sessions off. That means he was not after (attracting many) followers.

Except for a few words, some advice, and preaching, which ended in a
*dua* (supplication), nothing else would be brought up in his sessions.
Although the talks were rather repeated, the sessions were so
spiritually attractive that whatever repeated talks we heard they would
not make us tired or bored at all[^6] Like the Qur'anic verses that
whatever much you recite they are still fresh and pleasant, his talks
too were similarly always fresh and pleasant.

The sessions were so spiritual (and otherworldly) that nobody tended to
bring up the material and worldly issues, and if by any chance someone
would talk of the material things, the people around would ignore them
with contempt or even disgust. The reverend Shaykh's talks mainly
concerned "proximity to God", "love of God", and "journey toward God".
He would epitomize "proximity to God" in the following brief words:

"You should change your *ussa* (i.e., *ustad* or master); that is, you
have been doing for yourself whatever you did so far. From now on,
whatever you do, do it for God and (know that) this is the nearest way
to God. 'Step on your own self, embrace the Beloved.'[^7]

All human selfishness is due to one's self-love; you will not attain
anything (make no spiritual achievements) unless you turn to be a lover
of God:

'If you get rid of your self, you will join the Beloved; Otherwise, keep
burning eternally, your state of affairs being unripe'.

You should do things out of love for Him; that is, love Him and do
things for the sake of His love. Loving Him and doing things for Him is
the secret of all spiritual advances that mankind can make, and this
will be possible. Thus, all human advancements are attainable by
opposing carnal desires; you will not attain it unless you wrestle with
your *nafs* (carnal desire) and knock it down."

He said about egotism:

"Here, a fatigued body and a broken heart is worth buying, the
self-selling market is far away from this market place."

And he also said:

"Your price is as high as you demand; if you demand God, your price is
infinite and if you demand the world (material possessions); your price
is as low as what you have desired.

Do not ever say I wish this I wish that, (rather) see what God wishes.
When you give a feast see if you invite whomever *you* desire or
whomever that Allah wants you to invite. As long as you are following
the footsteps of your carnal wishes, you will reach nowhere. The heart
is God's Abode; do not let anybody else in; only God must be residing
and presiding in your heart. Imam Ali (a) was asked how he attained such
high station. 'I sat (watchful) at the gate of my heart and let no one
except God in. He replied."

After his short talks, light refreshments would be served and then
*munajat* (whispered prayer) would start. His *munajat* was really
pleasant to hear and his spiritual state was very fascinating. He would
not recite supplications plainly and formally; rather they were
performed as whispering love songs to a sweetheart. While reciting
*munajat,* he would so deeply get absorbed in the Beloved that it
sounded as if a mother was seeking her lost child, weeping
whole-heartedly lamenting and talking to the Beloved Friend in His Holy
Presence.

Sometimes it seemed that amid the supplication, he would have received
mystical intuitions, so that the signs and effects would then be
revealed in his talks and manners. He deeply regretted that his
"friends" did not make the advance that he had expected of them. He
wished his friends opened up their eyes soon enough to see the angels
and the Holy Imams (a).

When someone returned from a *Ziyarat* (of the Holy Imams' (a) shrines),
he would ask him:

"Did you see that blessed Entity?"

Of course some were successful in this respect, too, and had found good
spiritual states and even had some spiritual intuition. Others, however,
were dragging behind.

Anyway, his munajat was highly enchanting so that it would enliven the
others too. He knew the meanings of the supplications and stressed on
some phrases in the supplication, repeating or explaining them
sometimes. He would recite the supplication of *Yastashir* and
*Munajat-i Khamsa 'Ashar* very often. He believed that the supplication
of *Yastashir*[^8] was expressing love to the Beloved.

During the month of Muharram, he would talk very little; he would,
instead recite some poems from the book Taqdis on the afflictions of the
Ahl al-Bayt (a), and would weep and then recite the munajat*.*

Emphasis on Obeying God and Refraining from Carnal Desires
----------------------------------------------------------

The reverend Shaykh believed that the wisdom behind creating man is his
Divine vicegerency, representing God (on earth)[^9] Once man attains
this station, he can carry out Divine acts. The way to reach this place
is through obeying God and opposing the carnal desires. In this respect,
he said:

"It is quoted in a Divine *(Qudsi) hadith:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يا ابن آدم! خلقت الأشياء لأجلِك وخلقتك لآجلي"
  </p>
</blockquote>

'O son of Adam! I created everything for you and created you for
Myself.'[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"عبدي أطعني حتى أجعلك مِـثلي أو مَـثَلي"
  </p>
</blockquote>

'My servant! Obey me, so that I make you like Myself or an example of
Myself.'[^11]

Dear friends! According to these *ahadith,* you are vicegerents of
Allah; you are like pears, king of the fruits! Appreciate your value, do
not follow whims of your carnal soul, and obey God so that you can
achieve a place that enables you to perform divine things. God has
created the entire universe for you, and has created you for Himself.
See how high a station He has granted to you!"

The Shaykh believed that one would be ranked among the human beings
unless he attains the status of Divine vicegerency. He would say:

"As spoons are for eating food and cups are for drinking tea, so also
men are for turning into humans"

He would repeatedly say: "God has graced me with *karamat;* you too
perform Godly work, He will grant you the same. O person whose
profession is brick laying! O person whose work is tailoring! When you
lay the brick or stitch with the needle, do it with love of God and be
conscious of God! When you are wearing clothes .that cost one hundred
*tomans*[^12] a meter, do not say I have bought this one hundred
*tomans* a meter; say, in stead, God has bestowed this on me. Represent
God! Do not represent yourself!"

Recognition of Internal States
------------------------------

The Shaykh would recognize inner states of the audience through his
intuitive faculty. However, he would never point out the weak points of
any person in public, unless of course in a way that the person himself
would understand the admonition and would endeavor to rectify himself.
Two examples of such a case are briefly stated as follows:

Putting the Shaykh to Test
--------------------------

One of the eminent and upright preachers said: 'One afternoon in 1956, I
was in the *Madrasa* of Haj Shaykh Abdul Husayn in theTehran's
Bazaar-next to Masjid of Shaykh Abdul Husayn. The late Shaykh Abdul
Karim Hamid-an eminent disciple of the late Shaykh Rajab Ali-came to me
and talked about his *ustad* (master), Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat, and his
status of sincerity and spirituality and finally asked me 'to accompany
to the Shaykh's Thursday evening session with him. I accompanied him to
the Shaykh's session. When we arrived in, I saw the Shaykh was sitting
facing the *qibla* and engaged in reciting the *munajat* of Arnir
al-Mu'minin Ali (a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اللهم اني أسالك الأمان يوم لا ينفع مال ولا بنون .."
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O Lord! I seek Your security on the Day that neither property nor
children are of any benefit."

At the same time some of his devotees were sitting behind him, chanting
the *munajat* along with him. I, too sat behind the crowd in the last
row, saying to myself: O God! If he is one of Your *awliya,* may You
make my preaching sessions thrive so that I can get a good material
benefit!

As soon as this idea crossed my mind, the Shaykh said in the middle of
his supplication:

"I say forget about money, but he has come here to test me with money!"

He said this in Persian and then went on reciting the *munajat* (in
Arabic):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وأسالك الأمان يوم لا ينفع مال و..."
  </p>
</blockquote>

"I seek Your security on the Day that neither property……"

The Presence of an Informer
---------------------------

Gradually, high-ranking government officials and famous personalities
were also attending the Shaykh's sessions. According to the reverend
Shaykh, they would come (to attend his sessions) for solving their own
problems and looked for the "hag world" in the Shaykh's house.
Nevertheless, there were some among them who benefited from the
Shaykh's, sermons as much as their capacity. Due to the presence of such
individuals, the Intelligence Service of the Shah's regime become
suspicious toward the sessions held by the Shaykh, and commissioned a
major called Hasan al-Baygi to attend - incognito the Shaykh's sessions
together with another agent in order to report the reason for the
presence of the government officials in those sessions.

When the Intelligence Service agent entered the session, the Shaykh said
while preaching and giving advice to the audience:

"Focus your attention to God and do not let no one but God in your
heart, as heart is (like a) mirror and if it gets the slightest stain,
it will show itself up very quickly. Now, some look like informers and
come in with a nickname; for instance his name is Hasan but he feigns to
be such and such.

These words impressed and amazed the Intelligence Service agent, Major
Hasan al-Baygi, whose real name was not known to anybody, so deeply that
he was said to have resigned from SAVAK (the then Intelligence Service
in Iran).

"First Please your Father!"
---------------------------

Sometimes the reverend Shaykh did not admit some people in his sessions
or he would impose a condition on them. One of the Shaykh's disciples
who had been with him for about twenty years describes how his relation
with the Shaykh first began:

"At first, whatever I tried to attend his sessions, he would not allow
me; Until one day I saw him in Masjid-i Jamah, and after greeting asked
him why he does not let me in his sessions. He said:

"First, please your father, then I will talk to you!"

That night I went home and fell at my father's feet, imploring him to
forgive me. Having gotten very surprised, my father asked: What has
happened? I said: Do not ask anything, just forgive me, I know I did not
know what I was doing. ...And finally my father forgave me.

The next morning I went to the Shaykh's house. As soon as he saw me, he
said:

"Well done! Now come and sit next to me."

Since then, right after the Second World War, I remained in his company
until his death.'

2. Special Guidelines
---------------------

One of the most outstanding features of a perfect *ustad* (master) and
instructor on the path toward God Almighty is that his guidelines are
given according to the needs of a spiritual seeker in his different
stages of truth-seeking. This undertaking is, of course, not possible in
public and in the presence of others.

A physician, however expert and experiencd cannot treat all the patients
visiting him by a single prescription and a single drug. Each patient
needs a specific medication. It is even probable that for some reasons
two different types of medicine are prescribed for two patiets suffering
from a same illness. This is also true for the illnesses of the soul.

An ethics instructor is indeed a physician of man's soul. He can cure
the ethical maladies only if he identifies first and foremost the origin
of the illness, and has the suitable medicine at his disposal as well.

Great Messengers of God (a) who are the main instructors and trainers of
the souls were generally possessed of this characteristic. They not only
realized the general requirements of the human society in various ways,
but they were perfectly aware of personal needs of each members of their
community.

Imam Ali (a) comments on this feature of the Holy Prophet (s) as
follows: "He was a physician who, with his knowledge, wandered about
seeking his patients, while his medicines and medical instruments were
prepared by all means. They were used on demand and healed the souls
which were suffering (ailments such as) blindness, deafness, and
dumbness. With his medicine, he looked for the houses of negligence and
stations of bewilderment."[^13]

Scholars of Divinity, who are true successors to the prophets and to
their vicegerents, enjoy such characteristic too. They are the ones who
according to Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"هجم بهم العلم على حقيقة البصيرة، وباشروا روح اليقين"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Knowledge based on true insight have reached them and they have
attained the spirit of certitude!"[^14]

Of course, as stated inthe holy Imam's (a) words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أولئك والله الأقلَون عدداً، والأعظمون عند الله قدْراً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The number of those scholars of Divinity, who enjoy the highest status
with their God Almighty, are very few in number..."[^15]

The Importance of a Perfect Instructor
--------------------------------------

The late Ayatollah Mirza Ali Qazi (ra) is quoted as saying: 'The most
important requirement in this path is having a knowledgeable, selfless
perfected master. When a person is a seeker on the path to Allah, if
they spend half of their lives looking for a master *(ustad),* it is
worth it. The one who has found a master, they have traversed half the
way.'

Careful study of the Shaykh's special guidelines to his disciples
reveals that he had through self-negation, sincerity, and assistance
from the unseen attained such a high status of spiritual perfection that
he was able to diagnose the spiritual maladies and problematic
situations arising in the lives of others, and to cure and resolve them
with the proper prescription. This reality is clearly evident to those
who are familiar with the Shaykh's life.

Sins and Calamities in Life
---------------------------

From the Islamic viewpoint, man's improper deeds play a basic role in
the predicaments and misfortunes that befall him. The Holy Qur'an
asserts accordingly:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(وما أصابكم من مصيبة فبما كسبت أيديكم)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Whatever misfortune happens to you, is because of the things your hands
have wrought,..) (al-Shura: 30)

Interpreting and explaining the above verse, Imam Ali (a) said: "Beware
of sins, as all calamities and shortcomings in livelihood, even the
scratch on the body or falling down to the ground are due to committing
sins because God Almighty says: (Whatever misfortune happens to you, is
because of the things your hands have wrought.) (al-Shura: 30)."[^16]

If a person really believes that his improper deeds will not only cause
agonies in his life after death but also entangles his worldly life in
various predicaments, then he would avoid committing vileness and does
not even think of them. The more this belief is strengthened, the more
the ground for fostering pious human beings will be prepared.

With his Divine intuition and spiritual vision, the reverend Shaykh
would literally notice the relation of vileness to the plights and
predicaments of human life, and by stating them he would resolve
peoples' problems and difficulties. Employing this method of
self-building, he would direct them toward human perfection.

"We Sell on Credit even to you!"
--------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's children said: 'One day the late famous Murshid
Chilow'[^17], went to the Shaykh complained of his (catering) business
being sluggish, saying: '*Dadash* ( olloquial way of addressing a
friend)! What is this situation we are stuck in?! For a long time we had
prosperous position, we sold 3-4 large pots of *chelow* (cooked rice) to
plenty of customers. But all of a sudden the table turned and the
customers abandoned one after another, the sale turned sluggish and we
now hardly sell a large pot each day. The Shaykh pondered for while and
then said: ' It is your own fault; you reject the customers!"

Murshid said: 'I did not reject anyone; I even serve the children and
give them half a kebab.'

The Shaykh responded:

"Who was that Sayyid who ate (in your restaurant) for three days on
credit and the last time you pushed him out of your shop?"

Having gotten very embarrassed, Murshid left the Shaykh and hastened to
look for that Sayyid. When he found him, he apologized him and then put
up a sign on the window of his restaurant that read:

"We sell on credit, even to you; cash will also be lent as much as we
can afford!!"

Annoying the Child
------------------

One of the noble disciples of the reverend Shaykh said: 'My two year old
child, who is now forty years old, had wetted his bed and his mother had
beaten him so hard that he fell almost dead. An hour later, my wife came
down with a high fever so that we rushed her to a doctor, spending sixty
*tomans* for the medication, but the fever did not subside, and even
worsened: We visited the doctor again, spending another forty *tomans*
that was exorbitant for us those days.

Anyway, in the evening of the same day I picked up the Shaykh to
accompany him to the session. My wife was also present in the car. When
the Shaykh got in the car, I introduced my wife to the Shaykh and said:
"This is my children's mother, she's got a fever; I took her to the
doctor but her fever has not come down yet. The Shaykh looked at us and
said to my wife:

"A child is not to be beaten like that; ask Allah's forgiveness for
that, go appease him and buy something for him; she will recover from
the illness."

We did so, and her fever subsided!

Annoying the Wife
-----------------

The same person relates: One day the Shaykh and I were in Agha
Radmanish's house. I said to him (the Shaykh): 'My father[^18] died
around the year 1352 A.H. 11933 CE. I would like to see how he is doing
now (in the purgatory world). The Shaykh said:

"Recite (the Surah) al-Fatiha!"

Then he deliberated and paused for a while, and said:

"They do not let him come, he is encumbered due to his wife!"

I said: 'Please talk to his wife if possible.' He said: "Your stepmother
is coming."

'She was a villager who was my father's wife, and since my father got
married to several other women, so she was not on talking terms with my
father to the end of her life. Whenever my father entered through a
door, she would leave the room from another door.

I said to the Shaykh: 'Ask her what I should do to make her pleased with
my father'. The Shaykh replied: "He (i.e., me) should feed the hungry."
'How many?' I asked. He said one hundred people. I said: 'I could not
afford so many; and he finally lowered the number down to forty people.
Upon accepting, the Shaykh said: "Your father's voice is heard now. As
that woman became pleased, your father was liberated. He says tell my
son why he has married two women. See what affliction I am encumbered
in! Now take care to treat [your wives] justly." Another friend of the
Shaykh said: 'I asked him of my father's condition in barzakh (purgatory
world). The Shaykh answered: "He is encumbered by your mother!" I found
he was right; My father had married another woman and my mother was
upset in this regard. So I went to my mother and made her pleased. The
next time that I visited the Shaykh, he said as soon as I arrived in:

"How nice it is to reconcile two people; your father is at ease now!"

Annoying the Husband
--------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples related: 'There was a woman whose husband
was a Sayyid and a friend of the reverend Shaykh. She would irritate her
husband a lot. After some time, she died. At her funeral the Shaykh was
present. Later on he said:

"This woman's spirit was disputing while she was being buried, saying
well! Now I am dead, so what happened?! When she was being placed in the
grave her deeds materialized into a black fiel dog. As the woman noticed
the dog was (as torture in her grave) being buried with her, she found
out what misery she had piled up for herself in the course of her life.
She began to lament and implore and yell! I saw she was too distraught,
so I asked this Sayyid to forgive her; he forgave her for my sake. The
dog went away and she was buried!"

The Displeased Sister
---------------------

One of the Shaykh's sons narrated: 'There was an architect whose job was
constructing houses for selling. He had constructed one hundred units,
but due to excessive indebtedness he was in a terrible financial
situation and was about to be arrested and jailed. He came to my father
and said he could not go home, and that he had to hide himself from the
public. After a short deliberation, the Shaykh said: "Go and please your
sister!" The architect said: 'My sister is pleased.' The Shaykh said she
was not. The architect pondered for a while and then said: 'Yes, when my
father died, he bequeathed us some money. My sister's share amounted to
fifteen hundred *tomans* that I remember I did not give her. Then he
went away and returned some time later and said: 'I gave my sister five
thousand *tomans* and secured her consent.

My father kept silent for a moment and after a short deliberation said:

"She says she is not satisfied. Does she have a house?"  
 The architect said: 'No, she is a tenant.' The Shaykh said:  
 "Go and transfer the ownership of one of your best houses to her, and
then return to me to see what can be done for you."  
 The architect said: 'Reverend Shaykh! There are two of us sharing the
buildings, how can I do that?' The Shaykh said:  
 "I am at my wit's end; this servant of God is not yet satisfied."

At last, he went away again, finally transferred one of the houses to
the ownership of her sister, and helped her move her household furniture
to that house. When he returned the Shaykh told him: "Now it is solved!"

The next day he managed to sell three of the houses and relieved from
the predicament.

Unkindness toward the Sister
----------------------------

One of the merchants of (Tehran) Bazaar went bankrupt. While he was
complaining and telling his grief to his friend, the Shaykh passed by
his shop. Upon seeing him, his friend advised him to tell his problem to
the Shaykh. The merchant said: 'I do not know him.' He finally agreed to
consult the Shaykh, at his friend's insistence. He went to the Shaykh
and after greeting, narrated his problem to him. When he ended his
explanation, the Shaykh said with lowered head:

"You are a cruel person; it has been four months since your
brother-in-law has died and you have not called on your sister and his
(orphaned) children. This is the source of your problem."

The merchant said: 'We have a dispute.' The Shaykh said:

"Your problem is rooted there, but you do not know it yourself."

The merchant went back to his friend and told him what the Shaykh
revealed to him. Then he bought some household articles, took them to
his sister, reconciled with her, and his problem was resolved.

The Displeased Mother
---------------------

Several people, including a young man, were sentenced to death. His
relatives went to the Shaykh and asked him imploringly for a solution.
The Shaykh told them that he was encumbered by his mother. They went to
his mother and she said whatever she prayed it was to no effect. They
told her: 'The reverend Shaykh says you are displeased with him (her
son). She answered: 'That is right; my son had newly married when some
day after eating lunch I cleaned the table cloth, put the tableware on a
tray, and held it to my daughter-in-law to take it to the kitchen. My
son took the tray from me and said to me: 'I have not brought you a
handmaid!

Finally his mother was pleased with him and prayed for his son. The next
day, it was announced that there has been a mistake and the young man
was released.

The Broken-Hearted Aunt
-----------------------

One of the Shaykh's friends related: 'My father was suffering a serious
illness that whatever they did for his cure was to no effect. I told the
Shaykh that my father had been sick and bed-ridden for a year. The
Shaykh asked me if I had an aunt. The answer was, yes. The Shaykh said:

"Your father is encumbered by your aunt, and if she prays he would
recover."

'I requested my aunt to pray for my father; she prayed but my father did
not get well. I went to the Shaykh again and said my father did not get
well despite my aunt being pleased. The Shaykh gave me some instruction
for doing favor to my aunt's four orphaned children and told me to ask
them to pray.

I did as the Shaykh had instructed and then asked my aunt what the
reason for her discontent with my father was. She said: 'After my
husband died, your father took me and my four children to his own house
to live with them. Until one day that I was quarrelling with your mother
when your father arrived and dislodged my children and me from his
house. My heart was broken at that moment.

At last, with aunt being pleased, my father got better but did not
regain perfect health. Once again I went to visit the Shaykh and told
him the story. This time he instructed me to do favors to a Sayyid that
he introduced, and after I did so my father got perfectly well.

Annoying the Employer's Son
---------------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples quoted him as saying: "You are never
unduly afflicted."

Once I broke my head in an accident. Along with some friends I went to
see the Shaykh. My friend asked the Shaykh: 'See what he had done to
have broken his head!' The reverend Shaykh deliberated for a while and
then said:

"He has annoyed a child in the factory."

I found he was right. I was an operator of a bending device, which was a
rare profession in those days. Such professionals were typically dear to
their employers. Once my employer's son found a fault with me and it was
irrelevant to him; so I had a row with him to the extent that he burst
into tears.

The Shaykh said:

"If you do not satisfy him, your problem will continue." I went (to that
child) and apologized.

Annoying the Employee
---------------------

Several officials from the finance department went to see the Shaykh in
one of his disciples' house. One of them said, my body is itching and it
does not get cured. The Shaykh said after a little deliberation:

"You have annoyed a Sayyid woman.”

That person said: 'These (ladies) have come (to the office) to sit at
their desks but they do not perform their duty; and as you say something
to them, they burst into tears!' It turned out that a Sayyid woman had
been employed in their office and he had annoyed her with his remarks.
The Shaykh said:

"You are not going to recover from the itching unless you ask her
forgiveness."

Another of the Shaykh's disciples told a similar story as follows: We
were sitting in the presence of the Shaykh in the courtyard of one of
his friends' house. There was also present in the meeting a high ranking
official who regularly attended the Shaykh's sessions. Having stretched
his legs due to some ailment, he said to the Shaykh: Your reverence! I
am suffering this pain in my legs for the last three years. Whatever I
do, I get no results and the medication is not effective. As it was his
usual custom, the Sheikh asked the people present to recite the Sura
al-Fatiha, then deliberated for a while, and said:

"The pain in your legs started since the day you reprimanded the typist
lady because of her mistakes in typing and shouted at her. She was a
Sayyid woman whose heart broke and cried. Now you should find her and
beg her for pardon so that the pain disappears."

The man said: 'You are right, she was the typist in our office and I
shouted at her, making her cry.'

Usurping the Old Woman's Right
------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples, who had lost his spiritual state after
having eaten certain food, asked the Shaykh for help. The Shaykh
suggested:

"The kebab that you ate was paid by such and such a merchant who had
usurped the old woman's right."

Offending others (with foul language)
-------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples narrated: One day the Shaykh and I along
with some others were passing through Imam Zadeh Yahya (s). Street when
a bicycle rider hit a passer-by. The latter offended the rider by
calling him an ass!

The Shaykh, hearing this, said:

"His interior turned into an ass right away!"

Another of his disciples quoted him as saying: "Once I was passing
through the bazaar when I saw a cart moving by, with a man holding the
bridle of the horse that was pulling the cart. All of a sudden a
passer-by jumped before the horse to cross the bazaar. The carter
shouted at him: 'You hackney!' I saw that the carter also turned into a
horse, and the bridle split into two.

Cruelty to Animals
------------------

According to the Islamic laws, cruelty to animals is a reprehensible
deed. A Muslim is not allowed to annoy or even imprecate animals.[^19]

Thus, the Holy Prophet (s) is quoted as saying: --

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لو غُـفر لكم ما تأتون الى البهائم لغُفرَ لكم كثيراُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"If the cruelty you do to animals is forgiven, many of your sins are
forgiven!"[^20]

Although the slaughter of *halal* meat animals is allowed as lawful in
Islam, the slaughter itself involves rules that cause the animal suffer
as less pain as possible. One rule is that the animal must not be
slaughtered before the eyes of other animals of the same species.[^21]

As Imam Ali (a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لاتذبح الشاة عند الشاة ولا الجزور عند الجزور وهو ينظر اليه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Do not slaughter a sheep in the presence of another sheep and a camel
in the presence of another camel while they are looking at the animals'
being slaughtered.[^22]

So, beheading an animal's offspring before its mother's eyes is strongly
reprimanded, as it represents utmost cruelty and ferocity, leaving
detrimental impacts on the perpetrator,

One of the Shaykh's disciples related: 'A slaughterer came to the Shaykh
and said: "My child is dying; what shall I do?'

The Shaykh said:

"You have slaughtered a calf before its mother's eyes."

The slaughterer implored the Shaykh to do something for him. The Shaykh
said:

"It says: no way, he has slaughtered my baby, so his baby must
die!"[^23]

[^1]: Imam Khomeini's (ra) teacher in science of irfan. Imam Khomeini
(ra) always mentioned his name with high respect mentioning him as
'perfect arif'.

[^2]: Mizan al-Hikmah, I, 222: 850.

[^3]: He advised his son: "Make sure to attend the mourning gatherings
(rawda) always on the last day, snce Hadrat Fatima Zahra (a) is present
there.

[^4]: The late Muammad Mohsin Fayz renowned as Mulla Muhsin Fayz Kashani
(1595-1680 CE. / 1006-1091 A.H.) ranked among the leading scholars,
philosophers, mystics, exegetists, and poets of the 11th century A.H.

[^5]: Munajat khamsa asharah includes 15 tersely state whispered prayers
attributed to Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a). See The Psalms of Islam,
translated by William Chittick, London, 1988.

[^6]: The suffering by love is no more than a single story, and it is so
amazing that from whomever you hear it, it sounds untold. (Hafiz)

[^7]: Step on your own self, embrace the Beloved One (instead), up to
His ka'bah of union with Him, you are just one step away

[^8]: See "Recite the supplication of Yastashir", Chapter Six, Part 3.

[^9]: It is narrated that the Shaykh said: "I asked a number of scholars
and people of spirituality why God has created man. I did not get
convincing answers until I asked the same from Ayatollah Muhammad Ali
Shahabadi (ra). He said: God has created man as His vicegerent: (I will
create a vicegerent on earth.) (al-Baqarah: 30)"

[^10]: Sharh-i Asma-i Husna, I, 139: 202; Rasa 'il-i Karaki, III, 962

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, CV, 165; "Maqam-i Imam Ali (a), III; 185, with a
slight difference

[^12]: One hundred tomans per meter cloth was very costly at the time of
the Shaykh.

[^13]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon: 108, with some comment by the author.

[^14]: Nahjul-Balagha, Maxim: 147.

[^15]: Ibid.

[^16]: Khisal, 616:10; Bihar al-Anwar, LXX, 350: 47.

[^17]: The father of Heydar 'Ali Tehrani, the poet nicknamed "Mu'jiza".
(His story related to the Shaykh are given in, "Humility"; and "Your
Father should not Turn into an Idol for you" Chapter five, Part I, and
Chapter Two, Part 3, respectively.).

[^18]: Akhund Mulla Muhammad Baqir, son of Akhund Mirza Jani Qazvini,
was among the pious and combatant scholars of Qazvin, born in 1290 AH./
1873 CE, and a student of Grand Ayatollah Akhund Khurasani (the author
of al-Kifaya), Haj Shaykh Mulla Fatullah Khurasani, and Haj Muammad Hadi
Tehrani in Najaf-i Ashraf. Also see: Ganjinay-i Danishmandan, IX, 219.

[^19]: Mizan al-Hikmah, III, 1343.

[^20]: Ibid. III, 1344: 4520.

[^21]: Wasa'il al-Shi 'a, XXIV, 16; Tahrir al-Wasila, P. 151, issue no.
20.

[^22]: Al-Kafi, VI, 229: 7; Tahdhib al-Ahkam, IX, 80: 341.

[^23]: Ayatollah Fahri quotes Agha Sayyid Muammad Reza Kashfi as saying:
'There was a butcher living in our neighborhood whose son came down with
a severe stomachache. He appealed to Agha Kashfi, who in turn referred
him to the reverend Shaykh. He told him: "You have slaughtered a calf
before its mother's eyes, so this son of yours will not be cured."


