The Basis of Self-Building
==========================

"Salvation" is in fact an epitome of all the human virtues and
perfection and the way to attain it, from the Qur' anic viewpoint is
through self-building and purification of the soul. Following numerous
swearing, the Exalted Allah asserts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(قد أفلح من زكّـاها)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Truly he succeeds (attains salvation) that purifies it,) (al-Shams: 9)

All that the Divine Messengers have brought from the Almighty God for
guiding man, are preliminary steps to "Salvation" and actualization of
human potentials. The significant issue in purification of the soul for
mankind is to find out how to begin self-building and what its basis is
from the viewpoints of Divine Messengers. The basis of self-building and
the first step in purification of soul is "monotheism". Thereupon, the
first message of all Divine messengers was, "*La ilaha illa Allah-*there
is no god-but Allah":

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(وما أرسلنا من قبلك من رسول الا نوحي اليه انه لآ اله الا انا فاعبدون)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Not a messenger did we send before you without this inspiration sent by
Us to him: that there is no god but I; therefore worship and serve Me.)
(al-Anbiya: 25)

The first sayings of the Holy Prophet (s) addressed to the people was:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يا ايها الناس! قولوا: لا إله الله، تفلحوا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

O people! Say 'There is no god but Allah', so that you attain
Salvation."[^1]

Nevertheless, mere utterance of *"La ilaha illa Allah"* is not
sufficient by itself, as what forms the basis of self -building and
leads to Salvation and actualization of human perfection, is the truth
of monotheism and turning into a true monotheist.

The sign indicating that man has attained true monotheism-in the perfect
and real sense of the word-is that he can like Divine angels and through
Divine Essence witness the oneness of the Exalted God Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(شهد الله أنه لآ اله الا هو والملئكة واولوا العلم)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(There is no god but He: that is the witness of Allah, His angels, and
those endowed with knowledge...) (Ale 'Imran: 18)

One of the Shaykh's disciples said about him: 'May God bless his soul!
All his endeavors were toward attaining *la illaha illa Allah,* and all
his words were dedicated to reach the reality of this pure phrase. '

Another of his disciples said: 'The Shaykh was an expert in this
discipline. He did his best to transmit to others what he had attained
himself and to enhance his disciples to the rank of intuitive
monotheism.

The Shaykh said: "Monotheism is the basis of self-building. Anyone who
wants to construct a building, they must first lay the foundation firm
enough, otherwise that building will not be well grounded. The spiritual
seeker must begin his journey from monotheism, as the first utterance of
all the prophets has been *la ilaha illa Allah.* Man will fail attaining
human perfection, unless he appreciates the truth of monotheism and
believe that there is nothing in existence except God's Pure Essence.
Having grasped the reality of monotheism, man will whole-heartedly
attend the Creator."

He also said: "If you wish that God call[^2] you, (try to) gain a little
divine knowledge and (enter into a) deal with Him."

"When we say *la ilaha illa Allah,* we should tell the truth (be
honest). Until a man does not leave aside the false deities, he cannot
be a monotheist and be truthful in uttering *la ilaha illa Allah. Ilah*
(god = false deity) is something that captivates human heart, and
whatever that captivates his heart is his god[^3] When we say, *la ilaha
illa Allah* we should be astounded by Him."

"The entire Qur'an refers to the statement, *la ilaha illa Allah.* Man
must reach to the point that there remains nothing engraved in his heart
except this statement, and whatever other than Him depart from his
heart: (Say: ' Allah (sent it down)": then leave them.) (al-An'am: 19)

"Man is the tree of monotheism, the fruit of which is the emergence of
Divine attributes; it (the tree) will not be perfect until it yields
such fruit. Man's peak of perfection is reaching (nearness to) Allah,
that is, to become a manifestation of God's attributes. Try to bring to
life Divine attributes in you. He is Gracious; you be gracious too. He
is Merciful; you be merciful too. He is Concealer (of defects); you be
concealer too."

"What is beneficial to man is the Divine attributes, nothing else is as
influential on man, even the Greatest Name of God!"

"If you are engrossed in monotheism, you will enjoy the Exalted God's
special bounties at any moment that you had not enjoyed prior to that
moment. God's bounties and blessings are novel at any moment."

Cleansing of Polytheism
-----------------------

Cleansing polytheism off your soul and heart is the first step toward
attaining the truth of monotheism. Hence, in its main motto, i.e., *la
illaha illa Allah,* denying false gods is considered prior to proving
the One Real God.

Now, it must be noted what polytheism is. Who is a polytheist? Is
polytheism merely believing in deity of objects? Are polytheists the
only people who have faith in inanimate idols? Or something else is the
case.

Polytheism vs. monotheism is the belief in illusory forces and their
efficacy in the world of being and their worship against the Real
Efficient, i. e., the One Sustainer.

The monotheist does not view anything effective in the world except the
One God and does not worship anything, neither the inanimate idols nor
the animate ones, except Him.

The polytheists are the ones that view as effective other than God and
obey other than Him; sometimes they worship objects, sometimes they obey
the powerful, sometimes they are slaves to their own carnal desires and
whims, and sometimes they are in the service of all three.[^4]

From the Islamic viewpoint, all three types of polytheism are
blameworthy, and to attain the reality of monotheism there is no other
way than wiping ofolytheism in the strict sense of the word.

The remarkable point here is that the most dangerous type of polytheim
is the third type, i. e., following the whims of carnal soul (vain
desires). This type of polytheism is the source of obstacles to
intellectual and emotional cognition, and the beginning of polytheism in
the first and the second sense:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(أفاريت من اتخذ إله هواه وأضله الله على علم وختم على سمعه وقلبه وجعل
على بصره غشاوة فمن يهديه من بعد الله أفلا تذـّكرون)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Then seest thou such a one as takes as his god his own vain desire?
Allah has, knowing (him as such), left him astray, and sealed his
hearing and his heart (and understanding), and put a cover on his sight.
Who, then, will guide him after Allah (has withdrawn guidance)? Will ye
not then receive admonition?) (al-Jathiyah: 23)

Accordingly, the reverend Shaykh viewed the idol of *nafs* as extremely
detrimental to monotheism and would say:

"All troubles are regarding that grand idol that lies within
yourself."[^5]

Imam Khomeini (ra), the great ascetic and man of vision has also said:

"The mother of all idols is the idol of your own *nafs* (carnal
desires); unless this grand idol and powerful Satan is not shattered,
there will be no way to Him-the High and the Most Exalted. Lo and
behold! This idol can hardly be shattered and this Satan can barely be
tamed!"[^6]

If man triumphs over such a grand idol, he has achieved the highest
victories.
**Wrestle with your** ***Nafs*** **(Vain Desires)!**

One of the famous wrestlers of the time of Shaykh called "Aghar Agha
Pahlavan" narrated: 'Once I was taken to the reverend Shaykh, he patted
on my upper arm and said:

"If you are a real champion, wrestle with your own *nafs!"*

In fact, shattering the idol of *nafs* in the first and the last step in
obliterating polytheism and achieving the reality of monotheism.

'Step on your own self, embrace the Beloved One (instead),
Up to his Ka'bah of union with him, you are just one step away.
If you get rid of your self, you will join the Beloved; Otherwise, keep
burning eternally, your state of affairs being unripe.’

And maybe this is what is meant by nearness of the way to reach God,
which Abu Hamza Thumali has quoted Sayyid al-Sajidin (Ali ibn al-Husayn)
(a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وأن الراحل اليك قريبُ المسافة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"For the one who is faring the path toward You, the distance is
short."[^7]

And as Hafiz of Shiraz has put it:

'As long as you see erudition and knowledge, you are deprived of Divine
knowledge; I tell you only one point: do not mind yourself, and you will
be free.'

Apparently, the reverend Shaykh was appointed to go on a mission to
Kennanshah to tell the above point to such a great personality as Sardar
Kabuli:

Traveling for the Purpose of Telling a Point
--------------------------------------------

Ayatollah Fahri quoted the late Ghulam Qudsi as saying: 'In one year the
reverend Shaykh came to Kennanshah. He said to me one day to go to
Sardar Kabuli's house with him and we did so. I introduced the Shaykh to
the late Sardar Kabuli. A while passed by in silence and then the latter
said: "Reverend Shaykh! Say something to benefit us!"

The Shaykh responded:

"What should I say to the one whose trust in his own learning and
acquired knowledge is more than his trust in God's Grace."

The late Sardar Kabuli was sitting silently. Some moments later; he took
off his turban, put it down on the ground, and began hitting his head on
the wall so harshly that I felt pity for him and proceeded to stop him
but the Shaykh did not let me and said:

"...I have come here only to say this to him and return."

"Ask Allah's Forgiveness a Thousand Times!"
-------------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's sons related: 'A person from India called "Haj
Muammad" used to come to stay in Iran for one month every year. Once on
his way to Mashhad he got off the train to say his prayer in a corner.
When the train was about to depart, his friend called at him to get on
or he would be left behind. Haj Muammad did not pay any heed to his
friend's calling, and with his psychic power stranded the train for half
an hour. When he returned from Mashhad and visited the Shaykh, the
latter told him: "Ask forgiveness from God a thousand times!"

"What for?" He asked. "You did something wrong!" Replied the Shaykh. He
asked again: 'What wrong? I made a pilgrimage to Imam al-Reza (a) and
prayed for you too.'

The Shaykh said: "You stranded the train there, wishing to demonstrate
it was you who...! You see, the Satan deceived you. You were not
entitled to do that!"

Personality Cult and Polytheism
-------------------------------

The border between monotheism and polytheism is so narrow, subtle, and
unnoticeable that no eyes can see it. The Holy Prophet (s) said in a
*hadith:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"وإن الشرك أخفى من دبيب النمل على صفاة سوداء في ليلة ظلماء"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Verily, polytheism is more imperceptible than an ant moving on a black
stone at a dark night."[^8]

Only upright and insightful human beings can see the borderlines of
hidden polytheism and warn against them.

Personality cult is one type of various hidden and subtle kinds of
polytheism in which many people are entangled. If attention and
obedience to personality, however divine and great, is not for the sake
of God, it is regarded as polytheism. Thus the reverend Shaykh would
say:

"If you come to me for my sake, you have much to lose!"

"Your Father should not turn into an Idol for you!"
---------------------------------------------------

Hujjat al-Islam Sayyid Muhammad Ali Milani, the son of the eminent
jurist and *marja'* the late Ayatollah Sayyid Muhammad Hadi Milani (ra)
gave an account of the meeting between the reverend Shaykh and his noble
father as follows:

'The late Rajab Ali Khayyat, whom God had bestowed on with insight due
to his self-restraint and abandonment of sins, managed to train a group
of devoted people in sincerity and love of God.

He was interested in my father. I personally visited him frequently
because of our old friendship and sometimes even enjoyed his sessions,
in which he would generally preach for the spiritual seekers with
reciting of Qur'anic verses and the narrations of the Ahl al-Bayt (a).

One year he found the honor to pay a visit to Mashhd for pilgrimage of
the holy Imam al-Reza (a) and settled in a hotel nearby the Holy Shrine.
My late father invited him for lunch. The Shaykh came to our house and
my father was very pleased to meet him and they talked to each other
until evening. In the same meeting the late Shaykh faced me and said:

"Be careful your father should not turn into an idol for you!"

And said to my father:

"Watch out your son does not get you in trouble!"

It crossed my mind whether one could have both this world and the
Hereafter. The reverend Shaykh turned to me and said unprecedentedly:

"Recite this supplication a lot:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ربنا آتنا في الدنيا حسنة وفي الآخرة حسنة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

(O God! Grant me benefit in this world and benefit in the Hereafter)."

I accompanied him back to his hotel, where Heydar Agha Mu'jiza (author
of a poetry collection) came to the reverend Shaykh and invited him to
lunch for the following day. The Shaykh did not accept his invitation
first, but finally accepted at his insistence. Then, Heydar Agha went to
my late father and invited him, too. At last, along with my late father
we went to his house and found that the reverend Shaykh Rajab Ali and
two of his co-travelers were already there. That day our session lasted
until early evening.

How to Reach the Reality of Monotheism
--------------------------------------

Now the basic question is this: 'How can one cleanse themselves of
polytheism, and by shattering the idol of *nafs,* uproot the covert and
overt polytheism in themselves and achieve the lucidity of pure
monotheism?

The reverend Shaykh replied the question as follows:

"To my humble opinion if one seeks a way to be delivered and wishes to
attain real perfection and to enjoy the meanings of monotheism, they
should resort to four things: first, perpetual presence; second, to rely
on to the Ahl al-Bayt (a); third, begging at night (i. e., whispering
prayers and supererogation during night time); and fourth, benevolence
to people."

Elucidation of the above cases from the viewpoint of the Shaykh will be
given in the coming chapters.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, II XX, 202.

[^2]: We read in Munajat-i Sha'baniyya: "الهي واجعلني ممن ناديته فأجابك
ولاحظته فصَعك لجلالك فناجيته سراً وعمل لك جهرا" "O Lord! Make me one of
those people whom You call and they answer You; You look at them, they
fall unconscious at Your Majesty; and You talk to them secretly and they
act openly."

[^3]: (أفرأيت من اتخذ الهه هواه وأظله الله على علم) (Then you see such a
one as his god is his own vain desire? Allah has, knowing (him as such),
left him astray...) (al-Jathiyah: 23).

[^4]: The first group is referred to in the noble verse: وقالوا لاتذرن
الهتكم ولاتذرن وداً ولا سُواعاً ولا يغوث ويعوق ونسرا(And they have said
(to each other), abandon not your gods: abandon neither Wadd nor Suwa,
neither Yaghuth nor Ya'uq, nor Nasr.) (Nuh: 23). The second group is
referred to in: أن اعبدوا الله واجتنبوا الطاغوت (Serve Allah, eschew
Evil) (al-Nahl: 36). And the third group is referred to in: أفرأيت من
اتخذ الهه هواه (Seest thou such a one as taken for his god his own
passion (or impulse)?) (al-Furqan: 43).

[^5]: See: "A penny in Response to Ya Allah!". Chapter Six. Part 3.

[^6]: Sahifah-i Nur. XXII, 348.

[^7]: Mafatih al-Jinan, the supplication of Abu Hamza Thumali.

[^8]: Mizan al-Hikmah, VI, 2724: 9316.


