The Dhikr of the Friends of God
===============================

The reverend Shaykh had a basic guideline that on various occasions he
would repeatedly emphasize it. Although this guideline is adopted from
Islamic traditions, the significant point here is the Shaykh's personal
experience in that respect.

In principle, the significance of this divine man and righteous servant
lies in the fact that his sayings are his own findings and inner
expenence.

Perpetual Presence
------------------

The reverend Shaykh insisted to train his disciples in a way that they
see themselves in all states in the presence of the God Almighty. And
this is in fact the instructive and significant words of the Holy
Prophet (s) who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"اذكروا الله ذكرا خاملا، قيل: وما الذكر الخامل؟ قال: الذكر الخفي"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Remember God by the *khamil dhikr.* He was asked: 'What is *khamil
dhikr?'* He replied: The silent and *covert dhikr.*"[^1]

In another hadith, His Holiness (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يفضل الذكر الخفي الذي لا تسمعه الحفظة على الذي تسمعه سبعين ضعفاُ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The covert *dhikr* that is not heard by the angels is seventy times
better than the *dhikr* that they hear it"

The superiority of the covert remembrance of God over the overt one is
due to its significant and determining role in man's development
Remembrance by tongue is easy; however, remembrance by the heart,
especially when done uninterruptedly, is too difficult. Thus, Imam
Muhammad al-Baqir (a) views it as one of the most difficult tasks

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ثلاث من أشد ما عمل العباد: إنصاف المؤمن من نفسه، ومواساة المرء أخاه،
وذكر الله على كل حال، وهو ان يذكر الله عز وجل عند المعصية يهم بها
فيحول ذكر الله بينه وبين تلك المعصية، وهو قول الله عز وجل (ان الذين
اتقوا اذا مسهم طائف من الشيطن تذكروا فاذا هم مبصرون)
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Three tasks are the most difficult for people equity by the faithful, a
man's financial assistance to bis brothers, and remembrance of God in
all states, i.e., man should remember God when encoumering a (temptat;on
tn) sin and decision tn commit it Then this remembrance of God prevents
him from sins, as per the words of Almighty God (Verily, those who are
pious when an evil thought touches them by Satan, they invoke Allah's
remembrance, (then) they see things clearly) (al-A'raf 201)”[^2]

In another *hadith,* viewing equity, charity and perpetual *dhikr* as
among the most difficult Divine obligations, Imam al-Sadiq (a) clarifies
that what he means by remembrance in all states is not merely
remembrance by tongue, although it is also regarded as remembrance of
God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أما أني لا أقول: سبحان الله، والحمد لله، ولا اله الا الله، والله
أكبر، وإن كان هذا من ذاك، ولكن ذكر الله في كل موطن إذا هجمتَ على طاعته
أو معصيته"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"By remembrance of God, I do not mean reciting *Subban Allahi, wal
Hamduli'lallahi, wa la ilaha il Allahu wa Allahu Akbar;* although these
are also regarded as *dhikr,* but what is meant is remembering God when
encountering obedience and disobedience of God."[^3]

It is extremely difficult for man to see himself in the presence of God.
If man attains such consciousness, it is impossible that carnal vain
desires and Satan overpower him and force him to disobey his lord.

How to Liberate from Carnal Soul and the Satan
----------------------------------------------

The reverend Shaykh said: "There in no way to liberate from the evils of
carnal soul except by attention to God and perpetual presence in Him. As
long as you are in His presence and you are not disconnected from God,
the carnal soul will not be able to deceive you."

With reference to the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(ومن يعشُ عن ذكر الرحمن نقيض له شيطاناُ فهو له قرين)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(If anyone withdraws himself from remembrance of (Allah) the Most
Gracious, We appoint for him an evil one, to be an intimate companion to
him.) (al-Zukhruf: 36)

The Shaykh would say on many occasions:

"Whenever man's attention is turned away from God, the carnal soul and
the Satan that are lying in ambush will capture his heart and start
their job from there."

Take your Hands Off me!
-----------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples quoted him as saying:

"I saw my own carnal self in (my) spiritual state; I told it to take his
hands off me! It responded: Do not you know that I will not take my
hands off you until I destroy you!"

Perhaps due to the same intuition the Shaykh was very interested in the
following couplets:

'In the school of Eternity Your Beauty guided me.

Your Bounteous Grace assisted me to be enslaved by You. My vile carnal
soul favored all vanities.

Your Blessed Emanation liberated me from its clutches.'

Divine Grace descends on man's heart through perpetual remembrance of
Him. Once God's remembrance enters the heart, as the first step it will
purify the heart of satanic temptations and carnal vanities and prepares
it for receiving Divine Grace from the Absolute Bestower of Bounties.

In this respect, Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أصل صلاح القلب اشتغاله بذكر الله"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The quintessence of heart's soundness lies in its occupation with
remembrance of God."[^4]

Feeling perpetually present in the Presence of Almighty God liberates
man from the captivity of the carnal soul and the Satan and consequently
cures various maladies of the soul. Imam Ali (a) is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ذكر الله مطردة الشيطان"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Remembrance of God drives the Satan away."[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"ذكر الله دواء أعلال النفوس"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Remembrance ofGod is the medicine for the soul's maladies."[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يا من اسمه دواء وذكره شفاء"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O He whose Name is a Remedy, whose remembrance is cure."[^7]

Through perpetual remembrance of God, the Divine grace grants the heart
a human life and makes it radiant, reinforces the soul, makes the man of
heart intimate with his God, gradually gracing man with the elixir of
love and affection;

Imam Ali (a), the great knower of Allah and the one familiar with the
maladies of human soul, said accordingly:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"من ذكر الله سبحانه أحيى الله قلبه ونور عقله ولبه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Whoever remembers God Almighty, God will enliven his heart and
enlighten his mind and intellect."[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"مداومة الذكر قوت الأرواح"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Perpetually remembering God gives sustenance to the soul."[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"الذكر مفتاح الأنس"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Remembrance of God is the key to proximity (to Him)."[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"من أكثر ذكر الله أحبه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Whoever remembers God abundantly, God will love him."[^11]

What was briefly brought up here is a small part of the blessings of
remembering God in life and in enrichment and development of human
beings.[^12] With some deliberation on the above mentioned, however, it
will be clarified that how valuable is any moment that we are
remembering God and how detrimental is any breath that we take without
remembenng God.

Remembrance of God in Sleep
---------------------------

Dr. Thubati said: Once we were invited by a member of the session to his
house for lunch. After lunch, everybody proceeded to rest. I was lying
down and remembering God and thinking in this relation with my eyes
closed. At this moment, the Shaykh who was sitting before me and
noticing me recommended to the friends:

"You should be remembering God even when you are sleeping."

That was the only time I heard him recommend remembering God even at
sleep in that session and I do not remember him mentioning it anywhere
else.  
**A Message from** ***Barzakh***

One of the Shaykh's friends related: Once I had an audience with the
Shaykh who said:

"I saw a young man in *barzakh* who was saying: 'You do not know what is
going on here! When you come here you will find out; any breath that you
have taken for other than God has ended up to your loss.'  
**Virtues of some** ***Dhikrs***

When we talk about the virtues (benefits) of *dhikrs* in the school of
the Shaykh, it must be remembered that his is a school of love not of
outcome and results, and that he who does not seek anything other than
God, the one who does not even seek his own perfection, will gain
results. Similarly, whatever the results of remembrance of God, the goal
mustn't be anything other than God.  
**Giving Importance to Two** ***Dhikrs***

One of the Shaykh's devotees said: The Shaykh regarded *Istighfar*
(asking forgiveness) and *Salawat* as highly important, and had figured
out that these two *dhikrs* were two wings for the wayfarer to fly with.

The Shaykh would say:

"If you send Salawat abundantly in your lifetime, the Apostle of God (s)
will kiss your lips at death."

On Overcoming Carnal Desires
----------------------------

1. Perseverance in the *dhikr:* "لاحول ولاقوة الا بالله العلي العظيم"
*Lahawla wa la quwwata illa billa al 'Ali al- 'Azim* (there is no might
neither power except through Allah, the most High, the
Supreme-in-Glory)."

2. The *dhikr:* "يا دائم ويا قائم" *"Ya Da'im-u ya Qa* *'im* (O Eternal!
O Persistent!)

3. In order to suppress the unruly carnal desires, recite the following
*dhikr* thirteen or one hundred times in the morning and evening:
**"اللهم لك الحمد وآليك المشتكى وأنت المستعان**" *"Allahumma*
*lakalhamdu wa alayka* '*l mushtaka wa Anta al-Musta'an* (O Allah! All
praise is due to You, complaints are made to You, and You are the one
whose help is sought for)."

4. Recite one hundred times every night: **"يازكي الطاهر من كل آفة
بقدسه"** *"Ya Zakiyyut Tahiru min kulli afatin bi kudsih* (O You who
are) pure and clean from any bane through Your sanctity).[^13]

The reverend Shaykh stated while recommending the above *dhikr* for
suppressing the carnal desires:

"I myself have applied it and started (the spiritual seeking) through
reciting it. One day I recited this *dhikr* so many times that my carnal
soul died. I said to myself: I will continue until my (worldly)
existence turn into non-existence. However, when for a time I neglected
reciting it as is expedient to human nature, I found my carnal soul was
alive. Obviously anyone who directs his attention toward the world his
carnal soul will strengthen; reciting this *dhikr* is effective in
overcoming the carnal soul."

Suppressing the Satanic Temptations when Encountering Women other than our Next of Kin
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dr. Farzam related: the reverend Shaykh Rajab Ali considered the
*dhikr*  
 "يا خير حبيب ومحبوب صل على محمد وآله| *Ya* *khayra Habibin wa Mahbubin,
Salli 'ala Mubammadin wa Alihi* (O Best of Lovers and the Best of
Beloved! Bless Muhammad and his Family)) very effective after one
glances at a woman other than his next of kin. He frequently advised me
to recite this *dhikr* to remain secure from the Satan's temptation. He
said:

"When you glance at a woman other than your next of kin, if you do not
enjoy looking at her you are sick! But if you enjoy, you ought to cast
your look away from her and say: *ya khayra Habib* Which means: O God! I
cherish you. These are not likeable; whatever is mortal is not likeable.
..."

For the Love of God
-------------------

Reciting one thousand times Salawat (every night) for forty nights.  
**For Purifying the** ***Batin*** **(the inner)**

The reverend Shaykh regarded the recitation of the Sura *al-Saffat*
every morning and the Sura *al-Hashr* every night as very helpful in
purification of the batin.

One of the Shaykh's devotees said that he advised him to recite the Sura
*al-Hashr* every night, and he believed that the Greatest Name (of God)
is mentioned in the latter *ayahs* of this blessed *Sura.*

For Attaining the Honor of Meeting Wali 'Asr (aj)
-------------------------------------------------

Reciting one hundred times the holy Sura*,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(رب أدخلني مُدخل صدق وأخرجني مُخرج صدق وأجعل لي من لدنك سلطاناُ
نصيراُ)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(O my Lord! Let my entry be by the Gate of Truth and Honor, and likewise
my exit by the Gate of Truth and Honor; and grant me from Thy Presence
an authority to aid (me)) (al-Isra: 80), up to forty nights.

As narrated, many of the Shaykh's students have found the honor of
meeting Imam al-'Asr (aj) through persevering with this *dhikr;*
although at the time of meeting they have not realized the Imam (a). Two
instances are given as follows:  
**1. How Ayatollah Ziyarati Attained this Honor**

One of the Shaykh's disciples narrated: 'The reverend Shaykh had given
instructions to the late Ayatollah Ziyarati in Mahdi Shahr to meet Wali'
Asr (AJ) -apparently by the above-mentioned *dhikr.* After having
performed the instructions, he went to the Shaykh and said he had done
what he instructed but to no effect.

The Shaykh deliberated for a while and said: "When you were performing
prayers in the *Masjid,* a Sayyid told you: 'Wearing a ring on the left
hand is abominated'. And you replied: 'All the abominated *(Makruh)* are
permissible'. That holy man was Imam al-'Asr (a)."

2. How a Shopkeeper found this Honor
------------------------------------

Two shopkeepers undertook to provide for the needs of a Sayyid family.
One of them began the *dhikr* instructed by the Shaykh to find the honor
of meeting Imam al-'Asr (a). Before the fortieth night, one of the
children of the Sayyid family went to his shop and asked him for a bar
of soap. The shopkeeper grumbled that why her mother did not send him to
such and such -meaning the other shopkeeper - to get what they want!

This man said: When I went to sleep at the same night, I heard someone
was calling me. I went out to check but I did not see anyone. I went to
bed again; I heard that voice calling me by name. The third time I went
out to see who it was. When I opened the house door, I saw a Sayyid with
covered face who said:

"We can sustain our children, but we wish you to attain a (high)
position."

For Solving Problems and Curing Illnesses
-----------------------------------------

Dr. Farzam said: The reverend Shaykh would recommend some Qur'anic
verses and supplications along with sending*, Salawat* as *dhikr* for
solving problems and remedy to illnesses, such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"رب اني مغلوب فانتصر وأنت خير الناصرين"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Rabb inni maghlubun, fantasir wa anta Khayru'l* *Nasirin* (O Lord! I
am defeated. Help me Thou who art the Best of Helpers!)"

Once I had a problem, the Shaykh instructed me to say the following
*dhikr:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"رب اني مسني الضر وأنت أرحم الراحمين"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"*Rabb inni massani al-durr wa Anta Arham al-Rahimin* (O Lord! I am
afflicted with a loss, and Thou art the Most Merciful)." He would say:
"These are *dhikr,* say them along with Salawat!" Or when our children
got sick, he would recommend us to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يا من اسمه دواء، وذكره شفاء صل علي محمد وآل محمد"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"O He whose Name is a remedy, whose remembrance is a cure! Bless
Muhammad (s) and the Family of Muhammad (s)!"

For Averting Heat and Cold
--------------------------

One of the Shaykh's disciples related: 'On my first journey to the noble
Makkah for Hajj pilgrimage I asked the Shaykh what I should do for
warding off the extreme heat. He instructed me to resort to the
following verses to protect myself from cold and heat:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(سلام على ابراهيم \* كذلك نجزي المحسنين)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Peace and salutation to Abraham! Thus indeed do We reward those who do
right.) (al-Saffat: 109, 110)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(يا نار كوني برداً وسلاماً على ابراهيم)
  </p>
</blockquote>

(O Fire! Be thou cool, and (a means of) safety for Abraham.) (al-Anbiya:
69)

[^1]: Mizan al-Hikmah, IV, 1866: 6491 and 6493.

[^2]: Mizan.al-Hikmah, IV, 1856 6454

[^3]: Ibid. IV, 1856: 6455

[^4]: Mizan al-Hikmah, IV, 1846: 6394

[^5]: Ibid, IV, 1850: 6427.

[^6]: Ibid, IV, l850: 6418.

[^7]: Ibid, IV, l850: 6419.

[^8]: Ibid. IV, 1848: 6399.

[^9]: Ibid. IV, 1848: 6403.

[^10]: Ibid. IV, 1850: 6422.

[^11]: Ibid. IV, 1842: 6435.

[^12]: For more information about the impact of God's remembrance in
life, see Mizan al-Hikmah, under the entry: "Al-Dhikr", Thamarat
al-Dhikr.

[^13]: This dhikr is an item in the Dua -i Hazrat-i Idris (a). See
Misbah al-Mutahajjid p. 601.


