Prayers of the Friends of God
=============================

One of the eminent features of those trained at the school of the
reverend Shaykh is their presence of heart in prayer. And this became
possible only because the Shaykh did not accord any value to the
spiritless ostentatious prayers, and tried to make his disciples perform
really devotional prayers.

In the Shaykh's guidelines concerning prayers, there are four basic
principles in this regard, which are adopted from the Holy Qur'an and
Islamic traditions:

1. Love
-------

The reverend Shaykh believed that as a lover enjoys talking to his
beloved, a performer of prayers also should enjoy amorous whispering to
his lord. Personally, he was like this as friends of God are all like
this.

The Holy Prophet (s) described his joy in prayers as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"جعل الله جل ثناؤه قرة عيني في الصلاة، وحبب الى الصلاة كما حبب الى
الجائع الطعام، والى الظمآن الماء، وان الجائع اذا اكل شبع، وإن الظمآن
اذا شرب روي، وأنا لا أشبع من الصلاة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Allah-Great is His Adoration-made the delight of my eyes in prayers and
made prayers beloved to me as He made food beloved to the hungry and
water beloved to the thirsty; (with the difference that) when the hungry
eats he will be satiated and when the thirsty drinks he will be
quenched, but I never get satiated (or quenched) from (performing)
prayers."[^1]

One of the Shaykh's disciples, who had spent thirty years of his life
with him, said: 'God knows that I witnessed him standing in prayers like
a lover before his Beloved, engrossed in His Beauty .In my whole life I
only saw three people who were extraordinary in their prayers; the late
Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat, Ayatollah Kuhistani, and Agha Shaykh
Habibullah Gulpayigani in Mashhad. They were amazing when standing in
prayers; I would see intuitively that the quality of sphere (around
them) was otherworldly; they paid no attention to anything other than
God.

2. Courtesy
-----------

To be courteous in the presence of the Almighty lord by performers of
prayer is one of the issues that Islam has greatly stressed. Imam
al-Sajjad (a) said in this relation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"حق الصلاة ان تعلم انها وفادة الى الله عز وجل، وانك فيها قائم بين يدي
الله عز وجل فاذا علمت ذلك قمت مقام الذليل الحقير، الراغب الراهب،
الراجي الخائف، المسكين المتضرع، والمعظم لمن كان بين يديه بالسكون
والوقار، وتُقبل عليها بقلبك وتقيمها بحدودها وحقوقها"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The right accorded to prayer is that you should know prayer as entering
the presence of Allah the Most High, and that, when saying prayer, you
are standing before the Most High Allah. So, knowing this, you should
stand in prayer as an abased and humble servant, eagerly devoted,
hopefully fearful, helplessly lamenting; and proceed to prayer
peacefully and gracefully with great respect to the One you are standing
before, and perform it whole-heartedly with (full) observance of its
rules and rights."[^2]

The reverend Shaykh said about the courtesy of presence:

"The Satan is always distracting man; remember not to break your
attention to God, be courteous in prayer as when you stand attentively
before an eminent personality, so that if your body is pricked by a
needle, you would not move!"

The Shaykh said the above in reply to his son who said to him: 'You
smile sometimes when you say prayers.' His son said: 'I guess he was
smiling at the Satan implying that he cannot challenge him (i.e. the
Shaykh)!'

Anyway, the reverend Shaykh believed that any move (of the body) in the
presence of the Lord is considered as rude and is caused by temptation
from the Satan. He said:

"I saw the Satan kissing the part of the body that one scratched in
prayer!!"

3. Presence of Heart
--------------------

The quintessence of prayer is remembering God and sincere presence of
the performer's heart in the sacred companionship of Most Exalted God.
Thus the Holy Prophet (s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"لايقبل الله صلاة عبد لا يَحظر قلبه مع بدنه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"God would not accept the prayer of a person whose heart is not present
with his body."[^3]

In view of this issue and before leading the congregational prayer, the
reverend Shaykh tried to prepare those attending the prayer to find
presence of heart. His own prayer was a typical one with presence of
heart.

Accordingly, Dr. Farzam said: 'His prayer was very sober and good
mannered.[^4] Sometimes when I arrived late for the mass prayer and
(passing before him) saw his stature in prayer he looked as if his whole
body was shivering; with radiant, pale countenance, he was absorbed in
what he was reciting. His attention was totally directed on prayer and
his head was always lowered. My implication was that the reverend Shaykh
never felt an iota of doubt in his heart.

Another disciple of the Shaykh said: 'He sometimes said to me: "Such and
such! Do you know what you say in *ruku* 'and *sajdah?* When you say in
*tashahhud:* ' *Ashhadu an la ilaha ilia 'llahu wahdahu la sharika la-h*
(I bear witness that there is no god apart from Allah, Who is unique and
without partners)', are you telling the truth? Are you not entangled in
your carnal vain desires? Are you not attending other than God? Are you
not dealing with  
 (أرباب متفرقون) (many lords differing among themselves) (12:39)?!

4. Perseverance in Performing Prayers at their Due Time
-------------------------------------------------------

Islamic traditions have greatly emphasized performing prayers at their
due time. Imam al-Sadiq (a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"فضل الوقت الأول على الآخر كفضل الآخرة على الدنيا"
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Superiority of performing prayers at due time over performing it at the
end of (prayer) time is like the superiority of the Hereafter to this
world."[^5]

The reverend Shaykh was very prompt in performing his five prayers at
their due time and enjoined others to do the same.

"A Servant of Imam Husayn (a) would not put off his Prayers to Such Late Hours"
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The able preacher, Hujj. Agha Sayyid Qasim Shoja'i, related an
interesting memory about the reverend Shaykh: 'I used to give sermons
since my school years and as I was a well-spoken preacher I used to be
invited to many sessions for *rawzah*[^6], including the sessions held
in the house of the late Agha Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat on the seventh
day of each lunar month. Upstairs, on the right side, there was the room
where women gathered and I recited the *rawzah* for them once every
month. The Shaykh's room was downstairs. At that time I was only
thirteen years old and had not reached puberty yet.

One day after the sermon was over; I went downstairs and encountered the
Shaykh for the first time. He was holding a hat in his hand had seemed
to be going out. I said "salam to him" he took a glance at my face and
said:

"The son of the Holy Prophet (s) and the servant of Imam Husayn (a)
would not delay his prayer till now!!"

I said: on my eyes! It was two hours to the sunset and I was a guest
somewhere that day and hadn't said my prayer; as soon as the Shaykh
looked at my face he realized this and pointed it out to me. Since my
adolescence and after that when I attended his sessions -which were held
in the residence of Agha Hakimi Ahan Furush -I felt this man's sayings
were inspired whenever he spoke, as he did not have scholarly knowledge
but when he spoke the audience would get absorbed wholeheartedly. I
still remember some of his words as he said:

"Leave behind the word 'we'; wherever the words 'we' and 'I' reign there
abides polytheism. There is only one pronoun reigning and that is 'He',
and if you sideline that pronoun, the other pronouns are polytheistic."

Whenever the late reverend Shaykh expressed such statements, they would
get enshrined in one's heart and mind.

Anger, the Bane of Prayers
--------------------------

The reverend Shaykh is quoted as saying:

"One evening I was passing by a Masjid up the Sirus Avenue in
Tehran.[^7] Entered the Masjid to enjoy the virtue of performing prayer
at its due time and went into the *shabistan* (oratory). There I saw
someone saying prayer and he had a halo round his head. I thought to
myself I would become familiar with him to see what qualities he had
that caused him to have such spiritual state in prayer. At the end of
the mass prayer I accompanied him out of the Masjid. At the gate he had
a row with the Masjid attendant and even shouted angrily at him and went
on his way. After (letting out his) anger, I saw that halo disappeared
from around his head!"

[^1]: Mizan al-Hikmah, VII, 3092: 10535.

[^2]: Ibid. VII, 3124: 10669.

[^3]: Ibid. VII, 3116: 10635.

[^4]: One of the Shaykh's disciple said: 'Like the late Ayatollah
Shahabadi, the Shaykh also repeated the dhikr of ruku 'and sajdah three
times.'

[^5]: Mizan al-Hikmah, VII, 3130: 10685.

[^6]: Recital of the Martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (a).

[^7]: This Masjid was located down "Sarcheshmah Avenue". However, due to
road expansion it was divided into two sections.


