The Passing Away of Haj Akhund Turbati
======================================

Another of the friends of God whose story of death is interesting and
instructive to read is the late Haj Akhund Turbati, the father of the
famous preacher, the late Husayn Ali Rashed (ra). The latter, has
described the event of his father's death in his book, *The Forgotten
Virtues* which is a biography of his father, as follows:

One Week before his Heavenly Departure
--------------------------------------

Among the things we (the family members) remember of him and still is
ambiguous to us is that my father died on Sunday October 16, 1943 CE.,
(Shawwal, 17, 1362 AH.) at around two hours after the sunrise, having
said his morning prayer while lying in his deathbed. His legs being
stretched toward the *qibla,* he was conscious to the last moment of his
life and was whispering some words as if he was aware of his dying. The
last thing he uttered before his soul left his body was the phrase, *"la
ilaha illallah"* (there is no god but Allah).

"Salutation to you O Rasulallah (s)"
------------------------------------

It was exactly on Sunday the week before his death after the morning
prayer when he lay toward the *qibla* and covered his face with his robe
that all of a sudden his whole body became illuminated as brightly as
the sun rays projecting through an opening on a surface, making his face
radiant and shining whereas it had been pale and yellowish due to
illness; it was so brightly shining that it was seen from under the robe
that he had covered on his body. He made a movement and said:

*"Salam Alaikum ya Rasulallah* (s)! You have come to visit this unworthy
servant?!"

After that, as though he was really visited by some people, he saluted
Amir al-Mu'minin Ali (a) and all Imams (a) up to the twelfth Imam (aj)
one after another and thanked them for their visit. Then he saluted
Hazrat Fatima Zahra (a). Finally he saluted Hazrat Zaynab (a) and at
this moment cried a lot, saying:

"Bibi! I cried for you too much."

"Rest in Peace, Mother!"
------------------------

Then he saluted his own mother, saying:

"I am grateful of you mother, you gave me pure (sublime) milk."

This state lasted until two hours after sunrise. After that, the light
that had illumined his body disappeared and his face turned pale again
like before. It was just one week later on another Sunday at the same
period of two hours that he spent in the agony of death and then gently
gave up his body.

"Do not Tease me Husayn Ali!"
-----------------------------

On one of the weekdays-between the two Sundays-I told him: 'We hear
things narrated to us from the Prophets and noblemen and wish we had
been at their time and heard them directly; now, you who are my closest
kin have had this experience. I wish I knew what it was (that happened
to you). He kept silent and said nothing. I repeated my request two or
three more times in different wordings and he still kept silent. It was
the fourth or the fifth time (of my repeating the request) that he
responded:

"Do not tease me Husayn Ali"

I said: 'I meant to understand something.' He said:

"I cannot make you understand; you go and try to understand it
yourself."

This state has remained as a puzzle to me and my mother, brother, sister
and aunt, and up to the present that I am writing this account, i.e.,
9:30 a.m, Tuesday, July 15, 1975 (fifth of Rajab, 1395 AH.), I know
nothing of (the details of) this issue, but just say that such state
really happened.[^1]

[^1]: "The Forgotten Virtues", p. 149.


