Life
====

The pious man of God, Rajab Ali Nikuguyan known as the Reverend Shaykh
and Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat was born in Tehran in 1262 S.H./1883
CE.[^1] His father, Mashhadi Baqir was an ordinary worker. When Rajab
Ali was 12, his father passed away and left Rajab Ali alone with no
full-blooded brothers and sisters. There is no more knowledge at hand
about the Shaykh's childhood. However, he quoted his mother himself as
saying:

"One night when I was pregnant with you your father -who was then
working in a restaurant -brought home some wholesome Kebabs. When I
proceeded to eat, I found that you began to stir and beat my belly with
your feet. I felt I should not eat from this food. I refrained from
eating and asked your father why he had brought wholesome Kebabs that
night, whereas the other nights he used to bring the customers'
leftovers. He said he had actually brought these Kebabs without
permission! So, I did not eat from that food."

This story indicates that the Shaykh's father did not have worth
mentioning features. The Shaykh himself is quoted as saying:

"Doing good to and feeding a love of God by my father caused that God
Almighty brought me to this world through his loins."

The Shaykh had five sons and four daughters. One of his daughters died
in childhood.

The Shaykh's House
------------------

His simple brick house that was bequeathed to him from his father was
located on Mawlawi Avenue, Siyah ha (presently Shahid Muntazari) Alley.
He lived in this small house the rest ofhis life. His son says:

'Whenever it rained, the ceiling began to drip. One day, an army
general, along with some other governmental officials, came to our
house. We had placed some basins and bowls under the rain dripping from
the ceiling. Having seen our condition of living, he bought two pieces
of land and showed them to my father, and said he had bought one for
himself and one for him. My father replied: What we have is sufficient
for us.'

Another of his sons says: 'When my life condition changed for the better
I said to my father: 'Dear father! I have got four *tomans* and this
brick house can be sold for sixteen *tomans.* So let me buy a new house
on Shahbaz Avenue.'

The Shaykh said: "Whenever you wish go and buy one for yourself; for me,
this one is good enough!"

He goes on to say: 'After my marriage, we prepared the two rooms
upstairs and said to our father: 'High-ranking people come to visit you;
so, please arrange for your meetings in these two rooms.' He replied:

"No way! Whoever wants to see me, let him come to sit in this
dilapidated room."

The room he was talking about was a small one carpeted with a simple
coarse mat made of cotton with a table for tailoring.

Interestingly enough, several years later, the reverend Shaykh let one
of his rooms to a taxi driver named "Mashdi Yadullah" for twenty
*tomans* a month. Later on, when the latter's wife gave birth to a
daughter, the late Shaykh gave the name "Ma'suma" to her. When he
recited *adhan* and *aqama* into the baby's ears, he placed a two
*toman* bank-note in the comer of her swaddling clothes, and said:

"Aqha Yadullah! Now your expenses have increased; from this month
instead of twenty *tomans* pay only eighteen *tomans* (for rent)."

The Shaykh's Clothing
---------------------

The reverend Shaykh's clothing was very simple and neat. The type of
clothing he used to wear was a set of clothes like that of Ulama
including a cloak, a skullcap, and a robe.

What was interesting about him was that even in his dressing too, his
intention was to attain God's pleasure. The only time he put on a robe
to please others; he was reproached for that in his spiritual state.

His account of this event is as follows: *"Nafs* (carnal desire) is a
strange thing; one night I found I was veiled (in darkness) and was
unable to achieve divine grace, like I attained before. I probed into
the matter, and upon humble requesting, I found out that the previous
afternoon, when one of the nobles of Tehran came to visit me, he said
that he liked to perform the evening and the night prayers with me (as
prayer leader). So, in order to please him, I put on my robe while
performing prayers. ..!"

The Shaykh's Food
-----------------

His reverence never cared for delicious meals. Most often, he used such
simple foods as potatoes and puddings. At the tablecloth, he would kneel
down facing the *qibla* and kind of bending over the food. Sometimes he
would also hold up the plate in his hands while eating. He would always
eat with full appetite. Sometimes he would put some of his food in the
plate of a friend that he could reach out (as a sign of respect). While
eating, he would not talk, and the others would also keep silent out of
respect for him. If someone invited him to a feast, he would accept or
reject it with some deliberation. Nevertheless, he would most often
accept his friends' invitations.

He would not mind eating out; however, he was conscious of the effect of
food on one's soul, and regarded some spiritual changes as a consequence
of eating certain foods. Once, while he was traveling to Mashhad by
train, he felt some spiritual contraction. He made an appeal (to Ahlul
Bayt (a)), then after a while he was informed by intuition that the
spiritual contraction had been the consequence of drinking of the tea
served by the train's restaurant.[^2]

[^1]: S.H. Solar Hijra, the Iranian Solar Calendar that began at
Prophet's (s) Hijra to Medina

[^2]: See "Threatened to a destiny like that of Balaam of Boer", Chapter
Two, Part 2.


