Occupation
==========

Tailoring is one of the praiseworthy professions in Islam. "Luqman the
Sage" had chosen this as his occupation[^1]. It is quoted from the Holy
Prophet (s) who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عمل الابرار من الرجال الخياطة، وعمل الأبرار من النساء الغزل
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The job of the righteous men is tailoring and the job of the pious
women is spinning."[^2]

The reverend Shaykh had chosen this job as a means of livelihood. Hence,
he was known as Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat (the tailor). Interestingly,
his simple small house, as described before, was his tailoring workshop,
too.

In this respect one of his children says: 'At first, my father had a
room in a Caravanserai, where he pursued his tailoring profession. One
day the landlord came to him and asked him to leave the place. The next
day and without any arguing or demanding any due rights, my father
packed up his sewing machine and sewing table, brought them home, and
gave the room back to the landlord. Ever since, he worked at home in a
room near the entrance as his tailoring workshop.

Perseverance in his Work
------------------------

The reverend Shaykh was extremely serious and persevering in his work.
He worked hard to the last days of his life to earn his living through
his own endeavors. Although his devotees were whole- heartedly ready to
provide for his simple livelihood, he would never accept.

The Holy Prophet (s) said in a *Hadith:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أكل من كد يده، كان يوم القيامة في عداد الأنبياء ويأخذ ثواب الأنبياء
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Whoever earns one's own living, they will be ranked among the Prophets
and rewarded as Prophets."[^3]

And in another *hadith,* he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العبادة عشر أجزاءٍ تسعة أجزاء في طلب الحلال
  </p>
</blockquote>

"  
 Divine worship has ten parts, nine of which comprises earning lawful
daily sustenance."[^4]

One of Shaykh's friends says: I never forget the day I saw the reverend
Shaykh in the market who was pale in the countenance out of fatigue. He
was going home carrying some tailoring tools and material that he had
bought. I told him: 'Agha have some rest, you are not feeling well.' He
replied:

"What should I do with the wife and the children then?!"

The Holy Prophet (s) is quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان الله تعالى يحب أن يرى عبده تعباً في طلب الحلال
  </p>
</blockquote>

"God likes to see his servant tired out in the way of earning his lawful
sustenance." [^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ملعون ملعون من ضيع من يعول
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Cursed is the one, cursed is the one who does not provide for his
family's sustenance."[^6]

Equity in Receiving Wages
-------------------------

The Shaykh received very equitable wages for sewing clothes. He used to
get wages for exactly the amount of stitching he had done and just for
as much time as he had spent working on the clothes. By no means he
would accept to be paid more than what he had worked for. Thus, if
someone would say: 'Reverend Shaykh! Let me pay a higher wage.' He would
reject.

The reverend Shaykh charged his customers on the basis of *ij'ara*
(contract on hire and lease) according to Islamic law.[^7] But since he
never tended to receive more than what he had worked for the customers,
in case after finishing the work if he found that he had done less work
than predicted, he would give back the money that he thought was extra
to his real wages! One of the Ulama said: 'I took some cloth to the
Shaykh to make a robe, a cloak, and a quilted cloak. I asked him how
much I should pay.' "It needs two days work, so the wage will be forty
*tomans."* He said.

A couple of days later when I went for the clothes, he said: "The wage
is only twenty tomans."

I inquired: 'You said forty *tomans?'* He replied: "First I thought they
needed two days work, but it just took one day to complete!"

Someone else also said: 'I took some cloth to him to make a pair of
trousers. I asked him how much it will come to. He said: 'Ten tomans.' I
paid him right away. When some time later I went to pick up the
trousers, he placed a *two-toman* note on it and said: "The fee came to
eight *tomans."*

The Shaykh's son said: 'Once he settled with a customer to make a robe
for 35 Rials. Some days later the customer came for the role. No sooner
had he walked away with the robe than my father ran after him and gave
him five Rials back, saying: "I thought it would take me longer time to
make this robe, but it did not!"

A Reward for Equity
-------------------

Equity in all tasks, especially in transactions is an important issue
that has been highly stressed in Islam. Imam Ali (a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإنصاف أفضل الفضائل
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Equity is the best of virtues."[^8]

And he further said.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان أعظم المثوبة مثوبة الأنصاف
  </p>
</blockquote>

"The greatest reward is one granted for equity:' [^9]

Just to know how equity in transoctions is effective in self-building,
and that God's favor with the reverend Shaykh is not exaggerated on, it
will be worthwhile to deliberate on the following account:

Equity Toward People and Meeting with Hazrat Wali 'Asr (aj)
-----------------------------------------------------------

A man of knowledge was longing for meeting with Hazrat Baqiyyat Allah
Imam Mahdi (aj), and he suffered agonies of not being granted the chance
and for a long time he underwent severe austerity and pursued spiritual
seeking.

It is well-known among the *tullab* (Islamic seminary students) of
*Hawza* in Najaf-i Ashraf and the scholars of the holy shrine of Imam
Ali (a) that every one who finds the honor to go the Masjid-i Sahla to
perform the evening and night prayers every Tuesday uninterruptedly for
forty nights, they will be graced with meeting the Imam al-'Asr (aj) For
a while, he struggled to this end but to no effect. Then he resorted to
the occult sciences and numerical symbolism and started self-discipline
and other ascetic and rigorous practices in seclusion, anxiously seeking
to meet the Hidden Imam (aj) but all in vain. However, as a consequence
of his nightly vigilance and lamenting and wailing at dawns, he had
developed some kind of insight and intuition, and occasionally some
illuminating flash would be graced on him. He would fall in ecstasy and
rapture, often having certain visions and hearing some subtleties.

In one of these mystical states, he was told: "Your seeing and being
granted an audience with Imam al-'Asr (aj) will not be possible, unless
you make a trip to such and such a city. Quite difficult as it sounded
at first, but for that sacred purpose, it appeared to be so convenient.

Imam al- 'Asr (aj) in the Blacksmiths' Bazaar
---------------------------------------------

After several days the above-mentioned man arrived in that city and yet
even there he carried on his self-discipline and ascetic practices in
seclusion that intended to last forty days long. On the thirty seventh
day, he was told: "Right now Hazrat Baqiyyat Allah, Imam al-'Asr (aj) is
in the blacksmiths' bazaar, in a shop belonging to an old locksmith; so,
be quick to go now and seek his audience.

He stood up and, as he had already seen in his ecstatic vision, rushed
the way down to the old man's shop where he saw the Holy Imam (aj)
sitting there and talking amiably with the locksmith. When he greeted,
the holy Imam responded and beckoned to keep silent, (implying) watching
for a wonderful scene.

The Equity of the Old Locksmith
-------------------------------

At this moment I saw a bent, fragile, old woman with a walking stick who
showed us a lock with her shaking hand and said: "Will you, for God's
sake, buy this lock from me for "three *shahis*"[^10] I need three
*shahis?*

The old locksmith took a look at the lock and found it intact, and then
said: "My sister! This lock costs "Two *abbasis*"[^11] because its key
will cost no more than "ten *dinars"*[^12]; so if you give me ten
*dinars,* I will make a key to this lock and then it will cost ten
*shahis."*

The old woman answered: "No, I do not need that, I only need the money;
if you buy this lock from me for three *shahis,* I will pray for you."

The old man said with utmost naivety: "My sister! You are a Muslim, and
I too claim to be a Muslim. So why should I buy a Muslim's property for
a low price and deny someone's right? This lock already costs eight
*shahis;* if I want to benefit from it, I'll buy it for seven *shahis,*
for it is unfair to make more that a *shahi* profit in a deal of only
two *abbasis.* If you are sure you want to sell it, I'll buy it for
seven *shahis,* and I repeat again, the real price is two *abbasis.*
Since I am a businessman I buy it for one *shahi* less.

The old woman perhaps would not believe what the man said. She was upset
and complained that nobody had been willing to buy that price. She said
she begged them to buy it for three *shahis,* because ten dinars would
not have sufficed her. The old man paid seven *shahis* to the old woman
and purchased it from her.

I will Visit him!
-----------------

When the woman turned back to leave, the Imam (aj) said to me:

"My Dear! Did you watch the wonderful scene? You do likewise too, and
become like that, then I will come to see you. There is no need for
ascetic seclusion and resorting to *Jafr* (numerical symbolism).
Self-discipline and various travels will not be required; instead show
good action and be a Muslim so that I can interact with you. Of all
people of this city, I picked out this old man, since this man is
religious and knows God. And you observed the trial he went through:
This old woman requested all in the bazaar, to fulfill her need and
since they found her desperate and needy, they were all seeking to buy
(her lock) cheap; and nobody bought it even for three *shahis.* This old
man, however, bought it for its real price, i. e., seven *shahis.* Thus,
every week I pay a visit to him and show kindness and amiability to
him."[^13]

[^1]: Rabi' al-Abrar, II : 535.

[^2]: Mizan al-Hikmah, IV, 1628 : 5478.

[^3]: Ibid., V, 2058: 7209.

[^4]: Ibid., V, 2060: 7223.

[^5]: Mizan al-Hikmah, V, 2060: 7218.

[^6]: Ibid., V, 2058: 7202.

[^7]: See Mizan al-Hikmah, 1, 40: 16.

[^8]: Ibid. XIII, 6306: 20191.

[^9]: Ibid. XIII, 63O6 20I94.

[^10]: A shahi equals around a penny.

[^11]: An abbasi equals four shahis

[^12]: A dinar equals one-fifth of a shahi

[^13]: "Sarmaye Sokhan" (The capital of speech), I, 611-613, slightly
abridged.


