Self -Sacrifice
===============

One of the most outstanding features in the life of the Shaykh was his
serving the needy people and making self-sacrifice even in his very
poverty. From the viewpoints of the Islamic traditions, self-sacrifice
and altruism are the most beautiful benevolence, the highest levels of
faith, and the most superior ethical bounties[^1].

In spite of the reverend Shaykh's meager re-muneration from his
tailoring profession, he was highly generous and altruistic. The
accounts about the self-sacrifices of this man of God is really amazing
and instructive.

Self-Sacrifice toward other People's Children
---------------------------------------------

One of the Shaykh's children quotes his mother as saying: "It was a
famine period, Hasan and Ali[^2] were on top of the house roof making a
fire. I went up to see what they were doing. I noticed they had taken a
leather bag to roast and eat. Seeing such a scene, I burst into tears. I
climbed down the roof, picked up some copper and bronze (utensils) took
it to the small market nearby, sold it, andbought some cooked rice. On
the way back, I ran into my brother, Qasim Khan, who was a rich man. He
saw I was very disturbed; he inquired the reason for my disturbance. I
told him the story. When he found about the issue, he said: 'What are
you talking about? I saw Shaykh Rajab Ali handing out one hundred tokens
for chelowkebab among the people! Charity begins at home! When does this
man want to…? It is true that he is a devoted and ascetic man, but his
acting this way (neglecting his own family) is not rightful.'

"Hearing these words I got even more frustrated. When at night the
Shaykh came home I had an argument with him...and then went to sleep
disturbed and agitated. In the middle of the night I heard I was called
out to get up. I got up, I saw (in the dream) it was Mawla Ali Amir
al-Mu'minin (a) who introduced himself and said: He has been looking
after the people's children, and we have been looking after yours! When
your children starved to death, then go on and complain!"

Self-Sacrifice toward a Bankrupt Neighbor
-----------------------------------------

One of the reverend Shaykh's sons related: 'One night my father woke me
up and together picked two bags of rice; he carried one and I carried
the other. We carried the bags to the home of the richest man in our
neighborhood. Handing the bags over to the owner of the house, my father
said:” Dear fellow! Do you remember the British took the people to the
doorstep of their embassy and gave them rice, and took back an
ass-load[^3] of rice in return for each grain they had given to them,
and they still do not let them go?!"

With this joking, we handed the rice over and returned home. The next
morning he called out to me and said:" Mahmud! Buy a quarter of a kilo
half-broken rice as well as two Rials of fat oil and give it to your
mother to cook some rice!"

At those times, such behavior of my father was too heavy and
unintelligible, for why must he have to give away the rice we had at
home, whereas for our lunch we had to buy half-broken rice?!

Later on, I found that fellow had been bankrupt and (meanwhile) he was
going to have a large feast.

Self-Sacrifice on the New Year's Eve
------------------------------------

The late Shaykh Abd al-Karim Hamid relates: 'I was working as an
errand-boy at the Shaykh's shop for one *toman* a day. On the New year's
eve, the reverend Shaykh had fifteen *tomans;* he gave me some money to
provide rice and deliver to some addresses, and at last five *tomans*
was left that he gave to me!'

'I thought to myself: Is he going home empty-handed on the eve of the
New Year? And at the same time his son's trouser leg was torn. So, I
left the money he had given to me in the counter's drawer and ran away.
Whatever the Shaykh shouted I did not return. When I got home I found he
had been chasing me. He said:

"Why did not you take money?" And he insistently gave the money to me! ,

[^1]: Mizan al-Hikmah : 1, 22 : 1.

[^2]: Two of the Shaykh's sons who have died.

[^3]: A kharwar equals about 300 kilograms.


