Poetry
======

The reverend Shaykh was very interested in mystical and ethical poetry.
His sermons were, most often, given along with instructive poetry .He
especially valued the *Ghazals* of Hafiz and the Mathnawi of Taqdis; he
would cry when hearing their poetry.

He was very fond of Mathnawi of Taqdis and would say: "If there were
only one copy of Taqdis in the market, I would give anything I had in
order to buy that book"[^1]

Dr. Abul Hasan Shaykh, a close acquaintance of the Shaykh for many
years, said: 'The Shaykh was an expert on Hafiz poetry and interpreted
his poems quite well.

About the reverend Shaykh's viewpoint concerning poetry and poets,
particularly Hafiz, Dr. Hamid Farzam had this to say: 'Since 1954, when
I found the honor of friendship with the Shaykh through Dr. Guya, rarely
a session would have been held in which I would not hear relevant,
timely, and beautiful poetry from him. He was really fascinated by
Hafiz. Once I asked him why he was so deeply interested in Hafiz. He
replied:

"In spiritual and mystical aspects, Hafiz has really done his best and
expressed all spiritual truths and mystical-intuitive findings in his
poetry."

The Shaykh was more dedicated to Hafiz than to other poets, and would
always recite his poems even when he wished to warn or reproach
someone.'[^2]

He always referred to the world as a "hag". Sometimes facing a disciple
he would say:

"I see you have fallen again in the trap of this 'hag'!"

And then, he would recite this poem of Hafiz:

'There is none who is not entangled in that curling ringlet,

Who is there in the way of whom lies not such a snare of
tribulation?'[^3]

He would also say ironically:

"Most often they get entangled in it, and very few are the ones who are
detached from this hag!"

He would recite this fine couplet in condemning self-conceit:

'Being self-conceited and self-opinionated is infidelity toward being a
*dervish* recluse,

The command is what You (God) ordain, the opinion is what You think of.'

Reciting (singing) Poetry in a Delightful Voice
-----------------------------------------------

Dr. Farzam said in this respect 'The late reverend Shaykh would recite
poetry in a pleasant melody, for instance, certain poems of the late
Fayz-e Kashani, such as the following couplets which would highly
impress the listeners.

'I seek Allah's forgiveness of whatever (I have done for) other than the
Beloved,

I seek Allah's forgiveness for my fictitious existence

If a moment elapses without remembering his (beautiful) countenance,

I seek Allah's forgiveness myriad of times for that moment'

One afternoon we were in the company of the Shaykh in one of his
disciples' house. It had a very large guestroom and the Shaykh was
sitting near the doorway singing the following couplet of Hafiz.

'Who is the one who, out of loving kindness, may practice sincerity to
us?

(And) may do benevolence in lieu of ill-doing to such ill-doer as me'

He sang some couplets of this *ghazal* with a very beautiful and
pleasant melody while weeping and making others extremely overwhelmed
and tearful. It was so extraordinary! I said to Dr. Goya 'The reverend
Shaykh has got such a lovely voice and sweet breath!

He replied. 'It is a pity you made such belated acquaintance with him He
used to sing so beautifully that when he recited such poems in a
mystical state, the doors and walls literally vibrated.'

A Poem by the Shaykh and Reminiscence
-------------------------------------

It seems that the Shaykh himself used to write poems occasionally. One
of the contemporary *maraji'* who was a student of the great jurist and
mystic, the late Ayatollah Qadi (Allameh Tabataba'i's teacher) answered
to my inquiry about Shaykh Rajab Ali Khayyat as follows: 'I met him in a
session with Ayatollah Qadi in Najaf. In that session, he recited some
poems in praise of Amir al-Mu 'minin Ali (a) each couplets beginning
with the letters of *abjad.*[^4] He then recited another of his poems as
follows:

'Whatever Bounties You have granted to the whole Universe, All have You
granted to me, plentiful and diverse.'

"I was thinking that this was the most sublime interpretation of Divine
Bounties and thanksgiving to Him, until I came across this statement in
al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyya:"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شكري أياك من انعاماتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Shukri iyyaka min in 'amatika* (I am thankful to You for all Your
Bounties)[^5]  
**An Amazing and Instructive Miraculous Act**[^6]

At the end of the weekly session of "ethics" lesson[^7], a young man
came forward and, referring to what was mentioned at the footnote No.1
of this page, stated: "I am coming from Yazd. This issue was brought up
in a meeting where some of those present ridiculed and said it was
because of the Shaykh illiteracy that he did not know this phrase is not
found in al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyya! At that night, I saw him in a dream.
He said:

"What is quoted from me is not right. What I have said is as follows:
'And let my atitude to Thee for what Thou hast not granted me be more
abundant than my gratitude to Thee for what Thou hast bestowed upon
me!'[^8] And this content does exist in supplication number 35 of
al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyya!"

No doubt, this has been a true dream, since it is extremely important
and essential to note that "it is a great blessing for man not to attain
various worldly pleasures and luxuries which may divert him from sublime
human goal; it is a great blessing that deserves much more gratitude and
gratefulness than gratitude for the bounties that man has attained in
the world." Also, finding such an issue from al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyya in
a dream without connection to the Unseen world is usually
impossible.[^9]

[^1]: One of Shaykh's devotees said: ' He recommended reading of
"Taqdis" of Mulla Ahmad Naraqi and "Kimiyaye Sa'adat" of Ghazali.'

[^2]: See "You Lose Temper too quickly!" Chapter Three, Part 2.

[^3]: All the poems and ahadith in this volume are rendered into English
by the translator, except the ones adopted from other translated works
which are referred to in the footnotes.

[^4]: An arithmetical arrangement of the Arabic alphabet.

[^5]: Despite all the efforts made to identify this phrase in al-Sahifah
al-Sajjadiyya. However, all the phrases in Supplication 37 and the
"Whispered Prayer of the Thankful" of Imam al-Sajjad (a) do testify to
this notion.

[^6]: This title was later added to the eleventh edition of the Persian
Version.

[^7]: Weekly sessions of teaching ethics is held for a group of talabas
(seminary students) from Hawzah 'Ilmiyya (Islamic Seminary) of Hadrat
Abdul Azim al-Hasani (a).

[^8]: The Psalms of Islam, (al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyya), supplication 35,
p. 121, translated by William Chittick, Muhammadi Trust, London, 1988.

[^9]: It can be even said that this true dream somehow implicitly
confirms other issues quoted from the reverend Shaykh in this book.


