Preamble
========

The Muslim woman today is restrained between two ignorances
“jaahiliyyah”, one being the ignorance of the 20th century, which shows
a degraded portrait of the woman, and the other being the pre­Islamic
era that looks at the woman as a being more junior and of less status
than the man.

The new jaahiliyyah, with the pretext of the social activity of the
woman and defending her rights, calls the woman toward unknown
labyrinth. And the other ignorance, under the guise of chastity and
purity, keeps the woman far from so many human perfections and virtues.

Many are of the opinion that the Muslim woman has only two alternatives
before her, and she has no choice but to select one of them: either to
surrender to the western debauchery or to stay secluded in her house
deprived of all human perfections and sublimities.

Perusing attentively the main sources of religion “the Qur’an and
Prophetic Sunnah” will lay before us an intermediate way, neither that
seduction nor this petrifaction “tahajjur”, neither that libertinism nor
this seclusion.

Islam, according to genuine texts, presents a portrayal of the woman,
proving her to be a human being, but not a man, as the man being also a
human being but not a woman. It also divides arenas of life into two
parts: human and genus. The human arena makes no difference between the
woman and man, as it never recognises genus or sex, giving no
consideration to femininity or masculineness, as both - male and
female - are actively endeavouring in search for perfection.

But in the field of sexuality in life, the woman should be a woman,
doing only womanly acts and abiding by her special necessaries and
vestiges, whereas the man has to behave in this arena like a man,
practising only manly acts. Identifying and discerning these two arenas,
and deducing rules and laws controlling every behaviour, being in fact
not an easy job, but so complicated, squandering or excessive.

One this basis, there are some who imagine the humane arena as if
representing all life arenas of the man and woman, denying presence of
any diversity, considering the quantitative equality to be governing all
domains of life. And if it be in their hands they would even desire to
dispute the nature so as to eradicate whatever indicating a bit
divergence. The fancy they hold in mind may even include distributing
fosterage and pregnancy “between man and woman”!

Another group considers sexuality field to be all domains of human life,
though denying this in terms of words. Hence, they give limits to the
sphere of perfections, in a way that the two sexes would be affected and
affect each other so passively, to the extent that one glance and one
word produced by each sex would cause decline and decay of the other.
The manifestation of these two interpretations can be clearly found in
so many cultures, laws and norms.

No one can deny the necessity of diligent endeavour, far from time
fusses, for recognising these two God's creatures “man and woman”, so as
to be able to criticise these cultures, rules, etiquette, formalities
and views. In this course, the confirmed and mutawaatir religious texts,
i.e. the Qur’an and Prophetic Sunnah, with intuitive inferences and
experiments and man's thinking should be duly exploited and fully used.

In other words: giving heed to experienced researches and recognised
indisputable knowledge deductions, verily plays a good role in better
apprehending the religious texts. Further, I should refer to some
principles that constitute a criterion and foundation for religious
studies on women, with using the scientific achievements in this regard,
in the following way:

**1.** When making religious studies, the pivotal role of the Qur’an
should never be neglected, as it being the first and original source for
recognising the religion, with hadith and narration being studied and
examined with its reflection. Also, all Qur’anic stories, verses on
rulings “ahkaam”, knowledge branches and preaching sermons and others
should be taken into consideration and included in these studies.

**2.** For making religious studies, the sermons, sayings and practical
sirah “conduct” of the Messenger of Allah “may God's peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny” and Infallible Imams should be
collected and compiled, so as to infer and deduce rules and verdicts
from them. This while analysing the falsified narrations and verses and
disregarding the practical Sunnah of the Prophet (S) and Imams (A) being
a big blunder, and we should never neglect this principle when doing any
investigations about woman in general.

**3.** The fabrication and tahreef “alteration, perversion” of
traditions, with the influence of irreligious cultures should never be
neglected, and must be considered attentively. As through investigations
and scrutiny, it can be recognised that some beliefs are there which we
consider to be of the religion but they be not in truth, and they have,
throughout centuries, been foisted and leaked into our religion from
other alien cultures and traditions.

**4.** As regards making use of the accomplishments of human thoughts
and experimental sciences, their intuition and definite existence should
be realised. As there are so many viewpoints and theories, especially in
the field of anthropology, which have no scientific foundation or
background at all, so they can never be relied upon by investigators and
researchers.

**5.** In studying affairs and issues of women we should concentrate
particularly on external realisms, and past biographies of various
nations and peoples.

In this research, I will endeavour to commit myself sincerely to taking
these principles as a basis for analysing and studying the subjects set
for speculation. The themes of this book have been divided into six
sections, the first of which, that is the most essential one and as is
explicitly realised from its outward seeming, is dedicated for
manifesting the character of the woman. In my conception, the root of so
many of the wrong judgements lies in the unrealistic view held in regard
of the woman, so the fountainhead should be purified. On this basis,
this chapter has a leading role in relation to other chapters.

Thereafter, presence and activity of the woman in three main arenas of
life: individual, family and society, will be discussed and elaborated
in the next chapters - two up to four - under the titles: “The Human
Perfections,” “Woman and Family,” and “Woman's Participation in Social
Life.”

The subject of “Veil and Chastity” constitutes the fifth chapter of this
book. The fact that led me to broaching this topic being that it is
viewed by some people to be incongruous with the social presence of the
woman, while some others consider it as a sign of individual perfection
for the woman and consolidation of the family system. Analysing the
dimensions of veil “hijaab” and chastity and their effect on the life of
women, as well as giving replies to some questions would be the
objective of the discussion in this chapter.

The last chapter of this book will contain selection of Descriptive Book
Identification of Collections, in which general identification of a
number of collections and compilations is recorded. All my hope is that
this work can give, though so briefly, a manifest Idaho of the Islamic
perspective of the woman.

Mahdi Mahrizi


