Chapter 1: Character of Woman
=============================

The issue of the woman's character has a leading role in recognising the
woman in every creed and religion, and every thought course can, through
the portrait it displays for the woman's character, give its opinion and
lay bare its stance in respect of other affairs of the woman. In other
words, all other subjects like: woman's rights, her social
participation, moral perfections and veil and adornment are relevant and
correlated to the theme of the woman's character.

So studying and investigating the woman's affairs in perspective of
Islam, should also be conducted from this point. Further, it is explicit
that indicating the Islam's view toward the woman should be, on the one
hand, compatible to the incontrovertible religious sources, and on the
other, it should be compliant and corresponding to the conclusions,
necessaries and effects of this theory. Otherwise, this issue would be
incompetent to be a source of dependence and basis of inference.

Our view is that from an Islamic perspective, the woman is a human
being, having all development talents, with being devoid of any defect
or fault in the essence of her entity. And despite her owning all
factors of perfection and development, like men, but she has an
independent character and never be parasite on others. Because Allah has
created man and divided the human being into two classes: man and woman,
for the sake of his/her eternity. And classifying the creatures into
male and female is in fact a general rule, in this material world.

Allah has sworn by this reality in His Holy Book:

***“And Him Who hath created male and female.” (Qur’an, 3:3).***

Hence, malehood and femininity are verily not characteristics peculiar
to human beings, but rather they be a means of existence of all beings.
And as they can never be considered as a defect or evil on the part of
all things, the same is true too in regard of human genera. This
religious inference can be applied in the case of women in many aspects
and respects. devoid of any defect or fault in the essence of her
entity. And despite her owning all factors of perfection and
development, like men, but she has an independent character and never be
parasite on others. Because Allah has created man and divided the human
being into two classes: man and woman, for the sake of his/her eternity.
And classifying the creatures into male and female is in fact a general
rule, in this material world.

The Holy Qur’an
---------------

The Qur’an is verily the most important source for recognition of
religion, as it being an intact and uncorrupted book, to which other
books and sources should be measured and judged, and accepted only when
proved to be compatible and incongruous to it. For getting acquainted
with the Qur’anic view in respect of the character of the woman, I shall
put forth six questions the answers of which given in this Divine Book
would portray the real personality of the woman, as follows:

Creation of Man & Woman
-----------------------

Creation of the first man and woman has been described, in a story­like
form, in many verses in the Qur’an. First Allah has apprised the angels
that he was intending to place a viceroy and deputy in the earth:

***“And when thy Lord said unto the angles: Lo! I am about to place a
viceroy in the earth…” (Qur’an, 1:30).***

In other verses in surat al­-Hijr, He said to the angels:

***“And remember when thy lord said unto the angels: Verily I create man
of the essence of black mud fashioned into shape. So when I complete him
and breathe into him My spirit, fall ye down unto him prostrating “in
obeisance”.” (Qur’an, 16:28, 29).***

Then He taught Adam all the names concluding a covenant with him:

***“And He taught Adam the Names, all of them…” (Qur’an, 1:30).***

***“And indeed had we covenanted unto Adam before, but he forgot; but we
did not find in him any intention “to disobey us”.” (Qur’an, 20:115).***

In another place, He said:

***“Enjoined I not on you O children of Adam! that ye should worship not
Satan?” (Qur’an, 36:60).***

After that Adam and his wife dwell in the heaven:

***“And said we “O Adam! dwell thou and thy mate in the Garden…”
(Qur’an, 1:34).***

Then begins the temptation of the Satan when tempting Adam and his wife
Eve, or falsely swearing seducing them both to perpetrate that sin
through trickery, cheating them to eat from the forbidden tree, causing
them to deflect from the heavens.

In the holy Qur’an, it is said:

***“And said We “O Adam! dwell thou and thy mate in the Garden and eat
ye two therefrom freely as ye two wish but approach not ye two this tree
lest ye two will be of the transgressors! But Satan made them slip and
drove them out of what they were in; and “whereupon” said We: “Get ye
down! the one of you as an enemy unto the other…” (Qur’an, 1:35, 36).***

Threat, rebellion and disobedience could only be produced on the part of
Adam:

***“And Adam acted not “to the advises of” his Lord “deceived by Satan”
and got astray.” (Qur’an, 20:121).***

In this stage, Adam and his wife started to apologise to the Almighty
Allah for their fault, confessing their wrongdoing, seeking God's
forgiveness and mercy:

***“Said they “O Our Lord! unjust have we been unto ourselves, and if
Thou forgive us not and deal “not” with mercy unto us “then”, We will
certainly be of the losers.” (Qur’an, 7:23).***

Then Adam receives certain words and Allah relents toward him:

***“And received Adam from his Lord “certain” words “of prayer” and God
turned unto him “mercifully”, for verily He is the Oft ­turning “unto
mercy”, the Most Merciful.” (Qur’an, 1:37).***

Pondering and making a meditating pause on this story, the verses of
which have already been quoted, we will be led to the fact that no
difference or distinction is stated in the Qur’an in creation of the
woman and man. Thus it is incorrect to attribute all characteristics of
strength to the man and those of weakness and deficiency to the woman,
since it is both talking about the human being and man or son of Adam as
a symbol and specimen and representative of humankind.

Hence, in respect of vicegerency and succession, breathing of “God's”
soul, prostration “in obeisance” of angels, teaching the names, evil
whispering of Satan, rebellion and disobedience, covenant and contract,
selection and choosing, receiving of words, and relentless and material
of creation, they are both equal.

For completing discussion of this issue, two other subjects to which the
verses on creation of man referred, should be studied and perused
attentively.

Creation of Woman out of Man
----------------------------

When reading some of the Qur’anic verses, we may come to conclude that
Allah has created the woman from the man, and this is considered a kind
of deficiency on the part of the women.

These verses are the following:

***“O mankind! Be careful of your duty to your Lord Who created you from
a single self and created from it, its mate, and from them twain hath
spread abroad a multitude of men and women.” (Qur’an, 4:1).***

***“He it is Who did create you from a single soul, and therefrom did
make his mate…” (Qur’an, 7:189).***

***“He created you from one being, then from that “being” He made his
mate” (Qur’an, 39:6)***

***“And of His signs is that He created for you from yourselves, mates…”
(Qur’an, 30:21).***

***“And God hath given you wives of your own selves, and hath given you
from your wives sons and grandchildren…” (Qur’an, 16:72).***

***“He made for you from among your “own” selves pairs…” (Qur’an,
42:11).***

In the first three verses, it is stated that men have been created from
one self, and from that self their mates were created. In the next three
verses this subject was made in the plural form and addressing all men
that your wives were created from your own selves. Pondering over and
meditating in all the verses as a whole, will verily indicate that what
God intends to say is that the spouse of man being his mate and
counterpart and from his self, neither being alien to him, nor a part of
him or created from him “his body”. Since if this be true, it should be
said that every wife was created from her own husband, hence the last
three verses should be taken as evidences and proofs for manifesting and
elucidating the meaning of the first verses.

In interpreting these verses, Al-'Allamah At-Tabataba'i says:

The apparent meaning of the verse: ***“and from it, He created its
mate”*** being that God has created a spouse of the same species of the
man, and all the human beings belong to two equal and alike individuals.

The word “Min” “from” in the verse is a genetic preposition “i.e. it
shows the origin of something”. This verse, like other verses, discusses
the issue of creation of the woman and man, like the verses***: “And of
His signs is that He created for you from yourselves, mates… .”*** and
the verse: ***“And God hath given you wives of your own selves…”*** and
others.

On this basis, whatever is stated in regard of these interpretations
like that the denotation of this verse is to indicate the fact that the
woman is derived from Adam and a part of him, according to some
narrations “one of which claiming that God has created the wife of Adam
from his rib”, being all baseless claims for which no evidence is ever
established.[^1]

This statement was held by Wahbah Zuhayli, a sunni exegete, who quoted
it from Al-Fakhr Ar-Razi.[^2]

What can be concluded from all this discussion is the fact that the
Qur’an, when making simile between the woman and man, it concentrates on
the origin and root, and oneness of species of the two. Any claim other
than this topic should be neglected. Besides, some traditions are there
in support of this conclusion, to which we can refer here:

Al-Imam As-Sadiq was questioned once: Some people claim that Eve is
created from Adam's rib “what do you say”? He (A) replied: “Verily God
is absolutely pure and free from this.” Is God unable to create a spouse
for Adam, from other than his rib? So that to close the door leaving no
room or excuse to be exploited by some evil­minded to raise any doubt,
to say that Adam has got married to himself?! May God judge between us
and such people.[^3]

In another hadith it is said:

God has created Eve from the surplus of the clay of Adam, and similar to
him.[^4]

Philosophy of Creation of Woman
-------------------------------

In two Qur’anic verses a reference is made to a subject from which we
can conclude a supposition that the woman was created for the man and
she being a parasite to him.

Herewith I cite these verses, after which I will elaborate and explain
their meanings:

• ***"He it is Who created you from a single self and from it did He
make his mate that he may dwell resting unto her, when he covereth her,
she beareth a light burden and carrieth it, when it groweth more heavy
they both pray to their Lord; "If Thou givest a good child, certainly we
shall be of the grateful ones." (Qur’an, 7:189).***

• ***And of His signs is that He created for you from yourselves, mates
that ye may dwell "inclined" unto them, and caused between you love and
compassion: "Verily in this are signs for a people who reflect."
(Qur’an, 30:21).***

Out of these verses it can be understood that the philosophy of creation
of the woman being peace and repose for men. In fact, the original cause
for life being men, and the women were created for giving them rest and
repose.

In response to this we should say that this tranquillity and repose can
never be one­sided, but it is mutual between the woman and man, since
the love and compassion mentioned in the second verse, is stated as
mutual and reciprocal between the two. Further the verse considered this
affinity as one of God's signs, and in the first verse if dwelling in
rest stated one­sided, but it should be interpreted in view of the
second verse.

In exposing the second verse, al-Allamah At-Tabataba'i said:

The meaning of the verse ***"He created for you from yourselves
mates."*** is that He "God" created from your species the like of you so
as to make you benefit and get advantage. Because every woman and every
man is provided with genitals alike and similar that complement each
other, and when coming into each other they give production. That is, by
action of both of them "sexual organs" the work of production and
procreation of offspring is achieved and fulfilled.

Based on this, each one of them "man and woman" has a deficiency and in
need and want to the other spouse, and from intermingling them together
a complete full production will come out. Due to this need and lacking,
each one of them feels inclined to and moves toward the other, and when
copulation is done every one feels calm and at peace. Because every
imperfect is so eager and anxious to what complements him/her, and every
wanting is inclined to what meets his/her need and perfects him/her.
This is exactly the sexual appetite "lust" that is established and
deposited inside both the spouses.[^5]

In short, what the Qur’anic verses intend to demonstrate being not the
philosophy of creation of the woman, but they in fact tell of the kind
of spiritual and life connection between woman and man, and attachment
to each other.

**How Qur’an Introduces Talents of Men & Women**

The second question whose answer should be found in the holy Qur’an
being: How were the aptitudes and abilities of the woman and man divided
in the Qur’an? And are all of them stated to belong to the men alone? Or
no distinction is mentioned in it?

Further many verses are there in the Qur’an demonstrating the genetic
and legislative talents and powers of human beings, using everywhere
words of man and mankind with general expressions, with no exception on
behalf of women or preference of men over women.

In regard of aptitude, the Qur’an referred to the following points:

Divine Spirit
-------------

Man has "inside" a Divine Spirit, and this merit is not distinguished
alone to the men.

***"So when I complete him and breathe into him My Spirit, fall ye down
unto him prostrating "in obeisance". (Qur’an, 15:29).***

Fashioning and Modification in Creation
---------------------------------------

***"Surely We created man of the best stature." (Qur’an, 95:4).***

***"O thou man! What hath beguiled thee from thy Lord, the Most Gracious
One. "He" Who created thee, and fashioned thee and "gave thee a body"
justly proportioned." (Qur’an, 82:6, 7).***

Tools of Administration
-----------------------

***"He it is Who caused for you the hearing and the sight and hearts;
"very" little it is what ye give thanks "unto Him"." (Qur’an, 31:23).***

The Divine Creation
-------------------

***"Then set thou thy face uprightly for "the right" religion, in
natural devotion to the truth "following" the nature caused by God in
which He hath made the people..." (Qur’an, 30:30).***

Moral Conscience
----------------

***"By the soul as it is perfected. And inspired unto it "against" its
vices and "about" its piety!" (Qur’an, 91:7, 8).***

Bearing the Trust
-----------------

***"Verily we offered the trust unto the heavens and the earth and the
mountains, but they refused to bear it, and were afraid thereof..."
(Qur’an, 33:72).***

Further, He considered all natural potentials to belong altogether to
man, referring to them with plural form and with expressions like: "He
made subservient unto you, created for you, and made for you":

***"And made subservient unto you whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth." (Qur’an, 45:13).***

***"He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth..." (Qur’an,
2:29).***

***"Who made the earth a bed "resting place" for you and the sky a
structure and causeth water to descend from heaven..." (Qur’an,
2:22).***

In regard of educating the human beings, the plural pronoun with terms
of man are used:

***"God", The Beneficent, Taught He the Qur’an. He created man, He
taught him expression." (Qur’an, 55:1­4).***

***"He" Who taught "to write" with the pen. "He" taught man what he knew
not." (Qur’an, 96:4­5).***

In regard of delegating the apostles and legislating a religion, and
sending down a scripture also there is no distinguishment of
differentiation:

***"He it is Who raised among the ummies "illiterates" an Apostle from
among themselves, reciting unto them His signs, and purifying them, and
teaching them the Book "Qur’an" and wisdom..." (Qur’an, 62:2).***

What is the Aim of Creation of Woman & Man?
-------------------------------------------

Is there any difference in the objective of creation of woman and man?
Has the Qur’an stated any distinction between women and men in this
respect? The answers for these questions are definitely in negative, as
the Qur’an mentions the goal of creation to be servitude and devotion,
no difference is there in this regard between the woman and man. Also no
separation is seen between the two in regard of the end of invitation
"da'wah" of the messengers, which is life and living.

***"I created the jinn and humankind only that they might worship Me."
(Qur’an, 51:56).***

***"O ye who believe! respond ye to His Apostle "Muhammad" when He
calleth you to that which giveth you life..." (Qur’an, 8:24).***

How Do Woman & Man Enjoy the Values?
------------------------------------

A number of values are stated in the holy Qur’an that can be a moral
measurement criterion for man, and in which no distinction or preference
is seen. These values are the following:

Faith and Good Deed
-------------------

***"Whosoever did good, whether male or female, and he be a believer,
then We will certainly make him live a life good and pure..." (Qur’an,
16:97).***

Knowledge
---------

***"Allah will exalt those who believe among you, and those who have
knowledge, to high ranks." (Qur’an, 58:11).***

Piety "taqwa"
-------------

***"O ye people! Verily we have created you of a male and a female, and
made you in nations and tribes, that ye may recognise each other; Verily
the most honoured of you with God is the one of you who guardeth
"himself" the most "against evil"." (Qur’an, 49:13).***

Competing in Faith
------------------

***"And the foremost in the race, the foremost in the race. Those are
they who will be brought night." (Qur’an, 56:10, 11).***

Jihad "struggle"
----------------

***"... And Allah hath distinguished those who strive above those who
sit "holding back" by a great recompense." (Qur’an, 4:95).***

Migration
---------

***"So their Lord did respond to them "saying" "I will not suffer the
work of any of you that worketh to be lost, be he male or female, the
one of you being from the other. They, therefore, who did migrate and
were turned out of their homes and suffered in My way and who fought and
were slain, I will most certainly blot out their sins from them, and I
will most certainly admit them into gardens beneath which flow streams;
A reward from God! and God! Verily with Him "only" is the Excellent
Reward." (Qur’an, 3:195).***

In continuing discussion of values it is proper to relate a tale from
history of first stage of Islam.

Muqatil says: When Asma', the daughter of Ummays returned with her
husband Ja'far from Abyssinia, she went near the wives of the Messenger
of Allah "may God's peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny"
and said: Is there any verse revealed in the Qur’an regarding the women?
The answer came to her in negative.

Thereat she betook herself toward the Prophet (S) saying: The women are
sustaining a loss and detriment, all the time. The Prophet questioned:
Why? She replied: Since Allah has never referred to them in good terms,
as He did in regard of men.

After that the following verse was revealed:

***"Verily the Muslim men and the Muslim women, and the believing men
and the believing women, and the obedient men and the obedient women,
and the truthful men and the truthful women, and the patient men and the
patient women, and the humble men and the humble women, and the
almsgiving men and the almsgiving women, and the fasting men and the
fasting women, and the men who guard their private parts and the women
who guard, and the men who remember God much and the women who remember
God "much", Allah hath prepared for them forgiveness and a great
recompense." (Qur’an, 33:35).***

How can Felicity be Obtained by Man & Woman?
--------------------------------------------

The Qur’an has introduced only one way toward felicity of man, and
invited and asked all children of Adam, men and women, to follow and
adopt that way.

***"Enjoined I not on you O children of Adam! that ye should worship not
Satan? for he is your open enemy. And ye should worship "only" Me, "and"
this is the "only" Right way?" (Qur’an, 36:60, 61).***

Throughout the five daily "obligatory" prayers, every follower of Islam
implores God five times, day and night, to guide him toward the straight
path, which is way of guidance.

Enemy of Woman & Man on Course to Perfection
--------------------------------------------

Do the woman and man have enemies on the path to happiness? Is their
enemy a common one? Is his enmity to each of them of the same degree?
These are requests to which answers should be given within the last
question. Some of feeble and ignorant thoughts indicate that in view of
religion, the Satan contracts enmity with the man while proposing
friendship with women, and Adam was entrapped for the first time by
Satan, through his wife.

The holy Qur’an regards this idea to be incorrect. Besides, the creation
verses indicate that Satan has whispered and prompted to Adam and Eve to
err and they both went astray. But then they both confessed before their
Lord that they have wronged themselves.

In other verses the Qur’an considers the Satan as the enemy of man, not
the enemy of men.

***"... Verily Satan unto man is an open enemy!"*** ***(Qur’an,
12:5).***

The Almighty Allah has also made a covenant with all children of Adam
charging them to keep themselves far from Satan, as stated in surat
Yaseen:

***"Enjoined I not on you O children of Adam! that ye should worship not
Satan?" (Qur’an, 36:60).***

To sum up the discussion, it can be said that the holy Qur’an never
maintains any difference between personality of woman and that of the
man, but rather it looks at them both equally as a pure human entity,
preparing for both of them the ground of development and progress. The
only difference lies in the fact that the Qur’an considers the woman and
man as complementary to each other in human life.

***"... they are an apparel for you and ye are apparel for them;..."
(Qur’an, 2:187).***

In his exposition of this verse, al-Allamah At-Tabataba'i writes:

By apparel "libas" the commonly known meaning is indicated, that is
whatever man covers his body with. These two sentences are
metaphorically used, as each woman and each man can curb the other from
following evil ways and being a joint property, and every one of them is
raiment for the other, covering his/her defects and screening his/her
private parts.[^6]

The Prophetic Sunnah
--------------------

Through and between the traditions, an eloquent statement is quoted that
manifests the views of our religion leaders "Imams" the character of the
woman, to some of which I refer herewith:

Mates of Men "shaqaayiq"
------------------------

It is reported from the Messenger of Allah "peace and benediction be
upon him and his Progeny" that he said: "The women are verily the mates
"shaqaayiq" of the men."[^7]

The same hadith is quoted with other versions like: "They are verily
equals of men." and "The women are mates of men." [^8]

In regard of the meaning of the word Shaqaayiq, lexicographers write:

The woman are verily mates "shaqaayiq" of the men, meaning that they are
like and equal to them in morals and behaviour and nature, in a way that
it can be said the women have not been separated from the men. [^9] The
root of the term shaqeeq gives the meaning of full brother "from the
same father and mother".

Paradise is under the Feet of Women
-----------------------------------

In a hadith reported from the Prophet (S), he said: "Paradise is verily
under the foot of the woman."[^10] This hadith is recorded in books of
hadith with other versions, like: "Paradise is under the feet of
mothers," [^11] and: "Construction of paradise is under feet of
mothers."[^12] and others.

**Honouring Women**

In regard of honouring the women, the Prophet (S) said: "The best of you
are those who be too kind to their wives." [^13]

He also said: "None honouring the women but the magnanimous, and none
insulting them but the mean depraved one."[^14]

The noteworthy point here is that our religious leaders have, in their
last testaments and in most critical situations, recommended to respect
rights and dignity of women.

In the last year of his age and in his Farewell Pilgrimage "hijjat
al­wadaa'", which was attended by a huge multitude of people, the
Messenger of Allah (S) addressed people saying:

"O mankind, your wives have right over you and you have right over
them... so fear you the wrath of God, in respect of the women, and
recommend to them all the good."[^15]

al-Imam Ali "peace be upon him", after being stroked on the nineteenth
night of Month of Ramazan, has summoned his children giving them and all
people throughout history, precious recommendations, among which the
following maxim was also cited:

" "I recommend you to observe your duty to" Allah in regard of the women
and the captives whom your right hands possess. As the last thing
recommended by your Prophet was that he said: "I commit to your charge
the two feebles: the women and what your right hands possess."[^16]

That which can be concluded out of this statement is that the custom of
enslaving "others" is never approved by religion at all, and it has
exerted so many efforts for abolishing and eradicating it from the human
society.

Further, some laws and regulations have been revealed and enacted all
for changing and removing this abominable practice with time passage. In
regard of women the same method was followed and adopted to the effect
that our religion never intending to discriminate between males and
females, and the aim of some of the laws and rules was to creating
gradual accompaniment with the society and eradicating that habit
forever.

The Concealed Belief
--------------------

All Muslims, shi'ah and sunni, boast of their history due to having
virtuous and chaste women, enumerating for them distinguished
characteristics from which many men are deprived.

Among these great notable ladies we can refer to: Khadijah, Fatimah (A),
Umm Salamah, Zaynab, Hamidah "wife of al-Imam as-Sadiq (A), Sawsan
"mother of al-Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (A), Hakeemah "daughter of al-Imam
al-Jawad (A) and Umm Ahmad "wife of al-Imam al-Kadhim (A), and others.

Fathoming and examining the biography of women will show them to be
among perfection ­seekers, and each having a scholastic and spiritual
position in relation to the religious leaders. Rather some of them were
known to have the position of succeeding an Infallible Imam and being a
spiritual trustee, depository and executor of him.[^17]

The question arises here being: Does the woman have any difference in
essence and nature with the man, and is her human cause and background
like that of the man or that the difference being not in essence and
nature, but they differ in the dimension of human perfections affected
by outer circumstances.

If the first case be correct, the presence of women of virtue and
maturity and superior to many men, would be somehow impossible in
essence and unaccepted. Then how can be there many individuals in whose
essence a radical change happened, while no special and unusual
provisions being under consideration for them.

And when accepting the second case, that is to consider the women's
defect being a transient and ephemeral phenomenon imposed on them by the
social circumstances, again this question will still be raised: Are the
imposed provisions admitted by religion and religious leaders? Or that
they were concerned for removing that defect, intending to take away
those inconvenient conditions?

If the first supposition be admitted, then existence of virtuous and
prominent women will be incongruous and reversed to purpose and
objective of religion. As a result of all this, it is proper to say that
no difference is there whatsoever between women and men, in respect of
essence of humanity and leaven of development and maturity: And those
partial differences were only caused and created by inhuman conditions,
with which religion is not content, the evidence for which can be the
presence of outstanding women in history of Islam and Muslims, with
emphatic recommendations to maturity and perfection.

In short, we can say that according to the description and portrait of
the character of woman given by the Qur’an, "Prophetic" Sunnah and inner
belief of Muslims, there is no difference whatsoever in the nature and
composition of these two species. Besides, the ability to attain
maturity and perfection seeking is the same for both of them "men and
women", as they both can reach the sublime ideal and human positions,
and each one of them is never a parasite upon the other.

al-Allamah At-Tabataba'i has an elegant comment in this regard, in which
he says:

Evidences and experience necessitate that the man and woman, being two
individuals of one and the same essential species, which is the human
being. As all the marks and signs witnessed in category of men are
witnessed also in the category of women, without a bit difference, and
emergence of traces of any species undoubtedly obligates realisation of
its subject. No one can deny the fact that the category differs greatly
and slightly in some of the common traces, but this can never cause the
annulment of existence of species in every individual. Thus it becomes
clear that the specific extrapolations and maturities available for one
species can be found in the other species, of which the moral maturities
attained by faith, worships and seeking God's pleasure. So the best and
most comprehensive words expressing this meaning can be the following
Qur’anic verse:

***"... I will not suffer the work of any of you that worketh to be
lost, be he male or female, the one of you being from the other."
(Qur’an, 3:195).*** [^18]

For completing this view, I should give answers to a pair of important
questions, since otherwise all my discussion will lead to no conclusion
and will be incomplete.

The first question is: If we admit that female and male enjoy one and
the same essence and nature, with realising their being not one entity,
i.e. neither a woman is a man nor a man is a woman. Then where lies the
field of difference between these two beings?

The second question is: Some of religious expressions like deficiency of
woman's intellect, and lack of faith, contradict such view and weaken
it. But if we intend to defend this view "that the woman differs from
the man with 'aql and deen", we should give evidences that it can give
reply to such faults. Hence, in conclusion of this chapter, I will make
a condensed investigation about these two questions.

Field of Difference between Woman & Man
---------------------------------------

So many statements are said in regard of differences between woman and
the man, with some of them believing these differences to be little in
number and of no value and some believing many differences are there
between these two species. It is not easy to prove these claims. What
can be cited briefly and defended is the following:

**1.** Verily a difference is there between woman and man, and no one
can claim that there be full equality in all walks of life between woman
and the man.

**2.** Among the said differences, that which can be admitted and agreed
upon, there being some issues appertained to survival of species of
mankind. That is the differences that are relevant to quality of
reproduction of offspring of man. Naturally these differences have some
marginal consequences, whose limits, extent, steadiness and decline
being controvertible.

**3.** Beside all that is said, other differences could never be
established through definite religious or scientific evidences.

4. In regard of the differences circulated among people nowadays, how
can we be sure of not returning them to social conditions? And their not
being a transient phenomenon? For example, a woman in a locked society
may be confined at home never comprehending so many of social affairs,
with her social conscience being not shaped. But if this same woman be
brought up and grown in convenient and favourable conditions, no one
will dare to accuse her of deficiency of intellect.

Based on above­mentioned points, we can consider, in case of
contravention of differences between woman and man, only that extent
which is definitely established, and known to be unproduced by social
factors but having roots in the nature and composition of woman and man.
Otherwise, the identity of every woman and man, and their independent
personality and presence may make us to believe in oneness of all walks
of life for both of them.

Essence Deficiency of Women
---------------------------

The second question is thus: Some of the religious expressions raise
doubt in regard of common identity of the woman and man, like the phrase
saying that the women having defective intellect and shortage in
faith... etc.

Studying every and each one of these samples is quite out of scope of
this research and discussion, but I can give some criteria and rules
through which we can judge and issue decision in regard of them
"specimen".

**A)** Some of these traditions have not been properly interpreted, but
by mediation and taking good care a clear meaning can be given to them.
If it is stated in a hadith that the women having deficiency in reason,
this will not be an informing of a creative and inherent thing in women,
but rather taking into consideration acquired and experimental reason,
in which social, educational and political conditions have full
interference. This should never be taken to indicate inherent inability
of women, but would be like saying that the villagers have a lower
culture. And this, if supposed to be true, never means inherent
ignorance of the villagers, but rather they can, through bringing about
the necessary grounds, be equal and even higher than the townsmen, and
men of knowledge and culture.

It is natural that if a woman is detained inside the house, and refused
the qualifications of honour and knowledge, she would never be able to
have, like any other individual attending the events, full knowledge of
the incidents and proceedings and possess social understanding. No
difference here is found in this regard between woman and man as the
same thing would be true in regard of men when they are kept inside the
house. Hence the following is said in a hadith:

"Whoever forsaking merchandise, he will verily lose two­thirds of his
mind."[^19]

In this manner, the meaning of the hadith of shortage of faith "of
women" will be clear. Because what is intended of faith being not a
heartfelt and doctrinal state, but rather assignment and precept being
meant to which be referred with the term Deen in most of the narrations.
That is the assignment "takleef" of women being less than that one
imposed upon men, especially in time of menstruation, whereat God has
exempted them of some of the ritual duties and impositions.

The hadith of deficiency of faith has been stated in most of the
reliable sources and references with the term deficiency of religion,
and only in one version was referred to with the expression shortage of
faith "iman".[^20] Therefore it never implies any slander or deficiency
for women. And if what is meant by deficiency the inward defect, then
why have the fuqaha said: "It is recommendable for every woman to sit on
prayer rug at times of prayers citing some words in remembering
Allah."[^21]

Through abstruseness and pondering over contents of traditions, with
comparing and measuring them with other narrations, some of difficulties
and objections would be warded off and evaded. But of course this
mediation and abstruseness should be accompanied with equity, abstinence
from pre­arbitration and evacuating the mind of the current culture.

**B)** Some of these traditions can never be ascribed to the religious
leaders "Imams", but rather have been fabricated under the influence of
irreligious cultures and multifarious stimulants.

As an example for this, the following traditions are quoted from the
Prophet (S): "Burial of daughters "alive" is verily a dignity,"[^22] and
"The grave of the bridegroom is goodness."[^23] That is despite their
being contrary to the Qur’anic verses vilifying the pre­Islamic "jahili"
habits and customs,[^24] with the traditionists confirming their being
composed.

When the following hadith was reported by Abu Hurayrah that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: "Inauspiciousness lies in three things:
means of transport, a wife and a house." 'A'ishah said: "The Prophet
quoted this saying as a speech of the people of pre­Islamic era
"jahiliyyah", and its narrator has not quoted the first part of the
Prophet's speech."[^25]

There are so many alike samples in the texts of narrations and
traditions.

Undoubtedly, it should be noted that it is not right to consider every
hadith not agreeing with our taste and view to be fabricated and
falsified but we should have full knowledge of criteria of assessment of
chain of transmission "sanad", and apply them properly.

**C)** Some of the traditions and narrations are applicable to special
provisions, in a way that they can never be generalised. In other words,
the purport of the hadith is regarding the conditions and circumstances
of that time, not intended to expose the sought situation, like what is
reported between the lines of traditions on preventing the learning from
writings of women.[^26]

Nowadays no religious expert is found holding the belief that it is not
necessary for the woman to learn writing and reading. In the past too,
some scholars and thinkers were of this belief. Further a large number
of women related "in kinship" to religious scholars, were virtuous and
intellectuals. The example for this can be seen in the wife and daughter
of ash-Shahid al-Awwal,[^27] and Aminah Beigum daughter of al-Majlisi
the 1st,[^28] and others.

Seemingly, taking into consideration these principles and rules for
evaluating and comprehending so many of narrations concerning the woman
would be so helpful and useful.

[^1]: Al-Mizaan Fi Tafseer Al-Qur’an, vol. IV, p. 136.

[^2]: At-Tafseer Al-Muneer, vol. 1, pp. 139-140.

[^3]: Wasa'il Ash-Shi'ah, vol. XX, p. 352, Baab 28, vol. IV, p. 258.

[^4]: Bihaar Al-Anwaar, vol. XI, p. 115; vol. 42 .

[^5]: Al-Mizaan Fi Tafseer Al-Qur’an, vol. XVI, pp. 173-174

[^6]: ibid., vol. 11, p. 44.

[^7]: Musnad Ahmed, vol. VI, p. 256; Kanz Al-'Ummal, vol. XVI, p. 482.

[^8]: Mawsu'at Atraaf Al-hadith An-Nabawi, vol. III, p. 55 & 266

[^9]: Lisaan Al-Arab, vol. VIII, p. 166.

[^10]: At-Tabaqaat Al-Kubra, vol. IV, p. 274.

[^11]: Kanz Al-Ummal, vol. XVI, p. 461.

[^12]: Mawsu'at Atraaf Al-hadith An-Nabawi, vol. IV, p. 513.

[^13]: Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. II, p. 636.

[^14]: Mukhtasar Tareekh Dimashq, vol. VII, p. 50.

[^15]: Tuhaf Al-Oqool, p. 30

[^16]: ibid., p. 140.

[^17]: Zan Wa Payam-awari, pp. 145-238.

[^18]: Al-Mizaan, vol. IV, p. 89.

[^19]: Wasa'il Ash-Shi'ah, vol. XII, p. 8, hadith, no, 20.

[^20]: Masaadir Nahj Al-Balagha Wa Asaaneeduha, vol. II, p. 86.

[^21]: Tahreer Al-Wasslah, vol. I, p. 24, question 11.

[^22]: Silsilat Al-Ahaadeeth Az-Za'ifah Wal-Mawzu'ah, p. p. 220-221.

[^23]: Tahreer Al-Mar'ah Fi Asr Ar-Risaalah, vol. I, p. 13.

[^24]: As in the verses 58& 59 of surat An-Nahl: " and when is anounced
uto (any) one of them a daughter, black becometh his face and he is
filled with wrath. He hideth hismself from the people, of the evil for
the tidings given to him ( he pondereth whether) he shall keep her with
disgrace or bury her ( alive) in the dust ? Behold, (how) evil it is
what they decide,...".

[^25]: Al-Ijaabah Li Irad Ma Istadrakathu 'Ala As-Sahaabah, p. p.
114-117.

[^26]: Al-Islam Wa Mar'ah, pp. 28-29 and 51-52.

[^27]: Bihaar Al-Anwaar, vol. 103, pp. 55 & 261; Kanz Al-Ummal. vol.
XVI, p. 379.

[^28]: Mu'jam Rijaal Al-hadith, vol. XXIII, pp. 179 & 196.


