Chapter 2: The Human Perfections
================================

After discussing in the first chapter the equal identity of the woman
and man, and attaining to a clear conclusion of it, I will discuss in
this chapter the first arena of this common identity, that is the human
perfections and accomplishments. What I intend to say is that the door
of the human maturities under the protection of the Islamic Shari'ah, is
uniformly open wide before all women and men, who have ability, aptitude
and full innate readiness for traversing the various courses of these
maturities.

We have to investigate and peruse the woman's human perfection in two
grounds: Knowledge and moral conduct. And this theme can be laid for
disputation from two sides, one being theoretical confirmation, and the
second being historical and original consideration. Further, this issue
can be discussed according to religious texts and sources, that is the
holy Qur’an and Prophetic Sunnah, and also on the basis of historical
and external evidences this theory can be proved.

For completing and covering all dimensions of this matter, it is
essential and necessary to take its both sides into consideration. In
other words, we can say that the way to such development and perfection
was paved by the holy Qur’an and teachings and precepts of the Prophet
(S) and Infallible Imams, whose traces can be sought in that epoch and
many following eras. What follows is discussion and elaboration of two
arenas of perfection, i.e. moral behaviour and knowledge, with due
attention to theoretical and historical sources:

Moral Behaviour
---------------

The holy Qur’an has paved the way for moral behaviour before the woman,
in a way taking Mary and wife of Pharaoh as two examples and patterns to
be followed by all the believers:

***“Setteth forth God the similitude unto those who believe: the wife of
Pharaoh, when said she: “O my Lord! Build Thou for me a house in the
Garden and deliver me from Pharaoh and his doing, and deliver me from
the unjust people! And Mary the daughter of Imran, who guarded her
chastity; and breathed We unto it “her baby” of Our Spirit, and she
testified the truth of the words of her Lord, and His Scriptures, and
she was of the obedient ones.” (Qur’an, 66:11­12).***

These two women have attained to lofty ranks in faith and nearness to
Allah, though one having no father and the other being under protection
of an ill­natured husband claiming deity.

Further in the Qur’an the highest moral praises in recognition of Mary
are found, and she was addressed and praised with sublime terms like
“hath chosen you.” and ***“made thee pure” “(Qur’an, 3:42),*** with
being many times addressed by the Divine angels who once talked to her:
***“And when the angels said: O Mary!…” (Qur’an, 3:42, 45).***

Likewise on hearing that Salman was worried about the old worn clothes
of Fatimah (A), shedding tears for this, the Messenger of Allah (S)
declared: “Verily my daughter Fatimah is among the foremost
caravan.”[^1]

It is also reported that Al-Imam Al-Husayn (A), in the last minutes of
his life “on deathbed”, said to Zaynab (A): “O sister! never forget me
in qunut of salaat al­layl “supplication of night prayers”.[^2]

Also Hamidah, wife of al-Imam as-Sadiq (A), was of lofty moral position
that in her regard al-Imam (A) said: “Hamidah is verily purified of
pollutions.”[^3]

Moreover, in her regard Al-Imam Al-Baaqir (A) proclaimed: “She is
commended in the world and praiseworthy in the hereafter.”[^4]

Some are of the opinion that the women being more competent and able
than the men, because:

1. The space of marching of the women being shorter than that of men.

2. The women being lighter than men, since their attachments and
belongings being lesser than those of men, the fact making them able to
cover this short distance faster than men.

3. The obstacles before behaviour of men being more in number than those
before women, so they find it so difficult to deliver themselves from
them.

Some historical evidences are there to establish this view.

It is known for all that al-Imam Ali (A) got married to Fatimah (A) when
she was only nine years old and he in the age of 21, i.e. the difference
in age between them was 12 years.

On another part, in the Shi'ah and Sunnah narrations, it is reported
that the Prophet (S) said: “Had not been Ali existed, no equal mate
could be there for Fatimah.”[^5]

The evidence proving this view can be found in the Prophet's
confirmation of their equality and matchness to each other though the
difference of twelve years in age. Further, other evidences are there to
attest this opinion, but citing them is out of scope here.

In regard of women Az-Zuhri is reported to have said: No woman has ever
apostatised after having faith.”[^6]

Adh-Dhahabi is also reported to have said: It is never reported about
any woman to have falsified “Prophet's” hadith.” [^7]

In Mizan Al-I'tidal he introduced four thousand men by name, who were
suspected of fabrication in reporting the hadith, saying: I never know a
woman accused of falsification in narrating the hadith.[^8]

Some writers have interpreted Adh-Dhahabi's statement in this way:

“The reason behind this may lie in the fact that men are affected and
attracted by political tendencies, love for power, wilfulness and
supporting of views, sycophancy near kings and emirs with strong desire
to seize the people's hearths… beside other things that divert them from
straightforward path. But in regard of women these desires and
inclinations have no way or control over them.”[^9]

In this respect Al­Ostaz Jawadi Amuli says: “The holy Qur’an
endeavoured, through preaching which is strongly and directly connected
to the heart and mind, to talk to man, and also tried to talk through
wisdom which having indirect relation with heart. If channel of
intellect and thought fails to reach the passageway into heart and mind,
it will be of no use, and the women being more successful than men in
respect of heart, mind, tendency and attraction. Therefore fervent
prayer has more impact and effect on women than men or at least on their
fellow men, and preaching is more effective upon the woman than the man
or her mate man.”[^10]

Muhyi Ad-Deen Al-Arabi has not considered gnostic positions to be
special characteristics of men, but counting them to be shared by women,
when saying:

“These positions do not belong singly and specially to men, as women
also can have them, but since predominance is always for men so they are
all the time mentioned in the name of men.”[^11]

Certainly prevalence of gnostic men is never due to their being more
talented or able, but rather the social environment and inconvenience of
circumstances and atmosphere for education of women were the real reason
for this, not to refer to less attention being paid to recording of
history of women. The historians who paid much attention to registration
of biographies of men, have never cared much in regard of women.
Therefore numerous books were written on exposition of Gnostic positions
of men, like Hilyat Al-Awliya' and Tabaqaat Al-Awliya, Tabaqaat
As-Sufiyyah and others. But when it comes to women, they have inscribed
books on conditions of women singers, like the books authored by
Abul-Faraj Al-Isfahani: Al-Aghani and Al-Ima Ash-Shawa'ir and others.

In fact, there is no any defect in moral behaviour of women. When a
gnostic was asked: What is the number of abdal “substitutes”? He
replied: Forty souls…“meaning the Abdal being forty individuals. When he
was asked: Why haven't you said “forty men”? he said: First, all these
persons of distinction were not men, as among them women are found.
Second: Every individual that attained to rank of substitute is man
“human being”, and man has no specification for female or male at
all.[^12]

Imam al-Khomeini, one of eminent personalities, has played a great role
in portraying and stabilising this dimension of character of women in
the contemporary era.

In regard of status of Fatimah Az-Zahra (A) he said:

”… I suffice with quoting one narration which is reported with authentic
Sanad “chain of transmitters” in the noble book Al-Kafi. This riwaayah
reads thus: Al-Imam As-Sadiq (A) says: Fatimah (A) survived after her
father (S) for seventy-five days, living in this world overcome with
sorrow and hardships, with the Trustee Gabriel descending down upon her
offering her consolation, and foretelling her of future events. The
outward of the narration is thus: these seventy-five days were days of
frequentation, i.e. plying to and fro of Gabriel was too excessive, and
I don't believe that other than the first class of great prophets has
ever entered in this way upon a person to whom Gabriel frequented to and
fro within seventy-five days.”[^13]

He also said: “The holy Qur’an builds man, and women too build man. The
duty of women is building man. If man-building women are taken away from
the nations, these nations will verily be transformed to failure and
decadence, and they will be defeated and corrupted.”[^14]

He further said:

“The woman is manifestation of coming true of wishes of mankind. The
woman is educator and nurturer of honourable women and men. From the lap
of woman the man ascends to heaven. The lap of woman is a place for
education of great women and men.”[^15]

Nevertheless, despite all this inattention on part of history in
ignoring to record moral behaviour of exalted women, still the reality
has never remained covered or hidden.

Abu Abd Ar-Rahmaan Sullami “325­412H.” has written a book exposing in it
conditions of ascetic and Sufi women, citing names of eighty-four
professional gnostic women.[^16]

In Nafahat Al-Uns, Abu Abd Ar-Rahmaan Jami' stated names of forty
principled gnostic women.[^17]

Another book had been authored in the past years containing accounts and
biographies of devout and ascetic women, in which a reference was made
to a large number of women.[^18]

Some of the extant statements that history maintained in regard of these
Gnostic women worth mentioning:

Rabi'ah Ash-Shamiyyah, wife of Ahmad Ibn Abi Al-Hawari, when preparing
the table spread, said to her husband: “Eat it, as it could never be
cooked but only through tasbih “praising God in hymns”.” This may either
mean that she was reciting Tasbih during cooking the food, or this food
being product of Tasbih.[^19]

Rabi'ah Al-Adawiyyah says:

“Our seeking forgiveness needs another seeking of forgiveness.” [^20]

She also said:

“Conceal your good deeds as you hide your evils and indecencies.”[^21]

Further, once she addressed people saying: “O my soul “self” how much do
you sleep, and till when you sleep. You are about to go into a sleep of
which you would never get up but only with the scream of the Day of
Resurrection.”[^22]

In another place she said: “O my God, I have worshipped You neither out
of fear from Your Fire nor out of covetousness in Your paradise, but out
of love for You and intention to meet You.”[^23]

In conclusion of this discussion, it is necessary to refer to the fact
that menstruation of women being something natural and intrinsic, and a
requisite for procreation of offspring and survival of species of
mankind, and can never constitute any impediment in this trend. Though
the women are exempted, during these days “of menstruation” from certain
worships “like prayer, fasting”, but this really being only a religious
formality having nothing to do with spiritual and moral states of women,
since they can indulge themselves in God's remembrance and reciting of
Qur’an.

This fact is a facilitation on part of religion in regard of women, as
the same is true regarding traveller, who can shorten his “four rak'ah”
prayers and is ordered not to fast during travelling. A formal
facilitation can never be considered as an indication to weakness of
faith or moral states. And since in most of the cases a reference was
made to this fact, so the traditions on lack of faith can be taken to
have this meaning.

Because religion means charging with duty and a precept, and weakness of
religion in the days of menstruation indicates despising and belittling
the precepts and tasks on part of woman throughout these days.

Allah the Most High has considered menstrual discharge as an illness
“aza”,[^24] a state during which the women take pains and suffer
troubles. And since they are exempted from any imposition or tasking
with additional duty, so they are permitted or rather demanded to have
their own moral conditions, sitting on “prayer” rug and reciting hymns
for remembering God.

Thus the result we get, being that the women have, in field of moral
behaviour, an aptitude equal to that owned by men, and in perspective of
religion, they have been called to moral maturity and behaviour, to the
same extent of men. Further, so many samples of mature women have
emerged on the scene in history of Islam.

There are some who even hold that ground for moral growth and capability
of women for this motion is more and greater than men. a state during
which the women take pains and suffer troubles. And since they are
exempted from any imposition or tasking with additional duty, so they
are permitted or rather demanded to have their own moral conditions,
sitting on “prayer” rug and reciting hymns for remembering God.

Thus the result we get, being that the women have, in field of moral
behaviour, an aptitude equal to that owned by men, and in perspective of
religion, they have been called to moral maturity and behaviour, to the
same extent of men. Further, so many samples of mature women have
emerged on the scene in history of Islam. There are some who even hold
that ground for moral growth and capability of women for this motion is
more and greater than men.

Seeking Knowledge
-----------------

One of most valuable man's characteristics being one's power and
aptitude to acquire cognition and knowledge… cognition of oneself, of
the world in which one lives, and of secrets and mysteries concealed in
the existence… etc.

Man can acquire all this cognition through reasoning, detection and
witnesses, gaining perfection of existence for oneself within the range
of this cognition. In the Islamic Law this perfection has not spared
classification, rather all classes and species of mankind have been
invited to knowledge-seeking. Allah, when praising the knowledgeable and
learned and reproaching the illiterate in general, says:

***“Allah will exalt those who believe among you, and those who have
knowledge, to high ranks.” (Qur’an, 58:11).***

In another place He said:

***“Say “unto them, O Muhammad”: what! can those who know be equal to
those who know not?” (Qur’an, 39:9).***

Furthermore, the Almighty Allah regards teaching of people “rules of
religion” to be one of goals of prophets, without limiting this to a
certain class of them, as stated in the following verse:

***“Even as We have sent among you a Prophet from amongst yourselves who
recited unto you Our signs and purified you and teaches you the Book and
the Wisdom; and teaches you that which ye did not know.” (Qur’an,
2:151).***

More than this, the words and conduct of the Imams, contain so much
encouragement and persuasion toward knowledge-seeking.

If we get over the following general traditions:

“Seeking knowledge is a duty incumbent upon every Muslim.”[^25]

“May the whips be unsheathed over the heads of my Companions so that
they learn and distinguish the halaal “lawful” and the haraam
“unlawful”[^26]. we come to some other traditions inviting women to seek
knowledge, reported from these great leaders “Imams”, like:

“Seeking knowledge is a duty incumbent upon every Muslim man and Muslim
woman:[^27]

Also the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “Beat the women for learning good
and benevolence.”[^28]

The Prophet (S) further said: “What excellent women the women of the
Helpers “Ansar” are, their bashfulness could never curb them from
learning rules of religion.”[^29]

If we pass over these traditions we can see so many evidences indicating
prevalence of knowledge and sciences among the women, during the
lifetime of the Messenger of Allah.

The Women Questioning the Prophet
---------------------------------

The history of first era of Islam contains in within numerous examples
of science acquiring and knowledge­seeking on part of women.

Zaynab Attarah, whose profession was purchasing and selling women's
adornment equipment and tools, once upon a day came near the Prophet (S)
questioning him about the way of creation of the world, when the
Messenger of Allah (S) responded to her by explaining the creation from
the beginning till present time.[^30]

Also when Asma' bint Ummays returned from migration to Abyssinia, she
betook herself toward wives of the Messenger of Allah (S) asking them:
Is there any Qur’anic verse revealed in regard of women? On hearing a
negative reply, she had recourse to the Prophet saying to him: The women
are sustaining loss and detriment! The Messenger (S) said: What for? She
said: Because no one Qur’anic verse was revealed in their regard. At
that time verse 35 of surat Al­Ahzab was revealed.[^31]

The Women Questioning the Companions
------------------------------------

One example from history of first era of Islam is a sufficient evidence
for this case. Abdallah Ibn Mas'ud is reported to have said: Why don't I
curse those whom Allah has damned in the Qur’an, i.e. skin tattooer
“washimah” and women near whom people go for tattooing “mustawshimah”,
hair­dressers who join hair of some women to head of other women
“wasilah”, and those to whom people resort for this purpose
“mustawsilah”!

The woman who heard this speech, reviewed all the Qur’an but couldn't
find these words uttered by Ibn Mas'ud. The next day she went near him
saying: I have read the whole Qur’an but never found that which you
uttered in it.

Ibn Mas'ud said: Hasn't Allah said in His holy Book:

***“And whatsoever the Messenger giveth you, take it. And whatsoever he
forbiddeth, abstain “from it”.” (Qur’an, 59:7).***

And also the Messenger of Allah (S) expressed: “Allah has verily cursed
the skin tattooers women and women near whom people go for tattooing
“mustawshimah”.[^32]

The Companions Questioning the Women
------------------------------------

Too many questions were put forth by the Companions “*sahabah*” before
Fatimah, daughter of the Prophet and 'A'ishah. One day Ibn Mas'ud betook
himself to Fatimah (A) saying: Has the Prophet left anything of “his”
knowledge with you? Fatimah (A) said to her maiden: Bring me the pieces
of papers left by my father.[^33]

Likewise, the Companions used to put questions before 'A'ishah, and also
she used to criticise the Sahabah in many occasions.

In his book Al-Ijabah Li Irad Ma Istadrakathu 'A'ishah 'Ala As-Sahaabah,
Az-Zarkashi cited ninety narrations in which 'A'ishah found fault with
the reporting of the Sahabah, rectifying all their narrations.

These were only two examples of so many instances.

Women Questioning the Women
---------------------------

Women used to, during the lifetime of the Prophet, lay so many questions
before the Messenger's wives and daughter. Once upon a day a woman came
near Fatimah, Prophet's daughter, saying: I have a crippled mother, and
some of rules related to prayers “salaat” are dubious for her. She sent
me near you to seek answers and clarifications for her questions and
dubieties. Then Fatimah (A) gave her the satisfactory answers. Again she
put to her other questions and was given the replies. After repeating
this several times, she felt shy and returned.[^34]

Another woman came near her “Fatimah” and said: My husband told me to
come to you to inquire about whether I be among Shi'ah “followers” or
not? She (A) answered her saying: If you commit yourselves to our
biddings and prohibitions, you will be verily among our followers,
otherwise you won't be.[^35]

This scientific movement has created among women a change in culture of
Arab Peninsula and Islamic States, in a society in which men were
deprived of talent of knowledge and writing, causing to development of
learned women and men.

With blessing of this movement, the ground was paved for women to play
the role required in fields of time knowledge. As a consequence of this,
so many scientific works were brought out by women. Also women have
played a special role in field of reporting and narration of hadith.
This fact was unveiled by books like: Musnad Fatimah Musnad 'A'ishah,
Mawsu'at Ummahaat Al­Mu'mineen and Jami' Masaanid An-Nisa'.

Dr. Salih Yousif Ma'tuq has demonstrated the efforts and endeavours
exerted by women in relation of hadith during the eighth hijrah century,
in a separate book.[^36] As an example we can refer to the book of Dr.
Najiyah Abdallah Ibraaheem, under the title: Al-Juhood Al-'Ilmiyyah Lil
Mar'ah Khilal Al-Qarnayn Al-Khamis Was-Sadis Al-Hijriyyayn, in which she
exhibited the scientific efforts exerted by Muslim women in Baghdad
during the fifth and sixth centuries.[^37]

Likewise, Al-Ostaz Ahmad Muhammad Isa has revealed the scientific status
of Muslim women during the medieval ages of Islamic history, in one
short article.[^38] It is stated that in Iran alone about 3847 books
have been translated and compiled by women during the period from the
year 1921 till 1995.[^39] Furthermore, many great women have undertaken
task of teaching, and so many people became disciples in their school.

For instance Zaynab, the daughter of Muhammad Ibn Othmaan Ad-­Dimashqi
used to hold a class meeting, which was attended by fifty persons among
whom was Ibn Hajar.[^40]

Ibn 'Asaakir “499­571 H.” is known to have acquired hadith from more
than eighty women.[^41] Further Sakhawi, the author of the book Az-Zaw
Al­-Laami', learnt under fifty women.[^42] This practice was something
so common in the Shi'ah religious schools “Hawzaat”.

Also in the contemporary time the lady Ameena Isfahani was one of
knowledgeable women who used to have a class for teaching, from whom
scholars like Al-'Allamah Al-Amini author of Al-Ghadeer and Ayatullah
Marashi Najafi got license for narration “riwaayah”.[^43]

With all these traditional and historical evidences and indications,
there will be no room for any limitation or restriction on reservation
of knowledge on part of women. And if supposedly any interdiction was
there on hadith and Riwaayah it would be specific to exceptional cases
and can't be generalised or considered extensive in meaning, since all
Muslim Olamaa', Shi'ah and Sunnah have never applied or adopted such
traditions. This fact indicates that they either were doubting their
“ahaadeeth” veracity or had got a certain meaning from them.

Of course, no one can deny the fact that in some of the Islamic
societies there being some restrictions on knowledge-seeking by women,
but this should never be ascribed to the Islamic culture comprises the
Qur’anic verses and Prophet's traditions and conduct which I cited
before. And that one should be called a gleaned “multaqaat” culture of
Muslims, to that meaning that under the influence of foreign cultures
upon the Islamic culture, a new culture under the name of culture of
Muslims was produced. This culture is so weak and untenable that Muslims
should do their best to refine it.

In the same manner, any failure and negligence on part of women in
acquiring knowledge should never be reckoned on account of religion and
Shari'ah. The conclusion obtained is that the Islamic Shari'ah has
invited both women and men to seek knowledge, never putting any
impediment on the way toward their perfection ­seeking.

[^1]: Taraajum A'laam An-Nisa', vol. I, p. 207.

[^2]: Al-Hayaat, vol. II, p. 217.

[^3]: 'Alaam An-Nisa' Al-Mu'minaat, p. 381.

[^4]: Al-Kaafi, vol. I, p. 477, hadith 2.” Kitaab Al-Hujjaj.”.

[^5]: ibid., hadith I.

[^6]: Awaalim Al-Oloom, vol. XI, p. 278 & 280.

[^7]: Tahreer Al-Mar'ah Fi 'Asr Ar-Risaalah, vol. II, p. 423.

[^8]: ibid., vol. I, p. 118.

[^9]: 'Alaam Al-'Abidaat Az-Zahidaat, p. II.

[^10]: 'Alaam Al-'Abidaat Az-Zahidaat, p. II.

[^11]: Zan Dar Ainah Jalaal Wa Jamaal, p. 193.

[^12]: Sharh Qaysari Baar Khusus, p. 425.

[^13]: Rooh Al-Bayaan, vol. II, p 34.

[^14]: Tibyaan, vol. VIII, ” Woman's Position in Imam Khumayni's
thought, ” p. 20.

[^15]: ibid., p. 58.

[^16]: ibid., p. 57.

[^17]: Dhikr An-Niswah Al-Muta'abbidaat As-Sufiyyat, by Abu Abd
Ar-Rahmaan As-Salami.

[^18]: Nafahat al-Uns, p. 615-635.

[^19]: 'Alaam Al-A'abidaat Az-Zahidaat, Muhammad Ahmed Darniqah.

[^20]: Zan Dar Ainah jalaal Wa Jamaal, pp. 236-238.

[^21]: ibid., p. 239.

[^22]: ibid., p. 240.

[^23]: ibid., p. 241.

[^24]: ibid., p. 243.

[^25]: Surat Al-Baqarah, verse 222: “they question thee (o Muhammad)
concerning mensttuation. say: it is an illness”.

[^26]: Al-Kaafi. vol. I, p. 30. hadith I.

[^27]: Bihaar Al-Anwaar, vol. I, p. 213, hadith 12.

[^28]: ibid,. vol. I, p. 177, hadith 54.

[^29]: ibid., p. 249, hadith, 39.

[^30]: Al-Mar'ah Fi Al-Qur’an Was-Sunnah, p. 39.

[^31]: At-Tawheed, p. 276.

[^32]: Mizan Al-Hikmah, vol. IX, pp. 94-95.

[^33]: Majma' Al-Bayan, vol. II, p. 298.

[^34]: Da'irat Al-Ma'arif Al-Islamiyyah As-Shi'iyyah, vol. I, p. 10.

[^35]: Mustadrak Al-Wasa'il, p. 17. hadith 22, ( al. Al-Bayt).

[^36]: Tafseer Al-Imam Al-Askari, p. 308.

[^37]: Johood Al-Mar'ah Fi Riwayat Al-hadith, by Dr, Salih Yousif
Mu'tuq.

[^38]: Journal of Ainah Pizhohish, issue, no. 45, pp. 45-46.

[^39]: Journal of Risaalat Al-Islam, issue no I, pp. 78-83.

[^40]: Goftogo Magazine (dialogue), issue no 9, p. 134; Kitabnamah Zan,
1979- 1995, Az-Zahra university.

[^41]: Risaalat Al-Islam, issue no. I p. 81.

[^42]: Risaalat Al-Islam, issue no. I p. 82.

[^43]: Risaalat Al-Islam, issue no. I p. 83.


