Chapter 4: Women's Co­operation in Social Life
==============================================

The arena of social life being the third area of search and strival of
son of Adam for attaining to perfection, in which a great portion of
aptitudes and abilities are put in practice and flourishing, as they be
effective also in realising individual maturities and success in family
life. Further the social life is becoming nowadays much more
miscellaneous and extensive than it was in the past. The examples for
this can be seen in employment, art, sports, minute and enormous
management in the society, parties and associations, legal procedure,
and arbitration, education and training.

In other words, it can be said that the social life covers 3 fields:

1. Employment and economical activities;

2. Social activities, like education and training, physical exercise and
art;

3. Political participation.

These being the three main domains of participation of women in social
life.

Now the following question is raised: Is this area, with all its
dimensions, restricted to men, with no role left for women? Or no
confinement being there and this field endures no sexuality? Or is it
that with accepting the participation and co­operation we should ignore
any difference between women and men?

Some are of the opinion that women being created for the house and
housekeeping only. Abul­'Ala Al-­Mawdudi, an Indian Muslim scholar,
says:

“Politics, government administration, military and high services and
alike are undertaken by men restrictively. When Islam charges the women
with aiding the wounded during wars, this should never be taken to mean
that Muslims charge them during peace time with running libraries,
schools, workshops, associations and parliaments, since they were never
created for performing such jobs. Besides, charging the woman with works
for which she was not created by nature, would bring her failure and
disappointment.

Stating names of great women having outstanding background in these
fields as recorded in history books, never changes the truth, as the
criterion for judging the women being to view them the same eye as a
group and with regard to the constitution on which they were
created.[^1]

Some of Shi'i writers are reported to have said also:

Therefore the women should be either connected or pregnant, or nursing
so as to be counted among the humanity caravan that proceeding toward
the Worshipped and Beloved and Centre­point for the eagers and Ka'bah
for lovers, and searchers for reaching His Sanctuary of safety and
security, altogether with men.[^2]

If every woman tries, instead of engaging herself in various social
tasks, arts and handicrafts, give birth to a child, grow it up and
deliver it to the society with existentialist capabilities, she will
elevate herself to the highest status proportionate to the number of her
children.[^3]

Such extremist views led some other thinkers to base their viewpoints on
the Qur’an and say that: No trade or social profession is prohibited for
women except whoredom![^4]

Consulting and examining the holy Qur’an and biography of the Prophet
(S) and infallible Imams will definitely show us a rational and bright
path toward truth. Herewith I shall first demonstrate the pivots of
social activities from the Qur’an and Prophet's Sunnah and conduct
“Seerah”, and then I will give finish to manifesting the motives of
social joint co­operation of women with conditions of this presence.

Consulting and examining the holy Qur’an and biography of the Prophet
(S) and infallible Imams will definitely show us a rational and bright
path toward truth. Herewith I shall first demonstrate the pivots of
social activities from the Qur’an and Prophet's Sunnah and conduct
“Seerah”, and then I will give finish to manifesting the motives of
social joint co­operation of women with conditions of this presence.

Permission for Social Co­operation
----------------------------------

### Allegiance to Government

The holy Qur’an admits swearing allegiance to government, which being
the most salient manifestation of the political activity in every
society, to be practised by women.

***“O “Our” Prophet “Muhammad” when come unto thee believing women
pledging that they will not aught with God, and will neither steal, nor
commit adultery, nor kill their children, and they will utter not
slander, nor utter any falsehood which they had forged themselves
between their hands and their feet, and will not disobey them in what is
fair, then accept thou their pledge, and ask forgiveness for them from
God; Verily God is Oft­ Forgiving, the Most Merciful.” (Qur’an,
60:12).***

Further, the history of early Islamic era is indicative of
accomplishment of this political process on the part of women; As it is
reported that during the 2nd Aqabah Allegiance “bay'at al­aqabah
ath­thaniyah”, in which a great multitude of Medina men, after
performing rites of hajj pilgrimage, took an oath of allegiance to the
Messenger of Allah (S), two women under the names of UmmImarah and Asma'
were present too.[^5]

Also allegiance was sworn to the Prophet by other women at Mecca besides
these two[^6] “at Medina”.

In his Tabaqaat, Ibn Sa'd has dedicated several pages for explaining how
the women took an oath of allegiance to the Prophet, and showing
contents of these oaths of allegiance.[^7] And in another chapter of
this book he stated names of seventy women who took part in these
acknowledgements “bay'ahs”.[^8]

In the event that Qur’anic verse was to be used in these oaths of
allegiance “bay'ahs”, the women have taken an oath on two pledges: One
being religiosity and adoption of Islam, and the other being
acknowledging the Prophet as head of government “leader”.

Muhammad Ali Qutub has also dedicated a full book for elaboration on
subject of women's taking an oath of allegiance to the Prophet (S).[^9]

### Participation in Immigration

Immigration was one of socio-political movements that occurred twice
during the early Islamic era, in both of which Muslim women
participated. These immigrations had so many political dimensions, one
of which being banishment and rejection of the regime ruling over the
people. The second dimension being communication of the message of new
religion, and thirdly it represented a political precautious tactic for
safeguarding and eternalising the new-fashioned school “Islam”, to this
meaning that when the polytheists would annihilate the Muslims in Mecca,
other followers of the new religion would appear in another place for
protecting and defending them.

The holy Qur’an has in many verses, told about migration of Muslim
women.

**First:** It makes migration obligatory on the women and men to the
same level:

***“Verily those whom the angels take away “at death” while they are
unjust to their “own” selves “in sin”, they “the angels” shall ask “the
sinner souls”: “In what state were ye?” They shall reply: “Weakened “and
oppressed” were we in the land;” They “the angels” will say: “Was not
the land of God vast “enough” for you to migrate there in?” So these
“are those” whose refuge shall be Hell: and what a bad resort it is.
Except the “really” weakened ones from among the men and the women and
the children, who have not in their power the means “to escape from the
unbelievers” and nor they find the “right” way.” “(Qur’an, 4:97, 98).***

What is gleaned of these verses is that all those disdaining from
migration their abode will be in Hell, whether be men or women or
children. So all the Muslims, men and women, should migrate so as to
keep God's religion safe and intact.

**Second:** The Qur’an makes a special reference to migration of women
together with the Prophet toward Medina.

***“O “Our” Prophet! Verily we have made lawful unto thee thy wives whom
thou hast given their dowries, and those whom thy right hand possessed
out of those whom God returned unto thee “without war”, and the
daughters of thy paternal uncle, and the daughters of thy*** ***paternal
aunts, and daughters of thy maternal uncle and the daughters of thy
maternal aunts who fled with you…” (Qur’an, 33:50).***

One of the women participated in this migration was Asma', wife of
Az­Zubayr. She says: In this migration process I was conceived to a
child and period of pregnancy was over at that time. On reaching Medina
I gave birth to my son Abdallah at Quba.[^10]

**Third:** In another verse examining the immigrant women:

***“O ye who believe! when come unto you believing women­refugees, then
ye examine them; God knoweth best their faith; and if ye find them to be
believing women, return ye not them unto the disbelievers; neither these
women are lawful for them, nor are those men lawful for them…” (Qur’an,
60:10).***

In Hudaybiyyah peace Treaty it was determined that in case of coming of
Muslims to Medina they should be repatriated. However, Allah the Exalted
revealed this verse in which He exempted the women from that Treaty. Ibn
Abbas is reported to have said: The exam or interrogation of immigrant
women was thus, that the women should confess and admit that: “I pledge
and assure here that I have not migrated out of grudge against my
husband, or out of desire and inclination toward the new land or for
gaining worldly coveted objects or profits, but the only purpose and
goal for which I migrated being love to God and the Prophet.”[^11]

Among the women who migrated and were subjected to examination I can
refer to Damimah daughter of Bishr, Subay'ah daughter of Harith, Borough
daughter of Aqabah and Abdah daughter of Abd Al­-Aziz.

Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil
----------------------------------

The third social activity that the Qur’an attributed to women being to
enjoin good and forbid evil "al­amr bil ma'ruf wan­nahy anil­munkar".

It is known that bidding to decent deeds and forbidding from indecent
acts being one of social duties with which Islam charged every mature
man and woman. Eleven verses are revealed in the Qur’an talking about
this religious duty and rule, as a kind of social guardianship that the
believers have over each other. In the following verse this duty is
introduced as a common obligation on women and men:

***"And the believer men and the believer women they are guardians to
one another; they enjoin good and forbid evil and they establish "the
regular" prayer and pay the poor­rate and obey God and His Apostle
"Muhammad". These, God will bestow on them His mercy; verily God is
All­Mighty, All­Wise." (Qur’an, 9:71).***

This verse indicates that the Islamic society enjoys one and the same
identity, which cannot be disintegrated by masculinity and femininity.
Within this group, having one identity, every individual has
guardianship over the other. Hence, they should all undertake and commit
themselves to perform this duty and Divine charge.

Ownership
---------

The holy Qur’an confirms doing business and exerting efforts on part of
women and men for earning living, arranging and establishing their right
of ownership over what they have earned.

***"Unto men a fortune from that which they have earned, and unto women
a fortune from that which they have earned." (Qur’an, 4:32).***

In this verse, both earning the living and ownership for woman and man
have been spoken out. And it separated between women and men for the
only reason to dismiss the wrong notion and view which confines and
distinguishes ownership, earning and economical labour for men alone.

It is to be noted that no evidence is there in the verse indicating that
what is intended by earning and business being only intellectual and
moral practices. On this basis, the exegetes gave three probabilities
for this verse: wages and labour remuneration, economical earning and
activity, and inheritance.[^12] Some others gave only two
interpretations: wages and remuneration for work, and inheritance.[^13]

Performing Economic­-Social Activities
--------------------------------------

The holy Qur’an refers to daughters of Shu'ayb in state of performing
economic­social activities, reiterating their modesty during work. In
the following verses, the connection between women and men can be
clearly seen:

***"And when he arrived at the water of Madyan, he found on it a group
of men "watering their flocks" and found he besides them two women
keeping back "their flocks"; Said "Moses": "What aileth you?" Said the
two "women": "We cannot water until the shepherds take away "their sheep
from the water", and our father is very old. So he watered "their
flocks" for them, then retired he unto the shade, "and" then said he:***

***"O my Lord! Verily of what Thou hast sent down unto me of the good, I
stand in need." Then came unto him one of the two women walking
bashfully; Said she: "Verily my father calleth thee so that he may
recompense thee for what thou hath watered for us. So when came he unto
him and narrated unto him his story, said he "the old man": "Fear thou
not, thou art "now" secure from the unjust people." Said one of the two
women: "O my father! Employ him, verily the best of those who thou canst
employ is the strong "man" the trusted "one".(Qur’an, 28:23­2).***

In these verses, the shepherd Shu'ayb's daughters, relation and speaking
with men, social insight and recognising the individuals, and
bashfulness and modesty have been well manifested, and confirmed by God.

Sovereignty
-----------

The story of Queen of Saba' and her sovereignty is cited in the Qur’an
without any criticism or censure. On the other hand the Qur’anic verses
introduce her as a person of opinion and consultation and truth­seeking,
since when receiving the letter of Prophet Sulayman, she tried to find a
solution for the problem, having an inclination toward Sulayman:

***"Verily I found a woman ruling over them, and she hath been given
plenty of every thing, and she hath a throne magnificent." (Qur’an,
27:23).***

***"Said "the Queen of Shebah": "O ye chiefs! Verily, has been delivered
unto me a letter honourable!" (Qur’an, 27:29).***

***"Said she: "O ye chiefs! advise me in "this" my affair; "ye know"
that I decide not any affair but in your view." (Qur’an, 27:32).***

***"... Said "the Queen": "My Lord! verily I have been unjust to myself,
and I submit "along" with Solomon unto God, the Lord of the worlds."
(Qur’an, 27:44).***

Ibn Khaldoon considers Balqees "the Queen" to be the designer and
builder of Dam of Ma'rab, with having "ruling over" a populous country
full of different fruits with no match ever found in the world.[^14]

Some of the writers viewed this issue in this way:

I had no doubt in regard of what was quoted by Al­-Bayhaqi, had I not
seen with my own eyes women like Indirah Gandi, daughter of Nehru, who
managed and administered seven hundred million people, with a handful of
needy people starving to death on the sidewalks, reaching them, through
a green revolution, to a position of a wheat­exporting nation.[^15]

Many of clear­sighted men have taken hold of this story, regarding the
woman's occupying the highest political posts to be something
admissible.[^16]

Religious and ­Social Conduct
-----------------------------

In the event of mubahalah "cursing each other", which being a
religio­social conduct.

***"And unto him who disputeth with thee therein after the knowledge
hath come unto thee, say "O Our Apostle Muhammad!" "unto them": "come
ye, let us summon our sons, and "ye*** ***summon" your sons, and "we
summon" our women and "ye" your women, and "we summon" ourselves and
"ye" yourselves and then let us invoke and lay the curse of God on the
liars!" (Qur’an, 3:60).***

Sister for Deliverance
----------------------

The holy Qur’an reiterates the attempts of the sister of Prophet Moses
(A) for his deliverance, as in this verse:

***"When thy sister went "unto Pharaoh's wife" and said: "Shall I show
you one who will take care of him?" (Qur’an, 20:40).***

Participation in Jihad
----------------------

Participation of women in jihad "Islamic struggle" during the early
Islamic era and after it, is known for all. As the women made haste to
aid the warriors in the battlefields, preparing the food and looking
after the patients, and other things.

1. Anas "Ibn Malik" is reported to have said: During Battle of Uhud,
'A'ishah and Umm Salamah were shifting and handling the leathern bottles
of water and pouring them out into mouths of people "giving to thirsty
people".[^17]

2. UmmAtiyyah is reported to have said: "I have accompanied the
Messenger of Allah (S) in seven battles "campaigns" altogether,
remaining behind their men "in tents", cooking and preparing food for
them."[^18]

3. Hafsah, daughter of Sirin, reported from a Christian woman that she
said: My brother­in­law took part in twelve campaigns with the Prophet
(S), and my sister was accompanying him in six battles, saying: We were
taking care and looking after the patients "wounded"."[^19]

4. Rabi daughter of Miwaz is reported to have said: "We used to
participate in the campaigns with the Prophet (S), replacing and
returning the wounded and the killed to Medina."[^20]

5. Anas is reported to have said: "The Messenger of Allah (S) used to
take with him in his battles "against disbelievers" UmmSalim and some
Christian women, for looking after and curing the wounded."[^21]

During Battle of Uhud, when the Muslims left the battlefield UmmImarah
remained behind holding the weapon for protecting the Prophet.

Omar Ibn Al­-Khattaab used to say: I heard the Messenger of Allah (S)
saying during Battle of Uhud: To every side I was turning my face I
would see only UmmImarah fighting in defence of me." [^22]128

During Battle of Hunayn Umm Salim was seen holding a dagger. When the
Messenger of Allah (S) asked her for what she was holding a dagger, she
said:

I have held it for the reason that if one of the polytheists comes near
me "to attack the Muslims", I will rip open his belly. Then the
Messenger of Allah (S) broke into a laugh.[^23]

This issue was so explicit and manifest that many chapters were
dedicated for it throughout books of hadith and Sirah. In Saheeh
Al­-Bukhari & Saheeh Muslim, we can see a chapter under the heading:
"The Women's Fighting with the Men."

Employment
----------

Women's engagement in business and employment during the Prophet's
lifetime was so extensively common, and women were seen in every and all
kinds of professions and trades prevalent and current at that time.

The trade of selling women's adornment outfit was practised by Zaynab
Attarah,[^24] and Mulaykah daughter of Aqra' Thaqafiyya,[^25] and Asma'
daughter of Makhrabah.[^26] Besides, Zaynab bint Jahash occupied herself
with handicrafts.[^27]

An old woman used to occupy herself with business of selling off milk,
when Omar "Ibn Al­Khattaab" came in contact with her giving her a good
advice.[^28] Also Khawwat bint Jubayr engaged herself with sale of
cooking oil.[^29] Moreover some other women used to do pastoral
occupation and tending flocks, like Sallamah, UmmHani and others.[^30]

A woman called Zaynab was a doctor of Tribe of Bano Awd, and occupied
herself with curing the patients.[^31] Further other women, like Qaylah
mother of Bano Namar, used to exercise commerce business.[^32]

After establishing evidences from religious sources on permission of
women's social co­operation and participation, hereafter I will state
the incentives and motives behind co­operation "of women".After
establishing evidences from religious sources on permission of women's
social co­operation and participation, hereafter I will state the
incentives and motives behind co­operation "of women".

Motives of Co­operation
-----------------------

### Development of Woman's Character

The social activity paves the way for participation and presence in
various arenas, the factor causing development of dimensions of
existence and blossoming of talents and aptitudes.

"Whoever gives up merchandise, two thirds of his mind "brain" will be
lost."[^33]

From all this, it becomes clear for us that staying at home or seclusion
and separation from society and people results in nothing but abatement
and torpidity.

And if the sought slogan or best rule "religion" of the Prophet of Islam
(S) being abandoning Rahbaniyyah "monasticism, single life",[^34] but
this fact can never be distinguished to men only, and it includes all
followers of this religion, whether being women or men. Further,
Rahbaniyyah never means forsaking the society and seeking refuge in
caves or dens, but confining the women inside the house and driving them
out of arena of life and society being in fact some kind of monasticism.

Also education and learning can only be attained through presence and
activity within the society and among people. Besides, through this
social presence the ground can be prepared for doing service to other
human beings, which in itself being a step toward perfection and
maturity. More than this, through social participation man can attain to
political cognisance and full knowledge of the age, which being among
prerequisite for every and each man.

"That who has full awareness of his time, will not be attacked by
vicissitudes of time "mischiefs".[^35]

And thanks to the social activity, the duty of enjoining to good and
forbidding from evil can be put to practice, and through this
participation guiding the ignorant, which being a human duty, can be
fulfilled, beside jihad and immigration.

Therefore, one of incentives and motives for inviting to social life for
women, being to sublimate the scientific, theoretical and social
character of them, without which they can never attain to such a
position or can with exerting much toil.

### Easy living

To live a joyful and pure life, needs easiness and comfort, without
which life would be stagnant and lose its brightness and joy. Taking
easy and be lenient being one of principles of the Islamic Law. Many
evidences supporting this fact can be found in the holy Qur’an and
Prophetic Sunnah. Allah, in many verses on position of legislating some
rule or precept, point out ease and leniency, as in the following verse:

***"Allah desireth for you ease; He desireth not hardship for you."
(Qur’an, 2:18).***

The holy Prophet too has described his Shari'ah as plain and tolerant
law. It is reported from him to have said:

"The Messenger of Allah (S) was not given the option between two
alternatives, but he chose the easier one, unless he being sinful as in
that case he would be the farthest man from it."[^36]

On this basis, preventing the women from social presence and
co­operation is certainly contrary to principle of easiness. If the
women are bound to inquire about the questions and ambiguities facing
them from Mahram "consanguine" men "with whom marriage is prohibited"
and fulfil their duties through a medium, then their lives will not be
free from hardship and difficulty. During the lifetime of the Messenger
of Allah (S) the women used to inquire from the Prophet about the
questions and problems they face, the act from which the Prophet never
prohibited them. Association and supervision on part of the Prophet and
Imams with the women in presence of men, used to be an ordinary matter.
I draw the attention of readers to the following old quotations:

1. Ali Ibn Hamzah and Abu Baseer are reported to have said: We have had
an appointment with Al­Imam Al­-Baaqir "peace be upon him". So we betook
ourselves to his house. On entering it he loudly called: O Sukaynah,
bring me the lantern. When she brought the lantern, he said to her:
Bring me now the skin that is kept in so and so place. She brought it,
when he opened it and extracted from it some yellow­like writing.[^37]

2. Ash­-Shaykh At­-Tusi, in his book Tahdheeb, reports from Safwan Ibn
Mehran "who was a courier" that he said: I have offered Al­Imam
As­Saadiq for view the following: A Muslim woman, who has full knowledge
of my profession and whom I know to be a Muslim, calls on me to take her
with the caravan, but with no Mahram "man" accompanying her, what should
I do? He (S) replied: The believing man is Mahram with the believing
woman, citing then the verse: "And the believers, men and women, are
protecting friends one of another..."[^38]

These two quotations explicitly indicate that the human relations
between Muslim men & women is something natural & normal.These two
quotations explicitly indicate that the human relations between Muslim
men & women is something natural & normal.

### Manners of Social Co­operation

Women's social co­operation has, in view of Islam, certain etiquette,
the observation of which leads to permission and persuasion to social
presence. Some of these manners being common between men and women,
which both groups should observe and abide by. Some of them belong to
women distinctively.

Common Manners
--------------

### Lowering the Gaze

The holy Qur’an commands the believing men and women to lower their eyes
and be modest:

***"Say thou "O Our Apostle Muhammad!" unto the believing men that they
cast down their gaze and guard their private parts; that is pure for
them; Verily God is All­Aware of what "all" ye do. And say unto the
believing women that they lower their gaze and guard their private
parts..." (Qur’an, 24:30, 31)*** .

Lowering the gaze never means closing the eyes totally, but means
abstaining from seductive and alluring look. Restraining dazzling looks
is called in Arabic language "Ghazz". In other words, in these two
verses no prevention on sense of sighting is ordered, as God didn't say:
Do not look "la tanzura", but He gave His orders to do something
positive, i.e. lowering the eyes.

AbuSa'id Al­Khudri, reporting a hadith in this context from the Prophet
(S), said: "The Messenger of Allah (S) said: Abstain from sitting on the
"sidewalk of" roads. People said to him: We have no other alternative
but to sit and talk to each other. The Prophet said: Now if it be so,
you should fulfil the rights of roads. They questioned: What are rights
of roads? He replied: lowering the eyes, abstaining from harming the
others, responding to greeting, and enjoining to good and forbidding
from evil."[^39]

Examples of impudence can be found in some of the traditions, like the
following:

Ibn Abbas is reported to have said: The Prophet made Al­-Fadl Ibn Abbas
ride the mount behind him on Id Al­-Azha "Greater Bairam". Al­-Fadl was
of good and well­cut figure. Once upon a time, the Prophet made a halt
for giving answers to people's questions regarding religious
ambiguities. A good­-looking woman from Khatham Tribe came near the
Prophet to inquire him about some matters. When Al­-Fadl was dazzled
with her beauty and kept on gazing her with open eyes. There at the
Prophet put his hand before his "Al-­Fadl's" face and turned it to the
other side.

In this hadith a good example and true application of principle of
lowering the gaze can be clearly seen.

### Abstention from Shaking Hands with Women

Another sample of manners of partnership being abstention from shaking
hands with women. In the same way as seductive looking and dazzling
being an indecent and reprehensible act, that paving the way for inhuman
and illegal relations, shaking and extending hands to women "on part of
men" comes under the same category.

Many traditions are there concerning prohibiting and preventing this
habit, and it is reported that the Prophet has never shaken hands with
any woman during process of swearing allegiance to him.

A hadith is narrated thus:

"By God his "Prophet's" hand has never touched any woman's hand during
acknowledgement of allegiance "mubaya'ah"[^40]

### Prohibiting Crowding of Women with Men

Umm Salamah is reported to have said: The Messenger of Allah (S) used to
wait and linger in the mosque after finishing congregational prayers, so
as that the women could depart before him.[^41]

Also, the Messenger of Allah (S) has presented a proposal in regard of
manners of coming and going of women.[^42] It is reported too that when
the Prophet came out of the mosque once upon a day, he witnessed women
and men crowded and gathered in one place. Then he addressed the women
saying: You have to keep aside and move on the sidewalks.[^43]

To sum up, we are recommended and commanded to abstain from any act or
practice entailing intermingling and crowding, nearness and closeness of
bodies and interception of breaths "between men and women".

### Abstention from Privacy with women

One of the manners upon which so much emphasis is made, being
prohibition of seclusion to the woman with a foreign "unconsanguine" man
"with whom marriage is allowable", in a way that nobody else be present
and no room before others to come and go.

In many traditions this practice was prohibited with the following
expression:

Ibn Abbas reported that the Prophet (S) said: "No man should sit alone
and seclusively with any "foreign" woman but only with presence of a
consanguine man "with whom marriage is prohibited".[^44]

### Abstention from Conversation with women

Forbidden is every conversation "between men and women" that entails,
with it, sport and entertainment, or some kind of flirtation and
seduction or excitement. This subject is indicated in numerous Ahadith.

Khuwat Ibn Jubayr is reported to have said: We have landed one day, with
the Prophet, in Zahran "a place outside Mecca". When going out of my
tent I noticed some women sitting and conferring with each other. This
scene pleased me, so I returned to the tent, put on my best garment and
betook myself toward them, sitting beside them for taking part in their
conversation.

At that time the Messenger of Allah (S) came out of his tent and
summoned me. I became so upset and worried, saying to him: My camel has
fled away and I came out in its search "to find it"! The Prophet then
passed beside me and I followed him. Then he gave me his cloak and went
away. He performed his ablutions and addressed me: Tell me what did your
fugitive camel do?! The Prophet kept on reiterating this sentence every
time he coming near me.[^45]

Women's Special Etiquette
-------------------------

### Proper covering

In many Qur’anic verses the Muslim women are ordered to abstain and keep
aloof from displaying their charms and adornment, like the following:

***· "... and display not your finery like the display of the ignorance
of yore..." (Qur’an, 33:33).***

***· "... and they display not their adornment save what is apparent of
it; and to draw their veils over their bosoms..." (Qur’an, 24:31).***

***· "O "Our" Prophet "Muhammad"! say thou unto thy wives and thy
daughters and the women of the believers that they let down upon them
their cover garments..." (Qur’an, 33:59).***

Further many traditions are there emphasising on the proper covering for
women, and the Messenger of Allah (S) considers the naked women to be
among Dwellers of Hell.

Fatimah daughter of Qays says: The Messenger of Allah (S) said: I never
like to see the scarf taken away "removed" from your head, or the
clothes be drawn aside from your legs so as men can see them.[^46]

This subject will be elaborated more in chapter five, to come later on.

### Abstention from perfuming

It is impermissible for women to impregnate themselves with odour while
attending any meeting "where men are present". The Messenger of Allah
(S) has addressed the women once saying: Whenever you be present at the
mosque, never perfume yourselves with fragrance.

### Abstention from Speech­-Softening

The Almighty Allah said in His holy Qur’an:

***"... and be not soft in "your" speech lest lusteth after you he in
whose heart is a disease..." (Qur’an, 33:32).***

### Sobriety of Demeanour

In the holy Qur’an Allah the Exalted says:

***"... and let them not strike their feet "in walking" that what they
hide of their adornment gets apparent..." (Qur’an, 24:31).***

Also the daughters of "Prophet" Shu'ayb were praised in the Qur’an since
they walked with coyness:

***"Then came unto him one of the two women walking bashfully..."
(Qur’an, 28:25).***

In conclusion of this subject "of discourse" I draw the attention of
readers to the following points:

**1.** Housekeeping and nurturing and educating the children being an
essential duty to be undertaken by the women. And certainly, for
maintaining stability and safety and security of the family, men and
social foundations should endeavour and do their best to fulfil this
goal, since we won't be able to attain to a healthy society without such
efforts.

**2.** Essentiality of duty of housekeeping on part of women never means
negation of other social or even family functions for them. Because
women are in need of the society and also the society can never attain
its healthiness and progress without women. Therefore women have duties
other than education of children and keeping warm the house and family.

**3.** The claim of presence of a decisive and perpetual clash between
function of housekeeping and other tasks is invalid and incorrect.
Nevertheless, in certain special and rare cases some kind of incongruity
may be seen, but it could never be found in the past history, nor
nowadays.

In the present circumstances, where children spend their leisure times
in educational, cultural and training centres, this non­clash is
apparent more clearly. In other words, with more investigation we can
discover that most of the women with the ages up to 20 have not got
married, and so they got the chance to attend and be active in society,
without any predicament.

After marriage, if every couple have, as is common, five children when
reaching the age of forty, their last child will be at five and elder
child will have reached the age of 17 years. To this meaning that after
reaching the age of forty, if average age of women be 60, then they
would be able to within twenty years, play an effective role in society
with more freedom and devotion.

And throughout these twenty years, that having most of worries
pertaining to family, the women can also, with good planning and aid of
men, dedicate some time to such businesses.

By this calculation, which is made with great mitigation in behalf of
supporters of theory of limiting duty of women in housekeeping, no one
can claim presence of clash between duties of housekeeping & social
tasks of women, in all cases.

I finish this chapter with saying that every women should regard
education of children and housekeeping to be among her first and most
important duties and functions, but this thing has no contradiction,
whatsoever, with her presence and co­operation in society.

[^1]: Bihaar Al-Anwaar, vol. IXIX, p. 305, Ha 27.

[^2]: Al-Islam Fi Mowajahat At-Tahaddiyaat Al-Mu'asirah, p. 265.

[^3]: Anwaar Al-Malakoot, vol. 1, p. 178.

[^4]: Anwaar Al-Malakoot, vol. 1, p. 182.

[^5]: Al-Mar'ah Fi Ad-Deen Wal-Mujtama', p. 176.

[^6]: Fath Al-Baari, vol. XI, p. 220.

[^7]: At-Tabaqqqt Al-Kubra, vol. VIII, p. 10.

[^8]: ibid., pp. 14-15.

[^9]: ibid., pp. 222-273.

[^10]: Bay'at An-Nabi Li-Nisaa', by Muhammad Ali Qutub.

[^11]: Saheeh Al-Bukhari, vol. VIII, p. 29, ” Kitab Al-Manaaqib, ” “Baab
Jijrat An-Nabi Wa As-haabih lla Al-Madeenah.”

[^12]: Fath Al-Baari, vol. XI, p. 345.

[^13]: At-Tahreer Wat-Tanweer, vol. V, p. 32.

[^14]: At-Tafseer Al-Muneer, vol. V, pp. 45-46.

[^15]: Jami' Al-Moqaddimaat, vol. II, pp, 922-923

[^16]: ibid., p. 911

[^17]: Journal of Farzanah, issue no. I, p. 9; payam Zan, issue no. 3,
p. 14; Al-Mar'ah Wal-A'mal As-Si yaasiyyah Ru'yah Islamiyyah, p, 120;
journal of Al-Ba'th Al-Islami, vol. XXXIV, issue no. 3, article:
Shar'iyyat Qiyaadat Al-Mar'ah Lil-Hukm Fi Ad-Duwal Al-Islamiyyah

[^18]: Saheeh Al-Bukhaari, vol. VI, p, 418. Kitaab Al-Jihaad, Baab:
Ghazwa An-Nisa Wa Qitaalihinna Ma'a Ar-Rijaal

[^19]: Saheeh Muslim, vol. V, p. 199, Kitaab Al-Jihaad.

[^20]: Saheeh Bukhaari, vol. III, p. 122, Kitaab Al-Idayn, Baab: Idha
lam Yakun Laha Julbaab Fi Al-'Id.

[^21]: ibid., vol. VI, p. 420.

[^22]: Saheeh Muslim, vol. V, p. 196.

[^23]: At-Tabaqaat Al-Kubra, vol. VIII, p. 415.

[^24]: Saheeh Muslim, vol. V, p. 196.

[^25]: At-Tawheed, p. 276.

[^26]: Usd Al-Ghaaba, vol. V, p. 548.

[^27]: ibid., p. 452.

[^28]: ibid., p. 565; Nathr Ad-Durar, vol. I, p. 157

[^29]: Tareekh Dimashq ( Taraajum An-NIsa), p, 537.

[^30]: Usd Al-Ghaabah, vol. V, p, 477; Al-Mu'jam Al-Kabeer, vol. XXIV,
p. 427.

[^31]: Al-Muffassal Fi Taareekh Al-Arab Qabl Al-Islam, vol. IV, p. 620.

[^32]: Usd Al-Ghaabah, vol. V, p. 535; Tabaqaat Ibn Sa'd, vol. VIII, p.
311.

[^33]: Wasa'il As-Shi'ah, vol. XII, p8, Ha 10.

[^34]: Refer to Bu'd Ijtimaa'i Islam, pp. 35-52.

[^35]: Al-Hayaat, vol. II, p. 296.

[^36]: Saheeh Al-Bukhaari. Kitaab Al-Adab vol. VIII, p. 37.

[^37]: Bihaar Al-Anwaar, vol. XIVI, p. 266.

[^38]: Al-Mizaan, vol. XIX, p. 347.

[^39]: Saheeh Muslim, vol. VII, p. 3.

[^40]: Saheeh Al-Bukhaari, vol. X, p. 261

[^41]: ibid., vol. II, p. 467.

[^42]: Al-Jami' As-Sagheer, issue no 5134.

[^43]: Silsilat Al-Ahaadeeth As-Saheehah, issue no 856.

[^44]: Saheeh Al-Bukhaari, vol. XI, p. 246.

[^45]: Majma' Az-Zawaa'id, vol. IX, p. 201.

[^46]: Saheeh Muslim, vol. VIII, p. 203.


