Appendix: Hijaab
================

*Appeared in Fadak issue of Sha'ban 1420/1999*

· When one marries a woman for her beauty only, Allah makes her beauty
destruction for him.

· When one marries a woman for her wealth, Allah makes her wealth
destruction for him.

· When one marries a woman for her social status, Allah makes her status
destruction for him.

· When one marries a woman for her religion, then Allah given him all
three encompasses in her beauty, wealth and social status.

A woman who adheres to the principles of Islam is required to follow the
dress code called “hijaab”. its other definitions are veil, pardah
(cover, barrier) or just covering. it is an act of faith and establishes
a Muslim's life with honour, respect and dignity. The hijaab is regarded
as liberation for woman, in that the covering brings about as aura of
respect and woman are recognised as individuals who are admired for
their mind and personality. They are not judged by their beauty or its
lack of and they are not treated as sex objects. The hijaab acts as a
“barrier” between a woman and the opposite sex, although she retains her
femininity, she does not display or exposes her sexuality.

When a woman follows the true Islam, she is free to be who she wants to
be from within and express herself in her environment, whilst guaranteed
to be immune from being portrayed as a sex symbol and lusted after.
Islam exalts the status of a woman by commanding that she enjoys equal
rights to those of a man in everything. She stands on an equal footing
with man and both share mutual rights and obligations in all aspects of
life.

· Islam believes that a woman is to be judged by her character and
actions rather than by her looks or physical features.

The holy Qur’an teaches us that the only thing that makes one person
better than the other is his or her character. In western world, the
hijaab has come to symbolise either forced silence or unconscionable
militancy. Actually, it is neither! It is simply a woman's assertion
that judgement on her physical appearance is to play no role whatsoever
in social interaction. When she covers herself, she puts herself on a
higher level as her hijaab symbolises a religion and as a result men
will tread cautiously in their approach and look upon her with respect.
Instead of her physique and sexuality, she is being noticed for her
intellect, faith and personality.

· A Muslim woman may wear whatsoever she pleases in the presence of her
husband and family - parents, aunts & uncles, grandparents, brothers &
sisters, nephews & nieces, mother­in­law, sons & daughters - and amongst
other females. But when she goes out, or when foreign men (other than
those mentioned above) are present, she should practice her hijaab by
covering her hair and all parts of the body and not reveal her figure.

We cannot elaborate on this subject without mentioning the effects of
western trends on today's young Muslim woman. Youngsters living in the
west are alarmingly being influenced by their surroundings, peer
pressure and ironically, by some ulamas who pretend to be shi'ah but
distort its true teachings by confirming that such outfits comply with
the Islamic dress code.

· Please be advised that jeans, pants and other tight revealing outfits
are not the Islamic hijaab and neither are Nike or Tommy Hilfiger trendy
Hijabs, body­tight outfits or bright and attractive colours.

They are, in fact, a bad excuse and misrepresentation of hijaab. The
idea of an Islamic dress code is to refrain from displaying anything
that is beautifying - wearing make - up and dressing inappropriately
defies the objective of hijaab. You cannot change, modify or improve
upon the Islamic hijaab unless it is for a better and a stricter one.
Islam has clear guidelines for the minimum requirement of a woman's
hijaab:

· You may **only** show your face, hands up to the wrist, and the bottom
of your feet. If a woman's face is seductively beautiful, she cannot
show her face to strange men. This is it! You either agree and do your
best to follow or disagree and lag behind in this world and more so in
the next one - as the word “Islam” clearly states, “surrender” to your
Creator and all the rules of Islam.

The practice of an Islamic dress code is a big contrast compared to the
western fashion which evolves year to intentionally product more
seductive and revealing outfits that expose yet newer part of the body
for the public gaze! The intention of every western dress is to expose
the figure and display its owner whilst the intention of the Muslim
dress is to dignify its owner and conceal and cover her flesh, at least
from the public. A woman in Islam, is considered as valuable and
precious as a jewel and should therefore be kept like one - safe.

A Muslim woman does not feel the pressure to be beautiful or attractive.
She does not have to live up to the expectation of what is desirable and
what is not. Superficial beauty for the public is not her concern. Her
main goal is her inner beauty - she does not have to use her charms and
vital statistics to progress or gain recognition within society.

Another benefit of the hijaab is protection.

· Muslims believe that when a woman displays her beauty, she degrades
herself by becoming an object of sexual desire and consequently
vulnerable to men who would look upon her as “gratification for their
sexual desires.”

The hijaab makes her out as a lady belonging to the class of modest
chaste women and whilst she behaves accordingly, transgressors and
sensual men recognise them as such and dare not tease out of mischief.

When a man receives mixed signals from the way a woman reveals her body,
he may be misled to believe that she desires his advances. Hijaab solves
the problems of sexual harassment and uninvited sexual advances which
are greatly demeaning for woman.

According to the Qur’an, the same high standards of moral conduct are
required from men as they are required from women. Islam also commands
proper behaviour and dress code for men. They too must dress modestly
and their special commandment is to lower their years and not to
brazenly stare at women.

In Surat An-Noor of the holy Qur’an, it says:

***“Say to the believing men that they should lower their gaze and guard
their modesty; That will make for greater purity for them, and god is
well acquainted with what they do”.***

If both sexes adhere to their individual Islamic dress codes, corruption
would gradually diminish within society.


