Transactions
============

**Halal (allowed) Transactions**

961. There are many Halal (allowed) deals and businesses, some are
mentioned below:

(i) To sell and purchase intoxicating bevereges, non-hunting dogs,
pigs, and unsalughtered carcass (as a precaution). Basides, if a
permissible use of Najis-Ayn is possible, like, excrement and faeces
being converted to fertilisers, its transaction is permitted.

(ii) Sale and purchase of usurped property, when required using it,
like delivering or taking over.

(iii) Transaction with creditless money or counterfeil money, if the
other side of the transaction does not know it. If he knows, however,
the transaction will be permissible.

(iv) Sale and purchase of those things which are usually used for Halal
(allowed) acts only, like, gambling tools.

(v) A transaction which involves fraud or adulteration, like, when one
commodity is mixed with another, and it is not possible to detect the
adulteration, nor does the seller inform the buyer about it, like, to
sell ghee mixed with suet. This act is called cheating or adulteration
(Ghishsh). The holy Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.a.) said: If a person makes
a deceitful transaction with the Muslims, or puts them to a loss, or
cheats them, he is not one of my followers. And when a person chearts
his fellow Muslim (i.e.sells him an adulterated commodity), Allah
deprives him of Blessings in his livelihood, closes the means of his
earnings, and beams him to himself. Ghishsh has several kinds like
following:

1. Mixing a good commadity with another, or with a bad commidity, e.g.
mixing milk with water. 2. Giving good appearance to a commodity, like
pouring water on old vegetables to appear new. 3. Changing the outward
of the thing to another thing, like putting rolled gold, not allowing
the buyer to know. 4. Hiding the commodity's defect when the buyer
relies on the seller, in that he will not hide any defect.

962. There is no harm in selling a Tahir thing which has become Najis,
but can be made Tahir by washing it. And if it cannot be made Tahir with
water, and its use does not require it to be Tahir, like some oils, its
sale is permissible. In face, even if its use requires it to be Tahir,
if it has subs tantialHalal (allowed) benefit, its sale is permitted.

963. If a person wants to sell a Najis thing, he should inform the
buyer about it, providing by not telling him, he might do something
contrary to the rule of Shari'ah. For example, if he sells him Najis
water which the buyer may require Wudu or Ghusl, and to offer his
obligatory prayers, or he sells him something which he uses as foor or
drink-in all such cases, the seller should inform the buyer. Of course,
if the seller knows that it is no use informing the buyer who is
careless, and does not care about Taharah or Najasah, that iti not
necessary to inform.

964. There is no objection to selling or buying the oils which are
imported from non-Islimic countries, if it is not known to be Najis. And
as for the fat which is obtained from a dead animal, if there is a
probability that it belongs to an animal which has been slaughtered
according t o Islamic law, it will be deemed Tahir, and its sale and
purchase will be permissible, even if it is acquired from a non-Muslim
or is imported from non-Islamic countries. But it is Halal (allowed) to
eat it, and it is necessary for the seller to inform the buyer about the
situation, so that he dose not commit any thing contrary to his
religious responsibility.

965. The purchase and sale of hide and skin which is imported from a
non-Islamic country, or is bought from a non-Muslim, is permissible
provided that one feels that the animal may probably be slaughtered
according to Islamic lwa. And,Salat with it will be in order.

966. Transaction of intoxicating drinks is Halal (allowed) and void.

967. If a person has purchased a commodity on credit, and wishes to pay
its price later from his Halal (allowed) earning or wealth, the
transaction will be valid, but, he will have to pay the amount which he
owes fromHalal (allowed) property, in order to be absolved of his
responsibility.

968. If a thing which can be used forHalal (allowed) purposes is sold
with the intention of putting it to Halal (allowed) use, for example, if
grapes are sold so that wine may be prepared with them, the transaction
is Halal (allowed) However, if the seller dose not sell it with that
intention, but only knows that the buyer will prepare wine with the
grapes, the transaction will be in order.

969. Making a human sculpture or that of an animal, as a precaution is
Halal (allowed), but there is no harm in purchasing and selling it.
However, painting human portraits or animals is permissible.

970. It is Halal (allowed) to purchase a thing which has been acquired
by means of gambling, theft, or a void transaction Provided that it is
associated with its use, and if a person buys such a thing from a
seller, he should return it to its original owner.

971. If a seller sells a commodity which is sold by weight or
measurement, at a higher rate against the same commodity, like, if he
sells 3 Kilos of wheat for 5 Kilos of wheat, it is usury and, therefore,
Halal (allowed). In fact, if one of the two kinds of same commodity is
faultless, and the other is defective, or one is superior and the other
is inferior, or if their prices differ, and the seller asks for more
than the quantity he gives, even then it is usury and Halal (allowed).
Hence, if a person gives unpoken copper or pass and takes more of poken
copper and pass, or gives a good quality of rice, and asks for more of
inferior kind of rice instead, or gives manufactured gold and takes a
larger quantity of raw gold, it is usury and Halal (allowed).

072. If the thing, which he asks for in addition, is different from the
commodity which he sells, like, if he sells 3 Kilos of wheat against 3
Kilos of wheat and one Dirham cash, even then it is usury and Halal
(allowed). In fact, if he does not take anything in excess, but imposes
the condition that the buyer would render some service to him, it is
also usury and Halal (allowed).

973. If the person who is giving less quantity of a commodity,
supplements it with some other thing, for example, if he sells 3 Kilos
of wheat and one handkerchief for 5 Kilos of wheat, there is no harm in
it, provided that the intention is that the transacton is not on cerdit.
And if both the parties supplement the commidity with something, like 3
Kilos of wheat with a handkerchief is sold for 5 kilos of wheat and a
hand kerchief, thereis no objection to it, provided the intention is
that two kilos of wheat with the handkerchief on one side, was given for
a handkerchief on the other.

974. From the point of usury, wheat and barley are commodities of one
and the same category. Hence, if a person gives 3 Kilos of wheat and
takes in exchange thereof, 3-5 kilos of barley, it is usury and
Haram-and if, a person purchases 30 kilos of barley, on the condition
that the would give in exchange 30 Kilos of barley, on the condition
that he would give in exchange 30 Kilos of wheat at the time of its
harvest, it is Halal (allowed), because he has taken barley on the spot
and will give wheat some time later, and this amounts to taking
something in excess, and therefore Halal (allowed).

975. Father and son, husband and wife can take interest from each other
Similarly, a Muslim can take interest from a non-Muslim who is not under
protection of Islam. But a transaction involving interest with a
non-Muslim who is under protection of Islam, is Halal (allowed). But
after the transaction is completed, and deal is closed, if payment of
interest is permissible in the religion of that non-Muslim, a Muslim can
receive interest from him.

976. It is not permissible as an obligatory precaution, to shave the
beard or taking wage for doing it, except when there is helplessness, or
not doing it will result in harm or difficulty which is unbearable, even
if because of being mocked or disgraced.

977. Ghusl is Halal (allowed), and Ghusl means a vain word which is
sung in such a manner that is fit for debauchery meeting. Also it is not
permissible to recite Qur'an, supplications and the like, in this
manner, and as an obligatory precaution, words other than these, should
not be recited this way too. Listening to Ghina, and taking wages for it
is Halal (allowed) either, and the wage taken in this way will not
become one's possession. To learn and teach Ghina is not permissible.
Music, i.e. playing with instruments of music will be Halal (allowed),
when it is played in a manner which is fit for debauchery meetings, and
otherwise it will not be Halal (allowed). Taking wages for playing
unlawful musics is Halal (allowed) too, and it does not become the
player's possession. To learn and teach unlawful musics is Halal
(allowed) either.

**Conditions of a Seller and a Buyer**

978. There are six conditions for the sellers and buyers:

(i) They should be Bàligh.
(ii) They should be sane.
(iii) They should not be impudent, that is, they should not be
squandering their wealth.
(iv) They should have a serious and genuine intention to sell and
purchase a commidity. Hence, if a person says jokingly, that he has sold
his property, that transaction is void.
(v) They have not been forced to sell and buy.
(vi) They should be the rightful owners of the commidity which they
wish to sell, or give in exchange. Rules relating to these will be
explained in the following.

979. To conduct business with a child who is not Bàligh, and who makes
a deal independently, is void, except in things of small value, in which
transactions are normally conducted with the children who can discern.

980. The father or paternal grandfather of a child and the executor of
the father and executor of the paternal grandfather of a child, can sell
the property of the child, and if these persons are not present and the
circumstances demand, an Adil Mujtahid can also sell the property of an
insane person, or an orphan, or one who has disappeared.

981. If a person usurps some property, and sells it and after the sale,
the owner of the property allows the transaction, the transaction is
valid, and the thing which the usurper sold to the buyer and the profits
accrued to it, from the time of transaction, belongs to the buyer
similarly, the thing given by the buyer, and the profits accrued to it
from the time of the transaction, belong to the person whose property
was usurped.

**Conditions Regarding Commodity and what is Obtained in Exchange**

982. The commodity which is sold, and the thing which is received in
exchange, should fulfil five conditions:

(i) Its quantity should be known by means of weight or measure or
counting etc.
(ii) It should be transferable, otherwise the deal will be void.
(iii) Those details of the commodity, and the thing accepted in
exchange, which influence the minds of the people in deciding about the
transaction, must be clearly described.
(iv) The ownership should be unconditional, in a manner that, once it
is out of his ownership, on other one foresakes his rights over it.
(v) The seller should sell the commodity itself and not its profit.
Details of these will come later.

983. If a commodity is sold in a city by weight or measurement, one
should purchase that commodity in that city by weight or measure. but if
the same commidity is sold in another city at sight, one can purchase it
in that city at sight.

984. If the transaction has become void because of the absence of any
of the aforesaid conditions, except the fourth, but the buyer and the
seller agree to have the right of discretion over their exchanged
commodities, there is no objection if they do so.

985. The tranaction of a property which is Mawqufah (endowed) is void.
However, if it is so much impaired, or is on the verge of being
impaired, that it can not be possibly used for the purpose for which it
was dedicated, like, if the mat of a mosque is so torn that it is not
possible to offer prayer on it, it can be sold by the trustee or someone
in his position. And if possible, as a precaution, its sale proceeds
should be spent in the same mosque, for a purpose akin to the aim of the
person who originally endowed it.

986. There is no harm in buying and selling a property which has been
leased out to another person. However, the leaseholder will be entitled
to utilise the property during the period of lease. And if the buyer
does not know that the property has been leased out, or if he purchases
it under the impression that the period of lease is short, he can cancel
the transaction when he comes to know of the true situation.

**Cash and Credit**

987. If a commodity is sold for cash, the buyer and seller can, after
concluding the transaction, demand the commodity and money from each
other and take possession of it. The possession of immovable things,
like, house, land, etc, and the movable things, like carpets, dress etc.
means that the original owner renounces all his right over them, and
hands it over to the opposite party with full right of discretion over
it. In practice, the mode of delivery may vary according to the
situation.

988. When something is sold on credit, the period should be fixed
clearly. If a commodity is sold with a condition that the seller would
receive the price at the time of harvest, the transaction is void,
because the period of credit has not been specified clearly.

989. If a commodity is sold on credit, the seller cannot demand what he
has to receive from the buyer before the stipulated period is over.
However, if the buyer dies, and has some property of his own, the seller
can claim the amount due to him from the heirs of the buyer, before the
stipulated period is over.

990. If a person sells a commodity on credit, and stipulates a period
for receiving its price, and for example, after the passage of half of
the stipulated period, he reduces his claim and takes the balance in
cash, there is no harm in it.

**Conditions for Contract by Advance Payment**

991. Purchase by advance payment means that a buyer pays the price of a
commodity, and takes its possession later’Hence, the transaction will be
in order, if, tor example, the buyer says: I am paying this amount so
that I may take possession of such and such commodity after six months’,
and the seller says’, I agree’ ,or the seller acepts the mon ey and
says:’ I have sold such and such thing and will deliver it after six
months.

992. There are seven conditions of advance payment contract:

(i) The characteristic, due to which the price of a commodity may vary,
should be specified. However, it is not necessary to be very precise,
and it will be sufficient if it can be said that its particulars are
known.

(ii) Before the buyer and the seller separate from each other, the
buyer should hand over full amount to the seller, or if the seller is
indebted by way of cash to the buyer for an equivalent amount, the buyer
can adjust it against the price of the commodity, if the seller agrees
to it. And if the buyer pays certain percentage of the price of that
commodity to the seller, the transaction will no doubt be valid equal to
that percentage, but the seller can rescind the transaction.

(iii) The time-limit should be stipulated exactly. If the seller says
that he would deliver the commodity when the crop is harvested, the
transaction is void, because, in this case, the period has not been
specified exactiy.

(iv) A time should be fixed for the delivery of the commodity when the
seller is able to deliver it, regardless of whether the commodity is
scarce or not.

(v) The place of delivery should, as a precaution, be specified.
However, if that place becomes known from their coversation, it is not
necessary to mention the name.

(vi) The weight or measure of the commodity should be specified. And
there is no harm in selling through advance payment contract, a
commodity which is usually bought and sold by sight. However, for such a
deal, one must be careful that the difference in the quality of
individual items of the commodity must be negligibly small, like in the
cases of walnuts or eggs.

(vii) If the commodity sold belongs to the category which is sold by
way of weight and measure, then it must not be exchanged for same
commodity. In fact, as an obligatory precaution, it must not be
exchanged for any other commodity which is sold by weight and measure.
And if the commodity sold is the one which is sold by counting, then as
a precaution, it is not permissible to exchange it for the same
commodity in increased number.

993. If a person purchases a commodity by way of advance payment, he is
not entitled, till the expiry of the stipulated period of delivery, to
sell it to anyone except the seller, but there is no harm in selling it
to any person after the expirty of the stipulated period, even if he may
not have taken possession of it yet. However, it is not permissible to
sell cereals like wheat and barley, and other commodities which are sold
by weighing or measuring other than fruits, unless they are in
possession, except that the buyer wishes to sell them at cost or lower
price.

994. If the commodity which the seller delivers is of inferior quality
to that which was agreed upon, the buyer can reject it.

995. If the seller delivers a commodity different from the one he had
sold to the buyer, and the buyer agrees to accept it, there will be no
objection to it.

996. If a commodity which was sold by advance payment becomes scarce at
the time when it should be delivered, and the seller cannot supply it,
the buyer may wait till the seller procures it, or even cancel the
transaction, and take the refund, but as a precaution, he cannot sell it
back to the seller at a profit.

997. If a person sells a commodity promising to deliver it after some
time, and also agrees to take deferred payment for it, the transaction
is void.

**Circumstance in Which One Has a Right to Cancel a Transaction**

998. The right to cancel a transaction is called Khiyar (option to
cancel a transaction). The seller and the buyer can cancel a transaction
in the following ten cases:

(i) If the parties to the transaction have not parted from each other,
though they may have left the place of agreement. This is called
Khiyar-ul-Majlis.
(ii) If the buyer or the seller has been cheated in a sale transaction,
or in any other sort of deal either of the parties has been deceived,
they have a right to call off the deal. This is called
Khiyar-ul-Ghabn.
(iii) If while entering into a transaction, it is agreed that up to a
stipulated time, one or both the parties will be entitled to cancel the
transaction. This is called Khiyaru-sh-Shart.
(iv) If one of the parties presents his commodity as better than it
actually is, and thereby attracts the buyer, or makes him more
enthusiastic about it. This is called Khiyar-ut-Tadlis.
(v) If one of the parties to the transaction stipulates that the other
would perform a certain jod, and that condition is not fulfilled. Or if
it is stipulated that the commodity will be of particular quality, and
the commodity supplied may be lacking in that quality. In these cases,
the party which laid the condition can cancel the transaction. This is
called Khiyaru Takhalluf-ish-Shart.
(vi) If the commodity supplied is defective. This is called
Khiyar-ul-Ayb.
(vii) If it transpires that a quality of the commodity under
transaction is the property of a third person. In that case, if the
owner of that part is not willing to sell it, the buyer can cancel the
transaction, or can claim back from the seller the replacement of that
part, if he has already paid for it. This is called
Khiyar-ush-Shirkah.
(viii) If the owner describes certain qualities of his commodity which
the buyer has not seen, and then the buyer realises that the commodity
is not as it was described, the buyer can rescind the deal. Simlarly, if
the buyer may have seen the commodity something back, and purchases it,
thinking that the qualities it had then will be still existing, and if
he finds that those qualities have disappeared, he has a right to cancel
the deal. This is called Khiyar-ur-Ru'yan.
(ix) If the buyer does not pay for the commodity he has bought for
three days, and the seller has not yet handed over to him the commodity,
the seller can cancel the transaction. But this is in the circmstance
when the seller had agreed to allow him time for deferred payment,
without fixing the period. And if the seller had not at all agreed on
deferred payment, he can cancel the transaction at once, without any
delay. And if he had allowed him more than three days credit, then the
seller cannot rescind, the deal before the termination of three days. if
the commodity is perishable like fruits, which would perish or decay in
less than three days, the respite is less. This is called
Khiyar-ut-Ta'khir.
(x) A person who buys an animal, can cancel the transaction within
three days. And if a person sold his commodity in exchange for an
animal, he can also cancel the transaction withing three days. This is
called Khiyar-ul-ayawan.

999. If a buyer not know the price of the commodity, or was unconcerned
about it at the time of purchase, and buys the thing for higher than
usual price, he can cancel the transaction if the difference of price is
substantial, and if the difference is established at the time of
apigation. Otherwise, the buyer cannot cancel the deal as a precaution.
Similarly, if the seller does not know the price of the commodity, or
was heedless about it at the time of selling, and sells the thing at a
cheaper price, he can cancel the deal if the differen is substantial and
if other conditions mentioned above obtain.

1000. In a transaction of conditional sale, for example, a house worth
$2000 is sold for $1000, and it is agreed that if the seller returns the
money within a stip ulated period, he can cancel the transaction, the
transaction, the is in order, provided that the buyer and the seller had
genuine intention of purchase and sale.
1001. In a transaction of conditional sale, if the seller is sure that
even if he did not return the money within the stipulated time, the
buyer will return the property to him, the transaction is in order.
However, if he does not return the money within the stipulated time, he
is not entitled to dement the return of the property from the buyer. And
if the buyer dies, he (the seller) cannot dement the return of the
property from his heirs.

1002. If a person mixes in demand the ferior tea with superior tea, and
sells it as a superior tea .buyer can cancel the transaction.

1003. If a buyer finds out that the thing purchased by him is
defective, like, if he purchases an animal and finds that (after
purchasing it) it is blind of an eye, and this defect existed before the
transaction was made, but he was not aware of it, he can cancel the
transaction and return the animal to the seller.

And if it is not possible to return it, for example, if some change has
taken place in it, or it has been used in such a manner that it cannot
be returned, the difference between the value of the sound property and
the defective property should be assessed, and the buyer should get
refund in that prortion of the amount paid by him to the seller. For
example, he has purchased something for $4 and finds out that it is
defective. Now the price of the thing in perfect faultless state is $8
and that of deficient is $6, the difference between these two prices
will be assessed at 25%. The buyer will be paid 25% of what he actually
paid, and that will be one dollar.

1004. In the following two cases the buyer cannot cancel the
transaction because of defect in the property purchases by him, nor can
he claim the difference between the prices:

(i) If at the time of purchasing the property, he is aware of the
defect in it.
(ii) If at the time of concluding the contract, the seller says, I sell
this property with whatever defect it may have. But, if he specifies a
defect and says, I am selling this property with this defect, and it
transpires later that it has some other defect as well, which he did not
mention, the buyer can return the property due to that defect, and if he
cannot return it, he can take the difference between the prices.

