Laws of Partnership
===================

1005. If two persons make an agreement that they would trade with the
goods jointly owned by them, and would divide the profit between
themselves, the partnership will be valid.

1006. If some person enter into a partnership to share the wages from
their labour, like, if a few barbers or labourers agree mutually that
they would divide between themselves whatever wages they earn, that
partnership is not in order. But if they enter into a mutual compromise
that, say, half of what one earns will be given to the other, for a
fixed period, in exchange of half of what the other earns, this
transaction will be valid, and thus each will be a partner in the wages
of the other.

1007. If two person enter into a partnership, on the terms that each of
them would purchase a commodity on his own responsibility, and each
would be responsible for the payment of its price, but would share the
profit which they earn of them makes the other will be a partner in it,
which means that he and his partner are responsible for the debt, then
they will be considered partners in that commodity.

1008. The persons who become partners under the rules of partnership,
must be adult and sane, and should have intention and free volition for
becoming partners. They should also be able to exercise discretion over
their properties. Hence, if a feeble-minded person who spends his wealth
impudently, enters into partnership, it is not order, because such a
person has no right of disposal over his property.

1009. If a condition is laid down in an agreement of partnership, that
the partner who manages, or does more work than the other partner, or
does more important work than the other, will get larger share of the
profit, it is necessary that he should be given his share as agreed
upon.

1010. Partnership has two kinds: 1. Partnership with permission, which
occurs when the capital is jointly shared by the partners before the
deal of partnership is made. 2. Partnership with exchange which
establishes when either of the parties presents his property for
partnership, and then each of them exchanges half of his property with
half of the other party's property. If it is not specified as to which
of the partners will buy and sell with the capital, in the partnership
of permission neither of them can conclude any transcations with that
capital withuot the permission of the other. But in the partnership of
exchange each of them can make transaction in such a manner that the
partnership is not harmed.

1011. The partner who has been given the right of discretion over the
capital, should act according to the agreement of partnership. For
example, if it or will purchase the property form a particular place, he
should act according to the agreement. However, if no such agreement is
made with him, he should conclude transactions in the usual manner, and
carry on in such a way that no loss is suffered in the partnership.

1012. If a partner who transacts business with the capital of the
partnership, sells and purchases things contratly to the agreement made
with him, or in the case of absence of any agreement concludes
transactions in a manner which is not nor mal, the transaction made by
him in both the cases will be correct and valid; but if such a
transaction results in a loss, or a part of wealth is squandered, then
the partner who has acted against the agreement or the usual norm, will
be responsible for the loss.

1013. If in a permission partnership one of the partners dies, or
becomes insane, or unconscious, other partners cannot continue to
exercise right of discretion over investment held in the partnership.
And the same rule applies when one of them becomes feeble-minded, that
is, spends his property without any consideration of Sharian, as well as
custon.

**Orders Regarding Compromise (Sulh)**

1014. Compromise means that a person agrees to give to another person
his own property or a part of the profit gained from it, or waives or
forgoes a debt, or some right, and that other person also gives him in
return, some property or profit from it, or waives his debt or right in
consideration of it; and even if a person gives or another person his
property to profit from it, or waives his debt or right without claiming
any consideration, the compromise will be in order.

1015. It is necessary that the person who gives his property to another
person by way of compromise, should be adult and sane, and should have
the intention of making compromise, and none should have compelled him
to make the compromise, and he should not also be feeble-minded from
whom his own wealth is made inaccessible, or a bankrupt who has no right
to dispose of his property.

1016. If a person wants to make a compromise with another person in
respect of the debt which he owes, or in respect of his right, the
compromise will be valid only if the opposite person agrees to it. But,
if he wants to faorgo the debt or right owed to him, the acceptance by
the opposite person is not necessary.

1017. If a debtor knows the amount he owes, but the creditor does not
know and makes compromise with the debtor for an amount less than what
is owed to him, like, if the creditor has to receive $50 but he
unknowingly makes a compromise for $10, the balance of $40 is notHalal
(allowed) for the debtor, except that he himself tells the creditor what
he actually owes him, and seeks his agreement. Alternatively, the debtor
should be sure that even if the creditors had known the exact amount of
the debt, he would have still settled for that lesser amount.

1018. As long as the buyer and the seller do not leave the place where
a transaction was concluded, they can cancel the transaction. Also, if a
buyer purchases an animal, he has the right to cancel the transaction
within three days. And similarly, if the buyer does not pay within three
days, for the commodity purchased by him, and dose not take delivery of
the commodity, the seller can cancel the transaction, as stated in rule
no. However, one who makes a compromise in respect of some property,
does not possess the right to cancel the compromise in these three
cases. However, if the other makes unusual delay in delivering the
property over which the compromise was reached, or if it has been
stipulated that the property will be delivered immediately, and the
opposite party does not act according to this condition, the compromise
can be cancelled. And similarly, compromise can also be cancelled in
other cases which have been mentioned in connection with the rules
relating to purchase and sale, except in the case when one of the two
parties in compromise has been defrauded, in which the compromise can
not be cancelled if the compromise is for ending the quarrel; and even
in other conditions, the defrauded person cannot, as an obligatory
precaution cancell the compromise.

1009. A compromise can be cancelled if the thing received by means of
compromise is defective. However, it is a matter of Ishkal, if the
person concerned desires to take the difference of the price between the
defective thing and the one without defect.

1020. If a person makes a compromise with another person with his
property and imposes the condition that after his death the other person
will, for example, make that property Mawqufah, and that person also
accepts this condition, he should carry it out.
**Rules Regarding Lease/Rent**

1021. The person who gives something on lease, as well as the person
who takes it on lease, should be adult and sane, and should be acting on
their free will. It is also necessary that they should have the right of
discretion over the property. Hence, a feeble-minded person who does not
have the right of disposal or discretion over his property, his leasing
out anything or taking anything on lease is not valid. The same applies
to a bankrupt person, in the wealth over which he has no right of
discretion. Of course, such a person can give himself for hire.

1022. If a person takes a house, shop or room on lease, and the owner
of the property imposed the condition that only he (the lessee) can
utilise it the lessee cannot sublet it to any other person for his use,
except that the new lease is such that its advantage devolves on the
lessee himself, like, if a woman takes a house or a room on lease, and
later marries, and gives the room or house on lease For her own
residence to her husband. And if the owner of the property does not
impose any such condition, the lessee can lease it out to another
person, but, as a precaution, he should seek the permission of the owner
before giving it on lease. And if he wishes to lease it out for a higher
amount in cash or kind, he can do so, if he has carried out some work on
it, like, white washing or renovation, or if he has suffered some
expenses in looking after the property.

1023. If a person who is hired on wages, lays down a condition that he
will work for the hirer only, he (the hirer) cannot lease out his
service to another person, except in the manner mentioned in the
foregoing rule. And if the hired person does not lay down any such
condition, the hirer can lease out his services to another, but he
cannot charge more than the agreed wage for the hired person. Similarly,
if he himself accepts employment and then hires someone to do the task,
he cannot pay him less than what he will receive himself, unless he
joins that hired person in completing some of his work.

1024. If a person takes or hires something other than a house, a shop,
a room, a ship, or a hired person, say, he hires a land on lease, and
its owner does not lay down the condition that only he himself can
utilise it, and the lessee leases it out to another person on a higher
rent, it will be a matter of Ishkal.

1025. If a person takes for example, a house or a shop on lease for one
year, on a rent of one hundred Toomans, and uses half portion of it
himself, he can lease out the remaining half for one hundred Toomans.
However, if he wishes to lease out the half portion on a rent higher
than that on which he has taken the house, or shop on lease, like, if he
wishes to lease it out for hundred and twenty Toomans, he can do it only
if he has carried out repairs etc. in it.

**Conditions Regarding the Property Given on lease**

1026. The property which is given on lease, should fulfil certain
conditions:

(i) It should be specific. Hence, if a person says to another, I have
given you one of my houses on lease’, it is not in order.
(ii) The person talking the property on lease should see it, or the
lessor should give its particulars in a manner which gives full
information necessary about it.
(iii) It should be possible to deliver it. Hence, leasing out a horse
which has run away, and the hirer can not possess it, will be void.
However, if the hirer can manage to get it, the lease will be valid.
(iv) Utilisation of the property should not be by way of its
destruction or consumption. Hence, it is not correct to give pead,
fruits and other edibles on lease for the purpose of eating.
(v) It should be possible to utilise the property for the purpose for
which it is given on lease. Hence, it is not correct to give a piece of
land on lease for farming, when it does not get sufficient rain water,
and is also not irrigated by cancel water.
(vi) The thing which a person gives on lease should be his own
property, and if he gives the property of another person on lease, it
will be correct only it its owner agrees to it.

**Conditions for the Utilisation of the Property Given on Lease**

1027. The utilisation of the property given on lease causes four
conditions:

(i) That it should beHalal (allowed). Than if a property is for Halal
(allowed) uses only, or it is stipulated that it should be used for
Halal (allowed) purposes, or before concluding the contract the parties
agree to use it for Halal (allowed) purposes, and the contract is based
on that, the contract will be void. Hence, leasing out a shop for the
sale or storage of Alcoholic drinks, or providing transportation by
leasing for it, is void.

(ii) That doing the act or giving that service free of charge should
not be obligatory in the eyes of Shariah. Therefore, as a precaution it
is not permissible to receive wages for teaching the rules ofHalal
(allowed) and Halal (allowed), or for the last ritual services to the
dead, like washing it, shrouding atc.. And as a precaution paying money
in lieu of the services done should not be deemed futile in public.

(iii) If the thing which is being leased out can be put to several
uses, then the use permissible to the lessee should be specified. For
example, if an animal, which can be used for riding or for carrying a
load is given on hire, it should be specified at the time of concluding
the lease contract, whehther the lessee may use it for riding or for
carrying a load, or may use it for all other purposes.

(iv) The nature and extent of utilisation should be specified. In the
case of hiring a house or a shop, it can be done by fixing the period,
and in the case of labour, like that of a tailor, it can specified that
he will sew and stitch a particular dress in a particular fashion.

1028. If the period of lease is not specified, and the lessor says to
the lessee, At any time you stay in the house you will have to pay rent
at the rate of $10 per month, the lease contract is not in order.

1029. If the owner of a house says to the lessee, \`I have leased out
this house to you for f10 per month\`, or says, ~I hereby lease out this
house to you for one month on a rent of $10, and as long as you stay in
it thereafter the rent will be $10 per month ~, if the time of the
commencement of the period of lease was specified or it was known, the
lease for the first month will be proper.

**Miscellaneous Rules Relating to Lease/Rent**

1030. If a person has leased out something, he cannot claim its rent
until he has delivered it. And if a person is hired to perform an act,
he cannot claim wages until he has performed that act, except in the
cases where advance payment of wages is an accepted norm, like
deputyship for A\*ajj.

1031. If a lessor delivers the leased property, the lessee should pay
the rent, even if he may not take the delivery, or may take the delivery
but may not utilise it till the end of the period of lease.

1032. If a person is hired to perform a task on a particular day
against wages, and gets ready on that day to perform the task, the
person who hired him should pay him the wages, even if he may not assign
that task to him. For example, if a tailor is hired to sew a dress on a
particular day, and he gets ready to do the work, the hirer should pay
him the wages even if he may not provide him with the cloth to sew,
irrespective of whether the tailor remains without work on that day or
alternatively does his own or somebody else's work.

1033. If it transpires after the expiry of the period of lease, that
the lease contract was void, the lessee should give the usual rent of
that thing to the owner of the property. For example, if a person takes
a house on lease for one year on a rent of $100, and learns later that
the lease contract was void, and if the normal current rent of the house
is $50,he should pay $50. And if its normal current rent is $200, and
the person who leased it out was its owner, or his agent, and was aware
of the current rate of rental, it is not necessary for the lessee to
give him more than $100. But if a person other than these gave it on
lease, the lessee should pay $200. And the same order applies, if it is
known during the period of lease, that the lease contract is void in
relation to the outstanding rent for the past period.

1034. If a thing taken by a person on lease is lost, and if he has not
been negligent in looking after it nor extravagant in its use, he is not
responsible for the loss. Also, if, for example, a coth given to a
tailor is damaged or destroyed, when the tailor has not been
extravegant, and has also not shown negligence in taking care of it, he
need make any replacement.

1035. If an artisan or a tailor loses the thing taken by him, he is
responsible for it.

1036 If a butcher cuts off the head of an animal, and makes it Halal
(allowed), he must pay its price to its owner, regardless of whether he
charged for slaughtering the animal or did it gratis.

1037. If a person circumcisesa child, and as a consequence of it the
child dies, or is injured, the person who circumcises is responsible if
he has been careless or made a mistake, like having cut the flesh more
than usual. However, if he was not careless, or did not make any
mistake, and the child dies due to circumcision, or sustains an injury,
he will not be responsible, provided that, he had not been consulted
earlier about the possible injury, nor was he aware that the child would
be injured.

1038. If a doctor gives medicines to a patient with his own hands, or
prescribes a medicine for him, and if the patient sustains harm or dies
because of taking that medicine, the doctor is responsible, even if he
had not been careless in treating the

1039. If a doctor tells a patient, ~If you sustain harm I am not
responsible’ ~, and then exercises due precaution and care in the
treatment, but the patient sustains harm or dies, the doctor is not
responsible.

1040. If the lessor or the lessee realises that he has been cheated, if
he did not notice at the time of making the lease contract that he was
being cheated, he can cancel the lease contract as explained in the rule
no. However, if a condition is laid down in the contract of lease, that
even if the parties are cheated, they will not be entitled to cancel the
contract, they cannot cancel it.

1041. If a person takes something on lease, and during the period of
lease it becomes so impaired that it is not fit for the required use,
the remaining lease contract will be void, and the lessee can cancel the
lease for the past period also. And for that period, he may pay usual
rent.

1042. If an employer appoints a contractor to recruit labourers for
him, and if the contractor pays the labourers less than what he receives
for them from the employer, the excess he keeps is Halal (allowed) for
him and he should return it to the employer. And if the contraetor is
givena full contract aby complate a builiding, and is authorised to
either construct it himself or give a sub-contract to another party, if
he joins with the other party in doing some work, and then entrusting
him to do the remaining work against lower payment than what he has
collected from the employer, the surplus with him will beHalal (allowed)
for him.

**Rules Regarding Ju\`alah (Payment of Reward)**

1043. Ju\`alah means that a person promises that if a particular work
is completed for him, he will give a specified amount for it. For
example, he declares that if anyone recovers his lost property, he will
give him $10. One who makes such a declaration is called Ja\`il, and the
person who carries out that work is called ~Amil~. one of the
differences between Ju\`alah and hire is that, in the case of hire, the
hired person is bound to do the job after the agreement, and the hirer
becomes indebted to the hired person for his wages, whereas in the case
of Ju\`alah, the person who agrees to do the job is at liberty to
abandon it if he so wishes; and before he compltes the job assigned, the
person who declared the reward or payment does not become indebted to
him.

1044. A person who declares the payment or reward should be adult and
sane, and should have made it with his free will and intention, and
should have the right of disposal and discretion over his property.
Therefore, the declaration by a feeble-minded person who squanders his
property indiscreetly is not in order. Similarly, a bankrupt cannot
declare any reward or payment from that part of wealth over which he has
not right of discretion.

1045. The task for which the declaration was made by the employer
should not be Halal (allowed), futile, or one of those obligatory acts
which should necessarily be performed free according to Shariah. Hence,
if a person declares that he will give $10 to a person who drinks
alcohol, or traverses a dark passage at night without any sensible
purpose, or offers his obligatory prayers, the employment will not be in
order.

1046. It is not necessary for the employer for Ju\`alah to specify the
reward he would give with all its particulars. If the employee, in this
case, is certain that he would not be taken for a stupid or foolish
person if he undertook the assignment, it is sufficient. For example, if
the employer in Ju\`alah tells a person that if he sells a particular
stock or goods for more than, say, ten dollars, whatever is the excess
will be his, this from of Ju\`alah is valid. Similarly, if he says that
whosoever finds his horse, that person will own half of it, or that
person will be awarded ten kilos of wheat, Ju\`alah will be in order.

1047. If a person does not at all mention the amount of reward which he
would give for his work for example, if he says, ~I shall give money to
the person who finds out my son ~, and does not specify the amount of
money, and if some one performs the task, he should pay him according to
what is customarily paid for such task.

1048. If the person wishes to cancel the Ju\`alah agreement after the
employee has started work, it is a matter of Ishkal, except when they
come to an agreement.

1049. A person appointed to work in Ju\`alah can leave the task
incomplete. However, if his failure to complete the task causes harm to
the person who appointed him, he must complete it. For example, if a
person says, 'If someone operates upon my eye I shall give him so much
money ', and a surgeon commences the operation, and if by not completing
the operation, the eye will be defective, he must complete it.

1050. If the person appointed to work in Ju\`alah leaves the task
incomplete, he cannot demand any reward, provided that the Ja\`il
declares the reward for completing the task, like when he declares that
if anyone sews his dress, he will pay him $10. But if he meaned to pay
some money for doing any part of the task, he should pay the money for
the part done.


