Rules Regarding Mortgage (rahn)
===============================

1084. Mortgage means that a person effects a conveyance of property to
another person as security for money debt, or property held under
responsibility, with a provise that if that debt is not paid, the
creditor may pay himself out of the proceeds of that property.

(1). What is nowadays aommonly called ~Rahn~ in Iran, is not realy
Rahn. It is customary to give some money as lean to the owner of the
house in order to live in his house. But if this act is without any
rent, it will be usury and Halal (allowed), and the person cannot live
in it, and if it is with rent and leasing the house is a condition for
giving the loan, then it will be Halal (allowed), and if giving the loan
is a condition for leasing the house, as an obligatory precaution, it is
not permissible.

1085. A person can mortgage that property over which he has a right of
disposal or discretion, and it is also in order if he mortgages the
property of another person with his permission.

1086. The benefit which accrues from the mortgaged property, belongs to
the owner, whether the mortgagor or any other person.

1087. The mortgagee cannot present or sell the mortgaged property to
another person without the permission of the owner, whether he is the
mortgagor or any other person. However, if he presents or sells it to
another person, and the owner consents to it later, there is no harm in
it.

1088. If the creditor demands the repayment of debt when it is due, and
the debtor does not repay it, the creditor can sell the mortgaged
property and collect his dues, provided that he had been authorised to
do so. And if he was not authorised to do so, it will be necessary to
obtain permission from its owner. And if the owner is not available, he
should, as an obligatory precaution obtain permission for the sale of
the property from the Mujtahid. In either case, if the sale proceeds
exceed the amount due to him, he should give the amount in excess of his
debt to its owner.

1089. If the debtor does not possess anything other than his house he
occupies, and the essential household effects, the creditor cannot
demand the repayment of debt from him. But, if the thing mortgaged by
him is his house or its household effects, the creditor can sell them
and realise his dues.
