Usurpation (ghasb)
==================

Usurpation means that a person unjustly seizes the property or right of
another person. This is one of the major sins according to the wisdom,
traditions and the holy Qur'an. It has been reported from the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that, whoever usurps one span of another's land,
seven layers of that land will be put round his neck like a yoke on the
Day of Judgement.

1236. If a person does not allow the people to benefir from a mosque, a
school, a pidge and other places which have been constructed for the use
of the public, he usurps their right. Similar is the case when a person
reserves a place in the mosque for himself, but another person drives
that person out from that place and does not allow him to use it, in
which case the latter person commits a sin.

1237. If a person usurps a property, he should return it to its owner,
and if it is lost while it has a price, he should compensate him for it,
as will be explained later.

1238. If some benefit accrues from a thing which has been usurped, for
example, if a lamb is born of a sheep which has been usurped, it belongs
to the owner. Moreover, if, for example, a person has usurped a house,
he should pay its rent even if he does not live in it.

1239. If a person usurps a piece of land and cultivates or plants trees
on it, the crop and the trees and their fruits are his own property, and
if the owner of the land is not agreeable to the crops and the trees
remaining on his land, the person who has usurped the land, should pull
them out immediately even if he may suffer loss for that. Aiso, he
should pay rent to the owner of the land for the period the crop and the
trees remained on his land, and should also make up for the damage done
to the land, like, he should fill up the holes from which the trees are
pulled out. And if the value of land decreases because of that, he
should compensate. Moreover, he cannot compel the owner of the land to
sell it or lease it out to him nor can the owner of the land comple him
to sell the trees or crops to him.

1240. If a thing usurped by a person perishes and if it is like a cow
or a sheep, which has not much peers similar to it in characteristics
affecting the demands, the usurper should pay its price; and if its
market value has undergone a change on the grounds of demand and supply,
he should pay the cost which was at the time it perished.

1241. If the thing usurped by a person which has perished is like wheat
and barley, which has much peers similar to it in characteristics
affecting the demands, he (the usurper) should pay a thing which is
similar to the one usurped by him. However, the quality of that
replacement should be the same as of the thing which has been usurped
and has perished. For example, if he has usurped rice of superior
quality, he cannot replace it with a rice of inferior quality.

1242. If the thing usurped by a person is usurped from him by another
person and it perishes, the owner of the thing can take its compensation
from any one of them, or can demand a part of the compensation from each
of them. And if he takes compensation for the thing from the first
usurper, the first usurper can demand whatever he has given from the
second usurper. But if he is compensated by the second usurper, that
second usurper cannot demand what he has given, from the first
usurper.

**Rules of the Lost Property When Found**

1243. Any lost property other than an animal, which does not bear any
sign by means of which it may be possible to locate its owner,
irrespective of whether its value is less than a Dirham (12.6 peas of
coined silver) or not, can be kept for himself by one who finds it, but
the recommended precaution is that he gives it away as Sadaqah on behalf
of the owner, whoever he may be. The same rule applies for money which
has not any sign. But if there is signs like quantity or characteristics
of time and place for the money found, one should announce it as
mentioned in the following rule.

1244. If a person finds something which bears a sign by means of which
its owner can be located, and even if he comes to know that its owner is
a non-Muslim whose property must be protected, and if the value of that
thing reaches one Dirham, he should make an announcement about it at the
place of gathering of the people for one year from the day on which he
finds that thing, and if its value is less than one Dirham, the person
who finds it should, as an obligatory precaution, give it away as
Sadaqah on behalf of the owner, whoever he may be. And when the owner is
found, the replacement should be given to him, if he does not approve
the Sadaqah given on his behalf.

1245. If the person who finds such a things makes announcement for one
year, but the owner of the property does not turn up, he should act as
follows:

(i) If he has found that thing at a place other than the
Masjid-ul-Halal (allowed), he can retain it on behalf of the owner, so
that he may give it to him when he appears, or give it as Sadaqah to the
poor on behalf of the owner. As an obligatory precaution, he should not
keep it for himself.

(ii) If he has found that things in the Masjid-ul-Halal (allowed), the
obligatory precaution is that he should give it away as Sadaqah.

1246. If the person makes announcement for one year and the owner of
the property does not turn up, and he continues to care for it on behalf
of its owner, and in the meantime it is lost, he will not be responsible
for the loss if he has not been negligent nor overcautious about it. And
if he gave it as Sadaqah on behalf of the owner, then the owner will
have an option either to approve the Sadaqah or demand its replacement.
And in the latter case the reward for the Sadaqah will go to him who
gave the Sadaqah.

1247. If an insane person or a child who is not BÃ ligh finds something
which bearns a sign and is worth one Dirham or more, his guardian can
make an announcement. In fact, it is obligatory upon him to announce if
he has taken its possession from the child or the insane person. And if
the owner is not found even after having announced for a year, he should
act as rule no 2577.

1248. If during the year in which a person has been making an
announcement (about something having been found) he loses all hope of
finding the owner, he should give it away as Sadaqah, as an obligatory
precaution with the permission of the Mujtahid.

1249. If the property is lost during the year in which he has been
making an announcement, and he has been negligent in caring for it, or
has been overcautious, he will be responsible to the owner for
replacement, and should also continue announcing. But if he has not been
negligent nor overcautious, it is not obligatory for him to pay
anything.

1250. If the property which bears a mark, and has value equal to one
Dirham or more is found at a place where it is known that the owner of
the property will not be found by means of announcement, the finder
should give it to the poor persons as Sadaqah on behalf of the owner on
the very first day, and he should not wait till the year ends. As an
obligatory precaution this should be done with the permission of
Mujtahid.
