Vow and Covenant (nadhr and `ahd)
=================================

1280. Vow means malking it obligatory upon oneself to do some good act,
or to refrain from doing an act which it is better not to do, for the
sake of, or for the pleasure of Allah.

1281. While making a vow, a formule declaration has to be pronounced,
thought is not necessary to be in Arabic. If a person says, 'When the
patient recovers from his ailment, it will be obligatory upon me to pay
$10 to a poor man, for the sake of Allah, his vow will be in order. And
if one says,â€™ I vow to do so and so for the sake of Allah', he should,
as an boligatory precaution, do it. But if a person does not utter the
name of God, and says only, 'I vow', or utters one of the names of the
holy prophet or Imams, the vow will not be in order. If the vow is in
order, and the person under the vow does not perform it intentionally,
he has committed sin and should pay kaffarah, which is like Kaffarah of
violation of an oath as will be explained later.

1282. If a husband disallows his wife to make a vow, her vow will not
be valid, providing that vow in any way violates the rights of the
husband, even if it is made before the marriage contract. Similarly, if
a wife makes a vow to pay from her wealth, without her husband's
permission, she commits an act which is not free from Ishkal, except
when the vow is for A\*ajj, Zakat, Sadaqah or for doing a good turn to
her parents, or her blood relations.

1283. If a woman makes a vow with the permission of her husband, he
cannot apogate her vow, or restrain her from fulfiling her vow.

1284. If a child (son or daughter) makes a vow, with or without the
permission of his/her father, he/she should fulfil his/her vow. However,
if his/her father or mother disallows him/her to fulfil the vow, his/her
vow is void, provided that the prohibition is due to their compassion
and to oppose them will result in their annoyance.

1285. A person can make a vow only for an act which is possible for him
to fulfil. If, for example, a person is not capable of travelling up to
Karbala on foot, and he makes a vow that he will go there on foot, his
vow will not be in order. And if a person is capable when making the
vow, but becomes incapable later, his vow will be invalidated, and there
is no obligation on him, except when the vow is to fast, in which if the
person becomes incapable of fasting, he should, as an obligatory
precaution, either give 750 grams of food to poor person as Sadaqah, or
give 1.5 kilos of food to a person to fast in behalf of him.

1286. If a person makes a vow that he will perform or abandon a normal
permissible act, the performing or abandoning of which has equal merits
in Shari\`ah, his vow is not in order. But if performing it is better in
some respect, and a person makes a vow keeping that merit in view, his
vow will be in order.

1287. If a person makes a vow to perform an act, he should perform it
in strict accordance with his vow. If he makes a vow to give Sadaqah or
to fast on the first day of every month, or to offer prayers of the
first of the month, if he performs these acts before that day or after,
it will not suffice. Also, if he makes a vow that he will give Sadaqah
when a patient recovers, but gives away before the recovery of the
patient, it will not suffice.

1288. If a person makes a vow that he will observe fast on a particular
day, he should observe fast on that very day; and if he does not observe
fast on that day intentionally, he should, besides observing the Qada'
for that fast, also give Kaffarah for it. However, travelling for him on
that day is permissible, and thus he will not fast. Also, it is not
obligatory upon him to make an intention for staying ten days when he is
an a journey, so as to be able to fast. If a person who made the vow
could not fast on the particular day because of being on a journey,
illness, or in the case of a woman, being in the state of Haydh, or for
any good excuse, then he will give Qada' of that fast, and there will be
no Kaffarah.

1289. If a person, of his own choice and volition, violates his vow, he
should give Kaffarah for it.

1290. If a person makes a vow to renounce an act for some specified
time, he will be free to perform that act after that time has passed.
But if he performs it before that time, due to forgetfulness or
hellessness, there is no liability on him. Even then, it will be
necessary for him to refrain from that act for the remaining time, and
if he repeats that act before it without any excuse, he must give
Kaffarah for it.

1291. If a person makes a vow to renounce an act, without setting any
time limit, and then performs that act because of forgetfulness,
helplessness or carelessness or compulsion, or ignorance, it is not
obligatory for him to give a Kaffarah, but after the first instance, if
he repeats the act again at any time, voluntarily, he must give Kaffarah
for it.

1292. If a person a vow he would spend some amount of money on the
shrine of one of the Imam or the descendants of the Imams, without
having any particular project in mind, he should spend it on the
repairs, lighting, carpeting etc. of the shrine. And if this is not
possible, or the shrine is needless, it should be spend for its needy
pilgrims.

1293. If a person makes a vow to use something in the name of the holy
prophet (s.a.w.a), Imam or their descendants or passed scholars or the
like, and has an intention to put it to a specific use, he should spend
it for that very purpose. And if he has not made an intention to put it
to any, specific use, it is better that he should use it for a purpose
which has some relationship with that person, for example, he should
spend it on poor pilgrims of that Imam, or on the shrine of the Imam,
like its repairs etc. or for such purposes which would glorify the
memory of that person.

1294. If a father or a mather makes a vow that he/she will marry their
daughter to a Sayyid, the option rests with the girl when she attains
the age of puberty, and the vow made by the parents has no
significance.

1295. When a person makes a covenant with Allah, that if his particular
lawful need is fulfilled, he will perform a good act, it is necessary
for him to fulfil the covenant. Similarly, if he makes a covenant,
without having any wish, that he will perform a good act, the performing
of that act becomes obligatory upon him.

1296. As in the case of vow, a formal declaration should be pronounced
in the case of covenant (\`Ahd) as will. And it is not necessary for the
covenant to be a better act in Shri\`ah, but it is enough that it is not
forbidden in Shar\`ah, or has a preference according to the wise, or is
advisable for the person. If after making a covenant, it happens to be
no more advisable or preferable, it is not necessary to act according to
it, even if it has become Makruh.

1297. If a person does not act according to the covenant made by him,
he has committed a sin and should give a Kaffarah for it, i.e. he should
either feed sixty poor persons, or fast consecutively for two months, or
set free a slave.
