Things On Which Sajdah Is Allowed
=================================

538. Sajdah should be performed on earth, and on those things not
edible nor worn, which grow from earth (e.g. wood and leaves of trees).
It is not permissible to perform Sajdah on things which are used as food
or dress (e.g. wheat, barley and cotton etc.), or on things whinch are
not considered to be partsof the earth (e.g.golol, silver, etc.). And in
the situation of helplessness, pitch and tar will have preference over
other nonallowable things.

539. Sajdah should not be performed on the vine leaves, when they are
delicate and hence edible. Otherwise, there is no objection.

540. It is in order to perform Sajdah on things which grow from the
earth and serve as fodder for animals (e.g. grass, hay etc.).

541. It is allowed to perform Sajdah on limestone and gypsum. In fact,
there is no objection also in performing Sajdah on baked gypsum, lime,
pick and baked earthenware etc.

542. It is in order to perform Sajdah on paper, if it is manufactured
from allowed sources like wood or grass, and also if it is made from
cotton or flax. But it is made from silk etc, Sajdah on it will not be
permissible. In case of tissue (disposable handkercheif), Sajdah on it
is order only when one is sure that it is made from allowed sources.

543. Turbat-ul-Husayn is the best thing for performing Sajdah. After
it, there are earth, stone and grass, in order of priority.

544. If the Turbah sticks to the forehead in the first Sajdah, it
should be removed from the forhead for the second Sajdah.

545. If a thing on which a person performs Sajdah gets lost while he is
offering prayer, and he does not possess any other thing on which Sajdah
is allowed, he can perform Sajdah on any other thing.

**The Mustahab and Makruh Things in Sajdah**

546. It is Mustahab to say Takbir before going to Sajdah. A person who
prays standing will do so after having stood up from Ruku, and a person
who prays sitting will do so after having sat properly. It is also
recommended to place the nose on a Turbah, or on any other thing on
which Sajdah is allowed; and to say Takbir, after every Sajdah, when the
person has sat down and his body is composed; and when his body is
steady after the first Sajdah, to say: \`Astaghfiru-llaha rabbi wa atubu
ilayh\`; and to say \`Allahu Akbar\` for going into second Sajdah, when
his body is steady; and to recite Salawat while in prostrations.

**Obligatory Prostrations in the Holy Qur'an**

547. Upon reciting or hearing any of the following verses of the holy
Qur'an, the performance of Sajdah becomes obligatory:

\* Surat-us-Sajdah, 32:15
\* Surah Fussilat, 41:38
\* Surat-un-Najm, 53:62
\* Surat-ul-Alaq, 96:19

Whenever a person recites the verse or hears it when recited by someone
else, he should perform Sajdah immediately when the verse ends, and if
he forgets to perform it, he should do it as and when he remember. If
one hears the verse without any expectation, in an involuntary
situation, the Sajdah is not obligatory, though it is better to perform
it.

548. If a person hears the Sajdah verse, and recites it himself also,
he should perform two Sajdahs.

549. If a person hears the verse of obligatory Sajdah from a person who
is asleep, or one who is insane, or from a child who knows nothing of
the Qur'an, it will be obligatory upon him to perform Sajdah. But if he
hears from a gramophone or a tape recorder, Sajdah will not be
obligatory.

Similarly, the Sajdah will not be obligatory if he listens to a taped
recitation from radio (not to a live programme). But if there is a live
programme and a person recites a verse of Sajdah from the station, it
will be obligatory to perform Sajdah.

550. The obligotory precaution is that in the obligatory sajdah caused
by the Quranic verse, aperson should place his forehad ona Turbah, or
any other on which sajdah is allowed, and as a recommended precaution
one should keeo other parts of one’s body on the ground as require in
asajdah of prayer.

551. When a person peforms the obligatory Sajdah upon hearing the
relevant verse, it will be sufficient even if he does not recite any
Dhikr. However, it is Mustahab to recite Dhikr, preferably the
following: La ilaha illa-llahu haqqan haqqa ; la ilaha illa-llahu imanan
wa tasdiqa ; la ilaha illa-llahu ubudiyyatan wa riqqa ; sajadtu laka ya
rabbi ta'abbudan wa riqqa, la mustankifan wa la mustakbira, bal ana
abdun dhalilun daifun kha'ifun mustajir.

**Tashahhud**

552. In the second unit (Rak'ah) of all obligatory prayers, and in the
third unit of Maghrib prayer and in the fourth unit of Tuhr, A?r and
Isha prayers, one should sit after the second prostration with a
tranquil body, and recite Tashahhud thus: Ashhadu an la ilaha illa-llahu
wahdahu la sharika lah, wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan abduhu wa rasuluh;
allahumma salli ala Muhammadin wa ali Muhammad.

553. The words of Tashahud should be recited in correct Arabic, and in
usual succession.

554. If a person forgets Tashahhud, and rises and remembers before
Ruku, he should sit down to recite it, and then stand up again. He will
then continue with his prayer. But if he remembers this in Ruku or
thereafter, he should complete the prayer and perform two Sajdah-us-Sahv
for the forgotten Tashahhid.

555. It is Mustahab to say before Tashahhud: Al-hamdu li-llah ;
Bismi-llahi wa bi-llah, wal-hamdu li-llah, wa Khayr-ul-asma'i li-llah.
It is also Mustahab to place one's hands on noe's thights, with joined
fingers, and to look at one's laps, and to say this after Tashahhud and
Salawat: Wa taqabbal shafa atahu wa-rfa darajatah.

**Salam in the Prayers**

556. While a person is sitting, after reciting Tashahhud in the last
unit (Rak'ah), and his body is tranquil, it is Mustahab to say:
As-salamu alayka ayyuhan-nabiyyu wa rahmatu-llahi wa barakatuh. Then it
is obligatory to say: As-salamu alaykum ; and as a recommended
precaution add to it, Wa rahmatu-llahi wa barakatuh. Alternatively, he
can say:

As-salamu alayna wa ala ibadi-llahis-salihin. But if he recites this
Salam, then as per obligatory precaution, he must follow it up with
saying: As-salamu alaykum.

**Tartib (Sequence)**

557. If a person forgets a Rukn (elemental part) of the prayer, an
performs the next Rukn, like before performing Ruku if he performs the
two Sajdahs, his prayer would become void, as as measure of
precaution.

558. If a person forgets a Rukn, and performs an act after it which is
not a Rukn, like if he

recites Tashahhud without performing the two Sajdahs, he should perform
the Rukn and should recite again the part which he performed erroneously
earlier than the Rukn.

559. If a person forgets a thing which is not a Rukn, and performs a
Rukn which comes after it, like if he forgets al-Hamd and begins
performing Ruku, his prayer is in order.

560. If a person forgets an act which is not a Rukn, and performs the
next act which too, is not a Rukn, like if he forgets al-Hamd and
recites the other Surah, he should perform what he has forgotten, and
then recite again the thing which he mistakenly recited earlier.

**Muwalat (Maintenance of Succession)**

561. A person should maintain continuity during prayer, that is he
should perform various acts of prayer, like Ruku, two Sajdahs and
Tashahhud, in continuous succession, and he should recite the Dhikr etc.
also in usual succession. If he allows an undue interval between
different acts, till it becomes difficult to visualise that he is
praying, his prayer will be void.

**Qunut**

562. It is Mustahab that Qunut be recited in all obligatory and
Mustahab prayers before the Ruku of the second Rak'ah, and it is also
Mustahab that Qunut be recited in the Witr prayer (inSalat-ul-layl)
before Ruku, although that prayer is of one Rak'ah only.

In Friday prayer there is one Qunut in every Rak;ah. InSalat,there are
five Qunut, and in Id Prayers there are several Qunut in two Rak'ahs
which will be explained later. In the prayer of Shaf, which is a part
ofSalat-ul-layl, Qunut is to be performed with the intention of Raja.

563. It is also Mustahab that while reciting Qunut, a person keeps his
hands in front of his face, turning the palms facing the sky, and
keeping both the hands and the fingers, except the thumbs, close
together. It is Mustahab to look at the palms in Qunut. But as an
obligatory precaution Qunut will not be in order without raising the
hands, except in case of helplessness.000

**Taqibat (Supplications after Prayers)**

564. It is Mustahab that after offering the prayer, one should engage
oneself in reciting suppliacations, and reading from the holy Qur'an. It
is better that before he leaves his place, and before his Wudu, or Ghusl
or Tayammum becomes void, he should recite supplications facing Qiblah.
The Tasbih of Fatimat-uz-Zahra (peace be on her) is one of those acts
which have been emphasised. This Tasbih should be recited in the
following order:

\* Allahu Akbar -34 times
\* Al-hamdu li-llah-33 times
\* Subhana-llah -33 times
Subhana-llah can be recited earlier than Al-hamdu li-llah, but it is
better to maintain the said order.

565. It is Mustahab that after the prayer a person performs a Sajdah of
thanksgiving, and it will be sufficient if one placed his forehead on
the ground with that intention. However, it is better to say: Shukran
li-llah or Shukran or Afwan, 100 times, or three times, or even once. It
is also Mustahab that whenever a person is blessed with His bounties, or
when the adversities are averted, he should go to Sajdah for Shukr, that
is, thanksgiving.

**Salawat on the Holy Prophet**

566. It is Mustahab that whenever a person hears or utters the sacred
name of the holy Prophet of Islam, like Muhammad or Ahmad, or his title,
like Musatfa or his patronymic appellation like Ad-ul-Qasim, he should
say, Allahumma salli ala Muhammaden wa ali Muhammad; even if that
happens during theSalat.

**Things which Invalidate Prayers**

567. Twelve things make prayers void, and they are called
Mubtilat-us-Salatt.

First: If any of the prerequisites of prayer ceases to exist while one
is inSalat, like, if he comes to know that the dress with which he has
covered himself is Najis.

Second: If a person, intentionally or by mistake, or uncontrollably,
commits an act which makes his Wudu or Ghusl void, like, when urine
comes out, even if, as a precaution, it is discharged forgetfully, or
involuntarily, after the last Sajdah of the prayer. But if a person is
incontinent, unable to control urine or excretion, his prayer will not
be void if he acts according to the rules explained early in the Chapter
of Wudu. Similarly, if a woman sees blood of Istihadah during prayer,
herSalat is not invalidated if she has acted according to the rules of
Istihadah.

Third: If a person folds his hands as a mark of humility and reverence,
his prayer will be void, but this is based on precautionary rule.
However, there is no doubt about it being Halal (allowed), if it is done
believing that it is ordained by Shariah.

568. There is no harm if a person places one hand on another
forgetfully, or due to help lessness or Taqiyyah, or for some other
purposes, like, scratching.

Fourth: The fourth thing which invalidates prayer is to say Amin after
al-Hamd. This rule, when applied to one praying invalidually, is based
on precaution, but if someone utters it beliveing that it has been
ordained by Shariah, it is Halal (allowed). There is no harm if someone
utters it erroneously or under Taqiyyah.

Fifth: The fifth thing which invalidates prayer is to turn away from
Qiblah without any excuse. But if there is an excuse, hisSalat will be
valid, providing he has not deviated entirely to his right or left side.
But it is necessary to return to the dire ction of Qiblah assoon as the
excuse dis appears. And if he turned away towards right or left side or
his back turned towards Qiblah, due to forgetting, or ignorance or
mistaking in direction of Qiblah, he should pray again towards Qiblah as
soon as he remembers, if there is time left even for one Rak'ah. But if
there is no time for even one Rak'ah at his disposal, then he should
continue with the sameSalat towards Qiblah, and he will not have to give
any Qada for that. Similar rule applies to the one who has deviated
because of the external force.

Sixth: The sixth thing which invalidates prayer is to talk
internionally, even by uttering a single word consisting of one single
letter which has a meaning or denotes something. For example, one letter
“Q”i in Arabic means: protect. Or if someone asked a person who is
praying, as to which is the second letter of Arabic alphabet, and he
said simply Ba. But if the utterance is meaningless, then, if it
constitutes two or more Arabic letters, his prayer will be void, based
on precaution.

569. If a person forgetfully utters a word consisting of one or more
letters, his prayer does not become void, even if that word may carry
some meaning, but as a precaution, it is necessary that after the
prayer, he should perform Sajdat-us-Sahv, as will be explained later.

570. If a person utters a word with the object of Dhikr, like, if he
says Allahu Akbar, and raises his voice to indicate something, there is
no harm in it.

571. There is no harm in reciting the Qur'an or supplications in
prayers.

572. If a person intentionally or as a matter of precaution repeats
parts of al-Hamd and other Surah, and the Dhikr of prayer, there is no
harm in it.

573. A person offering prayer should not greet anyone with Salam, and
if another person says Salam to him, he should use the same words in
reply without adding anything to it. For example, if someone says
Salamun alaykum, he should also say “Salamun ‘alakum in reply, without
adding “wa rahmatu-llahi wa barakatuh.

574. It is necessary that the reply to Salam is given at once,
irrespective of whether one is praying or not. And if, whether
intentionally or due to forgetfulness, he delays reply to the Salam, so
much that if he gives a reply after the delay, it may not be reckoned to
be a reply to that Salam, then he should not reply if he is inSalat. And
if he is not inSalat it is not obligatory for him to reply.

575. If a woman or man or a discerning child, that is, one who can
distinguish between good and evil, says Salam to a person inSalat, the
person should respond. However, in reply to the Salam by a woman who
says Salamun alayka, the person offering prayer can say Salamun alayki,
giving Ka?rah to Kafat the end.

576. If a person inSalat does not respond to Salam his prayer is in
order, though he will have committed a sin.

577. If a person says Salam to a group of poeple, it is obligatory for
all of them to give a reply. However, if one of them relies, it is
sufficient.

578. If two person simultaneusly say Salam to each other, each one of
them should, on the basis of obligatory precaution, reply the Salam of
the other.
