Interpretations
===============

Validity as affirmation of conformity with reality was referred to
as*sidq* (veracity, truth) or*tasdiq* (certification of truth). The
"actuality of affairs" to which our knowledge conforms was comprehended
also as a sort of "authenticity," and the corresponding term*haqiqa* may
be rendered into English as "truth" as well. Thus verification is
carried out by comparing our knowledge to the "truth of things," and if
the result is positive, knowledge is "true (*sadiq* ); if not, it is
"false" (*kadhib).* Knowledge is valid by virtue of its coincidence with
the truth of things, while the truth of the latter needs no
verification. It follows from the fact of their "being affirmed": they
just "are there" as "fixed" and "true." The ideas of truth, fixity and
thing are closely linked in Arabic. The term "thing" (*shay'* ) is
usually explained as "something that is established" (*thabit),* and the
root*h-q-q,* from which "truth"*(haqiqa)* is derived, renders the same
meaning. (For example,*haqq* means both "true" and "unshakable.")

The problem of truth was raised rather early in Islamic thought, and
already the al-Rawafid discussed it. As al-Ash'ari informs us, most of
them maintained that all human knowledge is "necessitated" (*idtirar).*
From their point of view, a person is not free to acquire true knowledge
or to reject the false; moreover, knowledge about the falsity or
validity of our knowledge also cannot be obtained at our will. This
[438] argument proceeded from the general assumption that all human
deeds are "forced" (*idtirar).* At the same time, some of the al-Rawafid
considered the human mind able to receive true knowledge independently,
for example, to learn of God's unity (*tawhid* ) before the prophets
inform people of it. Knowledge gained independently, they argued, is
obtained with the help of*qiyas* (literally "co-measuring"). The term
designates rational epistemological procedures that produce new
knowledge "by measure" of the old one and was used not only in Kalam,
but in other sciences as well, denoting analogous judgment in*fiqh*
(Islamic jurisprudence) and the syllogism in logic. However, al-Rawafid
who affirmed the independent ability of reason to gain new knowledge
were in the minority (al-Ash\`ari, 1980, pp. 51-3).

The discussion of truth was deepened by the Mu'tazila. First, they were
concerned with determining the types of propositions that can be true or
false. These are statements containing "denial and affirmation"*(al-nafy
wa al-ithbat),* "praise and reprobation" (*al-madh wa al-dhamm)* as well
as "wonder"*(ta\`ajjub),* while "question"*(istifham),* "order and
interdiction" (*al-'amr wa al-nahy),* "regret" (*'asaf* ), "hope"
(*tamanni)* and "request"*(mas'ala)* are neither true nor false
(al-Ash'ari, 1980, p. 444). The Mu\`tazila seem to have been little
occupied with*how* true knowledge is reached, and this is perhaps due to
the fact that they discussed truth in connection with the reliability of
prophetic sayings - which is not an art to be taught. The Mu"tazila had
different opinions as to whether a proposition can be called true or
false if its author was ignorant of the "actuality of affairs." (The
question here is whether unintended deception can be called a lie, or
whether a statement that incidentally happened to be exact can be called
truth). When the relevant "actuality of affairs" does not exist (for
example, if the event has not yet occurred) or is unknown to a person,
the verification

procedure that compares a proposition to the "truth of things" cannot be
executed - for objective and subjective reasons respectively - and such
a proposition is to be regarded as neither true nor false. This
argument, however, was not generally accepted by the Mu"tazila.

As for Aristotelian logic, it took root in medieval Islamic thought
above all due to peripatetism. This school gave much more sophistication
to what the Mutakallimun said about truth and the possible ways of
acquiring it. Many elements of Aristotelian logic introduced by the
Islamic peripatetics became indisputable patterns of reasoning for
Islamic thinkers, and no school of medieval philosophy seriously
challenged the syllogism as a paradigm for the preservation of truth in
argumentation. What*was* disputed was the*sphere* in which the
syllogistic method is relevant. This method appears to have gained less
favor among Islamic thinkers than it did among ancient or medieval
Western thinkers, and in philosophy*per se* we find even among the
peripatetics great reservations in this respect.

Elements of Aristotelian logic were rather well known to Islamic
scholars from translations of Aristotle's works as well as from writings
of his great commentators, among which must be mentioned in particular
Porphyry's*Eisagoge.* There also existed quite a number of logical
treatises of educational and propadeutical character composed in Arabic,
many of which belong, or are ascribed to, al-Farabi.

[439] According to the peripatetics, the purpose of logic is to gain
true knowledge. Such knowledge is twofold, consisting of
"notions"*(tasawwur)* and "certifications of truth"*(tasdiq),* which are
both accessible only on the basis of some*a priori* know ledge. As for
"notions" (that is, understanding*what* the thing is), this knowledge in
the final analysis is based on the units of meaning that definitions,
later used in arguments, are composed of. In "certifications of truth"
this primary knowledge is represented by "principles of intellect"
(*awa'il al-\`aql),* that very intellect with the help of which, as
al-Farabi interprets Aristotle, we perceive the "certainty*(yaqin)* of
necessary and true general presuppositions" (al-Farabi, 1890, p. 40)
with no prior investigation or argument.

This is how Ibn Sina expresses the point in his concise*Book of Remarks
and Admonitions:*

The purpose of logic is to provide a canonical tool (ala qanuniyya) that
prevents aberration of thought. By "thought" (fikr) I mean here what
takes place when a person, having pulled himself up, passes from what is
present in his mind, what he has a notion of or what he is certain of...
to what is not [present] there. This transition has a certain order and
figure that might be correct and might happen to be incorrect. The
incorrect often looks correct or makes you believe that it is correct.
So logic is a science that studies ways of transition from what is
present in the human mind to what it acquires, the correct modes of
ordering this transition and its figures, as well as the kinds of
incorrect ones. (Ibn Sina, 1960. Pt I, pp. 167-78)

Atomic "individual meanings" (*ma'ani mufrada),* from which complex
logical structures are produced by "ordering"*(tartib)* and
"composing"*(ta'lif),* constitute the basis for all logical operations
(Ibn Sina, 1960. Pt 1. pp. 179-80). These meanings entirely correspond
to the things in question.

The correspondence is based on what is established by the language-giver
who assigns certain "meanings" (*ma'ani)* to certain "sounds" (*alfaz):*
this correspondence is therefore called "established" (*bi al-wad\`).*
For example, the sound "human" corresponds to the meaning "animal
endowed with speech." The sound and its meaning are the two elements
that make up a "word" (*kalima);* the relation of "denotation"
(*dalala)* exists between the first and the second. What is denoted by
the "sound" is that very "meaning" that constitutes the "truth"
(*haqiqa)* of things. Thus logic, dealing with sounds and their
meanings, deals in fact with things - as long as the denotation
originally established in language is preserved.

In order to acquire the correct notion of a thing, one must arrive at a
"clarifying saying" (*qawl sharih)* about it. This can be achieved,
first, in a "definition" (*hadd)* of the thing. The construction of
definitions is described in every detail as a procedure of answering the
question*what is it?* by providing its genus (*jins* ) and specific
difference*(fasl)* to produce a definition of the species*(naw')* that
informs us of the quiddity (*mahiya)* of the thing in question. Besides
a definition, a "description"*(rasm)* can also be given to clarify the
notion of a thing, although this does not deal with thing's quiddity. A
description has to be given to those tools that serve us in setting out
definitions - that is, notions of genus, species and specific
difference - as well as to the highest genera that have no genus above
them (and, consequently, [440] for which no definition can be given).
Second, a description may be given to the things that have quiddity; for
example, "animal endowed with laughter" serves as a description for
"human."

As for arguments, they are composed in the form of syllogisms.
Aristotelian syllogistic doctrine was exposed in Islamic peripatetism in
every detail, accompanied by the examination of possible errors,
mistakes and sophisms. The validity of conclusions reached through
syllogisms is based on the accuracy with which we establish true
meanings in definitions.

A great project of the unification and hierarchization of sciences was
advanced in Islamic peripatetism. The hierarchization was to be based on
differences in the degrees of generality of the various sciences'
subjects. What is proved in the more general sciences may serve as
non-provable principles for the more particular ones. From that point of
view, sciences form a pyramid of axiomatically subordinated branches of
knowledge. AI-Farabi, in*Kitab al-milla,* al-Kindi, in*Kitab al-falsafa
al-'ula,* Ibn Sina, in*al-Burhan* (part of*Kitab al-shifa')* (to give
only examples, and not an exhaustive list) speak about such
subordination of the more particular to the more general sciences. This
structure of knowledge is conceived as corresponding to the universe,
which is ordered along the same lines of generality-particularity.

Logic is an important instrument of cognition. This does not mean,
however, that the peripatetics tend to exaggerate its significance.
Besides knowledge acquired by means of logic, direct,
intuitive*(hadsiyy)* knowledge is possible. This is granted as immediate
manifestation, in which the thing unconditionally and completely
expresses itself*as such.*

Knowledge of our ego serves as a paradigm of intuitive cognition, Ibn
Sina introduces this thesis in his famous fragment about the "flying
person" in his*Book of Remarks and Admonitions:*

Look at your soul and answer: when you are in sound health, or even not,
but correctly perceive things, did it ever happen that you were ignorant
of your self(dhat) or didn't ascertain your soul? Imagine that your self
has just been created: assume that it is in its right mind and figure,
sees none of its parts and its members don't feel each other, but it is
spread and suspended at some moment in pure air. Then you will find that
it notices nothing: however it observes fixity of its egoness
(ana'iyya). (Ibn Sina. 1957, Pt 2, pp. 319-20)

The ego is always manifest to itself, and this manifestation is the
primary fact of our consciousness. It depends on nothing and,
furthermore, no sophisticated proof is needed to understand it: it
suffices to imagine the situation described above for the fact of the
ego's manifestation to itself to become clear.

Immediate manifestation can be considered a sort of completion for the
logical form of cognition. This concluding step, however, already
transcends the path that it completes and opens fundamentally new
horizons. According to Ibn Sina, Ibn Tufayl and other authors, a person
acquires complete and true knowledge through union with Active
Intellect - the last of the Cosmic Intellects, repository of all forms
and governor of the sublunar world. This full contact with the source of
forms that [441] are the subject of logical inquiry no longer
presupposes any necessity of*transition* from the already-present to the
yet-unknown, and thus places one outside the framework of logical
reasoning. Certainly, not everyone is able to achieve this union; only
if the soul is pure, Ibn Sina argues, can it be inflamed by Active
Intellect and directly imprinted with the forms of all possible
knowledge. It is the same intention of achieving immediately manifest
self-evidence that speaks for itself in these cases, as also when these
authors abandon philosophical jargon and talk about directly witnessing
the Divine world. It is also obvious that the patency of our ego for
itself guarantees its ability to reach absolutely complete and true
knowledge by witnessing the Divinity, for the two kinds of evidential
witnessing differ with respect to their subject, rather than in their
essence.

The exposition of the peripatetic doctrine of truth is in no way
complete before Ibn Rushd's work*Kitab fasl al-maqal wa taqrir ma bayna
al-shari\`a wa al-hikma min al-ittisal* (or "Decisive Saying
Establishing the Connection between Law and Wisdom") is mentioned.
Despite its title, the chief idea of this little treatise is that the
spheres of "wisdom" (that is, philosophy) and "Law" (the theoretical
postulates followed in religious life as well as its practical
prescriptions) may be separated. The work attempts to fix independent
rights of reason for obtaining the truth that -within the limits defined
for it - no one can violate. It is noteworthy that Ibn Rushd had
predecessors among the Mutakallimun in the differentiation of what falls
under the Law, which is established and can be revised under no
circumstances, and what reason is permitted to discuss and decide. "What
is known by reason and what is known only through Law," a chapter
in*Usul*

*al-din* (*Principles of Religion),* a book by an Ash'arite author, Abu
Mansur al-Baghdadi, bears a resemblance to Averroes's treatise not only
by its title. Al-Baghdadi definitely states that only Divine
prescriptions, either direct or transmitted through prophets, constitute
the domain of Law, whereas problems of the world's origin and similar
questions involve theories that human reason elaborates.

Isma\`ilism may to a certain degree be regarded as a successor of
peripatetism with respect to the theory of knowledge and truth.
Isma\`ili theoreticians, on the one hand, have no doubt concerning
reason's capability of knowing the truth; more over, cognition of the
truth is, in their view, indispensable for the person who wants to reach
salvation. On the other hand, they give up the syllogistic method as the
principal means of cognition. The Universe, in their estimation, is not
a unified structure arranged in the hierarchical
(generality-particularity) order that the peripatetics described. It is
rather a*system* of structures that stand with respect to each other in
relations of similarity, isomorphism and correspondence. This ontology
presupposes a special method of cognition.

This is how Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani. the most prominent Isma\`ili
theoretician, expresses these theses. Any science, he argues, has its
own "laws"*(qawanin) -* that is to say, criteria by which knowledge is
tested in order to determine whether it really corresponds to the "true
order" (*nizam al-haqq)* of the subject of study. And if the
peripatetics strive to achieve their aim, that is, "knowledge of the
meanings of existence"*(ma\`ani al-wujud),* by means of logic. Isma\`ili
philosophers employ a different method.

[442] Its basic premise can be expressed as follows: anything in the
world belongs to some structure and may correctly be comprehended only
within that structure, through its place in the overall framework and
its structural role. Thus the preliminary step for cognition is to
single out the universal structures that, being completely
"balanced"*(mutawazina)* and "isomorphic"*(mutashakila),* form the
created world. In their mutual conformity universal harmony is embodied,
expressing the highest wisdom of their creation and giving evidence to
the perfection of our world, which is the best of all possible worlds.

The principle of hierarchical harmony, penetrating the Universe, can be
traced on different levels. As Isma\`ili works show, this can be done
with great accuracy and amazing sophistication. There are four basic
structures to be identified; the metaphysical world, the religious
community, the natural world, and the human being. It is of fundamental
importance that knowledge of any of these structures allows us to know
all of the others with the help of special rules of interstructural
translation of meaning, since corresponding elements of different
structures have a similar structural place, function and essence.

Had all the structures of the Universe been manifest to us, no special
cognitive procedures would be necessary. However, universal structures
fall into two classes. Some of them are "obvious"*(zahir),* while others
are "latent" (*batin).* Isma\`ili theory of knowledge proceeds from the
premise that "latent" structure (as a whole, as well as any of its
separate elements) can be known only through the "obvious." Since it is
the structure of

Isma\`ili community (or as al-Kirmani prefers to say, the "world of
religion") that is known to us in every detail, all new knowledge is
acquired on this basis. This method is referred to as finding
"balance"*(muwazana)* and "correspondence"*(mutabaqa).* Isma\`ili
community structure is harmoniously balanced with all other structures
in the world (this is a postulate of Isma\`ili philosophy, not a
conclusion to be proved), and knowing it we can arrive at knowledge of
anything. Besides, numeric structures are widely used in search of
mutual structural correspondences. Using this method, al-Kirmani
consistently and in every detail describes the metaphysical world (the
hierarchy of Cosmic Intellects) as well as the natural world and the
microcosm.

Structural correspondence is for al-Kirmani not only a method of finding
new knowledge, but also a criterion for the verification of existing
knowledge. Only that is valid which has a correct structure. "This
criterion is such that what agrees with it. is true, and what disagrees,
is false; it is this criterion that is so attractive for the intellect
that seeks to know with its help what is given to it as well as what
escapes it" (al-Kirmani, 1983, p. 236). In cognitive procedures the
structure of the "religious world" (which means the Isma\`ili community)
is taken as a paradigm, but that structure too is verified by
correspondence to "God's creation." The perfection of the manifest
structure and its undoubted validity is proved for al-Kirmani by the
fact that it disagrees with the Universe in no detail (al-Kirmani, 1983,
p. 237).

Certainly, the person who would endeavor to apply this method of
cognition in his own research will hardly succeed. This method serves
well in the exposition and structuring of already acquired knowledge,
but in spite of what al-Kirmani maintains, not in the search for new
knowledge. The author of*Rahat al-'aql* leaves us [443] ignorant of the
most interesting and important detail of his method - those inter
structural semantic translation procedures that fill the unknown
structure with*new meanings* so that it balances the structure manifest
to us. In this respect what al-Farabi said on another occasion seems to
be relevant. In this critique of astrologers, the "Second Teacher"
argues that in the world one can single out diverse "sets"*(kathra)* of
things, like animals' movements, the voices of birds, written signs, and
so on, in order to put them in correspondence with the multitude of
events that we experience; such a procedure, however, produces "only
occasional, instead of necessary [truth] that reason should have
accepted" (al-Farabi, 1890, p. III).

Illuminative philosophy is another successor to peripatetism with
respect to the theory of truth. It is no exaggeration to say that Ibn
Sina is the greatest authority for the most prominent representative of
this school, Shihab al-Din Yahya al-Suhrawardi. The affinity of these
two thinkers is surprising, in view of the disagreements between their
teachings caused by al-Suhrawardi's adherence to a metaphysics of light
and darkness; on the subject of the theory of truth, however, the
disagreements between them are minimal.

Like Ibn Sina, al-Suhrawardi speaks about two kinds of true knowledge:
immediate intuitive knowledge and logical knowledge. The first he also
calls "truthful witnessing"*(mushahada haqqiya),* and the second
"research"

(*bahth).* Knowledge of the ego. or, as al-Suhrawardi himself calls it,
ego-ness*(ana'iyya),* serves for him. as it did for Ibn Sina, as an
archetype of the direct cognition of truth. But since the majority of
people are unable to experience the completeness of truth immediately,
they have to resort to indirect logical cognition, which starts with
basic unquestionably valid premises and proceeds from them to the
unknown (al-Suhrawardi, 1952, p. 18).

Al-Suhrawardi considers the elementary sensual perceptions "simple
meanings." logical atoms from which the construction of concepts begins.
These perceptions are simple, absolutely evident and self-identical;
they are the principal elements known by anyone who has healthy organs
of perception. Sensual perception is absolutely adequate, al-Suhrawardi
argues: we perceive exactly what*is* *there* in the things perceived.
Finally, basic sensual perceptions, being elements of knowledge, have no
logical definition (al-Suhrawardi, 1952, p. 104). This sensualism of the
celebrated mystic agrees well with his radical nominalism: according to
al-Suhrawardi, no general concepts exist independently of our minds. On
this basis he argues that quiddity is constituted not only by
substantial features, as the peripatetics maintained, but also by
accidental features. For the shape of a house, for example, is
accidental with respect to the clay from which it is constructed, and
nevertheless we say, in response to the question "what is it?" that it
is a "house," rather than "clay" (al-Suhrawardi, 1952, pp. 85-6). Given
Suhrawardi's metaphysics of light and darkness, he denies that the first
matter is universal substance, and consequently is compelled to look for
a different basis of individuation. For him it is not matter that is
"responsible" for the multiplicity of individuals which all have the
same quiddity and which therefore are, logically speaking, one and the
same, but rather the degree of perfection*(kamal)* or degree of
completeness by which this or that "universal meaning" is represented in
the individual (al-Suhrawardi, 1952, [444] p. 87). This concept of
individuality as a degree of perfection will later be elaborated in
Sufism by Ibn 'Arabi.

As for the syllogistic method, the importance that al-Suhrawardi
attaches to it is testified to by the fact that the first half of his
chef-d'oeuvre,*Hikmat al-ishraq (Wisdom of illumination),* is solely
devoted to its exposition. Al-Suhrawardi points out that it is a
necessary propaedeutic for the second, metaphysical and mystical, part
of his book. In his analysis of syllogisms accompanied by a detailed
study of possible errors and sophisms, al-Suhrawardi strives to prove
that all modes of syllogism can be reduced to a single positive
categorical mode, which, in his estimation, makes knowledge of all the
subtleties of the other modes superfluous.

As for the complete and perfect witnessing of truth, it is reached,
according to al-Suhrawardi, in the state of "illumination"*(ishraq).*
"Illumination" is the central concept of al-Suhrawardi's philosophy. It
signifies direct irradiation of the soul by superior, metaphysical
lights. The soul itself is a light that has descended from the world of
light" into the "world of darkness" and is yet impotent to return to its
original abode. This congeneity of human soul and the highest principles
of being constitutes the ontological foundation for the possibility of
such irradiation. Illumination

discloses the truth*(haqq)* immediately and needs no
verification*(tasdiq).* Logical instruments that verify the correctness
of "transition" procedures are of no use when no such transition takes
place.

The Sufi doctrine of the truth and the ways of acquiring it differs in
its central point from any of the doctrines that we have hitherto
discussed. No matter how truth is understood in Kalam, peripatetism,
Isma\`ilism, or the philosophy of illumination, all of these schools
have in common an explicit or implicit understanding of true knowledge
as something unhesitatingly established: the term "certainty"*(yaqin)*
generally serves to express this fixity. Such certainty is understood as
"quiescence"*(itmi'nan),* the same idea of quietude reached through
complete and true knowledge is expressed by the title of al-Kirmani's
magnum opus*Rahat al-'aql -* Peace of mind) on the basis of the
generally accepted notion of the "perfect"*(kamil)* and
"complete"*(tamm)* as immobile. The true. by virtue of its completeness,
needs nothing external to be accomplished and, consequently, no movement
is necessary for it. Against this understanding of truth as a state of
clear certainty, Sufism opposes the doctrine of the truth being
witnessed in its completeness in a state of "abashment" and
"confusion"*(hayra)* that presupposes constant restlessness.

Although in this respect Sufism stands in opposition to other trends of
medieval Islamic philosophy, there is doubtless continuity in the way
Sufi theoreticians arrive at the above conclusion. Peripatetism,
Isma\`ilism and the philosophy of illumination understand the
achievement of truth, at least in its logical form, as
"transition"*(intiqal)* from what a person possesses as established
truth to what he or she currently does not possess: as for mystical
revelation, it also provides a sort of finally established and
unequivocally valid knowledge. "The unknown - against the known," Ibn
Sina writes (Ibn Sina, 1960. Pt 1. p. 181): all things are divided into
two classes that stand to each other in a relation of exact mutual
correspondence; everything is truly known after it has been unknown.
Dividing things [445] into the "unseen" (*batin)* and the
manifest"*(zahir)* was commonplace in medieval Islamic thought, and
these concepts remain fundamental in Sufi epistemology as well, where
cognition is often referred to as "making [the unseen]
manifest"*(izhar).*

This substantial departure from traditional Islamic thinking in the
final conclusion of Sufi epistemology (that is, the cognition of truth
as "confusion" instead of as "fixed certainty") in spite of common
intention of finding the solution (truth as unseen made manifest) is
explained by a basic feature of this philosophy that may be defined as
interiorization. Both Sufi ontology and epistemology are deeply marked
by it. Just as the cause and effect relation is an inner division of the
same essence rather than an external relation between two different
essences, so the inner and the outside (the "hidden" and the "manifest")
are not two different and*definite* aspects of things, but rather one
and the same. What other schools of philosophy consider as
occurring*between* , Sufi philosophy regards as taking place*inside.*

However, Sufi philosophy does not deny other points of view. As the
doctrines of Ibn Sina and al-Suhrawardi demonstrated, logic may be

regarded as an incomplete version of immediate and perfect
truth-witnessing, rather than as its alternative. Ibn 'Arabi, the
greatest of Sufi philosophers, adopts the same position. In this sense
his theory of truth is inclusive rather than exclusive, for he regards
non-Sufi ways of cognition as also true - within their limits, however,
and not absolutely.

For example, the knowledge obtained through correct syllogisms is
certainly true, and there is no doubt about its scientific results, like
our knowledge of the sun's size or the rules of mathematics (Ibn 'Arabi,
1980. pp. 102-4). The intuitive "witnessing"*(mushahada)* gives true
knowledge as well: the "inner sight"*(basira)* discovers immediately
behind things their causes and thus discloses the inner essence of
things hidden under their manifest outwardness. The cause of things and
of their inner essence thus discovered is God, or The Truth*(al-Haqq) -*
each time seen in one of His infinite aspects. However, the "witnessing"
first brings into sight the thing, and then behind it, or inside it,
discovers God. The two are still divided and differentiated, and the
all-encompassing Truth that constitutes the*core* of everything is not
found as the thing's*outwardness.* The highest stage of truth is to
see*things in God.* to notice the sameness and equality of the
different, to be unable to differentiate. This is the ability of the
"heart"*(qalb).* Intellect, inner sight, and heart form an ascending
hierarchy of organs with their corresponding methods of cognition.

Rational knowledge is acquired by moving "from" premises "to" a
conclusion, by going along "the stretched path," as Ibn \`Arabi puts it
(Ibn 'Arabi, 1980, p. 73). The intuitive witnessing of God as the inner
essence of things spheres this line. But only when the sphered line
becomes equal to its center does "confusion" come, and the person sees
the hidden as manifest and the manifest as hidden, sees God as His
creation and the creation as God Himself. Total oneness and sameness,
the transcendence of any differentiation and the non-fixity of any
definiteness and any limit (the results of logical cognition included) -
this is what such a way of seeing the truth boils down to. The Sufi
[446] understanding of truth undermines well established stereotypes of
dichotomizing divisions. The fundamental ontological sameness of God and
His creation entails the sameness of any pair of opposed categories. The
law of excluded middle is irrelevant for this point of view: what it
points to is but a step that should inevitably be overcome. Truth turns
out to be a transcendence of dichotomic divisions - a transcendence
which, however, presupposes that each of them is fixed - but only as a
step in an unceasing movement, equal to any other of its infinite steps.


