Arbaeen of Imam Husayn
======================

By Shaykh Saleem Bhimji

[www.al-mubin.org](http://www.al-mubin.org)

*What follows in this piece is a brief look at the “Arba‘een” [the
commemoration of 40 days after the tragic events of Karbala] of Imam
al-Husayn, peace be upon him. The article concludes with the Arabic text
of Ziyarat Arba‘een with full English translation and a brief exposition
on certain passages of this powerful and moving visitation. Insha-Allah,
a more comprehensive understanding of this ziyarat will be presented in
the future.*

\*\*\*\*\*

There are very few mass gatherings in the world today which are entire
peaceful and which do not result in the loss of life, and in fact,
according to Wikipedia – “the Free Encyclopedia” - of the five
gatherings globally seeing over 10 million people, four were in Karbala:

*1. An estimated 21 million people visited the shrine of Imam Hussein in
Karbala, Iraq during Arba’een on 14 January 2012.*

*2. An estimated 15 million people visited the shrine of Imam Hussein in
Karbala, Iraq during Arba’een in 2011.*

*3. An estimated 15 million people attended the funeral of C. N.
Annadurai in Tamil Nadu, India in 1969.*

*4. An estimated 10 to 14 million people visited the shrine of Imam
Hussein in Karbala, Iraq during Arba’een in 2010.*

*5. An estimated 10 to 14 million people visited the shrine of Imam
Hussein in Karbala, Iraq during Arba’een in 2009*

![](/sites/default/files/arbaeen001.jpg)

Why is there such a fervent desire for millions to flock to what would
have been an otherwise unknown land and for millions to journey there by
foot from all parts of the world? This brief article will touch upon the
spiritual significance of *Arba‘een* as seen in the Noble Qur’an and
Islamic narratives as well as a short commentary on the *Ziyarat* of
*Arba‘een*.

The sayings of the Infallibles, peace be upon them all, have
emphatically guided the believers to be present in Karbala to mark the
40th day after the tragedy of Karbala and in fact, the 11th successor to
the Noble Prophet of Islam, Imam Hasan al-Askari, peace be upon him, has
actually considered this act as being one of the clear and apparent
signs of a true believer when he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علامات المؤمن خمس: صلاة إحدى وخمسين، وزيارة الأربعين، والتّختّم
باليمين، وتعفير الجبين و جهر ببسم الله الرحمن الرحيم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The signs of a true believer are five:

**1.** *51 rak’at of Salat (per day – 17 of which are the obligatory
prayers and 34 which are the recommended daily prayers)*

**2.** *Ziyarat Arba‘een;*

**3.** *Wearing a ring on the right hand (an Aqeeq ring);*

**4.** *Placing the head on the earth (during sajad in the Salat);*

**5.** *Openly pronouncing* **“بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم”** *(Bismillahir
Rahmaanir Raheem) when reciting the two surahs in the Salat.*

The *Ziyarat Arba‘een* which we recite in Karbala (and indeed from our
homes if we are not fortunate enough to be in Karbala on the 20th of
Safar) has been narrated from a companion named Safwan al-Jammaal from
Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammad as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, in which the Imam
told him to visit Imam Husayn and to recite a specific visitation
formula on the afternoon of the *Arba‘een*.

Although there are differences of opinion concerning the date of the
*Arba‘een-e-Husyani* - was it in the year 61 AH after the massacre in
Karbala, or was it the following year? Whatever the opinion is, the fact
remains that the visitation of the blessed grave of Imam Husayn, peace
be upon him, and his noble family and friends on the day of *Arba‘een*
is extremely important and is something which each and every true
believer will try and perform during his lifetime.

The first such visitation took form when Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari
paid his respects to Imam Husayn, peace be upon him. Jabir was a
well-known companion of the Prophet whom all Muslims love and respect;
and he had witnessed may wars and battles alongside the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his family, and he has narrated many
*ahadith* and in fact, he was so loved by the Messenger that the Prophet
would often go and visit him personally!

On one such meeting, Jabir asked his wife that when the Prophet comes
that she should not ask him any questions. She narrates that when the
Prophet came to their house, she did as she was asked and when Jabir met
him, he said: “O Messenger of Allah! Prayers from myself and my wife are
upon you!” The Prophet replied, “Prayers of Allah be upon you and your
wife!”

Indeed Jabir had heard numerous sayings from the Prophet in relation to
the status of Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him and he indeed fully
understood the lofty status of both grandsons of the Prophet – namely
Imam al-Hasan and al-Husayn as carried by the blessed heart of
al-Mustafa, and therefore it is of no amazement that he was the first
companion, despite his old age, who made the journey to Karbala after he
heard of what had happened to the beloved grandson of the Prophet, peace
be upon him and his family.

Al-A’mash narrates from ‘Atiyyah al-‘Awfi, who said: “I left with Jabir
ibn ‘Abdillah al-Ansari, may Allah have mercy on him, to visit the grave
of al-Husayn bin ‘Ali bin Abi Talib peace be upon him; and when we
entered Karbala, Jabir came near the bank of River Euphrates, performed
the major ablution *(ghusl)* and wore his clothes; then he opened his
purse which contained *su’d* [a plant with sweet fragrance]. He spread
the perfume over his body; thereafter he did not take a step save in the
remembrance of Allah, until he neared the grave [of al-Husayn, peace be
upon him].”

[Then] he said to me: “Make me touch the grave, and I made him do so.
Thereupon he fell over the grave unconscious.”

I sprinkled some water on him, and he gained consciousness.

Then he cried three times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا حُسين، يا حُسين، يا حُسين....
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Ya Husayn … Ya Husayn … Ya Husayn*

Addressing al-Husayn, peace be upon him, he said: “Why is the beloved
not responding to the call of the lover? But how can you respond, while
your veins have been severed, and your body has been separated from your
head?

I bear witness that you are the offspring of the Prophets, and the son
of the master of believers, and the offspring of the companion of piety,
and the offspring of guidance, and the fifth member of the people of the
cloak, and the son of the master of the chiefs, and the son of Fatimah,
the mistress of the women; how can you not be so, while the hand of the
Leader of the Apostles, peace be upon him and his family, fed you, and
you were breast-fed from the breast of belief, and trained in the bosoms
of pious people, your weaning accompanied the state of utter submission.

Hence you enjoyed a pleasant state both during your life time and after
your death; however, the hearts of the believers are sorrowful due to
your separation, and do not doubt about your great position. So upon you
be Allah’s Peace and Approval. And I bear witness that you faced what
your brother [Prophet] Yahya, peace be upon him, had faced.”

Thereafter Jabir felt the presence around the grave and said: “Peace be
upon you and the spirits that have descended in the neighbourhood of
al-Husayn, peace be upon him … I bear witness that you were steadfast in
your prayers and gave the *zakat* and you commanded the good and
prohibited the forbidden and struggled against the deniers of religion
and you worshipped Allah until conviction came to you. I swear by the
One Who sent Muhammad as a Prophet with truth; surely we participated
with you in what you encountered.”

‘Atiyyah (not understanding this powerful statement made by Jabir) says:
I asked Jabir: “How can that be possible, while we did not descend on
any valley, nor did we climb any mountainous area, nor did we fight with
the sword, whereas the heads of the group of al-Husayn, peace be upon
him, have been separated from their bodies, their children were made
orphans and their women were made widows?”

Jabir said: “O ‘Atiyyah, I heard from my beloved, the Apostle of Allah,
peace be upon him and his family, say: ‘Whosoever loves a nation, will
be resurrected with them, and whosoever loves the deed of a nation, will
be considered one who has participated in that deed (with them). I swear
by the One Who Sent Muhammad as a Prophet in truth, surely my intention
and the intention of my companions is according to the intention of
al-Husayn and his companions.”

[Then Jabir said to ‘Atiyyah]: “Take me towards the houses of Kufa.”

‘Atiyyah says: “When we reached a certain point on the way, Jabir said
to me: ‘O ‘Atiyyah, may I advise you, for I do not think that I will
meet you after this short journey? Love the lover of Aale Muhammad as
long as that person loves them, and have aversion for one who has
aversion for Aale Muhammad as long as that person has aversion for them;
for if a person was to fast and stand in prayer frequently and befriend
the lover of Aale Muhammad, then surely if one of their feet was to slip
due to excess of sin, the other foot would be firm due to love of Aale
Muhammad, for verily the lover of Aale Muhammad would return to Paradise
and the one who has aversion for them will return to the Hell Fire.’”

Does the number 40 have any significance?
-----------------------------------------

It is very much possible that the visitation of Jabir on the 20th of
Safar was “by chance” or a “coincidence” and that the 40th has/had no
significance and because he reached there on the 20th of Safar that we
now too mark this day – or it could be that this day actually does have
some mystical and spiritual importance?

In fact, there is spiritual significance to some numbers and this is
seen in the Qur’an and the traditions such that the number 40 is
repeated in many places of the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِذْ وَاعَدْنَا مُوسَى أَرْبَعِينَ لَيْلَةً ثُمَّ اتَّخَذْتُمُ
الْعِجْلَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ وَأَنْتُمْ ظَالِمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when We appointed a time of forty nights with Musa, then you
took the calf (for a god) after him and you were unjust.” (Suratul
Baqarah, 2: 51)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَالَ فَإِنَّهَا مُحَرَّمَةٌ عَلَيْهِمْ أَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً يَتِيهُونَ
فِي الْأَرْضِ فَلَا تَأْسَ عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْفَاسِقِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said: So it shall surely be forbidden to them for forty years,
they shall wander about in the land, therefore do not grieve for the
nation of transgressors.” (Suratul Maidah, 5:26)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَوَاعَدْنَا مُوسَى ثَلَاثِينَ لَيْلَةً وَأَتْمَمْنَاهَا بِعَشْرٍ
فَتَمَّ مِيقَاتُ رَبِّهِ أَرْبَعِينَ لَيْلَةً وَقَالَ مُوسَى لِأَخِيهِ
هَارُونَ اخْلُفْنِي فِي قَوْمِي وَأَصْلِحْ وَلَا تَتَّبِعْ سَبِيلَ
الْمُفْسِدِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We appointed with Musa a time of thirty nights and completed
them with ten (more), so the appointed time of his Lord was complete
forty nights, and Musa said to his brother Haroun: Take my place among
my people, and act well and do not follow the way of the
mischief-makers.” (Suratul A’raaf, 7:142)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَوَصَّيْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ إِحْسَانًا حَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ
كُرْهًا وَوَضَعَتْهُ كُرْهًا وَحَمْلُهُ وَفِصَالُهُ ثَلَاثُونَ شَهْرًا
حَتَّى إِذَا بَلَغَ أَشُدَّهُ وَبَلَغَ أَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً قَالَ رَبِّ
أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ
وَعَلَى وَالِدَيَّ وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحًا تَرْضَاهُ وَأَصْلِحْ لِي
فِي ذُرِّيَّتِي إِنِّي تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ وَإِنِّي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have enjoined on man doing of good to his parents; with
trouble did his mother bear him and with trouble did she bring him
forth; and the bearing of him and the weaning of him*** ***was thirty
months; until when he attains his maturity and reaches forty years, he
says: My Lord! grant me that I may give thanks for Thy favor which Thou
hast bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do good which
pleases Thee and do good to me in respect of my offspring; surely I turn
to Thee, and surely I am of those who submit.” (Suratul Ahqaf, 46:15)***

In addition, there are numerous traditions which mention the number “40”
such as the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن رسول الله (صلى الله عليه و آله و سلام): إنّ الأرض لتبكي على المؤمن
أربعين صباحاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his family, has said:
*“Indeed the Earth laments over the death of a true believer for the
period of 40 days.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الإمام محمد الباقر (عليه السلام) أنّه قال: إنّ السّماء بكت على
الحسين أربعين صباحاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, peace be upon him, has said: *“Indeed the sky
lamented over the death of al-Husayn for a period of 40 days.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الإمام الصّادق(عليه السلام) أنّه قال: إنّ السّماء بكت على الحسين
أربعين صباحاً بالدّم، والأرض بكت عليه أربعين صباحاً بالسّواد، والشّمس
بكت عليه أربعين صباحاً بالكسوف والحمرة، والملائكة بكت عليه أربعين
صباحاً، وما اختضبت امرأة منّا ولا ادّهنت ولا اكتحلت ولا رجّلت حتّى
أتانا رأس عبيد الله بن زياد وما زلنا في عبرة من بعده.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, said: *“The heavens cried for
forty days with blood (weeping) over Imam Husayn; the earth cried for
forty days by being covered with darkness; the sun cried for forty days
by being in eclipse and turning red; the mountains were torn apart and
dispersed; the seas gushed out and the angles cried for forty days over
him. After Imam Husayn’s martyrdom, all of our women stopped colouring
their hair, using kohl, applying oil, and styling their hair until the
head of Ubaydullah ibn Ziyaad was sent to us; and even after that we
(all) continued to weep over him.”*

In summary, this all points to the reality that there is “something”
contained in the visitation to Karbala 40 days after the tragic massacre
of Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him and his family, as the “40th” is
not marked for any other Imam nor is it marked for any other Prophet –
and perhaps if we are given the Divine Providence (tawfeeq) to be in
Karbala on the 20th of Safar to pay our respects and condolences to the
Prophet and the noble family on the supreme sacrifice offered on the
10th of Muharram 61 ah, then we may be able to benefit from the
spiritual bounties contained in this spiritual journey to reach our
Beloved.


