Ziyarat Arbaeen
===============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Benefecient, The Merciful***

Part One
--------

**Sending our greetings of peace, prayers and salutations upon the
Master of the Martyrs**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلىٰ وَلِيِّ اللهِ وَحَبِيبِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Peace be upon the intimate friend of Allah, and His beloved!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلىٰ خَلِيلِ اللهِ وَنَجِيبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Peace be upon the close friend of Allah, and His confidant!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلىٰ صَفِيِّ اللهِ وَابْنِ صَفِيِّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Peace be upon the choicest confidant of Allah, and the son of the
choicest confidant [of Allah].*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلىٰ الْحُسَيْنِ الْـمَظْلُومِ الشَّهِيدِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Peace be upon Husayn, the oppressed, the martyr.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلسَّلاَمُ عَلىٰ أَسِيرِ الْكُرُبَاتِ وَقَتِيلِ الْعَبَرَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Peace be upon the hostage surrounded by the tightening circle of sorrow
and grief, killed by a horde of savages.*

### Explanation

In the introductory salutations of the *ziyarat*, Imam as-Sadiq, peace
be upon him, discusses the spiritual lineage of Imam al-Husayn, peace be
upon him, and mentions that he is the son of the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him and his family – the one who is the most beloved to
Allah. Some of the Prophets of Allah are referred to by their titles
which they are well-known by; Prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him, who is
known as the Friend of Allah; Prophet Musa, peace be upon him, who is
known as the one who spoke to Allah; Prophet Isa, peace be upon him, who
is the Word of Allah; Prophet Nuh, peace be upon him, who is the Prophet
of Allah – keeping in mind that he (Prophet Nuh) was the first one to
attain the status of *nubuwwah*; Prophet Adam, peace be upon him, who
was the Chosen of Allah and finally, Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him
and his family, who is the Most Beloved of Allah.

In regards to the phrase “Peace be upon you” (السلام عليك) - many
different meanings have been given:

1. *As-Salam* (The Peace) is one of the names of Allah, the Grand and
Majestic and thus in this meaning, we are asking for Allah’s protection
to be on Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him.

2. *As-Salam* (The Peace) in the meaning of pure and complete
submission.

3. *As-Salam* (The Peace) in the meaning of safety and security.

With these different interpretations given, whose over all meaning is
that of safety and security, we can understand that when we greet Imam
al-Husayn, peace be upon him, with this phrase, what we are saying is
that we, who are visiting the Imam or are reciting this visitation from
far away, that we are promising the Imam that no harm or infliction of
grief will ever emanate from us unto the Imam – not at that particular
time that we are addressing him, nor at any other time – meaning that we
will do our best to keep away from breaking the laws which they
promulgated.

We understand that their entire purpose of existence was to guide and
rectify humanity and to keep us on the path of *tawheed* and the
obedience of Allah and this includes the obedience of all of their
teachings – including the moral illnesses such as pride, arrogance,
boasting, miserliness, love of the self, love of power, backbiting, etc…

Thus, when we recite these passages we must also work to ensure that we
remove all such negative ethical traits from within ourselves so that we
do not cause hurt or grief to the Imam.

When we have done this, then our ‘*Salam’* towards the Imam will be
truthful and sincere. It is through the recitation of the greeting and
its repetition that we seek spiritual closeness to the Imam and we
instill the love for the Imam and his teachings within our lives and we
work to remove all of the negative traits which may have built up within
ourselves over the years.

Such greetings to the Imam and his companions and family members
announce to Allah, the Prophet, the Imam and to our own inner heart that
we will not rest until we have removed and annihilated all of the inner
demons we carry and that we will also not rest until all external evil
forces have been destroyed and reduced to mere mention in the books of
history.

Part Two
--------

**Martyrdom and the bearing of witness by Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq, peace be
upon him, in regards to the greatness and lofty status of Imam Husayn,
peace be upon him**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللَّـهُمَّ إِنِّي أَشْهَدُ أَنَّهُ وَلِيُّكَ وَابْنُ وَلِيِّكَ
وَصَفِيُّكَ وَابْنُ صَفِيِّكَ الْفَائِزُ بِكَرَامَتِكَ، أَكْرَمْتَهُ
بِالشَّهَادَةِ وَحَبَوْتَهُ بِالسَّعَادَةِ، وَأَجْتَبَيْتَهُ بِطِيبِ
الْوِلاَدَةِ، وَجَعَلْتَهُ سَيِّداً مِنَ السَّادَةِ، وَقَائِداً مِنَ
الْقَادَةِ، وَذَائِداً مِنَ الَّذَادَةِ، وَأَعْطَيْتَهُ مَوَارِيثَ
الأَنْبِيَاءِ، وَجَعَلْتَهُ حُجَّةً عَلى خَلْقِكَ مِنَ الأَوْصِيَاءِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah! I give witness that beyond a shadow of doubt he is Your
favourite and choicest confidant, who enjoys Your confidence and favour,
precisely like his father. You looked to him and elected him in Your
cause, picked him and chose him for the good fortune, selected for him
the best purified parents. appointed him as a guardian, a leader, and a
defender of rights, a true representative (inheritor and progenitor) of
guardians, leaders and defenders of rights, gave him a lot and even more
from the inheritance of the Prophets, put him forward as a decisive
argument, along with the other successors (meaning the twelve Imams) to
all of mankind.*

### Explanation

In this transient world, everyone attains status or worth through a
“means” – either someone or something. In this portion of the *ziyarat*,
Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him, refers to Imam al-Husayn, peace be
upon him, as being the representative of Allah and the son of the
representative of Allah; and that he is the chosen one and the son of
the chosen one of Allah – and even though he comes from such a lineage
and possesses such a level of dignity and honour, however it is through
his martyrdom that he was given the greatest honour.

Indeed, it is through his martyrdom – and what a martyrdom he
experienced that Allah granted him the greatest level of felicity and
success and in actually when we review history we see that Yazid and his
supporters were seeking fame and glory in this transient world and went
through many means to try and attain it, however we see that Imam
al-Husayn, peace be upon him, and his companions who were seeking
nothing other than the pleasure of Allah ended up reaching the status of
being the most talked about and mentioned individuals that the world has
ever seen.

Part Three
----------

**The goals of Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him, in his uprising**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَعْذَرَ فىِ الدُّعَاءِ وَمَنَحَ النُّصْحَ، وَبَذَلَ مُهْجَتَهُ
فِيكَ لِيَسْتَنْقِذَ عِبَادَكَ مِنَ الْجَهَالَةِ وَحَيْرَةِ
الضَّلاَلَةِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He met with deadly dangers, acted justly and fairly, made use of
everything belonging to him to pay full attention to give sincere
advice; took pains, made every effort, and put his heart, mind, soul and
life at the disposal of Thy mission to liberate the people from the yoke
of ignorance and the evil of bewilderment.*

### Explanation

Before leaving for Mecca, Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him, addressed
his half-brother, Muhammad al-Hanafiyah and gave him a will and
testament which listed the reasons for his going to Mecca and what he
hoped to achieve by his movement – this can be summarized as being, *“I
am seeking to bring about reformation in the nation of my grandfather,
the Messenger of Allah and to enjoin the good and to forbid the evil…”*

Through a cursory study of the time of Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon
him, we understand that in the 50 short years following the death of the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his family, so many changes
had taken place in the religion and untold innovations had entered the
pristine teachings that the spirit and face of Islam had been altered
immensely.

In order to restore the true visage of the religion of the Noble Prophet
Muhammad, peace be upon him and his family, and to carry the religion
forward to future generations, Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him, saw no
other alternative but to take a stand in order to safeguard the
religious teachings of Allah.

Through this, the Imam was making a clear proclamation that the current
religion, rulers and state of affairs were not in line with the Islamic
teachings of the Prophet, and that there was corruption present at all
levels. Thus, his movement was to ensure that the original teachings of
the religion would be resurrected and reach all parts of the world.

Part Four
---------

**A glimpse at the killers of Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ تَوازَرَ عَلَيْهِ مَنْ غَرَّتْهُ الدُّنْيَا، وَبَاعَ حَظَّهُ
بِالأَرْذَلِ الأَدْنَى، وَشَرَى آخِرَتَهُ بِالثَّمَنِ الأَوْكَسِ،
وَتَغَطْرَسَ وَتَرَدّى فِي هَوَاهُ، وَأَسْخَطَكَ وَأَسْخَطَ نَبِيَّكَ،
وَأَطَاعَ مِنْ عِبَادِكَ أَهْلَ الشِّقَاقِ وَالنِّفَاقِ وَحَمَلَةَ
الأَوْزَارِ الْـمُسْتَوْجِبِينَ النَّارَ، فَجَاهَدَهُمْ فِيكَ صَابِراً
مُحْتَسِباً حَتَّى سُفِكَ فِي طَاعَتِكَ دَمُهُ وَاسْتُبِيحَ حَرِيمُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*But an* *evildoer, deceived with empty hopes of mean and worthless
worldly gains, had pressed heavily on him, and sold out his share (of
the eternal bliss) for the meanest and a lowest bargain, betrayed his
“Day of Judgment” for a vulgar return, took pride in insolence, fell
into the fathom-well of his own base desires, provoked You and Your
Prophet to anger, did as the harsh discordant, the hypocrite, the
heavily burdened bearers of sin, condemned to Hellfire, advised to him,
however, he (the Imam), steadily, rightly and justly coped with them,
until in Your obedience, gave his life after which his family was set
adrift.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللَّـهُمَّ فَالْعَنْهُمْ لَعْناً وَبِيلاً وَعَذِّبْهُمْ عَذَاباً
أَلِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, therefore, condemn them to hell as a denunciation and
conviction; and crack down on them with a painful punishment.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا ابْنَ رَسُولِ اللهِ، اَلسَّلامُ عَلَيْكَ يَا
ابْنَ سَيِّدِ الأَوْصِيَاءِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Peace be upon you O the son of the Messenger of Allah! Peace be upon
you O the son of the first of the successors (of the Holy Prophet)*

### Explanation

In this portion of the *ziyarat*, Imam as-Sadiq, peace be upon him,
describes the killers of his grandfather.

1. Umar ibn Sa’ad ibn Abil Waqqaas was one of the people directly
involved in the events of Karbala. Sa’ad who was the father of Umar was
one of the first people to accept Islam during the initial appointment
of Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him and his family. He witnessed and
went through many hardships in the formative years of Islam and through
which Iran was conquered and Islam was brought to that nation and he was
also responsible for the establishment of Kufa as a city.

However like many other companions of Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon
him and his family, the love of this transient world took him over and
when the issue of the caliphate came up, he did not support the rights
of Imam Ali, peace be upon him, and died sometime between the years of
55 and 58 ah.

Umar ibn Sa’ad, even though he was well-known due to his father’s name
and history, he too was a man who was enamored by the material world and
was a person whom both the Prophet and Imam Ali did not think highly of
and it is for this reason that Sa’ad himself did not leave any
inheritance for his son.

Umar ibn Sa’ad played an instrumental role in Karbala as he was the
commander of the forces of Ibn Ziyaad. He gathered over 4,000 soldiers
from Kufa to stand up against Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him.

2. Shimr ibn Dhil Jawshan was another perpetrators of Karbala. During
the era of Imam Ali, peace be upon him, he was actually on the side of
and a fervent supporter of the Imam and fought alongside the Commander
of the Faithful in the Battle of Siffeen against Muawiyah ibn Abu
Sufyan, however he ended up “changing” and then supported the likes of
Yazid and fought against Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him, on the day
of Ashura, and he committed many atrocities against the Ahlul Bayt,
peace be upon all of them.

This is an example of the types of people who fought against and killed
Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him, and his noble family and companion.

Both the historical narrations and the traditions of the Prophet and his
family show us that one of the principle reasons for what transpired in
Karbala had everything to do with “love of the transient world” and a
desire to attain as much of it as possible.

Farazdaq, the famous poet has stated: “In the year 60 ah, I accompanied
my mother from Kufa towards Mecca for the Hajj. On the way, we met Imam
al-Husayn, peace be upon him. The Imam asked me, “What is the news from
Kufa?” I replied: “The hearts of the people are with you, however their
swords are with the Bani Umayyah…”

To this Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him, replied: “Indeed people are
servants of this transient world and the religion is but a plaything on
the tips of their tongues. They gravitate around the religion so long as
it meets their material needs and requirements, however when they are
tested with tribulations and difficulties, very few people hold firm
onto the true faith.”

Part Five
---------

**Learning life lessons from the Leader of the Martyrs**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَشْهَدُ اَنَّكَ اَمِينُ اللهِ وَابْنُ اَمِينِهِ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I bear witness that Allah put faith in you like He had full confidence
in your father,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِشْتَ سَعِيداً وَمَضَيْتَ حَمِيداً وَمُتَّ فَقِيداً مَظْلُوماً
شَهِيداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*and that you always looked for and collected good and virtue, lived a
highly praiseworthy life, and departed from this world a martyr,
forsaken and abused;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْهَدُ أَنَّ اللهِ مُنْجِزٌ مَا وَعَدَكَ، وَمُهْلِكٌ مَنْ
خَذَلَكَ، وَمُعَذِّبٌ مَنْ قَتَلَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And I bear witness that Allah will promptly fulfill the promise He made
to you, and destroy those who left you helpless and punish those who
killed you;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ وَفَيْتَ بِعَهْدِ اللهِ وَجَاهَدْتَ فِي سَبِيلِهِ
حَتَّى أَتَاكَ الْيَقِينُ، فَلَعَنَ اللهُ مَنْ قَتَلَكَ، وَلَعَنَ
اللهُ مَنْ ظَلَمَكَ، وَلَعَنَ اللهُ اُمَّةً سَمِعَتْ بِذَلِكَ
فَرَضِيَتْ بِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*And I bear witness that you kept your promise made with Allah, and
strived in His way until what was certain came upon you, so curse of
Allah be on those who killed you, and curse of Allah be on those who
oppressed you, and curse of Allah be on the people who came to know of
it and approved (of all of it).*

### Explanation

The movement of Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him, has taught us many
lessons – both on an individual and personal level and also on a
societal level – some of which include:

1. **Personal and individual:**

    i. Spirit of monotheism (*Tawheed*) and the spirit of connection to
Allah;

    ii. Servitude to Allah;

    iii. Turning away from personal desires and the allures of this
world;

    iv. Submission to the will and pleasure of Allah;

    v. Requirement of studying and knowing all of the Divinely taught
values and worth of the human being;

    vi. Bravery and chivalry;

    vii. Standing firm in the face of difficulties and tribulations;

    viii. The spiritual worth of the human being;

    ix. Forgiveness and clemency;

    x. Not being afraid of death or martyrdom – rather, to accept these
wholeheartedly;

2. **Communal and societal:**

    i. Self-sacrifice and thinking of others before oneself;

    ii. Loyalty;

    iii. Equality of humanity and removal of all forms of
discrimination;

    iv. Importance of being political aware and active;

    v. Enjoining the good and forbidding the evil;

    vi. Realizing that the truth does not lie in ‘numbers’;

    vii. Standing up to oppression and tyranny and not following the
wicked;

    viii. Understanding that “politics” is not separate from “religion,”
and that “social struggle” and “spiritual action” are one and the same.

These lessons mentioned above are but a drop in the unlimited ocean of
the noble Divine teachings which were embodied in the message of the
Prophets and their safeguarding at the hands of all of the Imams –
specifically Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon all of them.

Part Six
--------

**Renewal of the pledge of allegiance to the Doyen of the Martyrs,
al-Husayn ibn Ali, peace be upon them both**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَللَّـهُمَّ إِنِّي أُشْهِدُكَ أَنِّي وَلِيٌّ لـِمَنْ وَالاَهُ
وَعَدُوٌّ لِـمَنْ عَادَاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah be my witness that I make friends with those who love him and
oppose those who deny him.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِأَبِي أَنْتَ وَأُمّي يَا بْنَ رَسُولِ اللهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*May my father and mother be sacrificed for you O the son of the
Messenger of Allah.*

### Explanation

This portion teaches us an important lesson which is that our friendship
and enmity in life should revolve around their friendship and enmity; we
also learn that our happiness and grief and every other emotion and
action in our lives should all revolve around Imam al-Husayn, peace be
upon him, and that in actuality, we become “extensions” of the Husyani
mission.

Since the meaning of “*Shia*” is “follower,” it only makes sense that as
the “*Shia*” of the Imams, we truly follow them in war and peace; in
love and hate – if we truly wish to be counted amongst their adherents
and followers.

This is the same understanding that we are given in *Hadith al-Kisa* in
which we say, “O Allah! Indeed these are my Ahul Bayt and my confidants
and my supporters. Their flesh is my flesh; their blood is my blood;
whoever hurts them has hurt me, whoever displeases them, displeases me,
and whoever fights against them, fights against me; I am at war with
those who are at war with them and I am at peace with those who are at
peace with them and I have enmity with those who have enmity with them
and love those who love them. Indeed they are from me and I am from
them…”

Part Seven
----------

**The pure, untouched genealogy of Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَشْهَدُ اَنَّكَ كُنْتَ نُوراً فىِ الأَصْلاَبِ الشَّامِخَةِ
وَالأَرْحَامِ الـْمُطَهَّرَةِ، لَمْ تُنَجِّسْكَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةُ
بِاَنْجَاسِهَا وَلَمْ تُلْبِسْكَ الْـمُدْلَهِمَّاتُ مِنْ ثِيَابِها،
وأَشْهَدُ أَنَّكَ مِنْ دَعَائِمِ الدِّينِ وأَرْكَانِ الـْمُسْلِمينَ
وَمَعْقِلِ الْـمُؤْمِنينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I know and bear witness that you were a Divinely-inspired light in the
sublime loins and in the pure wombs, never touched you the dirt of
ignorance, nor ever obscurity concealed you in its folds; I bear witness
that you are the pillar of the religion - support of the Muslims, refuge
of the faithful;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاَشْهَدُ اَنَّكَ الإِمَامُ الْبَرُّ التَّقِيُّ الرَّضِيُّ الزَّكِيُّ
الْهَادِيُ الْـمَهْدِيُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I bear witness that you are a truthful, well-aware, content,
intelligent, rightly guided guide (Imam);*

Part Eight
----------

**A description of the progeny of Imam al-Husayn, peace be upon him**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاَشْهَدُ اَنَّ الأئِمَّةَ مِنْ وُلْدِكَ كَلِمَةُ التَّقْوى وَأعْلامُ
الْهُدى وَالْعُرْوَةُ الْوُثْقى، وَالْحُجَّةُ على أهْلِ الدُّنْيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I bear witness that the Imams among your descendants are the symbols of
“conscious piety” and signs of “true guidance”, the “safe handle”-
Islam - and the decisive arguments over mankind;*

Part Nine
---------

**The theological beliefs (Usul ad-Din) of the followers of the Ahlul
Bayt, peace be upon them all**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأَشْهَدُ أنّي بِكُمْ مُؤْمِنٌ وَبِاِيابِكُمْ، مُوقِنٌ بِشَرايِعِ ديني
وَخَواتيمِ عَمَلي، وَقَلْبي لِقَلْبِكُمْ سِلْمٌ وَأَمْرِي لِأَمْرِكُمْ
مُتَّبِعٌ وَنُصْرَتي لَكُمْ مُعَدَّةٌ حَتّى يَأذَنَ اللهِ لَكُمْ،
فَمَعَكُمْ مَعَكُمْ لا مَعَ عَدُوِّكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I declare positively that I have full faith in you, and I know for
certain that you will return. I am fully committed to the laws of my
religion and certain of my deeds, my mind and heart ready for your
return and my affairs carried out in the light of your instructions,
until Allah gives you permission, together with you - along with you,*
***and not*** *with your enemies.*

Part Ten
--------

**Salawat (prayers of Allah) upon the noble Ahlul Bayt, peace be upon
them all**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلَواتُ اللهِ عَلَيْكُمْ وَعلى أرْواحِكُمْ وَأجْسادِكُمْ وَشاهِدِكُمْ
وَغائِبِكُمْ وَظاهِرِكُمْ وَباطِنِكُمْ آمينَ رَبَّ الْعالِمينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Blessings of Allah be upon you, and upon your souls, and upon your
bodies, and when you are present, and when you are absent, and upon your
perceivable aspects, and upon your innermost genius, be it so, O Lord of
the worlds!*


