Preface
=======

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

The subject under discussion is the knowledge of the Principles of
Jurisprudence (*Usul’ul Fiqh*). The study of Principles of Jurisprudence
is tantamount to a preparation to the study of Jurisprudence.

The knowledge about the Principles of Jurisprudence is more profound
than the knowledge of Jurisprudence itself. The relationship between the
study of Jurisprudence and its Principles is the same as it is between
the study of Logic and Philosophy.

For example, everybody knows that the price of a certain commodity shows
an upward trend while that of another remains static. This knowledge is
superficial but the knowledge as to why the prices show an upward trend
is a deep-rooted knowledge. The Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah of the Holy
Prophet gives us precise commandments and edicts to adhere to the
teachings of Islam in every walk of life; but all of these commandments
have not been explained in detail.

It has been so because events and situations pertaining to relevant
human activity and behavior vary; but to arrive at conclusions regarding
various general rules and regulations, a guideline in the form of
principles has no doubt been laid down.

Hence, the study of the Principles of Jurisprudence viz. the principles
of deducing laws has become very important as well as a fascinating
subject. The work on this subject started from the second century of the
Hegira with a view to making correct deductions from Islamic injunctions
for practical purposes.

In short, the Principles of Jurisprudence is the study of those rules
that are used in deducing Islamic laws from the Book of Allah (Qur'an)
and the Traditions of the Holy Prophet (*Ahadith*).  
 Publishers

The need for ‘Ilm’ul Usul
-------------------------

A man who believes in Allah, Islam and the Islamic law and who knows
that being a slave of Allah, the Almighty, he is accountable to Him for
all his actions, has no alternative but to lead his life in every
respect in accordance with the law of Islam. His common sense demands
that he should base all his personal actions as well as his relations
with others on Islamic teachings, and for all practical purposes take
that position which his knowledge of himself that is the knowledge that
he is a slave of Allah and has to obey the law sent by Him to His
Prophet, enjoins upon him.

In view of this, it is essential that in his practical life man should
know clearly what he should do and what he should not.  
 Had all the injunctions of Islam been quite clear and easy to
understand, everybody could determine himself what he should do in a
given case.

Everybody knows that it is his duty to follow the Islamic law. He has to
do whatever has been enjoined by it and has to refrain from whatever has
been declared improper by it. As for the acts which have been declared
permissible, he is at liberty to do or not to do them, Therefore if all
the rules of Islamic law as to what is obligatory, forbidden and
permissible were clear and definitely known, there would have been no
doubt regarding the practical attitude that a man should take to observe
the Islamic law in any given situation. In this case, there would have
also been no need of any wide scale research or study.

But owing to many factors including our remoteness from the time when
Islamic law was enunciated, in many cases the religious instructions are
not very clear and appear to be complicated. Consequently in these cases
it is very difficult for a layman to make a decision based on the
understanding of Islamic law.

Naturally a man, who does not know whether a particular act is
obligatory, forbidden or permissible according to Islamic teachings,
cannot be sure what practical attitude he should adopt in regard to that
particular act.

For this reason it is necessary to set up a science that may look into
each and every case and state with proof what practical attitude one
should adopt in regard to it according to the Islamic law.

The science of jurisprudence has come into being for this very purpose,
it determines and specifies the practical attitude in each specific case
in accordance with Islamic Law. This specification is supported by
arguments and proofs. The jurist endeavors to find out a rule of law for
every occasion and every incident in life, It is this process which is
technically called *Ijtihad*.

To find out the rules of law actually means the delineation of practical
attitude towards Islamic law. This delineation is substantiated by means
of supporting arguments. By practical attitude we mean the faithful
observance of the law of Islam, which is the duty of everybody.

Hence the science of Islamic jurisprudence means the science of the
arguments adduced in support of the fixation and delineation of
practical attitude towards every specific situation in conformity with
the shariah (Islamic law), the faithful observance of which is our
obligatory duty. The fixation of practical attitude through arguments is
what we call *Istinbat* (deduction) in the matter of Islamic law.

Thus it may be said that the science of Islamic jurisprudence is the
science of deducing the rules of Islamic law; in other words, it is the
knowledge of the process of deduction. The science of jurisprudence uses
two methods to determine the practical attitude by means of a proof that
removes any ambiguity or complexity from it:

**1. Indirect Method:** That means proving a rule of law by discovering
that it has been specifically prescribed by Islam and thus fixing
clearly the practical attitude enjoined on man by his duty in regard to
the observance of Islamic law. If we can prove that a certain action is
obligatory, we can be sure what our attitude should be to it and can
know that we must take that action.  
**2. Direct Method:** In this method a proof is adduced to determine the
practical attitude, but not through the discovery of a clear decision in
a particular case, as we I observed in the indirect method. Here we cite
a direct argument to determine what the practical attitude should be.
This is done in the case in which we are unable to find a firm legal
decision and do not know whether a particular act according to the
Islamic law is obligatory, forbidden or permissible.

In this case we cannot successfully employ the first method in the
absence of enough legal proof, but have to resort to other arguments
which may help us in determining our practical attitude and in deciding
what we should do so that we may be able to follow the teachings of
Islam earnestly and may not be slack in our duty which Islam has imposed
on us.  
 In both these methods the jurist deduces the rules of Islamic law and
fixes the attitude to be taken vis-à-vis the Islamic law. He adduces a
proof to support his opinion either in a direct or an indirect way.

The process of deduction in the science of Islamic jurisprudence is so
vast that it covers every event and every happening in human life. A
rule has to be deduced to cover every eventuality and every occasion.
For this purpose the jurist employs the above-mentioned two methods.

It is this process of deduction which comprises the science of
jurisprudence, and in spite of its multifold variety consists of a
number of common elements and general rules, which put together, form
the basis of the process of deduction, which constitutes the science of
jurisprudence.

The common elements forming the basis of deduction require the
institution of a special science for their study and processing to meet
the requirements of jurisprudence. This science is called *‘Ilm’ul
Usul’ul* *Fiqh* (the science of the principles of jurisprudence).

Definition of ‘Ilm’ul Usul
--------------------------

On this basis *‘Ilm’ul Usul* (the science of the principles of Islamic
jurisprudence) may be defined as the science dealing with the common
elements in the procedure of deducing Islamic laws. In order to grasp
this definition it is essential that we know what are the common
elements in the procedure of deduction (*Istinbat*).  
 Now let us cite a few examples of this procedure so that through a
comparative study of these, we may arrive at the idea of the common
elements, in the procedure of deduction.  
 Suppose, for instance, that a jurist faces the following questions and
wishes to answer them:

1. Is it prohibited for one who is fasting to immerse himself in
water?  
 2. Is it obligatory on an individual who inherits wealth from his
father to pay its khums?  
 3. Does prayers become null and void because of laughter during that
time?

If the jurist wants to reply to the first question, for example, he
would say, “Yes, immersion in water is prohibited for one who is
fasting''. The jurist derived this law of Islam by following a tradition
narrated by Ya'qub ibn Shu'ayb from Imam Ja'far Sadiq (a). “Imam Sadiq
(a) said, neither a mohrim (one in the state of ehram, i.e. ready for
pilgrimage) nor one who is fasting should immerse himself in water”. A
sentence framed in this way indicates, in common parlance, according to
philologists, to prohibition. The narrator of this tradition, Ya'qub ibn
Shu'ayb, is reliable and trustworthy.

And although a reliable and trustworthy narrator may, in rare cases, err
or deviate (since he is not infallible), the Almighty Law-giver has
prohibited us from attributing error and deviation to any reliable and
trustworthy narrator, and has declared such narrations to be taken as
true. He has also ordered us to follow them without paying any attention
to the slight possibility of error or deviation. Thus the conclusion is
drawn from the above that immersion in water is prohibited (haram) for
one who is fasting, and the *Mukallaf* (responsible person in the eyes
of Islamic law) must abstain from it while fasting in accordance with
the law of Islam.

The jurist will reply to the second question in the negative, i.e. that
it is not obligatory for a son to pay khums on the legacy (received)
from his father, because there is a tradition in that behalf, narrated
by Ali ibn Mahziyir, in which Imam Sadiq (a) has defined the kinds of
wealth on which the payment of khums is obligatory. In common parlance
this sentence clarifies that the Almighty Law-giver has not imposed
khums on legacies that are transferred from father to son. Although the
possibility exists that the narrator, in spite of his reliability and
trustworthiness, may have erred, the Almighty Lawgiver has ordered us to
follow the narrations of the reliable and trustworthy narrators, and to
disregard the slight possibility of error or deviation on his side.

Thus the *Mukallaf* is not bound to pay khums on wealth inherited from
his father, according to the Islamic law. The jurist will reply to the
third question in the affirmative i.e. “Laughter nullifies prayers”.
This reply is based on the tradition narrated by Zurarah from Imam Sadiq
who says, “Laughter does not invalidate ablution (wuzu) but it
invalidates prayers”. In common parlance, this would mean that a prayer
(salat) in which laughter occurs will be deemed null and void, and will
have to be repeated obligatorily.

In other words this means the nullification of the prayer. And the
narration of Zurarah falls among those which the Almighty Law-giver has
commanded us to follow and for which He has given clear and revealing
proofs. Thus it is obligatory on the worshipper, according to the
Islamic law, to repeat the prayers in which laughter occurred, as that
is required of him by the Islamic law.

By examining these three juristic standpoints we find that the laws,
which the jurist derived, belong to different categories. The first
concerns fasting and the one who fasts; the second khums and the
economic system of Islam; and the third prayer and some of its limits.
We also see that the proofs on which the jurist relied are all
different. Regarding the first law he relied on the narration of Ya'qub
ibn Shu'ayb, for the second on that of Ali ibn Mahziyar and for the
third, on that of Zurarah. Each of these narrations has its own text and
special verbal construction, which is essential to study in depth, and
to clearly define. However in the midst of this variety and these
differences in the three standpoints, some common elements are found in
all the three cases. These common elements were utilized by the jurists
in all the three procedures of deduction.  
 Among those common elements is the recourse to common parlance (al-'Urf
al-'Am) to understand a text (al-Nass).[^1] Thus the jurist relied for
his understanding the text in each case on the manner in which the text
would be understood in general usage. This means that general usage is a
valid proof and a competent source in fixing the exact meanings of
words. In terms of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, it is called Hujjiyah al-Zuhur
al-'Urfi,[^2] or the validity of general usage as a proof. So Hujjiyah
al-Zuhur al-'Urfi' is a common element in the three procedures of
deduction.  
 Similarly, another common element is found and that is the command of
the Almighty Law-giver, to accept and follow the narrations of the
reliable and trustworthy narrators. The jurist in each of the three
cases of deduction discussed and came up against a text transmitted by a
reliable and trustworthy narrator. In those texts the possibility of
error and deviation exists, since the narrators were not infallible.
However, the jurist disregarded this possibility, nay, ignored it
completely, on the basis of the command of the Almighty Law-giver to
accept and follow the narrations of the reliable and trustworthy
narrators.

To this common element we give the name Hujjiyahtul Khabar or the
validity of a reliable transmitted text as proof. Thus Hujjiyahtu'l
Khabar is a common element in all the three cases of deduction discussed
above. Had it not been so, it would have been impossible for the jurist
to derive the prohibition of immersion in water in the first case, or
that the payment of khums being not obligatory in the second case or the
nullification of prayers by laughter in the third instance.

Thus, we arrive at the conclusion that the procedure to deduce the law
consists of particular as well as common elements. By “particular
elements” we mean those elements

that vary from case to case. Thus the narration of Ya'qub ibn Shu'ayb is
a particular element in deriving the prohibition of immersion in water
(for one who is fasting) because it does not enter into other operations
of deductions. In such case other particular elements take its place as
for example, the narration of Ali ibn Mahziyar and Zurarah. By “common
element” we mean the general rules which enter into different operations
of deduction on a variety of subjects, as are the elements of Hujjiyah
al-Zuhur al-'Urfi and Hujjiyahtu'l Khabar.

In *‘Ilm’ul Usul* the common elements are studied in the process of
deduction which are not confined specifically to anyone legal problem.
And in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* (the science of jurisprudence) the particular
elements are studied in each case of the process of deduction that
concern that legal problem particularly.

Thus, it is left to the jurist to scrutinize meticulously, in every
legal problem, the particular narrations, which are connected with that
problem and to study the value of those narrations and to endeavor to
understand the texts and words in the light of common parlance. On the
other hand, the specialist in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* deals with the examination
of the validity of common parlance in itself as a proof (i.e.
*Hujjiyahtu'l 'Urf al-'Am*) and of the validity of a reliably
transmitted text as a proof (i.e. *Hujjiyahtu'l Khabar*). He poses
questions along the following lines: Is common parlance valid proof?
What are the limits within which recourse to common parlance is
obligatory'? On what evidence is the validity of a reliably transmitted
text established as a proof? What are the general conditions in a
reliably transmitted text by virtue of which the Almighty Law-giver
confers upon it the status of validity as a proof and deems it as
acceptable evidence? And there are other such questions pertaining to
the common elements in the process of deduction.

In this light we can conclude that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* is the science dealing
with the common elements in the process of deduction. It is the science
which discusses the elements which enter into different cases of
deduction to derive laws on a variety of subjects, as, for example,
al-Zuhur al-'Urfi and al-Khabar as a proof are two common elements which
were relied upon in the derivation of the laws concerning fasting, khums
and prayers (as discussed above).  
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* does not only define the common elements but it also
fixes the degrees to which they may be used in the process of deduction
and the inter-relationships existing between them, as we shall see in
the forthcoming discussion. It is through this that the general system
of deduction is established.  
 Hence, we deduce that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* are
inter-connected in the process of deduction. *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* deals with
the process of deduction whereas, *‘Ilm’ul Usul* deals with the common
elements in the process of deduction. A jurist delves into *‘Ilm’ul
Fiqh* and endeavors to derive a law of the *Shari’ah* by adding the
particular elements for that case in a legal discussion to the common
elements obtained in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. A specialist in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, on
the other hand, studies the common elements in the process of deduction
and places them at the search of the jurists.

The Subject Matter of ‘Ilm’ul Usul
----------------------------------

Every branch of knowledge usually has a basic subject matter on which
all its discussions are centered and around which they revolve, aiming
to discover the characteristics,  
 conditions and laws pertaining to the said subject matter. Thus, for
example, the subject matter of physics is nature and the discussions and
researches of physics are all connected with nature, so we attempt to
discover natural conditions and natural laws. Similarly the subject
matter of grammar is the word, as it discusses the various cases and
conditions of words. Thus the question arises, as to what is the subject
matter of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* to the study of which we devote all our
attention, and around which all its discussions revolve.  
 If we keep in mind the definition which we have mentioned above, we
conclude that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in reality, studies the same process of
deduction which the jurists study in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*, and all the
discussions of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* are connected with the close examination
of this process and also bringing out their common elements. Thus the
process of deduction is the subject matter of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, in view of
its being a science of studying the common elements which enter into
processes, such as, the validity of al-Zuhur al-'Urfi and al-Khabar as
proofs.

’Ilm’ul Usul is the Logic of ‘Ilm’ul Fiqh
-----------------------------------------

Your knowledge of logic would no doubt permit us to cite the science of
logic as an example in discussing *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. As you know, the
science of logic studies, in reality, the process of thinking, whatever
may be its kind or scope or academic field, and establishes a general
system that must be followed by the process of thinking in order that it
should be correct. For example, the science of logic teaches us how we
must proceed in reasoning, in view of its being a process of thinking,
in order that our reasoning be correct. How do we prove that Socrates is
mortal? How do we prove that the sum of the angles of a triangle is
equal to two right angles? How do we prove that a lunar eclipse is
caused by the earth coming in between the sun and the moon?  
 The science of logic replies to all these questions through the general
methods of reasoning like analogy and induction, which apply to these
different fields of knowledge. Thus the science of logic is the science
of the very process of thinking as it lays down the general methods and
elements for it.

From this angle, *‘Ilm’ul Usul* resembles the science of logic apart
from its discussing, a special category of thinking i.e. the process of
legal thinking to derive laws. *‘Ilm’ul Usul* studies the general common
elements which the process of deduction must include and be in
conformity with, in order to arrive at correct deduction, the
conclusions, which the jurists will accept. Thus *‘Ilm’ul Usul* teaches
us how we derive the rule of immersion in water for one, who is fasting,
How do we derive the rule of purifying a thing with the water of a
cistern i.e. Kur.[^3]

How do we derive that the Idd prayers are obligatory? How do we derive
the prohibition of defiling a masjid? How do we derive that a sale
affected through coercion is null and void? All these questions are
clarified by *‘Ilm’ul Usul* by setting up general methods for the
process of deduction and pointing out the common elements in it.  
 Thus, we can call *‘Ilm’ul Usul* “the logic of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*” because
the former plays an active part in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* analogous to the
positive role performed by the science of logic in different sciences
and in human thought generally. On this basis it is the logic of
*‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*, or in other words, “the logic of the process of
deduction”.  
 We conclude from all this that *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* is the science of the
process of deduction and *‘Ilm’ul Usul* is the logic of that process,
which brings out its common elements, and establishes a general system
on which *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* must rely.

[^1]: By al-Nass or text here, we intend the words transmitted from the
infallible Prophet or Imam.

[^2]: In the terminology of ‘Ilm’ul Usul, Hujjiyah means the validity as
a proof to justify the master punishing his servant if he had not acted
according to it and to justify the servant seeking release from
punishment by his master if he had acted thereby. So every proof having
this dual capacity is deemed as Hujjah in the terminology of ‘Ilm’ul
Usul. Apparent words of the master belong to this category. That is why
it is called Hujjiyah.

[^3]: 1 Kurr means water which takes 27 cubic span space (3x3x3). It is
better to make it 42 -78 cub. ft. Note: 1 span = 9 inches.


