The Importance of ‘Ilm’ul Usul in the process of Deduction
==========================================================

After the above discussion, we are no longer in need of stressing the
importance of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and the significance of its role in the
sphere of deduction, because, as long as it presents its common elements
and lays down a general system for it, then, it is the backbone of the
process of deduction, and its guiding force. Thus, without *‘Ilm’ul
Usul*, an individual would confront in jurisprudence scattered heaps of
texts and evidences, without being able to use, or benefit from them
through deduction. This is similar to a man who is given the tools of
carpentry like a saw and an axe, and who does not know the head or tail
of the techniques of carpentry and the method of utilizing those tools.

Just as the common elements, which *‘Ilm’ul Usul* studies, are essential
for the process of deduction, similarly the particular elements which
vary from one legal problem to another, like the scattered terms and
expressions of the Qur'an and the Riwayat (Traditions), which constitute
these particular varying elements in the process of deduction, attribute
to other essential parts, without which deduction is not possible. And a
mere knowledge and comprehension of the common elements which *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* describes will not suffice for the success of deduction.

Also, anyone attempting the process of deduction on the basis of only
the knowledge given by *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, is similar to one possessing the
general theoretical knowledge of carpentry but not having before him any
axe, saw or other tools of carpentry. Just as the latter will be unable
to build a wooden bed, for instance, the former will be unable to carry
out deduction unless he examines and scrutinizes the varying particular
elements as well.  
 Thus, we come to know that the common elements and the particular
elements are two conjoint poles of the process of deduction and both are
indispensable for it. It is therefore incumbent upon anyone attempting
the process of deduction to study the common elements as defined by
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* and then to add to it the particular elements, obtained
from studies of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*, so that he may complete the process of
deduction which occurs in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*.

Usul and Fiqh Represent the Theory and its Application
------------------------------------------------------

We are afraid that we may have given you a wrong idea when we said that
he, who is attempting to carry out deduction must study in *‘Ilm’ul
Usul*, the common elements and define them and then take the particular
elements from *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*, so that he may complete the process of
deduction. This is because some may thereby feel that once we have
studied the common elements in the process of deduction from *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* and we come to know, for example, the validity of al-Khabar and of
al-Zuhur al-'Urfi as proofs, as well as other such common elements,
there would be no need of any further intellectual exertion on our part,
and that we would need nothing further after possessing those elements,
than to merely extract the traditions and valid texts where they are
located just as one extracts the date of the Battle of Khaybar or the
reports about the Hejra (migration of the Holy Prophet (p) from Mecca to
Medina) from the biographies of the Prophet.

Thus the job of the jurist in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* would be confined to merely
searching for the particular elements from the traditions and valid
texts, so that these may be added to the common elements, and he may
derive from them the laws of the *Shari’ah*. And this would be an easy
and simple task in view of its needing no intellectual effort. The
result of it would be that the intellectual effort exerted by the
Mujtahid in the process of deduction would be represented by laying down
the common elements and their systematization and study in *‘Ilm’ul
Usul*, and not in gathering the particular elements from the valid
texts, traditions and other sources in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*.

The above conception is, to a large extent, misleading because the
Mujtahid, after studying the common elements in the process of deduction
and defining them in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, is not contented with blindly
collecting the particular elements from the books of traditions
(a*Hadith*) and narrations, for example; but it remains for him, in
*‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*, to apply those common elements and their general theory
to the particular elements; and application is an important intellectual
task which naturally requires careful study and thorough examination.
The intellectual effort spent in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in studying the common
elements and formulating their general theory cannot dispense with the
fresh effort required for drawing conclusion.

We are not, at this juncture, able to present a variety of examples to
show clearly the effort needed for the process of application, because
the understanding of those examples would depend on a prior knowledge of
the general theories of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. Therefore presenting one simple
example however shall suffice.

Let us suppose that the Mujtahid has accepted in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* the
validity of al-Zuhur al-'Urfi as a proof, together with its being a
common element in the process of deduction. Will it then suffice to
place his finger on the narration of Ali ibn Mahziyir (which established
the scope of khums), for instance, then to add it to that common element
and to derive from it a law that khums is not obligatory on wealth
inherited from one's father?

Is not the Mujtahid, in need of scrutinizing the meaning of the text in
the narration to come to know the kind of meaning given to it in general
usage, and of studying everything that is connected with establishing
al-Zuhur al-'Urfi, like the different contexts and characteristics, both
within and without the framework of the text so that he may be able to
honestly apply the common element expressing the validity of al-Zuhur
al-'Urfi as proof? Thus in this example, after discovering the common
element and accepting al-Zuhur al-'Urfi as proof there yet remains the
difficulty of fixing the nature of al-Zuhur in the text, and of studying
its relations and contexts, until the Mujtahid is sure that he has
established al-Zuhur in the valid text and its proving positively the
non-obligation of khums on inherited wealth, apply to the text the
general theory established by the common element stating the validity of
al-Zuhur al-'Urfi as proof, and he deduces from it the law that Khums is
not obligatory in such a case.

In the light of the above, we come to know that the legal study to
arrive at the particular elements in the process of deduction is not
merely a matter of collection, but its scope goes further in applying
the general theories established by the common elements in the process
of deduction. And the application of general theories always has its own
difficulties and endurance, and mere struggle in the general theories
does not dispense with the endurance needed in their application. Do you
not see that one who studies in depth the general theories in medicine,
stands in need of thoroughness, alertness, caution and deep thinking in
the field of their application, in addition to examining the
pathological symptoms, so that he may properly apply those theories to
the patient under his care?

Thus the studies of the specialist in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* concerning the
common elements and the general theories laid down, resemble the studies
of a physician concerning the general theories in medicine. And the
studies of the jurist concerning the particular elements in the field of
applying those general theories are like the studies of the physician
concerning the symptoms of the patient in the field of applying those
general medical theories to him. And just as the physician stands in
need of a great degree of research work so that he may apply those
general theories to the patient correctly and bring about whatever cure
is possible, similarly the jurist, after completing the study of
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* concerning the common elements and the general theories,
and after confronting a problem in the sphere of legal research and
studies (like the problems of khums, or fasting, etc.) stands in need of
deep thinking about how to apply those common elements correctly to the
particular elements in the problem mentioned before.

Thus, we come to know that *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, which describes the common
elements, is “the science of general theories”; while *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*,
which consists of the particular elements, is “the science of applying
those theories in the field of the particular elements”. Each of them
demands research and special intellectual effort.

Deduction is the result of the blending of the theories with their
application, i.e. of the common elements with the particular elements.
This process of blending is the process of deduction. The research
needed in formulating the general theories does not dispense with the
exactness required in applying them during the process of deduction.

The Second Martyr, Zaynuddin Jabal Amili, has referred to the importance
of this application in the field of law and what it demands of exactness
in his book of “laws”, is as follows, “Yes, together with that (with
formulating general theories) it is stipulated that he has the power and
ability to refer the derivative matters to their original sources and to
draw conclusion from it and this is the basic issue of this chapter….
And that power is in the Hands of Allah and because of its important
role, He bestows it on whomsoever He pleases from among His servants, in
accordance with His wisdom and purpose, to those who strive hard and are
capable”.

Interaction Between the Thinking of ‘Ilm’ul Usul and that Of ‘Ilm’ul Fiqh
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have come to know that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* plays the role of logic in
relation to *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and that the relationship between these two
is the relationship of theory to its application, because *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
formulates the general theories by establishing the common elements in
the process of deduction, while *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* applies those theories
and common elements to the particular elements, which vary from problem
to problem.  
 The strong mutual bond between *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*
explains the reciprocal interaction between the outlook of the former
(i.e. the standard of intellectual research at the level of theory) and
the outlook of the latter (i.e. the standard of intellectual research at
the level of application). This is because, any extension of the
researches on application would advance the researches on theory a step
forward, owing to the fact that such an extension would raise new
difficulties before it and would compel *‘Ilm’ul Usul* to formulate
general theories to solve those difficulties. Similarly, the accuracy
and thoroughness needed in research in theory is reflected at the level
of application, and as the theories become more subtle, they demand
greater probe, depth and comprehension for their application.  
 The history of these two branches of knowledge, *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and
*‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*, emphasizes the mutual interaction between their outlooks
and levels of thought all along the line, and reveals clearly the
various stages through which these two have passed in the history of
knowledge. *‘Ilm’ul Usul* has expanded and extended gradually following
extensions in the studies of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*. Since extensions at the
level of legal application directed the attention of those making the
application to new difficulties.

And the suitable solutions laid down for these difficulties took the
form of common elements in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. Similarly abstruseness in the
common elements in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and establishing their well-defined
limits were reflected at the level of application, since every time the
general theories were expressed in more difficult and subtle forms, they
become more complex and demanded greater care and attention at the level
of application.

We cannot, at this juncture, present any examples from these two
branches of knowledge to show their interaction, as we are in the first
stage, and the student does not, as yet possess enough knowledge about
the researches of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. Hence, it is enough for the student,
at present, to know that the interaction between *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* is one instance of the long line of interaction in many
fields, between the studies on the theories and on their application.
Does not the application of medical theories by the physician on his
patients on a large scale, continuously present new difficulties to him?

And do the studies on general medical theories not come up with
solutions for such difficulties? Do these theories not then become
gradually more complex? Is this greater complexity then not reflected in
future applications? And as the number of theories increased for the
physician so did application become a greater task for him. All of us
know that the physician of the past years was content in the field of
application with checking the pulse of the patient, and thus his task
was over in a few moments. However, today, the physician continues to
study the condition of the patient through a complex and extensive
procedure.  
 The same phenomenon of mutual interaction between the outlooks of
*‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, (the latter plays the role of logic
in relation to the former) is found between the generalized academic
thinking and the general outlook of logic, which studies the fundamental
system of human thought. Every time the scope of human knowledge widens
and its fields offer greater variety, new difficulties arise in the way
of putting forward proofs in the general system of thought.

Logic then attempts to overcome these difficulties and to develop and
perfect its theories in such a way as to preserve for itself the supreme
power of directing and systematizing human thought. In any case this
concept of interaction, whether it be between *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and its
special logic, as represented by *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*, or between all branches
of knowledge and general logic, or between the studies on any theory and
the studies on its application, requires greater clarification and
explanation. At present, we do not intend to refer to that concept, but
to arouse the mind of the student, even if it may be by a brief
description given above.

Examples of Questions Answered by ‘Ilm’ul Usul
----------------------------------------------

For the benefit of the student who does not possess information about
the studies and researches of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, it is best that we present
a list consisting of examples of the questions which are considered to
be solved by *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, in order to (depict, in a practical form,
the importance of the role it plays in deduction.

1. What is the evidence for the validity of the narration of a reliable
and trustworthy person as proof?  
 2. Why is it obligatory that we explain legal texts in the light of
general usage?  
 3. What do we do if we come across a problem for which we find no
evidence that reveals the nature of the law of the *Shari’ah* relating
to it?  
 4. What is the value of the majority in a legal problem? And is a
particular view of *Shari’ah* generally bound to be accepted if its
exponents are many in number?  
 5. What do we do if we come across two texts, the meanings of which are
not in agreement (with each other)?  
 6. What should be our stand-point if we had previously been certain
about a given law of the Shari 'ah and then doubts arise about its
continuing to hold good?  
 7. What are the words that clearly and directly indicate obligation?
And are they to be considered as imperative like the following “Take a
bath!” “Perform ablution!” “Offer prayers!”.

And so on numerous questions *‘Ilm’ul Usul* answers, and establishes
thereby the common elements in the process of deduction and fills every
gap which it is possible for a jurist to face in the process of deriving
a law of the *Shari’ah*, i.e. of deduction.

Permissibility of Istinbat
--------------------------

In the light of what has preceded, we have come to know that *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* plays the role of logic in relation to the process of deduction,
because it consists of the common elements of the latter and expresses
them as general laws in a comprehensive system. Therefore no individual
should attempt to carry out the process of deduction without first
studying *‘Ilm’ul Usul*.

Since *‘Ilm’ul Usul* is so closely connected with the process of
deduction, we must first of all know the viewpoint of the *Shari’ah*
about this process. Firstly, has the Almighty Law-giver permitted anyone
to carry out deduction? If He has permitted it then it is reasonable
that the branch of knowledge called *‘Ilm’ul Usul* be established to
study the common elements of deduction. However, if He has prohibited
it, then deduction would be null and void, and consequently *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* would be null and void since this branch of knowledge was
developed in order to make deduction possible. Thus if there were no
deduction, there would be no need of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, because it would
thereby lose its *raison d'etre* (purpose). Thus it is essential that we
study this point in a fundamental form.

In fact, this point the question of the permissibility of deduction,
when it is submitted for study in the form in which we have presented it
does not appear worthy of serious thinking and intellectual research.
This is because if we ask ourselves, “Is it permissible for us to carry
out the process of deduction? ' the answer is in the affirmative,
because deduction, as we have come to know in the foregoing, consists of
“the delineation of the practical stand-point vis-à-vis the Shari 'ah
through valid evidence and proofs”. Obviously man, by virtue of his
subordination to the *Shari’ah* and of the obligation on him to obey its
laws, is compelled to delineate the required practical standpoint. And
since the laws of the *Shari’ah* are mostly not obvious and clear to the
extent that setting out proofs can be dispensed with, it is reasonable
that the delineation of the practical stand-point through valid evidence
and proofs would not be prohibited to the whole of mankind, and they
would be forbidden to examine the proofs which delineate their
stand-point vis-à-vis the *Shari’ah*. Thus the process of deduction
would be not only permissible, but it is also essential that it should
be adopted. This necessity arises from man's subordination to the
*Shari’ah* and any dispute about that would be at the level of a dispute
about self-evident truths.

However, it happens that this point has, unfortunately, taken up a new
form, which is not free from ambiguity and confusion, and has on that
account become the cause of differences. The word “*Ijtihad*” has been
used to express the process of deduction and the question arises. Is
*Ijtihad* permissible in the *Shari’ah*? Since this word “*Ijtihad*” is
under discussion (and it is a word that has been given a variety of
meanings during its history) it has projected all those previous
meanings into the discussion. This has resulted in a group of our modern
'*Ulema’* replying to the question in the negative, and consequently
condemning the whole of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, since it is needed because of
*Ijtihad*, and if *Ijtihad* is null and void, then there remains no need
for *‘Ilm’ul Usul*.

By way of clarifying that point, we must mention the development
undergone by the word *Ijtihad* to show that the dispute that has arisen
over the process of *Ijtihad* and the outcry against it, are nothing but
the result of a superficial understanding of the academic term
“*Ijtihad*”, and of a disregard of the development it has undergone.

The Meaning of Ijtihad
----------------------

Literally “*Ijtihad*” is derived from the word Juhd and means “doing
one's utmost to perform any action whatsoever”. This word was first used
in the field of jurisprudence to express one of the rules laid down by
the Sunni schools of *Fiqh*, following their founding. This rule states
that, “When a jurist wants to derive a law of the *Shari’ah* and he
doesn't find any text referring to it in the Qur'an and the Sunnah, he
should have recourse to *Ijtihad* in lieu of such a text. Here *Ijtihad*
means “individual thinking”. Thus a jurist not finding any valid text
would resort to his specific individual thinking or Divine inspiration
and would base laws of the *Shari’ah* on the basis of his thinking. This
process is also expressed by the term *Ra’y* (opinion).

*Ijtihad*, in this meaning, is the expression of one of the proofs used
by a jurist and one of his sources of law. So just as a jurist relies on
the Qur'an and the Sunnah and uses them as proofs and evidence,
similarly he relies on his own *Ijtihad* and uses it as proof and
evidence in cases where there are no suitable texts.

The major schools of Sunni *Fiqh* have proclaimed this meaning of
*Ijtihad*, and at their head is the school of Abu Hanifa. At the same
time tough opposition was met from the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt and the
jurists attached to their schools of thought as we shall come across in
the forthcoming discussion.

An examination of the word “*Ijtihad* ” shows that it was used to
express this meaning since the time of the Imams (a) up to the seventh
century (A.H.). Thus the traditions related from the Imams of the Ahlal
Bayt condemned *Ijtihad*, i.e., that principle of *Fiqh* that adopts
individual thinking as one of the sources of Islamic law. The attack on
this principle also found its way into the literary works composed
during the period of the Imams (a) and of the narrators who transmitted
their traditions.

This attack used the word *Ijtihad* mostly to express that principle,
which can be seen from the usage in these traditions. Thus Abdullah ibn
Abdur Rahman Zubayri wrote a book called “Al-Istifadah fi al-Ta'un ala'l
awa'il wa 'r-radd 'ala as'hab al-*Ijtihad* wa'l- *Qiyas*”, while Hilal
ibn Ibrahim ibn Abi al-Fath al-Madani wrote a book on the topic named
“Al-radd 'ala man radda athar Rasul wa 'tamada 'ala nata'ij il-'uqul.
(The rejection of those who ignore the traditions of the messenger and
rely on their intellectual conclusions).

Isma 'il ibn Ali ibn Ishaq ibn Abi Sahl Nawbakhti wrote a book during
the period of the minor occultation or thereabouts on the rejection of
Isa ibn Aban concerning *Ijtihad*. The above has been mentioned by
Najashi, the biographer, in his biography of each of the above.

Just after the minor occultation we find Shaykh Saduq in the middle of
the fourth century A.H. continuing that attack. Here we quote, as an
example, the critical comments from his book on the story of Musa and
Khizr: “Musa -in spite of perfection of intellect, superiority and
cleverness bestowed on him by Allah was not able to perceive through the
rational processes of deduction, (istidlal) the meaning of the actions
of Khizr, so much so that the reasons therefore became obscure to him.

Now if it were not permissible for the Prophets and Messengers of Allah
to exercise *Qiyas* (analogy), Istidlal (reasoning) and Istikhraj
(deduction), for others who are below them in rank, it would be all the
more not permissible. Thus if Musa was not entitled to make a choice in
spite of his superiority and cleverness, how then can the Muslim ummah
be entitled to make a choice in the matter of the Imam? And how can they
be entitled to derive the rules of the *Shari’ah* through deduction
using their defective intellects and differences of views?”

In the closing years of the fourth century A.H. arose Shaykh Mufid
writing along the same lines and making an attack on the concept of
*Ijtihad*, which he used to mean the principle of Islamic law mentioned
above. His book on this subject is called “an-Naqd 'ala ibn Junayd fi
ijtihadir ra'y” (The Criticism on Ibn Junayd regarding the matter of
*Ijtihad*).

We find the same usage of *Ijtihad* by Sayyid Murtaza at the
commencement of the fifth century. He wrote in al-Zhari'ah criticizing
*Ijtihad*: “*Ijtihad* is null and void and for those who follow the
Imams, to act on conjecture, opinion and *Ijtihad* is not permissible”.
He also wrote in his book on *Fiqh*, “al-Intisar”, alluding to Ibn
Junayd: “The dependence of Ibn Junayd in this problem is on a kind of
opinion and *Ijtihad*, and his error therein is obvious”. And in the
chapter on cleanliness (Taharah) in his book al-Intisar, he wrote
concerning the question of wiping one's two feet, “we do not consider
*Ijtihad* nor do we advocate it”.

This usage of the word *Ijtihad* continued after that (period) also.
Thus Shaykh Tusi, who died about the middle of the fifth century wrote
in Kitab *al-Iddah* as follows: “As for *Qiyas* (analogy) and *Ijtihad*,
in our opinion they are not valid proofs. On the contrary, their use is
forbidden in the *Shari’ah*”.

At the commencement of the sixth century, on the question of the
contradiction between two statements of evidence, Ibn Idris considered a
number of grounds for preferring one to the other. He afterwards wrote:
“There is no preference on any other ground in our school of thought,
and *Qiyas*, Istihsan and *Ijtihad* are all null and void in our
opinion”.

The above texts, presented in their historical and chronological
sequence, prove clearly that the word *Ijtihad* was used to denote the
above mentioned principle of Islamic law up to the commencement of the
seventh century. On this basis, the word acquired a distasteful
connotation and the sign of dislike and disgust in the legal outlook of
the Imamiyah school of thought as a result of the latter's opposition to
that principle and their belief in its being null and void.

However the word *Ijtihad* was used in a different sense in the
terminology used by our jurists. Thus no Shi'ite text describing this
development is found historically prior to Kitab al-Ma'arij by Muhaqqiq
Hilli (d. 676 A.H.) who wrote under the heading “The Reality of
*Ijtihad*” as follows: “It is, in the terminology of the jurists, doing
one's utmost to derive the laws of the *Shari’ah*. Hence, the deduction
of laws from the proofs and evidence available in the *Shari’ah*
constitutes *Ijtihad*, because such laws are mostly based on the points
of view of a theory which is not deduced from the explicit meaning of
any text, whether such a proof is based on analogy or otherwise. Thus
*Qiyas* (analogy) is one of the kinds of *Ijtihad*. Therefore, if it is
said that it is accordingly imperative that the Imamiyah school of
thought is one of the exponents of *Ijtihad*, we will reply that it is
so, and that there is the suggestion that *Qiyas* is one of the kinds of
*Ijtihad*. Thus even if we exclude *Qiyas*, we shall still be among the
exponents of *Ijtihad* in deriving the laws of the *Shari’ah* by other
theoretical ways apart from *Qiyas*”.

It is quite obvious from the above quotation that the word *Ijtihad*
continued to be burdened with the stamp of its first usage in the
Imammiyah outlook. This quotation points out that there are those who
refrain from using this description and on whom calling the Imamiyah
jurists Mujtahids, weighs heavily.

However Muhaqqiaq Hilli does not refrain from using the term *Ijtihad*
after it had developed and changed in the usage of the Jurists in such a
way as to be in agreement with the methods of deduction in the Imammiyah
school of thought. Thus *Ijtihad* was previously used to denote a source
of Islamic law, from which the jurist derives laws, and furnish a proof
for it, just as the verses of the Qur'an and the traditions are regarded
sources. In the new usage it came to denote the jurist's utmost effort
in deriving a law of the *Shari’ah* from the valid proofs and sources,
but it was not considered as one of the sources used for deduction. On
the contrary, *Ijtihad* meant the very process of deduction carried out
by a jurist to derive a law from its valid sources.

The difference between the two meanings is quite important. In the first
usage of *Ijtihad*, the jurist derives laws on the basis of his own
individual views and particular inclinations in cases where the valid
texts are not adequate. Thus if he is asked, “What is your proof and
your source for this law which you have derived?” He will reply: “The
proof is my own *Ijtihad* and individual views”.

However, in the new usage of *Ijtihad*, the jurist is not permitted to
justify any laws of the *Shari’ah* by *Ijtihad*, as in this second
meaning, *Ijtihad* is not a source for laws, but it is the process of
deduction to derive laws from their sources. Thus if a jurist says:
“This is my *Ijtihad*”, he means that this is what he has derived
through deduction from the sources of laws and from valid proofs. Thus
we will have the right to demand of him, to indicate to us those sources
and proofs from which he derived the law.

This new meaning for the word *Ijtihad* also underwent development and
transformation. Muhaqqiq Hilli had limited it to the field of the
operations of deduction, which are not based on the explicit meanings of
texts. Thus every act of deduction that does not depend on the explicit
meanings of texts will be termed *Ijtihad*. Perhaps the reason for this
limitation is that the deduction of a law regarding the explicit meaning
of a text does not involve enough effort and academic labour to be
termed *Ijtihad*.

Then the scope of *Ijtihad* widened afterwards and included the process
of deduction of a law from the explicit meaning of a text also. This is
because the specialists in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* then rightly realized that the
process of deduction of a law, from the explicit meaning of a text,
involved much intellectual effort and labour in arriving at the exact
meaning and its limitation and in proving the validity of al-Zuhurul
'Urfi (general usage) as a proof. This expansion in the meaning of the
term *Ijtihad* did not cease there, but in a new development it came to
include all forms of the process of deduction. Thus under the heading of
*Ijtihad* came every process carried out by a jurist to determine the
practical standpoint vis-à-vis the *Shari’ah* either by establishing out
the proofs for the law of the *Shari’ah*, or by defining that practical
standpoint directly.

Hence, *Ijtihad* came to be synonymous with the process of deduction.
Consequently *‘Ilm’ul Usul* became an essential branch of knowledge for
the implementation of *Ijtihad*. In other words it is the science of the
common elements in the process of deduction.

These developments sustained by the word *Ijtihad* as a technical term
are, to a great extent, related to the developments of academic thought
itself. The elucidation of the above will be possible through our study
of the history of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*.

In light of the above, we can explain the standpoint of that group of
Muhaddithin (traditionalists) opposing *Ijtihad* and consequently
condemning *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. The word *Ijtihad* frightened them because it
carried the heritage of the first usage, against which the Ahlal Bayt
(Progeny of the Prophet) had launched a severe attack. The scholars also
prohibited *Ijtihad*, the banner of which was being carried by the
Mujtahids among our jurists, and they based this prohibition on the
standpoint of the Imams and their school of thought against *Ijtihad*.
They are, however, not aware that the standpoint of the Imams was
against the first meaning of *Ijtihad*, while the jurists among our
companions are propounding the second meaning of it.

The process of deduction however faced a strong and persistent attack
because of the attack on *Ijtihad*. Consequently the attack extended to
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* because of its relation to the process of deduction and
to *Ijtihad*. However, after having distinguished between the two
meanings of *Ijtihad*, we are now able to restore the problem to its
natural form, and to demonstrate clearly that the permissibility of
*Ijtihad* in the meaning, synonymous to the process of deduction, is one
of the self-evident truths.

Since the process of deduction to derive a law of the *Shari’ah* is
obviously permissible, it is essential that it should be preserved by
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* through the study of the common elements in that
process.  
 After we have established the permissibility of the process of
deduction in Islam, there remain two points for us to study:

1. Does Islam permit this process at every age and to every individual
or does it permit it only to some individuals and at certain ages?  
 2. Just as Islam permits an individual to make deductions to derive a
law relating to himself, does it also permit him to make deduction to
derive laws relating to others and to deliver formal legal verdicts for
that?

We shall soon study these two points in the forth-coming discussions,
which we have prepared for the higher stages of the study of this
science.


