The Main Sources of Proving Validity in ‘Ilm’ul Usul
====================================================

We have come to know that the process of deduction consists of common as
well as particular elements, and that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* is the science,
which deals with the common elements in which elements are studied,
defined and systematized.

Since *‘Ilm’ul Usul* is the science responsible for the study of these
common elements, the basic question naturally arises: What are the
sources which *‘Ilm’ul Usul* utilizes to prove the validity of al-Khabar
or al-Zuhurul'Urfi etc., as proofs, from the common elements in the
process of deduction ?

A similar type of question is faced in every branch of knowledge. For
instance, in relation to the natural sciences we ask: What are the means
of proof which these sciences utilize to discover and establish natural
laws? The answer is that the chief source of proof in the natural
sciences is experimentation. Or in relation to grammar we ask: What are
the means of proof utilized by the grammarian to discover the laws
relating to the inflection of a word and to define the conditions in
which it is placed in the nominative or the accusative case? The answer
is that in grammar the main sources of proof are the quotations from the
basic sources of the language and the words originally used. Thus
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* has necessarily to face this question and to lay down, at
the very beginning, the sources of proof, which, it has to utilize to
establish and define the common elements.

In this connection we can say that the main methods of proof (or proving
validity) which *‘Ilm’ul Usul* has to utilize, can be reduced to two
categories, viz.,  
 1. al-Bayan al-Shar'i (The text of Qur'an or the Sunnah).  
 2. al-Idrak al-'Aqli (Intellectual discernment).

Thus no proposition acquires the mark of a common element in the process
of deduction, nor is it permissible to utilize it in this process unless
it can be proved by one of these two main methods. Therefore, if the
specialist in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* is endeavoring to study, for instance, the
validity of al-Khabar (report) as a proof, so that he may utilize it in
the process of deduction, if it happens to be valid, he will ask himself
these two questions:

(a) Is there any al-Bayan al-Shar'i (i.e. text of the Qur'an or the
Sunnah) which indicates the validity of al-Khabar as a proof?  
 (b) Do we discern with our intellects or not that it is a valid proof
that has to be followed?

The specialist in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* will endeavour in his study to answer
these two questions in accordance with the level of meticulousness and
caution. If, therefore, he concludes his study with answers in the
negative to both the questions, it means that he possesses no sources of
proving the validity of al-Khabar as a proof. Consequently, he would
exclude al-Khabar from the scope of deduction. If, however, he is able
to answer in the affirmative to either of the two questions, it means
that he can prove the validity of al-Khabar as a proof and can include
it in the process of deduction as a common element in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. We
shall see in the forthcoming discussions that a number of common
elements have been proved by the first source (i.e. al-Bayan al-Shar'i
or a text of the Qur'an or the Sunnah) while a number of others have
been proved by the second (i.e. al-Idrak ul-'Aqli or intellectual
discernment). In the first category falls the validity of al-Khabar and
al-Zuhurul'Urfi as proofs, while an example of the second type is the
law that states “an act cannot be both obligatory and prohibited at the
same time”.

In the light of the above we come to know that it is essential, before
beginning the study of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, to determine the common elements,
so that we may study the fundamental sources which this science has to
use to prove the validity of those elements, and to define their
limitations so that afterwards we can use them in accordance with those
limitations.

Text of the Qur'an or the Sunnah
--------------------------------

Al-Bayan al-Shar'i is one of the two fundamental means of proving the
validity of the elements that participate in the process of deduction.
By al-Bayan al-Shar'i we mean the following:  
 (i) The Holy Book, i.e. the Qur'an that was sent down miraculously
through revelation of both meaning and words, to the noblest of the
Messengers -Muhammad (P).  
 (ii) al-Sunnah, i.e. every statement originating from the Messenger or
from one of the twelve infallible Imams. The statements originating from
them are of three types:  
 (a) al-Bayanul Ijabi al-Qauli, i.e. the words spoken by one of the
infallibles.  
 (b) al-Bayanu'l Ijabi al-Fe'li, i.e. an act done by one of the
infallibles.  
 © al-Bayan al-Salbi, i.e. the silence of one of the infallibles about a
specific situation in such a way as to reveal his approval of it and its
being in. conformity with the *Shari’ah*.  
 It is incumbent that we take all forms of' Bayan Shar'i into
consideration. Thus if anyone form, demonstrates the validity of a
common element in the process of deduction then that common element is
proved and acquires the stamp of legality in the *Shari’ah*.  
 In this connection there are a number of points to be discussed, but we
shall leave these for the forthcoming discussions.

Intellectual Discernment
------------------------

*Al-Idrakul ‘Aqli* is the second fundamental source used in the
researches of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* to prove the validity of the common
elements in the process of deduction. A common element in the process of
deduction is that which we discern with our intellect without the
necessity of recourse to al-Bayan al-Shar'i to prove its validity.
*Al-Idrakul ‘Aqli* is of the nature of the law that “an act cannot be
both prohibited and obligatory at the same time”. We are not in need of
any al-Bayan al-Shar'i, consisting of the form of laws of this type in
order to prove the validity of this law. It is proved through reason
because the intellect discerns that obligation and prohibition are two
contradictory qualities and that a single entity cannot simultaneously
have two contradictory qualities. So just as a body cannot have the
qualities of both motion and rest at the same time, similarly an act
cannot both be obligatory and forbidden.

*Al-Idrakul ‘Aqli* has various sources and different degrees. As far as
sources go, *Al-Idrakul ‘Aqli* includes the following.  
 (a) Intellectual discernment based on sense-experience and
experimentation. An example of this is our discernment that water boils
if its temperature reaches 1000 C. and that placing water on fire for a
long time will cause it to boil.  
 (b) Intellectual discernment based on self-evident truths. Examples of
this are the discernments of all of us that one is half of two or that
two contradictories cannot coexist in  
 one entity and that the whole is greater than the part. These facts are
self-evident and reason is naturally impelled to (accept) them without
any effort or hesitation.  
 (c) Intellectual discernment based on theoretical speculation. An
example of this is our discernment that the effect will cease once the
cause ceases. This fact is not self-evident and reason is not naturally
impelled to accept it. But it is discerned through speculation based on
proofs and arguments.  
 The different degrees in which *Al-Idrakul ‘Aqli* is divided include
the following:  
 (i) Complete, definite discernment: This is the type of intellectual
discernment of a fact in which there can be no error or doubt, e.g. our
discernment that the sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to two
right angles, or that two contradictories cannot simultaneously coexist
in the same entity, or that the earth is spherical or that water becomes
heated when placed on fire.  
 (ii) Imperfect intellectual discernment: This is the inclination of the
mind to consider a thing likely without complete certainty owing to the
possibility of error, e.g. our discernment that the horse which won
previous races will win next time also, or that the medicines which
succeeded in curing specific diseases will succeed in curing diseases
with similar symptoms, or that an act, which resembles a prohibited act,
in most cases, shares the quality of prohibition also.  
 The basic question, in this study is: What are the limitations of
reason or of intellectual discernment that function as a fundamental
means of proving the validity of the common elements in the process of
deduction? Thus is it possible to use intellectual discernment as a
means of proving validity regardless of its source or reliability or is
it not permissible to use it to establish validity except within fixed
limits as regards its source or reliability?  
 Concerning this point, this study is directed more to the treatment of
the question of reliability than to the treatment of the question of
source. The researches of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* concerning the limitations of
reason from the point of view of reliability have become extensive. The
views concerning the scope of reason and its limitations also differ
vis-à-vis using it as a fundamental means for proving validity. Thus the
question arises as to whether imperfect intellectual discernment (which
leads only to probability and likelihood) can be included, or whether it
should be restricted to complete definite intellectual discernment
(which gives certainty).  
 Thus, the history of this study is extensive in the field of *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* and in the field of the history of legal thinking as well, as we
shall see later.

Contradictory Tendencies Regarding Al-Idrakul ‘Aqli
---------------------------------------------------

The history of legal thinking reveals two completely contradictory
tendencies regarding this point, One tendency calls for the use of
reason in its extensive sphere including the imperfect intellectual
discernments as a fundamental source for establishing validity in the
different fields studied by the specialists in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and
*‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*. The other tendency sharply criticizes reason and divests
it of its being a fundamental means of proving validity. This second
tendency considers al-Bayan al-Shar'i as the sole means that can be used
in the process of deduction.

Between these two extremist tendencies, there is a third moderate
tendency represented by the majority of the jurists of the school of
thought of the Ahlal Bayt. This tendency believes, contrary to the
second one mentioned above, that reason or intellectual discernment is a
fundamental means of proving validity in addition to al-Bayan al-Shar'i,
but not in the unqualified manner propounded by the first tendency and
only within the limits wherein man achieves total satisfaction and
definite intellectual discernment about which there is no likelihood of
error.

Thus every intellectual perception, which falls within this category and
conveys complete certainty, is a means for proving validity. However the
imperfect intellectual discernments that are based on likelihood, and
are not capable of giving the element of certainty, are not valid as
means for proving the validity of any of the elements in the process of
deduction.

Thus reason, according to this third tendency, is a valid instrument of
knowledge and deserves to be relied on and to establish validity, if it
leads to the definite discernment of any fact to which no doubt is
attached. Thus neither there is rejection of reason as an instrument of
knowledge, nor is there exaggeration in relying on it where it does not
give a definite and certain discernment.

This moderate tendency, represented by the majority of the jurists of
the school of thought of Ahlal Bayt, demanded that those jurists should
engage in the combat on two fronts -one against the first tendency which
the Ahlar *Ra’y* (the exponents of the use of individual judgments)
adopted under the leadership of a group of eminent scholars from the
general public, and the other against the internal movement within the
ranks of the Imami jurists, represented by the traditionalists and
Akhbaris (the exponents of al-*Hadith* and al-Khabar) from among the
Shi'ah scholars, who sharply criticized reason and claimed that al-Bayan
al-Shar'i is the sole means, which can be used to prove validity. Thus
we come to know that the first struggle was against the unqualified use
of reason and the second in defense of its use in a qualified manner.

Struggle Against the Unqualified use of Reason
----------------------------------------------

During the middle of the second century (A.H.) there arose a school of
thought of jurisprudence known as the school of thought of *Ra’y* and
*Ijtihad* (with the first meaning of the latter as discussed in Chapter
2). This school propounded the use of reason (in its extensive meaning
including probability, conjecture, and individual estimation) as a basic
instrument for proving validity in addition to al-Bayan al-Shar'i and as
a fundamental source for the jurist in the process of deduction. This
process was given the name of *Ijtihad*.

Heading this school or among its leaders was Abu Hanifah (d. 150 A.H.).
It has been transmitted from the leading personalities of this school
that whenever they did not find any al-Bayan al-Shar'i indicating the
law of the *Shari’ah*, on a specific matter, they would study the matter
in the light of their individual judgments and of what they perceived
about suitability and appropriateness pertaining to their individual
thinking and accordingly preferred one stand-point to another. They
would then deliver their verdict in accordance with their conjectures
and preferences. To this they gave the name Istihsan or *Ijtihad*.

It is well known that Abu Hanifah was conspicuous in the exercise of
this sphere of jurisprudence. It has been reported from his pupil,
Muhammad ibn Hasan that Abu Hanifah used to debate with his colleagues
and they would demand justice from him and contradict him until he said,
“This is Istihsan ”, and then no one contradicted him. A statement
reported from him, in that he describes his methodology of deduction,
says, “I follow the Book of Allah (the Qur'an), if I find any text in
it, otherwise I follow the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah. However if
I find no text in the Qur'an or in the Sunnah, I follow the statements
of others. Thus if the matter ultimately gets to Sha'bi, Muhammad ibn
Hasan or Ibn Sirin, then I am entitled to make *Ijtihad* just as they
did”.

The basic concept leading to the establishment of this school of
thought, and to the adoption of unqualified reason as a fundamental
means of proving validity and as a source for the deduction of laws, is
the idea prevalent in the ranks of that school. It says, “Al-Bayan
al-Shar'i, as represented in the Qur'an and the Sunnah, is insufficient
and contains the laws on a limited number of propositions only. It is
not enough to lay down the laws of the Shari 'ah on many propositions
and problems”.

The propagation of this idea among the jurists of the masses was aided
by their inclination toward the Sunni school of thought (Mazhab),
wherein they believed that al-Bayan al-Shar'i is represented only in the
Qur'an and the Sunnah transmitted from the Messenger. Since these
suffice only for partial needs of deduction, they endeavoured to remedy
the situation, and to satisfy the other needs, by extending the use of
reason and proclaiming the principle of *Ijtihad*. However the jurists
of the Imamiyah school of thought, because of their religious
standpoint, held the opposite view, as they believed that al-Bayan
al-Shar'i still continued with the existence of the Imams. Thus they
found no moral motive for any illegitimate extension in the sphere of
reason.

Anyhow the idea of the inadequacy of the Qur'an and the Sunnah to meet
the needs of deduction spread, and played a vital role in the
intellectual outlook of many of the jurists and in their extremist point
of view concerning reason.

This idea developed and became more and more serious gradually, as it
changed from imputing to al-Bayan al-Shar'i (i.e. the Qur'an and the
Sunnah), deficiency, incompleteness and lack of proof for the laws
relating to many propositions, and began to impute to the *Shari’ah*
itself, deficiency and inability to deal with the various aspects of
life. Thus the question no longer remained one of deficiency in al-Bayan
al-Shar'i and in its elucidation, but in the Divine *Shari’ah* itself.
Their proof for this alleged deficiency in the *Shari’ah* is that it had
not laid down any law for many other matters not known to the Muslims.
The *Shari’ah* had set out its laws and proofs through the Qur'an and
the Sunnah so that these may be followed and may form a code of life for
the ummah (nation). In the minds of the masses the texts of the Qur'an
and the Sunnah, did not include the laws on many propositions and
problems. It indicates the deficiency and incompleteness of the
*Shari’ah* and that Allah had promulgated only a limited number of laws
in Islam. These are the laws described in the Qur'an and the Sunnah. As
for legislation in other spheres, He left to man, or to the jurists
especially, to devise laws on the basis of *Ijtihad* and deduction, on
the condition that none of the latter laws will contradict any of the
limited laws of the *Shari’ah* laid down in the Qur'an and the Sunnah of
the Messenger.

We have seen that this extremist tendency regarding reason was the
result of the propagation of the concept of imperfection (in the Qur'an
and the Sunnah) and the connotations thereof. When this idea of
imperfection imputed to al-Bayan al-Shar'i developed to become
imperfection imputed to the *Shari’ah* itself, this development was
reflected in the field of Sunni thinking. This resulted in the doctrine
of *Taswib* (Imputing correctness) in which that extremist tendency
regarding reason reached its utmost limit. To elucidate this point it is
necessary to explain the doctrine of *Taswib*.

The Doctrine of Taswib (Imputing Correctness)
---------------------------------------------

After the jurists of the school of thought of *Ra’y* and *Ijtihad* had
come to regard it as lawful for them to follow probabilities,
conjectures and preferences in accordance with the extremist tendency
regarding reason, naturally differences arose in the laws that they
derived through *Ijtihad*. This was due to the differences in their
views, in their ways of thinking and in the kind of preferences to which
they attached importance. Thus, one jurist considers that in a certain
case prohibition would be preferable because that act involves harm and
injury, while another feels that permissiveness would be preferable
since it involves expansion of the freedom of the servants of Allah and
so on.

At this juncture the following point arose: What is the position of the
Mujtahids who differ in arriving at a correct view in a specific case?
Is it to be taken that they are all correct as long as each of them had
given judgment according to his individual *Ijtihad*? Or should it be
considered that only one of them is correct while the others are all in
error?

The view spread among the ranks of the school propounding *Ra’y* and
*Ijtihad* that all the differing Mujtahids are correct because Allah has
given no confirmed general law in the fields where *Ijtihad* is
necessary, i.e., in which the texts of the Qur'an and the Sunnah are not
adequate. Thus the pronouncement of the law is related to the estimation
of the Mujtahid and what his views and preferences lead to. This is the
doctrine of *Taswib* or imputing correctness.

In this light we can clearly elucidate what we have mentioned above. The
doctrine of *Taswib* reflects the development of the idea of deficiency
and its transformation into imputing deficiency and incompleteness to
the *Shari’ah* directly. It allowed these jurists to deny the existence
of a definite law of the *Shari’ah* in the fields dealt with by
*Ijtihad* and to consider all the differing Mujtahids as correct.

Thus we come to know that the idea of deficiency in al-Bayan al-Shar'i
led to this extremist tendency regarding reason, which acted as a
substitute to fill the alleged deficiency. As this idea of deficiency
developed into the imputation of deficiency and incompleteness in the
*Shari’ah* itself, the doctrine of *Taswib* was brought about by that
extremist tendency regarding reason.

Now this development in the concept of deficiency, which led to the
imputation of deficiency to the *Shari’ah* and in believing all the
differing Mujtahids to be correct, brought about a great change in the
understanding of “Reason” and “*Ijtihad*”, as envisaged by the exponents
of this extremist tendency regarding reason. So far we have been
discussing reason and intellectual discernment as a means of proving
validity, i.e. of revealing the laws of the *Shari’ah* just as the texts
of the Qur'an and the Sunnah reveal such laws. However this concept of
deficiency in the *Shari’ah*, on the basis of which rested the doctrine
of *Taswib*, transformed the task of the jurist in the spheres of
*Ijtihad* into one of legislation and .nor of discovering the law.

Thus “Reason” in its comprehensive meaning and “*Ijtihad*” as used by
this extremist tendency regarding reason, were not considered on the
basis of the concept of deficiency in the *Shari’ah* as means of
discovering the laws of the *Shari’ah*, because there was no definite
law of the *Shari’ah* to be discovered by *Ijtihad* within its scope.
Instead, reason and *Ijtihad* were the bases of the formulation of new
laws by the Mujtahid, in accordance with his individual judgment. In
this way, *Ijtihad* became transformed on the basis of the doctrine of
*Taswib*, into a, source of legislation, and the jurist became one who
legislates in the fields dealing with *Ijtihad*, and who, discovers the
law in the fields pertaining to the texts of the Qur'an and the Sunnah.

We do not wish tat his juncture to study the doctrine of *Taswib* and
criticize fit. Our only aim is to show the gravity of this extremist
tendency regarding reason, and the importance of the struggle waged by
the, school of thought of the Ahlal Bayt against it. It was not merely a
struggle against a tendency in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, in reality it was a
struggle to defend the *Shari’ah* to uphold its completeness and
perfection and to demonstrate that it deals with all the different
aspects of life. Then the tradition were transmitted from the Imams of
the Ahlal Bayt during the period of that struggle, stressing that the
*Shari’ah* includes all laws and systematization that humanity stands in
need of, in all walks of life. These traditions also emphasized that
adequate al-Bayan al-Shar'i is found for everyone about those laws in
the Holy Qur'an, the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet and the statements of
the Imams.

Here we mention a few of those traditions taken from *Usul’ul* Kafi:

1. It is reported from Imam Sadiq (a): “Allah has revealed in the Qur'an
the clear exposition of all things, such that He has not left out
anything which His servants may stand in need of; hence no one can say,
'If this had been revealed in the Qur'an …' because Allah has so
revealed that in it.”  
 2. It is also reported from him, “There is nothing which is not
included in the text of the Qur'an or the Sunnah”.  
 3. It is reported that Imam Musa Ibn Ja'far (a) was once asked, “Is
everything contained in the Qur'an and the Sunnah, or do you add
anything to it?” He replied, “Everything is contained in the Qur'an and
the Sunnah of the Messenger”.  
 4. In a tradition Imam Sadiq (a), is reported to have described
“Jame'a” which sums up the laws of the *Shari’ah*. He said, “In it
(i.e., the *Shari’ah*) is contained every lawful and unlawful thing and
everything that mankind stands in need of, even the penalty for causing
injury by scratching”.

Contrary Reactions in Sunni Theology
------------------------------------

The waging of this violent struggle by the school of thought of the
Ahlal Bayt against the extremist tendency regarding reason does not mean
that this tendency was generally acceptable in the sphere of Sunni
theology, and that the struggle against it was waged specially in the
Jurisprudence of the Imamiyah school of thought. On the contrary this
extremist tendency regarding reason met with opposition from some Sunni
circles also. There were reactions against it in many fields of thought
as well.

In the field of *Fiqh* the activity of refutation was represented by the
establishment of the Zahiri school of thought by Daud ibn Ali ibn Khalf
Isfahani during the middle of the third century. This school called for
following the literal meanings of the Qur'an and the Sunnah and for
remaining confined to al-Bayan al-Shar'i. It also condemned taking
recourse to reason.

This act of refutation was reflected by the sphere of 'Aqa'id (beliefs)
and *Kalam* (scholastic theology) as represented by the Ash'arite school
of thought, which discarded reason and claimed that it lacked the power
to issue laws even in the field of' Aqa'id. It had been commonly
accepted by the *Ulema’* that the obligation of coming to know Allah and
the *Shari’ah* is not a law of the *Shari’ah* but a law based on reason.
This is because the laws of the *Shari’ah* have no power of motivation
and influence in the life of man except after he knows his Lord and His
*Shari’ah*.

Thus it is essential that the motivating force for knowing Allah and His
*Shari’ah* must be of a different nature vis-à-vis the laws of the
*Shari’ah*, i.e. it should be of the kind of law which is based oh
reason. My contention is that while this had been generally accepted by
the Mutakallimin (theologians), Ash'ari opposed this and discarded
reason for issuing law in any capacity. He stressed that the obligation
to come to know Allah is a law of the *Shari’ah* similar to the
obligation to fast or to offer prayers.

This act of refutation extended to the sphere of ethics, which at that
time formed a part of *‘Ilm’ul* *Kalam* (scholastic theology). The
followers of the Ash'arite school of thought denied that reason had the
power to distinguish good actions from evil ones even in the most
obvious cases. Thus reason cannot distinguish between injustice and
justice, but the first became evil and the second good owing to al-Bayan
al-Shar'i. Had al-Bayan al-Shar'i deemed injustice good and justice
evil, then reason would have had no right to object to that.

These reactions did not consist of less shame and danger than the
extremist tendency regarding reason itself. This is because they set out
to pass judgment against reason entirely and absolutely, and to strip it
of many of its capabilities. Also they set out to stop intellectual
development and growth in Islamic thought, because of their complete
devotion to the texts of the Almighty Law giver and their zeal to
safeguard the Qur'an and the Sunnah. These reactions thus differed
fundamentally from the stand-point of the school of thought of the Ahlal
Bayt, as the latter, side by side whi1e struggling against the extremist
tendency regarding reason, emphasized the importance of reason and the
necessity of relying on it within permissible limits and of utilizing it
within those limits as a fundamental means of proving validity, in
addition to al-Bayan al-Shar'i. The following is the text transmitted
from the Ahlal Bayt: “Allah has two authorities over mankind the
external and the internal. The external authority consists of the
Messengers, the Prophets and the Imams, while the internal is the
intellect (of reason)”.

This text clearly reiterates the establishment of reason as a
fundamental instrument for proving validity, in addition to al-Bayan
al-Shar'i.  
 Thus the school of thought of the Ahlal Bayt combined defending the
*Shari’ah* from the concept of deficiency, while defending reason from
the attack of those who are impervious to progress.  
 We shall return to this topic in a comprehensive and academic manner
during the forthcoming discussions.

The Struggle in Defence of Reason
---------------------------------

As regards the extremist tendency renouncing and condemning reason,
found within the sphere of Imami thinking, it came to be represented by
a group of our 'u1ema who took the name “al-Akhbariyin wal Muhaddithih”
(the scholars of the traditions). They opposed the role of reason in
different fields and' remained content with al-Bayan al Shar'i alone.
This is because reason is prone to error and the history of intellectual
thought is full of its errors and mistakes, Thus reason is not fit to be
used as an instrument for proving validity in any of the fields of
religion.

These Akhbaris are the very group that had launched an attack on
*Ijtihad*, as referred to in the previous chapter. The history of this
tendency had its origin in the beginning of the eleventh century A.H. It
was proclaimed by al-Mirza Muhammad Amin Istirabadi, (d. 1023 A.H:) who
was at that time living in Medina. He wrote a book called “al-Fawa'id al
Madaniyyah” in which he crystallized this tendency, brought forth proofs
and arguments for that and made it into a separate school of thought.

In his book Istirabadi emphasized that the branches of human knowledge
are of two kinds – one in which the propositions are derived from
sense-experience and the other in which sense-experience is not the
basis, nor can the conclusions be verified by it. The author, Muhaddith
Istirabadi was of the view that mathematics falls in the first category
as it derives its fundamental principles, as he claimed, from
sense-experience. As for the second category it is represented by
metaphysics that studies prepositions far removed from the reach and
limits of sense-experience. Its propositions include the nonmaterial
nature of the soul and its continued existence after the body is buried
and mortality of the universe.

According to the belief of Muhaddith Istirabadi, the first category of
the branches of human knowledge alone deserves full confidence as it
relies on sense-experience.

Mathematics, for example, relies, in the final analysis on propositions
within the reach of sense-experience, similar to 2+2 = 4. As regards the
second category it has no value;  
 and no confidence in reason is possible regarding the conclusions it
reaches in this category, because here reason is far removed from
sense-experience.  
 In this way Istirabadi propounded his analysis of knowledge by making
sense-experience a fundamental standard for distinguishing the value of
knowledge and the scope of the possibility of reliance on it.

In this light we see clearly that this tendency regarding
sense-experience in the view of Muhaddith Istirabadi inclines towards
the school of thought of sensationalism in the theory of knowledge,
which states that sense-experience is the basis of knowledge. Therefore
we can term the movement of the Akhbaris in Islamic thought as one of
the means in which the tendency regarding sense-experience infiltrated
into our intellectual heritage.

The Akhbaris, whatever they represented concerning sense-experience,
preceded the philosophical trend of sensationalism that was propounded
by John Locke (d. 1704 A.D.) and David Hume (d. 1776 A.D.). The death of
Istirabadi preceded Locke's death by about a hundred years. We can call
the former a contemporary of Francis Bacon (d. 1626 A.D.), who had paved
the way for the trend of sensationalism in European philosophy.

In any case there is a remarkable intellectual unison between the
intellectual movement of the Akhbaris and the schools of sensationalism
and experimentalism in European philosophy. All of them made a severe
attack on reason and nullified the value of all its conclusions that
were not derived from sense-experience.

The movement of Muhaddith Istirabadi against knowledge arrived at by
reason divorced from sense-experience, reached the same conclusions as
were recorded by the philosophies of sensationalism in the history of
European thought, as it found itself ultimately, owing to its erroneous
outlook, opposed to every proof arrived at by reason, which the
believers use to prove the existence of Allah. This is because all these
proofs are included in the sphere of knowledge arrived at by reason
divorced from sense-experience.

Thus we find, for instance, a Muhaddith like Sayyid Ni'matullah
al-Jaza'iri openly challenging these proofs in accordance with his
Akhbari outlook (i.e. of the school of the Akhbaris). This has been
transmitted by the jurist Shaykh Yusuf Bahrani in his book “al-Durar
al-Najafiyyah”. However that did not lead the Akhbari outlook to
apostasy as it led the European philosophies of sensationalism. This is
due to the difference in circumstances that helped the growth and
development of both of them.

The theory of knowledge of the trend of sensationalism and
experimentalism were developed at the dawn of the Renaissance owing to
the movement of experimentation and the accentuation of its importance.
It thus had the susceptibility of rejecting all knowledge derived from
reason divorced from sense-experience.

However, the movement of the Akhbaris possessed religious motives. It
had discarded reason on account of the *Shari’ah*, not on account of
experimentation. Thus it was not possible for its opposition to reason
to lead to a denial and rejection of the *Shari’ah* and of religion.

Thus the movement of the Akhbaris suffered from internal
self-contradiction, in the view of many of its critics, because, on the
one hand, it condemned reason in order to clear the way for al-Bayan
al-Shar'i to legislate and promulgate *Fiqh*, while, on the other hand
it continued to depend on reason to prove the validity of its religious
tenets. This is because the proofs of the existence of the Creator and
of the validity of Islam are not possible through al-Bayan al-Shar'i,
but have to be grasped through reason.


