The History of ‘Ilm’ul Usul
===========================

*‘Ilm’ul Usul* developed in the lap of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* just as the latter
developed in the lap of *‘Ilm’ul* *Hadith* (the science of traditions)
as a result of the various stages through which 'Ilmush *Shari’ah*
passed.

By 'Ilmush *Shari’ah* we mean the science that endeavors to come to know
the laws which Islam has brought from Allah the Most High. The beginning
of this science in Islam is represented by the campaign of a large
number of narrators to preserve and collect the traditions
(al-A*Hadith*) that appear in the laws of the *Shari’ah*. Thus in the
first stage 'Ilmush *Shari’ah* was at the level of *‘Ilm’ul* *Hadith*.
At that time the basic task seems to have been confined to collecting
the traditions and preserving their texts.

However as for the method of understanding the laws embodied in those
texts and traditions, it was not so important at that stage, because it
then consisted of nothing more than the simple method by which people
understood the words of each other in their everyday conversation.
Gradually the method of understanding the laws of the *Shari’ah* from
the texts became more and more complex, until the derivation of laws
from their legal sources became abstruse demanding profound and
comprehensive knowledge.

Increasing and exhaustive efforts were made to acquire that profundity
which the understanding of the laws of the *Shari’ah* from the texts and
their derivation from their sources demanded. Thus the seedlings of
academic legal thought developed and *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* was born. Then
*‘Ilm’ul* *Shari’ah* ascended from the level of *‘Ilm’ul* *Hadith*
(science of traditions) to that of deduction and of Istidlal (setting
out proofs and reasoned arguments) which is abstruse.

During that growth and development of *‘Ilm’ul* *Fiqh* and of legal
thinking and the embarkation of the scholars of the *Shari’ah* upon
carrying out the process of deduction and understanding the laws of the
*Shari’ah* with the degree of profundity and depth demanded by the
situation, the common threads (the common elements) of the process of
deduction began to appear and to reveal themselves. This was how the
birth of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* took place and how the legal thinking of the
outlook of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* was adopted.

Hence we can say that the science of the principles of jurisprudence was
born in the lap of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*. Thus, while previously' those
carrying out the tasks of *Fiqh* were using the common elements in the
process of deduction without completely grasping their nature and
limitation and the significance of their role in it -the entrance of the
trend of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* onto the stage of the thinking of *‘Ilm’ul
Fiqh*, they began to pay attention to these common elements and to study
their limitations.

We do not doubt that the seeds of the thinking of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* were to
be found with the jurists among the companions of the Imams since the
days of the Sadiqain (Imam Muhammad Baqir and Imam Ja'far Sadiq) at the
level of their legal thinking. Historical testimony to that is contained
(among other things) in the books of A*Hadith* (traditions) about the
questions concerning some of the common elements in the process of
deduction posed by a number of narrators to Imam Sadiq and other Imams
and the answers received from them.[^1]

Those questions reveal the existence of the seeds of the thinking of
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* among them and their tendency to establish general laws
and to delineate the common elements. This view is strengthened by the
fact that some pf the companions of the Imams like Hisham bin Hakam
wrote booklets on some of the problems of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. Hisham wrote a
book on 'Terms'.

However, in spite of that, the concept of common elements and the
significance of their role in the process of deduction were not
sufficient clear and propound in the beginning. The elucidation of these
characteristics and their increase in comprehensiveness took place
gradually during the expansion of the tasks of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and the
development of the processes of deduction. But the study of these common
elements did not become a separate study, independent of the researches
of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*, until a long time had elapsed after the birth of the
first seeds of the thinking of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. Thus the study of
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* remained for a long time mixed with the researches of
*‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and not independent of it. The thinking of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
in the meanwhile intensified its role with, increasing clarity until it
reached the degree which enabled it to become independent of *‘Ilm’ul
Fiqh*.

It seems that up to the time *‘Ilm’ul Usul* reached the level which
qualified it for independence, it continued to waver between *‘Ilm’ul
Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul Usul’ud Din* (science of theology).

Thus sometimes these researches were mixed with the researches of
*Usul’ud Din* and *Kalam* (scholastic theology) as Sayyid Murtaza has
indicated in his book on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* called al-Zari'ah in which he
says, “I have tome across one who has devoted a book to *Usul’ul* *Fiqh*
and its Styles and overstepped and exceeded its bounds extensively, and
even though he was right in the detailed presentation of its meaning,
principles and forms, yet he strayed away from *Usul’ul* *Fiqh* and its
methods and overstepped and exceeded its bounds extensively. Thus, he
discussed the limits of knowledge and speculation; how the theory of
knowledge was formulated; the necessity of effect from cause, etc. which
are exclusively the method of discussions belonging solely to *Usul’ud
Din* and not *Usul’ul* *Fiqh*”.

Now we find that the independence of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* as the distinct
science of the common elements in the process of deduction to derive the
laws of the *Shari’ah*, and its separation from all other religious
sciences from *Fiqh* to *Kalam* was not accomplished until after the
concept of the common elements in the process of deduction and the
necessity of formulating a general system for them had become clearer.

This was the reason which helped in distinguishing between the nature of
the studies of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and the studies of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and
*Kalam*, and led consequently to the setting up of a separate science
called *‘Ilm’ul Usul’ul* *Fiqh* or *‘Ilm’ul Usul*.

In spite of the fact that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* was able to gain complete
independence from *‘Ilm’ul* *Kalam* (the science of theology, there
remained in it some conceptual residue, the history of which goes back
to the time when the two sciences (*‘Ilm’ul Usul* and *‘Ilm’ul* *Kalam*)
were mixed. This residue continued to be a source of anguish. In that
residue was the concept that the narrations termed Akhbar Ahad (single
reports) cannot be used as proofs in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, as every proof
about it has to be definite and decisive. The source of this concept is
*‘Ilm’ul* *Kalam*, because in this science the scholars had laid down
that *Usul’ud Din* (the basic principles of Islam) require definite and
decisive proofs.

Thus we cannot prove the Attributes of Allah or the life Hereafter with
Akhbar Ahad. The mixture of *‘Ilm’ul Usul’ud Din* and *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
*Fiqh* and their sharing the word *Usul* led to the generalization of
that concept to apply to *‘Ilm’ul Usul* al-*Fiqh* also. Thus we see that
the books on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* (i.e. *‘Ilm’ul Usul’ul* *Fiqh*) up to the
time of Muhaqqiq Hilli in the seventh century A.H. continued to
criticize proving of the validity of the common elements in the process
of deduction with Akhbar Ahad as a departure from the above concept.

We find in the book al-Zari'ah concerning the mingling of *Usul’ul*
*Fiqh* and *Usul’ud Din* some relatively abstruse and limited
conceptions of the common elements in the process of deduction. The
author wrote, “You must know that the discussions of *Usul’ul* *Fiqh*
are in reality discussions about the proofs of *Fiqh*. In view of what
we have described, it is not necessary that the proofs, the methods of
arriving at the laws and the existing branches of *Fiqh* in the books of
the jurists, be of the nature of *Usul* (principles), because the
discussions on *Usul’ul* *Fiqh* are discussions on the nature of the
proofs by which these *Usul* establish laws, but not in a detailed
manner. The proofs of the jurists are of the same pattern. But their
discussions on the sum total are different from those in detail”.

This quotation taken from one of the earliest sources of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
in the *Shari’ah* heritage clearly includes the concept of the common
elements in the process of deduction, calling them “The proofs of *Fiqh*
(Adillatul *Fiqh*) in general”. It distinguishes between the studies of
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* and *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* on the basis of the distinction
between the proofs of the sum total and the proofs of the details, i.e.
between the common elements and the particular elements in our
terminology. This means that the concepts of common elements had
developed to a great degree by that time. The same concepts found
afterwards in the writings of Shaykh Tusi, Ibn Zuhrah, Muhaqqiq Hilli
and others. They all knew *‘Ilm’ul Usul* as “the science of the proofs
of *Fiqh* in general”. Thus they endeavored to express by this the
concept of common elements.

In Kitab *al-Iddah*, Shaykh Tusi says, “*Usul’ul* *Fiqh*” are the proofs
of *Fiqh*. Thus when we discuss these proofs, we discuss in general the
obligations, recommendations, permissibility, etc. from different
categories. It is not necessary that these proofs should lead to the
branches of *Fiqh*, as the former are proofs on the delineation of the
problems and the discussions about the sum total is different from the
discussion in detail”.

Here the terms “the sum-total” and “the details” are used to denote the
common and the particular elements, respectively.

From the above we come to the conclusion that the emergence of *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* and the intellectual awakening to the common elements in the
process of deduction depended on both the development of this process of
deduction to a degree of abstruseness and extensiveness and the
flourishing and increase in complexity of the thinking of *‘Ilm’ul
Fiqh*. Thus it was no coincidence that the emergence of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
historically followed the appearance of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul*
*Hadith*. And that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* should develop in the lap of *‘Ilm’ul
Fiqh* after legal thinking had grown and developed to the extent which
permitted the observation of the common elements and their study through
the methods of academic research, is again no coincidence. Hence, it was
but natural that the concept of common elements should develop gradually
and become more abstruse, with the passage of time, until it gained its
distinct form and correct limits and was separated from the studies of
both *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul Usul’ud* *Din*.

The Historical Necessity for ‘Ilm’ul Usul
-----------------------------------------

The delay in the emergence of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* historically, after the
appearance of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul* *Hadith*, was not due only to
the correlation between the outlook of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and the relatively
prior levels of legal thinking. There is also another reason that is of
great significance in this regard. It is that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* was not
found in the capacity of a kind of intellectual luxury, but was the
expression of the dire need for the process of deduction for which
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* was required to supply the indispensable common elements.

This means that the need for *‘Ilm’ul Usul* originated from the need of
the process of deduction for the common elements which are studied and
delineated in this science. This need of the process of deduction for
the common elements in reality is not an absolute necessity but arose as
a historical need.

In other words it was a necessity which was found and which became more
severe after jurisprudence had become far removed from the period of the
promulgation of the texts, This need was not found to that degree in the
jurisprudence contemporaneous with the period of the promulgation of
those texts.

To understand this concept clearly, suppose that you were living in the
time of the Holy Prophet, in close proximity to him and used to hear the
laws directly from him and to understand the texts given out by him
owing to their clarity of language and your direct approach to contexts
and their expressions. Hence, in such a case would you have been in
need, in order to understand the laws of the *Shari’ah*, for taking
recourse to a common element of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* like the validity of
al-Khabar as a proof, bearing in mind that you either heard the texts
directly from the Holy Prophet or they were transmitted to you by
persons whom you knew directly and in whose truthfulness you had the
least doubt?

Or would you have been taken recourse to a common element of *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* like the validity of al-Zuhur al-'Urfi as a proof, when you were
directly and clearly perceiving (with the aid of your sense of hearing)
the meaning of the texts issued by the Prophet, whose meaning was not at
all doubtful most of the times owing to your knowledge of all the
circumstances and contexts of those texts?  
 Or would you have required contemplation to formulate laws to explain
abstract (*muhmal*) statements issued by the Prophet when you were in a
position to ask him and seek clarification from him instead of
harbouring doubts on those laws? This means that as man was nearer to
the period of the promulgation of Islamic law and more conversant with
the texts, the less was the necessity for his own judgment regarding
general laws and common elements.

At that time the formulation of the laws of the *Shari’ah* would have
been completed in a simple manner without jurists having to face
numerous gaps and to contemplate filling them through the methodology of
the elements of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. However as the jurists became far
removed from the age in which the texts were issued, and were forced to
rely on history on the historians, on the narrators and the Muhaddithin
(traditionalists) in the matter of the transmission of the texts, they
faced many gaps and missing links, forcing them to contemplate
formulating laws. We may ask; “Was the transmitted text in reality
given: by the Prophet or the Imam or did the narrator lie, or did he
make a mistake in transmitting it?

What did the infallible one mean by this text? Did he indeed intend the
meaning I understand from the text when l read it, or did it contain
some other meaning according to the circumstances and contexts in which
it was issued and of which we are not aware? What does a jurist do when
he is unable to find a text on a specific problem? ” In this way man
becomes in need of the elements of the validity of al-Khabar, or
al-Zuhurul-'Urfi; etc. as proofs, from among the laws of *‘Ilm’ul
Usul*.  
 This is what we mean by saying that the necessity for *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
was historical, and connected with the extent of the distance in time of
the process of deduction from the age of the promulgation of the
*Shari’ah* and its separation from the circumstances and contexts of the
texts of the *Shari’ah*. It is this separation in time that brings about
the gaps and missing links in the process of deduction. It is these gaps
that brought about the urgent necessity for *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and its laws.

In order to fill up those gaps the need for *‘Ilm’ul Usul* was perceived
by the first pioneers of this science. Sayyid Jalil Hamza ibn 'Ali ibn
Zuhrah Husayn Halabi (d. 585 A.H.) wrote in the first chapter of his
book *al-Ghunyah*: “Since the discussions on the branches of
jurisprudence are based on the *Usul’ul Fiqh*, it is essential to begin
with those *Usul* and then follow the branches of *Fiqh*. Any discussion
on the branches, of *Fiqh*, without mastery of the *Usul* will not be
fruitful. However some detractors had objected to it, saying, 'If,
concerning the laws of the *Shari’ah*, you know only a statement of an
infallible one, what is the need for *‘Ilm’ul Usul*? Your discussions on
it seem meaningless and useless”.

In this text Ibn Zuhrah connects the need for *‘Ilm’ul Usul* with the
gaps in the process of deduction by referring to the necessity of the
Imamiyah school of thought following the statements of the infallible
Imam only. This is because as long as they continue following such
statements they have no need for *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. This is due to the fact
that if the derivation of a law is based directly on the statement of
the infallible Imam, then it is a simple task, containing no gaps, which
demand contemplation to formulate laws and elements of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* to
fill them.

In a text of Muhaqqiq Sayyid Muhsin A'raji (d” 1227 A.H.) in his book on
*Fiqh* 'Wasa'ilush Shi'ah”, we find a complete awareness of the concept
of the historical necessity for *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. He spoke about the
differences that arose owing to the distance in time from the age of the
promulgation of the texts and its being far removed, from it as regards
circumstances and contexts. Summing this up, he wrote, “What comparison
is there between one favored with nearness in time and one afflicted by
being far removed from it, so that they can be termed equals in, riches
and poverty?

No, there is a world of difference between them. Owing to the length of
the period of' separation, the severity of hardships, and the
universality of tribulations; what has occurred would have led to a
return to the period of *Jahiliyah* (Age of ignorance), had it not been
for Allah and the blessings of His pious servants.

Languages have been corrupted, terminologies and usages changed, the
contextual circumstances have disappeared, lies have increased,
hypocrisy has spread and contradictions between proofs have become
serious so much so that one is almost not able to find a law which is
universally agreed upon, owing to the allegations of differences in it.

At the same time there is also no one to whom questions may be
addressed. Suffice it to say that there is a distinction between the two
groups -the contextual circumstances and what is perceived in speaking
in detail and in brief. This is different from him who comes across only
different narrations and contradictory traditions and needs to apply
them to the Qur'an and the known Sunnah: For such an individual
preparation, readiness and training in that field are necessary so that
he may not make mistakes, because he has to select from the conflicting
views”.

In the light of this we come to know that the subsequent emergence of
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* historically was not only the consequence of its
correlation with the development of legal thinking and the growth of
deduction, it was also the consequence of the nature of the necessity
for *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. This necessity was historical and was found and
developed in direct proportion to the distance in time from the period
of the promulgation of the texts.

Works on ‘Ilm’ul Usul
---------------------

In the light of the preceding, which confirms that the need for *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* was historical, we are able to explain the separation in time
between the heyday of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in the sphere of Sunni legal
thinking and its heyday in the sphere of our Imami legal thinking.
History indicates that this branch of knowledge relatively thrived and
flourished in the sphere of Sunni Jurisprudence before it did so in our
Imami Jurisprudence. It is said that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in Sunni theology
entered the phase of literary works in the closing stages of the second
century (A.H.) when works in that field were written by al-Shafi'i (d.
189 A.H.) and Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Shaybani (d. 189 A.H.), while we
don't find any extensive work on that subject in Shi'ah theology until
just after the short occultation i.e. at the beginning of the fourth
century (A.H.). However some essays on various topics of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
by companions of the Imams do exist.

We have come to know that the development in the thinking of *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* was the result of the need for principles in the sphere of
deduction, and that this need was historical. This need increased and
became more severe as the distance in time from the age of the
promulgation of the texts increased. Therefore it was only natural that
this separation in time be found earlier in Sunni theology and that
Sunni thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* should grow and expand before Shi'ah
thinking, because Sunni theology claims that the age of the promulgation
of texts ended with the death of the Holy Prophet.

Thus when Sunni legal thinking crossed the second century, it had become
separated from the age of the promulgation of texts by a long period of
time which had engendered gaps and missing links in the process of
deduction. Thus there was the pressing need for the formulation of
general laws of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* to cover up the gaps and missing links.
As regards the Imamis, however, they were at the time still living in
the age of the promulgation of texts of the *Shari’ah*. This was due to
the presence of the Imam as an extension of the stay of the Holy
Prophet. Thus the difficulties faced by the 1mami jurists in making
deduction were very few; hence, the field did not permit severe
necessity for formulating *‘Ilm’ul Usul*.

Thus, we find that for the Imamis, the age of the promulgation of texts
ended with the beginning of the occultation or with the end of the minor
occultation more specifically, their thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* only
then emerged and they began to study the common elements in the process
of deduction. A number of distinguished pioneers from among our jurists
established themselves as the leaders in this field, such as Hasan ibn
Ali ibn Abi Aqil and Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Junayd Askafi in the fourth
century (A.H.).

*‘Ilm’ul Usul* then quickly entered the stage of literary works. Shaykh
Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn, No'man known as Shaykh Mufid (d. 413 A.H.)
wrote a treatise on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in which he continued the line of
thinking followed by lbn Abi Aqil and Ibn Junayd, his predecessors. He
criticized both of them for a number of their views. After him came his
pupil Sayyid Murtaza (d. 436 A.H.) and he developed this line of
thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. On this subject he produced a relatively
comprehensive work, which he called al-Zari'ah. In its preface Sayyid
Murtaza mentioned that this work was unique in this sphere owing to the
trends of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in it, which fully distinguished the Imamis
from others. However Sayyid Murtaza was not the only one among the pupil
of Shaykh Mufid to have developed this new science and done work in this
branch. A number of other students of Shaykh Mufid also wrote on
*‘Ilm’ul Usul*. Among them was Salar ibn Abdul Aziz Daylami (d. 436
A.H.) who wrote “al-Taqrib fi *Usul’ul* *Fiqh*”.

Also among them was the jurist and Mujaddid Shaykh Muhammad ibn Hasan
Tusi (d. 460 A.H.) who was recognized as the leader of the jurists after
his two predecessors, Shaykh Mufid and Sayyid Murtaza. He wrote a book
on Ilmu'l *Usul* called “*al-Iddah* fil *Usul*”. Through his efforts
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* entered a new phase of intellectual maturity, just as
with him jurisprudence also entered a higher level of expansion and
extension.

In addition to research and studies in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* that age also
witnessed an extensive effort to collect the traditions transmitted from
the Imams of the Holy Prophet's progeny and to assimilate smaller
collections of traditions into large and comprehensive ones. And before
that age had come to an end, Imami intellectual thinking was enriched by
the four comprehensive sources of traditions. These are “al-Kafi” by
ThiqatuI Islam Muhammad ibn Ya'qub Kulayni (d. 329 A.H.); “*Man la
Yahzaruhul Faqih*” by Shaykh Saduq Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Husayn (d. 381
A.H.); “al-Tahzib” by Shaykh Tusi (which he wrote in the lifetime of
Shaykh Mufid) and also “al-Istibsar” by Shaykh Tusi. These books are
called in the terminology of the Imamis “al-Kutub al-Arba'ah (The Four
Books).

The Development of the Knowledge of Theory and of its Application by Shaykh Tusi
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Tusi's work on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* was not merely as a continuation of
the same line of thinking, but it may be considered as a new advancement
altogether like a separate part of the extensive development of the
whole of legal and intellectual thinking. This pioneering jurist was
successfully able to accomplish it. The book 'al-lddah' was an
expression of this development on the subject of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, whereas
the book “*al-Mabsut* *fil* *Fiqh*” was an expression of the great
development in the studies of *‘Ilm’ul* *Fiqh* at the level of
application, in a manner parallel to the development in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
at the level of theory.

As regards the qualitative distinctions between the tendencies in the
sphere of knowledge resulting from this new development and the
preceding tendencies, we can consider Shaykh Tusi as the separating
boundary between the two periods in the history of knowledge -the
preparatory era and the era of maturity in knowledge. This pioneering
scholar brought the preparatory era to close, and initiated that age of
knowledge in which *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul Usul* became sciences
with their own specific intellectual outlooks, their own art, and their
own abstruseness.  
 In this connection perhaps the best pf all possible methods to
elucidate the tremendous development which knowledge underwent at the
hands of Shaykh Tusi would be to examine two statements written by him-
one in the Introduction to his book “*al-Iddah*” and the other in the
Introduction to his book '*al-Mabsut*'.

He wrote in the introduction of *al-Iddah*: ” You (may Allah grant you
support) have asked for a brief statement on *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* encompassing
briefly and concisely all chapters in, accordance with the views of our
school of thought and our principles. Whoever has written on this
subject has done so along the lines dictated by his own principles
(*Usul*) But none of our companions known to have written on this
subjects except Shaykh Abu Abdillah in “*al-Mukhtasar*”, his book on
*Usul’ul* *Fiqh*.

However he did not write with complete accuracy because certain
irregularities have been transmitted from him and they necessitate
rectification and revision. Sayyid Murtaza in most of his discourses had
pointed out those irregularities. However, he has not written anything
on this subject to which recourse may be taken or which can act as a
central pillar to be relied on. Thus you may say, “It is essential to
attach the greatest importance to this branch of knowledge because the
whole of the *Shari’ah* is based on it and the knowledge of any aspect
thereof is not complete without mastering the principles (of *Usul*
*Fiqh*). And whoever does not master the principles of *Usul’ul* *Fiqh*
can be a storyteller and a layman but not a scholar”.

This text of Shaykh Tusi reflects the extent of the importance of the
development of *Usul’ul* *Fiqh* which he carried out in his book
“*al-Iddah*” and his important role in this field and the importance of
what he has derived through research on the formulation of the theories
of *Usul’ul* *Fiqh* within the general religious framework of the Imami
school of thought.

This text also re-affirms that Shaykh Mufid was in the forefront of the
field of writings on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in the sphere of Imami theology. 1t
also shows that Shaykh Tusi wrote “*al-Iddah*” or at least began writing
it during the lifetime of Sayyid Murtaza, as he has prayed in it for the
latter's long life. Perhaps, he did not at that time know of the
existence of Sayyid Murtaza's book “al-Zari'ah ” as he negated the
existence of any book on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* by the latter. This means that
Shaykh Tusi began his book before Sayyid Murtaza wrote “al-Zhari'ah” or
that “al-Zhari'ah” had already been written but had not been known or
publicized, so that Sayyid Murtaza 's contemporary (Shaykh Tusi) did not
know of it when he began writing “*al-Iddah*”.

In his great work on jurisprudence, “*al-Mabsut*.” Shaykh Tusi wrote, “I
continue to hear a group of jurists and those associated with the study
of jurisprudence who are opposing us, belittling the jurisprudence of
our Imami companions and saying, regarding the paucity of branches
(*Furu'*) of jurisprudence and of legal problems. They are the exponents
of “insertion” and “competition”. Verily those who deny *Qiyas*
(analogy) and ljtihad have no means of solving many of the legal
problems and of deriving the branches from the underlying principles
(*Usul*), since the major part of these are based on the two principles
of *Qiyas* and *Ijtihad*.

This statement of theirs reflects ignorance regarding out school of
thought and their lack of reflection on our principles. Had these
critics only examined our traditions and our jurisprudence, they would
have come to know that most of the legal problems mentioned by them are
to be found in our traditions based on the authority of the Imams, whose
statements, as regards proof, follow the course of those of the Holy
Prophet, to specify, generalize, clarify or comment on them. And as for
the majority of problems relating to the branches (*Furu’*) of
jurisprudence with which their books are replete, there is no branch
which is hot dealt with in our principles, and is not found in our
school of thought. It is not dealt with on the basis of *Qiyas*. We
follow the principle that to act according to obligatory knowledge is
obligatory.

“Acquiring this knowledge is facilitated because it is based on the
underlying principle (*al-Asl*) and on meeting one's obligations etc. In
addition, most of the branches of jurisprudence have their origin in the
texts transmitted from our companions. However their number has
multiplied at the hands of the jurists because of their approach to
handle the legal problems, some based on others and their
inter-relationships and abstruseness so much so that many of the clear
problems have become abstruse owing to this kind of handling even if the
problems themselves are familiar and clear.

“For a long time I had a keen desire to write a book covering that
field. My desire was aroused but different circumstances interrupted me
and other preoccupations kept me busy. Also the lack of desire on the
part of this group for such a book and their lack of concern for it, was
a setback for my intention. They had written down the traditions and
their writings consisted of exact definite words, so much so that if a
problem was presented in different words or put forward in a manner
other than the usual, they became astonished and were unable to
understand it”.

“Previously I had written the book “*an-Nihayah*” in which I had
discussed all that was reported by our companions in their writings and
all the problems they had dealt with together with their differences
thereon. These I arranged in the order of the problems of *Fiqh* and I
collected their views and arranged the books in the given order for
reasons explained there. Hence, I did not undertake the branches of the
problems nor writing the conclusions of different chapters nor arranging
the problems, nor commenting on them, nor reconciling to their differing
views. Instead I present all or most of them in the form of quotations,
so that they may not have an aversion to that. At the end I wrote brief
sentences of conclusion on *Ibadat* (acts of devotional worship) in
which I preferred brevity and conciseness. I also wrote concluding
sentences on the chapters related to *Ibadat* (prayers)”.

In “*an-Nihayah*” I promised to write a book especially on the branches
of jurisprudence, which, taken, in conjunction with the former, would be
complete and sufficient for all intents and purposes. Then I realized
that would be incomplete, and to understand it would be difficult for
the reader because a branch is understood only when viewed in
conjunction with its underlying principle. Thus, I thought it only just
that I should write a book encompassing all the works on jurisprudence
written so far numbering about thirty and I that I should mention each
of them, to the extent that its summarization is possible.

These are the works dealing solely with *Fiqh* and not with invocations
or etiquette. I also felt that I should assign chapters, divide the
legal problems, reconcile the differing views and treat the matter as
exhaustively as possible also that I should deal with most of the
branches of jurisprudence mentioned by our opponents, and state the view
of our school of thought dictated by our basic principles, after
mentioning the underlying principle of every problem.

This book, if Allah grants me the Grace to complete it, will be a work
unmatched both among the works of our companions as well as among those
of our opponents. This is because I have not come to know so far of any
single work by any jurist, which deals with .the underlying principles
as well as with the branches of jurisprudence exhaustively according to
our school of thought. On the contrary their books, in spite of being
numerous, do not encompass the underlying principles as well as the
branches of jurisprudence in a single work. As for our companions they
have no work on this topic worthy of reference; they give only
summaries”.

The above quotation expresses the historical circumstances that occurred
in the initial stages of the development of legal thinking, through
which science of Islamic law expanded and developed in the Imami school
of thought until it resulted in the likes of Shaykh Tusi, one of the
illustrious scholars who expanded and extended it to a greater and
deeper level.

From the above quotation it seems that the legal studies and research
that preceded Shaykh Tusi (which he came across and felt anguished
thereby) were confined mainly to the review of the traditions and texts.
To this, Shaykh Tusi refers as the underlying principles (*Usul*) of the
problems. This review of the data was restricted to the self-same forms
that appeared in the original sources of those traditions. Naturally
legal research and studies when confined to the underlying principles of
the problems, given in a direct manner in the texts, and to the
transmitted forms, will be very narrow and restricted with no scope for
originality and extension.

In the scales of the development of knowledge, transforming legal
thinking from its narrow limited scope dealing with the underlying
principles of problems to a wider scope, in which the jurist deals with
the branches of *Fiqh*, with details, with the comparison between laws
and with the application of general laws, and also examines the laws of
different occurrences and hypotheses in the light of the given data in
the texts in these scales, the book “*al-Mabsut*” was a great and
successful endeavor.

From a study of the texts of Shaykh Tusi, the eminent jurist in
“*al-Iddah*” and in *'al-Mabsut*”, we are able to derive the following
two facts:

Firstly, *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, in the stage of knowledge, which preceded
Shaykh Tusi, was proportional to the level of legal research and studies
which, at that time, were confined to the underlying principles of
problems and the immediate data from the texts of the *Shari’ah*, and it
was not possible for *‘Ilm’ul Usul* to develop considerably in that
period. This is because the limited need for legal research that
confined itself within the limits of the immediate data in the texts of
the *Shari’ah* did not help such a development.

Thus naturally, *‘Ilm’ul Usul* had to await the expansion and
development of legal thinking and its passing through those stages about
which Shaykh Tusi felt annoyed and expressed his discontent, Secondly,
the development of *Ilm’ul Usul*, which Shaykh Tusi presents in his book
'*al-Iddah*' followed a line parallel to the tremendous development
which occurred in that period in the field of jurisprudence.

This historical parallelism between the two developments supports the
view which we have previously put forward about the interaction between
the thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, i.e., between the
studies in theory and practice in the field of jurisprudence. Thus a
jurist, who concerns himself with the limits of the meaning of a text
and the immediate data either in the same words or in synonymous words,
and, who lives at a time not far from that of the infallible ones, will
not feel a great need for laws, However when he enters the stage of the
branches of that text and the study of details and of putting forward
new hypotheses to derive the laws, through whatsoever means, from the
texts; he finds himself in great and urgent need of the common elements
and the general laws.

The wide horizons of legal thinking then open up before him. We must
not, however, conclude from the preceding quotations from Shaykh Tusi
that the transformation of legal thinking from the stage of being
confined to the underlying principles (*Usul*) of the problems and its
Stagnation on the forms of the traditions to the stage of branches and
of application of laws, took place suddenly at his (Shaykh Tusi's) hands
without any prior preparation. In fact the development that Shaykh Tusi
brought about in legal thinking had its seed sown before him by his two
illustrious teachers, Sayyid Murtaza and Shaykh Mufid, and before them
by Ibn Abi Aqil and Ibn Junayd as we have alluded to previously.

Those seeds had their own importance from the point of view of the
developments of knowledge, so much so that Abu Ja'far ibn Ma'd Musawi
(who came later than Shaykh Tusi) is reported to have come across the
book on jurisprudence by fun Junayd called 'al-Tahzib” and to have
remarked that he had not come across any book, more excellent, more
eloquent, with better expression or with a more delicate meaning than
that. This book deals with the branches of jurisprudence as well as the
underlying principles, and shows differences in the problems and cites
proofs, both according to the way of the Imamis as well as according to
the way of their opponents. This testimony demonstrates the value of the
seeds that grew until they bore fruit at the hands of Shaykh Tusi.

Then came Shaykh Tusi's book “*al-Iddah*', which represented the
development of the thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* as the fruit of those
seeds, in compliance with the needs for extension and expansion in the
legal research and studies. In this light we come to know that it is an
error to say that the book “*al-Iddah* ” severed the relationship
between the development of *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and that of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and
established the possibility of .the development of the thinking on
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* to a considerable extent without thinking on science of
jurisprudence. This is because Shaykh Tusi wrote “*al-Iddah*” in the
lifetime of Sayyid Murtaza and at that time thinking on science of
jurisprudence was in its initial stages and did not develop except in
the book “*al-Mabsut*” which the learned Shaykh Tusi in the latter part
of his life the reason why making such a statement is an error is that
though the book “*al-Mabsut*” was chronologically younger than
“al-lddah”, yet the former only embodied the extension and expansion of
legal thinking which had begun to develop and branch out at the hands of
Ibn Junayd, Sayyid Murtaza, etc,

Relative Stand Still in Knowledge
---------------------------------

No sooner had the great Mujaddid (reformer) Muhammad ibn Hasan Tusi
appeared than the study of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and of applications in the
sphere of *Fiqh* spurted out tremendously and he left behind an enormous
heritage in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* as represented by “al-lddah” and another
enormous heritage in the sphere of applications in *Fiqh*, embodied in
“*al-Mabsut*”, However this enormous heritage remained at a standstill,
without any further development, after the demise of the great Mujaddid
for a century, both in the fields of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*
equally.

This fact, in spite of the stress of a number of scholars, is the basis
for questioning ourselves about it. This is because the revolutionary
movement, started by Shaykh Tusi, in the spheres of *‘Ilm’ul* *Fiqh* and
*‘Ilm’ul Usul*, and the great achievements, which he accomplished,
should expectedly have been a powerful force for knowledge and should
have opened up wide horizons for subsequent scholars to exercise
originality and creativity, and for continuing the journey on the track
shown by the Shaykh. How is it that they did not associate with the
views of the Shaykh and his researches that would naturally serve to
urge and motivate towards following the same path?

This is the question that deserves an explicit answer. It is possible
for us, at this juncture, to indicate a number of reasons that would
throw light on the situation.

1. It is a historical fact that Shaykh Tusi migrated to Najaf in 448
A.H. as a result of the disturbances and strife that erupted between the
Shi'ahs and Sunnis in Baghdad about 12 years before his death. In
Baghdad he had become a centre of learning before his migration. He was
very popular among the public as well as among the scholars, so much so
that he gained the chair of “al-*Kalam* wal Ifadah” from the Caliph
Qa'im bi Amrillah. The Caliph used to bestow this honor only on eminent
and reputable scholars. Shaykh Tusi was not only a teacher, he was also
an authority and a religious leader, from whom the Shi'ahs of Baghdad
sought help in their various affairs after the death of Sayyid Murtaza
in the year 436 A.H. Hence, his migration to Najaf served to free him
from many duties and gave him the opportunity to devote himself
completely to intellectual pursuits.

This helped him to perform his enormous intellectual role which raised
him to the status of one of the founders, as alluded to by the Muhaqqiq
Shaykh Asadullah Tustari in his book “Maqabisu'l Anwar” in the following
words: “Perhaps it was the Divine Wisdom to allow Shaykh Tusi to free
himself for the duties which he alone carried out in laying the
foundation of the sciences of the *Shari’ah*, especially in the sphere
of the problems of jurisprudence”.

In the light of the above, naturally, the years which Shaykh Tusi spent
in Najaf had a great influence on his intellectual stature and
personality, as represented in his book, ”'*al-Mabsut*”. This was the
last work on jurisprudence written by him, as mentioned by Ibn Idris in
“Bahth ul-Anfal minas Sara'ir”. It was the last work written by him in
his life as his biographers mention.

In addition to this, we see that Shaykh Tusi, by migration to Najaf,
most probably separated himself from his students and his academic
circle in Baghdad and began to develop a young circle around him from
among his children or from those desirous of pursuing studies on
jurisprudence from among the students at the sacred tomb of Imam Ali (a)
at Najaf or the residents of nearby towns like Hillah etc. This circle
developed gradually in his lifetime and the Mash'hadi element (named
after Mash'had 'Alawi) became prominent in it. The Hilli element from
which the intellectual currents flowed to Hillah also came into
prominence.

When we put forward the view that Shaykh Tusi, by his migration,
separated himself from his original circle of students and founded a new
circle in Najaf we are relying on a number of considerations. First of
all, we see that the historians writing about the migration of Shaykh
Tusi to Najaf do not at all indicate that his students in Baghdad
accompanied him or that they joined him immediately after his migration.

Further, when we examine the list of the Shaykh's students mentioned by
his biographers we find that the place of students is not mentioned
except in the case of two persons about whom it is clearly mentioned
that they studied under Shaykh Tusi at Najaf. They are Husayn ibn Hasan
ibn Muzaffar ibn Ali Hamadani and Husayn ibn Hasan ibn Babwayh Qummi and
most likely they were the new students of the Shaykh. Regarding Husayn
ibn Muzaffar, Shaykh Muntajabuddin has mentioned in the former's
biography in “al-Fihrist” that he studied all the Shaykh's writings
under him at Ghara. Studying all the Shaykh's writings under him, at
Najaf, increases the possibility that Husayn was one of his new
students, who joined him after his migration to Najaf, since this
student had not studied under the Shaykh before.

The probability of this is further increased by the fact that Husayn's
father, Muzaffar also used to attend the lectures of Shaykh Tusi and
prior to that, those of Sayyid Murtaza as Muntajabuddin mentions in
al-Fihrist. This increases the probability that the son, Husayn, was
from a later group of students than the one in which his father
participated as one of the Shaykh's students. About Hasan ibn Husayn
Babwayh (Qummi), we know from his biography that he was also a student
of Abdul Aziz ibn B'arraj Tarabulusi and that he narrated traditions
from Karachuki and Sihrishti. The latter three were all students of
Shaykh Tusi. This means that Hasan who became a student of the Shaykh in
Najaf was one of his later students since the former was also a student
of the Shaykh's students.

Another fact, which increases the likelihood that the academic circle,
which assembled around the Shaykh in Najaf, was wholly new, is the role
played in it by his son Hasan, better known as Abu Ali. The latter
assumed the leadership of the academic group after the demise of his
father, migrated to Najaf, because although his dates of birth and death
are not known, it is historically established that he was alive in the
year 515 A.H., as is clear from a number of references in the book
“Basharatul Mustafa, viz. that he lived for about seventy years after
his father's migration to Najaf. About his education it is stated that
he was a student of his father's classes, at the same time as Hasan ibn
Husayn Qummi, who, we think, probably belonged to the later circle of
students. It is also said that Shaykh Tusi granted the certificate of
graduation to Abu Ali in 455 A.H. i.e. fifty years before the latter's
death.

This fact agrees with the view that he was one of the new students. Thus
knowing that Abu Ali succeeded his father in teaching and in
intellectual leadership of the academic circle in Najaf in spite of his
being one of the Shaykh's later students (as is most likely), we are
able to estimate the intellectual level of that circle. Hence, the
likelihood of its being a new formation is apparent.

The picture, which becomes clear to us, on the basis of the above is
that Shaykh Tusi, by migrating to Najaf became separated from his
original circle of students in Baghdad, and that he founded a new circle
around him in Najaf. There he was able to find time for study and
research, and for furthering the cause of knowledge. If this happens to
be the true picture, then we are in a position to explain the phenomenon
confronting us. Naturally, the new academic circle, which formed around
the Shaykh in Najaf, because of its newness, was not able to rise to the
level of creative interaction, with the development that Shaykh Tusi
brought about in intellectual thought. As regards the original circle,
having its roots in Baghdad, it did not interact with the ideas of the
Shaykh because he was carrying on his work, cut off from it.

Thus even though his migration to Najaf prepared him for undertaking his
great intellectual role, as it afforded him free time, yet it also cut
him off from his original circle of students. Owing to this, the
intellectual originality of the Shaykh in the field of *Fiqh* did not
flow from him to that circle, as he was drawing his own conclusions and
introducing his original ideas. And there is a great difference between
a creative thinker putting forward his original ideas within the sphere
of an academic circle and continuously interacting with that circle so
that it participates in those original ideas with full consciousness and
awareness and a creative thinker working outside the sphere of such a
circle and far removed from it.

Thus, it was necessary, in order that creative intellectual interaction
be effected, that youthful circle which developed around the Shaykh in
Najaf should become powerful enough to reach that level of interaction
on the intellectual standard.

Thus a period of apparent stagnation prevailed until that youthful
circle matured to (reach) the required level. Thus the course of
knowledge had to wait necessarily for nearly a hundred years to allow
that circle to be mature enough to bear the load of the intellectual
heritage of the Shaykh in a manner so as to act meaningfully on his
views and then to spread his original creative thinking to Hillah.
Meanwhile the old circle in Baghdad withered away and was totally cut
off from intellectual creativity and originality of which the youthful
circle in Najaf and its branch in Hillah especially, were the natural
heirs.

2. A group of scholars attributes that strange intellectual stagnation
to the great esteem that Shaykh Tusi enjoyed in the eyes of his students
as he was above criticism in their views. They thus made his views and
theories into sanctified things not open to objections nor fit for being
subjected to a thorough examination. Thus in “Ma'alimuddin”, Shaykh
Hasan ibn Zaynuddin writes on the authority of his father that most of
the jurists who came after Shaykh Tusi used to follow him and completely
rely on his authority owing to their great reverence for him and their
high opinion about him. It is also reported that Himsi who lived during
that period, said, “Strictly speaking the Imamis have no Mufti (jurist)
left; they are all narrators”.

This means that the sentimental reaction to the new and original ideas
of the Shaykh, as represented in that attitude of sanctification,
prevailed over the intellectual reaction which should have been
expressed in the study of propositions and problems which the Shaykh had
presented and in the continuity of intellectual development in the field
of jurisprudence.

The attitude of sanctification reached such an extent in the minds of
the Shaykh's contemporaries, that we read of those among them who spoke
of the dream of the Commander of the Faithful in which Imam Ali (a)
testified to the correctness of all that Shaykh Tusi had written in his
book “*an-Nihayah*”. This clearly shows the extent to which the
intellectual and spiritual authority of the Shaykh was implanted in the
depths of their minds.

However this reason given to explain the intellectual stagnation is
interconnected with the first one, since the intellectual esteem, in
which a jurist is held, no matter to what extent, is normally not enough
to close for others the doors of growth and interaction with the views
of that jurist in the sphere of legal thinking. This usually happens
only when others are not at that intellectual level which qualifies them
for such interaction. In such a case the esteem is transformed into
complete faith and blind confidence.

3. The third reason can be deduced from two historical facts. The first
is that the growth of thinking in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
with the Shi'ahs was not separated from the external factors which were
aiding the growth and development of academic thinking and research. One
of those factors was Sunni thinking because researches in *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
in the sphere of Sunnism and the development of these researches
according to the Sunni school of thought continuously motivated the
thinkers among the Imami jurists to study those researches within the
framework of the Imami school of thought, and to formulate theories in
accordance with Imami views on every problem and difficulty raised by
Sunni research and to criticize the solutions put forward by others.
Quotations from two eminent Imami jurists will be enough to establish
the role of motivation played by Sunni thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*.

(a) Shaykh Tusi in the preface to his book '*al-Iddah*' says, justifying
the step he had taken in writing this book on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, “Whoever
has written on this subject has followed the lines dictated by his own
principles (*Usul*). But none of our companions is known to have written
on this subject”.

(b) Ibn Zuhrilh in his book, “*al-Ghuhyah*”, has explained the intended
objectives of research on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. We also have another objective
in discussing *Usul’ul* *Fiqh* apart from what has already been
mentioned. This is to show the incorrectness of many of the views of the
schools of thought of our opponents and of many of their ways of
reaching correct views.[^2]

It is not possible for them to correct themselves nor for us to show
them their incorrectness using any of the branches of jurisprudence.
This is because knowledge of the branches without understanding the
underlying principle is impossible. This major objective requires
careful consideration of *Usul’ul* *Fiqh* and motivating towards a
careful study of those *Usul* (underlying principles) ”. This is the
first of the two historical facts.

The second fact is that Sunni thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* began to
decline in the fifth and sixth centuries A.H. and its power of
revitalization began to stagnate and it more and more tended towards
Taqlid (reliance on authority) and this finally resulted in the official
closing of the doors of *Ijtihad*”.

The evidence pertaining to that period, from a Sunni scholar living at
that time, is enough to establish this fact. Al-Ghazali (d. 505 A.H.),
while discussing the pre-requisites for one participating in polemics,
mentioned, “that the person engaging himself in polemics should be a
Mujtahid who gives legal verdicts on the basis of his own opinions and
not according to the school of thought of al-Shafe'i or Abu Hanifah or
any other. Thus if it appears to him that the right verdict is in
accordance with the school of thought of Abu Hanifah, he should abandon
the corresponding views of al-Shafe'i and deliver his verdict in
accordance with what he considers to be correct. However for him, who
has not reached the level of *Ijtihad*, this law includes everyone in
all periods. Then what is the benefit, for him in polemics?”

When we combine these two facts and realize that the Sunni thinking on
*‘Ilm’ul Usul*, which was a motivating factor for Shi 'ah thinking in
the same field began to decline and became stagnant, we would be able to
conclude that, intellectual thinking by our Imami jurists thus lost one
of its motivating factors. This, we can deem as a contributing factor
for the stagnation in the development of knowledge.

Ibn Idris Describes the Period of Stagnation
--------------------------------------------

Perhaps the best historical document concerning that period is the
writing of the outstanding jurist, Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Idris, who
lived during that period and played a major role in resisting the
stagnation. He infused a new life into intellectual thinking as we shall
come to know soon. In the preface of his book “*al-Sara’ir*, he wrote,
“When I saw the indifference of the people of this age towards knowledge
of the *Shari’ah* of Muhammad and of the laws of Islam, their
sluggishness in seeking knowledge of it, their hostility towards that
which they don't know and their neglect of that which they know and when
I saw even in the elders of this age, the predominance of ignorance and
their neglect of the demands of the time and their being satisfied with
only that much knowledge which is obligatory on them so much so that
they seem to be concerned with only today, and with the achievement of
only this hour, and when I saw that knowledge was going to the depths of
degradation, and the field of knowledge was devoid of security, I took
the necessary steps to preserve the remaining signs of life, and
restored life, which was at the point of cessation ”.

Renewal of Life and Vitality in Academic Research
-------------------------------------------------

However, a hundred years had not elapsed, when a new life flowed into
the researches on jurisprudence and principles of jurisprudence in the
sphere of the Shi'ite school of thought. It was at a time when Sunni
intellectual research and study was stagnant, as described by al-Ghazali
in the fifth century (A,H.).

The underlying factor for this difference in the state of Sunni and
Shi'ite research and study is based on many reasons, which contributed
to Shi'ite intellectual thinking regaining its vigour and vitality in
the spheres of jurisprudence and principles of jurisprudence while Sunni
intellectual thinking failed to follow suit. We shall mention the
following two reasons for this:

**(1)** The spirit of Taqlid (following), which had pervaded the
academic circle left behind by Shaykh Tusi, had penetrated in the midst
of Sunni jurisprudence. However the nature of this spirit of Taqlid
differed in the two cases. In the first case the spirit of Taqlid spread
in the academic circle left behind by Shaykh Tusi because the former was
not matured and could not readily interact with the new and original
ideas of the illustrious Shaykh. Thus it was necessary for it to wait
for sometime before it could grasp those ideas and before it could reach
the level to interact with and influence those ideas. Thus by its very
nature this spirit of Taqlid was only temporary. On the other hand in
the Sunni juristic groups, the spirit of Taqlid spread because of their
bygone days, when they had reached the peak of expansion and
development, or after they had realized their objectives. We cannot
elaborate on this point at this juncture because of the level of the
present discussion. However, it was only natural that the spirit of
stagnation and taqlid should become more firmly implanted in those
groups with the passage of time.

**(2)** Sunni jurisprudence was the official jurisprudence adopted by
the State and promulgated for the fulfillment of its religious
obligations. Hence, the State was a factor for the motivation and
development of Sunni jurisprudence. Thus, Sunni jurisprudence was
influenced by political circumstances and flourished in times of
political stability but its zeal was diminished in circumstances of
political confusion and instability.

On the basis of the above, it was only natural that Sunni jurisprudence
should lose something (no matter how much) of its vitality in the sixth
and seventh centuries and afterwards as a result of political
instability, and finally of the devastation at the hands of the Mongols
who stormed the world of Islam and overthrew the governments.

On the basis of the above it was only natural that Sunni jurisprudence
should lose something (no matter how much) of its setup. Nor did the
Shi'ite jurists derive motivation and incentives for intellectual
research and study from the needs of the political set-up. On the
contrary they derived such motivation from the needs of the people who
believed in the Imamate of the Ahlal Bayt (Progeny of the Prophet) and
who took recourse to the jurists of the latter's school to solve their
religious difficulties and to learn about the religious obligations
according to the Shari 'ah. Hence, Shi'ite jurisprudence was influenced
by the needs of the people and not by the political environment, as was
the case with Sunni jurisprudence.

The Shi'ite jurisprudence, following the Ahlal Bayt, was in a state of
continuous development. The relationship of the Shias with their jurists
and their method of seeking and obtaining the jurist's verdicts was
becoming more defined and expanded. In this light, we come to know that
Shi'ite jurisprudence did not lose any of the factors propelling it
towards growth and development, but that it expanded, with the expansion
of Shi'ism and with the spread of the idea of Taqlid, in an organized
manner. Thus, we come to know that Shi'ite intellectual thinking
possessed factors of expansion and development internally owing to its
growth and its attitudes on the road to development and also externally
due to the relationships between the Shi'ite jurists and the Shi'ah sect
and the ever-increasing needs of the latter.

The relative stagnation of Shi'ite jurisprudence after the death of the
illustrious Shaykh Tusi was only for the purpose of recouping its forces
and of directing its development and growth to the level where it could
interact with his views.

As regards the element of motivation represented by Sunni intellectual
thinking, in spite of its being deprived of the Shi'ite intellectual
thinking owing to the stagnation of the Sunni juristic groups, it then
assumed anew form. This was because of the activity of religious
confrontation taken up by the Shi'ahs. In the seventh century and
thereafter they began the missionary role of inviting people to the
Shi'ite school of thought. This missionary activity was carried on by
our scholars like Allamah Hilli and others on an extensive scale. This
in itself was enough to motivate Shi'ite intellectual thinking towards
great depth and expansion, in the study of the underlying principles of
the Sunnis, of their jurisprudence, and of their *Kalam* (scholastic
theology). Thus, we witness a remarkable vigor and vitality in the
studies on comparative jurisprudence undertaken by those scholars among
the Shi'ite jurists, who were carrying out that missionary activity,
like Allamah Hilli.

From the Author of Al-Sara’ir to the Author of Al-Ma’alim
---------------------------------------------------------

Intellectual thinking began to emerge from the period of relative
stagnation at the hands of that creative jurist, Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn
Idris (d. 598 A.H.) who infused new life into it. His book on
jurisprudence, “*al-Sara’ir*” stated that the school of Shaykh Tusi had
matured to the level where it could interact with, the Shaykh's ideas.
He thoroughly examined them and even criticized them.

From a study of the book, “*al-Sara’ir*” and a comparison with
“*al-Mabsut*” we are able to arrive at the following points:

1. The book “*al-Sara’ir*”; brings out the elements of *Usul’ul* *Fiqh*
in the study of *Fiqh* and their relationship to jurisprudence in a more
comprehensive manner than “*al-Mabsut*”. For example we may mention that
lbn ldris brought out three rules of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* while deducing the
rules relating to “water” and linked his research on jurisprudence to
them. However, we find no mention of any of these in the rules relating
to “water” in the book  
 “*al-Mabsut*”, even though in a general theoretical way they were
present in the books on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* before lbn ldris.

2. The arguments and proofs presented by lbn ldris are more extensive
than those in “*al-Mabsut*” and they include points on which lbn Idris
differs with the Shaykh extensively on the objections to and the
accumulation of testimonies. This is to the extent that a problem (for
example)., the discussion of which may not exceed one line in
“*al-Mabsut*” takes up a whole page in “*al-Sara’ir*”. In this category
is the question of the purity of contaminated water if the water of the
cistern happens to be kurr (377 kilograms).

Shaykh Tusi's verdict was that the water remained impure and he
explained the reason for his view in a single sentence. On the other
hand Ibn ldris adjudged the water pure in such a circumstance and
extensively discussed the question. He concluded by saying, “On this
question alone we have written about ten pages in which we reached our
utmost limits, and we clearly proved our verdict thereon, elucidating
various points, and giving proofs and testimonies from the verses of the
Qur'an and the authentic traditions”.

Regarding the points, on which Ibn Idris differs from Shaykh Tusi, we
observe a great care on the former's part to carefully examine all the
arguments which could support the latter's point of view, and then to
refute them. Either the arguments which he examines and refutes are the
products of his own point of view, or they represent an opposition to
the mode of thinking prevalent against the new views of lbn ldris, i.e.
that prevalent mode of thinking which these views aroused and which
began to defend the views of Shaykh Tusi. Thus lbn Idris used to collect
the arguments of his opponents and then refute them. This means that Ibn
Idris's views provoked a reaction and exercised his influence on the
prevalent intellectual thinking and invited the scholars to
confrontation.

We know from “*al-Sara’ir*” that Ibn Idris used to confront his
contemporaries with his views and debate with them and was not solely
preoccupied with the task of writing. Thus it was only natural that he
should provoke reactions and that those reactions should express
themselves in the form of arguments to support the views of Shaykh Tusi.
Among those confrontations was the one mentioned in the chapter on
Muzari'ah (contract of share-cropping) in “*al-Sara’ir*” wherein Ibn
Idris wrote as follows about a juristic view which he disapproved: “The
exponent of this view is Sayyid Alawai Abul Makarim ibn Zuhrah Halabi,
whom I've seen and met. We corresponded and I made him aware of the
mistakes he made in his writings and he excused himself (May Allah grant
him mercy)”.

Similarly, we become aware from the researches of Ibn Idris what he had
to do with those who relied on the authority of Shaykh Tusi and were
completely devoted to his views, and how he was harassed by their
stagnation. On the question of the least amount of water obligatory to
be emptied from a well in which an unbeliever has died, Ibn Idris gave a
ruling that it was obligatory to empty all the water, on the basis of
the unanimously accepted argument that if an unbeliever falls into the
water of a well while alive it is obligatory to empty all of it.

Thus emptying all the water when he dies is all the more so obligatory,
This form of argumentation based on priority and precedence bears the
stamp of intellectual courage when compared with the level of knowledge
during the time of Ibn Idris who commented on that level as follows,
“It's as if I am among those who listen to this statement and then shun
it and set it aside, saying: who said this? Who has seen thus in his
book? Who has referred to it from among the specialists who are the
models to be followed in this field? “Sometimes we find Ibn Idris
addressing those who rely totally on the authority of Shaykh Tusi by
attempting to prove to them that the latter was also inclined to the
same view, even though it needs a bit of interpretation. For example, on
the question of water made impure.

About the contaminated water in the cistern, if it is a kurr he gives
the verdict of its being pure and endeavors to prove that Shaykh Tusi
also was inclined to the view of its purity. He wrote, “Shaykh Abu
Ja'far Tusi, who holds the opposite view and is followed by many on this
question, has used arguments in many of his statements, which strengthen
the view and the verdict that such water is pure. I shall explain that
the fragrance of the complete acceptance of this point spreads from the
lips of Shaykh Abu Ja'far, when his statement and writings are justly
pondered over examined correctly and considered impartially”.

3. Historically the book ' '*al-Sara’ir*', was in a way contemporary to
the book *'al-Ghunyah'* in which Hamza ibn Ali ibquhrah Husayni Halabi
started the study of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* as an independent branch of
knowledge, because Ibn Zuhrah died only 19 years before Ibn Idris. Hence
the two books belong to the same period.

If we examine the *Usul* (underlying principles) of lbn Zuhrah, we find
that he shares the distinction with Ibn Idris in that age of absolute
reliance on the views of Shaykh Tusi. This distinction is the departure
from or disagreement with the latter's views and the acceptance of
points of view directly in conflict with the Shaykh's stand on *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* or *Fiqh*. Just as in “*al-Sara’ir*” we see Ibn Idris trying to
refute the Shaykh's arguments in the sphere of jurisprudence, similarly
in al-Ghunyah we find Ibn Zuhrah criticizing the arguments of the Shaykh
in his book “*al-Iddah*” and bringing forth arguments to support
contradictory points of view. Not only that; he even raises new issues
in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* not raised before in “*al-Iddah* ” in that manner.[^3]

This means that intellectual thinking had grown and expanded in both
fields, *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and *Fiqh*, until it had reached the level
enabling it to interact with the views of the Shaykh and to an extent to
criticize them in both these fields, This only strengthens our view that
the growth of thinking in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *Usul’ul* *Fiqh* proceeds
along the parallel lines not differing greatly from each other, because
of the interaction and inter-relationships between them.

The intellectual movement continued to grow, expand, and increase,
generation after generation. In those generations there were some
illustrious scholars, who wrote on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and
showed originality in their work. Among them was Muhaqqiq Najmuddin
Ja'far ibn Hasan ibn Yahya ibn Sa'id Hilli (d. 676 A.H.), who was a
pupil of the students of Ibn Idris, He was the author of that
outstanding book on jurisprudence, “Shara'iul Islam” which became the
pivot for further research and study in the academic circle replacing
the book “*an-Nihayah*” which Shaykh Tusi had written before
“*al-Mabsut*”.

This change from “*an-Nihayah*' to “Shara'iul Islam” indicates a
tremendous development in the standard of knowledge, because the former
was a book of law covering the basic questions in jurisprudence and
principles of jurisprudence, On the other hand, Shara'iul Islam” was an
extensive work covering branches (*Furu’*) of jurisprudence as well as
the derivation of laws along the lines laid down by Shaykh Tusi in
“*al-Mabsut*'. Thus the assumption by this book to the official position
formerly held by “*an-Nihayah*” in the academic circle and the
intellectual movement indicate that the movement for branching out from
the general laws and deriving other laws had become widespread to the
extent that the whole academic circle was undertaking such activity.
Muhaqqiq Hilli also wrote books on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* among which are
*'Nahjul Wusul ila Ma'rifatil* *Usul*' and *'al-Ma'arij*.'

Among those illustrious scholars was also the student and nephew of
al-Muhaqqiq, known as al-Allamah. He was al-Hasan ibn Yusuf ibn Ali ibn
Mutahhar (d. 726 A.H.)  
 He wrote a number of books on principles of jurisprudence of the nature
of “*Tahzibul Wusul ila ‘Ilm’ul Usul*”, “*Mabidiu'l Wusul ila ‘Ilm’ul
Usul*”, etc.

The intellectual growth in the fields of research on principles of
jurisprudence continued till the end of the tenth century. The main
representative of that growth in the latter part of the tenth century
A.H. was Hasan ibn Zaynuddin (d. 1011 A.H.) His book on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
was “al Ma'alim” in which he reflected the high level of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
in his age in a simple style and a new arrangement and systematic order.
This endowed the book with a great importance in the world of research
on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, so much so that it became a textbook on this branch
of knowledge and research scholars took it up for writing commentaries
on it and criticizing it.

From the point of time “*al-Ma’alim*” was near to the book “*Zubdatul*
*Usul*” written by eminent scholar, Shaykh Baha'i (d. 1031 A.H.), in the
beginning of the eleventh century (A.H.).

The Shock Experienced by ‘Ilm’ul Usul
-------------------------------------

After the demise of the author of “Ma'alimuddin”, *Usul’ul* *Fiqh*
experienced a shock that thwarted its growth and development and exposed
it to severe attack. The attack was the result of the emergence of the
movement of the Akhbaris (exponents of the traditions exclusively) in
the beginning of the eleventh century (A.H.) at the hands of Mirza
Muhammad Amin Istirabadi (d. 1021 A.H.) and the grave situation which
developed after the demise of the founder especially during the latter
part of the eleventh and the twelfth centuries. This attack had
psychological motives which prompted the Akhbaris from among our
scholars led by the Muhaddith Istirabadi to oppose *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and
rendered help in the relative success of their opponents. Among those
motives we may mention the following:

**1.** The lack of comprehension of the concept of common elements in
the process of deduction on the part of the Akhbaris. This caused them
to think that attributing the process of deduction to the common
elements and to the laws of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, results in disregarding the
authentic texts of the *Shari’ah* and in lowering the importance of such
texts.

Had they only grasped the concept of common elements in the process of
deduction in the manner taught by the *Usul*iyin (the specialists in
*‘Ilm’ul Usul*) they would have come to know that both the common and
the particular elements have their own fundamental role and importance
and that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* does not aim at replacing the particular
elements by the common elements. On the contrary, it lays down the
necessary laws for making deduction to derive the laws from those very
particular elements.

**2.** Historically the Sunnis had before that pursued research in
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* and produced rich literature on it. Thus, in the minds of
those opposing it, *‘Ilm’ul Usul* had acquired the stigma of Sunnism,
and they began to consider it to be a result of the Sunni school of
thought. Previously we mentioned the historical priority of Sunni *Fiqh*
in pursuing research on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* did not result from any special
link between *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and the Sunni school of thought. On the
contrary, it is related to the extent of the distance in time of the
thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* from the age of the promulgation of the
authentic texts it believed in.

The Sunnis believed that this age came to an end with the demise of the
Holy Prophet (p). Thus they found themselves, at the end of the second
century, far removed from the age of the promulgation of the authentic
texts to such an extent that it set them thinking on establishing
*‘Ilm’ul Usul*. However at that time the Shi'ahs were still living in
the period of the promulgation of the authentic texts, which in their
view, extends up to the Occultation period. We find this notion clearly
and explicitly in the following quotation from *al-Wasa’il* by the
jurist, Muhaqqiq Sayyid Muhsin A'raji (d. 1227 A.H.) refuting the
Akhbaris: “Our opponents, as they needed to give consideration to these
matters before we did so, preceded us in the collection and compilation
of traditions, as they were far removed in time from the companions of
the Holy Prophet (p) and the rightly guided Imams (a).

They then opened anew field for the deduction of laws, covering many
subjects abstruse in nature and of copious details, i.e. al-*Qiyas*
(analogy). They were forced towards the compilation and collection of
traditions because of great urgency, while at that time we were
satisfied with living in the age of the promulgators of the *Shari’ah*
(the rightly guided Imams), taking the laws from them verbally and
coming to know what they desired directly. This continued up to the
occurrence of the Occultation, when there was separation between the
Imam of the age and us. Then we became in need of those subjects and our
predecessors wrote on them. Those scholars included like Ibn Junayd and
Ibn Abi Aqil, and those after them like Sayyid, the two Shaykhs, Abu
Salah; Abu Makarim, Ibn Idris, the two Fazils and the two Shahids
(*shahid awwal* and *shahid thani*), and others right up to the present
day.

Do you think we should avoid those subjects in spite of the pressing
need that we experience, just because our opponents have preceded us in
that field? The Holy Prophet (p) had said, 'Wisdom is the lost property
of the believer!' we did not enter those fields as followers, but we set
about making the most careful research and investigation and did not
give a ruling on any question until after we had advanced valid proofs
arid after we had made our method clear”.

**3.** What served to support the stamp of Sunnism on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in
the minds of these Akhbaris is that Ibn Junayd one of the pioneers of
*Ijtihad* and of those who planted the seeds of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in
Shi'ite *Fiqh*, was in agreement with most of the Sunni schools of
thought in advocating al-*Qiyas* (analogy). But the fact that some ideas
from the Sunni schools of thought were adopted by a person like Ibn
Junayd does not mean that *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, is intrinsically something
like Sunnism. It is only a case of a later intellectual endeavour being
influenced by earlier experiences in its field.

Since the Sunnis had prior experience in research on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, it
is but natural that we find the influence of this in some later
researches. Sometimes this influence reaches the degree of adoption of
some previous views, ignoring factual evidence. However this does not
necessarily mean that the Shi'ahs acquired *‘Ilm’ul Usul* from Sunni
thinking or that it was imposed upon them from that source. On the
contrary it was a necessity that the process of deduction and the needs
of this process, imposed on Ja'fari jurisprudence.

**4.** The belief of the Akhbaris that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* had a Sunni
framework was supported by the spread of terminology from the Sunni
researches on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* to the Shi'ite specialists on this subject,
and their acceptance of that terminology after it had developed and
become delineated to devote concepts which were in agreement with the
Shi'ah point of view. An example of this is the term '*Ijtihad*' which
we have previously discussed. Our Shi'ah scholars took this term from
Sunni *Fiqh* and developed its meaning. This caused the Akhbaris among
our scholars, who did not perceive the fundamental change in the usage
of this term to feel that *‘Ilm’ul Usul* of our scholars had adopted the
same general trends present in the intellectual thinking of the Sunnis.
That is why they sharply criticized '*Ijtihad*' and opposed the research
scholars among our companions regarding its permissibility.

**5.** The role played by reason in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* was another thing
which provoked the Akhbaris against this branch of knowledge, owing to
their extremist view regarding reason, as we have seen in a previous
discussion.

**6.** Perhaps the most successful tactics employed by Muhaddith
Istirabadi and his colleagues to arouse the general Shi'ah view in
regard to *‘Ilm’ul Usul* was the exploitation of the modernity of the
founding of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. It was a branch of knowledge that did not
develop in the Shi'ite outlook until after the Occultation.

This means that the companions of the Imams and the jurists of their
school of thought passed their lives without *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and did not
feel any need for it. The jurists among the students of the Imams like
Zurarah ibn A'yun, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Muhammad ibn Abi Umayr, Yunus
ibn Abdur Rahman, etc. were not in need of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* in their
*Fiqh*. Thus, there is no need to get entangled in that in which they
did not involve themselves, and to say that deduction and *Fiqh* are
dependent on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* is meaningless.

We can realize the error in the light of the fact that the need for
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* was a historical one. Thus if the narrators of traditions
and the jurists living in the age of the promulgation of the authentic
texts of the *Shari’ah* felt the need to found *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, it does
not mean that the thinking on *Fiqh* would have no need to be removed in
time from the contexts of the texts of the *Shari’ah*, particularly when
this distance in time is daily increasing. This is because this great
distance in time brings the gaps in the process of deduction and it then
becomes obligatory on the jurist to formulate general laws of *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* to deal with those gaps.

The Alleged Roots of the Movement of the Akhbaris
-------------------------------------------------

Despite the fact that Muhaddith Istirabadi was the leader of this
movement, he tried in his book Fawa'idul Madaniyyah to trace the history
of the movement back to the age of the Imams and to prove that it has
deep roots in Shi'ite jurisprudence, so that it might acquire the stamp
of legality and respect. Thus, he would say that the Akhbari trend was
the prevalent one among the Shi'ite jurists up to the age of Kulayni and
Saduq and others who in Istirabadi's opinion, are among the
representatives of this trend) but this trend did not make its presence
definitely felt until the latter part of the fourth century and even
afterwards when a group of Shi'ite scholars began to deviate from the
lines of the Akhbaris and to rely on reason in making deduction and to
relate researches in *Fiqh* to *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, having been influenced by
the Sunni method of deduction.

Thenceforth, this deviation began to expand and spread. In this context
Istirabadi quotes a statement of Allamah Hilli (who had lived three
centuries before the former) in which a group of Shi'ite scholars is
referred to as “the Akhbaris”. He used this statement to show the
historical antiquity of the Akhbari trend. However, the fact is that in
using the word 'Akhbaris' in his statement, Allamah Hilli was referring
to one of the stages of the thinking on *Fiqh*, and not to a movement
advocating a limited trend in deduction. From the earliest ages there
were Akhbaris among the Shi'ah jurists representing the initial stages
of the thinking on *Fiqh*.

Whereas these other Akhbaris are those who have been discussed by Shaykh
Tusi in “*al-Mabsut*” about the narrowness of their horizons and their
confirming their legal researches to the underlying principles (*Usul*)
of the problems and avoiding the branches and extensions as far as
application is concerned. In tough opposition to them are the jurists
specializing in *‘Ilm’ul Usul* who think with its principles and apply
themselves to the branches of *Fiqh* in an extensive sphere. The use of
the word, “Akhbaris” in the olden days was only an expression to devote
one of the levels of legal thinking and not one of the schools of
thought.

This point has been emphasized by the eminent research scholar Shaykh
Muhammad Taqi (d. 1248 A.H.) in his extensive commentary on
“*al-Ma’alim*”. Referring to this matter he wrote, 'If you say, 'from
the olden days the Shi'ah scholars were divided into two classes,
Akhbari and *Usul*i, as the Allamah has indicated in “*an-Nihayah*.” and
as others also have done then I would reply that even though our earlier
scholars were divided in two classes and that the Akhbaris were one of
them, yet their ways were not those as claimed by today's Akhbaris. Nay
there were no differences between them and the *Usul*iyun, except in the
extent of the scope of the branches of *Fiqh* and the extent of the
importance given to the universal laws and to the power to derive
branches from that.

Among them was a group who were the preservers of the authentic texts of
the *Shari’ah* and the narrators of traditions. However many of them did
not possess insight and depth to tackle intellectual problems. They
mostly did not undertake the branches not dealt with in the texts. These
are the scholars known as the Akhbaris. Another group of scholars
possessed insight, and, being inclined to research and deep study,
investigated the problems to formulate the laws of the *Shari’ah* from
the arguments available.

They had the ability to formulate principles and universal laws from the
proofs and arguments existing in the *Shari’ah* and to apply them to the
branches from that and to derive the laws of the *Shari’ah* accordingly.
These are the scholars known as the *Usul*iyun (the specialists in the
principles of jurisprudence), like 'Umani, Iskafi, Shaykh Mufid, Sayyid
Murtaza, Shaykh Tusi and others who followed in their footsteps.

If you consider for a while, you will not find any differences between
the two groups except that the latter carry on the research on problems
and possess great insight to make necessary deductions and to derive the
branches from the various laws. For this reason their scope was more
extensive in research and insight and they took upon themselves the task
of explaining the branches and the legal problems, and went beyond the
scope of the texts of the traditions. Those Muhaddithin
(traditionalists) mostly did not have the ability to do so, nor had that
mastery over the art. Hence, they confined themselves to the literal
meanings of the traditions and in most cases did not go beyond their
literal contents, nor was their scope for discussing the branches on the
basis of the laws extensive.

Since they lived at the beginning of the spread of *Fiqh* and of the
emergence of the Shi'ite school of thought, they were concerned with
checking the underlying principles of the laws that were based on the
traditions narrated from the pious Ahlal Bayt (Progeny of the Holy
Prophet). Thus they were not able to examine their contents more closely
and to derive various branches from them. This was done in the later
periods because of the continuous influx of ideas”.

The eminent jurist Shaykh Yusuf Bahrayni in his book “*al-Hada'iq*”,
despite being in agreement with some of the views of the Muhaddith
Istirabadi, accepts that the latter was the first to make the Akhbari
outlook a separate school of thought and to create differences in the
ranks of the scholars on that basis. He wrote, “The fame of these
differences did not arise nor did this deviation occur before the author
of “*al-Fawa 'idul Madaniyyah'*, (may Almighty pardon him and grant him
mercy). He was the one to open his lips to denounce the companions in
elaborate detail. He is noted for his bigotry and fanaticism which was
not becoming of a noble scholar of his status”.

Trends of Writing in that Period
--------------------------------

If we study the intellectual achievements of that period, in which the
Akhbari movement expanded, in the latter part of the eleventh and during
the twelfth centuries, we would find an active trend at that time,
confined to the collection of traditions and to writing voluminous
extensive works on the traditions and narrations. It was during that
period that Shaykh Muhammad Baqir Majlisi (may Allah bless him, d. 1110
A.H.), wrote the book, “*al-Bihar*”, which is the greatest of the
extensive works on traditions with the Shi'ah. And Shaykh Muhammad ibn
Hasan Hurr Amili (may Allah bless him, d. 1104 A.H.) wrote the book
“*al-Wasa’il*” in which he collected a large number of traditions
related to *Fiqh*. Fayz Muhsin Kashani (d. 1091 A.H.) wrote “*al-Wafi*”
containing the traditions mentioned in *al-Kutub al-Arba'ah* (The Four
Books on Traditions). And Sayyid Hashim Bahrani (d. 1107 A.H. or
thereabouts) wrote “*al-Burhan*”, in which he collected the narrations
relating to the interpretations of the Qur'an.

However, this general trend of writing on the traditions in that period
does not mean that the Akhbari movement was the reason for its coming
into being, even though it was most probably a contributing factor,
despite the fact that some of the most prominent authors in that trend
were not Akhbaris. This trend was the result of a number of reasons, the
most important of which was that a number of works on traditions were
discovered during the century after the Shaykh and were not mentioned in
*al-Kutub al-Arba'ah*. Hence it was necessary that extensive works might
be composed encompassing those different books and containing all the
investigation and thorough research in respect of traditions and books
of traditions.

In the light of the above, we can consider the activity in writing those
voluminous extensive works, which took place in that period, as one of
the factors (in addition to the Akhbari movement) which opposed the
growth and development of research on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. In any case this
was an auspicious factor because the composition of those extensive
works was useful in the process of deduction which *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
served.

Research on ‘Ilm’ul Usul in that Period
---------------------------------------

In spite of the shock experienced by research on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* during
that period, its flame was not extinguished nor did it come to a
complete halt. Thus Mulla Abdullah Tuni (d. 1071 A.H.) wrote
“*al-Wafi*yah” on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. After him there was the eminent
research scholar Sayyid Husayn Khunsari (d. 1098 A.H.) who was known for
his immense knowledge and erudition. He imparted a new vigour to the
thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* as is evident from his ideas on that subject
contained in his book on *Fiqh*, *'Mashariqush Shumus fi Sharhid
Durus*”.

As a result of his great work in philosophical colour in a manner
unmatched before him we say that it took on a philosophical colour and
not a philosophical outlook, because this illustrious scholar was an
opponent of philosophy and had long conflicts with its exponents. So his
thought was not philosophical in the form of taqlid which philosophy had
developed, even though it bore a philosophical colour. Thus when he
undertook research on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* this philosophical colour was
represented in it and into *‘Ilm’ul Usul* flowed a philosophical trend
in thinking with a spirit of freedom from the forms of Taqlid, which
philosophy had adopted in its discussions and research. This spirit of
freedom exercised a tremendous influence in the history of knowledge
afterwards, as we shall see Insha Allah.

It was in the time of Khunsari that Muhaqqiq Muhammad ibn Hasan Sherwani
(d. 1098 A.H.) wrote his commentary on “*al-Ma’alim*”. After that we
come across two works on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. The first one was carried out
by Jamaluddin ibn Khunsari, who wrote a commentary on “*al-Mukhtasar*”.
And Shaykh Ansari has confirmed in “al-Rasa'il ” that Jamaluddin was the
first to arrive at some of the concepts of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. The second of
those two works was by Sayyid Sadruddin Qummi (d. 1071 A.H.) who was a
student of Jamaluddin and wrote a commentary on Tuni's “*al-Wafiyah*”.
Ustad Wahid Bahbahani was a student of Sayyid Sadruddin.

The fact is that the elder Khunsari, his contemporary Sherwani, his son
Jamaluddin, and his son's pupil Sadruddin, despite living in the period
when the Akhbari movement shook research on *‘Ilm’ul Usul* to its roots,
and when work on the traditions was spreading despite all this, these
were the factors in furthering the thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. They
paved the way through their studies for the emergence of the school of
Ustad Wahid Bahbahani, which initiated a new era in the history of
knowledge, as we shall see later. Hence, we can deem the studies carried
out by the four scholars as the main seeds for the emergence of this
school and the last laurels won by intellectual thinking, in the second
era, as a preparation for the changeover to the third era.

The Victory of ‘Ilm’ul Usul and the Emergence of a New School
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Akhbari trend was able, in the twelfth century, to take Karbala
(Iraq) as its centre. Hence, it was contemporary to the birth of a new
school in *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, which arose in Karbala also
at the hands of its leader, the great Mujaddid Muhammad Baqir Bahbahani
(d. 1206 A.H.). This new school set itself up to check the Akhbari
movement and to secure victory for *‘Ilm’ul Usul*, which it did until
the Akhbari trend declined and suffered defeat. In addition this school
began to advance the cause of intellectual thinking and to raise
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* to a very high standard, so that we can say that the
emergence of this school and the co-operative efforts made by Bahbahani
and the students of his school (who were great research scholars) formed
a distinct dividing line between two eras in the history of intellectual
thinking on *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh* and *‘Ilm’ul Usul*.

The positive role played by this school and the opening by it of a new
era in the history of knowledge were influenced by a number of factors,
among which are:

The reaction evoked by the Akhbari movement, especially when its
exponents assembled at the same place as the group advocating *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* i.e. Karbala. This naturally led to an increase of tension and a
multiplying of the strength of the reaction.  
 The need for producing new extensive works on the traditions had been
sated and had ceased to exist, after the writing of “*al-Wasa’il*”,
“*al-Wafi*” and “*al-Bihar*” except that the cause of knowledge should
direct its intellectual vigour towards deriving benefit from those works
in the process of deduction.

The philosophical trend in thinking, of which Khunsari had established
one of the main bases endowed intellectual thinking with anew strength
for development and opened a new field for originality. The school of
Bahbahani was the heir to this trend.

The factor of place; the school of Ustad Wahid Bahbahani developed not
far from the main centre of the academic circle in Najaf, and this
proximity to the centre was one reason for its permanence and continuity
of existence through succeeding generations of teachers and students.
This enabled it to continuously increase its knowledge of one generation
of its scholars to be added to that of the succeeding generation, until
it was able to make a great leap in advancing the cause of knowledge to
the extent of giving it the feature of a new era. Thus Bahbahani school
is distinguished from so many other schools which arose here and there,
far from the centre of the academic circle, and which disappeared with
the death of their founders.

Text Depicting the Struggle with the Akhbari Movement
-----------------------------------------------------

Muhaqqiq Bahbahani, the founder of this school wrote a book on *‘Ilm’ul
Usul* named “al-Fawa'id al-Ha'iriyah” from which we come to know the
strong motive of the struggle he waged against the Akhbari movement.
Here we are selecting a passage from that book referring to some of the
doubts of the Akhbaris and their arguments against *‘Ilm’ul Usul*. Our
previous explanation that the need for *‘Ilm’ul Usul* was felt will
become evident in refuting those arguments.

Bahbahani wrote, “As the age of the Imams receded into history and the
characteristics and proofs of *Fiqh* which had been laid down by the
jurists and openly accepted by them, became vague and indistinct owing
to their demise, the centres of learning became empty, so much so, that
most of their works became extinct, as was the case with previous
nations and the fate of previous codes of law. When the age became more
distant in time from the promulgator of its *Shari’ah*, the old concepts
became vague and new ideas came into being until that *Shari’ah*
disappeared altogether. Some imagine that Shaykh Mufid and the jurists
after him up to the present day, were united in ruling that the original
thinkers introducing new ideas were misguided that they were following
the masses and opposing the way of the Imams and changing the latter's
specific way in spite of their nearness[^4] in time to the age of the
Imams, of their utmost glory, justice and knowledge of *Fiqh* and of the
traditions, of their profoundness, piety and godliness”.

He goes on to present the extent of the insolence of his antagonists
against those great scholars and calls them to account for that
insolence. Then he goes on, “Another of their doubts is that the
narrators of these traditions did not know the laws of the Mujtahids[^5]
(i.e. *‘Ilm’ul Usul*) although traditions formed a valid proof for them.
So we also like them, do not stand in need of any of the conditions of
(*ijtihad*) and our circumstances are exactly like theirs. They do not
direct themselves to the fact that those narrators were fully aware that
what they had heard were the words of their Imam and that they were able
to understand those words by virtue of their belonging to the
literatures of the age of the infallible ones and were not beset with
any of the confusions which you feel and thus did not need any remedy
for them”.

Summary
-------

We are not in a position, at the level of this discussion to elaborate
on the important role played by the teachers as well as the pupils of
this school and the development and profoundity that it secured for the
cause of knowledge. However, we can reiterate that what has preceded
about the history of knowledge is that intellectual thinking passed
through three eras:

1. The preparatory era -the age when the main seeds of *‘Ilm’ul Usul*
were planted. This era began with Ibn Abi Aqil and Ibn Junayd and ended
with the appearance of Shaykh Tusi.

2. The era of knowledge- the age of the germination of those seeds and
their bearing fruit. During this period the outlines of thinking on
*‘Ilm’ul Usul* became delineated and represented in the fields of
research on *Fiqh* on a wide scale. The leader of this age was Shaykh
Tusi and among its eminent scholars were Ibn Idris, Muhaqqiq Hilli, the
Allamah, Shahid awwal and other illustrious scholars.

3. The era of perfection in knowledge- the age which was initiated in
the history of knowledge by the new school which appeared in the latter
part of the twelfth century at the hands of Ustad Wahid Bahbahani and
which began the third era for knowledge, through its co-operative
efforts in the fields of *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and *‘Ilm’ul Fiqh*.

These efforts were expressed in the thoughts and researches of the
leader of the school, Ustad Wahid, and of the prominent figures, who
continued the work of their leader for nearly half a century until the
general characteristics of the third era were completed, and this age
reached its peak. In this period, three generations of illustrious
scholars followed.

The first generation is represented by the great research scholars among
the students of Ustad Wahid, like Sayyid Mahdi Bahrul 'Ulum (d. 1212
A.H.), Shaykh Ja'far Kashiful Ghita' (d. 1227 A.H.), Mirza Abul Qasim
Qummi (d. 1227 A.H.), Sayyid A1i Tabataba'i (d. 1121 A.H.) and Shaykh
Asadullah Tustari (d.1234 A.H.).

Representing the second generation are those illustrious scholars
trained by some of the above, like, Shaykh Muhammad Taqi ibn Abdur Rahim
(d. 1248 A.H.), Shariful 'Ulama Muhammad Sharif ibn Hasan Ali (d. 1245
A.H.), Sayyid Muhsin A'raji (d. 1227 A.H.), Maula Ahmad Naraqi (d. 1245
A.H.), Shaykh Muhammad Hasan Najafi (d. 1266A.H.) and others. As regards
the third generation, at its head was a pupil of Shariful '*Ulema’*, the
great research scholar Shaykh Murtaza Ansari who was born after the
emergence of the new school in 1214 A.H. and whose level of education
was contemporary to this school at the peak of its development and
activity.

He was able to rise together with the cause of knowledge in its third
era to the height at which the new school was aiming. *‘Ilm’ul Usul* and
intellectual thinking are still prevalent in the Imami academic circles
which existed in this third era as initiated by the school of Ustad
Wahid.

Our division of the history of knowledge into three eras does not
preclude us from dividing each of these eras into various stages of
growth, each stage having its own leader and director. On this basis, we
deem Shaykh Ansari, (d. 1281 A.H., may Allah bless him), the supreme
leader of one of the stages in the third era, i.e. the stage
representing intellectual thinking from more than a hundred years ago to
the present day.

[^1]: Among these are the reports transmitted about dealing with
contradictory texts, about the validity of the narrations of trustworthy
narrators as proofs, about the genuineness of al-Bara'at (exemption),
about the permissibility of using Ra’y and Ijtihad and other such
propositions.

[^2]: Viz. throwing light on the incorrectness of many of their views
which are put forth and they try to prove these, as correct views.

[^3]: There is no harm in citing two or three instances wherein the view
of Ibn Zuhrah differs from that of the Shaykh Tusi. Among them is the
question of the imperative mood indicating immediacy (to perform an act
at once). Shaykh Tusi had given the ruling that the imperative mood
indicated immediacy, which was denied by Ibn Zuhrah who said, "The
imperative mood is neutral, indicating neither immediacy nor
non-immediacy". There is also the question that prohibition from a
certain act necessarily indicates its being corrupt. Shaykh Tusi had
given the ruling that its being corrupt was necessarily implied in a
prohibition. This was denied by Ibn Zuhrah, who made a distinction
between illegality (al-Hurmah) and being corrupt (al-Fasad), and denied
that one necessarily implied the other. Later on Ibn Zuhrah, in his
researches on generality (al-'Am) and particularity (al-Khass), raised
the issue of the validity as proof of a specific generality, outside the
source of its specification, whereas this issue had not been raised in
the book "al-Iddah".

[^4]: They are blamed, for their (unbecoming) attitude, in spite of
their nearness in time, to the age of the Imam (P).

[^5]: ‘Ilm’ul Usul is meant by the laws of the Mujtahids.


