Laws of the Shari’ah and their categories
=========================================

We have come to know that ‘*Ilm’ul Usul* studies the common elements in
the process of deduction to derive laws of the *Shari’ah*, hence, it is
necessary at the very outset to formulate a general concept of a law of
the *Shari’ah*. ‘*Ilm’ul Usul* pursues its derivation by defining the
common elements in the process of deduction (*Istinbat*)"A law of the
*Shari’ah* is the legislation originating from Allah Almighty to
regulate the life of man. The commands (*al-Khitabat*) of the *Shari’ah*
contained in the Qur'an and the Sunnah bring out and reveal the laws but
are not themselves the laws of the *Shari’ah*.

In the light of this explanation it is a mistake to define a law of the
*Shari’ah* in the popular manner used by the earlier specialists on
‘*Ilm’ul Usul*. They used to define it as the command (*al-Khitab*) of
the *Shari’ah* concerned with the actions of the *Mukallafin* (i.e. the
legally responsible individuals) for the command reveals the laws and
the laws are derived from the command. In addition to that, the fact
that a law of the Shari 'ah is not always concerned with the acts of
*Mukallafin* it may concern their own selves or other things connected
with them, as the objective of the laws of the *Shari’ah* is to regulate
the life of man.

Just as this objective is achieved by a command concerned with the acts
of *Mukallafin* like "Pray" or "Fast" or "Do not drink wine", similarly
it is achieved by the commands concerned with their own selves or with
other things that are part of their life. They are of the nature of the
laws and commands which regulate the matrimonial relationship, on the
basis of which a woman is deemed to be the wife of a man under certain
specific conditions, or which regulate the relationship of ownership, on
the basis of which an individual is deemed to be the owner of property
under certain specific conditions. Now these laws are not concerned with
the actions of legally responsible individuals.

On the contrary, matrimony is a law of the *Shari’ah* concerned with
their own lives, while ownership is a law connected with property. It is
best therefore that we change the accepted form of the definition of a
law of the *Shari’ah* as mentioned above to state that a law of the
*Shari’ah* is "The legislation originating from Allah to regulate the
life of man, regardless of (the fact) whether it is connected with his
actions or with his own self or with other things forming a part of his
life".

Division of Laws into Positive (Taklifi) and Situational (Waz'i)
----------------------------------------------------------------

In the light of the above we may divide the laws of the *Shari’ah* into
two categories:

1. Those laws connected with the actions of man and regulating his
conduct directly in the different spheres of his life -personal,
devotional, matrimonial, economic, and political, that have been treated
and regulated by the *Shari’ah*, like the prohibition from drinking
wine, the obligation of offering prayers, the obligation of spending
money on some categories of relatives, the permissibility of cultivating
the land and the obligation on the ruler for dispensing justice. This is
the category of positive laws (*al-Ahkam al-Taklifiyah*).

2. Those laws of the *Shari’ah* that do not directly lay down
regulations for man in his actions or conduct. This covers every law
dealing with a specific situation and having indirect influence on the
conduct of man. It is of the nature of the laws that regulate the
matrimonial relationship. These laws deal specifically with a specific
relationship between a man and a woman and influence their conduct
indirectly and direct, that a woman, after becoming a wife, has to
conduct herself in a specific manner vis-à-vis her husband. This
category of laws is known as the situational laws (*al-Ahkam
al-Waz'iyah*).

The connection between the situational laws and the positive laws is
very strong, since each and every situational law is accompanied by a
positive law. Thus matrimony is a situational law and is accompanied by
positive laws, like the obligation on the husband of maintaining his
wife and the obligation on the wife of obeying her husband under
specific conditions. Similarly ownership is a situational law of the
*Shari’ah* and is accompanied by formal laws of the nature of the
prohibition on a non-owner to dispose of property without the consent of
the owner, and so on.

Subdivisions of Positive Laws
-----------------------------

The positive laws, i.e. the laws concerned with the actions of man and
regulating them directly are divided into the following five categories:

1. Obligatory (*al-Wujub*): This refers to those laws of the *Shari’ah*
which direct towards the things with which they are connected to the
degree of necessity, e.g. the obligation of prayer and the obligation on
the leader of supporting the needy.

2. Recommendatory (*al-Istihbab*): This refers to those laws of the
*Shari’ah* that direct towards the things with which they are connected
to a degree below that of necessity. Thus these are always accompanied
by the permission of the Almighty Law-giver to act contrary to it, e.g.
the recommendation of *Salatul-Layl,* (midnight prayers).

3. Prohibitory (*al-Hurmah*): This refers to those laws of the
*Shari’ah* that prevent the things with which they are connected to the
degree of necessity e.g. the prohibition of giving and taking interest
(*Riba*), the prohibition of adultery and fornication and the
prohibition of selling arms to the enemies of Islam etc.

4. Abominable (*al-Karahah*): This refers to those laws of the
*Shari’ah* that prevent the things with which they are connected to a
degree less than that of necessity. Hence abomination in the field of
prevention is like recommendation in the field of direction, just as
prohibition in the field of prevention is like obligation in the field
of inducement. for example, breaking a promise is an abominable act.

5. Permissible (*al-lbahah*): This refers to the Law- giver's leaving
the field open for the *Mukallafin* (the legally responsible persons) to
do or not to do a permissible act. Accordingly the *Mukallaf* enjoys
freedom in permissible actions; if he wishes he can do it and if he
wishes he can refrain from doing it.


