[History of Science]
====================

Between 250,000 and 30,000 years ago a subspecies of Homo sapiens,
commonly known as neanderthals, inhabited a territory from England
across southern Europe into Asia.  They built hut-like structures,
hunted big game, and developed ceremonial rituals.  The remains of this
relatively short-lived group reflect a consciousness akin to our own.
They clearly had a sense of the passage of time and physical mortality.
Ceremonial burials show a concern with life after death.  We find in the
neanderthals the signs of a greater consciousness of the subtleties of
the world and, in this greater consciousness, the roots of our own
religious and scientific thinking.  The subspecies to which all living
humans belong, Homo sapiens sapiens, probably emerged somewhere around
100,000 years ago, and forms a cultural, and probably intellectual,
continuum with the neanderthals.

We really don't know much concerning the specific world-views of early
humans.  We have only some burial sites, figurines, and cave paintings
to provide tantalizing hints.  These suggest that their thinking was of
a type that would now be called magical or superstitious.  It seems
clear that these stone-age people sought to employ magical rituals to
influence the external world, hoping to positively affect hunting,
fertility, and other survival-related aspects of their lives.  Though
such thinking may seem primitive to us, it clearly reflects a mind
attempting to bring order into the universe.

Many scholars believe that the magical, animistic approach to
understanding the world led directly to the mythical approach.  Repeated
attempts at magic would probably give birth to ritual.  Even when such a
ritual outlived its original purpose or when its true meaning had become
obscured over time, it might still remain a psychologically essential
part of the culture.  An appropriate myth could provide justification
for its continuance.  In any case, with the coming of civilization some
10,000 years ago, it is clear that the magical thinking of the earliest
peoples had already evolved into mythology.

Myths, though differing in their local details, have some common threads
running through them.  Often powerful non-human, but anthropomorphic,
figures create and control the world and its inhabitants.  Myth is
always related to creation; it tells how something came into existence
(the universe, human beings), or how a pattern of behavior was
established.  This History is considered to be absolutely true and
sacred.

Surely myth arose from our need to make sense of the world as a whole,
and, particularly, of our place as human beings in it.  We see in myth
attempts to find cause and effect explanations for the experienced
world.  Early people wove basic sensory knowledge of the world into a
pattern that seems reasonable. (The Mesopotamian creation myth used
their knowledge of how silt deposits form land where fresh and salt
water meet.)  Thus, Although there are some obvious differences between
the mytho-poetic approach and the scientific approach, we can also see
connections.  Myths are the first rungs on the ladder of discovery.
Embedded within them are basic truths about both the universe and the
human condition.

Science had its beginnings in ancient Greece.  Although it is probably
an exaggeration to think in terms of "the Greek miracle" or of
"motherless

Athena," as is frequently done, it is clear that about 600 B.C. a new
approach to understanding the universe emerged.  Although the Greeks had
their myths, they went beyond the myths to search for physical
explanations.  Unlike earlier cultures, they were not content to explain
the universe in terms of the actions of the gods; the Greeks insisted on
thinking in terms of natural processes.  These protypical scientists
made the remarkable assumption that an underlying rational unity and
order existed within the flux and variety of the world. Nature was to be
explained in terms of nature itself, not of something fundamentally
beyond nature, and in impersonal terms rather than by means of personal
gods and goddesses. Science was born here, not motherless, to be sure,
but nonetheless a new and distinctly different way of looking at the
world.

![](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0785-the_birth_of_science/images/image001.jpg)

Thales (624-547 B.C.) was born in the Greek city of Miletus across the
Aegean Sea from the Greek mainland.  The inhabitants of this region were
known as Ionians (Greeks who fled the Dorian invasion).  Its location on
the coast of Asia Minor provided Thales with exposure to the cultures of
both the Babylonians and the Egyptians, and in fact, he visited both
countries.  It was his knowledge of Babylonian astronomy that allowed
him to make his famous prediction of the solar eclipse of May 28, 585
B.C.

We consider Thales the first scientist because, as far as we can tell
from the admittedly incomplete historical record, he was the first to
approach the world from a scientific perspective.  He wondered how the
universe came to be and came up with an answer far different from that
depicted in the creation of the gods myth of Hesiod's Theogony (8th
century B.C.).  It seemed to him that all things either came from
moisture or were sustained by moisture.  So he concluded that the
universe grew from water.  According to Thales the earth was a flat disc
floating on a sea of water.  The

unique element in the cosmology of Thales was the idea that the universe
developed over time through natural processes from some undifferentiated
state.  The first recorded use of a physical model in explaining a
natural phenomenon is Thales belief that earthquakes were caused by
disturbances in the water that supported the earth.

As with any human being, Thales was of course constrained by the level
of knowledge available at the time and by the cultural and intellectual
context in which he found himself.  It is clear that the earlier
mythopoetic tradition exerted a strong influence on him.  For example,
from Aristotle we learn that included in Thales' metaphysical and
cosmological doctrines was the idea that inanimate objects that move and
are moved (magnets and iron, amber and wool) possess souls.  It's hard
to know what Thales meant by this exactly, but on the surface of it, it
doesn't strike us as scientific.

There is an additional, more subtle, nonscientific element in Thales
view.  His two primary assumptions about the origin of the world were 1)
that the present world order arose out of some preexistent state and
thus had a beginning in time, and 2) that this world order occurred by a
process of differentiation from a previous state.  These beliefs are not
suggested by an unbiased observation of nature itself, at least not as
it was known to Thales.  He must have come to this conclusion for
deeper, perhaps subconscious, reasons.  Similar psychological
pre-dispositions have continued to play a role in science through to the
present day.

Thales had a student named Anaximander (610-546 B.C.).  He introduced
the notion of a spherical universe, an idea that survived for more than
2000 years.  He saw the earth as suspended in space (rather that
floating on water).  He also believed that living creatures arose from
the moist elements when it had been partially evaporated by the sun.
According to Anaximander, humans in the beginning resembled fish.

In the second half of the the fifth century, the materialism of the
sixth century was adopted and extended by the atomist Leucippus of
Miletus (fl. 440 B.C.E.) and Democrutus of Abdera (c. 470 – c. 400
B.C.). Democritus constructed a complex explanation of all phenomena in
purely materialistic terms: The world was composed exclusively of
uncaused and immutable material atoms. These invisibly minute and
indivisible particles perpetually moved about in a boundless void and by
their random collisions and varying combinations produced the phenomena
of the visible world. In the words of Democritus, “nothing exists except
atoms and the void; all else is mere opinion.”

It is interesting to note that a central concept in the thinking of
Thales, Anaximander, and Democritus is that there is no real distinction
between the terrestrial and celestial realms.  Only later did Greek
thinking regress to needing a fifth essence (the quintessence) for
celestial objects.

The earlier and simpler phase of Greek thought terminates with the fifth
century in a thinker of an entirely different type, Socrates (470-399
B.C.). With Socrates and his student Plato (427-347 B.C.), we have a
unique synthesis of Greek science and Greek religion. The visible world
contains within it a deeper meaning, in some sense both rational and
mythic in character, which is reflected in the empirical order but which
emanates from

an eternal dimension that is both source and goal of all existence. This
is described in some detail in Tarnas, The Dual Legacy, pp 69-72.

With Aristotle (348-322 B.C.), the pendulum began to swing back toward
the more down-to-earth perspective of the presocratics. Plato asserted
the existence of archetypal Ideas or Forms as primary, while the visible
objects of conventional reality are their direct derivatives. These
Ideas, according to Plato, possess a quality of being, a degree of
reality, that is superior to that of the concrete world. On the other
hand, Aristotle assumed that true reality was the perceptible world of
concrete objects, rather than the imperceptible world of Plato’s eternal
Ideas. Aristotle placed a new and fruitful stress on the value of
observation and classification. He provided a language and logic, a
foundation and structure, and, not least, a formidably authoritative
figure without which the philosophy, theology, and science of the West
could not have developed as they did. The Aristotelian system of
physics, in a more or less modified form, was absorbed by the various
philosophical schools of antiquity and played a very important part in
the history of Christian thought. Its fundamental bases were:


