Islam & Science
===============

Astronomy in the Greek tradition was carried on in Islam, however. In
just a century the followers of Muhammad (about 570 – 632) conquered all
the Middle East to India, as well as North Africa and most of Spain.
After their victories they became tolerant of diverse ideas and
attitudes, and conditions for intellectual life improved in their
domains. Starting around 750 and for the next 250 years, the caliphs of
Baghdad became patrons of science and the city a center of learning. By
the eleventh century the library of the caliph of Cairo contained
roughly 150,000 volumes; by contrast, a Western monastery considered
itself fortunate to have 150.

An important factor in the development of Islamic science was the old
Greek writings that the Arabs found in the lands they conquered. Within
just a few decades after 750 the major Greek scientific works were
translated into Arabic; by the end of the tenth century essentially all
the known Greek manuscripts had been translated. The atmosphere of
tolerance was such that this work was done by Christians, Jews, and
pagans, as well as by Islamic scholars.

The religious requirements of Islam were a powerful impetus to the study
of astronomy. For example, Islam adopted (and generally still uses) a
strictly lunar calendar, which, however, begins not at the time of the
new Moon, but at the first sighting of the crescent Moon just after
sunset. Calculating when this occurs requires fairly complex geometry.
Since the lunar year is about 354 days long, the months of the Islamic
year cycle through the seasons in about 33 years. Mosques had to be
oriented toward Mecca, and Muslims were to pray facing in that
direction. Furthermore, time-keeping was required to properly set the
five times for daily prayer.

In attacking such problems, Islamic scholars developed mathematics,
especially trigonometry and spherical geometry, far surpassing the
Greeks. They learned of the sine trigonometric function from India, and
invented the other five. They also derived some of the relations among
these trigonometric functions, such as the law of sines. With these
developments, it was far easier to solve the geometric problems of
astronomy. The Arabs also used a system of numbers, including the
concept of zero, which they had acquired from India, which in turn they
transmitted to the West, and which we use today. These Arabic numerals,
as they are called, are far easier to calculate with than are Roman
numerals. Arab texts describing these new mathematical developments as
well as various summaries and commentaries on the Almagest eventually
found their way in Latin translation to the West, where they became
standard works for centuries.

Islamic astronomers refined many of the basic astronomical constants,
for example, the length of the year and the eccentricity and inclination
of the Sun’s (really the earth’s) orbit, data that were later used in
the West. Although they worked within the Ptolemaic tradition, they
questioned some of the constructs of Ptolemy. The equant (the point
around which the angular motion was uniform), for example, was felt not
to conform to the requirement of uniform circular motion. Even epicycles
were questioned, and attempts were made to construct a system that did
not require them.

From our point of view, however, the Muslims’ most important
contribution was that they preserved much of the Greek learning, and
then, beginning around the year 1000, became the means by which it was
retransmitted to the West. Cities near the boundaries between Islamic
and Christian domains, such as Toledo in Spain, became centers of a
“translation industry” (from Arabic to Latin) and Arabic words such as
zenith, nadir, alchemy, algebra, and algorithm entered our language,
along with star names such as Algol, Aldebaran, Alcor, Vega, Deneb, and
Betelgeuse.

The richness, diversity, and power of the Greek writings made a deep
impression on Western scholars, and soon they were attempting to
accommodate them to the Christian tradition. Thomas Aquinas (1225 –
1274) was a key figure in this effort (called Scholasticism), and he
showed how much of Aristotle’s thought could be integrated into
Christianity. This amalgam became the foundation for natural science in
the West.


