Introduction
============

   
 For the introduction for the 40 ahadith on prayers, we could not think
of anything that could be more complete, interesting and profound than
what appears in the beginning of the chapter on prayers in the
*Tawdhihul Masail* of Ayatullah Khomeini, the founder of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.  Hence we have selected it with the hope that all
those who love the AhlulBayt (peace be upon them) and that great gnostic
may derive abundant benefits from their invaluable words and statements.

“The prayers are the most important of the religious acts such that if
they are accepted by Allah, all the other acts of worship shall also be
accepted.  However if the prayers are not accepted, then the other acts
too shall not find acceptance.”

And just as a person who washes himself five times a day has no dirt and
uncleanness remaining on his body, similarly the five daily prayers
cleanse a person from his sins.

It is befitting that the prayers are offered as soon as their time sets
in, and one who considers the prayers to be trivial is like one who does
not offer his prayers.  The Noble Prophet (peace be upon him and his
progeny) has said: “*One, who does not attach importance to (his)
prayers* *and considers them to be inconsequential, deserves the
chastisement of the hereafter.”*

One day, while the Noble Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny) was
present in the mosque, a person entered it and engaged himself in
prayers.  However, the manner in which he offered them was such that he
neither performed his *ruku* (bowing) correctly, nor his *sujood*
(prostration).  Observing this, the Noble Prophet (peace be upon him and
his progeny) remarked: “*If this person happens to die and his prayers
are like this, he would not have died upon my religion!”*

Hence, a person must exhibit care that he does not offer his prayers in
haste.  Whilst offering his prayers, he should remember Allah (s.w.t),
possess a dignified, humble and submissive demeanor, should know with
Whom he is conversing, and consider himself absolutely trivial and minor
before the greatness and exaltedness of the Lord of the Worlds.

If the person were to focus on these aspects in their entirety, he would
become oblivious of himself.  He would be just like Amirul Mo’minin
(peace be upon him) who was oblivious to the removal of the arrow which
was taken from his foot whilst he was engrossed in his prayers.

A person who prays should also repent (for his past misdeeds), and
refrain from sins that hinder the acceptance of prayers such as
jealousy, pride, backbiting, consuming haram food and wealth, drinking
intoxicants, withholding zakat and khums, etc…  Rather, he should
refrain from all sins!  
 It is also befitting that he should desist from committing acts that
reduce the rewards of prayers such as offering prayers in a state of
drowsiness, or while withholding one’s urine, or looking up at the sky
while offering prayers.

At the same time he should perform acts that increase the rewards of
prayers such as wearing an agate (Aqiq) ring, wearing clean clothes,
brushing the teeth, combing the hair and applying perfume.”[^1]

We conclude this introduction by narrating a beautiful[^2] tradition
from the Noble Prophet (peace be upon him and his progeny).  He has
said:

“My Ummah consists of four groups:

1. One group offers the prayers, however yet are unmindful of their
prayers, and they shall be placed in *‘Wayl’.*  *‘Wayl’* is the name of
one of the bottom-most levels of hell.  Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَيلٌ لِلْمُصَلِّينَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ صَلاَتِهِمْ سَاهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So woe to the praying ones, who are unmindful of their
prayers.**”*[^3]

2. One group is such that it occasionally offers the prayers, and so,
*‘Ghayy’* is the abode for the people of this group.  *‘Ghayy’* is the
name of another of the bottom-most levels of hell.  Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَخَلَفَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ خَلْفٌ أَضَاعُوا الصَّلاةَ وَ اتَّبَعُوا
الشَّهَوَاتِ فَسَوْفَ يُلْقَونَ غَيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But there came after them an evil generation, who neglected prayers
and followed the sensual desires, so they will meet perdition.**”* [^4]

3. The third group consists of those, who never offer their prayers, and
for them is *‘Saqar’*, which is also the name of another of the low
levels of hell and about which Allah has said:    
                        

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا سَلَكَكُمْ فِي سَقَرَ قَالُوا لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ الْمُصَلِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(The inmates of paradise shall ask the inmates of hell) What has
brought you into hell? *** ***They shall say: We were not of those who
prayed.”*** [^5]  
 4. The fourth group consists of those, who offer their prayers
regularly and are humble in them.  Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفلَحَ الْمُؤمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلاَتِهِمْ خَاشِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Successful indeed are the believers, Who are humble in their
prayers.**”* [^6] and [^7]  
 We pray to Allah (Glory and Greatness to Him) that He decrees all of us
to be of the fourth group.

Mahmud Sharif  
  

[^1]: Tawdhihul Masa’il of Ayatullah Khomeini, pg. 84 (before issue
Number 727).

[^2]: The beauty of this tradition is in the fact that the Noble Prophet
has derived this classification from the Noble Qur’an and has also
mentioned the verses related to each group.

[^3]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Ma’un, Verses 4 & 5.

[^4]: Noble Qur’an, Surah Maryam, Verse 59

[^5]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Muddathir, Verses 42, 43

[^6]: Noble Qur’an, Suratul Mu’minun, Verses 1 & 2

[^7]: Al-Mawaidhul \`Adadiyyah, Chapter 4, Page 122.


