Introduction
============

***In the Name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful***

*“I am a hole in a flute by which blows the breath of Christ, listen to
this music.”*

Hafiz, the Persian Poet

\*\*\*\*\*

Today we increasingly read that Christianity and Islam ‘share’ Jesus -
that he belongs to both religions. More than ever before, the notion of
the ‘Abrahamic civilization’ where once people spoke of ‘Judeo-Christian
civilization’ includes Islam too. The Qur’an refers to Prophet Abraham
as a monotheist [see Ale ‘Imran (3), Verse 67]. According to the Qur’an,
[Al-An’am (6), Verses 85-87] the other prophets sent to mankind, in
addition to Prophet Ibrahim (Abraham) include (but are not limited to):
Ishaq (Isaac), Ya’qub (Jacob), Nuh (Noah), Dawud (David), Sulaiman
(Solomon), Ayyub (Job), Yusuf (Joseph), Musa (Moses), Harun (Aaron),
Zakariyya (Zachariah), Ilyas, Isma’il (Ishmael), Al-Yash’a (Elisha),
Yunus (Jonah), Lut (Lot), and ‘Isa (Jesus) – God’s blessings be upon all
of them.

The notion of one God, sharing prominent prophets, and the belief in the
afterlife are common between Islam, Judaism, and Christianity. The
similarities between Islamic and Christian thinking about Jesus are
equally important: both accept the virgin birth and among the numerous
miracles attributed to Jesus in the Glorious Qur’an are the revival of
the dead and the creation of a bird from clay.

There are two main sources in Islam for knowing Jesus. The Qur’an gives
us a history of his life, while the hadith (the traditions of the
Prophet Muhammad (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) and his
Divinely appointed successors) collections establish his revered place
in the Muslim understanding. As with previous prophets, Jesus’s
revelation verified previous prophets’ revelations [see Ale ‘Imran (3),
Verses 49 and 84; Al-Ma’idah (5), Verse 46; As-Saff (61), Verse 6].
Furthermore, Prophet Muhammad (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
family) also verified the previous revelations, including the revelation
to Jesus (see An-Nisa’ (4), Verse 47), such that Muslims also believe in
the revelation which Jesus received (Al-Baqarah (2), Verse 136).

Given the commonality of the scriptures and the fact that Muslims and
Christians have shared history of some 1,400 years, having lived side by
side, one would have thought that they might know each other better.
Unfortunately much of that 1,400-year history has been marked by mutual
hostility. Whilst there have been periods of mutual respect and peace,
the Muslim-Christian relationship has gone through major phases of
conflict (the Crusades, colonization and the decline of Muslim
civilization). The current phase that began with the tragedy of 9/11,
has been a period of searching for real understanding, however, it has
been marked by ignorance and stereotyping.

The way forward between the faiths is to begin the process of
understanding each other. At this critical point in history where
information technology has shrunk the boundaries of the global village
even further, creating friendships and beginning the process of the
rediscovery of the meaning of one’s faith through dialogue is more
important then ever.

One must, however, make the distinction that inter-religious dialogues
are not like other dialogues. For example, negotiations between nations,
bargaining between labor and management, or any attempt to find middle
ground between disputing parties are common forms of dialogue which
involve compromise. Compromise often makes a society run better. Labor
and management have to compromise or factories don’t operate. However,
when people of faith have dialogue, they are not attempting any
compromise.

The primary objective of inter-religious dialogue is not to build one
faith for the whole planet, but to share and learn from one another.
Inter-religious dialogue can be a process of spiritual growth that can
have a transforming effect on those engaged in it, especially when such
exchanges are done in the spirit of seeking clarity with humility,
kindness, patience, generosity, and trust with a genuine desire to grow
in our understanding of the greatness, abundance and mercy of God.

Dr. David Thomas of Selly Oak Colleges, Birmingham, UK who often speaks
of the past relations as being “…something of a nightmare, which
encumbers Christians and Muslims today with a heavy baggage of memories
of war, oppression and conquests” advocates that we go beyond “… the
baggage to try to see each other as the other is.” He goes even further
and states, “…we try to take off our shoes and walk on the holy ground
of the other faith … in order to come back to our own faith as bigger …
more enriched people ready for the encounter to which God calls us.”

In the glorious Qur’an, Jesus is described thus: “O Mary! Verily Allah
gives you the glad tidings of a Word from Him; his name is the Messiah,
Jesus son of Mary, prominent in this world and in the Hereafter of those
near [to God].” (Suratul Ale ‘Imran (3), Verse 44) It is in this light
that we present this selection of narrations of Prophet Jesus.

The collection in this publication is essentially concerned with ethics
and morals. These are as much Christian morals as they are Islamic
morals. In this day and age of relative morality, the concepts of right
and wrong have been muddled by the modern understanding of ethics. The
simple yet sublime words of Jesus provide a refreshing insight into
unchanging moral values and ethics for all times and for all faiths.

We hope that this publication which offers some reflections on the
‘Muslim Jesus’ will further enhance understanding between the two great
faiths and their inter-religious dialogue. With the portrait of Jesus
presented in the Islamic sources, we demonstrate the reverence Muslims
have for Jesus and hope that it will inspire better relations between
Muslims and Christians.

Hasnain Walji
Plano, Texas
Muharram 1st 1426 A.H.
February 10th 2005 C.E.


