Jesus on Ethics – Forty Pieces of Advice from the ‘Word of God’
===============================================================

The Wealthiest of People
------------------------

“I entered into the morning among you while my stew has been hunger, my
food has been something that grows from the earth for the wild animals
and beasts, my lamp has been the moon, my carpet has been the earth, and
my pillow has been stone. There is no house for me that may be ruined,
no property which may be destroyed, no child who may die, and no wife
who may become sad. I enter into the morning while there is nothing for
me and enter into the night while there is nothing for me, and I am the
wealthiest person among the children of Adam.”

The Greatest of Trials
----------------------

Jesus once asked a person, “What trial remains which has not been
visited upon you?” The person replied, “He protected me from a trial
which is the greatest of trials, and that is disbelief.” Then Jesus
touched the man, and God cured him from his illnesses and beautified his
face. Then he became a companion of Jesus and worshipped with him.

The Praise of God
-----------------

It is reported that Jesus passed by a man who was blind, leprous and
paralytic, and Jesus heard him giving thanks and saying, “Praise be to
God who has protected me from the trials with which He afflicts the
majority of men.”

The Pitfall of Hypocrisy
------------------------

“I saw a stone upon which was written, ‘Turn me over,’ then I turned it
over, then I saw written on it, ‘He who does not act according to what
he knows will not be blessed in his search for what he does not know and
what he knows will come back against him.’”

Kindness to all Creations
-------------------------

Verily, when Jesus the son of Mary, passed along the shore of a sea, he
threw a piece of his bread into the water. Then some of the disciples
said: “O Spirit of God and His Word! Why did you do this when that was
your food?” He said, “I did this in order that some animal among the
animals of the sea may eat it, and the reward of God for this is great.”

Humility to Others
------------------

Jesus served a meal to the Apostles, and when they had eaten it, he
himself washed them. They said, “O Spirit of God! It would have been
more proper for us to wash you!” He said, “I did this only that you
would do this for those whom you teach.”



“O assembly of Apostles! I have a request of you. Fulfill it for me.”
They said, “Your request is fulfilled, O Spirit of God!” Then he stood
up and washed their feet. They said, “It would have been more proper for
us to have done this, O Spirit of God!” Then he said, “Verily, it is
more fitting for one with knowledge to serve the people. Indeed, I
humbled myself only so that you may humble yourselves among the people
after me, even as I have humbled myself among you.” Then Jesus said,
“Wisdom is developed by humility, not by pride, and likewise plants only
grow in soft soil, not in stone.”

The Trial of the Believer
-------------------------

The disciples complained to Jesus, the son of Mary about the disrespect
of the people for them and their hating them. He said, “Be patient.
Likewise, the believers are hated among the people. The example of them
is like the example of wheat. How sweet is its taste and how numerous
are its enemies.”

Providing for Yourself
----------------------

It is reported that the disciples were the followers of Jesus. Whenever
they were hungry they said, “O Spirit of God! We are hungry.” Then Jesus
would hit his hands on the ground, whether smooth or hilly, and he would
bring out two loaves of bread for each of them. Whenever they were
thirsty they said, “O Spirit of God! We are thirsty.” Then Jesus would
hit his hands on the ground, and brought out water and they drank from
it. They asked, “O Spirit of God! Who is better than we are? Whenever we
want, we are given food, and whenever we want water is given to us. We
have faith in you and follow you.” Jesus said, “Better than you are
those who work with their hands and eat from what they earn.” After that
the disciples washed clothes by the stream and ate from their wages for
it.”

The Best of People
------------------

Jesus was asked about the best of people and he said, “One whose speech
is the mention of God, whose silence is contemplation, and whose vision
is admonition.” [That is, he takes a lesson from what he sees.]

The Greatest Action
-------------------

The disciples asked Jesus, “Indicate to us a work by which we may enter
the Garden.” He said, “Do not speak at all.” They said, “We cannot do
that.” He said, “So, do not speak except what is good.”



A man said to Jesus the son of Mary, “O good teacher, indicate to me a
work by which I may enter the Garden.” Then he said to him, “Beware of
God secretly and openly, and do good to your parents.”



Jesus, the son of Mary, passed by a group of people who were crying. He
asked why they were crying. It was said to him that they were crying for
their sins. He said, “You should pray about them and you will be
forgiven.”

Self-Training
-------------

It was said to Jesus, “Who trained you?” He said, “No one trained me. I
saw the ugliness of ignorance and, so, I avoided it.”



The Apostles met with Jesus and said to him, “O teacher of the good!
Guide us!” He said to them, “Verily Moses the interlocutor of God,
commanded you not to swear by God, the Blessed and Exalted, falsely, and
I command you not to swear by God falsely or truly.” They said, “O
Spirit of God! Guide us more!” Then he said, “Verily Moses, the prophet
of God, commanded you not to commit adultery, and I command you not to
talk to yourselves about adultery, let alone to commit adultery. Verily,
one who talks to himself about adultery, is like one who sets fire to a
room that is decorated so the smoke damages the decor, even though the
room is not burnt.”

Having a Good Regard for Others
-------------------------------

It is reported that Jesus passed by a carcass with his disciples. Then
the disciples said, “How putrid the smell of this dog is!” Then Jesus
said, “How intense is the whiteness of his teeth!”

Whom to Associate With
----------------------

The Apostles said to Jesus, “O Spirit of God! With whom should we keep
company?” He said, “He the sight of whom reminds you of God, the speech
of whom increases your knowledge, and the works of whom make you
desirous of the other world.”

Knowing the Prophet
-------------------

Jesus the son of Mary used to spend some time with the disciples and
advise them, and he used to say, “He does not know me, who knows not his
soul, and he who does not know the soul between his two sides, does not
know the soul between my two sides. And he who knows his soul which is
between his sides, he knows me. And he who knows me, knows He who sent
me.”

Moral Traits
------------

“He who often becomes upset, his body becomes sick; he whose character
is bad, his self becomes his torment; he who often talks, often
stumbles; he who often lies, loses his worth; he who quarrels with men,
loses his manliness.”



“That which is not loved by you for someone to do to you, do not do that
to others; if someone strikes you on the right cheek, turn to him your
left cheek also.”



“O Children of Israel! Do not be excessive in eating, for those who are
excessive in eating are excessive in sleeping; those who are excessive
in sleeping are deficient in praying; of those who are deficient in
praying, it is written that they are negligent.”



“Mind your tongue to reform your heart, be satisfied with your house,
beware of pretentiousness and excess, be ashamed before your Lord, cry
over your mistakes, and escape from people as you would run from the
lion or viper, [for] they were medicine but today, they have become
illness. Then, encounter God when you will.”

The Life of the World
---------------------

“Who would build a house on the waves of the sea? This world is that
house, so you should not take it as a dwelling.”



“The love of this world and the next cannot be aligned in the heart of a
believer, like water and fire in a single vessel.”



“When one of you sits in his house, he should have clothes on. Verily,
God has allotted modesty for you, just as He has allotted your
sustenance.”



“If you are my lovers and my brothers, you must accustom yourself to the
enmity and hatred of the people, otherwise you will not be my brothers.
I teach you this that you may learn it; I do not teach you so that you
may become proud. Verily, you will not achieve that which you desire
unless you give up that which you desire, and by enduring patiently that
which you detest, and guard your gaze, for it plants lust in the heart,
and it is sufficient to tempt him. Happy are they who see that which
they desire with their eyes, but who commit no disobedience in their
hearts. How far is that which is in the past, and how near is that which
is to come. Woe to those who have been deluded when what they loathe
approaches them, and what they love abandons them, and there comes that
which they were promised. Woe to those whose efforts are for the sake of
this world, and whose works are mistaken. How he will be disgraced
before his Lord! Moreover, do not speak much for aught but the
remembrance of God. Those who speak much about aught but God harden
their hearts, but they do not know it. Do not look at the faults of
others over much [the phrase used here indicates spying], but look after
the purity of your own selves, for you are enslaved servants. How much
water flows in a mountain without its becoming soft? And how much wisdom
are you taught without your hearts becoming soft? You are bad servants,
and you are not pious servants. You are not nobly free. Indeed, you are
like unto the oleander, all who see it wonder at its flower, but when
they eat from it they die. So, peace be unto you.”



“This world and the next are rivals. When you satisfy one of them you
irritate the other; when you irritate one of them you satisfy the
other.”



“In truth I say to you, just as one who is sick looks at food and finds
no pleasure in it due to the severity of the pain, the masters of this
world find no pleasure in worship and do not find the sweetness of it,
for what they find is the sweetness of this world. In truth I say to
you, just as an animal which is not captured and tamed becomes hardened
and its character is changed, so too when hearts are not softened by the
remembrance of death and the effort of worship they become hard and
tough, and in truth I say to you, if a skin is not torn, it may become a
vessel for honey, just as hearts, if they are not torn by desires, or
fouled by greed, or hardened by blessings, may become vessels for
wisdom.”



“Do not take the world as a master, for it will take you as its
servants. Keep your treasure with One who will not squander it. The
owners of the treasures of this world fear for its ruin, but he who owns
the treasure of God does not fear for its ruin.”



Jesus said to the disciples, “Be satisfied with a little of the world,
while your religion is safe, likewise the people of this world are
satisfied with a little of the religion, while their world is safe; love
God by being far from them, and make God satisfied by being angry with
them.” The disciples said, “O spirit of God, so with whom should we keep
company?” He said, “He the sight of whom reminds you of God, his speech
increases your knowledge and his action makes you desirous of the other
world.”

Conduct with Others
-------------------

“O Children of Israel! Do not speak with the ignorant of wisdom, for
otherwise you do injustice with it, and do not keep it from its folk,
for otherwise you do injustice to them, and do not help the unjust with
his injustice, for otherwise your virtue becomes void. Affairs are
three: the affair whose righteousness is clear to you, so follow it; the
affair whose error is clear to you, so avoid it; and the affair about
which there are differences, so return it to God, the Almighty and
Glorious.”



A man said to Jesus the son of Mary, “O good teacher, indicate to me a
work by which I may enter the Garden.” Then he said to him, “Beware of
God secretly and openly, and do good to your parents.”

Lowering the Gaze
-----------------

“Beware of looking at what is prohibited, for it is the seed of lust and
plant of depravity.”

Entering into Paradise
----------------------

“In truth I say to you, the folds of heaven are empty of the rich; the
entering of a camel through the eye of a needle is easier than the
entering of a rich man into heaven.”

A Prayer of Jesus
-----------------

Among the supplications narrated from Jesus, the son of Mary, is: “O
God! You are the Deity of all who are in heaven and the Deity of all on
the earth. There is no Deity in them other than You, and You are the
All-wise for all in heaven and the All-wise for all on the earth. There
is no All-wise in them other than You. And you are the King of all in
heaven and all on the earth. There is no King in them other than You.
Your power in heaven is like Your power on the earth. And Your
sovereignty in heaven is like Your sovereignty on the earth. I ask you
by Your All-generous Name and Your radiant face and Your eternal
kingdom, do such and such for me.”



It is reported that a man complained to Jesus about his debts. Jesus
said to him, “Say: ‘O God, Who takes away grief, removes sadness,
disposes of sorrow, and answers the prayers of the needy! O Merciful of
this world and the other world and the Compassionate of them! You are
Merciful to me and Merciful to all things! So, be Merciful to me, with a
mercy that will make me needless of the mercy of others than You, and by
that mercy let my debts be paid.’”

Be Critics of Speech
--------------------

“Take the truth from the folk of falsehood, but do not take the false
from the folk of truth. Be critics of speech. How much aberration is
adorned by a verse of the Book of God, like the adornment of a copper
dirham with silver plating. Looking at it is the same, but those who
have vision are aware.”

Divine Retribution
------------------

It is said that a man accompanied Jesus the son of Mary and said that he
would go with him. They continued along until they came to a river. They
sat and started to eat. They had three loaves of bread. They ate two of
them and one remained. Jesus went to the river, drank some water and
returned. He did not find the third loaf. He asked the man who had taken
that loaf. He said that he did not know. They continued until they came
to a doe followed by two fawns. Jesus beckoned one of the fawns, killed
it, roasted it and they ate it. Then Jesus addressed the fawn [that had
been eaten,] saying, “Live!” It came to life and went away. Then Jesus
said to the other man, ‘By the God Who has shown you this miracle, who
took that loaf of bread?’ He said that he did not know.

They continued until they reached a lake. Jesus took the hand of the man
and led him over the water. When they reached the other side, Jesus
said, ‘By the One who has shown you this miracle, who took that loaf of
bread?’ He said that he did not know. They continued until they reached
a desert and sat down. Jesus gathered some sand or dust and said, “By
the permission of God, be gold!” and it became gold. He divided it into
three portions and said, “One third is for me, one third for you, and
one third for whoever took that loaf of bread.” The man said, “Alright,
I took that loaf of bread.” Jesus said, “Then all of this gold is yours’
and he left him.

The man encountered two other men in the desert who wanted to take his
gold and kill him. He said, “Let us divide the gold into three
portions.” They sent one of them to the village to buy food. The one who
went said to himself, “Why should I let them have portions of this
wealth? I shall put some poison into the food, and kill them.” So, he
poisoned the food. The other two said, “Why should we give a third of
this wealth to him. When he comes back, let us kill him, and divide the
rest of the wealth between us.” When he returned, they attacked him and
killed him. Then they ate the food and died. The wealth remained in the
desert with the three dead men beside it. Jesus passed them and saw the
situation. He said to his disciples, “This is the world, so beware of
it!”

Life to the Dead
----------------

Imam As-Sadiq[^1] (peace be upon him) was asked, “Did Jesus the son of
Mary enliven someone after his death, so that he was eating and had a
daily living, continued his life for a term and had a child?” He said,
“Yes, he had a friend who was a brother in God to him. And when Jesus
passed by he would go down to him. And Jesus would spend a while with
him. Then he would leave with salutations of peace unto him. Then his
mother came out to him [Jesus]. Then she said to him, ‘He died, O
Apostle of God!’ He said to her, ‘Would you like to see him?’ She said,
‘Yes.’ He said to her, ‘I will come to you tomorrow to enliven him, with
the permission of God.’

When the morrow arrived he came and said to her, ‘Accompany me to his
grave.’ So they went to his grave. Jesus stopped, then called on God.
Then the grave opened and her son came out alive. Then when his mother
saw him and he saw her, they cried. Jesus had mercy on them and said to
him, ‘Would you like to remain with your mother in the world?’ He said,
‘O Apostle of God! With eating and a daily living and a term, or without
a term and no daily living and no eating?’

Then Jesus said to him, ‘But with a daily living and eating and a term
you will live for twenty years, marry and father a child.’ He said,
‘Yes, in that case.’” [Imam As-Sadiq] said, “Then Jesus returned him to
his mother and he lived for twenty years, married and fathered a child.”

The Closest Ones to God
-----------------------

Verily, Jesus passed by three people. Their bodies had become thin and
their colors had changed. Then he said, “What has brought you to what I
see?” They said, “Fear of the Fire.” He said, “It is the duty of God to
give security to those who fear Him.” Then he passed from them to three
other men. He was surprised to find them even thinner and more changed.
Then he said, “What has brought you to what I see?”

They said, “Yearning for the Garden.” He said, “It is the duty of God to
give to him who has hope in Him.” Then he passed to three others. He was
surprised to find them even thinner and their faces were shining like
mirrors. Then he said, “What has brought you to what I see?” They said,
“Love of God, the Mighty, and Magnificent.” Three times, he said, “You
are those who are close to God.”

[^1]: The 6th Divinely appointed successor to the Prophet Muhammad
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) – Ja’far ibne Muhammad.


