Jesus, the Son of Mary in the Noble Qur’an
==========================================

***“And We gave the Book to Moses and made the Messengers follow in his
path. To Jesus, the son of Mary, We gave the miracles and supported him
by the Holy Spirit. Why do you arrogantly belie some Messengers and
murder others whenever they have brought you messages that you dislike?”
(Noble Qur’an 2:87)***

****** ****** ******

***“Say: We believe in God and (in) that which had been revealed to us,
and (in) that which was revealed to Abraham and Ishamel and Isaac and
Jacob and the tribes, and (in) that which was given to Moses and Jesus,
and (in) that which was given to the (other) Prophets from their Lord.
We do not make any distinction between any of them, and to Him alone do
we submit.” (Noble Qur’an 2:136)***

******

***“We have made some of these messengers to excel the others. Among
them are they to whom God spoke, and some of them He exalted by (many
degrees of) rank; and We gave clear miracles to Jesus, the son of Mary,
and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. And if God had pleased, those
after them would not have fought one with another after clear arguments
had come to them, but they disagreed. So there were some of them who
believed and others who denied. And if God had pleased they would not
have fought one with another, but God brings about what He intends.”
(Noble Qur’an 2:253)***

****** ****** ******

***“‘Behold,’ the Angels told Mary, ‘God has given you the glad news of
the coming birth of a son whom He calls His word, whose name will be
Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, who will be a man of honour in this life
and the life to come, and who will be one of the ones nearest to God. He
will speak to the people while in his cradle and preach to them when he
will be a man, and he will be one of the righteous ones.’ (Mary) said,
‘How can there be a son for me when no mortal has touched me?’ The Angel
replied, ‘That is how God creates whatever He wants. When He decides to
do something He just orders it to exist and it comes into existence.***

***God will teach him (Jesus) the Book, the Wisdom, the Torah, and the
Gospel. He will be a Messenger of God to the Children of Israel to whom
he will say, ‘I have brought you a miracle from your Lord. I can create
for you something from clay in the form of a bird. When I blow into it,
it will become a real bird, by the permission of God. I heal the blind
and the lepers and bring the dead back to life, by the permission of
God. I tell you about what you eat and what you store in your homes.
This is a miracle for you if you want to have faith. I testify to what
is true in the Torah and make lawful for you some of the things that
were made unlawful.***

***I have brought you a miracle from your Lord, therefore, have fear of
God and obey me - God is my Lord as well as yours. Worship Him for this
is the straight path.’ When Jesus*** ***found them denying the truth, he
said, ‘Who will help me in the cause of God?’ The disciples replied, ‘We
are the helpers of God. We believe in Him. (Jesus), bear witness that we
have submitted ourselves to Him.’ They prayed, ‘Lord, we have believed
in what You have revealed to Your Messenger (Jesus) and we have followed
him, therefore, write down our names with those who testify in support
of the Truth.’” (Noble Qur’an 3:45-53)***

****** ****** ******

***“And when God said: ‘O Jesus! I am going to terminate the period of
your stay (on Earth) and cause you to ascend unto Me and purify you of
those who disbelieve (and ascribe divinity to you) and make those who
(truly) follow you above those who disbelieve (in you) until the day of
resurrection. Then to Me (O’ humanity) shall be your return, so I will
decide between all of you concerning that in which you differed (in
regards to Jesus).” (Noble Qur’an 3:55)***

****** ****** ******

***“To God the case of Jesus is as that of Adam whom He created from the
earth and then said, ‘Exist,’ and he (Adam) came into existence.” (Noble
Qur’an 3:59)***

****** ****** ******

***“Say: We believe in God and what has been revealed to us, and what
was revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes,
and what was given to Moses and Jesus and to the prophets from their
Lord. We do not make any distinction between any of them, and to Him do
we submit.” (Noble Qur’an 3:84)***

****** ****** ******

***“Their hearts were also sealed because of their lack of faith, their
gravely slanderous accusations against Mary, and their statement that
they murdered Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger of God. Rather, they did
not murder him nor did they crucify him, but this is what appeared to
them. Even those who disputed (the question of whether or not Jesus was
murdered) did not have a shred of evidence.***

***All that they knew about it was mere conjecture and they certainly
did not murder Jesus. Rather, God raised him up to Himself and God is
Majestic and All-Wise. There will be no one from amongst the People of
the Book who will not believe in him (Jesus as being merely a Prophet of
God) before their death. On the Day of Judgment, (Jesus) will testify
against them.” (Noble Qur’an 4:155-159)***

****** ****** ******

***“We have sent you (Muhammad) revelation (in the form of the Qur’an)
just as We sent revelation to Noah and the Messengers after him. We sent
inspiration to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Tribes, to Jesus,
Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon, and to David We gave the Psalms.” (Noble
Qur’an 4:163)***

****** ****** ******

***“People of the Book [Jews and Christians], do not exceed the limits
of devotion in your religion or say anything about God which is not the
Truth. Jesus, son of Mary, is only a Messenger of God, His Word, and a
spirit from Him whom He conveyed to Mary. So have faith in God and His
Messengers. Do not say that there are three gods, this is much better
for you. There is only One God.***

***He is too glorious to have a son. To God belongs all that is in the
Heavens and the Earth. God alone is a Sufficient Guardian for all. Jesus
never disdained the worship of God nor did the nearest Angels to God.
Whoever, out of pride, disdains the worship of God should know that
everyone will be brought before Him.” (Noble Qur’an 4:171-172)***

****** ****** ******

***“Certainly they disbelieve who say: Surely, God is He the Messiah
(Jesus), son of Mary. Say: ‘Who then could control anything as against
God when He wishes to destroy the Messiah son of Mary and his mother and
all those on the earth? And God’s is the kingdom of the heavens and the
earth and what is between them; He creates what He pleases; and God has
power over all things.” (Noble Qur’an 5:17)***

****** ****** ******

***“We made Jesus, son of Mary, follow in the footsteps (of the earlier
Prophets) and confirm what existed in the Torah in his time. We gave him
the Gospel containing guidance and light, as a confirmation of the Torah
and instruction and advice for the pious ones.” (Noble Qur’an 5:46)***

****** ****** ******

***“Those who say that Jesus, the son of Mary, is God, have, in fact,
turned to disbelief. Jesus said to the Children of Israel, ‘Worship God,
my Lord and yours. God will deprive anyone who considers anything equal
to God of Paradise and his dwelling will be the fire. The unjust people
have no helpers.’ Those who say that God is one of the three, have, in
fact, turned to disbelief. There is no Lord but God, the only One Lord.
If they will not give-up such belief, the disbelievers among them will
suffer a painful torment [in the next life].” (Noble Qur’an 5:72-73)***

****** ****** ******

***“Jesus, the son of Mary, was no more than a Messenger, before whom
there lived many other Messengers. His mother (Mary) was a truthful
woman and both of them ate earthly food [and lived an earthly existence
as mortal human beings]. Consider how We explain the evidence (of the
Truth) to them and see where they then turn back.” (Noble Qur’an
5:75)***

****** ****** ******

***“When God said, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, recall My favors to you and your
mother. (Recall) how I supported you by the Holy Spirit, made you speak
to people from your cradle and when you grew up, taught you the Book and
the Wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel. (Recall) when, by My will, you
made a sculpture of a bird out of clay, blew into it, and it***
***turned into a real bird by My Will. (Recall) how, by My will, you
healed the deaf, the lepers, and raised the dead. (Recall) when you came
to the Children of Israel in the house with clear miracles and I saved
you from their mischief, even though the disbelievers among them said,
‘This is obviously magic’. (Recall) when I inspired the disciples
(around you) to have faith in Me and My Messenger.***

***They said, ‘We have accepted the faith. Lord, bear witness that we
have submitted ourselves to Your will.’ (Recall) when the disciples
said, ‘Jesus, son of Mary, can your Lord send us a table full of food
from heaven?’ and you replied, ‘Have fear of God if you are true
believers.’ They said, ‘We only wish to eat there from to comfort our
hearts, to know that you have spoken the Truth to us, and to bear
witness to it along with the others.’ When Jesus prayed, ‘Lord, send us
a table full of food from heaven so that it will make a celebration for
the first of us and the last of us and an evidence from You. Give us
sustenance, for You are the best Provider.’***

***God replied, ‘I am sending it to you, but if anyone of you turns back
to disbelief, then I will make him suffer a torment that no one has ever
suffered.’ When God asked Jesus, son of Mary ‘Did you tell mankind to
consider you and your mother as their gods besides (Me) God?’ He [Jesus]
replied, ‘Glory be to you! How could I say what I have no right to say?
Had I ever said it, You would have certainly known about it. You know
what is in my soul, but I do not know what is in Yours.***

***It is You who has absolute knowledge of the unseen. I did not tell
them anything except what You commanded me to tell them. I told them
that they must worship [the One] God who is everyone’s Lord. I watched
them as long as I was among them until You raised me to Yourself, and
You Yourself had also watched over them; You are Omnipresent. You may
punish Your servants or forgive them for You are Majestic and Wise.’ God
said, ‘This is the Day when the truthful ones will benefit from their
truthfulness. For them there are gardens wherein streams flow and they
will live therein forever. God is pleased with them and they will be
pleased with God in their supreme triumph.’ (Noble Qur’an 5:110-119)***

****** ****** ******

***“This is the story of the blessing of your Lord to His servant
Zachariah. When he quietly called his Lord and said, ‘My Lord, my bones
have become feeble and my hair has turned white with age. Yet I have
never been deprived in receiving from You the answer to my prayers. I am
afraid of what my kinsmen will do after (my death) and my wife is
barren. Lord, grant me a son who will be my heir and the heir of the
family of Jacob. Lord, make him a person who will please you.’ We
answered his prayers with the glad news of the birth of a son by the
name of John and told him, ‘We have never given such a name to anyone
else.’ He said, ‘Lord, how can I have a son? My wife is barren and I
have reached an extremely old age.’ (The Angel) said, ‘This is true, but
your Lord says, ‘For Me it is easy; I created you when you did not
exist.’’***

***Zachariah asked, ‘Lord, show me evidence (that this is indeed
heavenly news).’ The Lord said, ‘The evidence for it is that you will
not speak (to any mortal) though you are in good health for three nights
(and days).’ Zachariah came out to his people from place of worship and
inspired them to glorify the Lord both in the morning and evening. We
commanded John, Zachariah’s son, to follow the guidance of the Lord with
due steadfastness, and to John We gave knowledge and wisdom during his
childhood. We gave*** ***him compassion and purity and he was a pious
person, kind to his parents, not arrogant or a rebellious person. Peace
be upon the day he was born, the day he died and the day when he will be
brought back to life again. (Muhammad), mention in the Book (the Qur’an)
the story of Mary how she left her family and started living in a
solitary place to the East out of her people’s sight.***

***We sent Our Spirit to her, who stood before her in the shape of a
well-formed human being. Mary said, ‘Would that the Beneficent God would
protect me from you. Leave me alone if you are a God fearing person.’ He
[the Spirit] said, ‘Surely I am the Messenger of your Lord. I have come
to give you a purified son.’ She said, ‘How can I have a son when no
mortal has touched me nor am I an unchaste woman.’ He said, ‘This is
true but your Lord says, ‘It is very easy for Me. We have decided to
give you a son as evidence (of Our existence) for human beings and a
mercy from Us. This is a decree already ordained.’ She conceived the
child and retreated with him to a distant and solitary place when she
started to experience (the pain of) of childbirth labour. (Sitting) by
the trunk of a palm tree in sadness she said, ‘Would that I had died
long before and passed into oblivion.’***

***Then she heard the baby saying, ‘Do not be sad. Your Lord has caused
a stream to run at your feet. If you shake the trunk of the dried palm
tree, it will provide you with fresh ripe dates. Eat, drink, and
rejoice. Should you see a person going by, inform him that on this day
you have promised the Beneficent God to fast and not talk to any human
being.’ (After some time) She took him (Jesus) to her people and they
said, ‘Mary, this is indeed a strange thing. O’ sister of Aaron, your
father was not a bad man nor was your mother unchaste.’ She pointed to
the baby (and referred them to him for their answer). They said, ‘How
can we talk to a baby in the cradle?’***

***He [Jesus] said, ‘I am the servant of God. He has given me the Book
and has appointed me to be a Prophet. He has blessed me no matter where
I dwell, commanded me to worship Him and pay the religious tax for as
long as I live. He has commanded me to be good to my mother and has not
made me an arrogant rebellious person. Peace be upon me on the day when
I was born, the day when I shall die and when I shall be brought to life
again.’ Such was the true story of Jesus, the son of Mary, about which
they dispute bitterly. God is too exalted to have a son. When He decides
to bring something into existence He needs only command it to exist and
it comes into existence.” (Noble Qur’an 19:2-35)***

******

***“When the son of Mary was mentioned as an example, you people cried
out in protest, saying, ‘Are our (many) gods any better than he
(Jesus)?’ What they say is only a false argument. In fact, they are a
quarrelsome people. He (Jesus) was not but a servant of Ours to whom We
had granted favors and whom We made as an example for the Children of
Israel. Had We wanted, We could have made the Angels as the successors
on the Earth. (Muhammad), tell them, ‘Surely in him [Jesus], there is a
sign of the Hour [of the end of time since his return will herald in the
establishment of the kingdom of God and the impending day of
Judgement.]***

***Therefore, have no doubt about it and follow me; this is the straight
path. Let Satan not prevent you from the right path for surely he is
your sworn enemy.’ When Jesus came with clear proof (in support of his
truthfulness), he said, ‘I have come to you with wisdom*** ***to clarify
for you some of the matters in which you have disputes. Have fear of God
and obey me. God is your Lord and my Lord, so worship Him. This is the
right path. But certain groups created differences among themselves
therefore, woe to the unjust for surely they will face a painful
torment. Are they waiting for the Hour of Doom when the torment will
suddenly strike them and they will not even realize from where it
came?’” (Noble Qur’an 43:57-66)***

****** ****** ******

***“Jesus, son of Mary, said to the Children of Israel, ‘Surely I am the
Messenger of God sent to you. I confirm the Torah which is in existence
and give you the glad news of the coming of a Messenger who will come
after me named Ahmad.’ When this Messenger came to them with all the
proofs (to support his truthfulness), they said, ‘This is surely pure
magic.’ (Noble Qur’an 61:6)***

****** ****** ******

***“O you who have true faith! Be helpers of God just as when Jesus, the
son of Mary, asked the disciples, ‘Who will be my helpers for the cause
of God?’ The disciples replied, ‘We are the helpers of God.’ A group of
the Children of Israel believed in him and others rejected him however
We helped the believers against their enemies and they became
victorious.” (Noble Qur’an 61:14)***


