Preface
=======

Rites enjoy an important role in Islam. Their injunctions represent an
important part of jurisprudence and a worshipping conduct which
formulates a noticeable phenomenon in the daily life of the pious.

The system of rites in Islamic jurisprudence represents one of its
static facets which cannot be affected by the general trend of life or
the circumstances of civil progress in man's life except by a small
portion, contrary to other judicial aspects which are flexible and
dynamic.

The method of application and utilization of these judicial aspects is
affected by the circumstances pertaining to civil progress in man's
life, such as the system of deals and contracts.

In the sphere of worship, the man of the age of electricity and space
prays, fasts, and performs the pilgrimage just as his ancestor from the
age of the stone mill used to pray. fast.

and perform the pilgrimage .

It is true, however, that in the civil aspect of getting prepared to
perform a rite. this person may differ from that: for this travels to
his place of pilgrimage in a plane, while that used to travel with a
camel caravan. And when this covers his body-while saying his prayers or
during other occasions-with clothes manufactured by machines, that
covered his body with clothes he hand-sewed. But the general formula of
worship, as well as its method and legislation, is the same. The
necessity of its application has never suffered any change, nor has its
legislating value been affected or shaken by the continuous growth of
man's control over nature and his own means of living.

This means that Islamic Sharia (Jurisprudence) has not prescribed
prayer, fasting, pilgrimage, and other Islamic rites temporarily, or as
a juridical formula limited to conditions such Sharia lived in its early
epochs of history. Rather, it enjoined these rites on man while he uses
atomic energy to mobilize the engine, just as it has enjoined them on
man while ploughing his field with a hand plough.

Thus do we derive the deduction that the system of rites deals with the
permanent needs in the life of man, for whom they are created, and which
remain the same inspite of the continuous progress in man's life-style.
This is so because the application of a fixed prescription requires a
fixed need. Hence, this question comes up:

Is there really a fixed need in the life of man ever since
jurisprudence started its cultivating role, remaining as such until
today, so that we may interpret-in the light of its stability-the
stability of the formulae whereby jurisprudence has treated and
satisfied this same need, so that in the end we can explain the
stability of worship in its positive role in man's life?

It may seem, at first look, that to suggest such a fixed need of this
sort is not acceptable, that it does not coincide with the reality of
man's life when we compare today's man with the man of the future. We
certainly find man getting continuously further-in the method, nature of
problems, and factors of progress of his own life-from the circumstances
of the tribal society, his pagan problems, worries, limited aspirations,
and the method of treating and organizing these needs, wherein appeared
the concluding jurisprudence. Therefore, how can rites-in their own
particular juristic system-perform a real role in this field which is
contemporary to man's life-span, inspite of the vast progress in means
and methods of living? If rites such as prayers, ablution, ceremonial
washing (ghusul), and fasting had been useful during some stage in the
life of the bedouin man- taking part in cultivating his behaviour; his
practical commitment to clean his body and keep it from excessive eating
and drinking- these same goals, by the same token, are achieved by
modern man through the very nature of his civilized life and the norms
of social living. So, it would seem that these rites are no longer a
necessary need as they used to be once upon a time, nor have they
retained a role in building man's civilization or solving his
sophisticated problems ! But this theory is wrong.

The social progress in means and tools- for example, in the plough
changing in man's hand to a steam or electric machine-imposes a change
in man's relationship to nature and to whatever material forms it takes.
Take agriculture, for example, which represents a relationship between
the land and the farmer; it develops materially in form and context
according to the norm of development described above.

As regarding worship, the latter is not a relationship between man and
nature, so that it would be affected by such sort of development or
progress. Rather, it is a relationship between man and his Lord. This
relationship has a spiritual role which directs man's relationship to
his brother man. In both cases. However, we find that humanity
historically, lives with a certain number of fixed needs faced equally
by the man of the age of oil (i.e:, animal oil used for lighting) as
well as that of the age of electricity. The system of rites in Islam is
the fixed solution for the fixed needs of this sort, and for problems
whose nature is not sequential; instead, they are problems which face
man during his individual, social and cultural build-up. Such a
solution, called "rites," is still alive in its objectives until today,
becoming an essential condition for man to overcome his problems and
succeed in practicing his civilized vocations.

In order to clearly know all this, we have to point out some fixed
lines of needs and problems in man's life, and the role rites play in
satisfying such needs and overcoming such problems.

These lines are as follows:

1) the need to be linked to the Absolute
2) the need for subjectivity in purpose and self-denial
3) the need for inner feeling of responsibility to guarantee execution
The system of rites is a way to organize the practical aspect of the
relationship between man and his Lord; therefore, it cannot separate his
evaluation from that of this very relationship and of its role in man's
life. From here, both of these questions are inter- related:

First: What is the value achieved through the relationship between man
and his lord in his civilized march? And is it a fixed value treating a
fixed need in this march, or is it a sequential one linked to temporal
needs or limited problems, losing its significance at the end of the
stage limiting such needs and problems?

Second: What is the role played by rites as regarding that relationship
and what is the extent of its significance as a practical dedication to
the relationship between man and God?

What follows is a summary of the necessary explanation concerning both
questions:


