The Inner Feeling of Responsibility
===================================

If we observe humanity in any of its historical periods, we will find
it following a particular system of its life, a specific manner in
distributing rights and responsibilities among people, and that
according to the amount it acquires of securities for its members to
cling to this system and to its implementation, it will be closer to
stability and the achievement of the general goals expected from that
system.

This fact is equally true concerning the future, as well as the past,
for it is an established fact of man's civilized march along its lengthy
range.

Among the securities is that which is objective, such as penalties
enforced by the group to punish the individual who transgresses beyond
his limits. And among them is that which is inner, i.e., man's inner
feeling of responsibility towards his social obligations, towards
whatever obligations the group demands of him, determining,
spontaneously, his own rights.

In order to be an actual fact in man's life, the inner feeling of
responsibility needs the belief in. a supervision from whose knowledge
not an atom's weight in earth or sky escapes and to a practical
application through which such a feeling grows, and according to which
the feeling of such an inclusive supervision lays roots.

The supervision, for whose knowledge not even an atom's weight escapes,
is created in man's life as a result of his link with the True Absolute,
the all-Knowing, the Omnipotent, the One Whose knowledge encompasses
everything. This link with His self saves man the need for such a
supervision, thus enabling the creation of an inner feeling of
responsibility.

The practical application, through which this inner feeling of
responsibility grows, materializes through practicing rites. For worship
is the duty imposed by the Unseen, and by this we mean that checking it
externally is impossible. Any external measures to enforce it can never
be successful, for it stands through the self's own purpose and the
spiritual attachment to work for God; this is a matter which can not be
included in the calculation of a subjective supervision from the
outside, nor can any legal measure guarantee that either. Rather, the
only capable supervision in this respect is the one resulting from the
attachment to the Absolute, the Unseen, the One from Whose knowledge
nothing escapes.

The only possible assurity on this level is the inner feeling of
responsibility. This means that the person who practices worship is
performing a duty which differs from any other social obligation or
project when he borrows and pays back, or when he contracts and adheres
to the conditions. When he borrows money from others and he returns it
to the debtor, he performs a duty which lies within the range of social
supervision's monitoring; hence, his estimation of the predictment of
social reaction dictates to him the decision to do so.

The ritual duty, towards the Unknown, is one whose inner implication
none knows except God, the Praised, the Omnipotent, for it is the result
of the inner feeling of responsibility.

Through religious practices, such an inner feeling grows, and man gets
used to behaving according to it. Through the medium of such feeling can
we find the good citizen. It is not sufficient for good citizenship that
a person is anxious to perform the legal rights of others only because
of his apprehension of the social reaction towards him should he be
reluctant to do so. Rather, good citizenship is achieved by the man who
does not relax his own inner feeling of responsibility.

In Islam, we notice that it is often recommended to perform optional
rites secretly, rather than publicly. There are even rites which are
secretive by nature such as fasting, for it is an inner curb which
cannot be checked externally. There are rites for which a secretive
environment is chosen, avoiding the public stage, such as the nightly
Nafl optional prayers whose performance requires after midnight time.

All this is for the sake of deepening the aspect of worshipping the
Unseen, linking it more and more to the inner feeling of responsibility.
Thus, this feeling gets deepened through the practice of rites, and man
gets used to behaving on its basis, forming a strong guarantee for the
good individual's discharge of his duties and obligations.


