General Outlook At Rites
========================

If we cast a general look at the rites we have observed in this book,
comparing them with each other, we can then derive some general outlooks
at these rites. Here are some of these general outlooks. The Unseen In
Explaining Rites We came to know previously the important role worship
plays in man's life and that it expresses a fixed need in his civilized
march.

From another aspect: if we scrutinize and analyze the particulars, in
the light of advanced science, to be acquainted with the pieces of
wisdom and secrets which Islamic jurisprudence expresses in this regard
and which modern science has been able to discover.

This wonderful agreement between the outcomes of modern science and
many particulars of Islamic jurisprudence, and whatever rules and
regulations it decided, expresses a dazzling support for the position of
this jurisprudence, deeply emphasizing its being God-inspired. In spite
of all this, however, we quite often face unseen points in worship,
i.e., a group of details whose secret cannot be comprehended by the
person practicing worship, nor can he interpret them materialistically;
for why must sunset prayer be three prostrations while the noon-time
prayer more than that? And why should each rekaa include bowing down
once instead of twice, two prostrations instead of one? Other questions
of this sort can also be put forth.

We call such as aspect of worship which cannot be interpreted,
"unseen." We find this aspect, in one manner or another, in most rites
brought forth by the Islamic jurisprudence. From here, we can consider
obscurity in the meaning we have already mentioned as a general
phenomenon in rites and one of their common characteristics .

This obscurity is linked to the rites and to their imposed role
jointly, for the role of rites, as we have already come to know, is to
emphasize the attachment to the Absolute and deepen that practically.
The bigger the element of submission and yielding in a worship is, the
stronger its effect in deepening the link between the worshipper and his
Lord.

If the deed practiced by the worshipper is understood at all its
dimensions, clear in its wisdom and benefit in all details, the element
of submission and yielding gets minimized, and it will be dominated by
motives of interest and benefit, no more a worship of God as much as it
is a deed of benefit practiced by the worshipper so that he might derive
advantage out of it, benefiting of its results.

Just as the spirit of obedience and attachment in the soldier grows,
getting deepened through military training, by giving him orders and
requiring him to perform them with obedience and without discussion, so
does the feeling of the worshipping person grow and get deepened in its
attachment to his Lord through requiring him to practice these rites in
their unseen aspects with submission and yielding.

For submission and yielding require the assumption of the existence of
an unseen aspect and the attempt not to question this unseen aspect of
worship. Demanding its interpretation and limitation of interest means
stripping worship of its reality-as a practical expression of submission
and obedience- and measuring it by measurements of benefit and interest
like any other deed.

We notice that this obscurity is almost ineffective in rites
representing a great general interest, one that conflicts with the
personal interest of the worshipper, as is the case with Jihad which
represents a great general interest which contrasts the desire of the
person performing it to preserve his life and blood, and also in the
case of Zakat which represents a great interest which contrasts the
strong desire of the person paying it to preserve his wealth and
property. The issue of Jihad is very well understood by the person
performing it, and the issue of Zakat is generally understood by the
person who pays it; neither Jihad nor Zakat thus loses any element of
submission and obedience (to God), for the difficulty of sacrificing
life and property is what makes man's acceptance of a worship-for which
he sacrifices both life and property-is indeed a great deal of
submission and obedience. Add to this the fact that Jihad and Zakat and
similar rites are not meant to be merely aspects of upbringing just for
the individual, but also for the achievement of social benefits secured
thereby. Accordingly, we observe that obscurity is highlighted more and
more in rites dominated by the educating aspect of the individual, such
as prayer and fasting.

Thus do we derive the conclusion that the unseen in worship is strongly
linked to its educating role in attaching the individual to his Lord,
deepening his relationship with his Lord.

When we observe the different Islamic rites, we find in them an element
of inclusion of all different aspects of life. Rites have never been
limited to specific norms of rituals, nor have they been restricted to
only needs which embody the manner of glorifying God, the Praised, the
High, like bowing, prostrating, praying and invoking; rather, they have
been extended to include all sectors of human activity. Jihad, for
example, is a rite. It is a social activity. Zakat is a rite. It, too,
is a social activity, a financial one. Fasting is a rite. It is a
nutritious system.

Both ablution and Ghusu1 (ceremonial washing) are norms of worship.
They are two ways of cleaning the body. This inclusion of worship
expresses a general trend of Islamic upbringing aiming at linking man,
in all his deeds and activities, with Almighty God, converting each
useful deed to worship, no matter what field or type. In order to find a
fixed basis for this trend, fixed rites were distributed to the
different fields of human activity, preparing man to train himself on
pouring the spirit of worship over all his good activities, and the
spirit of the mosque over all places of his works:

in the field, the factory, the shop or the office, as long as his deed
is a good one, for the sake of God, the Glorified, the High. In this
respect, Islamic jurisprudence differs from two other religious trends,
one: a trend to separate worship from life; and the other: a trend to
limit life to a narrow frame of worship as do monks and mystics.

As for the first trend, it separates worship from life, leaving worship
to be conducted at places made especially for it. It requires man to be
present in these places in order to pay God His dues and worship Him, so
much so that when he gets out of them to different fields of life, he
bids worship farewell, giving himself up to the affairs of his life
until he goes back again to those holy places. From here came Islamic
jurisprudence to distribute the rites on the different fields of life,
urging the practice of ritual rites in each good deed. It explains to
man that the difference between the mosque, which is God's house, and
man's home is not in the quality of building or slogan; rather, the
mosque has deserved to be God's house because it is the yard whereupon
man practices a deed that goes beyond his ego and wherefrom he aims at a
bigger goal than that dictated by the logic of limited materialistic
interests, and that this yard ought to extend to include all life's
stages. Each yard, whereupon man does a deed that goes beyond his self,
aiming thereby to achieve the pleasure of God and all people, does,
indeed, carry the mosque's spirit.

As for the second trend, which restricts life in a narrow frame of
worship, it tried to confine man to the mosque instead of extending the
meaning of the mosque to include all the yards which witness a good deed
of man.

This trend believes that man lives an inner conflict between his soul
and body, and that he cannot accomplish one of these two duality of
worship and different activities of life paralyze worship and obstruct
its constructive upbringing role to develop man's motives and make the
objective, enabling him to go beyond his ego and narrow personal
interests in various scopes of his deeds.

God, the Glorified and Praised, never insisted on being worshipped for
the sake of His own Person, since He is independent of His worshippers,
so that He would be satisfied with a worship of this sort, nor did He
ever put Himself as the goal and objective of the human march, so that
man may bow his head down to Him within the scope of his worship, and
that is it! Rather, He meant such worship to build the good person who
is capable of going beyond his ego, participating in a bigger role in
the march.

The exemplary achievement of this cannot be reached except when the
spirit of worship gradually extends to other activities of life, for its
extension-as we have already seen-means an extension of objectivity of
purpose and the inner feeling of responsible behaviour, ability to go
beyond the self to be in harmony with man within this inclusive cosmic
frame, with eternity, immortality that both encompass him.


