The Inner Feeling of Responsibility /2
======================================

Except at the cost of the other. Therefore, in order for him to
spiritually grow and be elevated, he has to deprive his body from the
good things, shrinking his presence on life's stage battling
continuously against his desires and aspirations in different fields of
life, until he finally achieves victory over all of them through long
abstention and deprivation and the practice of certain rituals.

Islamic jurisprudence rejects this trend, too, because it wants rites
for the sake of life. Life cannot be confiscated for the sake of rites.
At the same time, it tries hard to ensure that a good man pours the
spirit of worship over all of his behaviour and activity. This must not
be taken to imply that he has to stop his different activities in life
and confine himself between the altar's walls; rather. it means that he
converts all his activities to rituals.

The mosque is but a base wherefrom a good man sets to conduct his daily
behaviour, but it is not limited to that behaviour alone. The Holy
Prophet (peace be upon him) has said to Abu Tharr al-Ghifari: "If you
are able to eat and drink for the sake of none save God, then do so!"

Thus, worship serves life. Its upbringing and religious success is
determined by its extension, in meaning and spirit. to all fields of
life. Worship And The Senses Man's perception is not merely by his
senses, nor is it merely an intellectual and nonmaterial reasoning.

It is a mixture of reasoning plus material and non-material feeling.
When worship is required to perform its function in a way with which man
interacts perfectly, and whereby it harmonizes with his character,
worship is composed of a mind and senses; worship then must contain a
sensitive aspect and a non-material intellect, so that worship will be
compatible with the worshipper's personality, and the worshipper, while
performing his worship, lives his attachment to the Absolute with all
his existence.

From here, the intention, as well as the psychological contention of
worship, always represents its intellectual and non-material aspect, for
it links the worshipper to the True Absolute, the Praised, the High.
There are other aspects of worship whicl1 represent its material
aspect:

The qibla towards whose direction each worshipper must direct his face
while praying; The Haram, visited by both those who perform the
pilgrimage and those who do the Umrah, around which they both perform
tawaf;

The Safa and Marwah, between which he runs; Jamratul Aqabah, at which
he casts stones; The Mosque, which is a place especially made for
adoration wherein the worshipper practices his worship.

All these are things related to the senses and tied to worship: there
is no prayer without a qibla, nor tawaf without a Haram, and so on, for
the sake of satisfying the part related to the senses in the worshipper
and giving it its right and share of worship.

This is the midway direction in organizing worship and coining it
according to man's instincts as well as his particular intellectual and
sensual makeup.

Two other directions face him: one of them goes to the extreme in
bringing man to his senses, if the expression is accurate at all,
treating him as if he had been a non-material intellect, opposing all
sensual expressions of his in worship's sphere. As long as the True
Absolute, the Praised One, has no limited place or time, nor can He be
represented by a statute; then H is worship has to stand on such a
premise, and in the manner which enables the comparative thinking of man
to address the Absolute Truth.

Such a trend of thinking is not approved by Islamic jurisprudence, for
inspite of its concern about the intellectual aspects brought forth by
the Hadith: "An hour's contemplation is better than a year's adoration."
it also believes that pious worship, no matter how deep, cannot totally
fill man's self or occupy his leisure, nor can it attach him to the
Absolute Truth in all his existence, for man has never been purely an
intellect.

From this realistic and objective starting point rites in Islam have
been based on both intellectual and sensuous bases. The person
performing his prayers is practicing by his intention an intellectual
adoration, denying his Lord any limits, measurements. Or the like. For
when he starts his prayer with Allah o Akbar (God is Great). while
taking at the same time the holy Kaaba as a divine slogan towards which
he directs his feelings and movements. he lives worship by both
intellect and feeling, logic and emotion nonmaterialistically as well as
intellectually.

The other trend goes to the extreme in the part related to the senses,
changing the slogan to an identity, and the hint to reality, causing the
worship of the symbol to substitute what the symbol really stands for,
and the direction towards him instead of the reality it points to; thus,
the worshipping person sinks, in one way or another, in shirk and
paganism.

Such a trend totally annihilates the spirit of worship and it stops its
function as a tool linking man and his civilized march to the True
Absolute, converting it to a tool for linking him to false absolutes, to
symbols which changed-through false intellectual stripping of the
matterto an absolute. Thus, false worship becomes a veil between man and
his Lord, instead of a link between both of them.

Islam has rejected such a trend because Islam convicted paganism in all
its forms, smashing its idols and putting an end to all false gods,
refusing to take any limited object as a symbol for the True Absolute,
God, the Glorified, or as a personification of Him. But it deeply
distinguished between the meaning of the idol which it crushed and that
of the Qibla it brought, whose meaning conveys nothing more than a
particular geographic spot to have been divinely favoured through
linking it to prayers for the sake of satisfying the worshipper's aspect
related to the senses.

Paganism is really nothing but a deviated attempt to satisfy such an
aspect, and Islamic jurisprudence has been able to correct it, providing
a straight path in harmonizing between the worship of God, as being
dealing with the Absolute Who has neither limit nor personification, and
the need of man who is composed of feeling and intellect to worship God
by both of his feeling and intellect!


