Caliphs and glad tiding of Prophet
==================================

The tenth tradition on the excellences of caliphs and the order their
caliphate is narrated by Suyuti. In his*al-Khasaes* , he mentions: Ibn
Abi Khathima (in his history), Abu Ya'ala, Bazzaz and Abu Na'aeem have
quoted Anas as saying:

One day I was with the Holy Prophet in a garden. Someone knocked at the
gate. The Holy Prophet (s) ordered me to get up and open the gate for
him and give him the glad tiding of Paradise and caliphate after me. I
opened the gate and it was Abu Bakr. Thereupon another person knocked at
the gate. The Holy Prophet (s) ordered me to get up and open the gate
for him and give him the glad tiding of Paradise and caliphate after Abu
Bakr. I opened the gate and it was Umar. Thereupon another man knocked
at the gate. The Holy Prophet (s) ordered me to get up and open the gate
for him and give him the glad tiding of Paradise and caliphate after
Umar and tell him that he would be killed. I opened the gate and it was
Uthman.[^56]

Fabricated tradition from the viewpoint of Khatib Baghdadi
----------------------------------------------------------

Saqar bin Abd al-Rahman bin Bint Malik bin Mughul – he was from Kufa.
Known as Abu Behz he lived in Baghdad. He narrated traditions- told me:
Ali bin Muhammad bin Hasan Maliki narrated from Abdullah bin Uthman
Saffar from Muhammad bin Imran bin Musa Sayrafi from Abdullah bin Ali
Madini who told me he had talked about Abu Behz's tradition – which he
had narrated from Ibn Idris from Mukhtar bin Filfil from Anas – with his
father and told him this tradition is similar to Abu Musa's.

My father said that this tradition was fabricated. Thereupon Khatib
narrates it through his own chain from Abu Ya'ala, which is as under:

Abu Behz bin Abd al-Rahman bin Bint Malik bin Mughul narrates from
Abdullah bin Idris from Mukhtar bin Filfil from Anas bin Malik who
quotes the Holy Prophet (s) as saying:

One day I was with the Holy Prophet in a garden. Someone knocked at the
gate. The Holy Prophet (s) ordered me to get up and open the gate for
him and give him the glad tiding of Paradise and caliphate after me. I
opened the gate and it was Abu Bakr. Thereupon another person knocked at
the gate. The Holy Prophet (s) ordered me to get up and open the gate
for him and give him the glad tiding of Paradise and caliphate after Abu
Bakr. I opened the gate and it was Umar. Thereupon another man knocked
at the gate. The Holy Prophet (s) ordered me to get up and open the gate
for him and give him the glad tiding of Paradise and caliphate after
Umar and tell him that he would be killed. I opened the gate and it was
Uthman.

Abd al-Mu'amin says that he asked Abu Ali about his opinion regarding
Saqar, he said that Saqar was a simple teacher to whom no one paid
attention in Baghdad. He used to fabricate traditions. Abu Ali goes on
saying that Salih bin Muhammad is among the most lying people and his
son Abu Hez excels his father in lying.[^57]

It has to be mentioned that Aini has also narrated this tradition in his
commentary on*Sahih Bukhari* saying that Abu Ya'ala Musili has narrated
it as one of the traditions of Mukhtar bin Filfil from Anas. According
to him, it is a hasan (good) tradition.[^58]

Other opinions
--------------

As mentioned above, some of the Sunni memorizers have considered Abu
Behz as a liar and regarded this tradition of his as fabricated. Ibn
Udai says that whenever he narrated a tradition from him, Abu Ya'ala
would point out that it was weak.Dahabi is also among those who deem
this tradition as fabricated. After giving an account of Saqar's life,
he, in his*Mizan* , says that Saqar bin Abd al-Rahman known as Abu Behz,
was the grandson of Malik bin Mughul. He narrates this false tradition
from Abdullah bin Idris from Mukhtar bin Filfil from Anas who quotes the
Holy Prophet (s) as saying: O Anas! Get up, open the gate and give him
the glad tiding of Paradise and caliphate after me….!

This tradition mentions the same thing about Umar and Uthman. Zahabi
says according to Ibn Udai Abu Ya'ala considered him as weak whenever he
narrated a tradition from him.

In Abu Bakr's point of view, he used to fabricate traditions. According
to Abu Ali he was lying very much.[^59] In his*Lisan al-Mizan* , Ibn
Hajar has followed Dahabi, after mentioning his words. He narrates the
said tradition using his own chain from Abu Ya'ala from Saqar bin
Abdullah bin Idris from Mukhtar bin Filfil from Anas. According to him,
if this tradition were authentic, Umar would not leave the matter of
caliphate to council and would introduce Uthman as the next caliph.[^60]


