Caliphs on Day of Judgment
==========================

The fourteenth tradition on the excellences of caliphs and the order of
their caliphate is reported by a group memorizers of tradition.

Ibn Jawzid narrates the second of his traditions from Hibatullah bin
Muahmmad bin Hasin from Abu Talib bin Ghaylan from Abu Bakr Sha'afi'a
from Muhammad bin Uthman bin Abi Shaiba from Hasan bin Salih from Hasan
bin Hasan Narsi from Asba'a bin Faraj from Bai'a bin Muhammad from Abu
Sulayman Iili from Ibn Jarih from Amr bin Dinar from Ibn Abbas who
quotes the Holy Prophet (s) as saying:

When there is the Day of Judgment, a caller calls from beneath the Arsh
saying: Where are the companions of Muhammad? It is at this moment that
Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali are brought. Abu Bakr is told to stand at
the gate of Paradise and let anyone he pleases enter Paradise through
the mercy of Allah and not to let anyone he pleases enter Paradise
through the knowledge of Allah!

Umar is told to control the scale increasing the weight of the pan of
anyone he pleases through the mercy of Allah and decreasing the weight
of the pan of anyone he please with Allah's knowledge!

The Holy Prophet goes on saying: Two sumptuous dresses are prepared for
Uthman bin Affan and he is told to wear them for [Allah] has saved them
for him as He was creating the heaven and the earth.

Ali bin Abi Talib is given a rod from Usaj, a tree created by Allah in
Paradise and he is told to disperse through it the people from around
the pool!

Ibn Jawzi says that Isba'a has narrated this tradition from Sulayman bin
Abd al-'Ala from Ibn Jarih. Similarly, according to him, Isba'a has
narrated this tradition from Sari bin Muhammad from Abu Sulayman Iili
from Ibn Jarih. This shows that Isba'a or other narrators of this
tradition are talking nonsensical things. The chain of this tradition
contains some unknown names.

Ahmad bin Hasan Kufi has narrated this tradition from Waki'a who
according to Dar Qutni is rejected. According to Ibn Hayyan he narrates
fabricated traditions from reliable persons.

Ibrahim bin Abdullah Masisi has also narrated this tradition from Hajjaj
bin Muhammad from Ibn Jarih. On Ibn Hayyan's view, Ibrahim used to steal
traditions and change them. According to him, he used to narrate
traditions from reliable people, which were not part their traditions.
Thus on his view, Ibrahim is to be placed among people whose traditions
are rejected.[^78]

Fabricated tradition and Dahabi and Asqalani
--------------------------------------------

After mentioning the name of Ibrahim bin Abdullah in his Mizan, Dahabi
gives an account of his life. While elaborating on his life, he touches
two traditions -one of which we mentioned above- saying that on his view
he is a liar. Hakim says that his traditions are forged and fabricated.

Hakim narrates in a marfu'a format from Ibrahim from Waki'a from Sufyan
from Amr bin Dinar from Ibn Abbas who quotes the Holy Prophet (s) as
saying: when there is the Day of Judgment Abu Bakr will be at one of the
pillar of the pool, Umar at the second pillar, Uthman at the third
pillar

and Ali at the fourth. Anyone who is hostile towards anyone of them will
not be given water to drink.

Ibrahim narrates in a marfu'a fomat from Hajjaj from Ibn Jarih from Amr
bin Dinar from Ibn Abbas who quotes the Holy Prophet as saying:

When there is the Day of Judgment, a caller calls from beneath the Arsh
saying: Where are the companions of Muhammad? It is at this moment that
Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali are brought. Abu Bakr is told to stand at
the gate of Paradise and let in anyone he pleasesthrough the mercy of
Allah and not to let in anyone he pleasesthrough the knowledge of
Alllah![^79]

In his*Lisan* , Ibn Hajar follows in the footstep of Dahabi. While
giving an account of his life, he refers the said two traditions and
says that Ibrahim bin Abdullah is a liar.[^80]


