Fabricated traditions and final word
====================================

The aforementioned traditions were but a small part of numerous
fabricated traditions on the excellences of caliphs. Some Sunni scholars
have mentioned part of these fabricated traditions in their books on
fabricated traditions. These books include among others*al-Mawdu'at* by
Ibn Jawzi,*al-Kamil* by Ibn Udai,*Mizan al-Itidal* by Dahabi,*al-Lu'ali
al-Masnu'a* by Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti,*Lisan al-Mizan* by Ibn Hajr
and*Tanzih al-Shari'a* by Ibn 'Arraq.

Despite all these, the said scholars refuse to admit that the traditions
available in Sihah Sitta, specially*Sahih Bukhari* and*Sahih Muslim* are
fabricated. This is because these two books have a high status in their
eyes.

In our researches, we have studied part of the traditions of*Sahih
Bukahri* and*Sahih Muslim* with the aim to show that these two books,
like every other book, contain authentic and unauthentic traditions. In
our previous works that are even published, we have dealt with this
issue in a rather detailed manner. We thank Allah because of doing all
this.

These traditions are however false and fabricated and their mention
in*Sahih Bukhari* or*Sahih Muslim* does not change anything.

The aim of the fabricators of these traditions is not something that is
veiled from the viewpoint of scholars. The Sunni scholars who support
caliphate know very well about what happened after the demise of the
Holy Prophet (s). They also know that Allah has not provided them with
any reason to prove their point of view. That is why they deem it
necessary in the past and they feel it is necessary to day to justify
the issue of caliphate [on the basis of something that is related to
revelation]. But no one can amend [overnight] what time has corrupted in
ages!

May Allah bless Muhammad and his progeny!


