Caliphs visit the Holy Prophet (s)
==================================

We narrate the second fabricated tradition from Muslim Nayshaburi. In
his*Sahih* , Muslim narrates the following:

Abd al-Malik bin Shuayb bin Laith bin Sa'eed narrates from his father,
from his grandfather from Aqil bin Khalid from Ibn Shahab from Yahya bin
Sa'eed bin 'As from Sa'eed bin 'As who quote Aisha, wife of the Holy
Prophet (s) and Uthman as saying:

Abu Bakr sought permission from Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon
him) for entrance (in his apartment) as he had been lying on his bed
covered with the bed-sheet of A'isha, and he gave permission to Abu Bakr
in that very state and he, having his need fulfilled, went back. Then
Umar sought permission and it was given to him in that very state and,
after having his need fulfilled, he went back. And 'Uthman reported:
Then I sought permission from him and he got up and raid to A'isha: Wrap
yourself well with your cloth, then I got my need fulfilled and came
back. And A'isha said: Allah's Messenger, why is it that I did not see
you feeling any anxiety in case of dressing properly in the presence of
Abu Bakr and 'Umar (Allah be pleased with them) as you showed in case of
'Uthman. Thereupon Allah's Messenger (may peace be upon him) said:
Verily Uthman is a person who is very modest and I was afraid that if I
permitted him to enter in this very state he would not inform me of his
need.[^13]

Transmitters of Tradition
-------------------------

We need to evaluate the transmitters of this fabricated tradition. The
scholars of the science of rijal hold varied opinions concerning them.

### 'Aqil bin Khalid

###

One of the transmitters this chain includes is 'Aqil bin Khalid.
Although Abu Hatam, commenting on him, says that he though not a
memorizer of tradition was author of a book and was truthful. Majishun
describes him as a policeman. Zahabi says that he was a stupid governor
(of one of the Syrian cities). Yahya Qattan regarded 'Aqil as weak in
terms of transmitting traditions.[^14]

### Zuhri

###

Among others, this chain includes the name of Zuhri. He was among the
most well-known figures who was deviated from the straight path of Imam
Ali (a.s), commander of the faithful and the Holy Prophet's progeny
(a.s) and was thus fabricating traditions with the aim of underrating
them and overrating their opponents.

Commenting on this regard, Ibn Abi al-Hadid says: Zuhri was among those
figures who were deviated from the straight path of Imam Ali (a.s) and
the Holy Prophet's family (a.s). Jarir bin Abd al-Majid quotes Muhammad
bin Shaiba as saying: One day I went to the mosque of Medina. I saw that
Zuhri and Urwa bin Zubair were sitting there talking ill of Ali (a.s).

Ali bin al-Husain learnt about it and thus he walked towards them. When
he reached them he said: O Urwa! My father complained against your
father before Allah and Allah passed a judgment in favor of my father
against your

father. As far you Zuhri! If I were in Macca I would have shown you the
position of your father.

Ibn Abi al-Hadid adds: 'Asim bin Abu 'Amir Bajli narrates from Urawa's
son that Yahya bin Urwa said: Whenever my father mentioned the name of
Ali he would talk ill of him.[^15]

Speaking about Zuhri, Ibn Abd al-Barr says: In his Jami'a, Mu'ammar,
quoting Zahri, says: Zaid bin Haritha is the first one who embraced
Islam.Abd al-Razzaq says that no one other than Zuhri has made such a
claim.[^16]

The word mentioned above implies that Zuhri has told a lie, because it
was Imam Ali (a.s) who was the first to embrace Islam whereas Zuhri
wanted to refute this virtue.

Moreover, Zuhri's hostility towards the Holy Prophet's progeny was so
intense that he did not hesitate to narrate from Umar bin Sa'ad bin Abi
Waqqas! Speaking in this regard, Zahabi says: Umar bin Sa'ad bin Abi
Waqqas, quoting his father and Ibrahim and Abu Ishaq quoting Umar Sa'ad,
say that Zuhri and Qutada narrate from Umar Sa'ad in 'mursal' format.

Ibn Mu'aeen exclaims saying how the killer of Imam Husain could be a
credible person.[^17]

It has to be said that Zuhri is among the supporters and secret agents
of Ummayyid rule. Commenting on him in his*Rijal al-Mishkat,* Sheikh
Muhadith , Abd al-Haq Dihlawi says: Because of accompanying rulers,
Zuhrihad a weak faith. Scholars and pious people close to him were
critical of him, pinpointing to him the risks of accompanying rulers.

In response, Zuhriwould always say that he was sharing their good deeds
and was loathing their evil actions.

The scholars and pious people would, in turn, say: Don't you see that
they cherish false ideas and do evil deeds?

Ibn Khallakan says that Zuhriwent on accompanying Abd al-Malik and his
son, Hisham, after his father's death. Yazid bin Abd al-Malik used to
make use of him in in judiciary matters.[^18]

It was because of this that Ibn Mu'aeen criticized him. Quoting Ibn
Mu'aeen, Hakim Nayshaburi says: Best chains are those in which 'Amash
narrates from Ibrahim from 'Alqama from Abdullah. Somebody addressing
Ibn Mu'aeen said that 'Amash is also like Zuhri. Ibn Mu'aeen in response
said: You regard 'Amash as equal to Zuhri! Zuhriis after worldly gains
working for Ummayids. This is while A'amash is a forbearing fakir who
knows the Holy Quran and keeps distance from rulers.[^19]

It was on account of this that Imam Zayn al-'Abdidin (a.s) wrote him a
letter, admonishing him, reminding him of Allah['s wrath] and the
hereafter and telling him about the bad consequences of accompanying
rulers and staying in their castles.

God save you and us from seditious matters and guard you against the
Fire (of Hell) out of His mercy. You have been enjoying a state due to
which it is serving for anyone who knows you to show compassion to you.
You have been overburdened with the graces of God Who has given you a
good physical health and a long age. Furthermore, He has constituted His
claims against you when He charged you with the responsibility of His

Book, made you understand His religion, introduced to you the traditions
of His Prophet Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family). He has also
imposed upon you a responsibility in every favor that He has done to you
and every claim that He has instituted against you. He has tested your
gratitude in every matter that He has done to you and every grace
through which He has shown His favors to you. He says:

If you give thanks, I shall give you greater (favors), but if you show
ingratitude, know that My retribution is severe. Consider to which party
you will be added when you will (inevitably) stand before God Who will
ask you about His graces; how you acted upon them, and about His claims;
how you treated them. Never think that God will accept your
unjustifiable excuses or will be satisfied with your negligence. Too far
is that! Too far is that! It is definitely not in that manner. God has
ordered the scholars (to show people and not to hide any part of it) in
His Book when He said:

When God made a covenant with the People of the Book saying: Tell the
people about it without hiding any part.**You should know that the least
of concealing knowledge and the lightest burden is to entertain the
estrangement of an unjust person and pave the way of seduction to him
through responding to him when he sought your nearness and called upon
you. I am too afraid that** you will acknowledge your sins with the
betrayers tomorrow and will be asked about whatever you have gotten due
to your supporting the unjust in oppression, since you have taken the
gift that was not yours, you have been close to him who did not give
back anyone's right, you have not rejected a wrongdoing when he
approached you, and you have responded to him who antagonized God. As
the unjust ones invited you, they make you the axis of the hand-mill of
their wrongdoings, the bridge on which they cross to their misfortunes,
and the stairs to their deviation.

You have been the propagandist of their temptation when you took their
courses. They have employed you as the means through which they aroused
doubts against the scholars and dragged the hearts of the ignorant to
them. The best one in their government and the most powerful of them
could not achieve success like that which you have attained through
showing their corrupt affairs as honest and attracting the attentions of
the celebrities as well as the ordinary people to you. If you compare
what you have done to them with what they have given to you, you will
find it too little. Likewise, they have built for you very trivial thing
while they ruined your great things. Look in yourself, for no one will
look in you except you yourself, and maintain judgment with yourself as
if you are the judge. Look into your gratitude to Him Who nourished you
with His graces when you were little and when you became old. I am too
afraid you will be one of those about whom God says in His Book:

Their descendants who inherited the Book gained (by bribery only)
worthless things from the worldly life saying, "We shall be forgiven
(for what we have done). You are not living in a permanent abode; you
are in a temporary house that you will leave soon. How does a man stay
after the departure of his matches? Blessed be those who are fearful of
this world. How miserable those who die and leave their sins after them
are! Beware; you have been told. Take the initiative; you have been
respited. You are

dealing with Him Who is never ignorant. He who counts your deeds is
never remiss. Supply yourself (with the necessary provisions); the long
journey is approaching you. Correct your guilt; it has been inflicted by
a cureless malady.

Do not think that I wanted only to censure, reproach, and dishonor you.
I only wanted God to revive the opinions that you have missed and give
you back your religious affairs that you have lost. This is because I
remembered God's saying: Keep on reminding them. This benefits the
believers. You neglected the reference to your old men and friends who
passed away while you remained after them like a hornless sheep. See
whether they had suffered what you suffered or faced what you faced. Had
they neglected a good-deed that you did or had they been unaware of
something that you retained?

The only difference between you and them is that you have occupied a
distinctive standing in people's minds that they have been pursuing your
opinions and carrying out your orders. They deem lawful anything that
you deem lawful and deem unlawful anything that you deem unlawful. You
are not fit enough for so. It is, in fact, the departure of their
scholars, the prevalence of ignorance upon them and you, the fondness of
leadership, and the seeking of the worldly pleasures that they, as well
as you, enjoy-these matters made them overcome you through their desire
to gain what you have in possession.

Can you not feel the ignorance and deception that you live, while people
are indulging into misfortunes and sedition? You have exposed them to
misfortunes and tempted them by precluding them from their earnings
because of what they have seen from you. Hence, they longed for
attaining the level of knowledge that you have attained or obtaining,
through it, what you have obtained. They therefore have drowned in a
bottomless ocean and an immeasurable misfortune. God give you and us. He
is the One Whose help is sought. So then, leave all that in which you
are engaged so that you may catch up with the virtuous ones whom were
buried with their tatters while their bellies were stuck to their backs.
No screen was put between God and them. The worldly pleasures could not
charm them and they paid no attention to them (such pleasures). They
longed for (God), sought (Him), and soon caught up (with Him). If this
world makes you in such a manner, while you are attaining such an age,
enjoying such a deep-rooted knowledge, and being so near of death, how
can then a juvenile be saved (against the worldly pleasures), while he
is ignorant, weak-minded, and brainless? We are Allah's and to Him we
will return.

Upon whom should we depend? Whom should we blame? We should only
complain of our grief and what are we suffering to God. We only charge
our misfortune about you to God's account. Look into your gratitude to
Him Who nourished you with His graces when you were little and when you
became old, your magnifying Him Who makes you handsome among people
through His religion, your preserving the dress of Him Who covered you
up among people through His dress, and your closeness or remoteness from
Him Who ordered you to come near and be modest to Him. Why do you not
wake up from your slumber, and reform yourself after your

stumble? You should have said: By God I swear, I have not done any act
for the sake of God and for stimulating one of the rites of His religion
or terminating one of the wrong customs. Do you show gratitude to Him
Who settled all your needs in this way?

I am too afraid you are one of those about whom God the Exalted says:
(They) neglected their prayers and followed their worldly desires. They
will certainly be lost. God has ordered you to carry His Book and
deposited His knowledge with you, but you have wasted them both. We
thank God Who has saved us from that with which He has inflicted you.
Salaam.[^20]


