Unknown Excellences
===================

The fifth fabricated tradition is reported by Tirmidhi. In his*Sunan* in
a chapter on 'excellences of Ma'az bin Jabal, Zaid bin Thabit, Ubai bin
Ka'ab and Abu Ubaida bin Jarrah, he narrates a tradition using two
different chains of transmitters:

Sufyan bin Waki'a narrates from Hamid bin Abd al-Rahman from Dawood
Attar from Mu'ammar from Qutada, from Anas bin Malik who quotes the Holy
Propeht (s) as saying:

Abu Bakr is the kindest person, Umar the strictest person in applying
divine commandments, Uthman bin Affan the most modest individual, Ma'az
bin Jabal the most knowledgeable in divine commands and prohibitions,
Zaid bin Thabit the most knowledgeable in inheritance rules and Ubai bin
Ka'ab the best reciter of the Holy Quran among my followers. Every
community has a trustworthy and the trustworthy of my community is Abu
Ubaidah Jarrah.

This is a good but strange tradition which is quoted by no one other
than Qutadah. A similar tradition has been reported by Abu Qalaba from
Anas bin Malik from the Holy Prophet (s). The tradition reported by Abu
Qalaba is more popular.

Muhammad bin Bashshar narrates from Abd al-Wahhab bin Abd al-Majid
Thaqafi from Khalid Hazza from Abu Qalaba from Anas bin Malik who quotes
the Holy Prophet (s) as saying:

Abu Bakr is the kindest person, Umar the strictest person in applying
divine commandments, Uthman bin Affan the most modest individual, Ma'az
bin Jabal the most knowledgeable in divine commands and prohibitions,
Zaid bin Thabit the most knowledgeable in inheritance rules and Ubai bin
Ka'ab the best reciter of the Holy Quran among my followers. Every
community has a trustworthy and the trustworthy of my community is Abu
Ubaidah Jarrah.

However others have also narrated this narration, among whom is Ibn
Majah. He narrated this tradition via two chains of transmitters that
are as below:

Muhammad bin Muthanna narrates from Abd al-Wahhab bin Abd al-Majid from
Khalid Hazza from Abu Qalaba from Anas bin Malik who quotes the
Messenger of Allah (s) as saying:

Abu Bakr is the kindest person, Umar the strictest person in applying
divine commandments, Uthman bin Affan the most modest individual, Ma'az
bin Jabal the most knowledgeable in divine commands and prohibitions,
Zaid bin Thabit the most knowledgeable in inheritance rules and Ubai bin
Ka'ab the best reciter of the Holy Quran among my followers. Every
community has a trustworthy and the trustworthy of my community is Abu
Ubaidah Jarrah.

Like Ibn Qudama, Ali bin Muhammad narrates this tradition from Waki'a
from Sufyan from Khalid Hazza from Abu Qalana from Anas bin Malik who
quotes the Messenger of Allah (s) as saying:

Abu Bakr is the kindest person, Umar the strictest person in applying
divine commandments, Uthman bin Affan the most modest individual, Ma'az
bin Jabal the most knowledgeable in divine commands and

prohibitions, Zaid bin Thabit the most knowledgeable in inheritance
rules and Ubai bin Ka'ab the best reciter of the Holy Quran among my
followers. Every community has a trustworthy and the trustworthy of my
community is Abu Ubaidah Jarrah.

Hakim also narrates this tradition saying: Abd al-Rahman bin Hamdan
Jallab (from Hamadan), narrates from Abu Hatam Razi from Muhammad bin
Yazid bin Sunan Rahawi from Abu Muhammmad Kowthar bin Hakim Halabi from
Nafi'a from Ibn Umar who quotes the Holy Prophet (s) as saying:

Abu Bakr is the kindest person, Umar the strictest person in applying
divine commandments, Uthman bin Affan the most modest individual, Ubai
bin Ka'ab the best reciter of the Holy Quran, Zaid bin Thabit the most
knowledgeable in inheritance rules, Ali bin Abi Talib the most
knowledgeable in judging,Ma'az bin Jabal the most knowledgeable in
divine commands and prohibitions,and Abu Zar the most truthful person in
my followers. In fact, Abu Ubaidah Jarrah is the trustworthy of my
community and the religious scholar of my community is Abdullah bin
Abbas.[^32]

Evacuation of transmitters of tradition
---------------------------------------

What we mentioned above were the most important chains in the most
authentic Sunni sources. If we mention all chains it will keep us away
from the aim of this booklet. We will thus suffice to evaluating a few
chains of the transmitters of this tradition.

### Sufyan bin Waki'a

###

The first chain of transmitters of this tradition used by Tirmidhi
contains the name of Sufyan bin Waki'a. Scholars of traditions have made
certain comments about him.

Bukhari is of the view that scholars are critical of Sufyan due to the
warnings they had given to him. Abu Zar'a says he is accused of lying.
Ibn Abi Hatam says that when his father was asked about Sufyan he said:
He was careless in narrating traditions. Commenting on him, Sufyan says
that he is not a trustworthy person. Elsewhere he mentions that Sufyan
is not a worthy person. According to Ajuri, Abu Dawood refused to
narrate his narrations. Zahabi has considered him as one of those people
who were weak in terms of transmitting traditions. According to Ibn
Hajar, Sufyan had a writer who would write down what he would dictate.
He jotted down things as traditions which were not in reality
traditions. When Sufyan was told to change his mind about him, he
refused to accept it. Thus his traditions are not authentic.

### Dawood 'Attar

###

Dawood 'Attar is another person the first chain of Tirmidhi includes.
Hakim Nayshabur quotes Yahya bin Mu'aeen as saying that his traditions
are weak. Azdi says that scholars are critical of him.[^33]

### Qutada

###

He is another person the first chain of Timidhi includes. He was a
fatalist and was a propagandist of this school of thought. On the other
hand, he was

known as a deceiver. According to Sha'abi, he was mixing authentic and
unauthentic traditions together.[^34]

### Muhammad bin Bashshar

###

He is among the narrators of the second chain used by Tirmidhi. Fallas
has regarded him as a liar. Dawraqi says that he saw Yahya bin Mu'aeen
who did not pay attention to him, regarding him as weak in narrating
tradition. Qawariri did not like him either. He was the owner of a
bath.[^35]

### Abd al-Wahhab bin Abd al-Majid

###

He is another person this chain includes. Commenting on him, Ibn Abi
Hatam quotes his father as saying: He is an unknown person. Ibn Mahdi
places his name among those who narrated traditions from others' books
but were not able to keep them. Quoting Ibn Mu'aeen, Dawri says he was
suffering from absent-mindedness. According to Abu Dawood he was
suffering from sense disruption. On Aqili's view, he was among weak
narrators.[^36]

### Khalid Hazza

###

He is also among those narrators this chain includes. Concerning him Abu
Hatam says the scholars record his traditions but do not act on them. In
his*Ta'arih* , 'Aqili quoting Yayha bin Adam through Abu Shahab as
saying: Rely on Hajjaj bin Artat and Muhammad bin Ishaq, because they
are among the memorizers of tradition. However conceal the traditions
reported by Khalid Hazza and Hisham, from me when we are among Basrans.
Yahya said that he asked Hammad bin Zaid as to what was the fault of
Khalid Hazza. In response he said that he came here from Syria but we do
not accept him as a memorizer.

Abbad bin Abbad says that Shu'aba wanted to criticize Khalid but Hammad
bin Zaid and I met him and told him not to do so. We threatened him and
as a result he was silent. Quoting Ahmad bin Hanbal, 'Aqili says: when
one of his traditions was narrated to Ibn Illiyya, he did not pay
attention to it and said that he was weak. Ibn Hajar, commenting on
their words, says that they made such remarks, because Khalid had lost
his memory towards the end of his life or because he had chosen to be an
agent of the ruler of his time.[^37]

### Abu Qalaba

###

Another reporter of this chain is Abu Qalaba Abdullah bin Zaid Jarmi. He
had hostility towards Ali (a.s) and was impolite towards him. That is
why he did not narrate any tradition from him. Moreover, all including
those who did not see him, agree that he was a deceitful person.
Commenting on him, Abu al-Hasan Qabsi Malik is reported to have said
that he was among the jurists of tabia'een and from the viewpoint of
people he was a foolish person.[^38]

Two points
----------

Based on what was mentioned above the chain used by Ibn Majah is not
acceptable either. Two points have to be mentioned in regard with the
chain of this tradition.

One: This tradition, in addition to having the afore-mentioned flaws, is
reported in a mursal format. Ibn Hajar and other commentators of*Sahih
Bukhari* have mentioned this point. In his commentary, Manavi, quoting
Ibn Hajar, says: Tirmidhi and Ibn Hayyan have narrated the full version
of this tradition from Khalid Hazza through Abd al-Wahhab Thaqafi. This
tradition begins with the word 'kindest' and its chain is authentic. The
memorizers of traditions have however said that the starting part of
this tradition is mursal (broken) and the portion that is muttasil
(connected) is reported by Bukhari.[^39]

Two: The narrator of this tradition is Anas bin Malik who has lied on
several occasions. Thus one cannot rely on him.

Reporters of Hakim's tradition
------------------------------

### Muhammad bin Yazid Rahavi

###

He is one the reporters the chain of Hakim includes. Scholars of
tradition have criticized him. Dar Qutni says he is weak in transmitting
traditions. According to Nisaee, he is not strong in narrating
traditions. Ibn Hatam quoting his father says that he is not a worthy
reporter. He ignores his father. On Bukhari's view, Abu Farwa is muqarib
al-hadith (mediocre in transmitting traditions), but his son, Muhammad
has narrated unknown traditions from him. According to Ajuri as quoted
by Abu Dawood, Abu Farwa Jazri was not a valuable reporter. Neitherwas
his son. According to Tirmidhi, his traditions are not reliable and he
is weak in narrating tradition. Based on Ibn Hajar's view, he is not
strong in terms of narrating tractions.[^40] Dahabi has touched his life
in*al-Mughni fi al-Du'afa* .[^41]

### Kawthar bin Hakim

###

He is another reporter his chain includes. In*al-Du'afa wa al-Matrukin*
, Bukhari says that his traditions are unknown. Nisaee also says in the
same book that his traditions are rejected. Abu Dar'a, commenting on him
says that he is weak. According to Ibn Mu'aeen he is not an important
narrator. In Ahmad's point of view, his traditions are false whereas in
Dar al-Qutni's opinion his traditions are rejected. In*al-Mughni,
Dahabi* Dahabi says that the scholars of tradition have abandoned his
traditions which are strange.[^42]

Thus it is plain that those who considered his traditions not only weak
but also fake and fabricated were right.[^43]


