Part 1: Finality of Prophethood
===============================

Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s): Islam or Disbelief
----------------------------------------

Prophets Ibrahim (a.s.) and Yaqoub (a.s.) advised their sons thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِيَّ إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَىٰ لَكُمُ الدِّينَ فَلَا تَمُوتُنَّ
إِلَّا وَأَنْتُمْ مُسْلِمُونَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O my sons! Surely Allah has chosen for you (this) faith, therefore
die not unless you are Muslims."*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah, 2:132)***

In another verse, Allah the Almighty addresses the believers,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ تُقَاتِهِ وَلَا
تَمُوتُنَّ إِلَّا وَأَنْتُمْ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah with care
which is due to Him, and do not die unless you are Muslims.”***
***(Surah Aale Imran, 3:102)***

In another verse, He notifies:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ
يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ اللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ
وَنَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَّخِذُوا بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ
سَبِيلًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ حَقًّا ۚ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لِلْكَافِرِينَ
عَذَابًا مُهِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَلَمْ يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ
أَحَدٍ مِنْهُمْ أُولَٰئِكَ سَوْفَ يُؤْتِيهِمْ أُجُورَهُمْ ۗ وَكَانَ
اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers and (those
who) desire to make a distinction between Allah and His messengers and
say: We believe in some and disbelieve in others, and desire to take a
course between (this and) that. These it is that are truly unbelievers,
and We have prepared for the unbelievers a disgraceful chastisement. And
those who believe in Allah and His messengers and do not make a
distinction between any of them-- Allah will grant them their rewards;
and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful”.*** ***(Surah Nisaa, 4:150-152)***

In yet another verse, Allah the Almighty gives tidings,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ رَبِّهِ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
ۚ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ لَا
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْ رُسُلِهِ ۚ وَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا
وَأَطَعْنَا ۖ غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***"The Apostle believes in what has been revealed to him from his
Lord, and (so do) the believers; they all believe in Allah and His
angels and His books and His Apostles; We make no difference between any
of His Apostles and they say: We hear and obey, our Lord! Thy
forgiveness (do we crave), and to Thee is the eventual course."***
***(Surah Baqarah, 2: 285)***

On paying attention to the above verses, it becomes amply clear that to
accept Allah and whatever He has revealed, and to obey Him, is belief.
On the flip side, refuting anything revealed by Him is disbelief and for
the unbelievers, Allah the Almighty has prepared a painful chastisement.

True Islam
----------

We should strive to ensure that our lives end on Islam (i.e. we die as
Muslims). For this, it is essential that we must subscribe to all that
Allah the Almighty has revealed and the Messenger of Allah (S) has
conveyed.

It is easy to believe in something. Anybody can believe in anything. But
only that creed can guarantee salvation, which has been endorsed by
those whom Allah has chosen as witnesses over this nation. Allah the
Almighty has appointed the Messenger of Allah (S) and the infallible
Imams (a.s.) as witnesses over this nation. On the Day of Judgment, only
those, whose belief and creed has been verified by these holy personas
(a.s.), will gain deliverance.

True Beliefs
------------

Sayyed Abdul Azeem Ibn Abdullah al-Hasani (r.a.) was a highly revered
personality from the progeny of Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.), whose
resplendent shrine is in Rayy, a suburb of present day Tehran, Iran. The
reward of visiting his shrine is as much as that of going to the holy
shrine of Imam Husayn (a.s.). He enjoyed an extremely great position and
had attained a high level of perfection in knowledge and virtues.

He is the pride of the family of Prophethood and Imamat. Fountains of
guidance have gushed out from his clan. But concerning truth and
correctness of his belief, he does not rely on his knowledge and
pre-eminence. Rather, he goes to the Imam of his time, Imam ‘Ali Naqi
(a.s.), presents his beliefs to him (a.s.) for verification and deems
him (a.s.) to be a witness over his creed. Come, let us hear it from the
source himself.

**''I went to the presence of my blessed master, Imam ‘Ali Naqi (a.s.).
On seeing me, he (a.s.) remarked, 'Welcome, O Abul Qasim! You are our
true friend.' I requested, 'O son of Allah's Messenger! I want to
present my beliefs and creed before you. If you declare these beliefs to
be correct and are satisfied with them, I will remain steadfast on them
and meet the Lord with them.' He (a.s.) ordered, 'Go ahead, and explain
them."**

I declared, 'I believe that

### Tawhid (Divine Monotheism)

Allah, the High and the Almighty, is only One. None is like Him. He is
between the two limits, the limit of denial and the limit of immanence
(similarity). He is neither body nor form nor accident nor essence.

Rather, He is the Creator of bodies, the Maker of forms, the Originator
of accidents and essences. He is the Lord of everything and their
Master. He is their Originator and He is the One to grant them existence
from non-existence.

### Prophethood

I deem Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (S) to be the slave of Allah, His
Messenger and His last Prophet. There will be no prophet after him till
the Day of Judgment. His Shariah is the last Shariah and there will be
no other Shariah till the Day of Resurrection.

### Imamat

I believe that after Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (S), the Imam, the Caliph,
and the one in authority (Wali al-‘Amr) is Amir’ul-Mu’minin ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.), followed by his two sons, Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.) and
Imam Husayn (a.s.), the Chief of the Martyrs. Thereafter, Imam ‘Ali Ibn
Husayn (Zain ul-‘Abideen) (a.s.), Imam Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali (al-Baqir)
(a.s.), Imam Ja'far Ibn Muhammad (as-Sadiq) (a.s.), Imam Musa Ibn Ja'far
(Kadhim), Imam ‘Ali Ibn Musa (ar-Ridha’) (a.s.), Imam Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali
(Taqi) (a.s.), and after him, you, O master!

### Mahdawiyyah

{On hearing this} Imam (a.s.) remarked, 'After me, my son Hasan
(al-‘Askari) (a.s.), followed by his successor. What will be the
condition of the people concerning his successor?'

I asked, 'Master! What will be this condition and what will happen?'

He (a.s.) informed, 'He will not be seen. It will not be permitted to
remember him by his name till he reappears and fills the earth with
justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and tyranny.'

### Tawalla and Tabarra

**Tawalla (Loving the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)) and Tabarra (Expressing Disgust
Against their Enemies)**

I said, 'Master! I acknowledge their Imamat and believe that their
friend is Allah's friend and their enemy is Allah's enemy. Their
obedience is tantamount to obeying Allah and disobeying them is defying
Allah.

### Day of Judgment

I believe that the ascension (Me'raaj) is truth, questioning in the
grave is truth, paradise is truth, hell is truth, the bridge (Seraat) is
truth and the weighing scale (Meezaan) is truth. Certainly, the Day of
Judgment is bound to arrive and there is no doubt or reservation about
its advent. And most surely, Allah, the Powerful, will raise the dead
from their graves.

Branches of Religion
--------------------

I subscribe to the creed that after Imamat and Mastership of the Ahle
Bait (a.s.), the following obligations exist: Prayers, Fasting, Hajj,
Struggling in Allah's way, Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil.'

After hearing all these, Imam Ali Naqi (a. s.) exclaimed,

**"O Abul Qasim! Surely this is the very religion that Allah has chosen
for His servants. Be steadfast on it. May Allah keep you committed on
this in this world as well as the Hereafter!"**[^1]

### Another Chain

There is a very important ziyaarat of Imam al-Zamaana (a.t.f.s.) called
Ziyaarat al-Aale Yaaseen. Renowned traditionalist Shaikh Abbas Qummi
(r.a.) has mentioned it as the very first ziyaarat of Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) in his celebrated work, 'Mafaateeh al-Jenaan'. It is highly
recommended to recite this ziyaarat on Mondays and Fridays. These
beliefs have been stated in this ziyaarat as well and Imam al-Zamaana
(a.t.f.s.) himself is made as a witness over these beliefs.

**"Then you be a witness on what I have made you as a witness."**

Belief, Disbelief and Deviation
-------------------------------

The lowest grade of belief: Amir’ul-Mu’minin ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)
states,

**"The bare minimum by which a person becomes a believer is that when
Allah introduces Himself, he should submit himself completely and
absolutely before His commands.** **And when He grants him the
recognition of His Prophet (S), he must obey him (S). And when He
introduces His Proof and His Witness on His earth to him, he should
acknowledge him and obey him (a.s.)."**

**On this Sulaym asked Amir’ul-Mu’minin (a.s.), "Even if he remains
unaware of other realities?"**

**He (a.s.) replied, "Yes. This will apply till he continues to obey
what has been made obligatory on him and refrains from what has been
prohibited."**[^2]

The lowest grade of disbelief: In the same tradition, Amir’ul-Mu’minin
(a.s.) proceeds to explain the minimum thing that makes a person an
unbeliever.

**"The minimum that makes a person an unbeliever is that he considers
Allah's command as prohibition and that Allah has determined for him a
religion which he is following, and he thinks that he is worshipping as
per the dictates of Allah, although the fact is that he is venerating
the Devil."**

### The lowest grade of deviation

**"And the minimum level of deviation is that man does not recognize
Allah's proof, His** **witness upon the creatures, whose obedience has
been ordered by Allah and whose leadership and mastership is
compulsory."**[^3]

### Please Note

Man is either a believer or an unbeliever or deviated. In this
tradition, Amir’ul-Mu’minin (a.s.) has provided the standards for all
three. Belief is that man recognizes Allah, the Messenger of Allah (S)
and the Imam of his time. Along with this recognition, he also worships
Allah and obeys His Messenger and the Imam.

Disbelief is that man denies all that has been revealed or acknowledges
that which Allah has not revealed. He accepts them as his Prophet and
Imam whom Allah has not appointed. Deviation is that he denies the
Imamat and mastership of those whom Allah has deemed to be His Proofs on
the earth and made them as His Witnesses on the people.

To believe in the Messenger of Allah (S) and his recognition implies
that we recognize him (S) as Allah has introduced him (S). Moreover, we
should believe that he (S) enjoys all those positions and stations that
Allah has determined for him (S). It is evident and everybody is aware
of the fact that the Messenger of Allah (S) is the chief of all
messengers and prophets (a.s.). He is the last of all His messengers and
prophets (a.s.). Messengership and Prophethood have ended with him (S).

Now, till the Day of Judgment, no messenger or prophet will arrive. His
shariah is the last heavenly shariah and his book, the Holy Quran, is
the last divine and heavenly book. Islam is the last and most perfect of
all religions. Things that have been made permissible by it shall remain
so till the Day of Judgment and articles that have been prohibited by it
shall remain so till the Day of Judgment.

To believe in Allah's Proofs connotes that we believe only in the
leadership, mastership and caliphate of those appointed by Allah; whose
following is the guarantee for salvation, and whose love and obedience
are deemed to be the keys of paradise. The Messenger of Allah (S) has
fixed their number to be twelve and prophesied,

 **"After me, till the Day of Judgment, the number of my successors will
be twelve. All of them will be from Quraish. The first of them will be
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and the last and twelfth will be the son of
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), the Hujjah, the Mahdi. Allah will grant him a
long life and keep him in occultation. During his concealment, people
will benefit from his existence like they draw advantage from the sun
when it hides behind the clouds."**[^4]

### Our Prophet is the Last Prophet

From the above, we can easily deduce that the Messenger of Allah (S) is
the seal of all of His Messengers and Prophets (a.s.), Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) is the last Imam, the Majestic Quran is the last book and
Islam is the last religion.

But from times ancient, anti-Islamic forces, imperialist powers and
Zionist conspirators have tried their best to create obstacles in these
universally accepted and firmer than mountain beliefs of the Muslims,
and to deviate them from the right path. Therefore, there were a few
from the community, willing to sell their conscience and negligent of
realities, who claimed the elevated station of Mahdawiyyah.

Worse are their followers, who throw their leaders into further depths
by becoming their ardent fans, to the extent that they (the claimants)
seriously start considering themselves as a Prophet or an Imam.
Meanwhile, the Holy Quran has declared in no uncertain terms,

***"And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah, or
says; it has been revealed to me; while nothing has been revealed to
him, and he who says: I can reveal the like of what Allah has revealed
and if you had seen when the agonies of death and the angels shall
spread forth their hands: Give up your souls: today shall you be
recompensed wit h an ignominious chastisement because you spoke against
Allah other than the truth and (because) you showed pride against His
communications. "*** ***(Surah An'aam, 6:93)***

Similarly, in another verse, it warns,

***"…who, then is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah
that he should lead astray men without knowledge? Surely Allah does not
guide the unjust people."*** **(*****Surah An'aam, 6:144)***

False Claimants
---------------

Besides these clear statements, Allah the Almighty has made such
fantastic arrangements, which expose these false claimants and show
their true colours. They forgot that they as well as their followers
are/were believers of the Messenger of Allah (S) and the Holy Quran.
When Allah the Almighty declares our Prophet (S) to be the last of all
Prophets and the Holy Quran to the final of all revelations, then where
does the question of someone else's Prophethood arise?

And if they don't believe in our Prophet (S) and do not regard the Holy
Quran as their book, the fact stands that till date Allah the Almighty
has not sent a Prophet (S) or a Messenger, who has not verified the
previous prophets and accepted their books. Hence, if these false
claimants accept the prophethood of our Prophet (S) and acknowledge the
truth of the Majestic Quran, then the Book of Allah as well as the
Prophetic traditions declare very clearly that Muhammad (S) is the last
messenger and Islam is the final religion.

Therefore, the question of another prophethood is completely ruled out
and when the possibility of another prophethood is refuted, the
discussion of another religion is rejected at the very outset.[^5]

And if these false claimants do not accept the prophethood of the
Messenger of Allah (S), then such a person can never claim to be a
divine prophet, who does not verify the prophethood of the previous
prophets and their books. Hence, these false claimants cannot prove
their claim in any manner whatsoever.

How meaningful and consequential are the following verses of the Noble
Quran!

***"And when Allah made a covenant through the Prophets: Certainly what
I have given you of Book and wisdom- then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
assist him. He said: Do you affirm and accept My pact in this matter?
They said: We do affirm. He said: Then bear witness, and I too am of the
bearers of witness with you.***

***Whoever therefore turns back after this, these it is that are the
transgressors.***

***Is it then other than Allah’s religion that they seek (to follow),
while to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly
or unwillingly, and to Him shall they be returned.***

***Say: We believe in Allah and what has been revealed to us, and what
was reveled to Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq and Yaqoub and the tribes,
and what was given to Musa and Isa and to the prophets from their Lord;
we do not make any distinction between any of them, and to Him do we
submit.***

***And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him, and in the hereafter he shall be one of the
losers.*** ***" (Surah Aale Imraan, 3:80-84)***

Seal of the Prophets
--------------------

The aforementioned verses unmistakably declare that it is compulsory and
obligatory to believe in all the previous prophets, messengers, and the
books revealed on them. Moreover, Allah will not accept any religion
other than Islam. Apart from the above, we present hereunder three
verses from the Holy Quran and one tradition that plainly announce our
Prophet to be the last Prophet and Islam to be the final divine
religion..

1.***"Muhammad is not the father of any of your men but he is the
Messenger of Allah and the seal of the Prophets. And Allah is the Knower
of all things."*** ***(Surah Ahzaab, 33:40)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَا أَحَدٍ مِنْ رِجَالِكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ ۗ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
عَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

This verse evidently announces of the finality of the Holy Prophet’s
(s.a.w.a) prophethood.

2. ***"Say: O people! Surely I am the Apostle of Allah to you all…***
***" (Surah A'raaf, 7:158)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

In the above verse, the terms, 'O people!' and 'to you all' explain that
the Messenger of Allah (S) is not confined to a particular era or to a
special group or generation of people. Rather, his messengership and
prophethood is universal and forever.

3. ***"He is the one Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion
of truth, that He might cause it to dominate over all religions, though
the polytheists may be averse."*** ***(Surah Tawbah, 9:33)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Noticeably, domination and overpowering imply that this religion will
continue to survive till the day of resurrection. Had Allah the Almighty
revealed any religion other than Islam and raised any other Prophet,
certainly this religion and Prophet would have abrogated Islam just as
Islam had abrogated the laws of the previous prophets.

In this case, Islam should not gain clear victory and domination over
other religions. But when Allah the Almighty is clearly declaring that
We have raised Our Messenger with Islam to grant it victory and
domination over all religions and sects, then such triumph can be
achieved only when Islam is the last heavenly religion and no other
religion ensues. This, undoubtedly, is the fact that Allah has not sent
any other shariah or religion or sect after Islam.

4. The following tradition is present in most of the authentic books of
the Shias as well as the Sunnis. Addressing Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.), the Messenger of Allah (S) declared,

**انت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى الا انه لا نبي بعدي**

**"You are unto me as Haroon was to Musa except for the fact that there
is no prophet after me."**

After these irrefutable and undeniable proofs, the falsity of all
claimants of prophethood after the Messenger of Allah (S) stands
exposed, whether he is the Punjabi of undivided India, Ghulam Ahmad
Qaadiyaani, or the Iranian, ‘Ali Mohammad Shirazi, known as Baab.

Interestingly, the teachings and ethics, which they claim to be their
creation, are all plagiarized from the Holy Quran and traditions, and
not a single of these belong to them. And whatever actually belongs to
these (impostors) is replete with contradictions. These inconsistencies
and paradoxes are sufficient proofs that they had nothing to do with
Allah.

Before claiming divinity, they had averred Mahdawiyyah. The sequence of
events was as follows: Initially, they claimed to be the representative
and door (Baab) of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), thereafter, they claimed to be
the Mahdi, then a Prophet and finally, God. Since there is no position
beyond divinity and godhood, they stopped at it. Incongruities in these
claims are sufficient evidences to expose these opportunistic
claimants.[^6] ()

Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)-The Last Imam
-----------------------------------

We have already mentioned that after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.),
the number of his successors and the leaders of this nation is twelve.
The first of them is Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and the last is Imam
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), who is still alive and in occultation on Allah's
command.

On analyzing these false claimants, the following consequences come to
light:

1) The presence of false claimants proves the existence of the true
claimant to this esteemed position. The counterfeit of only those
currencies are available, which are actually in circulation. Hence, one
can never find a 75 paise coin or a 25 rupee counterfeit note in the
market.

2) An important peculiarity of the real Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is that he
will spread Islam to the nooks and corners of the world. The Islamic
slogan 'There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah" will echo throughout the universe. All these bogus charlatans
have departed from this world but failed in making Islam as the dominant
religion of the universe. On the contrary, they became the cause of
further dissension and disputes among the Muslims.

3) Yet another significant characteristic of the real Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) is that his Imamat and leadership will continue till the Day
of Judgment. Immediately after his martyrdom, Resurrection will occur.
These phony claimants have already left this world, causing confusion
and chaos with all their deviations and no sign of Resurrection. Their
demise without the occurrence of Resurrection is another proof of their
falsity.

4) Yet another very important feature of Imam Mahdi's (a.t.f.s.)
leadership, which has been highlighted in all books concerning him, is
that he will fill the earth with justice, fairness and equity as it
would be fraught with injustice, tyranny and oppression. These sham
impostors neither reduced the oppression and tyranny of the world nor
did they fill it with justice and fairness. The converse was the
reality. They became the cause of intense augmentation and increase in
tyranny and oppression. This is another evidence of their deception and
fallacy.

5) Allah the Almighty has never appointed any fallible and sinning
person as a Prophet or an Imam. Human intellect supports the idea that a
person who is responsible for the guidance of the entire humanity and is
the guarantor of their salvation has to be infallible (ma'soom). While,
we observe that among all these fake claimants, none were infallible. A
brief look at their lives will reveal the filth and contamination in
which they existed.

6) The true representatives of Allah always raised their voice against
injustice and oppression. Consequently, the tyrants and their despotic
reigns always opposed them and afflicted them with all kinds of tortures
and troubles. On the other hand, these sham impostors assisted the
oppressors in their mischievous designs and considered rebellion against
the tyrants as prohibited. Obviously, they had to support these
oppressors for otherwise, from where would they receive support and
assistance for their devious aims?

This is precisely the reason that even today their head offices are
based in imperialist and colonial capitals. For instance, while intense
war rages on in Palestine, Bahaism continues to have its headquarters in
Israel. Similarly, Qaadiyanism has its main centers in Britain and the
United States. Obviously, children feel secure in the lap of their
parents and are nourished in better there.[^7]

For details, refer to books on Finality of Prophethood and on Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.). Moreover, reliable and authentic books have been penned in
refutation of these self-idolizing impostors and their sham religions.

These few lines have been jotted down to caution all from being deceived
by every false claimant and glib talker, and to preserve our religion
and belief.

The Messenger of Allah, Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (S) is the last Prophet,
his Shariat is the last Shariat and the Majestic Quran is a divine book.
After him (S), there is neither any prophet nor book nor religion. Even
today, he (S) is a Prophet and hence, everyday we proclaim in our azaan
and our prayers, 'I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah
(S)'. Not that he 'was' the Messenger of Allah, but he 'is' the
Messenger of Allah.

Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the twelfth and last of the chain of leadership
and guidance. He is alive and in occultation on divine command. Further
information concerning Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will be provided for in the
coming pages, Inshallah.

Blessings of Allah be on you, O Master of Age, help us!

The belief in the Imamat, awating and reappearance of Hazrat Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) is a mirror, which reflects the peak and perfection of true
Islam. In it lies the cure of oppressed mankind and the remedy for
tyrannized humanity.

In which one can observe justice, equity, brotherhood and fraternity,
instead of injustice, oppression and tyranny. In which one sees the
manifestation of pure monotheism (Tawhid) and sincere worship instead of
polytheism and unbelief. In which man, free from all sorts of dangers,
hazards and insecurities, is worshipping the One God.

It is the reappearance of the Imam who will raise the standard of a
divine government. Who will destroy and uproot the oppressors and raise
the oppressed slaves to unprecedented glories. Whose advent will be a
living portrait of perfection of religion, completion of bounties and
satisfaction of the Lord.

[^1]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, p. 379-380

[^2]: Al-Kaafi, vol. 2, p. 414, Tr. No. 1

[^3]: Al-Kaafi, vol. 2, p. 415

[^4]: Saheeh al-Muslim, vol.2, p. 19; Mataaleb al-So'l, vol. 2, p. 79;
Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, p. 280; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 93

[^5]: Tableegh al-Resaalat, vol. 2, p. 144; Ayyaam al-Sulh, p. 146

[^6]: Talkhis al-Tarikh al-Nabeel, p. 317 by Haikaluddin

[^7]: Taryaaq al-Quloob, p. 15


