Part 2: Significance and Obligations
====================================

1) The Creed of Imamate
-----------------------

The belief of Imamate is that important pillar of Islamic belief,
without which the religious structure remains incomplete. The acceptance
of all actions depends on the belief in Imamate. When the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) commenced his mission with Daawat al-Zul Asheerah, along with
the call for Divine Monotheism, proclamation of his own messengership,
he (S) also announced the mastership and wilayat of Amir’ul-Mu’minin
(a.s.).

He invited one and all for accepting this invitation. From then onwards,
the Holy Prophet (S) kept informing and announcing the people about
Imamate and Caliphate. Finally, on 18th Zilhajj, 10 A.H., in the vast
plain of Ghadir al-Khumm, in front of a crowd of 1,24,000 pilgrims, he
(S) not only announced the successorship and Imamate of Amir’ul-Mu’minin
(a.s.) in clear terms, but, even ordered the people to pay allegiance to
‘Ali (a.s.). The Muslims duly obliged. Later, in the destruction of
Harith Ibn No'man, people also saw the fate of him who denies ‘Ali's
mastership.

Along with the announcement of the mastership of ‘Ali (a.s.), the Holy
Prophet (S) also declared the Imamate and mastership of his eleven
descendants. On various occasions, and in numerous ways, he made it
clear that after him, till the Day of Judgement, the number of his
successors and caliphs shall remain only twelve. The first of them will
be ‘Ali (a.s.) and the last, Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

In a number of traditions, he has also mentioned the names, titles,
agnomens, and characteristics of these twelve successors. Through his
companion, Jaabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari, he sent salutations to the fifth
among the Imams, Imam Muhammad al-Baqer (a.s.). All these are practical
testimonies of the truthfulness of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a).

The series of Imamate and guidance continues today and will go on till
the dawn of resurrection. The Messenger of Allah (S) has underlined the
significance of Imam al-Asr's (a.s.) recognition through the famous
tradition,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"من مات ولم يعرف امام زمانه مات ميتة جاهلية."
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"One who dies without knowing the Imam of his time, dies the death of
ignorance (i.e. unbelief).**

As is evident, the unbelievers will not attain salvation. They will go
to hell and shall abide in it forever. Anybody who desires to save
himself from the perennial chastisement of hell and gain the everlasting
bounties of paradise, then it is for him to gain the recognition of the
Imam of his time.

On the flip side, one who does not recognize the Imam of his time, his
religion is not perfect, his bounties are not complete and Allah the
Almighty is not satisfied with him.

### Today, who is our Imam?

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s) has already mentioned that the chain of
Imamate will continue after him till the Day of Judgement. Therefore, it
is necessary that there should be somebody from that series who has been
divinely ordained. Who is he? In the light of reliable and authentic
traditions (narrated by Shias as well as Sunnis), the Imam of our time,
is the son of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), Hazrat Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

2) The Importance in the Belief of Mahdawiyyah
----------------------------------------------

If somebody believes and is certain about the Commencement of
Prophethood of all the previous Prophets and Messengers (peace be on
them) but denies the Messengership of the last Prophet, Hazrat Muhammad
Mustafa (S), he is an unbeliever and his salvation, impossible.

Similarly, if someone believes in the Imamate of all the infallible
Imams (a.s.) but refuses to accept the Imamate of the last Imam, Imam
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), he is not a believer and his deliverance,
unattainable. Renowned Sunni scholars like Shaykh al-Islam Hamveeni, in
his book "Fara aedus Simt ain" and Shaykh Su layman Qundoozi in his
famous work "Yanaabee' al-Mawaddah" have recorded that the Holy Prophet
(S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"من انكر خروج المهدي فقد كفر."
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"One who denies the reappearance of Mahdi, is an unbeliever".**

### Imam's Life at a Glance

Name : M H M D

Title : Mahdi, Baqiyyatullah, Imam al-Zaman, Vali al-Asr, Qaem, etc.

Agnomen : Abul Qasim, Aba Saaleh al-Mahdi

Father : The Eleventh Imam, Hasan al-Askari (a.s.)

Mother : Narjis Khatoon , also called as Sosan.

Birthday : 15th Sha'baan, 255 A.H.

Birthplace : In the house of Imam Askari (a.s.) in the Iraqi city of
Saamarra

Commencement : 8th Rabi-al-Awwal, 260 A.H.

Age : Still alive. Shall reappear on the command of Allah the Almighty

3) Occultation (Ghaibat)
------------------------

One can find in reliable traditions narrated on the authority of the
Holy Prophet (S) that when Mahdi reappears, oppression and tyranny will
be eradicated from the face of earth, and unjust and tyrannical rulers
will be uprooted. Therefore, every oppressive king, particularly the
contemporaries of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), strove to prevent the
birth of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) and his advent in this world.

Also, as the Messenger of Allah (S) had prophesied that the number of
Imams will be twelve, and that Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) will be the
eleventh Imam, (and Mahdi the twelfth), they were sure that Mahdi will
be born in his house only. Consequently, tight security and strict
surveillance was imposed.

But just as Firaon had failed in his machinations to prevent the birth
of Hazrat Musa (a.s.), which ultimately did occur, in the same way,
despite all their efforts, the oppressors could not stop the birth of
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). As there was a great danger to the life of Imam
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), the news of his birth was not announced to all and
sundry. Only those who could be relied upon were informed about this
holy occurrence.

After the martyrdom of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), when the Imamate and
leadership of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) began, the perils to his life
increased. His residence was raided umpteen times by the king's army.
Hence, on divine command, Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) went into
occultation. On the one hand, conditions were threatening and danger
loomed large.

While on the other, the masses had their queries and posers for which
contact with Imam (a.s.) was necessary. Considering this necessity, Imam
(a.s.) appointed four special deputies, through whom contact with Imam
(a.s.) could be possible. These four persons were called as Special
Deputies (Nuawwaab al-Arba' or Naaebeen al-Khaas).

The names of these Special Deputies were as follows (in chronological
order):

1) Usman Ibn Saeed Amri

2) Muhammad Ibn Usman Ibn Saeed Amri

3) Husayn Ibn Rauh Nawbakhti

4) ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Seymouri

The series of special deputyship started from 260 A.H. and terminated in
the year 329 A.H. (i.e. 69 years). This period is called as Minor
Occultation (Ghaibat al-Sughra). The year 329 A.H., with the death of
the fourth deputy, ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Seymouri, marked the end of minor
occultation and the beginning of the Major Occultation (Ghaibat
al-Kubra).

Till Allah the Almighty does not permit Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) to
reappear, the major occultation will continue. Today, we are living in
the era of the major occultation in which, Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has
not appointed any special deputy. But he has also not abandoned us.

For our religious problems and questions, he has appointed jurists
(mujtahideen), bearing all the necessary conditions, as his proof upon
us and has ordered us to refer to them. As per his command, it is
essential that our lives should be in conformity with the edicts of the
living mujtahid.

4) Benefit of Imam al-Zaman's (a.t.f.s.) Existence in Occultation
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Presently, our Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is in occultation. But it does
not mean that he is living in an isolated place, far away from
inhabitation. Occultation means that people are not aware of his place
of abode. Even when they see their Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), they do not
recognize him. Imam Sadeq (a.s.),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يرونه ولا يعرفونه
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"They see him but do not recognize him."**[^1]

But Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) sees the people and recognizes them too. He
himself declares,

**"None of your news is hidden from us. We are not negligent in your
protection nor are we forgetful of your remembrance. Had it not been so,
calamities would have descended upon you and enemies would have
annihilated you."** [^2]

This proves that although Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is hidden from the
eyes of the people, he is aware of their conditions. Now, we can benefit
from his existence just as people draw advantage from the sun when it is
concealed behind the clouds. We can relate all our difficulties to him.

At every step, we can reach out to him through our cries for help. Just
let us give it a try, and feel his hand reach unto us, notwithstanding
the veil of occultation. One can find thousands of such incidents in
reliable books when people have called out to Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
for help and he has come to their rescue.

5) Longevity
------------

Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) was born in 255 A.H. Today the age of Imam
al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) exceeds 1150 years. This is just his present age and
his reappearance is still pending. The years after reappearance have
also been discounted.

Perhaps some minds might pose the query, 'Is it possible for a man to
live so long?'

The answer is a definite yes. Man can certainly attain longevity for the
following reasons:

1) Till date, no limit has been fixed for human age, that after such and
such age, man cannot or should not live.

2) There have been people who have lived even more than the present age
of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), like Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) who propagated for
950 years before the famous deluge and his total age exceeded 2500
years.

3) Hazrat Khizr (a.s.) and Hazrat Ilyas (a.s.) continue to live till
date.

4) Shaitan preceded Hazrat Adam (a.s.) in existence and is still alive.

Imam Zain al-Abedeen (a.s.) says,

**"In our Qaem, is the tradition and sign of** **Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) and
that is his longevity."**[^3]

6) Awaiting (Intezaar)
----------------------

In the major occultation, an important duty is to await the reappearance
of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Imam Sadeq (a.s.) relates from the Holy
Prophet (S),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
افضل اعمال امتي انتظار الفرج
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"The best act of my nation is to await the reappearance."**[^4]

Awaiting is an inner condition that we experience vis-à-vis our beloved.
Our restlessness for the meeting with the beloved is directly
proportionate with the presence of love in our hearts for him. If you
are waiting for a guest, you will prepare yourself for his arrival by
cleaning up the house and providing the necessities of his comfort. You
will inform the people about his arrival and will exhort them to join
you in welcoming him. More than the house, you will prepare your heart
for his comfort, leisure and ease.

If such preparedness and restlessness is found in us, then we are truly
awaiting for the guest. But if I am simply sleeping lazily, without
feeling the need for any preparation and readiness, then such an
awaiting is nothing more than lip service.

Those who are waiting for Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) are restless for his
reappearance. They are preparing for his arrival by improving themselves
and inviting others to change for the better. They are themselves
learning religious laws and injunctions while making others also aware
of their religious obligations. They are restless due to the delay in
the reappearance. The occultation of their beloved Imam al-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) has snatched sleep from their eyes.

Imam Zainul Aabedeen (a.s.) has described the characteristics and
importance of the one who awaits the reappearance thus,

**"O Abu Khalid (Kabuli)! In the period of his occultation, those who
believe in his Imamate, await his reappearance are the best people of
all times. Allah the Almighty has endowed them with intellect,
understanding and cognition to such an extent that occultation (of Imam)
for them is as good as his presence.**

**They are equal (in status) to those who are fighting alongside the
Prophet of Allah (S) with their swords. Certainly, these are the real
believers and our true Shias and they call towards the path of Allah,
openly and secretly."**[^5]

7) Duties and Responsibilities
------------------------------

It is clear now as to how important it is to await for the reappearance
of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and how great is the status and position of
those who await. Also, it is a reality that as the level increases,
responsibilities and duties increase too. Although there are a number of
responsibilities of a believer during the major occultation, we shall
mention a few important ones hereunder, keeping brevity into
consideration.

### a) Recognition of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)

By recognition, historical knowledge and information is not what is
implied. Rather, it means to be aware of those levels, perfection and
authority that has been granted to Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) by Allah the
Almighty.

If we believe in these, then we will be sure that he is definitely
keeping a watch on all our actions, every single one of them. He rules
on each and every particle of this world. The entire universe is subject
to his command. Only then will we refrain from sins and seek refuge and
help from him for all our difficulties.

### b) Improvement in deeds

We cannot see Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) with our sinful eyes but he,
definitely, is observing us . If somebody really believes that he is
constantly being watched by Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), he will keep away
from quite a few sins. Good deeds are the only way to gain proximity and
nearness to Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). And who does not desire to be
nearer to his Imam (a.s.)? He (a.t.f.s.) himself has admonished us,

**"Then each one of you should act in such a way that your deeds bring
you closer to our love, and refrain from all those actions that will
bring you nearer to our wrath and anger."**[^6]

### c) Reformation of the Society

To rectify and improve our society, i.e. our children, brothers,
sisters, relatives, friends, acquaintances, etc. is also our
responsibility. For, it is essential that the ground be prepared for the
reappearance. Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) says,

**"An orphan is he who loses his father. But greater than him is he who
has become distanced from his Imam and does not have access to him. He
is not aware of his responsibilities and obligations.**

**Among our** **Shias, one who is knowledgeable of our** **traditions
and knowledge, should teach this** **Shia who is ignorant and unaware,
and guide him. It is as if he has sheltered and nourished an orphan.
Yes, the one who guides him and teaches him our religious laws, will be
with us in the highest grades of paradise."**[^7]

### d) Supplication (Du’a)

Supplication is a weapon of the believer through which he repels
calamities and encounters difficulties. He attains his desires with its
help. The reappearance of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and his being safe
from all evils and calamities is the heartfelt desire of every believer.
One of the rights that he (a.s.) enjoys upon us is that we should pray
for him, first and foremost, in our supplications and invocations.

Naturally, we always pray for that thing first which enjoys utmost
significance in our eyes. Nobody is greater than Imam al-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) nor is anything more important than his reappearance. It is
necessary that after every namaz, our first supplication be in favour of
Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). We must begin and end our day with the prayers
for the reappearance of our beloved Imam (a.s.).

Although there are a number of invocations for Imam -e -Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
like Du’a al-Nudbah, which should be recited on Fridays, etc. we shall
suffice here with only two important supplications for him.

a) In every Salat, especially in obligatory prayers, we should recite
the following invocation in the Qunoot. This is also called Du’a
al-Faraj.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم كن لوليك الحجة بن الحسن صلواتك عليه وعلى ابائه في هذه الساعه وفي
كل ساعه وليا وحافظاو قائدا وناصرا ودليلا وعينا حتى تسكنه ارضك طوعا
وتمتعه فيها طويلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

b) After Salat al-Subh (morning prayers), we must recite the brief Du’a
al-Ahd. It is a salutation, a covenant and a supplication, all put
together.[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم بلغ مولاي صاحب الزمان صلوات الله عليه عن جميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات
في مشارق الارض ومغاربها وبرها وبحرها وسهلها وجبلها حيهم وميتهم وعن
والدي و ولدي وعني من الصلوات والتحيات زنه عرش الله ومداد كلماته ومنتهى
رضاه وعدد ما احصاه كتابه واحاط به علمه اللهم اني اجدد له في هذا اليوم
وفي كل يوم عهدا وعقدا وبيعه في رقبتي اللهم كما شرفتني بهذا التشريف
وفضلتني بهذه الفضيله وخصصتني بهذه النعمه فصلي على مولاي وسيدي صاحب
الزمان واجعلني من انصاره واشياعه والذابين عنه واجعلني من المستشهدين
بين يديه طائعا غير مكره في الصف الذي نعت اهله في كتابتك فقلت صفا كانهم
بنيان مرصوص على طاعتك وطاعة رسولك واله عليهم السلام اللهم هذه البيعه
له في عنقي الى يوم القيامه
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, convey to the master, the Master of the Time, from all the
believer men and women in the easts of the earth and its west. In its
lands and its seas, in its plains and its mountains, their living and
their dead, and from my parents and my children and from me, from the
blessings and greetings, which are the weight of Allah’s throne and ink
on his words, and whatever His knowledge enumerates and his book
encompasses.

O Allah renew for him my covenant, pledge and allegiance on my neck on
this day and whatever days (of my life) I live.

O Allah, like You honored me with this honor, and gave me this
excellence and bestowed this bounty to me especially, bless my master
and chief, the leader of the time and make me from his helpers and
followers and protectors and make me of those who seek martyrdom in his
presence, with full eagerness, without any hesitation put me in that row
of the army of those whom You have described in Your Book and said: “in
ranks as if they were a firm and compact wall” on Your obedience and the
obedience of Your Messenger and his progeny, peace be on them.

O Allah, indeed, this allegiance is upon my neck till Judgment Day.

### e) Sadaqah

When a person knows and likes somebody from the depth of his heart, he
wishes him well and desires his safety from all evils and calamities. He
prays for his wellbeing and health. He gives sadaqah for his safety and
protection. Praying or giving sadaqah does not mean that the concerned
person is afflicted with calamities. Rather, it is an expression of our
love for him. The more we love him, the more will be our invocations and
sadaqah in his favour.

Today, who is more deserving to be loved and be attached with than the
holy person of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)? Can a believer’s heart love
anybody else more than him? To pray for Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and to
give sadaqah for his safety is an expression of our love for him. In the
ta’qeebaat of the obligatory prayers, it has been emphasized to recite
Ayat al-Kursi for the safety and security of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

### f) Seeking of Desires

Allah the Almighty has appointed the infallible Imams (a.s.) as the
media and doors for approaching Him. Presently, Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
is that door through whom Allah is approached. The Holy Quran says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ بِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And all the good names are for Allah, then*** ***call Him through
them."(Surah A'raaf, 7:180)***

In the interpretation of this verse, traditions say that good names in
the verse implies the infallible Imams (a.s.) and that we should call
Allah through them. (Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 618, H.2)

Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the Door of Allah and His Name. If we plead
to Allah through this all-important medium, our supplications will be
accepted. Besides, it is the sincere desire of every father or every
elder that the youngsters of the family approach him for their needs and
that he fulfills them. Particularly, when he is in a position of power
and authority. The elders feel great joy in fulfilling the needs of the
youngsters.

Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is our father, elder and the master of all
bounties. Today, it is an important duty for us that we present our
difficulties to him for their solution. Unfortunately, we speak of our
problems to everybody but to that Imam who is able to provide its
remedies within no time.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.) says,

"**Whenever you get entangled in some difficulty, then seek refuge in
the presence of Hazrat Hujjat (a.t.f.s.) and invoke him. He will save
you and grant you salvation. He answers the needy. He is the refuge of
anybody who seeks refuge in him."**[^9]

8) Meeting
----------

Today, we are living in the times of the major occultation but it does
not imply that all the doors leading to Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) have
been shunted. Direct visitation is possible only on account of his
grace. Nobody can arrange a meeting with him unilaterally (without
Imam's consent). There have been some extremely fortunate people who had
the honor and grace of a direct meeting with their master, Imam al-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.). Consequently, their problems were solved.

Reliable books have mentioned the incidents of these fortunate ones.
This was regarding apparent, physical visitation. As far as heart to
heart rendezvous is concerned, the possibility always exists for
everybody. The heart is aware of the path to the sought one. For
heartily contact, words are not required. Rather, its beats translate
into the most effective of words. A broken heart narrates a thousand
incidents in a few seconds. In Du’a al-Nudbah, we cry,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بنفسي انت من مغيب لم يخل منا بنفسي انت من نازح مانزح عن
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"May our lives be sacrificed on him who is distanced from the eyes but
the hearts are not devoid of him. He is physically far from us but his
remembrance and memories are not distant from our gatherings."**

9) Time of Reappearance
-----------------------

There is no doubt that one day certainly Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will
reappear from the Holy Ka'bah. A heavenly voice will announce his advent
to one and all. There will not be any place on earth where the voice of
this announcement will not reach. Of course, none knows that when this
reappearance will actually occur. Its knowledge is only and only with
Allah and none else. The holy Prophet (S) says,

**"The reappearance of Mahdi will be like resurrection which will be
very heavy for the heavens as well as for the earth. It will be sudden,
unexpected."**[^10]

We cannot fix the time of reappearance but can advance it with our
incessant and unceasing invocations and supplications. Imam al-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) exhorts,

**"Pray more for the reappearance for in it lies your salvation."**[^11]

10) The Companions of Imam al-Zaman
-----------------------------------

We all desire earnestly and fervently to be included among the
companions of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Every believer aspires to help
the Imam of his time. There is no status or fortune higher than this for
him.

More than nearly fourteen hundred years after his friends achieved
martyrdom in Karbala while defending the Imam of their time, Imam Husayn
(a.s.), Prophets, Messengers, successors, angels, martyrs, witnesses,
the truthful ones, and even the Almighty Allah Himself, continue to send
incessant blessings and salutations on them.

The door of helping and assisting the Imam of the time is not closed. We
too can be among the helpers and supporters of the Imam of our time.
Traditions have talked about the characteristics of Imam al-Zaman's
(a.t.f.s.) helpers.

If these attributes and traits are found in us, then a million thanks to
the Almighty, and we should pray for their betterment and improvement by
the day (both quantitatively as well as qualitatively).

But if these characteristics are not found in us, or if some are found
and others are not, then we should supplicate to Allah the Mighty and
the Wise that He adorns us with these attributes, for the sake of Imam
al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Some of these characteristics and attributes are as
follows:

• They are devout and highly religious individuals;

• Their hearts are overflowing with the love of their Imam al-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.);

• They are nice and decent;

• They are concealed like mines of treasures in the earth;

• In their certitude, they are stronger than steel; if they pass by
mountain, they will render it into pieces;

• They fight only for divine pleasure; any opponent who stands against
them, bites the dust;

• They are not cowed down by criticism and censure.

11) Advent and Government
-------------------------

When Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) arrives, the world will be a completely
different place. Every particle will rejoice at his advent. Hazrat Eesa
(a.s.) will descend from the fourth heaven and perform namaz behind him.
Self-sacrificing, pious, devout, religious and sincere believers will
gather around Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

They will form circles around him, with him sitting right in the middle,
like a moon encircled with stars. He will reappear from Mecca and make
Kufa his capital. The entire world will be under the rule of true Islam
and the standard of Tawhid will be hoisted in the universe.

Polytheism, disbelief, hypocrisy and their like will be uprooted from
the face of the earth. Justice, equity, brotherhood and fraternity will
be the order of the day. Traditions have painted the picture of his
reappearance beautifully. We shall mention a few special characteristics
of his reappearance hereunder:

### Justice and Equity

Numerous traditions contain the following sentence,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يملا الارض قسطا وعدلا بعد ما ملئت ظلما وجور
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be fraught
with injustice and oppression."**[^12]

Today, whatever oppression or injustice we are witnessing in any form
whatsoever, will be totally annihilated. Justice, and sheer justice,
will prevail. The deeply felt prayer of humanity will be actualized with
the reappearance. The efforts of the Prophets (a.s.) and the Messengers
(a.s.) will yield fruits with the establishment of justice.

### Honour For Religion

Religion will be honoured in the government of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).
It will be implemented with all its minute details. The Holy Quran will
dominate the universe. All those religious injunctions that have been
forgotten or distorted will regain their original practical form and
every one will act on them. In the salwaat of Friday, we find,

**"O Allah! Enliven through him those laws of Your religion that have
been destroyed. Grant a fresh lease of life to those sciences of Quran
that have been forgotten. Manifest through him those laws that have been
distorted. Till Your Religion appears in its original and pure form at
his hands."**[^13]

### Unity and Harmony

One of the most serious maladies of our society is maladies of our
society is mutual discord and disharmony. Capabilities are destroyed.
Assets are rendered useless. Respect and honour are grounded to dust.
Houses are divided and families are torn to shreds. All because of a
single ailment - disunity and factionalism. But after the reappearance,
all this will change. Factions will unite on one platform. In Du’a
al-Nudbah, we read,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين جامع الكلمه على التقوى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"Where is the one who will gather the people on piety and devotion?"**

### Freshness and Greenness

Traditions have prophesied that when Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) reappears,
the earth will throw up all its treasures. It will be green and vibrant.
There won't remain any piece of land that will be dry and barren. The
earth will gain new life and there will be vitality and vigour
everywhere. Grains and fruits will be in immeasurable abundance. In one
ziyarat, we salute Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) with the following sentence,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام عليك ياربيع الانام ونضرة الايام
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"Peace be on you, O spring of creation and brightness of days."**

### e) Perfection of Intellect

Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will not only enliven the earth and extricate
its hidden treasures but he will infuse new life into hearts, restore
capabilities and perfect intellects. Traditions have prophesied,

**"When Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) reappears, he will gently stroke the
heads of the people by which their intellects will become complete and
perfect**."[^14]

Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), in the first sermon of Nahjul
Balagha, while explaining the aim of sending the Prophets and Messengers
(a.s.), states,

**".. .that they may extricate the hidden treasures of the
intellects..."**

Therefore, the advent of Imam al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will mark the
realization of the aim of sending of divine emissaries (a.s.). Moreover,
he will also avenge the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.). All those who
killed him, oppressed him or were satisfied at these oppressions will be
the targets of his sword.

12) A Final Request
-------------------

Come, let all of us make a covenant that we shall not attach ourselves
to any other door except that of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). (They are the
strong rope of Allah (Hablallah), without fastening unto them, salvation
is impossible). We shall pray for the safety and security of Imam
al-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). We will always remember him and narrate our
difficulties to him. We shall plead to him from the depth of our hearts
and seek cure from him for our ailments. O Master! We are ill, weak,
poor of memory, backward, harassed, in debts, etc. Master! Your Shia and
in such a bad state!

We know that our deeds are presented to you due to which your heart
bleeds. You are unhappy and unsatisfied with our actions. We are very,
very sinful. We confess to all these but Master! If unworthy children
will not find refuge in the house of their father, where will they go?
Where shall the subjects go but to the court of the king? If sinners
will not go to their Imam, whose door will they knock? Master! We are
disgraced, ignorant and disobedient. But we do not have anybody besides
you. You are our refuge, our solace, our shelter. We shed tears for your
ancestors and seek apologies from you.

We shall end our brief discussion with the following statement:

The brothers of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) were the ones who had thrown him in
the well and sold him. Whatever difficulties Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) had to
face was on account of his brothers. Yet, notwithstanding all these
atrocities and crimes which they had committed against their own
brother, when they came to Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.), who by then had become
the King of Egypt, they said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الْعَزِيزُ مَسَّنَا وَأَهْلَنَا الضُّرُّ وَجِئْنَا
بِبِضَاعَةٍ مُزْجَاةٍ فَأَوْفِ لَنَا الْكَيْلَ وَتَصَدَّقْ عَلَيْنَا ۖ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَجْزِي الْمُتَصَدِّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O King! Calamity has afflicted us and our families. We have come
with a handful of provisions. But you repay us in full measure and be
charitable towards us. Surely Allah loves the charitable."*** ***(Surah
Yusuf, 12: 88)***

Accepting their brief apology, Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) excused them.

We repeat the same apology in your presence, O Yusuf al-Zahra, Hazrat
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). O Master! Difficulties and calamities have
surrounded us. We have come to you with very few good actions. But
please have mercy on us and grant us in full measure.....

[^1]: Muntakhab al-Asar, Part 2, Ch. 38, p. 301

[^2]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, Ch. 31

[^3]: Kamaal al-deen, vol. 2, p. 524

[^4]: Kamaal al-deen, vol. 2, p. 644

[^5]: Kamaal al-deen, Ch. 31, H. 2

[^6]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, p. 181

[^7]: Tafseer Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), p. 114, 115

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, volume 99, page110 (Arabic version), Mikyalul
Makarim, vol.2.

[^9]: An-Najm al- Saaqib, p. 787

[^10]: Muntakhab al-Asar, Part 1, Ch. 1, p. 30

[^11]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, p. 181

[^12]: Muntakhab al-Asar, Part 6, Ch. 1, p. 421

[^13]: Mafaateeh al-Jinaan, A'maal for Friday

[^14]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 336


