Chapter IV: On the Advantages of Silence
========================================

#### Story 1

####

I said to a friend that I have chosen rather to be silent than to speak
because on most occasions good and bad words are scattered concurrently
but enemies perceive only the latter. He replied: 'That enemy is the
greatest who does not see any good.'

The brother of enmity passes not near a good man

Except to consider him as a most wicked liar.

Virtue is to the eyes of enmity the greatest fault.

Sa'di is a rose but to the eye of enemies a thorn.

The world illumining sun and fountain of light

Look ugly to the eye of the mole.

#### Story 2

####

A merchant, having suffered loss of a thousand dinars, enjoined his son
not to reveal it to anyone. The boy said: 'It is thy order and I shall
not tell it but thou must inform me of the utility of this proceeding
and of the propriety of concealment.' He replied: 'For fear the
misfortune would be double; namely, the loss of the money and, secondly,
the joy of neighbours at our loss.'

Reveal not thy grief to enemies

Because they will say 'La haul' but rejoice.

#### Story 3

####

An intelligent youth possessed an abundant share of accomplishments and
discreet behaviour so that he was allowed to sit in assemblies of
learned men but he refrained from conversing with them. His father once
asked him why he did not likewise speak on subjects he was acquainted
with. He replied: 'I fear I may be asked what I do not know and be put
to shame.'

Hast thou heard how a Sufi drove

A few nails under his sandals

And an officer taking him by the sleeve

Said to him: 'Come and shoe my horse.'

For what thou hast not said no one will trouble thee

But when thou hast spoken bring the proof.

#### Story 4

####

A scholar of note had a controversy with an unbeliever but, being unable
to cope with him in argument, shook his head and retired. Someone asked
him how it came to pass that, with all his eloquence and learning, he
had been unable vanquish an irreligious man. He replied: 'My learning is
in the Quran, in tradition and in the sayings of sheikhs, which he
neither believes in nor listens to. Then of what use is it to me to hear
him blaspheming?'

To him of whom thou canst not rid thyself by the Quran and tradition

The best reply is if thou dost not reply anything.

#### Story 5

####

Galenus saw a fool hanging on with his hands to the collar of a learned
man and insulting him, whereon he said: 'If he were learned he would not
have come to this pass with an ignorant man.'

Two wise men do not contend and quarrel

Nor does a scholar fight with a contemptible fellow.

If an ignorant man in his rudeness speaks harshly

An intelligent man tenderly reconciles his heart.

Two pious men keep a hair between them untorn

And so does a mild with a headstrong man.

If however both sides are fools

If there be a chain they will snap it.

An ill-humoured man insulted someone.

He bore it and replied: 'O man of happy issue,

I am worse than thou canst say that I am

Because I know thou art not aware of my faults as I am.

#### Story 6

####

Subhan Vail is considered to have had no equal in rhetorics because he
had addressed an assembly during a year and had not repeated the same
word but, when the same meaning happened to occur, he expressed it in
another manner and this is one of the accomplishments of courtiers and
princes.

A word if heart-binding and sweet

Is worthy of belief and of approbation.

When thou hast once said it do not utter it again

Because sweets, once partaken of, suffice.

#### Story 7

####

I heard a philosopher say that no one has ever made a confession of his
own folly except he who begins speaking, whilst another has not yet
finished his talk.

Words have a head, O shrewd man, and a tail.

Do not insert thy words between words of others.

The possessor of deliberation, intelligence and shrewdness

Does not say a word till he sees silence.

#### Story 8

####

Several officials of Sultan Mahmud asked Hasan Muimandi one day what the
sultan had told him about a certain affair. He replied: 'You must
yourselves have heard it.' They rejoined: 'What he says to thee he does
not think proper to communicate to the like of us.' He answered:
'Because he trusts that I shall not reveal it. Then why do you ask me to
do so?'

A knowing man will not utter every word which occurs to him.

It is not proper to endanger one's head for the king's secret.

#### Story 9

####

I was hesitating in the conclusion of a bargain for the purchase of a
house when a Jew said: 'Buy it for I am one of the landholders of this
ward. Ask me for a description of the house as it is and it has no
defect.' I replied: 'Except that thou art the neighbour of it.'

A house which has a neighbour like thee

Is worth ten dirhems of a deficient standard

But the hope must be entertained

That after thy death it will be worth a thousand.

#### Story 10

####

A poet went to an amir of robbers and recited a panegyric but he ordered
him to be divested of his robe. As the poor man was departing naked in
the world, he was attacked from behind by dogs, whereon he intended to
snatch up a stone but it was frozen to the ground and, being unable to
do so, he exclaimed: 'What whore-sons of men are these? They have let
loose the dogs and have tied down the stones.' The amir of the robbers
who heard these words from his room laughed and said: 'O philosopher,
ask something from me.' He replied: 'I ask for my robe if thou wilt make
me a present of it.'

We are satisfied of thy gift by departure.

A man was hoping for the gifts of people.

I hope no gift from thee. Do me no evil.

The robber chief took pity upon him, ordered his robe to be restored to
him and added to it a sheepskin jacket with some dirhems.

#### Story 11

####

An astrologer, having entered his own house, saw a stranger and, getting
angry, began to insult him, whereon both fell upon each other and fought
so that turmoil and confusion ensued. A pious man who had the scene
exclaimed:

'How knowest thou what is in the zenith of the sky

If thou art not aware who is in thy house?'

#### Story 12

####

A preacher imagined his miserable voice to be pleasing and raised
useless shouts, thou wouldst have said that the crow of separation had
become the tune of his song; and the verse- for the most detestable of
voices is surely the voice of asses- appears to have been applicable to
him. This distich also concerns him:

When the preacher Abu-l-Fares brays

At his voice Istakhar-Fares quakes.

On account of the position he occupied the inhabitants of the locality
submitted to the hardship and did not think proper to molest him. In
course of time, however, another preacher of that region, who bore
secret enmity towards him, arrived on a visit and said to him: 'I have
dreamt about thee, may it end well!' 'What hast thou dreamt?' 'I dreamt
that thy voice had become pleasant and that the people were comfortable
during thy sermons.' The preacher meditated a while on these words and
then said: 'Thou hast dreamt a blessed dream because thou hast made me
aware of my defect. It has become known to me that I have a disagreeable
voice and that the people are displeased with my loud reading.
Accordingly I have determined henceforth not to address them except in a
subdued voice':

I am displeased with the company of friends

To whom my bad qualities appear to be good.

They fancy my faults are virtues and perfection.

My thorns they believe to be rose and jessamine.

**Say.** Where is the bold and quick enemy

To make me aware of my defects?

He whose faults are not told him

Ignorantly thinks his defects are virtues.

#### Story 13

####

A man used to shout superfluous calls to prayers in the mosque of Sinjar
and in a voice which displeased all who heard it. The owner of the
mosque, who was a just and virtuous amir, not desirous to give him pain,
said: 'My good fellow, in this mosque there are old muezzins' to each of
whom I pay five dinars monthly but to thee I shall give ten, if thou
wilt go to another place.' The man agreed and went away. Some time
afterwards however, he returned to the amir and said: 'My lord, thou
hast injured me by turning me away for ten dinars from this place
because where I next went they offered me twenty dinars to go to another
locality but I refused.' The amir smiled and said: 'By no means accept
them because will give thee even fifty dinars.'

No one can scrape the mud from gravel with an axe

As thy discordant shouting scrapes the heart.

#### Story 14

####

A fellow with a disagreeable voice happened to be reading the Quran,
when a pious man passed near, and asked him what his monthly salary was.
He replied: 'Nothing.' He further inquired: 'Then why takest thou this
trouble?' He replied: 'I am reading for God's sake.' He replied: 'For
God's sake do not read.'

If thou readest the Quran thus

Thou wilt deprive the religion of splendour.


