Joint Diseases of the Powers of Intellect, Anger, and Passion
=============================================================

This last section of the book deals with vices relating to combinations
of any two of the Powers, Intellect, Anger, and Passion, or all three of
them, and the methods of treating them. There are thirty-one of such
vices. This discussion, which deals with a large number of vices and
virtues and which contributes to the subject matter of most books on
ethics, covers half of the total length of the *Jami\` al-Sa\`adat.* In
order to keep ourselves within limits appropriate to this summary, we
shall confine ourselves to a brief discussion of the points raised in
this section of the book.

1. Jealousy (Hasad)
-------------------

*Hasad* consists of a desire to see someone's advantage or blessing
taken away from him. If one simply aspires to have the same advantage as
someone else, this would be *ghibtah* (envy), and if one has the desire
to see someone continue enjoying an advantage or a blessing, which he
deserves, this would be *nasihah.* That which is a vice amongst all
these states, is *hasad,* which makes man deserve chastisement both in
this world and the next. The jealous person knows no peace, and is
always burning in the fire of jealousy. Moreover his jealousy destroys
the value of all of his good works, as mentioned in a prophetic
tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسد يأكل الحسنات, لما تأكل النار الحطب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jealousy consumes virtues as fire consumes wood.

However, both *ghibtah* and *nasihah* are virtues, which must be
nourished by cleansing the soul from the vice of *hasad.* The fatal
disease of *hasad* may proceed either from the Power of Passion or the
Power of Anger, or both of them, depending on what motivates it. Thus,
in order to cure it, we must concentrate our attention on these two
Powers, and what we have already said about various diseases associated
with these Powers also applies to the disease of jealousy.

What can best help the individual to cure himself of this disease is to
contemplate the negative psychological and spiritual effects of
jealousy, which affect only the jealous person himself, not him who is
the object of jealousy. Moreover, the jealous individual should try to
create within himself the virtue of *nasihah* (wishing the welfare of
others), which is the opposite of jealousy. At the beginning, it may be
necessary for him to impose upon himself the attitude necessitated by
this virtue, notwithstanding his inner inclination to the contrary,
until jealousy is overcome and *nasthah* becomes an established trait of
his character.

2. Harassing and Insulting Others
---------------------------------

This kind of behaviour is usually caused by jealousy and enmity,
although it may also be rooted in greed *(hasad),* avarice *(tama'),*
pride *(takabbur),* etc. Thus, its source is either the Power of Anger
or the Power of Passion, or both. In any case, harassment and. insulting
of other Muslims is a major sin, and has been repeatedly condemned both
in Qur’anic verses and traditions:

***And those who hurt believing men and believing women, without that
they have earned it, they bear the guilt of slander and manifest sin.***
**(33:58)**

And in a tradition attributed to the Prophet (S) we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من آذى مؤمنا فقد آذاني, ومن آذاني فقد آذى الله, ومن آذى الله فهو ملعون
في التوراة والإنجيل والزبور والفرقان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever hurts a believer, hurts me; whoever hurts me, hurts God: and
whoever hurts God is the accursed of Torah, the Gospel, the Psalms, and
the Qur’an. *(from Jami' al-akhbar)*

On the other hand, stopping someone from harassing and insulting others
is a worthy act praised in several traditions, of which the following
prophetic *hadith* is an example.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ‏من زحزح عن طريق المسلمين شيئا ‏ ‏يؤذيهم, كتب الله له به حسنة ومن كتب
له عنده حسنة أدخله الله بها الجنة. ‏ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever removes an annoying hurdle from the path of Muslims, God shall
write for him a virtue, whose reward is Paradise.[^1]

3. Frightening and Bothering Muslims
------------------------------------

This kind of behaviour is a branch of the above-mentioned vice, and is
caused by either anger, ill-temperedness, or avarice. Its opposite is
making others happy and removing their cause of sorrow or anxiety. There
are numerous traditions in praise of this virtue, such as the following
from the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان احب الأعمال إلى الله عز وجل إدخال السرور على المؤمنين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed the most beloved action near God, the Almighty, is to make the
believers happy.

4. Indifference to the Affairs of Muslims
-----------------------------------------

Being indifferent to the affairs of Muslims is a moral vice caused by
lethargy, spiritual weakness, or miserliness. This vice is condemned in
numerous traditions, an example of which is the following wellknown
statement of the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أصبح لا يهتم بأمور المسلمين فليس منهم ومن سمع رجلا ينادي يا
للمسلمين فلم يجبه فليس بمسلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who wakes up without any concern for the affairs of Muslims, is not a
Muslim; and he who hears the cry, \`O Muslims!' without responding is
not a Muslim.

On the contrary, to meet the needs of the Muslims and to solve their
problems is considered as one of the noblest forms of worship. The
Prophet is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من مشى في حاجة أخيه ساعة من ليل أو نهار, قضاها أو لم يقضها, كان خيرا
له من اعتكاف شهرين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

An hour covered on foot, at night or during day, in the effort to help
one's brother meet his need, is better than two months of *i\`tikaf*
(spiritual retirement), regardless of whether or not one succeeds in
one's effort.

5. Negligence in Carrying Out the Duty of "Al-amr bil ma'ruf wal nahy 'an al-munhar"
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Failure to carry out the duty of *al- amr bil-ma\`ruf wal-nahy \`an il
munkar* is an unforgivable sin caused either by moral weakness or lack
of attention to one's religious duties, and results in the spread of
immorality, corruption, injustice, and other forms of indecency
throughout society.

"Commanding others to do their Divine duties and forbidding them from
committing illegitimate deeds" is an obligatory duty of every Muslim,
and has stages and conditions which have been explained in detail in
books dealing with Islamic *fiqh.*

Since what we are concerned with here are the individual's duties with
regard to his relationship with others, this brief mention of this duty
is sufficient.

6. Unsociableness
-----------------

This vice is caused either by hostility, vengefulness, jealousy, or
miserliness, and, therefore, it belongs either to the Power of Passion,
or the Power of Anger. It has been condemned in numerous traditions.

The opposite of this vice is the virtue of sociability, hospitality and
friendliness, which is conductive to expansion of warm, brotherly
relations throughout the community. This virtue is highly recommended by
Islam.

7. Breaking Ties with One's Family and Kin
------------------------------------------

This vice is a branch of unsociableness, but is far uglier and more
harmful. The opposite of this vice is the virtue of maintaining close
cordial family ties. A large number of traditions which can be found in
the books on *hadith* deal with this subject.

8. Being undutiful to Parents
-----------------------------

This is the worst form that the vice of breaking off ties with one's
family can take, and according to severely worded traditions, it is the
cause of severe chastisement both in this world and the next. As opposed
to this, kind and loving behaviour towards one's family is considered to
be one of the highest of human virtues.

It is reported that Imam al-Sadiq (A) was asked: "What action has the
greatest value before God?" And he reportedly answered: "Prayer at the
very beginning of its appointed time, kindness to one's parents, and
*jihad* in the way of God." This mention of kindness to parents by the
side of prayer and *jihad,* which are two of the most important pillars
of Islam, clearly demonstrates its importance.

Here it is also necessary to emphasize one's duties to neighbours and
the neighbours' rights, since it also belongs to the category of
interpersonal relations briefly discussed above, and there are many
traditions condemning harassment of one's neighbours and undesirable
behaviour towards them.

9. Finding Faults with Others and Exposing Their Shortcomings or Sins
---------------------------------------------------------------------

This vice is caused either by jealousy or hostility, and leads to the
spread of corruption, animosity, and destruction of good relations
between the people. The opposite of this vice is the virtue of covering
up the defects and sins of others. This virtue has immeasurable merit,
and here we shall mention one verse and a *hadith* in this regard,
although there are a large number of traditions dealing with this
subject:

***Those who love that indecency should be spread abroad among the
believers theirs will be a painful chastisement in the present world and
the world to come ....*****(24:19)**

And the Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من ستر على مسلم ستره الله في الدنيا والآخرة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*He who covers up [the faults of] a Muslim, God shall cover up his
faults in this world and the next.*

10. Revealing Other People's Secrets
------------------------------------

Disclosing other people's secrets leads to social discord and at times
to animosity. Therefore, it is considered a vice and has been condemned
in a large number of traditions. This vice may take various forms, one
of which is to recount to someone the derogatory remarks made about him
by another individual, thus creating discord and hostility between them.

Another form is to recount to someone in power and authority something
that another may have said or done against him, thus inciting him to the
detriment of the victim. In general, the vice of creating conflict and
discord among people and stirring up hostility between individuals can
take various forms, and disclosing people's secrets is one of its forms.

The opposite of this vice is the virtue of working to create good
feeling, harmony, and love amongst people, which is a quality of great
value. In opposition to the vice of revealing other people's secrets is
the virtue of guarding their secrets and concealing them.

In any case, all the various forms of *'ifsad bayn al-nas* (corrupting
mutual relations between people) are considered sins and condemned in
many Qur’anic verses and traditions.

11. Shamatah
------------

This vice consists of attributing the misfortunes befalling someone to
his unsavoury acts, delighting in his misfortunes, and blaming him for
his misfortune. This vice is usually caused by jealousy or the Power of
Passion.

*Shamatah* has been severely condemned in a large number of traditions,
and it has been said that, firstly, *shamatah* causes the culprit who
engages in it to fall victim to the same misfortunes he so delights in
when they befall others; secondly, his *shamatah* hurts the feelings of
his brother in faith, and is therefore a cause for Divine punishment;
thirdly, the fact that a misfortune has befallen someone does not mean
that he has committed an evil act; it may be a Divine test which may
occur even in case of those closest to God.

12. Taunting and Dispute (Ta'n wa Mujadalah)
--------------------------------------------

Taunting *(tan)* means saying something sarcastic with a derogatory aim,
and disputatiousness *mujadalah* refers to engaging in futile disputes
without really wanting to discover the truth. These two traits are
considered moral vices, and lead to misunderstanding and bad feeling
amongst friends. In opposition to those vices is the virtue of upright
speech that aims at discovery of the truth through polite, sincere, and
friendly discussion.

13. Making Fun of Other People and Ridiculing Them
--------------------------------------------------

This vice has the same harmful effects as taunting behaviour and
disputatious attitude.

14. Joking
----------

Joking must also be avoided as a general rule, because it may cause bad
feeling and hostility in some people. However, it should be kept in mind
that what is bad is jesting in its extreme form; otherwise the kind of
humour which delights the soul and lightens the mind without resorting
to lying and slander, and without discomfiting others, is permissible.

15. Backbiting (Ghibah)
-----------------------

Backbiting consists of saying something about an individual that he
would not like. Backbiting is one of the major sins, about which much
has been written, and which has been condemned in a large number of
traditions and Qur’anic verses. A detailed discussion of its limits,
characteristics and exceptions is undertaken in the book.

However, in order to remain within the limits set by the brief nature of
our summary, we abstain from this elaborate discussion.

What is worse than backbiting *(ghibah)* is slander *(buhtan)*, that is,
false accusation. The opposite of backbiting is praising others, and the
opposite of slander-which consists of falsehoods-honest mentioning of
the actual good qualities of an individual.

16. Lying
---------

Lying is a shameful vice and a great sin, which leads to personal and
social corruption. There are a large number of traditions and Qur’anic
verses regarding the evil of lying, and many works have been written to
condemn it. The opposite of this vice is the virtue of truthfulness
*(sidq)*. Truthfulness is one of the most praiseworthy qualities of a
human being and *sidq* is a word that recurs a great number of times in
the Holy Qur’an.

17. Simulation (riya')
----------------------

Simulation means doing a good deed for the sake of ostentation rather
than for the sake of God. It is a great sin, and causes spiritual
deterioration and death. And the Qur’an says:

***So woe to those that pray and are heedless of their prayers, to those
who would be seen [at worship], yet refuse charity.*** **(107:4-7)**

In another verse we read:

***...showing off to the people and not remembering God save a
little.*** **(4:142)**

Here is a prophetic tradition about the vice of *riya*':

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن اخوف ما أخاف عليكم الشرك الأصغر, قالوا: وما الشرك الأصغر؟ قال:
((الرياء))
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يقول الله عز وجل يوم القيامة للمرائين إذا جازى العباد باعمالهم: اذهبوا
إلى الذين كنتم تراؤن في الدنيا ، فانظروا هل تجدون عندهم الجزاء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[The Prophet (S) said:] "The main thing that I fear concerning you is
\`minor idolatry' (*shirk*)". They asked "What is \`minor idolatry'?" He
answered: "Simulation! On the Day of Judgement, when Allah the Almighty
is examining the past deeds of His creatures, He shall say to the
simulators, "Go to those to whom you showed off during your lives in the
world and ask them for your reward."

There are different kinds of *riya': riya'* in worship, whatever form it
may take, is always reprobate; *riya'* in other matters, which is
sometimes reprehensible, but at other times may be permissible *(mubah)*
and even desirable.

For example, if one is openly generous with the intention of encouraging
others to be generous also, his action is not only without reproach, but
in fact is highly commendable. The significance of simulation in each
case depends on the intentions of the individual involved.

The opposite of *riya'* is *ikhlas* (sincerity), which means doing
everything for the sake of God alone, without expecting any reward from
anyone for what he does. The station of *ikhlas* is one of the highest
that a believer may attain, but may be reached through persistent
exercise and perseverance.

18. Hypocrisy (Nifaq)
---------------------

Hypocrisy, that is feigning to be what one is not or to believe what one
does not, in religion or in social relations, is one of the most
destructive vices. Throughout the Holy Qur’an, hypocrites are condemned
in the strongest of terms. Also, there are many traditions in
condemnation of this vice.

The opposite of hypocrisy is being the same in one's external appearance
and inward self, or preferably, being better inwardly than what one
appears to be. This latter trait is a characteristic of the *mu'minun*
(true believers) and those who are close to God (*awliya'* *Allah).*

19. Pride (Ghurur)
------------------

Pride consists of conceit based on selfish desires and fancies, and it
may be in regard to the affairs of this world or that of the next. One
may become proud of one's worship, or one's sons, wealth, position and
power, or something else. All of these may lead to pride, and
consequently to the spiritual and moral fall of man. And thus we see

that the Holy Qur’an warns man against all forms of pride, which is a
kind of illusion and self-deception:

***...Let not the life of the world beguile you, nor let the Deceiver
(Devil) deceive you in regard to God.*** **(31:33)**

People from all walks of life may fall prey to the vice of pride. They
may be believers or infidels, scholars, pious people, mystics, and so
on, and each of them may be proud of some particular thing. Thus we see
that pride can take numerous forms. Pride may be caused by the Power of
Intellect, the Power of Passion, the Power of Anger, or all three of
them together.

The opposite of pride-which as mentioned is a kind of self deception-is
knowledge, wisdom, awareness, and *zuhd;* because the more a man is
aware of reality the less he is likely to fall prey to pride. The
following tradition of Imam al-Sadiq (A) suggests the true remedy to the
vice of pride:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعلم أنك لن تخرج من ظلمات الغرور والتمني إلا بصدق الانابة إلى الله
والاخبات له ومعرفة عيوب أحوالك من حيث لا توافق العقل والعلم ولا يحتمله
الدين والشريعة وسنن القدوة وأئمة الهدى وإن كنت راضيا بما أنت فيه فما
أحد أشقى بعلمك منك وأضيع عمرا, فأورثت حسرة يوم القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Know that you shall not be freed from the darkness of pride and desire
unless you truly return to God in humility and penitence, and become
aware of your faults and shortcomings-that is, those things which do not
agree with reason and intelligence, and are not upheld by religion,
Divine Law, and the tradition of the leaders of guidance.

And if you are satisfied with the condition you are in, be certain that
no one is more callous and wicked in regard to your own acts and none
more indifferent to the wastage of your years of life than yourself, and
this attitude will ultimately leave you with the inheritance of bitter
despair on the Day of Resurrection[^2]

20. Having Elaborate and Far-Flung Hopes and Desires
----------------------------------------------------

This vice is caused by the Power of Intellect and Passion, and is rooted
in ignorance and the love of the world. It harms man by keeping him
occupied with worldly matters and by retarding his spiritual
development.

In order to cure oneself of this disease, one must constantly think
about death and the Hereafter, with the knowledge that the world and
worldly existence are transitory, and whatever one may acquire, one day
one is forced to leave it behind and embrace death. He must keep alive
this realization in his mind that the only useful things that he can
carry across the abyss of death are his good works.

21. Rebelliousness (\`Isyan)
----------------------------

Rebelliousness here means disobeying God's commands. This vice belongs
to the Power of Anger and Passion; its opposite is obedience and
God-fearing (*taqwa*).

22. Shamelessness
-----------------

Belonging to the Powers of Anger and Passion, this vice consists of
impudence and absence of shame in doing prohibited acts. Its opposite is
modesty and shame (*haya'*) which is a part of faith. Imam al-Sadiq (A)
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحياء من الأيمان, و الأيمان في الجنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Modesty belongs to faith and faith is in paradise.

23. Persistence in Sin (al-'israr \`ala al-ma'siyah)
----------------------------------------------------

This is an evil state, and its opposite is repentance *(tawbah).*
Repeating sins makes them seem ordinary, insignificant, everyday
affairs. Therefore, before this happens to one, it is necessary for him
to contemplate the vicious outcome of committing sins and examine their
harms both in this world and the next. Such contemplation leads him to
repent his sins and become genuinely sorry and ashamed that he ever
committed them.

On the other hand, *tawbah* or repentance is return from the state of
sinfulness. An even higher state of repentance is *'inabah,* which is
turning away from and giving up even permissible *(mubah)* things. In
this higher state of repentance one seeks, in speech and act, only to
please God, and remember God continuously. A necessary adjunct of
*tawbah* is *muhasabah* and *muraqabah,* which means that a sincerely
repentant person constantly takes an account of his deeds and gives
thought to the moral quality of his actions. There is a tradition that
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاسبوا أنفسكم قبل ان تحاسبوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Take account of yourselves before you are taken to account.

24. Neglect (Ghaflah)
---------------------

*Ghaflah* means indifference and lack of attention; its opposite is
attention and resoluteness. If what is neglected is our ultimate
felicity and well-being, it is a vice. However, neglect and indifference
to baseness and wickedness is a virtue. That is, care and attention
given to evil and base things is a vice, while care and attention given
to things having to do with our well-being and felicity is a virtue.

Both negligence and resoluteness, or care, are derived either from the
Power of Passion or the Power of Anger. For example, if one is intent on
getting married, the motivation for such a resolution is rooted in the
Power of Passion, and is a virtue. If one resolves on defending oneself
against some enemy, that resolution is rooted in the Power of Anger and
is also a virtue.

This was a general description of negligence and care or resoluteness.
However, as a term used in Qur’anic verses and traditions, negligence
usually refers to indifference to the real aims of human existence and
the agents of man's well-being and happiness in this world and the next;
and its opposite, resoluteness, is also interpreted as clarity of will
and purpose in the same sense. In this sense, therefore, negligence is
always bad and resoluteness is always good. The Qur’an makes the
following remark about the neglectful:

***We have prepared for hell many jinn and men; they have hearts
wherewith they understand not, they have eyes wherewith they see not
they have ears wherewith they hear not. They are like cattle; nay,
rather they are further astray. Those-they are the neglectful.
(7:179)***

25. Aversion (Karahah)
----------------------

\`Aversion' refers to a state of abhorrence for all things entailing
hardship and labour. Its extreme form is *maqt* or \`hatred.' The
opposite of *karahah* is *hubb* or inclination. *Hubb* consits of the
soul's liking for pleasant and beneficial things. The extreme form of
*hubb* is *ishq* (love).

Aversion can be either good or bad; for example, if one is averse to
*jihad* for the sake of God or to self-defense, this is highly
undesirable and reprehensible. If, however, one has an aversion to ugly
deeds and sins, it is good and highly desirable. The same rule applies
to *hubb,* in that if one likes good and beneficial things, it is a
desirable trait; but not so if one likes evil things.

The point worthy of notice is that *hubb* must essentially be directed
only towards God and whatever is associated with the Divine. This is the
highest form of *hubb.* It should be kept in mind that the Real Beloved
is God, and it is only when man loses his Real Beloved that he
mistakenly adopts other objects for his love, such as wife, children,
wealth, status, or any other worldly thing.

If man were to find his True Beloved again, he would also achieve
deliverance from his endless, aimless wanderings. In order to find the
True Beloved, first we must know all the various forms of *hubb.*
Basically *hubb* may be directed towards nine different things:

1. The human being's *hubb* for itself; which is one of the strongest
forms of *hubb.*

2. The human being's *hubb* for things outside itself for the purpose of
deriving physical pleasure from them, such as various kinds of foods,
clothes, and other things which serve to satisfy physical needs and
desires.

3. Man's *hubb* for another human being on account of the kindness or
service that the other has rendered him.

4. Man's *hubb* for something on account of that thing's inherent
goodness, such as beauty and righteousness.

5. Man's *hubb* for another individual without his being able to find
any particular reason for it; not because that individual has beauty,
wealth or power or something of the kind, but simply because of the
existence of some invisible spiritual link between them.

6. Man's *hubb* for an individual who has come from a far-off place, or
whom he has succeeded in meeting during a long journey.

7. Man's *hubb* for his colleagues and fellow professionals, such as the
liking of a scholar for another scholar, or a merchant's for another
merchant, and so on.

8. The *hubb* (affinity) of the effect for its cause, and vice versa.

9. The *hubb* of common effects of a single cause for one another; such
as the love between members of a single family.

If we give some thought to this matter, we shall reach the conclusion
that since God is Absolute Existence and all other things depend on Him,
whatever other things man may love lack any independent existence of
their own. In other words, since God is the Ultimate Reality, He is in
fact the ultimate object of true love, and all other kinds of love
directed towards things are figurative and imaginary. Thus it is that
one must sublimate one's love and discover its real object; and this is
not possible unless the following conditions appear in him:

1. He should have a fervent desire of meeting God *(liqa' Allah);* in
other words, he should have no fear of death. His actions must be such
as to reflect his assurance that he will meet God after his death.

2. He should give priority to God's wish over and above his own wishes
and desires, since this is one of the requirements of love.

3. He should not forget God for even a moment, just as the lover is not
forgetful of his beloved for even a second.

4. He must not be happy when he gains something, or sad when he loses
something, since if all his attention is centered on God all other
things would be unimportant for him.

5. He should be kind and loving towards God's creatures, since whoever
loves God will certainly love His creatures also.

6. He should have fear of God at the same time that he loves Him, since
these two states are not contradictory.

7. He should keep his love of God a secret.

Under such conditions God would also love His servant and fulfil His
promise:

***Say ( O Muhammad), \`If you love God, follow me; God will love you
and forgive your sins.'...*** **(3:31)**

26. Sakhat
----------

*Sakhat is* being grieved at adversities and misfortunes which may
befall one to the extent of complaining about them. The opposite of the
vice of *sakhat* is the virtue of *rida* which is being satisfied and
content with whatever God wills. *Sakhat is* a kind of *karahah,* and
*rida* is a kind of *hubb.*

There are many traditions condemning *sakhat* and exhorting man to be
patient in face of adversities and misfortunes; since they are for
trials Divinely ordained. Basically, we must realize that life in this
world is made up of suffering, difficulty, sickness and death, and
without exception all men must undergo these things. So, we must teach
ourselves to deal with these kinds of hardships. Such a preparedness is
called *rida,* and its highest stage is complete contentment with Divine
will. This is how the Qur’an describes such people:

***...God is pleased with them and they with Him. That is the great
triumph.*** **(5:119)**

And this is how it describes those who lack this quality:

***...and they desire the life of the world and feel secure therein
....*****(10:7)**

It should be noted that in books of ethics *taslim* (resignation) and
*rida* (contentment) are usually used synonymously. This is because of
their close meanings; because one who is content with whatever God wills
for him is also completely resigned to God's will in all aspects of his
life.

27. Huzn
--------

*Huzn* means grief and remorse for losing or failing to attain something
cherished. *Huzn,* like *sakhat,* follows from *karahah.*

28. Absence of Trust in God
---------------------------

This vice consists of reliance on intermediate means, not God, for
solution of one's problems. It is caused by insufficient faith, and
originates from the Powers of Intellect and Passion. Reliance on
intermediary means is a form of *shirk* (polytheism).

The opposite of this vice *is tawakkul* (trust) in God in all aspects of
one's life, with the belief that God is the only effective force in the
universe. This is the meaning of the famous dictum:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا حول ولا قوة إلا بالله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no power or might except that [it is derived] from God.

And the Qur’an explicitly states:

***...And whosoever puts his trust in God, He will suffice him*** **....
(65:3)**

And the Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من انقطع إلى الله, كفاه الله كل مؤنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever abandons hope in everything except God, He shall take care of
his means of life.

It should be noted that the notion of *tawakkul* does not contradict the
idea that man has to undertake endeavour in order to benefit from the
bounties of God.

This is why Islam considers it obligatory for the individual to strive
in order to make a living for his family, defend himself, and to fight
for his rights. What is important is to consider all these intermediary
means as subject to God's authority and power, without any independent
role of their own.

29. Ingratitude (Kufran)
------------------------

This is the vice of being unthankful for Divine blessings, and its
opposite is *shukr* (thankfulness). The virtue of *shukr* consists of
the following elements:

1. Recognition of blessings and their origin, which is Divine
Beneficence.

2. Being delighted on account of the blessings-not for their worldly
worth or for having gained them, but for their value in bringing us
closer to God.

3. Acting on this joy and delight by undertaking to satisfy the aim of
the Giver, in word and in deed.

4. Praising the Bestower of the blessings.

5. To use the bounty given to us in a way which would please Him. By
\`blessings' are meant all those things which bring pleasure, benefit,
and felicity, whether in this world or the next.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***...If you are thankful 1 will give you more; but if you are
thankless, My punishment is surely terrible.*** **(14:7)**

And in elaboration of the second part of the previous verse, the Qur’an
says:

***God has struck a similitude: A city that was secure and well content,
its provision coming to it in abundance from every place, then it was
unthankful for the blessings of God; so God let it taste the garment of
hunger and fear, for the things that they were working.*** **(16:112)**

30. Jaza \` (Restlessness)
--------------------------

*Jaza\`* leads to screaming, beating one's face, tearing clothes, and
raising a clamour when faced with some misfortune or calamity. *Jaza\`*
is one of the vices of the Power of Anger. Its opposite is *sabr*
(forbearance), which is one of the noblest virtues. In any case,
*jaza*\` is one of the vices which leads to man's fall, since it is
essentially a complaint against God and rejection of His decrees.

*Sabr,* on the contrary, consists of preserving one's calm under all
circumstances and doing one's duty in all conditions. *Sabr* has a
different function in different situations; for example, *sabr* on the
field of battle lies in perseverance in performing one's duty; in other
words, it is a form of courage.

*Sabr* in the state of anger is self-control and synonymous with *hilm*
(gentleness). *Sabr* in face of desires and lusts is *\`iffah*
(chastity). *Sabr* with respect to luxurious and opulent living is
*zuhd* (abstinence). To sum up, *sabr is* a virtue related to all of the
four Powers.

*Sabr* has been much praised in Islamic traditions, and the Holy Qur’an
extols this virtue, its merits and its rewards in seventy different
places. For example, it says:

***...Yet give glad tidings to the steadfast who, when an affliction
visits them, say: \`Surely we belong to God and to Him we return;' upon
those rest blessings and mercy from their Lord, and those-they are the
truly guided.*** **(2:155-157)**

And the Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصبر من الإيمان بمنزلة الرأس من الجسد, ولا جسد لمن لا رأس له, ولا
ايمان لمن لا صبر له.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The relationship of *sabr* to faith *('iman)* is like that of the head
to the body; just as the body cannot live without the head, so also
faith cannot survive without *sabr.*

There are five kinds of *sabr* in relation to the Islamic Shari'ah:
*wajib* (obligatory), *haram* (forbidden), *mustahabb* (desirable),
*makruh* (reprehensible), and *mubah* (permitted). An example of
\`obligatory *sabr'* is abstinence from forbidden pleasures and desires.
An example of \`forbidden *sabr'* is patience in face of injustice such
as oppression or cruelty. \`Desirable *sabr'* is steadfastness in doing
things which are desirable *(mustahabb),* while \`reprehensible *sabr*'
is related to toleration of situations which are reprehensible. Finally,
*mubah* or permitted *sabr* is related to permitted things.

It follows, then, that *sabr* is not always a worthy trait, and its
worth, or the lack of it, depends on its object. In general, the
criterion by which the various kinds of *sabr* are judged is the same by
which all other deeds and traits are judged, i.e. all those actions
which facilitate man's spiritual development are considered worthy and
laudable, while all other actions and traits are considered bad and
harmful.

31. Fisq
--------

*Fisq* as a term means disobedience to the obligatory commands of
Islamic Shari'ah or committal of acts forbidden by it; its opposite is
*ita'ah* (obedience) to the commands of God, the Supreme.

A major part of the Divine commands consists of specific forms of
worship which are considered either *wajib* or *mustahabb* in Islam.
They are: *taharah* (purity), *salat* (prayer), *du'a'* (invocation),
*dhikr* (remembrance of God), *qira' ah* (reciting the Holy Qur’an),
*sawm* (fasting), *hajj* (pilgrimage to Mecca), *ziyarat al-Nabi*
(pilgrimage to the Prophet's (S) tomb), *jihad* (fighting in the way of
God), *ada' al-ma'ruf* (discharging the financial duties set down by
Islamic Law, consisting of *khums, zakat* and *sadaqah* [voluntary
alms-giving]).

At this point al-Naraqi-may God's mercy be upon him-centers his final
discussion which is a treatment of the Divine commands just mentioned,
their rationale,. and their beneficial role in the spiritual growth and
development of man. Since this discussion is mostly concerned with
*fiqh,* we shall forego recounting it here for brevity's sake.

In conclusion we hope that God grants us the strength to morally improve
ourselves by putting into practice the advices set forth summarily in
the preceding four sections. It is also to be hoped that a careful study
and examination of this short discourse on Islamic ethics would motivate
us to adhere to its principles, thus bringing joy and satisfaction to
the spirit of its author. *Amin.*

*Concluded; wal-hamdu lillah*

[^1]: Ihya\`ulum al-din, vol. II, p. 172

[^2]: Misbah al-Shari\`ah, chapter 36.


