Introduction
============

**In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

Man has a soul and physical body, each of which is subject to its own
pleasures and diseases. What harms the body is sickness, and that which
gives it pleasure lies in its well-being, health and whatever is in
harmony with its nature. The science that deals with the health and the
maladies of the body is the science of medicine.

The diseases of the soul constitute evil habits and submission to lusts
that degrade man doom to the level of beasts. The pleasures of the 'soul
are moral and ethical virtues which elevate man and move him closer to
perfection and wisdom bringing him close to God. The study that deals
with such matters is the science of ethics *('ilm al-akhlaq).*

Before we commence a discussion of the main topics of our subject, we
must prove that the soul of man is incorporeal, possesses an existence
independent of the body, and is immaterial. In order to prove this, a
number of arguments have been set forth amongst which we can mention the
following:

1. One of the characteristics of bodies is that whenever new forms and
shapes are imposed upon them, they renounce and abandon their previous
forms or shapes. In the human soul, however, new forms, whether of the
sensible or of the intellectual nature, enter continuously without
wiping out the previously existing forms. In fact, the more impressions
and intellectual forms enter the mind, the stronger does the soul
become.

2. When three elements of colour, smell, and taste, appear in an object,
it is transformed. The human soul however, perceives all of these
conditions without being materially affected by them.

3. The pleasures that man experiences from intellectual cognition can
belong only to the soul, since man's body plays no role in it.

4. Abstract forms and concepts which are perceived by the mind, are
undoubtedly non-material and indivisible. Accordingly, their vehicle,
which is the soul, must also be indivisible, and therefore immaterial.

5. The physical faculties of man receive their input through the senses,
while the human soul perceives certain things without the help of the
senses. Among the things that the human soul comprehends without relying
on the senses, are the law of contradiction, the idea that the whole is
always greater than one of its parts, and other such universal
principles.

The negation of the errors made by the senses on the part of the soul,
such as optical illusions, is done with the aid of these abstract
concepts, even though the raw material required for making corrections
is provided by the senses.

Now that the independent existence of the soul has been proved, let us
see what are the things responsible for its well-being and delight, and
what are the things that make it sick and unhappy. The health and
perfection of the soul lies in its grasp of the real nature of things ,
and this understanding can liberate it from the narrow prison of lust
and greed and all other fetters which inhibit its evolution and
edification towards that ultimate stage of human perfection which lies
in man's nearness to God. This is the goal of \`speculative wisdom'
*(al-hikmat al-nadariyyah).*

At the same time, the human soul must purge itself of any evil habits
and traits it may have, and replace them with ethical and virtuous modes
of thought and conduct. This is the goal of \`practical wisdom'
*(al-hikmat al-\`amaliyyah).* Speculative and practical wisdom are
related like matter and form; they cannot exist without each other.

As a matter of principle, the term "philosophy" refers to \`speculative
wisdom' and "ethics" refers to \`.practical wisdom'. A man who has
mastered both speculative wisdom and practical wisdom is a microcosmic
mirror of the larger universe: the macrocosm.


