The Meaning and Origin of Akhlaq
================================

The word *akhlaq* is the plural for the word *khulq* which means
disposition. "Disposition" is that faculty *(malakah)* of the soul which
is the source of all those activities that man performs spontaneously
without thinking about them. *Malakah* is a property of the soul which
comes into existence through exercise and repetitive practice and is not
easily destroyed.

A particular disposition *(malakah)* may appear in human beings because
of one of the following reasons:

1. Natural and physical make up: It is observed that some people are
patient while others are touchy and nervous. Some are easily disturbed
and saddened while others show greater resistance and resilience.

2. Habit: Which is formed because of continual repetition of certain
acts and leads to the emergence of a certain disposition.

3. Practice and conscious effort: Which if continued long enough will
eventually lead to the formation of a disposition.

Even though the physical make-up of an individual produces certain
dispositions in him, it is by no means true that man has no choice in
the matter and is absolutely compelled to abide by the dictates of his
physical make-up. On the contrary, since man has the power to choose, he
can overcome the dictates of his physical nature through practice and
effort, and can acquire the disposition of his choice.

Of course, it should be admitted that those dispositions which are
caused by the mental faculties such as intelligence, memory, mental
agility, and the like, are not alterable. All other dispositions,
however, may be changed according to man's will. Man can control his
lust, anger and other emotions and desires, and channel them to edify
himself and propel himself along the path of perfection and wisdom.

When we speak of man's capacity to bring about changes in his
dispositions, we do not mean that man should destroy his instincts of
reproduction or self-preservation. Man could not exist without these
instincts. What we mean is that one should avoid going to either
extremes in regard to them, and maintain a condition of balance and
moderation so that they may perform their functions properly. Just as
the seed of a date grows into a fruitful tree through proper care, or a
wild horse is trained to serve his master, or a dog is trained to be the
lifelong friend and a help to man, so also can man attain perfection and
wisdom through self-discipline and intelligent perseverance.

Human perfection has many levels. The greater the amount of
self-discipline and effort on the part of the individual, the higher the
level of perfection that he would attain. In other words, he stands
between two extreme points, the lowest of which is below the level of
beasts and the highest of which surpasses even the high station of
angels. The human movement between these two extremes is discussed by
\`*ilm al-akhlaq* or the science of ethics. It is the goal of ethics to
raise and guide man from the lowest animal state to that exalted
position superior to that of the angels.

The importance of ethics is thus revealed. And it is because of the
reasons mentioned above that ethics is considered to be the most exalted
and valuable of sciences; since the worth of any science is directly
related to the worth of the subject with which it is concerned, and
since the subject of the science of ethics is man and the means through
which he can attain perfection. Moreover, we know that man is the
noblest of creatures, the ultimate purpose of whose existence is to
attain perfection; therefore, it follows that ethics is the noblest of
all sciences.

In fact, in the past, the philosophers did not consider any or the other
fields of learning to be truly independent sciences. They believed that
without the science of ethics and spiritual purification, mastery over
any other science is not only devoid of any value, but it would in fact
lead to the obstruction of insight and ultimate destruction of those who
pursue it. That is why it has been said that which means, \`knowledge is
the thickest of veils', which prevents man from seeing the real nature
of things.

Souls Purification and Adornment
--------------------------------

Moral virtues in man gain him eternal happiness, while moral corruption
leads him to everlasting wretchedness. It is therefore necessary for man
to purge and purify himself of all evil traits of character and adorn
his soul with all forms of ethical and moral virtues. Moreover, without
having cleansed oneself of all evil habits, it would be impossible to
nourish and develop moral virtues in oneself. The human soul can be
compared to a mirror in this regard.

If we wish to see something beautiful reflected in a mirror, we must
first cleanse the mirror, so that dust and dirt do not disfigure the
reflection. Any attempt to obey God's commands would be fruitful and
successful only when one has purified himself of evil habits and
tendencies; otherwise, it would be like putting on jewels on a dirty and
unwashed body. When self-purification has been completed and one is
completely rid of all evil habits of thought, speech and action, then
the soul is ready to receive the unlimited grace of God. Such reception
is the ultimate reason for which man was created.

In truth, God's grace and the Divine mysteries are always accessible to
man. It is man that must purify his soul and develop within himself the
necessary receptivity to benefit from the infinite grace of his Creator.

There is a tradition of the Holy Prophet (S) which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
((لا تدخل الملائكة بيتا فيه كلب))
  </p>
</blockquote>

The angels do not enter a house in which there is a dog.

How is it possible, then, for the rays of God's grace and Divine
illumination to enter a heart filled to the brim with immoral, selfish,
and bestial desires? The hadith of the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
))بنى الدين على النظافة))
  </p>
</blockquote>

"My religion is based on cleanliness", does not refer to outward
cleanliness alone; more than that it alludes to the inner purity of the
soul.

In order to attain ultimate and final perfection, it is necessary to
traverse the path of struggle against selfish lusts and immoral
tendencies which may exist within the soul, and thus to prepare the soul
to receive the grace of God. If man sets foot on the path of
self-purification, God shall come to his aid and guide him along the
path:

***And [as for] those who struggle in Our cause, surely We guide them in
Our ways. (29:89)***

Faculties of the Soul: Their Effects and Characteristics
--------------------------------------------------------

At the time of its creation, the soul of man is like a clean tablet,
devoid of all faculties (traits), whether good or evil. As one
progresses through life, he develops faculties which are directly
related to the way he lives, thinks, and acts. The speech and deeds of
man, when repeated over a long period of time, produce a lasting effect
in the soul which is known as a "faculty".

This faculty penetrates the soul and becomes the origin and cause of
man's actions. In other words, the human soul becomes used to these
faculties, establishes a union with it, and determines the human being's
direction in accordance with their dictates. If these faculties
(*malakat*) are noble, they manifest themselves as moral and wise speech
and behaviour in man. If, on the contrary, they are evil and base, they
are manifested through immoral and perverse behaviour.

These very faculties play the decisive role in determining the fate of
the individual in the eternal world of the Hereafter. The soul shall be
accompanied there by the same faculties that it was associated and
united with in this world. If these faculties are virtuous, the soul
shall have eternal bliss, and if they were wicked ones, it shall face
eternal damnation.

This matter of *malakat* provides the answer to those who say how could
the Compassionate and Merciful God condemn an individual to eternal
damnation for a sin committed in a short span of time. The thing to keep
in mind is that when a sin committed repeatedly leads to the development
of a faculty in man, since this evil faculty is incorporated in the
soul, the punishment and torture which accompany it will also afflict
the soul. The Qur’an says:

***And every man-We have fastened to him his bird of omen upon his neck
and We shall bring forth for him, on the Day of Resurrection, a book he
shall find spread wide open. Read thy book! Thy soul suffices thee this
day as a reckoner against thee. ( 17:13-14)***

***And the book shall be set in place; and thou wilt see the sinners
fearful at what is in it, and saying, \`Alas for us how is it with this
Book, that it leaves nothing behind, small or great, but it has numbered
it?' And they shall find all they wrought present, and thy Lord shall
not wrong anyone. (18:49)***

***The day every soul shall find what it has done of good brought
forward, and what it has done of evil; it will wish if there were only a
far space between it and its deeds. (3:29)***

The Soul and Its Powers
-----------------------

The soul *(nafs)* is that heavenly essence which employs the body and
uses its various organs to attain its goals and purposes. The soul has
also other names as spirit *(ruh),* intelligence *(\`aql),* and heart
*(qalb)* although these terms have other usages as well.

The most important faculties of the soul are:

1. The power of intelligence *(al-quwwah al-aqliyyah)*-angelic.

2. The power of anger *(al-quwwah al-ghadabiyyah)*-ferocious.

3. The power of desire *(al-quwwah al-shahwiyyah)*-animalistic.

4. The power of imagination *(al-quwwah al-wahmiyyah*)-demoniac.

The function and value of every one of these powers or forces of the
soul is commonly well understood. If man did not have the power of
reason, it would have been impossible for him to distinguish between
good and evil, right and wrong, true and false. If he did not possess
the faculty of anger, he could not defend himself against attack and
aggression. If the force of sexual attraction and desire did not exist
in man, the continued existence of the human species would be
endangered. And finally, if man lacked the power of imagination, he
could not visualise universals or particulars, and he would be unable to
make any inferences based on them.

With this explanation, the characteristics mentioned for each of the
four human faculties are made clear and comprehensible. Reason is the
guiding angel of man. The power of anger and fierceness in man brings
about ferocity and violence in him. His power of desire and passion
propels him towards immorality and licentiousness.

And the imaginative power in man provides the preliminary material for
the formation of demoniac schemes, plots and machinations. Now, if the
faculty of reason is put in control of the other faculties, it keeps
them in their rightful place and moderates their excesses; they will
work for the welfare of man and shall perform useful functions;
otherwise, nothing except evil and mischief will come of them.

The relationships of these four faculties of the human soul to one
another are described in the following allegorical manner. Imagine a
traveller on horseback accompanied by a dog and a man who is a spy for
the bandits. The mounted traveller represents reason. The mount
represents desire and passion. The dog represents the power of anger and
fierceness.

And the spy represents the imaginative power. If the traveller just
mentioned is successful in controlling his mount, the dog, and the spy,
and in maintaining his authority over them, he shall arrive at his
destination safely; otherwise, he will be destroyed. The human soul is
thus a stage or a battlefield on which there is a continuous struggle
between these four powers.

What would be the dominant characteristic and nature of an individual's
soul is entirely dependent on the outcome of this struggle. In other
words, whichever of the four powers emerges victorious, it shall
determine the character and inclination of the soul. That is why some
souls are angelic, some are animalistic and bestials and still others
are demoniac.

In a hadith from Imam Ali (A), he is related as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
)) ان الله خص الملك بالعقل دون الشهوة والغضب, وخص الحيوانات بهما دونه
وشرّف الانسان باعطاء الجميع ، فان انقادت شهوته وغضبه لعقله صار افضل من
الملائكة لوصوله الى هذه المرتبة مع وجود المنازع والملائكة ليس لهم
مزاحم))
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely God has characterized the angels by intellect without sexual
desire and anger, and the animals with anger and desire without reason.
He exalted man by bestowing upon him all of these qualities.
Accordingly, if man's reason dominates his desire and ferocity, he rises
to a station above that of the angels; because this station is attained
by man in spite of the existence of hurdles which do not vex the angels.

Pleasures and Pains
-------------------

Pleasure is a condition experienced by the soul when it perceives
something harmonious with its own nature. Pain and suffering is
occasioned when the soul comes into contact with things which are in
disharmony with its nature. Since the powers of the soul are four in
number, it follows that the pleasures and pains of the soul must also be
divided into four categories, each corresponding to one of the four
faculties.

Pleasure of the reasoning faculty lies in gaining knowledge about the
real nature of things, and its pain lies in ignorance and deprivation
from such knowledge.

Pleasure of the faculty of anger and fierceness lies in the feeling of
being victorious and in satisfaction at overcoming an enemy and taking
one's revenge. Its pain lies in the feeling of being overpowered and
defeated.

Delight of the faculty of desire and passion is enjoyment of foods,
drinks, and sexual association while its pain lies in denial of such
experiences.

Pleasure of the imaginative faculty lies in the visualization of
particulars which lead to the appearance of carnal desires and demonic
tendencies, while its pain lies in the insufficiency and inadequacy of
these visions.

The strongest and the purest of pleasures is the pleasure experienced by
the faculty of reason. This is a form of pleasure which is both inherent
and natural to man. It is a pleasure which is constant, not subject to
the changing experiences in his daily life.

It is unlike the other pleasures, which belonging to the body and being
animalistic, are transitory in nature and without any lasting value.
These animal pleasures are in fact so low and trivial that man is
ashamed of them and tries to conceal them. If it were to be said of a
man that he derives great pleasure from eating, drinking, and engaging
in sexual intercourse, he shall be ashamed and upset about it. While, if
such activities and pleasures were becoming for man, not only would he
not be ashamed of them, he would in fact be glad if such a matter were
published widely and be proud of it.

We can conclude, then, that the kind of pleasure that is becoming for
man and could be said to be really gratifying, and not be such in
appearance alone, is the kind 'of pleasure experienced by the soul's
reasoning faculty. This sort of pleasure has many degrees, the highest
of which is experienced in nearness to God. This most sublime of
pleasures is attained through love and knowledge of God, and acquired
through abiding effort to be ever nearer to Him. When one's whole effort
is directed towards attaining this real and lasting pleasure, sensual
pleasures will be overshadowed; they shall take their proper place in
man's life, being pursued in moderation.

Goodness and Happiness
----------------------

The ultimate aim of the purification of the soul and acquirement of a
moral and ethical character is to attain felicity and happiness. The
most consummate felicity and happiness for man is to be the embodiment
and manifestation of Divine attributes and characteristics. The soul of
a truly happy man is developed with the knowledge and the love of God;
it is illuminated by the effulgence emanating from the God head. When
that happens, nothing but beauty shall emanate from him; since beauty
can emanate only from what is beautiful.

It should be kept in mind that true felicity can not be attained or
retained unless all the faculties and powers of the soul are purified
and reformed. By reforming some faculties of the soul, or all of them,
for a short period of time, happiness will not be attained. It is
similar to physical health. A body can be said to be healthy only when
all its limbs and organs are healthy. Therefore, the individual who
seeks to attain ultimate and perfect happiness, must free himself or
herself from the clutches of demonic and animal forces and tendencies
and step on the ladder of ascension to the higher realms.


