Diseases of the Soul and their Treatment
========================================

In diagnosis of physical ailments there are certain rules and procedures
to be followed. First of all the disease must be identified. Secondly,
the way of treatment must be determined. Thirdly, treatment must begin
with the use of appropriate medications and avoidance of harmful things,
and continue until complete recovery.

It has already been explained that the diseases of the soul are caused
when its powers trespass the bounds of moderation, moving towards the
extremes of either deficiency or excess. The way in which these diseases
must be treated is the same as that used in treatment of physical
illness, and must follow the three stages mentioned above until full
recovery is attained.

We shall continue our discussion, describe each disease and indicate its
proper treatment. The diseases to be studied shall be divided into the
following four categories:

1. Diseases of the Power of Intellect and their treatment.

2. Diseases of the Power of Anger and their treatment.

3. Diseases of the Power of Passion and their treatment.

4. Diseases relating to combinations of any two of these powers, or all
three.

Before we begin our discussion of the diseases in these four categories,
it must be stated that every one of these powers can exist in either of
the three different states of moderation, deficiency, or excess.

In discussing every one of these powers, we shall first consider its
deviation towards excess, which is a kind of illness, and indicate its
proper treatment. This shall be followed by a discussion of its
deviation towards the condition of deficiency and the proper method of
treating it. Next we shall consider its state of moderation. We shall
conclude our study of each power with an examination of various kinds of
moral maladies which may afflict these powers, and their method of
treatment.


