Diseases of the Power of Anger and Their Treatment
==================================================

As already said, the Power of Anger has three states: deficiency,
moderation, and excess; each of which will now be discussed in detail.

a. The Condition of Excess
--------------------------

Foolhardiness: Foolhardiness, a disease of the Power of Anger, is
reckless entrance into dangerous and deadly situations despite the
warnings of both reason and religion.

The Holy Qur’an explicitly forbids it when it says:

***....and cast not yourselves by your own hands into destruction
....*****(2:195)**

The way to cure foolhardiness is to think carefully before embarking on
any particular course of action to see whether reason and religion
approve of it or not. If it meets their approval, one may act upon it,
but he must abstain from it if disapproved by any one of them. It may
even be necessary for him to abstain from actions in which the amount of
danger is not great, so as to curtail his propensity for foolhardiness.
He must maintain this course until he is certain that he has been
completely cured of the vice, and until the condition of moderation,
namely courage, has been reached. Once he has reached this state, he
must try to preserve it.

b. The Condition of Deficiency
------------------------------

Cowardice: Cowardice is timidity under circumstances which call for
immediate violent action. Cowardice, the opposite of angry and violent
temper, results in a feeling of inferiority, irresolution, melancholy,
and lack of self-confidence. In a tradition attributed to the Holy
Prophet, it is stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني اعوذ بك من البخل وأعوذ بك من الجبن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O God, I seek Thy refuge from miserliness and cowardice.

The way to treat the disease of cowardice is to stimulate anger and
violent temper in oneself, and take a violent course of action when it
is not too dangerous to do so, until the soul arrives at the state of
courage, which is the moderate condition of the Power of Anger. He must
then be on his guard not to move out of the state of moderation towards
the condition of excess.

c. The Condition of Moderation
------------------------------

Courage: Courage is the manifestation of the Power of Anger in its state
of moderation, and is defined as subservience of the Power of Anger to
the Power of Intellect. This subservience is a most admirable trait, and
is the cause of numerous spiritual virtues. It is attained after
successful struggle against foolhardiness and cowardice as the result of
constant perseverance and exercise.


