Other Vices of the Power of Anger
=================================

The Power of Anger may be afflicted with seventeen different vices,
which we shall now describe in brief.

1. Fear (khawf)
---------------

Fear is an uneasy expectation that something unpleasant might happen.
For example, one may be afraid of boarding a ship or sleeping all alone
in a house. It is clear that there is a difference between cowardice and
fear.

Fear is of two kinds. Firstly, there is the fear of God and fear of sins
and Divine punishment. Secondly, there is the fear of things other than
God. The first kind of fear is praiseworthy, and leads man to
perfection; whereas the second kind of fear is an undesirable vice
brought about by the disease of cowardice.

Inappropriate fear is caused by the possibility that something
unpleasant might happen either to oneself or something or someone dear
to one. For example, one may be afraid of death, fatal danger, dead
bodies, demons, etc. The root cause of these fears is spiritual
weakness, which can be removed by self-examination. For example, if one
realizes that he can do nothing to avert a certain or probable danger of
death and that fear is of no use .in averting it, he will gradually lose
his fear. If his fear of death is caused by an inordinate love of the
world and material things, he must reduce this attachment.

Some fears have imaginary causes, such as the fear of darkness and dead
bodies. In such cases, one should put aside one's fancies and strengthen
one's soul.

The appropriate and praiseworthy kind of fear is that of the majesty and
greatness of God. This fear is also called *khashyah* or *rahbah.* It is
also the fear of sins one has committed and their punishment. The
greater such fear is, the greater the contribution it can make towards
one's spiritual development and perfection. Moreover, the greater and
the deeper one's understanding and knowledge of God is, the greater his
fear of His power shall be. The Holy Qur’an says:

***....Even so only those of His servants fear God who have knowledge***
**.... (35:28)**

Thus in accounts of the lives of saints, we find that occasionally they
would faint because of the intensity of their fear of God.

Intense fear of God is the best controlling force over human spirit;
because it weakens lustful and selfish desires, keeps the self from
rebellion and sin, and tames the human heart into submission to Divine
commands. Furthermore, fear of God annihilates all other fears, making
one strong in confronting injustice, tyranny, and oppression. Speaking
of such people, the Holy Qur’an says:

***....theirs is safety; and they are rightly guided.*** **(6:82)**

And

***....So fear not mankind, but fear Me ....*****(5:44)**

And

***....God is well pleased with them, and they are well pleased with
Him; that is for him who fears his Lord.*** **(98:8)**

And:

***But as for him who feared the Station of his Lord and forbade his
soul from lust, surely Paradise shall be the refuge.*** **(79:40-41)**

And the Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من خاف الله اخاف الله منه كل شيء. ومن لم يخف الله أخافه الله من كل
شيء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever fears God, He will make all things fear him; whoever is not
afraid of God, He will cause him to be afraid of everything.

There are many Qur’anic verses as well as traditions about the merits of
being in fear of God; however, for the sake of brevity, we abstain from
mentioning all of them here.

It must be kept in mind that even in fearing God one must be careful to
stay within the bonds of moderation, so that it should not make one lose
all hope in the mercy of God; since losing one's hope in the mercy and
compassion of God is itself a great sin. The Qur’an says:

***....And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord save those who are
astray?*** **(15:56)**

If the fear of God has been taken to such an extreme, then it must be
counterbalanced with *raja'* or hope in the mercy of God; for, with the
aid of the two wings of hope and fear an individual can ascend to the
highest levels of human perfection. The Qur’an refers to this point in
these words:

***Tell My servants I am the All-Forgiving, the All-Compassionate, and
that My chastisement is the painful chastisement.*** **(15:49-50)**

2. Self Depreciation or Inferiority Complex
-------------------------------------------

This vice, caused by cowardice, is a condition that results when an
individual lacking courage to interfere positively in important matters
fails to carry out his social responsibilities such as persuading others
to perform righteous action and forbidding them from evil deeds.

Treatment of this disease is the same as that which was described in the
case of cowardice. The individual affected by this moral vice should
know that a true believer in God is never subjected to disgrace, and
that God has bestowed honour and dignity on the believer. The Holy
Qur’an says:

***....honour belongs to Allah and to His messenger and the believers***
**.... (63:8)**

There is a tradition which says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الله فوض إلى المؤمن كل شيء إلا اذلال نفسه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

God has assigned to the believer the duty to [suffer] everything except
humiliation of his own self.

The characteristic opposite of self-depreciation is strength of
character and self-respect; that is, one should acquire a temperament
which is unaffected by anything pleasant or painful, either praise or
blame. Imam al-Baqir (A) has been quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المؤمن اصلب من الجبل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A true believer is firmer than a mountain.

In another tradition, he has been quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الله اعطى المؤمن ثلاث خصال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العز في الدنيا والآخرة, والفلح في الدنيا والآخرة والمهابة في صدور
الظالمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

God has bestowed on the believer three qualities: honour in this world
and the Hereafter, salvation in both the worlds, and fear of him in the
hearts of the oppressors.

3. Diffidence
-------------

It means a feeling of inferiority which results in not making an effort
to reach the heights of perfection open to the human being, and being
content with lower and rudimentary attainments. This is one of the
consequences of self-depreciation.

Its opposite is the trait of confidence, which is willingness to make
effort in order to attain felicity in this world and the next and to
attain perfection. The virtue of confidence is brought about by
spiritual qualities of steadfastness, courage, and self-respect. Its
treatment is subsidiary to that of the disease of cowardice, which is
the mother of all vices in this class.

4. Lack of the Sense of Dignity
-------------------------------

This vice consists of a lack of enough attention and failure to take
care of matters which need attention and care, such as faith, honour,
children, and property. This vice is caused by weakness of character and
an inferiority complex. Its opposite is the sense of honour and zeal for
it, which are praiseworthy virtues in man.

In regard to religion, it implies effort to keep it immune from
deviations, zeal in its propagation, effort to comply with religious
laws oneself, and making others follow them too.

With regard to one's honour, it means safeguarding of one's self respect
and effort to preserve one's honour. With regard to one's children, it
means that one must attend to their right upbringing and sound ethical
and cultural development, so that they receive an early moral training,
which becomes a part of their personality. Islam gives great importance
to parents' duties in training and upbringing of their children. This is
discussed in detail in books on tradition.

In regard to one's property and possessions, it means that one should
always consider them as a part of God's blessing and as a trust given to
him by God. He must abstain from excessive consumption and waste,
discharge his religious duties, and not forget to help the needy.

5. Hastiness
------------

It is a state which impels someone to abrupt decision and action without
due thought. This condition is also a consequence of weakness of
character and an inferiority complex. Its opposite is the virtue of
thoughtfulness in action and speech. The outcome of haste is
detrimental, and accompanied by remorse and repentance. In many cases,
the damage caused by hasteful actions may be irreversible.

In order to cure the vice of hastiness, one must understand its dire
consequences, and accustom oneself to dignified behaviour and
thoughtfulness.

6. Ill-feeling Towards the Creator and His Creation
---------------------------------------------------

This is a condition which arises when an individual harbours distrust
and cynicism in regard to God, His creatures, and their works,
interpreting everything in a negative manner. It is also a consequence
of cowardice and product of an inferiority complex; because a weak
charactered person acts according to impressions that his imagination
may produce. In opposition to this trait is good will and trust with
regard to God and men; which means having a favourable attitude towards
every thing; unless there is a clear evidence to the contrary. The
Qur’an says:

***....and you thought evil thoughts, and you were a people
worthless.*** **(48:12)**

Imam Ali (A) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضع أمر أخيك على أحسنه حتى يأتيك ما يغلبك منه,  ولا تظنن بكلمة خرجت من
أخيك سوءا وأنت تجد لها في الخير محملا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Think favourably of what your brother does, unless you find something
that proves the contrary; don't distrust what he says as long as it is
possible for you to consider it right and good.

The way to counteract this vice is to overlook whatever one may see or
hear about his brother in faith, and to preserve a favourable opinion of
him in one's heart, maintaining a respectful and loving attitude towards
him.

7. Anger
--------

Anger is one of the conditions of the soul, and possesses three states.

a. The state of excess, which is defined as what would put one outside
the bounds of religion and its laws.

b. The state of deficiency, which is defined as the state in which one
fails to take a violent action even though it is necessary for his self
defense.

c. The state of moderation, in which anger is stimulated in appropriate
and permissible circumstances. Thus it is clear that the first and the
second states are amongst the vices of the soul, while the third is
amongst ethical virtues produced by courage.

Excessive anger is a fatal disease, which can be considered as a type of
temporary madness. When it subsides, it is immediately followed by
remorse and repentance, which represent healthy responses of a rational
person.

Imam Ali (A) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحدة ضرب من الجنون, لأن صاحبها يندم, فأن لم يندم فجنونه مستحكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Anger is a stroke of madness, since the afflicted later feels remorse
and regrets. If someone does not feel any remorse after anger, it means
that his madness has become fixed.

Moreover, absolute absence of anger is also a vice, which drags man into
humiliation, subjugation and inability to defend his rights. In order to
cure excessive anger, one must first remove its causes. These may be
pride, selfishness, stubbornness, greed and other such vices. One must
also consider how unseemly excessive anger is, and how evil its
consequences may be. Secondly, he must examine the benefits of
forbearance and self-restraint, and associate with people who possess
these qualities.

He must also realize that God's power is supreme, and everything is
under His command, which would make him realize his own weakness
compared with the infinite power of God. Thirdly, he should know that a
person in a state of anger is not loved by God; moreover, he may do
something in anger, of which he will be ashamed later on.

The opposite of anger is mildness and forbearance-characteristics which
count amongst perfect qualities of the soul. They make a person
forgiving and merciful, although he may have complete power to take
revenge. The Holy Qur’an says:

***Keep to forgiveness, and enjoin what is fair, and turn away from the
ignorant.*** **(7:199)**

And the Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العفو لا يزيد العبد إلا عزا فاعفوا يعزكم الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Forgiveness raises a man's station; forgive so that God may honour you.

8. Violence
-----------

Violence consists of use of furious and destructive force either in word
or action, and is one of the consequences of anger. Its opposite is the
virtue of gentleness, which is a product of patience. Addressing the
Prophet (S), the Holy Qur’an says in regard to this trait:

***....for if thou hadst been stern and fierce of heart, they would have
dispersed from about thee ....*****(3:159)**

And in a tradition attributed to the Prophet (S), it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذا أحب الله عبدا أعطاه الرفق, ومن يحرم الرفق يحرم الخير كله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

When God loves one of His servants, He blesses him with the trait of
friendliness, and whoever lacks this trait, lacks all other blessings.

Elsewhere, in a prophetic tradition, it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المداراة نصف الإيمان
  </p>
</blockquote>

Consideration and kindness for people is half of the faith.

9. Ill-temper
-------------

This vice is also caused by anger, and its opposite is
good-temperedness. This vice causes people to shun someone who possesses
it, and brings him ruin in this world and the next. It also destroys all
of one's good works. The Prophet (S) has been quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سوء الخلق يفسد العمل كما يفسد الخل العسل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ill-temper ruins good works, just as vinegar ruins honey.

Addressing the Prophet (S), the Qur’an says:

***Surely thou art of a mighty morality.*** **(68:4)**

10. Rancour
-----------

Rancour is also caused by anger, and is a complex formed when anger is
suppressed. It has evil consequences such as jealousy and severance of
relations with someone against whom it is directed, and may result in
physical assault, passing of illegitimate remarks about him, spreading
of lies, backbiting, slander, divulging of his secrets, etc.

Sometimes rancour comes out into the open and manifests itself as
outright hostility, resulting in confrontation, fighting, cursing and
name-calling-all of which are fatal vices.

The way to cure this spiritual disease is that the afflicted individual
must first understand that the feeling of rancour hurts one who harbours
it in his heart more than the 'person against whom it is directed.
Secondly, he must decide to adopt an attitude of friendliness and
helpfulness towards the individual towards whom he feels rancorous, do
good things for him even though his emotions pull him in the opposite
direction, and continue his affectionate attitude towards him until he
is rid of this disease.

11. Self-conceit and Vanity
---------------------------

This is another vice of the Power of Anger-a condition in which a man
thinks highly of himself on account of some advantage, real or imagined.
On the other hand, he fails to acknowledge the attributes of perfection
of God, Who is the source of all things. A great number of traditions
point out the evilness of this trait. One quotes the Prophet (S) as
having said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لو لم تذنبوا لخشيت عليكم ما هو أكبر من ذلك, العجب العجب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Even if you do not commit any sins, I fear that you may fall into
something which is worse: conceit! conceit!

The evil products of self-conceit and vanity are: arrogance;
forgetfulness; negligence of one's faults, and, therefore, failure to
correct them; falling of the worth of one's deeds in the eyes of men and
God; absence of gratitude for God's blessings, and thus risking their
loss; failure to ask questions about the things one is ignorant of, and,
therefore, remaining in ignorance; and finally, holding and proclaiming
of incorrect and unfounded opinions.

In order to cure an individual of this disease, it is necessary for him
to turn his attention towards God and to know Him. When he realizes that
only the omnipotent Creator deserves worship and praise, and that he is
nothing in comparison with the majesty of God, and that there is
absolutely nothing which he may call his own, and that even beings far
more superior to himself, such as the prophets and angels, are nothing
in comparison with God, he shall awake to the fact that it is absurd to
be conceited and vain, and that he must consider himself what, in truth,
he is: an insignificant creature of God.

When man contemplates his humble beginnings as a sperm-drop, his certain
end as a handful of dust, and the brief interval of his life as a
wretched creature prone to disease and dominated and driven by lust and
instincts, he will forget not only his vanity but his very self, and
devote his entire being to the worship of God. The Qur’an says:

***Perish man! How unthankful he is! Of what did He create him? Of a
sperm drop. He created him, and proportioned him, then the way eased for
him, then makes him to die, and buries him; then, when He wills, He
raises him.*** **(80:17-22)**

And we have the following couplet from a Persian poet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بر مال و جمال خويشتن غره مشو كان را به شبى برند و اين را به تبى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Don't boast of your riches, vigour and elegance,*

*Since one of them can be taken away in one night by thieves, and the
other can vanish at a single stroke of fever.*

It must be kept in mind that vanity and self-conceit may also be caused
when one is favoured with such Divine blessings as knowledge, devotion,
piety, faith, courage, generosity, patience, an honourable ancestry,
beauty, wealth, strength, high position, intelligence, and so on. In
order to avoid such an outcome, one must always remember one's
weaknesses and shortcomings; such remembrance will help him to avert
conceit.

The opposite of self-conceit and vanity is modesty, which is a most
worthy trait that brings about edification of the soul and man's
perfection.

12. Arrogance
-------------

Arrogance is one of the consequences of vanity and self-conceit. When an
individual thinks too highly of himself, it is self-conceit; and when he
tends, moreover, to consider others as inferior to-himself, that is
arrogance. In contrast to these states, when one thinks of himself as
small and insignificant, that is called modesty; and when, in addition
to this, he considers others as superior to himself, that is called
humility. In any case, arrogance is one of the most fatal of moral
vices. This is so because arrogance is a thick veil which hides one's
shortcomings from his own view, and thus prevents him from removing them
and attaining perfection. The Holy Qur’an says:

***....Thus does Allah seal every proud, arrogant heart.*** **(40:35)**

And

***I shall turn away from My Revelations those who magnify themselves***
**.... (7:146)**

And the Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يدخل الجنة من كان في قلبه مثقال حبة من خردل من كبر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who has even a particle of pride in his heart, shall not enter
paradise.

Jesus (A) has said: "Just as a plant grows in soft ground, not where it
is rocky and hard, so also wisdom sprouts and grows in a heart which is
humble and soft, not in the hard hearts of the arrogant. Don't you see
that the man who keeps his head high bashes it against the roof, while
one who holds his head low has the roof as his friend and shelter?"

The cure of arrogance is the same as that prescribed for the vice of
self-conceit. Another remedy is to study the various Qur’anic verses and
traditions which deal with this vice and condemn it. One must also
persevere in the practice of humility towards God and men, associate
with the poor and the weak, abstain from ostentatious dressing, put on
simple dress, be on equal good terms with the poor and the rich alike,
greet everyone regardless of his age, and abstain from seeking a seat at
a high place of honour at gatherings. In short, he must resist all those
selfish desires which contribute to make him arrogant.

The opposite of arrogance is humility, and is one of the most
praiseworthy of moral virtues. The Holy Qur’an makes this statement
about the virtue of humility:

***The (faithful) servants of the All-Merciful are they who walk upon
the. earth with humility, and when the ignorant address them, answer:
Peace.*** **(2.5:63)**

***And lower thy wing (in kindness) unto those believers who follow
thee.*** **(26:215)**

It should be noted that humility is the middle ground between arrogance
and abjectness, and just as the former is a vice, so is the latter. The
difference between abjectness and humility is also clear. Thus while it
is praiseworthy for man to be humble, it is a vice to abase oneself.

13. Rebelliousness
------------------

A form of arrogance, it is also a fatal vice. It is defined as rebelling
against all those to whom it is necessary to be obedient, such as:
prophets and their vicegerents, righteous governments, teachers,
parents, etc. In a prophetic tradition, we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن اعجل الشر عقوبة البغي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The sin quickest to be punished is that of rebelliousness.

The Prophet (S) has also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حق على الله عز وجل الا يبغي شيء على شيء إلا اذله الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is the right of God to humble anything that rebels against anything
else.

Imam Ali (A) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان البغي يقود اصحابه إلى النار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rebelliousness drives the rebellious towards the Fire.

The way to cure the vice of rebelliousness is for the afflicted to
meditate upon his spiritual condition and refer to traditions in which
rightful obedience is enjoined, and at the same time strive to promote
the spirit of humility in himself.

14. Blindness to One's Faults
-----------------------------

This is another result of vanity and self-conceit. Its opposite is
awareness of one's faults and shortcomings.

15. Fanaticism
--------------

Fanaticism is another moral vice which leads to degeneration of the
afflicted person's mind and understanding. Prejudice may exist in regard
to one's religious beliefs, nation, tribe, family, or other such things,
and may be manifested through one's speech or action. When fanaticism is
in regard to appropriate things, it is called enthusiasm and zeal, and
is most praiseworthy. If, on the other hand, it is in regard to
inappropriate things, it would be a vice.

There is a prophetic tradition that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من كان في قلبه حبة من خردل من عصبية بعثه الله يوم القيامة مع اعراب
الجاهلية
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever has the least amount of fanaticism in his heart shall be raised
by God on the Day of Resurrection together with the pagan Arabs of
pre-Islamic times.

The way to cure the vice of fanaticism is for the afflicted individual
to engage in introspection, and to realize the fact that fanaticism
blocks one's development and clouds his understanding of reality. Thus,
if he seeks to know the truth, he must set aside blind .fanaticism and
prejudice, and examine things in an objective and dispassionate manner.

16. Concealing Truth
--------------------

The vice of misrepresentation and concealment of the truth is caused by
fanaticism, cowardice or fear. It may also be caused by the desire for
wealth or similar motives. In any case, this vice leads one to deviate
from the straight path, and brings about moral degeneration. The
opposite is revealing of the truth and steadfastness on the path of
truth. There are numerous traditions and Qur’anic verses which condemn
concealing of truth and praise the truthful. Some of the verses that
most clearly and directly state this matter are the following:

***....Why do you confound the truth with falsehood and knowingly
conceal the truth?*** **(3:71)**

***....And who is more unjust than he who hides a testimony which he
hath received from Allah? ....*****(2:140)**

***Those who hide the clear signs and the guidance that We have sent
down, after We had made it clear for mankind in the Book-they shall be
cursed by God and the cursers.*** **(2:159)**

To cure oneself of this disease, one should note the fact that this
trait earns Divine anger and may lead to *kufr* (infidelity). Moreover,
he should meditate on the benefits of giving expression to truth, and
then compel himself to follow it in action.

17. Callousness and Cruelty
---------------------------

When an individual is afflicted by the vice of callousness and cruelty,
he is not affected or saddened by the pains and sufferings of his fellow
men. Its opposite is the virtue of mercy and compassion. There are a
number of Qur’anic verses which reproach this vice, and praise
compassion and love.

Treatment and cure of this disease is most difficult, because cruelty
and callousness sink into one's character, and become chronic and
difficult to cure.

The best treatment for this disease is for the afflicted person to
avoid, first of all, cruel actions, which are outward manifestations of
this vice. Next, he should make an effort to share in the sufferings and
difficulties faced by others, and consider their problems to be his own.
Furthermore, he should try to react in an appropriate manner to such
situations, until, gradually, he begins to taste the flavour of
compassion, slowly making it permanent within himself.


