Vices of the Power of Passion
=============================

The third of the four sections of the book deals with the diseases of
the Power of Passion and their treatment. These diseases are of ten
kinds, and we shall briefly discuss each of them.

1. Love of the World
--------------------

The best definition of this vice and the "world" condemned therein is to
be found in the following verse of the Holy Qur’an:

***Decked out fair to mankind is the love of lusts-women, children,
stored-up heaps of gold and silver, horses of mark, cattle and tillage.
That is the enjoyment of the life of the world; but God-with Him is the
fairest resort.*** **(3:14)**

It must be kept in mind that all the things mentioned in this Qur’anic
verse, being Divine blessings, may not be condemned. Moreover, proper
use of Divine blessings is also not an unworthy thing to do. However,
what is undesirable is becoming attached to these things, and giving
them a fundamental significance in one's life-an emphasis which may
exceed even that given to God.

But if these things do not take the place of God and were to be used as
means of attaining self-development and acquiring nearness to God, not
only this is not objectionable but highly desirable. Therefore, the
condemnation and praise of the world that we come across in the Qur’an
or *hadith* relate to the kind of use the world and its things are put
to.

If someone makes the world his idol, and is engulfed in worldly hopes to
such an extent that he forgets God and the Hereafter, or sells the
Hereafter for the world (2:86)-to use a Qur’anic expression-then we can
say that such a man has fallen victim to the disease of the "love of the
world." One Prophetic *hadith* delineates the features of the lovers of
the world in these words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من اصبح والدنيا اكبر همه فليس من الله في شيء, والزم الله قلبه اربع
خصال: هما لا ينقطع عنه ابدا, وشغلا لا يتفرع منه ابدا, وفقرا لا ينال
غناه ابدا, واملا لا يبلغ منتهاه ابدا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One who wakes up with his whole attention directed towards the world is
cut off from God, and God shall make four qualities to accompany him:
endless sorrow, never ending occupation, a neediness which is never
relieved, and a hope which is never achieved.

In order to cure this disease one must meditate on the fact that the
good things of the world are transitory, and what remains for man are
spiritual attainments, nearness to God, and the efforts made in
preparation for the Hereafter.

2. Love of Wealth and Richness
------------------------------

This vice is a branch of the disease of the love of the world, and
whatever was said in praise and condemnation of the world could be said
about riches. Some Qur’anic verses and traditions have praised wealth
and riches, while others condemn it.

There is, however, no contradiction between them; because those verses
and traditions that condemn it, are meant to condemn riches which
alienate man from God and the Hereafter; whereas those which praise
wealth and riches refer to the wealth that serves to uplift human
character and brings man closer to God. In a Qur’anic verse we read:

***O believers, let not your wealth nor your children distract you from
remembrance of Allah. Those who do so, they are the losers.***
**(63:9)**

And in another verse, a nation is called to implore for God's
forgiveness and the following favours are promised:

***...And will help you with wealth and sons, and will appoint for you
gardens,and will appoint for you rivers.*** **(71:12)**

And according to narrations, the Prophet (S) has been quoted as both
praising and condemning wealth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حب المال والشرف بنبتان النفاق, كما ينبت الماء البقل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The love of wealth and position nourish Hypocrisy *(nifaq)* just as
plants are nourished by water.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نعم المال الصالح للرجل الصالح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

How fair is rightly acquired wealth in the possession of an upright man.

In any case, the proper and right kind of wealth is one which has been
acquired in a legitimate manner, and which is used in God's good
pleasure-such as for *hajj, jihad,* helping the needy, and all other
kinds of charities aimed at public welfare.

*Zuhd (Abstinence):* The opposite of cherishing the world is *zuhd,*
which is abstinence from worldly affairs, both inwardly and outwardly,
except for such things as are necessary for the purpose of acquiring the
bounties of the Hereafter, and for attaining nearness to God. The
*zahid* has been highly praised in Qur’anic verses and *hadith*; *zuhd*
is considered as one of the traits of Divine prophets and saints.

*Zuhd* has different degrees, which are:

*1.* Abstinence from sins.

2. Abstinence from things which are *"mushtabah,"* that is things which
are not known with certainty to be forbidden, but which are suspect.

3. Abstinence from what is more than needed.

4. Abstinence from the pursuit of selfish desires.

5. Abstinence from everything except God;'i.e. confining one's attention
to the Creator, being content with the minimum needed to meet one's
physical needs, and giving away the rest in the way of God.

People practise *zuhd* for three different reasons:

1. In order to escape the Hellfire. This kind of *zuhd* is called *"zuhd
al-Kha'ifin,"* or the "abstinence of the fearful."

2. In order to gain God's good pleasure and to attain the joys of
paradise. This kind of *zuhd* is called *"zuhd al-rajin"* or the
"abstinence of the hopeful."

3. For obtaining Divine communion. This is the highest aim and the most
worthy form of *zuhd,* practised neither out of fear of hell nor desire
for the pleasures of paradise.

3. Affluence and Opulence
-------------------------

It means being in possession of life's necessities and it has many
degrees, at times leading, to great amount of wealth and hoarding of
riches. The opposite of it is poverty and neediness, which means lack of
life's necessities.

Both affluence and poverty may either uplift man's character or destroy
him.

If affluence is acquired through legitimate means, and the surplus
wealth above his needs is spent for the sake of God and in the service
of His creatures, it is considered as one of the virtues. If, however,
it has been obtained through illegitimate means, through injustice and
exploitation, and the affluent person is heedless of the needs of the
deprived and the destitute, it will lead to his certain destruction. The
Qur’an says:

***No indeed; surely man waxes insolent, if he considers himself
affluent.*** **(96:6-7)**

In the same way, poverty too, if accompanied by forbearance,
resignation, and contentment leads man to spiritual edification;
otherwise, it will also lead him to destruction. Thus, if we see that in
Qur’anic verses and traditions sometimes affluence and poverty are
acclaimed and condemned at other times, it is because if these states
are accompanied by proper conditions they are desirable, otherwise
undesirable and abominable.

4. Greed (Hirs)
---------------

Greed is a condition which makes man dissatisfied with whatever he
possesses and makes him yearn for yet more. Greed is one of the worst of
destructive vices, and is not limited to worldly possession, but also
includes indulgence in food, sex and other things

The Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يشيب ابن آدم ونشب فيه خصلتان: الحرص, وطول الأمل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

As man grows in age, two of his characteristics become young: greed, and
far fetched hopes.

Imam Abu Ja'far al-Baqir has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مثل الحريص على الدنيا كمثل دودة القز, كلما ازدادت على نفسها لفا كان
أبعد لها من الخروج, حتى تموت غما.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The greedy man in his love of the world is like the silk-worm: the more
it wraps itself in its cocoon the less chance it has of escaping from
it, until finally it dies of grief.

The opposite of greed is the virtue of contentment, which enables man to
control his desires and to be content with having the necessities of
life. One who has this virtue always lives honourably and respectably,
as a free man; he is immune from the vices of affluence in this world
and the consequent punishment in the Hereafter.

In order to free oneself from the vice of greed one must meditate on its
evil and harmful consequences and realize that greed is a characteristic
of animals, who recognize no restrictions for gratification of their
sensual desires, and use all means to attain it. It is thus necessary
for the individual to free himself from this vice and bring his
rebellious self under control.

5. Avarice (tama\`)
-------------------

Caused by the love of the world, avarice is another type of moral vice,
and is defined as having one's eye on the possessions of others. The
opposite of this vice is being independent of others and indifferent to
what is in their hands. There are numerous traditions in praise of being
independent of others and in condemnation of avarice. Here we shall
quote two traditions in praise of being self-sufficient, which also
condemn avarice. Imam al-Baqir has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بئس العبد عبد له طمع يقوده, وبئس العبد عبد له رغبة تذله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

What an evil creature is he who is led by his avarice. What an evil
creature is he whose desire earns him ignominy.

Imam \`Ali (A) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إستغن عمن شئت تكن تظيره، وارغب الى من شئت تكن أسيره، واحسن الى من شئت
تكن أميره.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whomever you are able to do without, you will be able to become his
peer. Whomever you are fond of, you will become his captive. Whomever
you are generous to, you will be able to become his master.

6. Miserliness (Bukhl)
----------------------

Miserliness is defined as being parsimonious where one should be
generous, just as prodigality, which is its opposite, is defined as
being lavish where one should practise frugality. The middle path
between these two extremes is *sakhd';* this is, being generous when
generosity is called for. The Qur’an, describing the characteristics of
the believers, who are also called *\`ibad al-Rahman"*or "the slaves of
the All-merciful," says:

***...who, when they expend, are neither prodigal nor parsimonious, but
between that is a just stand.*** **(25:67)**

Whereas miserliness *(bukhl)* is caused by the love of the world,
generosity *(sakha')* is a consequence of *zuhd.* There are numerous
verses and traditions in praise and condemnation of each of these
qualities, which we shall leave unmentioned for brevity's sake. The
highest degree of generosity is sacrifice, i.e. readiness to give to
others what one needs oneself. Describing the believers the Qur’an says:

***....and preferring others above themselves though poverty be their
lot...*** **(59:9)**

In order to cure oneself of the disease of miserliness, it is necessary
to pay attention to the Qur’anic verses and traditions in which this
vice is condemned, and to meditate about its harmful results. If that
proves ineffective, one must force oneself to be generous and liberal,
even if such generosity be completely artificial; and this must be
continued until generosity becomes one's second nature.

Generosity is necessary when carrying out such obligatory duties
*(wajibat)* as paying *khums* and *zakat,* providing for one's wife and
children, incurring expenditures for *hajj* (pilgrimage) and so on. It
is also necessary in carrying out the recommended duties
*(mustahabbat),* such as helping the poor, giving presents, giving
parties in order to create or solidify ties of friendship or kinship,
giving loans, giving more time to debtors in financial hardship,
providing clothes and housing for the needy, spending what is necessary
to safeguard one's honour or to alleviate injustice, and contributing to
expenditures for such public facilities as mosques, bridges, etc.

7. Illegitimate earning
-----------------------

This vice consists of amassing wealth in an illegitimate manner without
caring to avoid *haram* and forbidden means of earning. This vice is
caused by greed and the love of the world, and results in moral
deterioration and the loss of human dignity. Several verses of the Holy
Qur’an and many traditions severely warn about approaching *haram* means
of income and remind of the dire consequences of it.

It must be kept in mind that wealth is of three kinds:

1. That which is purely *halal* (legitimately acquired).

2. That which is totally *haram* (illegitimately earned).

3. That which is mixed up of both *haram* and *halal* earnings.

What is *halal* is usable and what is either *haram* or of doubtful
origin *(mushtabah)* must be avoided. *Haram* things are of many kinds,
such as pork or dog's flesh, alcoholic drinks, all those things whose
consumption may harm the body, anything gained through force, injustice,
or theft, earnings made through unlawful practices, such as cheating in
weight or hours of work, hoarding, bribery, usury, and all other
illegitimate means which have been described in detail in the books on
Islamic *fiqh* (jurisprudence).

The opposite of earning through *haram* means is abstinence from all
forms of *haram* practices *(wara\` an al-haram).* This virtue can
gradually become a habit in the individual through the exercise of self
restraint, so that he will ultimately be able to abstain from even those
things which are *mushtabah* (i.e. of doubtful legitimacy). A prophetic
tradition says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من اكل الحلال اربعين يوما, نور الله قلبه, واجرى ينابيع الحكمة من قلبه
على لسانه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever lives on halal earnings for forty days, God shall enlighten his
heart and cause springs of wisdom to emanate from his heart flowing to
his tongue.

8. Treachery (Khiyaniah)
------------------------

Treachery is another type of the vices belonging to the Power of
Passion. Treachery may occur in regard to money or as a violation of
trust. It may occur in regard to honour, power, or position. The
opposite of treachery is trustworthiness *('amanah),* which also applies
to all things mentioned about treachery; that is, one's property and
possessions, which are Divine trusts; one's family, one's position, the
authority and power one wields.

One must always remember that all of the things mentioned are blessings
of God, accompanied by specific responsibilities, violation of which
amounts to treachery. The wise Luqman has been quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما بلغت الى ما بلغت اليه من الحكمة, إلا بصدق الحديث وأداء الأمانة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I did not attain my station of wisdom except through truthfulness and
fulfillment of trust.

9. Licentiousness and Profligacy
--------------------------------

These include such vicious practices as adultery, fornication, sodomy,
intoxication, and all other forms of extravagance-all of which arise out
of the Power of Passion, and drag man down into a beastly mode of life.
There are numerous Qur’anic verses, traditions and narratives in
condemnation of this sort of behaviour, mentioning of which is
unnecessary since they are widely known.

10. Delving in Obscene and Haram Matters
----------------------------------------

This vice consists of discussing unlawful and *haram* actions, relishing
such talk, and exchanging obscene jokes and stories not befitting human
dignity and station. Since the *haram* and obscene is of many kinds,
delving in them can also be classified variously.

In order to be freed of this vice, one must control and limit his talk,
and speak only of such matters as would please God. The Holy Qur’an
quotes the inmates of hell as saying:

***And we used to plunge [in vain talk] with the plungers. (74:45)***

And in another verse, it warns against organizing parties for such
purposes:

***...do not sit with them [who disbelieve and mock] until they plunge
in some other talk*** **....(4:140)**

One of the many forms this vice takes is delving in futile and frivolous
matters-discussions which are of no benefit whatsoever either in this
world or the next. Moreover, such talk involves waste of one's time and
is an obstacle to useful contemplation and thought. This is why the
virtue of silence has been upheld in opposition to this vice. And what
is meant by \`silence' here is not that one should be permanently
taciturn, but rather that one should protect his tongue and ears from
useless and nonsensical talk. In other words, one should be careful in
speech, saying only those things that are beneficial to both our worldly
existence and our Hereafter. The wise have said: "Two things can destroy
a man: too much wealth and garrulousness. "The Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طوبى لمن أمسك الفضل من لسانه, وانفق الفضل من ماله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Blessed is he who is frugal in speech and generous with regard to his
possessions.


