Etiquette of Dressing & Wearing Shoes
=====================================

1. Elegant and Proper Clothing:
-------------------------------

A person should clothe himself neatly and decently according to his
position in life; provided, what he wears has been acquired through
legitimate (halal) means; and if he cannot clothe himself properly
through legitimate means, then he should try to be decent within his
limits, as recorded in most of the reliable traditions of Islam.
However, acquisition of a variety of dresses should not be exceeded to
an extent as to tempt one during his prayers. If God has bestowed one
with suitable income or increased it, then one should eat, clothe and
spend accordingly, keeping in view one's fellow brothers; and in case
one's income is meagre one should adjust and keep away from
non-legitimate (haram) means of earning.

It is an acknowledged fact that Imam Ali Al-Reza (a.s.) used to sit on a
mat woven with date-leaves during summer, and on coarse jute cloth in
winter. But when he ventured outside his home he was elegantly dressed
from head to foot to show the world the blessings of Almighty.

It is narrated from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that decency and
cleanliness in one's outfit are highly endearing to God and those who
practise otherwise, displease Almighty. He likes His creatures to be
properly dressed and perfumed and to keep their houses spick and span,
and light then before sunset, so that poverty should disappear and their
sources be increased.

A historical incident reflecting the attitude of the chosen one of God,
Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) is thus narrated. One of the leaders of the
Ascetic Sufi school of thought tried to belittle and tease the Imam
(a.s.) before the whole congregation while he was seated in Masjid
al-Haram, elegantly attired. He approached the Imam (a.s.) and
questioned him why he was so decently attired when the Holy Prophet and
other ancestors of the Imam (a.s.) never were. The Imam (a.s.) recited
the following verse from the Holy Book;

Say: (O Our Messenger Mohammed) "Who hath prohibited the adornment
(granted) of Allah, which He hath brought forth for His servants and the
good things of the provisions?"

and elaborated that in the days of Prophet there was poverty while at
present there was economic prosperity and as such pious people had a
better right of spending to display the generosity of God. Further,
revealing the clothes he was wearing underneath, he said that the
outward attire is just for the view of the world but underneath he was
coarsely dressed for the sake of his soul.

2. Materials which are not permitted to be worn:
------------------------------------------------

Men are not permitted to use pure silk and brocade and are asked to be
careful that their headgear and all those clothings which do not cover
the private parts should not be made of silk. Even certain accessories
of clothing, like borders, frills etc. should only be made of artificial
silk, cotton or any cloth, where silk is one tenth of the other yarn
used in the material. Cloth made of any yarn except silk is preferable.
Non-essential parts of clothing like handkerchief, shawl etc. can be
made of silk.

It is better for children who have not come of age, to be stopped from
wearing pure silk and gold; as according to the tradition of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) as narrated by Hazrat Ali (a.s.), the Prophet had
asked Ali (a.s.) not to wear a golden ring and silk as he would be
dressed in silk in paradise and decorated with gold. Though Ali (a.s.)
never used to wear these but it was an indirect address to the people.
Some persons had asked Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) whether they could
dress their children in gold. The Imam (a.s.) ordered them to refrain
from using gold themselves and dressing their children (not having come
of age) in gold; only their women and (female) slaves could use it.

3. Instructions about cotton wool and artificial silk:
------------------------------------------------------

It is narrated by Ameer-ul-Momineen, Hazrat Ali (a.s.), that cotton and
woolen cloth should be used, as the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and Ahle
Bait (a.s.) wore them. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used woolen cloth
when required.

There is a tradition related with Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) from Husain
Ibne Kaseer who saw Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) wearing a woolen cloak
over coarse cloth. After praising the Imam (a.s.) he asked why he wore
the woolen over coarse as he thought the woolen to be abominable
(makrooh). The Imam (a.s.) replied that his ancestor, Imam Zainul
Abedeen (a.s.) used to wear coarse cloth while praying and therefore the
Ahle Bait did likewise.

4. Colours of the dress which are sunnat or makrooh
---------------------------------------------------

It is related from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that white colour is the
best and suited to men who should also be provided with a white winding
sheet.

5. Tradition
------------

According to a tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) he saw Hazrat
Ali (a.s.) buying three clothes for a gold coin. The shirt measured till
the ankle, the Tahmad measured from the waist down to the knee and the
shawl not only covered his chest, but was much longer than his back.
After having bought these clothes Hazrat Ali (a.s.) looked at the sky,
thanked God and returned to his lodging.

According to Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) God ordered the Prophet to keep his
clothes clean and it meant that the clothes should not be so long as to
gather dirt and must be free from impurities.

As related by Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
advised a person not to have his shirt and pyjama too long, as it is a
sign of pride and God does not allow the proud to come near.

6. About the clothes which are particularly used by women and non-muslims:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Men are prohibited from wearing women's face-covering sheet (Muqna),
veil, bodice and Burqa etc. and women should not wear men's clothes such
as cap, cloak, cassock (qaba) etc. Both men and women are prohibited
from adopting the particular headgears by which the Jews, Nusairis and
other non Muslims are identified. According to Imam Baqir (a.s.) men
should not use make up like women and women should not make up
themselves like men as the Holy Prophet had cursed such men and women.

It is stated in Fiqha-ur-Riza that one should wear the pyjama while
sitting and recite the following prayer:

‘I begin with the name of Allah (Oh Allah!) Draw a veil over my nudity
and let me not be insulted on the Day of Judgement! Shower me with
chastity and separate not me from my faith!’

People who do not practise this are faced with disease and death.
According to a tradition, all the Prophets and even Hazrat
Ameer-ul-Momineen (a.s.) used to put on the shirt before wearing pyjama.

7. Instructions about wearing and cutting new cloth:
----------------------------------------------------

According to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.), a person while putting on a new
dress should recite the following prayer:

‘O Allah make this cloth to be the cause of peace, piety and reward! O
Allah as long as I go on wearing this dress let me be able to carry out
Thy worship in its entirety, and let me be able to be obedient to Thy
bidding and thankful for Thy blessings. All praise is for Allah who has
given me such a garment that covers me up and is a source of respect and
decency among people.’

According to a tradition coming down from Hazrat Ali (a.s.), the Holy
Prophet had given the following prayer to Ali (a.s.) that he may recite
it while putting on new clothes.

‘O Allah make this dress such a source of blessing that whatever I may
try after putting it on should be for gaining Thy goodwill and for
populating Thy mosque (centres of prayers).’

The Prophet had said that those who recite this prayer will have their
sins forgiven.

According to another tradition, Ali (a.s.) asked those who were putting
on new clothes to recite so:

‘There is no God but one Allah and Muhammed is His Messenger.’, that
they may be protected from all the troubles and every single thread of
such a garment will ensure constant happiness as long as it lasts.

8. How to put on and take off one's dress:
------------------------------------------

According to Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) man should not keep his body naked
at any time, night or day.

Hazrat Ali (a.s.) seems to have stated that a naked man is an easy
victim to the devil and his temptations; and a man while sitting among a
certain number of people should lower his thighs. He also asked men to
recite Bismillah while taking off the clothes that the jinn may not wear
them as they do during the night, when we do not say Bismillah.

According to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) Janabe Fatima (a.s.) used to
have Muqna so wide that it reached her limbs. All women should be
likewise.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) muslim women should not use
transparent veil or clothing. Another tradition states that a person
asked Hazrat Moosa Kazim (a.s.) if possessing ten garments was supposed
to be a luxury. The Imam (a.s.) replied on the contrary that the extra
dresses will help men to keep tidy provided those clothes or garments
are kept washed and clean, away from dirty places.

According to Ameer-ul-Momineen (a.s.) wearing of clean clothes keeps
sadness away and helps in the prayers being answered.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that a man who patches his garment,
stitches his worn out shoes and carries his own purchases home, will be
protected from pride.

9. Socks and shoes:
-------------------

For sandals and shoes, the best colour is yellow and next comes white.

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.) fine shoes keep the body free from germs
and diseases. They also help in wazoo (ablution) and Namaz (prayers) as
the shoes keep the feet free from dirt.

According to Sarraf, when he went before Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.)
while having white shoes on the Imam (a.s.) asked him if it was
intentional and before Sarraf could answer, the Imam (a.s.) said that
any person who buys a white shoe will get money from unknown sources
before the shoe gets worn out. Saraf said, that hardly had he started
wearing them, when he got hundred gold coins from a place which he could
not even dream of.

10. How to wear socks, shoes and sandals:
-----------------------------------------

According to a tradition related to Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and Imam
Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), the shoe should be put on the right foot first
and then on the left; but while taking them off, the shoe of the left
foot should be taken off first. It is also stated that anyone who has a
shoe on one foot and none on the other, and walks thus, will be tempted
by the devil and will go mad.

According to Abdul Rehman Ibne Kaseer, once while he was walking with
Imam-e-Sadiq (a.s.), Imam (a.s.)'s sandal belt broke. Ibne Kaseer
immediately took out a new belt and started repairing the sandal. All
that while the Imam (a.s.) kept his hand on his shoulder and said that
if someone helps a momin while his sandal is being repaired, God will
give him a fast camel on the Day of Judgement to enter heavens on it.

Another tradition from Abdul Rehman Ibne Abdullah states that he once
went to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) accompanied with another man. When
they arrived at the Imam's place, he (the Imam (a.s.)) took out his
sandals and said that a person should take out his sandals while
sitting, that the feet may feel comfortable.

It is further stated that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) prohibited walking
with one shoe on and also to put on shoes while standing or walking.

A chapter on salvation (Kitabe-Najat) in Makaremul-Akhlaq states that
one should put on socks and sandals while sitting and recite the
following prayer:

‘I begin with the name of Allah. O Allah shower thy grace (send durood)
on Muhammad and Ale-Muhammad and keep my feet steady in this world and
that to come and on the Day when the best of the people will tumble on
the Bridge of Sirat! Thou keep both my feet steady.’

And take them off standing and recite:

‘I begin with the name of Allah! All praise is to God who has blessed
with a thing that preserves both my feet from pain. O God keep both my
feet steady on the Bridge of Sirat and let them not go astray from the
right path.’


