Classes of Human Beings, their Rights and the Manner of Living with other people
================================================================================

1. The rights of relatives, slaves (males and females):
-------------------------------------------------------

It is stated in many reliable traditions that pity on the day of
resurrection will hold the heavens of God and beseech the Almighty to
render kindness on those who were kind to their relations and not to be
kind to those who were not kind to them during their hours on earth.

According to many traditions, being kind to the relatives makes your
action be rewarded for, increases your daily earnings, makes worries
disappear, increases age, and the ordeal on giving account of one's
action on the day of resurrection becomes easier.

A reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that there
are two ends of Pul-e-Sirat, there is Amanat (trust) on one end and pity
and kindness to relatives on the other end. Therefore people who have
never misused the trust kept in them and have been kind to their
relatives will cross the path very easily and will enter heaven; but
those who have misappropriated the trust preserved with them and have
spoken badly about their relatives, will not be benefitted by their
deeds and they will be thrown from Pul-e-Sirat.

According to another tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), a
person inquired from him whether he had any obligation towards his
relatives who are not Shias. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) emphasised that
the person is obliged to be kind towards his non-shia relatives, for
kindness cannot be deprived to anyone whoever he may be. However, if the
relatives are Shias, one is doubly obliged. One should not only show
kindness to them which is their due but should take into consideration
their being one of the brotherhood - namely, Muslims or Shias. Further
it is stated that dispersing kindness with people of one's religion will
make it easier for one to render his accounts on the Day of Judgement;
besides, many sins will be forgiven. Therefore, it is advisable not to
restrain from kindness whether it is with brothers of your own religion
or with others, though it may be just greeting them or responding to
their greetings.

According to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), there are things, the doer of
which gets punished before he dies; these being, cruelty, restraining of
kindness to one's relations and false swearings and promises. However,
at times, even the children and fortune of people of bad character may
increase as a reward to kindness to relatives and false promises destroy
homes and generations.

In another tradition it was stated that three types of people will never
be able to enter heaven, those who always take wine, who always indulge
in magic and lastly, those who have always withheld dispersing kindness.

It is also upheld that those who fulfill and encourage the obligations
of their relatives will be rewarded by being elevated to a thousand and
two thousand stages, the distance between each of them being that of a
complete hundred years. The first stage will be of silver, the second
will be of gold, the third of pearl (marvarid), the fourth will be of
emeral, the fifth of zaberad (jade), the next of musk, followed by that
of umber, camphor, and

so on and so forth, the stages being made from all the materials which
the Almighty God has promised.

A reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) quotes that the
Prophet, on the holy night of Me'raj saw a person holding fast the
heavens and complaining about one of his relatives. The Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) asked the Almighty God the proximity of relationship between
the person and the relative he was complaining about. God said unto the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that there was a distance of forty generations
between the man and his cousin.

In a tradition from Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), it is stated that when a
person hits his slave (male or female), without any justification
according to Shara and even if the act is within the limits fixed by
God, the only way of accounting for that act is by freeing that slave.

Another tradition from the same Imam (a.s.) states that Zarrara asked
him about the attitude of a master towards his slaves. The Imam (a.s.)
answered that an act unintentionally done by them is not punishable, but
when they are persistantly and intentionally disobeying the will of the
master, then they can be punished. When Zarrara further questioned about
the limit of punishment, the Imam (a.s.) stated that it should not be
more than three or four whips.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), if a slave is Momin and has
worked for one for seven years, then he should be freed. After that
taking work from him is not permissible. The religious scholars and
divines have restricted this hadeeth of freeing the slave after seven
years as Sunnate Mowakkedah.

According to a tradition from Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), a man
possessing the following four characteristics will be forgiven and will
be placed highly in the values of realms of heaven; one who shelters an
orphan and takes interestin the circumstances and problems in which an
orphan is placed and is kind to him in a fatherly way, giving him the
love of parents; one who is kind and helpful to weak; one who spends on
his parents and is kind and thoughtful while looking towards them; and
lastly, one who is not furious in his behaviour towards his servant or
slave and helps him the work one has ordered, and refrains from ordering
him such task which is beyond his capacity.

It is stated in reliable traditions from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
that a person is ordered to give to his slave what he himself eats and
to make him dress in the manner in which he himself dresses.

Another tradition states that there are three types of people who will
not be cruel to you if you are not cruel to them, namely, a person who
is mean, secondly, a lady who is your wife, thirdly, a person who is
your slave.

According to a reliable tradition, one day a slave of Imam
Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) disappered. The Holy Imam (a.s.) hunted for his
slave and at last found him sleeping at a certain place. The Imam (a.s.)
sat near his head and started fanning him until he awoke. When the slave
got up, the Imam (a.s.) only said that it was not adivsable for him to
sleep during night as well as day, and that he should sleep only during
the night.

A reliable tradition from the Imam (a.s.) states that the prayers of
three types of people are not answered and accepted. These are, a slave
who runs away from his master (until the time he does not give himself
up to his master), a person who leads the prayers when those who pray
behind him are not ready to accept him, and lastly the wife whose
husband is unhappy with her.

According to a reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the
persons who will enter the heaven first are the following:

a) The martyr

b) The slave who prays to the Almighty Creator and has the interest of
his master foremost in his mind

c) A man with a family who keeps himself aloof from the things which are
not permissible (haram) or supposed to be non-permissible

2. Rights of neighbours, orphans and relatives:
-----------------------------------------------

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) stated that Jibrael told him so many times
about the neighbours that he felt that the neighbours will be induced in
the inheritance (Meeras).

Further, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) stated that even if a person
encroaches on land of his neighbour as wide as a hand-stretch, he will
be chained by the seven stage below the earth which will be put around
his neck and will be there even when he will be called to account for
his deeds on earth. The only way for him to escape this punishment will
be retribution and returning back the land of his neeighbour which he
had wrongly encroached upon.

In another tradition he (a.s.) has stated that a person who snatches
away the house of his neighbour and gives him trouble, God will give
away his house to another neighbour.

According to a reliable tradition, people asked the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) whether there were any other rights and obligations
concerning possession besides Zakat. The Prophet (s.a.w.a.) answered
that there were many obligations to be fulfilled besides Zakat -
firstly, one should oblige and be kind towards those relatives who are
even unkind towards one; secondly, one should be kind towards neighbours
who are muslims, for if one has ignored one's muslim neighbour who was
hungry, while one had a satisfying meal at night, then one does not have
faith on the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

Many reliable traditions from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) quote that all
the houses within the forty yards (on all sides) of one's own house are
those of one's neighbours whose rights should be fulfilled.

In another tradition he (a.s.) has stated that among other rights of the
neighbours is also included maoon, which, when a person does not fulfill
or restrains from fulfilling, will, as a punishment, be thrown in hell.
Maoon is that loan which is given to neighbours or the kindness which is
performed in the neighbour's interest or the grocery of everyday use
which is lent to them.

According to reliable traditions, a few healthy prisoners were brought
before the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). Among the prisoners was one who was
sentenced for hanging. At that time, Jibrael (a.s.) descended to earth
and, addressing the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), said that the particular
person is very

generous as he open-heartedly gives to his family, gives wholesome
feasts to the people and bears huge expenditures in the interest and
benefit of his relatives. Then the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) addressed the
person and said that it was revealed unto him by the Almighty God that
on account of his already-mentioned habits, God has asked the Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) to pardon him and given him back his life. When the prisoner
questioned the Prophet if his God liked those qualities, the Prophet
replied in the affirmative. Then the prisoner stated that he will become
witness to oneness of the Almighty God and His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and
swore by God and the Prophet that he will never keep away his
possessions from anyone.

A reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that a
person who will look after orphans and bear their expenditure will be
near to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in Heaven, as the first finger is
near to the middle finger.

Another reliable tradition from Hazrat Ali (a.s.) states that a person
who keeps his hand over an orphan's head with love, God will reward him
with as much kindness as the hair which were touched by the hand.

In another tradition it is stated that when an orphan cries, the sky
trembles. At that time the Almighty God says that the person who
comforts and soothes the crying orphan (whose mother and father are
taken away from him) will be rewarded Heaven, compulsorily, by God.

According to a tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), God has stated
in the Holy Quran two punishments for a man who has deprived the orphans
of their possessions. After death he will be thrown in hell and on earth
his orphans will meet the same treatment as had been meted out to the
orphans, by him.

3. Rights of friends and fellow believers:
------------------------------------------

Reliable traditions state that Hazrat Ali (a.s.), at the time of his
death willed upto his eldest son, Imam Hasan (a.s.) that he should treat
all the fellow believers in a brotherly fashion for the sake of his
nearness to God and to render kindness unto them and to accept their
kindness towards him in a friendly manner.

In another tradition, a person complained to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.)
that there are times when he feels so depressed and sad without any
outward cause that his friends and children make it out from the
expression on his face. The Imam (a.s.) replied that God has stated that
all momins are made from the qualities of heaven and in their forms are
blown His kindness, as such all momins are like true brothers. Whenever
the spirit of one of them is hurt, it is natural for others to feel sad
and depressed.

It is stated from reliable traditions related to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) that it is worship (Ibadat) to see the face of Imam-e-Adil
(Just), to look up towards a religious scholar or divine, to see in a
kindly fashion towards parents and to look towards that fellow-believer
with whom one is very friendly.

It has come down from reliable traditions that brotherhood is already
established among momins in the world of spirit. In this world when they
will see, they will recognise each other.

In another tradition it is stated that a momin (a pious one) is a
brother of another momin. He is his eye, his guide and one momin never
betrays the trust of another momin. He is not cruel to another momin,
does not fool another momin, does not lie and does not speak ill about
another momin.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), there are certain conditions of
friendship, love and unity. If all those are not found among a person,
then he is not a fast friend or a reliable one, and if a person does not
possess any of thses, then the title of a friend is not for him.
Firstly, a friend should have the same attitude before him and behind
him; he should think of a friend's respect as his own respect and his
downfall and faults as his own; thirdly, his attitude should remain the
same even after he has acquired wealth and become honourable and not to
refuse or side-track anything which is within his power. Lastly, he
should not separate himself when a friend is in trouble and difficulties
or give a cold shoulder and his friendship at the time of need.

According to Imam Reza (a.s.), twenty years' friendship is equal to
blood relationship and knowledge which two friends of such long standing
gain about each other brings them nearer as between two real brothers.

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.), one should keep one's friendship
steadfast with one's friends and surrender oneself completely to them so
that one day they may not turn against one and become an enemy. And one
should never mete out enemity towards one's enemies as there are
possibilities that one day they may become one's friends.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), a person who is not in
possession of the following five things, his life is a burden:

a) Physical health

b) Peace

c) Wealth

d) Contentment

e) True friend

Hazrat Luqman (a.s.) had advised his sons to make hundred friends but
not a single enemy, and that one should accept the slavery of pious
people than being a son of vicious ones. One should always seek the
companionship of wise, even if he is not generous so that one may avail
of his wisdom, but safeguard oneself from his vice. It is also advised
to seek companionship of a generous person though he may not be wise as
one can avail of generosity through one's wisdom. One should keep away
from the fool who is also stingy.

4. Rights of one momin towards another momin and the kindness which should be meted out to the creatures of God:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to a reliable tradition, Mu'alla Ibne Khunais inquired of
Hazrat Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) the right of one muslim over another
muslim. The Imam (a.s.) answered that there were seven rights and all of
them were compulsory and ignoring even one of these is disobeying God
and the cause of loosing Almighty's friendship. Mu'alla asked what were
those rights. The Imam (a.s.) replied that he was afraid that even after
gaining their knowledge Mu'alla may be unable to practice them. When

Mu'alla begged him many times, the Imam (a.s.) answered that the first
and the easiest right is that:

a) One should select that thing for another muslim which one likes as
well as desires for oneself and not to select that thing for a fellow
muslim which one does not desire for oneself

b) To seek safety from anger of fellow-muslim and to keep him happy and
to carry out his orders and legitimate wishes

c) To help him during life, with tongue, hand and feet

d) To act as a mirror for him and to be his guide

e) If he is hungry, one should not eat without him, if he is thirsty one
should not have water without him and if he is without dress, one should
clothe him before one dresses oneself

f) If one has a servant, one should make him wash his clothes, cook his
food and make his bed

g) If he has ordered you some work, you should do it; if he has asked
you at his place for a meal, you should accept it; if he falls ill, you
should visit him and if he dies, you should be present during his last
rites and if you know him to be in need, you should offer assistance
even before he requests you for it and these actions will give rise to
love between you and the fellow-muslim

In another reliable tradition it is stated that one who believes in
Almighty God and the Day of Judgement should fulfill his obligations.

It is stated from Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.) that you should make
friends with fellow-muslims and desire that thing for them which you
like for yourself and not to desire that thing for him which you do not
desire for yourself. If you need anything, ask him and when he asks you
for something, give him and if there is some good news you need not hide
it from him. At the time of need, help him that he may help you when you
are in need. Respect him behind his back and when he returns from a
journey, you should visit him and respect and honour him in all
circumstances and not seek separation. If he is angry with you, do not
become aloof until the misunderstanding is cleared. If God blesses him
with some reward, thank God and if some curse descends on him, be more
kind and loving to him than before.

According to a reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), a
person who gets up in the morning with no care about the work of any
musalman then he is not a muslim. If a person hears another muslim
begging for help and ignores him instead of helping him, then also he is
not a muslim. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) stated that he loved that
person most, by whom the people are greatly benefitted. Further, the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has stated that heaven becomes obligatory on
that person who save muslims from the harm that can be caused by fire or
water.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), the following are the
obligations of a momin towards another:

a) He should be a real friend to him

b) He should not love his possessions more than his friend

c) He should care for another momin's children when he goes on a journey

d) If anyone is being cruel to another momin, he should help the momin

e) If another momin is not present, he should take his share and keep it
for him

f) If another momin dies, he should pay his respects to the momin's
grave often

g) He should not be cruel to another momin, neither deceive him nor he
should misuse the confidence placed in him

h) He should not speak with him about something which he dislikes and if
he misbehaves (uses bad words) with him, then he will lose his
friendship

i) If he names another as his enemy, then he will turn a kafir
(non-believer), for if the one who says as such is a liar, then he
himself is a non-believer and if he is saying the truth, then the other
person is a kafir. If one blames another wrongly, then the one who
blames will lose faith as salt melts in water.

In another tradition it is stated that a person presented himself before
Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.). The Imam (a.s.) asked him about the
conditions in which he left his brothers. He replied that he had left
them all in a satisfactory condition. Then the Imam (a.s.) questioned
him whether those who were rich among them looked after those who were
not so well-off and poor. He replied that they took very little interest
in their poor brethren. Again the Imam (a.s.) questioned the man as to
how many times the rich visit the poor - the man replied that it was
very few times that the rich visited the poor. Then again the Imam
(a.s.) asked as to how kind the rich were towards the poor - the man
said that the rich hardly help the poor. The Imam (a.s.) ultimately said
that how could these people (who are rich) be termed as Shias of
Ahle-bait.

In another tradition it is stated that one should make friends with kind
and pious people and the friendship should be for the sake of God and
when the friends meet among themselves or sit in a crowd, they should
talk about their religion and traditions coming from the Ahlul bait.

5. Helping momineen, assisting them in their work and making them happy:
------------------------------------------------------------------------

In a reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), a person who
makes a momin happy is actually making the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
happy, and the one who makes the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) happy, is
making God happy.

In another tradition it is stated that God addressed Prophet Musa (a.s.)
and said that there were a few human beings for whom he has reserved
heaven and further they will be made the rulers of Heaven. When the
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked as to who were they, God answered that they
were those momins who try to please and give happiness to other momins.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) stated that once God revealed unto Hazrat
Dawood (a.s.) that among his beings there will be a few who will forward
such an act, which they had performed that He will reward them heaven
just for that single act. When Prophet Dawood (a.s.) asked what will be
that act which will make the person be rewarded heaven, the Almighty God
replied

that it will be the act of making another momin happy even if just by
giving him a single date.

According to a reliable tradition from the same Imam (a.s.), when the
momin will come out of his grave, another person will accompany him out
of the grave. This person will reveal the rewards God has decided for
the momin. The momin will pray to God to give this person, the harbinger
of happiness, the same rewards. After that, the person will always be
with the momin. When the momin has to cross some dangerous place, the
person will comfort the momin by saying that the dangerous inclines are
not for him and therefore the momin should not be scared. When the momin
will come across serene and pleasing places, he will tell the momin that
these places are meant for him. In this manner the person will go on
revealing to the momin at every step, and thus they will reach the stage
where the account of the deeds performed on earth are rendered. When,
after the accounts, God will order heaven for the momin, then the person
will reveal unto momin the good tidings of the being sent to heaven.
When the momin will hear this order, he will feel relaxed and then ask
the person, "O brother, who are thou who has accompanied me from my
grave to heaven, and who has been considerate and sympathetic with me
through the difficult stages of loneliness and have at last given me
such happy tiding?" The person will reply, "I am happiness which you had
given to that particular momin while you were alive. Therefore Almighty
God has personified me that I am giving you happy tidings at every stage
and share in your misfortunes."

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.),
performing a single Haj is better than freeing seventy slaves, but
assuming the responsibility of providing a muslim family with food and
clothing and saving them from poverty and insult is equivalent and
better than performing seventy Haj.

Another reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that
when a person goes round the Ka'ba seven times, God lists six thousand
good deeds in his record and rubs off six thousand sins and elevates him
to six thousand stages and fulfills his six thousand wishes, but if he
fulfills a single need of a momin, his act is greater than going ten
times round the Ka'ba.

According to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), if a momin informs his fellow
momin of his needs but the latter is unable to do anything about it and
is sad on its account, then the Almighty God will reserve heaven for him
for feeling sad about his inability to fulfill the momin's requirements.

A reliable tradition from Hazrat Ali Ibnul Husain (a.s.) states that a
person who will do one work for his fellow-momin, God will fulfill a
hundred of his desires and he will be rewarded heaven.

A person who will relieve another momin from a single distress, God will
alleviate many of his anxieties on the Day of Judgement.

God will help a person at the delicate moment when others will be
staggering on the bridge of Sirat, if he takes the side of a momin and
helps him against his tormentor.

A person who will clothe a momin who is nearly naked, will be clothed in
the heavenly silk by the Almighty God and will keep all evils and

anxieties away from him as long as the helped momin retains even a
thread of that garment.

A momin who makes a fellow-momin sit with him on his means of transport,
thus stopping him from the trouble of walking, will be blessed by a
heavenly carriage on the Day of Judgement and he will feel proud and the
feeling of elevation will make him think above all the angels.

According to Hazrat Moosa Kazim (a.s.), God had ordained a shelter on
the Day of Judgement for Prophets, vicegerents, revered, and those
momins who had freeed a fellow-momin or met hte debt of a momin or
performed the marriage of a momin.

Another tradition from Imam Ali ibnul Husain (a.s.) states that one
should consider all the muslims as one's relatives, all the aged as
one's father, all the children as one's children and all one's equal as
one's brothers; then no one would be cruel to each other, use bad
language or reveal each other's weakness. If the shaitan is tempting one
to consider one's self better than others, then to cure oneself of this
obsession, one should think of oneself as more of a sinner than any aged
person one happens to see who is better in faith and practice than
oneself. If one sees a minor instead of an adult, then one should think
as one who adheres more to the faith and practices it, therefore better
than one's self. If one comes across a person equal to one in age, then
one should be definite about one's own sins and doubtful about his - as
such one can never prefer a doubt over certainty and therefore think of
that person as better than oneself.

If people pay respect to you, you should think it to be on account of
their personal goodness and politeness and if they are reserved with
you, think it as an accountof you behaviour's shortcomings. Following
these precepts will make life easy and you will have more friends and
few foes. You will be happy as a reaction to the kind acts of others and
will be unaffected by the deplorable action of others. One should
understand that people pay the most respect to those people who receive
news and rumours while sitting at home and take the least interest in
them and do not ask anything of others. Next in reverence comes that
person who is needy but does not ask for anything from anyone, as the
world loves its material belongings and those who do not share their
belongings are respected. Those who give away their belongings instead
of begging others for requirements are highly esteemed and the respect
rendered to them knows no bounds.

The Imam (a.s.) has stated in another tradition that if a person
withholds a favour, which is in his power, from another momin; or stops
those who can bestow the favour, God will humiliate him on the Day of
Judgement by blacking his face, making his eyes blue, hands will be
around his neck all chained and God will say to this man, "This is your
punishment for the abominable act of producing obstackes where a
kindness could be done and this obstacle you created in the work of the
Almighty God and the Prophet ", and then God will order the person to be
taken to hell.

6. Visits to momineen and looking after the sick:
-------------------------------------------------

Reliable traditions from Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.) and Imam
Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) state that a person who visits a fellow-momin in
the name of

God, God appoints seventy thousand angels, who go on announcing that he
is fortunate and heaven is reserved for him, all the time, till he
returns home.

According to a reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
Jibrael revealed unto him that Almighty God had sent an angel on the
earth. This angel reached near a person who was standing in front of a
door of a house and was asking the permission of the owner of the house
to enter. The angel asked the person about the work he had with the
owner oof the house. The man outside the door replied that the owner of
the house was a muslim brother of his, and he, Abdullah (servant of
God), had turned up on a visit to him. Then the angel questioned if the
sole purpose of the man was a visit and nothing else besides it. The man
replied that he had come on no other purpose except a friendly visit.
The angel then revealed unto the man that God had sent him to the earth
to salute on behalf of Him and the Almighty God has made Heaven
obligatory on him and has stated that a muslim visiting a fellow-muslim
is just like visiting God and He is responsible for its reward which is
heaven.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has said that happy are those who are
friends with each other for the sake of God, for Almighty God has laid a
foundation pillar of red yakut in heaven and has constructed seventy
thousand palaces over it and every palace contains seventy thousand
chambers (resting places) and all these have been made for those lucky
beings who are friends with each other in the name of the Almighty God.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), a person who cannot serve
Ale-Mohammed i.e. the family of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.), should oblige
those people who are pious Shias (friends). That person will receive the
same reward which is meant for those who can oblige Ale-Mohammed. And
those people who possess no power to meet the Imams should pay a visit
to Shias (friends of Ahlul bait) and they will be rewarded likewise.

Another tradition coming from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that if
a person pays a visit to a sick muslim then he will be attended by
seventy thousand angels till the evening if he visits in the moning; and
till dawn if he visits at dusk. These seventy thousand angels will
recite durood on him all that time.

A tradition in this context also states that if a person pays a visit to
a sick person then God sends seventy thousand angels to reside in his
house till the Day of Judgement and pray to God all the time, half the
reward of which will be recorded with the person.

A reliable tradition from Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) states that a person,
when he is ill should allow people to visit him as the prayers of these
visitors will be heard.

A tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that when a person
pays a visit to a sick man, he should ask the sick man to pray for him
as the prayers of a sick man are equal to the prayers of the angels.

The Imam (a.s.) has also stated in another tradition that one need not
pay a visit to a sick person when he is suffering from eye diseases. But
in other types of illness, a person should visit a sick person
constantly for three days and then on alternate days. If the illness
seems to prolonng, then the sick

person should be left alone with his family and one should not visit too
often.

A momin who visits a fellow-momin when he is ill, is surrounded by
angels who tell him, "O congratulations to thee on the heaven", and it
is reported that the momin has said that alleviating a single suffering
of any momin is better than I'tekaf (retirement for God's worship) and
continued fasting for two auspicious months.

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.), that man is rewarded more who pays a
short visit to the sick and not a lengthy one unless the patient desires
him to stay back and requests him to wait longer (and the doctor has
permitted).

Another tradition states that when one pays a visit to the sick, then he
should take with him apples, behi, turanj or any fragrance or food
(incense) as an offering.

7. Providing food, water and dress to the momins, helping them in every conceivable way and supporting the victimised:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is stated from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that if a person makes a
momin take a hearty meal at his expense, then God makes Heaven
obligatory on him. Buf if a person makes a kafir (non-believer) have a
hearty meal at his expense, then God fills the stomach of that person
with zaqoom of Hell.

In another tradition, the Imam (a.s.) has stated that no creature of
God, whether he is a king or Prophet can have knowledge of the reward a
person gets for giving a hearty meal to the momin except the Almighty
God; and among the acts which are a source of forgiveness, giving a
hearty meal to the muslims is also included.

According to another tradition, if a person provides a hearty meal to an
afflent momin, then his reward will be equal to freeing a slave from the
off-spring of Ismail (a.s.) and saving him from being murdered. If a
person provides a hearty meal to a poor momin, his reward will be
equivalent to saving a hundred slaves from the off-springs of Ismail
(a.s.) from being murdered.

According to a tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), there are
three acts which are dearest to God:

a) To fill the stomach of a hungry muslim

b) To meet the debts of another muslim

c) To cure the worries and anxieties of another muslim.

The house which does not provide food to the hungry is deprived
blessings in daily food, leading to scarcity in the house, as speedily
as a knife can be thrust in the hump of a camel.

According to Imam Zainul A'abedin (a.s.), a person who has plenty of
clothes and does not give a few of them to a fellow-momin who has no
clothes, the Almighty God will throw such a person in the fire of hell.
And if a person who has enough food to eat and ignores or is unaware of
a momin in his neighbourhood who goes without food, the Almighty God is
angry with him and makes the angels His witness that He is never going
to forgive that man though he may carry on his activities in the
temporary world. It is stated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that a
person who sleeps

well at night after a hearty meal and his brother muslim remains hungry,
then he has not brought faith on the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), God takes an oath in His honour
that he will not let that person enter Heaven at any cost, who possessed
a house and refused to shelter a momin when the momin was in dire need
of a house - because that person has committed an act of stinginess
against a fellow-momin.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), if a person removes obstacles
from the path of a fellow-momin, God will give him the reward of
reciting 400 ayats (verses) and against every alphabet in the ayat, ten
acts of kindness will be recorded.

Another tradition states that some muslims will enter Heaven because
they had removed thorns from the path of a fellow-momin. It is stated
from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that exchanging gifts and offerings
between each other is a good thing as it prevents recurrence of evil
thoughts about each other. He has also stated that there are three types
of offerings - one which is associated with the hopes of profit, the
second which is bribe and the third which is exchanged for the love of
God without any material or worldly ambitions connected with it.

A tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that if one appeases
the thirst of a muslim at a place where water is available then the
Almighty God will reward him with seventy thousand acts of kindness; and
if one appeases the thirst of a momin where water is scarce or
unavailable then his reward is unimaginable and will be equivalent to
saving a slave from the sons of Ismail from being murdered.

8. The rights of poor, weak, victim of cruelty and difficulties and the behaviour to be meted out to them:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), it is
stated that a poor momin will reach heaven forty years ahead of a
wealthy momin. Then he compared the rich and the poor to two boats which
are crossing the custom outpost. Evidently, the empty boat will be
allowed to pass immediately; but the boat carrying a lot of goods will
have to render its account and will be detained until the collection of
the tax.

In another tradition he (a.s.) has stated that the more the faith of a
momin increases, the less he gets his daily living and the momineen had
not cried and waited for their daily living, it would have been less
than the normal.

A tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that the destitution
with self respect is trust from God for the other human beings. A man
who will shelter or hide them, God will bless him as though he had
fasted during day and prayed at night. And a person who expresses it
before a person who is able to fulfill the wishes but does not do so,
then it will be like the latter murdering a poor; not with a sword or
spear, but by wounding the heart of the former.

A tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that God will be
talking to the poor momineen on the Day of Judgement as though He is
apologising to them. The Almighty God will state that He had not made
them poor in the world because they were low to Him, and they would see
today how He

would treat them and He would ask them to hold the hand of those people
who were kind to them in the world and lead them into heaven. A person
from amongst the poor will say, "O Almighty God, the people of the world
had women, they used to wear fine cloth, eat delicious food, and live in
spacious houses, and ride on fine horses. Give us today, all those
things." The Lord will reply, "I will give you each seventy times more,
the blessings which I had bestowed on the people from the beginning of
the world to its end."

According to another tradition, a rich man wearing fine clothes entered
the presence of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and sat down. After a little
while, a poor man wearing cheap clothes entered the presence of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and sat down. When he sat, it was over an end of the
rich man's apparel. The man pulled out the end of his apparel from under
the poor man. At that, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) recited istafsar
(there is no one as great as the Almighty God) and questioned the rich
man if he was frightened that poverty will stick to him. The rich man
replied in the negative. Then the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked him if
he was afraid that some of his wealth will go to the poor man. The rich
man replied in the negative. Then the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked him
if he wanted to keep his clothes away from dirt fearing that they will
go dirty. Again the rich man replied in the negative and further stated
that he possessed another sour which was worse than shaitan which makes
all evils attractive to him and all good abhorrent and to appease for
what he had done, he is ready to give the poor man half of his wealth.
Then the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) addressed the poor man and asked him if
he was ready to accept the offer. The poor man replied in the negative
stating that he feared he would also become a victim to snobbishness and
pride in case he accepted the offer.

In another tradition, Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) asked a financially
worried person if he ever visited the bazar. The man replied in the
affirmative. Then the Imam (a.s.) asked him that had he not seen things
which were beyond his means. The man replied that he very often saw
articles which he could not afford. At that response, the Imam (a.s.)
replied that for each of the article he sees which he cannot afford, one
act of goodness is added in his record of deeds.

According to another tradition, there will be a group of people who,
after being accounted for on the Day of Judgement, will take their way
directly towardsheaven. At the door of heaven the angels will stop them
and ask them why they were in a hurry to enter without rendering the
accounts. They will reply, "What have we been given of which we have to
render an account." At that moment the Almighty will say, "You all are
stating the truth, go and enter the heaven!"

Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) has stated that God had said that He had not
made the Affluent rich for He considers them worthy of respect; nor He
has made the needy poor for He considers them low - but through the poor
He wants to test the rich, for had there been no poor, the rich could
not have seen the face of heaven.

It is stated from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that a man who will look
down on another man because he is poor, God will make all the creatures
see him low and beneath their station on the Day of Judgement.

A reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that a
person who hurts a fellow-momin should be prepared to fight with God,
and a personn who respects a fellow-momin should not fear the divine
curse and God has further said that if there is only one momin existing
from East or West with the Just Imam, then their prayers will be enough
for all sins being committed by all the creatures of the world and on
account of them will exist the seventh sphere of earth and sky and God
will make faith the friend of these two (the momin and the Imam) and
they will need no other friends.

He (a.s.) also said that one should never look down on a fellow-momin
and try to assail or hurt him by even half a word, for, on the Day of
Judgement it will be written between both his eyes that he has been
deprived from the blessings of God.

A tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that a person who
speaks politely and affectionately to a fellow-momin, respects him,
fulfils his desires and alleviates his sufferings and anxieties, God
will keep him under the aura of his blessings all the time he is busy
speaking affectionately and is busy alleviating the sufferings.

According to another tradition, a person who slaps a fellow-momin;
unless and until he asks for forgiveness and begs pardon for his deed;
will, on the Day of Judgement, gain notice on account of his each bone
becoming separate, an iron ring being round his neck and both his hands
will be chained and he will be thrown into hell.

In another tradition it is stated that speaking filthy language is
prohibited and fighting with a momin is kufr and speaking harmfully
about a momin is equal to disobeying God.

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.),
fighting with any momin is kufr (equal to not believing in God) and a
person who scares a momin by announcing that he will harm him through
authority and though he may not harm him will be thrown into hell with
the Pharoah (firaun) and his offsprings.

In another tradition the Imam (a.s.) has stated that a person who nags a
momin will meet a worse type of death and he deserves to be punished in
a way that his end is not good.

In another tradition from the same Imam (a.s.) it is stated that a
person questioned him as to what he thought of a person who refuses to
let a visitor enter his house inspite of being at home and does not come
out himself to meet the visitor. The Imam (a.s.) replied that if a
person refuses to meet a person who has come on some business or on a
visit and says that he is not at home when he is at home and does not
come out himself, then he will be forced with the curse of God until his
meeting with the visitor.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) has stated that a momin in whose presence
another momin cannot enter on account of formalities and obstacles, that
momin will have to face seventy thousand walls between him and the
heaven. The width of each wall will be equal to thousand years' journey
and

the spacebetween each wall will be equal to a journey covering seventy
years.

A reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that one day
the angels lifted one of the pious momins from his grave and said that
they will whip him hundred times as a punishment accorded by God. The
pious momin became almost unconscious on hearing this and said that he
had not got the strength to face a hundred whippings. Then the angels
said that they will whip ninety-nine times, lessening one. The pious
momin went on and on protesting and begging until the angels
condescended to whip him once only. At that the momin asked the angels
as to why they should whip. The angels replied that once he had offered
prayers without wuzu (ablution) and at another time he had walked away
even after seeing a fellow-momin being cruelly treated. At last they
whipped him once at which his whole grave was filled with fire.

In another tradition he has stated that God will see with kindness
towards four people on the Day of Judgement:

a) A trader who, after selling something to a person will accept when it
is returned if the person had misgiving after buying it

b) A person who responds to a call of help from another momin

c) A person who frees the slaves

d) A person who performs the wedding of a bachelor

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), a person who will come to the
help of a fellow momin and save him from being murdered or help him in
his difficulties and sufferings, God will add ten kind acts in his
record of deeds, elevate him ten folds and give him the reward meant for
liberating ten slaves and free him from ten divine punishments and
provide him with ten blessings on the Day of Judgement.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has stated that a person who respects an old
and aged man on account of his age, God will free him from the fear of
the Day of Judgement, and also that person who respects a man with a
white beard on account of his age. He had also stated that respecting a
man with a white beard is equal to paying respects to God.

Further, he (s.a.w.a.) has stated that those who are not kind to the
youngsters and respectful towards elders are not from amongst us.

It is stated from Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.) that Hazrat Ali (a.s.) had
stated that if a person guides a blind man on an even ground, the reward
awarded to him will be so much that the whole earth, filled with gold,
will be equal to the eye of a needle. And the person who rescues a blind
man from the dangers and obstacles of the path will be rewarded for the
deed by a lakh times more than this world, and the kindness will
overpower all his sins and will engross everyone and will take him to
the higher spheres of heaven.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), one should not see the
sufferers and lepers a lot, as seeing them makes one feel sad.

In another tradition it is stated that one should run away from lepers
as one runs away from the tiger and when talking to them one should keep
at a distance of at least one yard.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), one should be restrained from
five types of people:

a) A leper

b) A person with white spots

c) A mad or lunatic person

d) A bastard

e) A Beduin Arab.

According to Hazrat Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), when one sees someone in
trouble, one should recite the following prayer:

‘Thanks is due to God Who has kept me safe from this curse which has
incurred on you and has elevated me from you and most of His creation.’

Another reliable tradition from the Imam (a.s.) states that if one sees
a person suffering from a terrible disease then one should recite the
following Doa thrice in slow tones that the patient may not hear it:

‘Thanks is due to God Who has kept me safe from this curse but has
incurred on you this curse and has elevated me from you and most of His
creatures.’

A person who recites this Doa will be safeguarded from these diseases.

9. Regards for the rights of momineen and also the stating of any one's faults in his absence (Gheebat):
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Zainul Aabedin (a.s.), a
person told him that another person considered that the Imam (a.s.) was
misguided and acted against Sunnat. The Imam (a.s.) said that the person
(the informant) had not preserved the sanctity of the meeting and had
apprised him of the talk which he had with the other person and neither
the former had done any justice with the Imam (a.s.) by informing him
about something he was ignorant of. Death will come to everyone and all
will be questioned on the Day of Judgement and justice done in all cases
and God will also settle the case between the Imam (a.s.) and the one
who had libelled him but the Imam (a.s.) refrained the middle man from
informing him of any talks as talking behind one's back is the food of
those who are of hell.

According to a reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), a
follower of God and the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) should never sit in the
company which abuses the Imam (a.s.) or talks against any muslim.

In another tradition he (s.a.w.a.) has stated that a person who tries to
discredit a muslim has his reward of fasts and wuzu (ablutions)
curtailed; and on the Day of Judgement he will smell worse than a dead
animal which will hurt all those present on the Day of Judgement. And if
this person dies before he asks for forgiveness, he will be taken as the
one who thinks all those things permissible which had been made
non-permissible by God.

A man who does a good turn for a fellow-momin and stops people from
talking bad about others, God will liberate him from all the evils of
the world and that to come. However, if it is within the power of a
person to stop another from uttering libels, and he does not stop him
then 70 times of the evil from that reserved for a liar will be added in
his record of deeds.

In another tradition it is stated that a person who will talk about a
fellow-momin without witnessing with his eyes or hearing with his own
ears, will be counted among those about whom God has said:

"Verily those who love to spread scandal about those who believe, they
shall have a grievous chastisement in this world and the hereafter."

According to another tradition, revealing the fault of a momin which God
had hidden in his Beneficence is equal to defaming and attaching a fault
to a momin which is not present in him and is equal to revealing.

In another tradition it is stated that a person who speaks ill about
anohter person without having any enmity or differences with him, has in
his make-up an inheritance from shaitan.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), defaming a person is worse
than rape, for when a person who has raped, asks for remission of his
sins, God forgives him; but when a person who has spoken ill of another,
asks for forgiveness, God will never forgive him unless the person who
had been harmed forgives the gossiper.

Another tradition states that a sinner who commits an act of sin openly
and does not care for anybody, is not to be respected nor talking
against him is non-permissible.

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), a
person before whom anohter person is uttering libels about a
fellow-momin and the addressee instead praises his fellow-momin, then
God will praise and encourage him on the Day of Judgement. A person, if
inspite of having authority, does not stop another person from speaking
ill about a fellow-momin and does not praise the fellow-momin, then God
will make that person worthy of contempt on the Day of Judgemment.

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), a
person who abuses another momin or talks with others to purposely bring
out the faults of another momin that his bravery and kindness should be
underestimated and people resultingly look down on him, then God will
exclude this blasphemer from His blessings and kindness and he will be
thought of as an assistant and follower of the shaitan.

A tradition from Imam Zainul Aabedin (a.s.) states that a momin who
restrains himself from speaking ill of another momin, God will forgive
all his sins on the Day of Judgement.

It is stated from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that one should not get
happy at the misfortunes affecting a fellow-momin, for it is possible
that God may shower his kindness on the victim and take away that curse
from him and make victim of the one who was laughing at the other's
misfortune (unfortunates).

According to many reliable traditions, next to a kafir (non-believer)
are those who make friends with a momin pretentiously to find out his
faults and sins and remember them that they may later on be able to
criticise the momin and blame him.

Another tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that a person
who utters libels about a brother momin is made devoid of faith as faith
melts away from his heart as salt melts in water.

It is stated that once the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) questioned the people
wheter he should show them the persons who are worse than everyone. When
the gathering replied in the affirmative, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) stated
that those people are abominable who gossip unnecessarity, who separate
friends and associates a certain fault with those who are deviod of it.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has also stated that if two people get angry
with each other and do not talk within three days then they are
exterminated from the fold of Islam and the person who makes the first
gesture to reunite is the person who will enter heaven first.


