Etiquette of Salutation, Shaking Hands, Embracing, Kissing, Sneezing and of Sitting in a Company and Dispersing the Company
===========================================================================================================================

1. Etiquette and sanctity of salutations and answering the salutations:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

According to reliable traditions, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had asked
his companions to possess or cultivate seven qualities:

a) Visiting the ill

b) To accompany the coffin of the dead

c) To believe and agree to a word which a person gives with an oath or
promise

d) To pray for anyone who sneezes

e) To encourage and give help and moral support to the innocent

f) To salute everyone

g) To accept an invitation of hospitality

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), if a person starts talking
before saluting then one should not answer him and until he salutes, one
should not invite him for food.

In another tradition the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has stated that a
person who salutes ten people during his busy schedule will get the
reward of liberating a slave.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), when a person is saluting he
should do so in a loud tone that he may not have to complain that though
he had saluted no one had replied. In the same manner, one should answer
the salutations in a loud tone, that the one who is saluting may not
have a chance to complain that though he had saluted no one had answered
the salutations.

It is stated from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that three types of
persons, even if alone, should be addressed in plural form. The person
who sneezes should say:

‘May Allah show his pity towards you.’

even though no one may be with him. Secondly, whomsoever you salute, you
should say:

‘Let the salam (greetings) of Allah descend upon you.’Or ‘Allah's Salam
on you.’

though he may be alone. And when you are praying for someone, you should
say:‘May Allah grant you peace.’

even though he may be all alone. Always, one should use plural form
because there are angels accompanying momins. Therefore, one can include
even the momins who are not present, in salam and Doa (salutations and
prayers).

It is stated from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that one should not salute
three types of persons:

a) A person who is walking alongwith the janaza

b) A person who is going for Namaz-e-Jumma (Friday prayers)

c) A person who is in the bathroom and perhaps has no cloth wrapped
around him

According to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), if a person reaches the mosque
when everybody is busy with prayers then he should not salute (say
salam) to those who are busy in prayers, instead he should take the name
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and join the prayers concentrating on
them. But if you reach a gathering where people are talking among
themselves, then you should surely perform the salutations.

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.), when one enters one's house, one should
say salams to all those present in the house but wheen the house is
empty, one should say:

‘May peace be on us from our Creator.’

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), when you meet each other, you
should say salams and shake hands and when you part with each other then
you should pray for each other's salvation.

According to another tradition, a person who, on reaching his home,
performs salams to the members of his family (wife and children), God
will bless his house and the angels will cultivate an association and
affection with it.

2. Etiquette of shaking hands, touching necks (embracing) and kissing:
----------------------------------------------------------------------

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), the salutation is complete when
people shake hands after saluting each other provided they are living in
the same city; but if a person has returned from a journey then his
salutation is only complete after embracing.

A reliable tradition from Hazrat Abu Obeida states that he was sitting
in the same kajawa with Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.) while once travelling
together. While boarding the kajawa Abu Obeida used to sit inside first
and then the Imam (a.s.) used to follow and when both had seated
themselves comfortable in the kajawa, then the Imam (a.s.) used to
salute him and ask about his welfare as though he had met him after a
long time. And when it was time for alighting, then the Imam (a.s.) used
to step down first and Abu Obeida used to follow. And when both reached
the ground safely, then the Imam (a.s.) used to salute Abu Obeida and
ask of his welfare in the same manner. Then Abu Obeida said, "O son of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) none of the people around us say and do what
you say and do." Then the Imam (a.s.) replied that perhaps Abu Obeida
was unaware of the rewards of salutation and hand-shaking; as long as
two momins are busy in saluting each other and shaking hands, their sins
are falling away from them as leaves from trees and as long as these two
are in each other's company, God is blessing them with his kindness and
mercy.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), whenever the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) used to shake hands, he never used to withdraw his hand
unless the other person returned it first.

In another tradition he has stated that one should shake hands as
shaking hands lessens rift.

3. Gathering and etiquette of sitting in the gatherings:
--------------------------------------------------------

It is stated that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had willed unto Hazrat Ali
(a.s.) that if eight types of persons are insulted, then they should
curse themselves:

a) A person who is an un-invited guest at a party

b) A person who dominates over the Lord of the house

c) A person who expects kindness from his enemies

d) A person who expects to be obliged by the stingy and mean people

e) A person who interferes when two persons are talking without
permission

f) A person who is scared of the king

g) A person who sits at a place in the gathering which is below his
dignity

h) A person who is talking to another person who is not hearing his talk

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.), a person who sits at the head of
gathering without possessing these qualities is a fool:

a) Whatever question is put to him, he should be able to answer

b) When other people are fed up of talking about justice, he should be
able to clarify the complete picture

c) He should advise in such a manner that people are benefitted by
following that advice

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), when a group is sitting in a
gathering then a momin should sit behind it as jumping over the heads of
the squatters to reach the celebrity of the gathering is lack of
manners.

In another tradition he has stated that in a large gathering someone has
taken your place and other people are making place for you, then you
should accept their hospitality and sit, as it is a sign of respect
shown to you by a brother momin. If there is no place left and no one is
making place for you, then you should sit where ever it is possible.

According to another tradition, if a person visits a house, he should
sit where the master of the house asks him to, as he is aware of the
virtues and faults of his own house.

Hazrat Ali (a.s.) has stated that one should never sit on a public
highway.'

In another tradition he (a.s.) has stated that when one is sitting among
people, one should never sit with open legs.

According to Imam Hasan Askari (a.s.), if a person feels happy to sit at
a place which is below his honour, then God and His angels will send
durood on him as long as he is thus seated.

A tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) always used to sit facing Qibla.

In another tradition he (a.s.) has stated that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) used to sit in three ways - at times his knees used to be
above the ground and his hands around his knees with the palm of one
interlocked in the palm of the other. At other times he used to sit as
one sits during prayers with knees bent on the ground and hands kept on
the knees. He also used to sit by placing one foot over other; but he
never used to sit all spread out on both the knees.

A tradition from Abu Hamza states that he saw Imam Zainul Aabedin (a.s.)
seated with his one foot kept on the thigh of the other. He told the

Imam (a.s.) that people do not think it proper to sit in this manner as
this posture is supposed to be that of God. The Imam (a.s.) replied that
he sat in this way on account of fatigue; but the Almighty God never
gets tired neither He feels sleepy. He has no body (form) for which
sitting, standing or sleeping is necessary. The Almighty is above all
these things.

A reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) quotes that when
people sit together during summer season, they should have a distance of
at least a palm-stretch between each other.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), if a person sits all spread out
in a tight place, then one should never consider him as a human being.

4. Those gatherings where one is allowed to go and those people with whom one is allowed to move:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), one should follow that man who
makes you cry, but he is your well-wisher; but one should never accept
the lead of that man who makes you laugh, but is playing fraud with you.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has advised everyone to know well those with
whom one moves, for when he will die, he will be counted as their
companion. If one moves about with one well-behaved and pious then He is
happy and if he is ill-behaved and sinister, then He is hurt and
therefore sad.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) has stated that he considered that fellow his
best friend who speaks about his faults on his face. He also advised us
to consider our love compulsory to old friends and to be afraid of the
company of new friends; for the new ones generally never fulfill their
promise and never depend on anyone, however near they may be to us.

At the time of his (a.s.) departure from the material and temporary
world, Hazrat Ali (a.s.) has willed that a muslim should never visit
places which can make one notorious and to refrain from keeping company
with those about whom people hold no good opinion, for the bad always
leaves his friend in a lurch.

Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) has stated that one should save oneself from
doubtful situation and circumstances which can lead to gossip and
notriety. A man should not even stand with his mother on a wayside, for
all the way-farers may not know that she is his mother.

Imam Zainul Aabedin (a.s.) had asked us not to keep company of five
persons on any account:

a) A liar, who is like a mirage and will make you see far-off things as
near-at-hand and near-at-hand things as beyond one's reach

b) A wicked and vicious person, for he will sell you (your weakness) to
another for a single meal or less than it

c) The stingy, for he will never help you with his possession even when
you are in deep trouble

d) The fool, for even if you are to be benefitted, it will turn into a
loss

e) A heartless person, who disconnects himself from his relatives, as
God has cursed him in three places in the Holy Quran

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the company of lower grade of
people, women and the very rich, makes a coward of one.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) has stated that one should keep away from the
company of dissenters as people may think the same about them.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the most wise among men is he
who runs away from the company of the ignorant.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) has stated that a person who does not stop a
brother momin from a wrong act when it is within his means, then he is
not fulfilling the demands of true friendship. A person who does not
refrain himself from the company of a fool will very soon be deprived of
his own manners.

In another tradition he has stated that there are four acts which do not
reap any harvest:

a) Loving him who does not return your love

b) Obliging a person who does not accept your obligation

c) Imparting knowledge to a person who does not pay heed

d) Confiding your secret in someone who cannot keep it

A tradition states that the companions asked the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
as to whose company they should keep. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
answered that they should keep company with those, the sight of whom
will remind them of God, whose talk will increase your knowledge and
whose acts will take you nearer to the ultimate reality.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has said that four things make a coward of
one:

a) Sinning continuously

b) Talking a lot with women

c) Quarrelling with fools who think something entirely different when
you are talking about one thing

d) Sitting a lot with men. When people asked for an explanation of the
term ‘mean’, the Holy Prohet (s.a.w.a.) said that mean are those people
who have forgotten God.

A reliable tradition states that Imam Zainul Aabedin (a.s.) used to
advise his children to keep company with thsoe who have love of God and
if such people are not available, then loneliness is better than the
company of others, as it is a source of welfare; and in case one is
compelled to keep company, then one should sit in the company of those
who are kind as they do not abuse.

Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) has stated that one should respect and guard the
companions or associates of one's father, as rendering a kindness unto
them is equal to being kind to one's own father.

In another tradition he (a.s.) has stated that Hazrat Luqman (a.s.) used
to tell his son that he should observe the people before he moves with
them. If there is a group who remembers God, then he should sit among
them; for if he is a scholar, then they will be benefitted by his
knowledge and their knowledge will increase. In case he is ignorat, then
he will be benefitted by their knowledge and it is probable that God is
blessing them and including him among His blessing. If there is a group
which has forgotten God then he should not sit among them, for if he is
ignorant, then his ignorance will be increased and it is possible that
God is sending punishment or curses on them and he will be included in
them.

In another tradition it has been stated that one should visit a place
from one's own place only when one has the following reasons:

a) Visiting the House of God (Ka'aba)

b) Visiting the houses of religious scholars as one is benefitted by it
and has to face losses by opposing them

c) Visiting the scholars for gaining religious or worldly knowledge

d) Visiting the houses of generous people who give away their possession
for the reward of the Day of Judgement

e) Visiting the home of a fool as circumstances at times make you take
their obligation

f) Visiting the house of rich people for gaining honour or meeting your
needs

g) Visiting those people whom people think as responsible for taking
their advice and suggestion; and whose sober attitude and stability
makes one expect a lot from them

h) Visiting a fellow-momin as one is morally bound to look after another
momin

i) Visiting the house of one's enemies as constant visits can soften
enmity and clear misunderstandings (when there is no risk)

j) Visiting those gatherings which elevate one's manners, love and
generosity

5. Ways of sneezing, spitting and belching:
-------------------------------------------

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), when one momin meets another
momin, he is obliged to salute him and when a momin gets ill, he is
obliged to visit him and when one momin sneezes, he is obliged to pray
in his interest.

A momin who sneezes should compulsority say:

‘All praise is to Allah Who nourishes all creatures and Who has no
partner.’

In another tradition it is stated that a man is healthy and fit because
God has blessed him with certain conditions; but man forgets to thank
God for his blessings; therefore God orders the air to pass through his
body and escape from the nose. This is the cause why one is supposed to
praise God when sneezing, as this praise is a way of thanksgiving; and
in case one has neglected thanks, then the praise is a way of appeasment
for the aforementioned carelessness.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that once a young boy (a minor) was
sitting near the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). When he sneezed and said
‘Alhamdolillah’, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) replied:"May Allah bless
you in this."

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.), one should not spit towards the Qibla
and in case one does it by forgetfulness, then one should send istagfar.

6. Etiquette of joking, laughing, whispering, sitting in a company and of keeping the sanctity of a gathering:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to a tradition coming from Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), one
should not whisper when there are only three people gathered, as it is
bound to hurt the third person present.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), when a person ignores and cuts
short the talk of a fellow-momin, it is like scratching the face of the
fellow-momin.

Many traditions have stated that when one sits with someone, or in some
gathering, then one should not disclose the talk which had taken place
in their company before others, unless one has taken their prior
permission.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), one should keep the sanctity
of all meetings and gatherings except when murder, rape or loot were
committed.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that there is no momin who is not used
to humour and is also well-behaved.

According to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), a person who enlivens the mood
of a company, is considered a friend by the Almighty God, provided he is
not using bad language for the purpose.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), a momin only laughs with a
smile, not with a loud sound.

In another tradition he (a.s.) has stated that laughing loudly makes a
coward of a man and wastes faith in the same manner as salt melts in
water; and that laughing without any purpose is ignorance.

Yet in another tradition, laughing a lot has been prohibited as it
spoils the youthfulness of one's looks.

He (a.s.) has also stated that you can only joke with those you are
intimate with, but you should never use your hands and feet (i.e. no
practical jokes should be done).

A reliable tradition states that when one roars with laughter, one is
submitting oneself to shaitan and a lot of laughing robs one of one's
look of freshness.

Hazrat Ali (a.s.) has stated that one should not make fun of others as
it is understood to be a low type of abuse and it creates more improper
feelings in the other's heart.

A reliable tradition from Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) states that joking a
lot makes one lose the light of faith and lessens generosity and
manliness.

In another tradition it is stated that Prophet Yahya (a.s.) used to cry
only - he never smiled. Whereas Prophet Esa (Jesus) (a.s.) used to cry
and laugh as well. In another tradition it is related that Hazrat Dawood
(a.s.) asked his son Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.) that he should not laugh a
lot, for a lot of laughing makes a man poor on the Day of Judgement.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has stated that for a person aware of hell
it is very difficult to laugh.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), people who laugh a lot, just to
while their time or on account of corruption, will have to cry a lot on
the Day of Judgement. There are a few people who cry over their sins and
they will laugh a lot.

All these traditions emphasize that a momin should not always make a
face and be reserved with everyone; on the contrary, a momin should be
broad minded, well-mannered and laugh a little, but he should not laugh
a lot and make fun of others and it is a sigh of a low and degraded
person.

7. The blessings and rewards of talking about the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and the Ahlul Bait (a.s.) in gatherings and also discussing their knowledge and relating traditions of their qualities:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), those people who, in a
gathering, do not speak about the Almighty God and ourselves i.e. the
Imams (a.s.), will, on the Day of Judgement feel sorry about such a
gathering.

Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.) has stated that a talk about Imams (a.s.) is
a talk about the Almighty God, and a talk about their (the Imams')
enemies is talk about the shaitan.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) has stated that God has ordained a certaain
number of angels to travel over the earth. Whenever the angels come
across a group which is talking about the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and
Ahlul Bait (a.s.), then they stop and participate in that gathering and
say "We have achieved our purpose." When this gathering disperses, then
if any participant of the gathering is ill, they visit him; and if any
of them dies, they are present near his body, and if any of them
disappears, they search him.

In another tradition, the Imam (a.s.) has stated that there are a few
angels in the heaven who constantly watch the small group (comprising of
two and three)of Shias who are busy in relating about the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) and Ahlul Bait (a.s.). Then the angels say to each other, "Do
you not see the courage of these people who, though few in number and
among a large number of enemies, are relating the qualities of Ahlul
bait (a.s.)". Another group of angels reply to them, "That is the grace
of God. He bestowith it upon whomsoever He willeth; and God is the Lord
of Mighty Grace."

A reliable tradition states that Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.) enquired of
Mubashshir whether his Shias assemble at any time and discuss among
themselves about the qualities and knowledge of the Imams (a.s.). At
that, Mubashshir replied, "Yes, by God." Then Imam (a.s.) answered that
by the Almighty God, he liked that he should participate in such
gatherings and smell their good perfume, as they all were on the faith
of God and the angels of God. He further beckoned Mubashshir to keep
away from the prohibited things and take pains with prayers that he may
help the Imam (a.s.) to intercede on his behalf and recommend him.

In another tradition it is stated that whereever there are two or three
momineen gathered, the same number of angels come to them. If these
momineen are asking something from God, the angels say "Ameen", and if
these momineen are requesting to be guarded from some mischief, the
angels pray to God to keep away the mischief; and if they are asking for
a favour, the angels ask God to grant them the favour.

And if two or three dissenters who do not accept the rights of Ahlul
bait (a.s.) are assembled, the same number of devils are present with
them. The devils talk in the same manner these disenters are talking;
when they laugh, the devils also laugh; and if they are insulting the
friends of God, the devils follow their lead. In case a momin is snared
among these devils, he should leave the gathering when they start
insulting the friends of God, and thus not

become a member and companion of their assembly; for the anger of God
cannot be beared by anyone and no one can nullify the curses of God. In
case he is forced to be in that company, he should retaliate against the
insults being hurled on the friends of God and should leave the company
for a little while, every few minutes.

In another tradition it is stated that a person who treads the path of
knowledge shall have the path of heaven broadened for him by the
Almighty God. The angels lay their plumage (hair) happily for the
student and all the creatures of earths and skies (heaven) pray for him;
even the fishes of the sea pray. The greatness of a scholar over a
person who offers more prayers is like the greatness of the moon of the
fourteenth night over the stars.

In another tradition sorrow is expressed over that person who, even on a
Friday, cannot forsake his worldly affairs to learn the religious
knowledge.

Yet another tradition states that the Almighty God states, "A discussion
about knowledge among my men enlivens their deed and hearts."

It is stated from a reliable tradition that whenever the muslims meet,
they should discuss about knowledge and relate tradition, for traditions
brighten the hearts which had gone to rust; for the hearts rust in the
same manner as swords; and as the swords are brightened by polish, so
are the hearts by the narration of traditions.

According to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), the reward of speaking about
knowledge is equal to the reward of already heard (accepted) prayers.


