Smelling and Application of Scent, Flowers and Oil
==================================================

1. Benefits of sweet-scent and its proper application:
------------------------------------------------------

According to reliable traditions, applying scent and smelling it is
included in the elegant manners of the Prophets.

It is stated froom Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that sweet scents increase
the strength of heart and virility.

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Reza (a.s.), it is not
advisable for man to leave off applying scent. It is better if one
applies it every day; if he cannot, he should apply every alternate day
and even if that is not possible, he should never miss applying scent on
a Friday.

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.), one should apply scent on the moustaches
as it was the habit of the Prophets. The angels who record the deed are
impressed as they like good scent.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), the person who applies it
(scent without spirit) in the morning will be free from freak of reason
until night; and that the prayer of a person who applies it during
prayers, is better than 70 prayers performed without it.

Another tradition states that people used to recognise the place where
Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) had done sajdah (bowing down during prayers)
by the scent which used to emanate from the place.

According to a tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the scent
which is used by women should have a prominent colour and its perfume
subdued whereas the scent used by men must possess a subdued colour and
impressive perfume.

Hazrat Ali (a.s.) states that it is imperative for a woman to be always
well-perfumed for the sake of her husband.

2. A version on refusing scent or perfume:
------------------------------------------

People asked Imam Ja'farr-e-Sadiq (a.s.) whether it was proper for a
person to refuse perfume when it is offered. The Imam (a.s.) replied
that it is not advisable to refuse the creation of Almighty.

According to a tradition, people brought perfumed oil as a gift to
Hazrat Ali (a.s.). He (a.s.) accepted the gift and applied it to his
body though he had already applied oil to his body earlier in the day
and said that he had never refused perfume at any time.

Another tradition states that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) never used to
refuse the sweets and perfumes brought for him.

According to Hasan ibne Juane, he visited Imam Reza (a.s.) one day. The
Imam (a.s.) brought a container which had musk in it and asked him to
take some from it. He did what was told. He was ordered to take musk
once more and apply it on his neck and garment. He did what he was told
and there was a little left in the container. The Imam (a.s.) asked him
to take that much also and apply it as he had applied before and said
that except a donkey no one refuses the wonders of God. When Hasan
inquired of the Imam (a.s.) as to what were the wonders of the Almighty,
the Imam (a.s.) replied, perfume, relaxing cushions which people offer
one to sit comfortably and also those things which are the signs of
respect.

3. The blessings of musk, umber and saffron:
--------------------------------------------

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), perfume implies musk, saffron
and ood.

Another tradition states that Imam Zainul Aabedin (a.s.) possessed a
musk container made of alloy (rang). Before changing his clothes he used
to apply a little on his body.

Another tradition states that he kept a little bottle of musk in his
prayer mat and used to apply it every time he stood for prayers.

Another tradition states that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used to apply
so much musk that the colour of the musk could be seen on his forehead.

Another tradition states that Imam Reza (a.s.) possessed a bottle of
scent which had many sections in it. Each section contained a separate
perfume and in one section there was musk.

Another tradition states that Ali, the son of Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq
(a.s.), asked his elder brother Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) whether it was
permissible to mix musk in the oil which was applied on the body. The
Imam (a.s.) said that it was not harmful as he himself mixed musk with
the oil meant for body.

Many traditions have praised Khulooq (name of a perfume) but some
traditions have prohibited its constant use.

4. Advantages of Ghalia (Musk):
-------------------------------

According to a reliable tradition, it is stated that Ishaq ibne Ammar
said to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that when he meets merchants he
applies a little ghalia (musk) that they may not think him poor. The
Imam (a.s.) said that whether the ghalia is more or less, it does not
matter and even a little of its application once in a while is enough.
Ishaq said that he listened to the advice of Imam (a.s.) and only with
ghalia worth ten dirhams he was able to keep himself perfumed for the
whole year.

5. Advantages of Almond and Banafsha Oil:
-----------------------------------------

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), the
greatness of banafsha oil over others is comparable to the greatness of
the Ahle bait over other people. One should rub it in good quantity, as
it cures all sorts of headaches and eye troubles.

According to a tradition from Aqba, a person fell down from a donkey.
The Imam (a.s.) ordered that drops of almond and banafsha oil should be
poured into the injured man's nose. The man felt greatly relieved. Then
the Imam (a.s.) addressed Aqba thus. ‘O Aqba, banafsha oil gives heat in
winter and is cool in summer. It is beneficient for our shias and
harmful for the unbelievers and if people come to know every beneficient
quality of banafsha oil, then a very little of it will be valued as a
gold coin.

6. Advantages of Chambeli (a tropical flower) and Bakain oil:
-------------------------------------------------------------

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.), one should apply bakain oil as it has
been used by the Prophets. It safeguards one from all types of pains.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), there are many benefits of
chambeli (jasmine) oil. It cures seventy diseases.

Even according to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), there are many beneficial
uses of chambeli oil besides its being a cure for seventy diseases.
Chambeli implies white chambeli and in arabic the word for chambeli is
Raazne as stated in many traditions.

7. Advantages of other oils:
----------------------------

It is stated, according to a tradition, that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
said to Hazrat Ali (a.s.) that olive oil should be eaten and applied on
the body because shaitan keeps away from the man who applies it for
forty days.

According to a tradition, when the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) suffered from
headache, he used to put drops of washed til (sesamum seed) oil in his
nose.

According to another tradition, Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) used to apply
oil of a flower known as Gule Khairo on his body.

8. Advantages of incense, its types and how to take it:
-------------------------------------------------------

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), one should, when possible,
incense one's clothes.

Whosoever used to enter the presence of Imam Reza (a.s.) used to feel
the aroma of incense.

A tradition from Marazam states that when he once visited a
bathing-house with Imam Reza (a.s.), and the Imam (a.s.) reached the
stage of putting on clothes after the bath, he ordered for Oode Sooz and
applied it to his body and then ordered that the perfume should be given
to Marazam too.

According to a tradition, the wife of Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) used to
incense his clothes by putting the seed of sobhani dates and other types
of fragrant material in fire so that the scent may increase and last
longer.

According to another tradition, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used to
smell the incense of Ood-Qumari.

Another tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that one
should take the incense of Ood-e-Hindi as it possesses eight kinds of
cures.

Another tradition quotes Imam Reza (a.s.) as taking incense and later
applying rose and musk on his body.

A tradition from Syed ibne Toos (a.r.) states that the Prophet used to
recite the following while taking incense:

‘All praise is for Allah Whose blessings are the cause of all goodness.
O Allah make our perfume clean and purified and make our place of
eternal rest better. Piety is our accompaniment. Our place of return is
heaven and Thy care and blessings are always with us. Undoubtedly You
are Almighty.’

9. Benefits of Rose, Rose-water and other flowers:
--------------------------------------------------

It is stated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that washing the face with
rose-water enhances its beauty and removes worry and poverty.

It is stated from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that a person who sprays a
handful of rose water on his mouth on the first of Ramazan-ul-Mubarak
will find freedom from worries, and the person who will spray a handful
of water on his mouth on the eighth day will be free from cerebral
disease and pneumonia.

According to a tradition from Hazrat Ali (a.s.), Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
gave him a handful of red flowers and when Hazrat Ali (a.s.) started

smelling them, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) said that amongst the flowers of
Heaven, after rose this was the best.

According to another tradition, rubbing narcissus (nargis) or smelling
it is very advantageous. When Abraham (a.s.) was thrown in fire and when
that fire froze and he came out unburnt, God created narcissus for him
and that was how it first came on earth.

10. Etiquette of smelling flowers:
----------------------------------

According to a reliable tradition from Malik Juainer, he gave a flower
to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.). He (a.s.) smelled it and touched his eyes
with it and said that a person who smells flowers and touches his eyes
with them and recites:

‘O Allah shower Thy blessings on Mohammed and Ale-Mohammed (a.s.)’

will be pardoned of his sins before he could keep it on the ground.


