Etiquette of Sleeping, Reciting Do'as at the Time of Sleeping and Seeing Dreams
===============================================================================

1. Timings of sleep:
--------------------

It should be remembered that sleeping from early hours of the morning
till the rise of the sun, between Maghrib and Isha (night prayer) and
after Namaz-e-Asr (afternoon prayer) is makrooh. However, sleeping is
sunnat before Namaz-e-Zohr during summer and also between Zohr and Asr.

According to another reliable tradition, if one recites extra prayers
(Taqeebat) after Namaz-e-Subh (morning prayers) and sleeps just before
sunrise, it is not harmful. Another tradition states that Imam Reza
(a.s.) asked a man to meet him after the sun has risen completely as he
slept just after his morning prayers.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the earth complains to God on
the basis of three things; firstly on blood-shed without any justice,
secondly when the water falls on the earth while taking bath after
committing adultery and thirdly when a person is sleeping before
sunrise.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), sleeping during morning hours
is a source of loss of income, plain, of complexion ugliness. Sleeping
at such hours is undesirable because God distributes food. One should
never sleep at that time for Bani Israel used to receive roasted chicken
and Trinjabeen at that time and the sleeping one never used to receive
his share.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), a person who sits on the
prayer-mat during those hours will be saved by God from the fire of
hell; and another tradition states that that person will receive the
reward of a (sunnat) Haj of Ka'aba and his sins will be forgiven.

According to Hazrat Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), sleeping in the early
hours of the morning is foolish, sleeping in the afternoon is a blessing
and it is harmful to sleep after Asr and sleeping between Maghrib and
Isha is depriving oneself of the daily bread.

Another tradition states that a person entered the presence of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) and said that his memory was getting worse and he is
forgetting everyting easily. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) pointed out
that he has left midday nap and the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) bade him to
do as he used to do before and his memory would improve.

2. To do ablution (wuzoo) before sleep:
---------------------------------------

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), when a person performs wuzoo
before lying on bed, his bed becomes as good as a mosque. If one forgets
to perform wuzoo and remembers afterwards, then he can perform tayammum
on the sheet with which he is covering himself. If after this form of
purification and before going to bed he thinks and praises God until he
is asleep, then his sleep will be as good as prayer.

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.), a muslim should not sleep in the state
of janabat and without wuzoo. If water is not available for bathing or
wuzoo, then one should perform tayammum as the spirit of the momin
travels towards Heaven while he is sleeping and according to its
cleanliness and purification it is received by God. It is blessed and
rewarded by God. And if

he dies while sleeping, then he gets a place in the blessings of God. If
he is alive, then God sends angels to guard him.

According to another tradition, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked his
followers that who amongst them kept fasts all the year round. Hazrat
Salman-e-Farsi replied that he fasted all the year round. The Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) questioned who had spent his nights in prayers, being
awake all through. Again Salman replied that he was the man in
accordance with the description. Then, looking at all the assembled
companions, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked who reads one Quran every
day. All kept quiet except Salman who replied in the affirmative. One of
the assembled was furious at Salman and said to others that Salman is
showing off and lieing as he had seen Salman many a days not observing
fast, many a nights sleeping instead of praying and also not completing
a Quran each day. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) intervened and said that
Salman is like Lukman (Soloman the Great) and whosoever doubts him
should question him directly and he would reply. Then he immediately
questioned Salman and Salman gave the following answer; every month he
fasted on 13th, 14th and 15th. God has said that he will reward ten
times any good act; therefore, his three fasts are equal to thirty fasts
and in this manner he fasts for one month it will be like keeping fasts
all the year round. Besides, he fasted all through the month of Shaban
and Ramzan in this way he keeps more fasts when each fast will be
multiplied by ten. And about being awake at night and praying, he had
heard from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that sleeping with wuzoo is equal
to being awake at night and praying all the while; and about reading one
complete Quran each day, he had heard from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
that reciting three Sura-e-Tauheed (chapter 112) is equal to reciting
one Quran. He heard the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) saying to Hazrat Ali
(a.s.) that Ali (a.s.) and his followers are like Sura-e-Tauheed in the
Quran. When a person recites Sura-e-Tauheed once it is like reciting one
third of the Quran, if he recites it twice, it is like reciting two
third of the Quran and if he recites three times, it is like reciting
the whole of the Quran. Then the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) continued that
a person who is just a verbal friend of Hazrat Ali (a.s.), his faith
will be only one third complete; the person who is literally as well as
from his heart a friend of Hazrat Ali (a.s.), then his faith is two
third complete; whereas a person who is not only a literal and true
friend of Hazrat Ali (a.s.), but also practically follows Hazrat Ali
(a.s.), his faith is complete. If all those on earth were as friendly
towards Hazrat Ali (a.s.) as the Shias, then God would not have put any
being to trial or punish them.

3. Etiquettes to be observed before sleeping and the place of sleeping:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

According to reliable traditions, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has cursed
three types of people:

a) Those who eat alone

b) Those who travel alone

c) Those who sleep in an empty house

The probability in the last case is that the man who sleeps alone will
go mad on account of fear.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), a person who is forced by
circumstances to sleep alone in a desert or a house should recite the
following prayer before going to sleep:

‘O Allah be my friend in depression and anxiety and help me in my
loneliness.’

According to another reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.),
sleeping alone on the roof of the house is prohibited and also on that
roof which has no encircling walls. This applies both to men and women.
When people asked him whether it was permissible to sleep on a roof
having wall on three sides, he replied in the negative and said that
walls should be on all the four sides of the rood. In certain traditions
the height for these walls was ascertained. Some state it as 2 yards and
others as 1¼ yards.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has warned that hands should not be dirty or
full of food particles while going to sleep as, in that case, shaitan
overbomes and it is probable that that man may get mad and in that case
he himself is to be blamed. He also asked children's faces to be washed
before they went to sleep as otherwise shaitan will smell their hands
and frighten them.

Many reliable traditions state that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had
asked the beds to be cleaned and sweeped before going to bed as any
hidden harmful animal (insect) which is roosting inside the bed may be
thrown out and the person becomes safe from any harm.

4. Complete manners of sleeping:
--------------------------------

It is sunnat to sleep inclined on the right side and facing Qibla and
the right hand should be kept under the face. Sleeping inclined towards
the left side is makhrooh.

According to Hazrat Ali (a.s.) there are four ways of sleeping. When the
prophets slees, their eyes are not closed but are awaiting revelation
from the Almighty God. Momins or the pious sleep inclined toward right
side and facing Qibla (west); wordly kings and princes sleep inclined
towards the left side that the food they have eated may be digested; and
Shaitan and those who follow him sleep on their stomachs, flat.

In another tradition he (a.s.) prohibits sleeping, lying on one's
stomach and to awake those persons who sleep in such a manner and not to
let them sleep like that. He even requested the people to sleep with
their right hand under the right side of their face as one never knows
whether he will ever wake up.

Besides this many other traditions have extolled the rewards or benefits
of sleeping towards the right and prohibited sleeping inclined towards
the left.

5. The verses and prayers meant to be recited before going to bed:
------------------------------------------------------------------

According to a Hadees from Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) one has to lye in
the bed with his right hand with his right side of his face then he
should recite the following prayer:

I begin with the name of Allah, Oh Allah I have my life unto Your care,
turn my face towards You, hand over my work unto You I am afraid only of
You and seek Your good will Only on You I depend for my salvation and

towards You for refuge. I have brought faith on the Book which You have
sent and the apostle which You have made prophet.

After this he should recite Tasbeeh-e-Hazrat Fatima (a.s.)

Another tradition states that the Imam (a.s.) has asked the following
do'a to be recited with punctuality before going to bed and never to
miss it.

I safeguard my life, the life of my wife and children and my property
with complete wordings of Allah from every devil, harmful animal and
black eye.

This prayer was recited by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) on Hasnain (a.s.)
for their protection.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) one should recite Qool ya
Ayyohal Kaferoon and Qool Howal-laho Ahad before going to sleep as the
former deals with repulsion and fatigue from polytheism and the latter
express (Tauhid) Oneness of God.

‘In the name of God the Beneficent the Merciful Say thou (O'Our Apostle
Muhammad!) "O'ye who disbelieve! I worship not what ye worship Nor
worship ye Whome I worship Nor shall I worship whome ye worship. Nor
will worships ye Whom I worship. Unto ye be your religion, and unto me
my religion."

‘In the name of God the Beneficent, the Merciful Say "He, God, is ONE
(alone). God, the Needless, He begetteh not, nor is He Begotten And
there is none like unto Him."

Another tradition states that if a man after being in bed recited:

‘All praise is for Allah who is All-elevated and Almighty and all praise
is for Him only, Who, though hidden Himself, is well aware of
everything; and all praise is for that Allah who raises up the dead and
makes the living die; and He holds power over everything.’

then he will be purified of his sins like a newborn baby just born of
his mother.

According to Imam Reza (a.s.), a person who recites Ayatul Kursi:

‘God there is no God but He, the (Ever) living, the self-subsistent.
Slumber seizeth Him not nor sleep; His it is whatsoever is in the
heavens and whatsoever is on the earth; who is he that can intercede
with Him but with His permission; He knoweth what is before them and
what is behind them, while they cannot comprehend anything out of His
knowledge save that which He willeth. His Throne extendeth over the
heavens and the earth, and the preservation of them both, tireth Him
not, and He is the Most High and Most Great. No compulsion be in
religion; indeed truth has been made manifest distinct from error;
therefore he who disbelieveth the rebels (false deties) and believeth in
God hath indeed laid hold on the strongest handle no break is for it;
and verily God is All-Hearing, All-Knowing. Allah is the Guardian of
those who believe; He taketh them but of darkness into light; and those
who disbelievel the rebels are their guardians, they take out from light
to darkness; they are the companions of the (Hell) fire, therein shall
they abide.’

before going to bed, will be safe from paralysis.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), if a person recites Surae
Yaseen before going to bed, God will send one thousand angels to guard
him from the mischief of shaitan or any other harm.

According to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), a person who recites Surae
Waqaya (chaper 56) every night before he goes to bed will have a face
shining like the full moon of the fourteenth night, on the Day of
Judgement.

According to another tradition from him, no scorpion or insect will bite
the person who will recite the following Doa at night:

‘I seek shelter from that sting which has been evil and from the
mischief of all those things which walk over the earth and Allah only is
aware of their destiny. I seek shelter through the Words (Kalema) of
Allah whose power no good or bad thing can escape. There is no doubt
that my Allah is the right path. Undoubtedly, Allah has restrained the
Heaven and the earth from deterioration and if they deteriorate, is
there anyone who can check them? Undoubtedly, Allah is Almighty and
Forgiver.’

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), a person who recites:

‘There is no God but one Allah.’

ten times while going to sleep will have a house in heaven for him, made
by God. And a person who recites a hundred times will be washed of all
his sins as the leaves fall down from a tree.

According to another reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.),
a person who recites the Sura of Qool Howallaho Ahad (Sura Tauheed)
seven times before going to bed will have all his sins forgiven and his
neighbours will be safe from any harm; and if he recites this sura
hundred times then all the sins which he may commit during the next
fifty years (in nature) will be forgiven.

Another tradition from the Imam (a.s.) states that if a person recites
the following do'a before going to bed.

Oh Allah I hold you witness unto me that you have made the love of
Hazrat Ali Ibne Abi Talib, Hasan and Husain Ibne Ali, Ali Ibnul Husain,
Muhammad Ibne Ali, Ja'far Ibne Muhammad, Moosa Ibne Ja'far, Ali Ibne
Moosa, Muhammad Ibne Ali, Ali Ibne Muhammad, Hassan Ibne Ali and
Hujjat-e-Qaem incumbent on me.

and dies during the night, then he will enter heaven.

According to a reliable tradition from Hazrat Ali Ibnul Husian (a.s.) a
person who recites the following prayer while going to bed will be freed
from poverty and worry and will be safe from the insects and animals who
bite:

‘Oh Allah You are the first before Whom nothing even existed and You are
Almight and well revered and nothing is greater than You and Your are
Hidden though there is nothing that is not known to You and You are such
a 'Last' after which nothing will exist. On Allah who cherishes! made
Taurait, Injeel and Zaboor and the wisdom of the Quran keep me safe from
the mischief of all those things which crawl on the earth, the destiny
of which you alone know; I seek refuge with You only Who undoubtedly is
right path.’


