Etiquette of Entering and Departing from the House
==================================================

Section I
---------

1. Well-spaced house:
---------------------

A reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that one of
the things which shows a man as fortunate is his house open and
palatial.

According to a reliable tradition Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) bought a house
and asked one of his friends to move into that house as the friend's
house was small and not enough for him. The friend told the Imam (a.s.)
that he could not move into the new house, which the Imam (a.s.) had
bought for him, as the house he lived in, was built by his father. The
Imam (a.s.) answered that it was not necessary for his friend to stick
to the mistake which his father had committed.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) there are three things which are
a source of satisfaction and comfort for a Momin. Firstly the house
should be open (i.e. airy); it should also be hiddeen or sheltered to
the extent that its faults and secrets are not open to the public eye;
secondly a pious wife who is his assistant in the affairs of this world
and the next, as well; thirdly that sister or daughter who leaves his
house, only after getting married (i.e. Nikah) or at her death.

In another tradition he (a.s.) has started the following things which
are signs of the good luck of a person:

a) his son should resemble him

b) he should have a beautiful but pious wife

c) his house should be spacious.

In a tradition he (a.s.) has also stated that following things are
connected with the house being unlucky.

a) the open ground being less

b) the neighbours being bad, and

c) the house itself having many faults.

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) has stated that two things are the curse of
life - changing house often, and buying bread from outside.

### 2. Reproof on making a house of great height and on having too many extra provisions in it:

###

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), God infuses the desire of
making a many-storied house, in that person who earns by illegal ways,
that his money may be wasted in mud and water.

In another tradition, he (a.s.) has stated that a building which will be
more grand than necessary will be a source of burden for its owner on
the Day of Judgement. It will be pushed on its owner.

According to Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.), God has named a few of the places of
the earth as ‘Marhoomat’ and He desires that at these places His name
should be taken and people should remember Him and pray to Him that He
may accept these prayers. In the same manner He has reserved certain
places of land as ‘muntakamat’ (places of revenge) on which He makes
those people live, who earn by illegal and prohibited ways, and waste
their money.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), a person who constructs a
building for the sake of gaining fame and name, will find that on the
Day of Judgement his building is dug into the seventh layer of earth and
tied around his neck, after which he will be thrown into hell. Nothing
of hell will form an obstruction to prevent him from entering into hell.
But if he seeks remission, he will be saved. When people asked the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) to explain "for fame and name", the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) replied that it applies to those persons who build a house
more than required, or so high that it becomes a source of trouble to
their neighbours and build it in front to show-off against others as a
source of pride.

It is stated from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that God has kept an angel
for all the buildings. When the roof of any building exceeds eight
hands, then the angel says, "O fasiq (O wicked) how far will you". In
another tradition it is stated that instead of the word ‘fasiq’ it is
‘the greatest fasiq of all’.

According to another tradition, a person complained to Imam
Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) that the jins hurt his children. The Imam (a.s.)
asked him as to how high was the roof of his house. He replied that it
was ten hands high. The Imam (a.s.) asked him to measure eight hands and
write Ayatul Kursi between the eighth and tenth hands on all the four
sides. The Jins come to those houses which are above eight hands in
height.

In another tradition it is stated that if the height of the house is
more than eight hands, then Ayatul Kursi should be written on the walls
where the measurement exceeds eight hands.

In a tradition from Abu Khuzalman, it is stated that he saw Ayatul Kursi
written over the door of Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) and also facing
Qibla where the prayer mat (Janamaz) of the Imam (a.s.) was spread.

### 3. Prohibition of drawing, sketching and building an idol of the living which can cast its shadow:

###

It is famous among scholars that building of an idol which can cast its
shadow is strictly prohibited. Making pictures on walls and cloth is
supposed to be makrooh and is held prohibited by some. One should be
careful that no gilt-edging is done in the house and no pictures should
be made, even that of a tree and especially of a full and perfect human
form. If such a type of picture exists, it should be destroyed i.e.
rubbed off or one of the parts of the body should be struck off, like
the eye or the hand.

In a reliable tradition quoted from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that the
angel Jibrael has said that the band of angels do not enter that house
which has a dog or an idol or that (uncleaned) utensil in which people
urinate.

In another reliable tradition it is stated that a person who makes idols
will, on the Day of Judgement, be asked to give life to those idols. And
when he will be unable to bestow life to the idols, then punishment will
descend on him.

A tradition states that some people asked Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) his
opinion about pictures carved on floors or printed on household linen
used for spreading on the floor. The Imam (a.s.) said it did not matter
as long as the faces of the forms were mutilated.

A tradition from Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.) states that one should not pray
in that house which has pictures hung in front of one. In case of no

alternative, one should either cut the photo or turn it on the wrong
side and then only one should pray.

In another tradition people asked him (a.s.) about making pictures of
trees, sun, moon etc. He (a.s.) said it did not matter if we drew
pictures of lifeless objects.

### 4. Etiquette of the floor of the house and of bed-making:

###

According to Imam Moosa Kazim (a.s.), there are three sources of
beautification:

a) a four-footed animal with elegant gait

b) a well-behaved slave

c) a beautiful floor

Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) has stated that a man needs a bed for
himself, his wife and his guest; and more than that is the property of
shaitan.

In a reliable tradition it is stated that Imam Reza (a.s.) used to seat
himself on Boria (dried grass mat) during summers and on a blanket in
winters. He used to wear rough clothes at home and when he used to go
outside he used to wear better clothes and make himself presentable for
the sake of people.

It is stated in a reliable tradition that when Hazrat Ali (a.s.) married
Hazrat Fatima Zehra (a.s.), he possessed only a cloak to cover himself,
a bedding of goat skin and pillow of the same skin filled with the
date-tree peelings.

In another tradition it is stated that Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) used
to pray at those places where the floor was covered with painted
pictures of birds. He used to spread a cloth over these pictures while
praying. The Imam (a.s.) had received many linen sheets from Syria as
gifts on which were printed pictures of birds but he had rubbed, changed
the heads of the birds into the form of trees.

In another tradition it is stated that there is no harm if a floor of
sheet whcih is tread and walked on by human feet has pictures on it.

### 5. Etiquette of praying at home:

###

According to a reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.),
Hazrat Ali (a.s.) had reserved a small room for himself in his house. In
that place there were only Quran-e-Sharif and a sword, but nothing else;
and here he used to pray.

According to another tradition Hazrat Ali (a.s.) wrote to Mussama that
he would like him to reserve a place of prayer in his house where he
should go in coarse and old clothes and ask God to free him from the
fire of hell and enter him into heaven; not to pray anyting against
Shara (the laws of Islam) and against anyone.

In another reliable tradition it is stated that one should beautify and
brighten one's home by reciting Quran instead of turning it into a grave
in the manner the Jews and Christians pray in churches and synagogues
but never in their homes. That home improves its condition where Quran
Sharif is recited much and the people of that house feel more comfort,
and the inhabitants of the sky receive light from this house as the
people on earth receive light from the stars.

### 6. Prohibition of keeping a dog in the house:

###

A reliable tradition from Hazrat Ali (a.s.) states that there is no
advantage of keeping any dog except the one used in hunting and one
which safeguards the herd.

According to two traditions from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), one can
keep the hunting dog in the house but he should have his separate place,
quite far away from oneself. At least there should be a door between the
dog and you which can be closed.

In another tradition it is stated that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has
allowed the keeping of dogs in the homes of those who live far away from
the population.

A reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that one
should not go often for hunting and whenever one hears the voice of a
dog or an ass one should pray to God to keep one away from the mischief
of shaitan for both these animals can see things which cannot be seen by
the human beings.

It is stated in many reliable traditions that if an animal is caught by
a trained dog and you reach at the time when the animal is still alive,
then you should cut its throat (zibha) and even if the animal is dead it
is allowed (halal) provided you had said ‘Bismillah’ when the dog was
let loose on the smell. But if the animal is caught by an untrained dog,
it is only permissible when you reach before it is dead and you cut it's
throat; but if the animal is dead by the time you reach, then it is not
permissible. If you have struck an arrow from the bow or just an arrow
in the body of an animal, then it is only permissible if you reach
before it is dead and cut it; but it is not permissible if it has died
before you have reached. And if the animal is dead but you have said
‘Bismillah’ before letting off the arrow then it is permissible;
otherwise it is non-permissible. The same order applies to hunting with
sword, spear or iron instruments of hunting. If one has hunted with
stone, gun or pitlet-bow which has no iron in it and can just wound the
animal, hten if you reach before the animal is dead, you can cut its
throat and make it permissible; but if the animal is dead on account of
the wound before you can reach, then it is non-permissible.

Section II
----------

### 1. Etiquette about the house:

###

According to a reliable tradition from Hazrat Ali (a.s.), a man should
never stay for a moment in the house which has no curtains.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the Almighty God does not take
the responsibility of looking after three types of persons.

a) A person who gets in a shattered house and starts living in it.

b) A person who offers prayer on a public highway

c) A person who leaves his animal free without keeping anyone to look
after it

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), one should sweep the ground in
one's house and should not imitate Jews who do not sweep their homes.

A reliable tradition from Hazrat Ali (a.s.) states that one should not
keep the day's rubbish for the whole night, one should throw it off in
the day only, as the devil finds a place in the rubbish.

It is stated from Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.) that sweeping and cleaning
the house keeps poverty away from it.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), the devil resides in those
places in one's house where the spider makes its web.

A reliable tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that one
should keep the openings of all the utensils of water and food closed,
for the devil does not open closed utensils and one should blow off the
candle before going to bed so that a rat may not set the house on fire.

In a tradition it is stated that on account of heat, the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) used to start sleeping out from Thursdays and when the cold
winds of winter began blowing, he started sleeping inside from a Friday.

According to Imam Mohammed Baqir (a.s.), the shaitan will overcome those
people who urinate or excrete on a grave or in a tank of standing water,
urinate standing, go to sleep without washing their hands and mouth
after having food and go to sleep in an empty house. These are the
situations where a shaitan can easily get hold of a man and will not
leave him until he goes out of his mind. It happened one that once when
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was on his way to a holy war, he crossed a
valley which was inhabited by jins. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) ordered
that his companions should go through the valley two together with one's
hand in the other's hand; no one should go through the valley alone. A
person disobeyed the orders and as soon as he entered the valley alone,
he was seized by a fit of lupteria. Other companions informed the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) who pressed the thumb of the unconscious man and
recited:

‘O evil spirit, run away with the name of God, I am his Prophet.’

and the man suddenly stood up alright, cured of the fit.

In another tradition the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked a person as to
where he was residing during his stay. The person replied that in a
certain house. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) asked him not to stay alone
or to live in another house as the devil dare not attack any man except
when he is alone in a house.

A reliable tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that one
should not keep that cloth in the house in which one brings the daily
meat as

it is the returning place of the shaitan; and one should not collect the
rubbish before the door as it is the retreat of shaitan; and when one
enters one's own room, one should say ‘Bismillah’ as the shaitan runs
away and when entering one's room one should say the ‘Salam’ as it
increases the fortune of the house and angels get attached to it.

It is stated from Hazrat Ali (a.s.) that one should not keep cobwebs in
the house as they cause poverty and anxiety in the house.

A tradition from Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.) states that keeping one's
utensils clean and washed and one's house well-swept and neat increases
one's daily earning.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), that handkerchief or towel
should not be kept in the house which is filled with fat and food by
constantly cleaning hands after meals with it, for it is the residing
place of the devil.

According to Imam Ja'far-e-Sadiq (a.s.), one should not keep canister
open as the shaitan spits in it and takes out as much as he likes from
the contents of the canister.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), one should look after one's
wife, children, friends and pet animals until the sun sets, for that is
the time when the shaitan can overcome them.

A reliable tradition states that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has
prohibited peeping in a neighbour's house.

In another tradition the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) states that God does
not like the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) to have six habits which the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in turn does not like his vicegernts and Shias to
possess. These habits are:

a) playing with one's beard or clothes during namaz;

b) abusing in the state of fasting;

c) making someone realize that you have given charity to him as an
obligation;

d) visting mosques when unclean;

e) laughing in a graveyard; and

f) peeping in the houses of other people.

### 2. Etiquette of entering and going out of the house:

###

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) after sleeping for the first
part of night one should not go out as there are certain creatures of
God which are spread over the earth at this time carrying out their
orders.

A reliable tradition from Imam Mohammad Baqir (a.s.) states that when a
person leaves the house he should say:

‘I begin with the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful, I have
brought faith on Allah and rely on Allah whatever His Will may be.
Except Allah no one posseses any strength or might.’

Reciting this prayer makes the angles slap the face of devil and keep
the devil away from you.

According to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) when a person says ‘Bismillah’
when coming out of the house then the angel retorts that he should live
well. And when the man says after it ‘La Ilaha Illallah’ then the
angle's reply is that all his task will be accomplished; and when the
man says ‘Tawakalto

Alallah’ then the angles retort that he will be safe from anxieties and
troubles.

Imam Reza (a.s.) states that when his father used to leave his house, he
used to recite the following 'doa':

‘Bismillah-Hir-Rehmanir-Rahim. I have come out by the strength and might
of Allah not by my strength and might. Oh Allah, only by your strength
and might I have started in search of daily bread, which You give me
with comfort.’

A reliable tradition from Hazrat Ali (a.s.) states that when a person
enters his house he should offer salutations and if his family is not
present then he should say:

‘May there be peace on us from our God.’

When he is inside the house he should recite Sure Qul Huwallaho Ahad as
it keeps away poverty and anxiety. when one has to go out for some
special work then one should go on a Thursday morning and recite verses
from Aale Imran Ayatul Kursi, Inna Anzalna and Sure Alhamd.
