1. Longevity: a Philosophical Perspective
=========================================

According to philosophy, every thing has a cause. Thus, nothing can
come into existence without cause occurs. And anything that comes into
existence, for it to become non-existent, another cause is required. So,
just as it is essential that for every existent there should be a cause,
it is also necessary that for its non-existence, there must be some
reason. For, if there is no Surah Aale Imran (3): 185
Surah Zumar (39): 30
68Surah Yaasin (36): 68

cause, the first cause (of existence) will provide continuity to its
effect. Therefore, whatever exists is due to a cause and whatever ceases
to occur is again because of some reason. If we have proof for the
existence, we must have proof to establish that it no longer exists;
otherwise, we must believe in the perpetuity of its existence.

Based on this principle of logic, Islamic jurisprudence has a law named
"Isteshaab". If I have placed this card on the table and have a proof
that I have done this work, then if I want to say that the card is not
on the table, I must furnish evidence in support of my claim. Of course,
to prove that the card is not on the table is the responsibility of the
one who makes such a claim and not me, who believes that the card is on
the table.

No doubt, "Evidence is the responsibility of the claimant while oath is
for the one who denies" is a well-established principle of
jurisprudence. But if the claimant has brought the proof for the
existence of the thing that he claims exists, then it is for the
opponent to provide evidence for its non-existence because it is a new
claim and not just denial. If it is established that 'A' lives, then the
one who claims that he is dead, must bring some proof for his claim,
otherwise it will be assumed that A continues to live.

Let us cite an instance for better understanding of the issue. Suppose,
one day we plant fifty trees on the road. The first day when we see
these fifty trees, the question that crops up in our minds: Till when
will these fifty trees continue to live? Immediately, we will remember
this law and say to ourselves that till the time it is necessary for
them to survive, they will continue to do so provided no obstacles or
impediments come in the way of their lives.

But after ten days, when we see that five of these trees are missing,
the query that comes in the mind as to why be these five trees missing?
We don't ask ourselves as to why are the remaining forty-five trees
still surviving. We search for answers for the former question and come
to know that these five trees are missing because they dried up or were
cut down, or they were not watered properly, or some children have
uprooted it, and so on and so forth.

The same law applies for animals and for humans. For example, in a
maternity home, fifty infants are born. On seeing them, the question
that arises in our minds is that how long will they continue to live? In
reply to this question, we shall say that if the demands of their lives
are provided for and the obstacles done away with, then they shall
continue to live and we have no proof for their non-existence because
they have already come into existence.

After ten days, two infants die. Now the question will be asked as to
why these two failed to survive? It is due to this law of continuity of
existence that whenever we hear of somebody's death, we ask for the
reasons for his death and never question a person that why is he
continuing to live?

**2. Longevity: A Scientific Perspective**

From the scientific aspect, the statement that man is like a car is
baseless because man is not a car. For, the day it comes out of the
factory, a car is subject to deterioration and wear and tear. But man,
from the first day of his birth, constantly craves for perfection. Body
cells are not like nuts and bolts or like parts of machine. In the human
body, the process of renewal and discarding of the old cells is a
never-ending process till they attain a certain degree of perfection.

Hence, to strike a similarity between a newborn child on par with a
just- produced factory car is absurd because on the whole, a living
being differs vastly from a car. You may recite a thousand elegies in
front of a car and yet it will not budge. But if you inflict just a
single spiritual tragedy on man, it will reduce his age to half.
Similarly, it does not make any difference to a car whether it is being
used for carrying a bride to her groom's home or is being used as a
hearse. But it does matter to man as to how he is being used. Thus, from
both material and spiritual aspects, man varies vastly from stones as
well as vegetation.

As for the hereditary factor in longevity it can be said: firstly from
the scientific aspect hereditary has not been established in longevity.
Secondly in numerous hereditary factors some are seen in the next
generation while others are not. Moreover, the hereditary factor is
propounded just as a probability and it is not that all the
characteristics of an individual are transferred or transmitted to the
next generation, leave alone to all his descendants. Therefore, even if
we assume the proof of hereditary as true for the sake of argument yet
under this rule, we cannot claim that all the sons are exactly identical
in age to their father. As we see that there have been people who
enjoyed long lives but their sons were either still born or die at a
very young age. Also there have been people who died in the prime of
their youth but their sons enjoyed extremely long lives.

Without prejudice to whatever we have discussed, even if we assume that
longevity is hereditary, it will apply only for natural lives. But if in
a family, all the ancestors have been poisoned or killed, we cannot
submit that the short lives of the ancestors will affect their eleventh
generation descendant (particularly where all have been either poisoned
or killed). Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) belongs to that family where all his
forefathers, till Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.) have been martyred and did
not die their natural deaths. Thus, even if accept the argument of
legacy, it will not be applicable for this particular family.

As for establishing longevity, numerous anthropologists have presented
and jotted down their investigations. Among the best books on the
subject is that of Dr. Paaknejaad and I advise all of you to go through
it. Its title is "Awwalleen Daanishgaah wa Aakhareen Peyaambar" (The
First University and the Last Prophet). In the second or third volume,
he discusses longevity and mentions the views of various scientists on
the subject.

The anthropologists mentioned in this book opine that man is like an
existent whose structure is such that if all his requirements are
provided for and external factors are kept at bay, he will continue to
live for an indefinite period. A comparison will facilitate the
understanding of the discussion. Let's say, a watermelon that is kept in
the open will become rotten in a week or a month even if none touches
it. But this card is unlike the watermelon. For, if this card is kept
here for years together and none touches it, it will remain unaffected.
This is because the atoms of the watermelon are perishable while those
of the cards are not.

Regarding man, the anthropologists suggest that human cells contain
inherent potential perpetuity. Now, let me cite a quote from the book
"Man: The Unknown" by Dr. Alexis Carrel. I have read this book during my
days as a student. Regardless of the author being from the East or the
West, we must admit that it is a masterpiece from the scientific aspect.
It provides a profound insight into the human being while discussing
about human cognition and inter-human spiritual relations.

While submitting his investigations, Dr. Carrel writes that if the
human cells are protected in the desired manner, he can continue to live
infinitely. It can also be said that he will not die and remain young
forever69.

Anyhow, we don't intend to get involved into the debate vis-Ã -vis the
mode or means of longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Rather, we just
want to answer the objection raised by some that according to modern
science, longevity is impossible. We refute this objection by saying
that as per the anthropologists, it is very much possible for man to
live a long life. If you talk about hereditary, we state that the
hereditary factor has not been established in determining the human
lifespan. Even if we assume heredity as a factor in longevity, it will
not apply in the case of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

If you argue that everything in the universe is perishable, we deny the
contention, as this is not the general principle of nature. Thus, the
objection raised is refuted at the outset.

We observe human interference in this very nature and witness that he
manages to reduce as well as increase the lifespan of other existents.
He plucks a flower from a plant to decorate his vase. Had he not plucked
it, the flower would have continued to live for a few more days or
weeks. This proves that man has an effective role to play in mostly
increasing or sometimes reducing the life of other creatures. Like a
gardener, through various procedures of Bonsai, protects a flower from
being affected by extreme weather conditions like summer and winter,
thereby increasing its Man, the Unknown, p. 173 (Persian). Interested
readers can refer to the original English version.

life to a considerable duration. Similarly, man strives to augment the
lifespan of animals and other human beings as well. If man can augment
or reduce lifespan, it shows that some kind of a method or procedure is
involved in the same. Now, this procedure involves either direct
interference in the nature of the existent or to enhance the
characteristics that will help it in prolongation of its life. For
example, some stimulant or booster is added to its diet that helps
increase its age.

Nowadays, scientific researches are debating furiously the ways and
means of increasing the average age of mankind. All efforts of medical
science are in the direction of augmenting the standard age of humanity
and they have indeed succeeded to a certain extent. For example, if
previously the mean age of humanity was 25-30, now it has gone up to
35-40. Scientists and doctors have focused their efforts in preventing
man from dying. In other words, their researches are directed to explore
the secret of survival, longevity and youth of mankind.

Before proceeding with the discussion on Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), let
us make a general query: Is there or not a nutrient, herb or medicine
available in nature, which on being used will increase a person's life?
Does there exist a scientific possibility or not? We ask the scientists:
Do you consider it scientifically possible or do you deem it to be
impossible? In other words, is it possible that a man, facing all
psychological pressures that the society inflicts on him and the
spiritual stress that he encounters, benefits from such a nutrient,
which will enhance his lifespan and increase his age? They will
certainly reply in the positive. Why? For, only he can answer in the
negative, which has researched and investigated each and every existent
in nature.

Therefore, when we have not done so, how can we make such a claim that
there is no such medicine or nutrient at all?

Now let us come and evaluate the standard of investigations. Is there
not a chance that among the herbs there is a flower or plant that can
enhance human life? Is it possible or not? How many of the total plants
and herbs existent in the universe you have studied and researched? Can
they reply that we have researched all the herbs and plants existent in
the universe? How many of the herbs present in the jungles and deserts
have reached to the physical laboratories of the world?

We say that we have stated about the herbs, now let us talk about the
animals. Is it possible that the flesh of an animal possesses the
ability to increase the longevity of mankind? Or perhaps, the flesh of
some beast bears this particularity? The sheep that you eat everyday,
have you completely researched and studied about its bones, veins,
joints, etc. and are you sure that there are no signs of longevity
available in it? If you are not fully aware about one sheep, then what
about the entire animal kingdom! Also, animal kingdom ranges from the
beasts of the land to the sea creatures.

Even if we assume that all herbs, fruits or animals are researched
thoroughly and it is found that there is no sign of longevity in them,
yet the same cannot be said when two plants, two vegetables, two herbs,
etc. are cross-fertilized and other similar permutations and
combinations. For example, if we say that the watermelon does not
possess the trait of longevity in it, for that matter the cucumber too
does not contain this particularity. But then, what about the product
that is the result of grafting of a watermelon and a cucumber? It's here
that an entire ocean of ignorance unfolds before man.

Consequently, to answer the aforementioned question in the negative is
beyond the realm of science. Science can never reply the query of
longevity in the negative. To conclude the discussion, we submit that
never can a congregation of scientists declare that it is impossible for
a human being to live beyond a certain age. Therefore, we ask the
skeptics of longevity, 'Are your discussions scientific or based on
ignorance?' If it is scientific, you should know that a scientist could
never declare longevity as impossible. And if your discussions are based
on ignorance, then we have no arguments with the ignorant and you too
kindly take off your scholarly guise.

**3. Longevity in Quran**

Now let us proceed to have a Quranic analysis (with regards to
longevity). Firstly, let us evaluate the verses. One such verse is
"Every soul will taste death." Of course, none denies this fact. But,
the limit (of age) for death has not been defined. We cannot claim at
this moment that so and so has died. If asked why? We answer that
because Quran says that every soul will taste death.

Another verse declares, "Surely you will die and they will die." When
this verse was revealed on the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), did he
(s.a.w.a.) die instantly? Like the previous verse, this one too does not
fix the time of death and hence cannot be used for the above purpose.

As for the third verse that declares, "And whosoever We give long life,
We render him miserable in creation", has stated the matter very
explicitly. To elaborate a little, sometimes when we initiate the cause,
the effect is bound to follow and it is not possible for us to prevent
the effect. For example, any glass that I strike with a stone breaks.
But I don't say that I strike the glass with a stone and I break the
glass. Why? Because striking the glass with a stone and its breaking is
one and the same thing.

In logic, sometimes the relation between the subject and the predicate
is that of a cause and effect. At other times, both are related to one
object and neither is the subject of the other. In the former instance,
when the relation is of cause and effect, when the cause is brought into
existence, the effect occurs automatically. Like we said, when we strike
the glass with a stone, the glass breaks automatically. But the same
does not apply to the statement: I will give watermelons to all the
guests whom I invite. In other words, it is possible that I invite some
guests but don't offer watermelons to them. It is in my hands whether to
give them watermelons or not. Invitation of guests and offering them
watermelons are not one and the same thing. Choice lies with the hosts,
whether to offer the watermelons to the guests or not.

Similarly, when the Holy Quran declares, "And whosoever We give long
life, We render him miserable in creation", it does not mean that
whosoever We give long life, We have to render him abject in creation.
No, this verse does not relate this law. Rather, it explains a general
law of creation that whosoever lives a long life, will become abject in
state. But those possibilities are in the hands of Allah. If He wants,
He can render his condition pitiable or else, He can also allow him to
remain young and handsome despite longevity.

Thus, the terms of Quran are such that both the possibilities are
mentioned and both of them are related to divine intention. First, He
explains the general law that whosoever He increases his lifespan, He
will render him abject in state. Now, we ask humbly, O Allah! If You
want to give somebody a long life and prevent his condition from being
pitiable, can You not do so? He, the Almighty, will retort angrily, 'Of
course! I can. The choice lies with Me (because I have power over all
things).

Therefore, nowhere does the aforementioned Quranic verse create any
doubt whatsoever. For, Allah's sunnah is such that He can provide
exceptions for any rule that He makes. For example, the sunnah of Allah
is that He brings a person into existence after copulation of man with a
woman and the necessary processes that follow. But in one instance,
Allah the Almighty, willed to create Hazrat Eesa (a.s.) without a
father. There are plenty of such exceptions.

After replying to the verses that are cited as evidences against
longevity, now let us proceed to establish longevity from the Quranic
verses itself.

The first clear proof from the Quran is about the longevity of Hazrat
Nuh (a.s.). The Holy Quran informs, "And indeed We sent Nuh to his
nation, then he stayed with them for a thousand save fifty years. Later,
the deluge overtook them while they were unjust.70"

Obviously, Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) did survive for quite a few years even
after the deluge. This is not an absolutely clear verse of Quran that
does not call for esoteric interpretation nor is it an ambiguous
verse.

Likewise, in the Majestic Quran, there are various instances when Allah
the Almighty has displayed His Power and granted long lives to some of
His creatures. Here, we shall mention one such verse for the benefit of
our readers. In the story of Hazrat Ozair (a.s.) [or Irmiya (a.s.)
according to some interpreters as the name is not mentioned in the
Quran] it has come down as follows:

"Or the like of whom (Ozair) who passed by a town and it had fallen
down on its roofs. He said, 'When will Allah give it life after its
death?' So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, and then raised
him to life. He said, 'How long have you tarried?' He said, 'I have
tarried a day or a part of a day.' He said, "Nay! You have tarried a
hundred years, then look at your food and drink- years have not passed
over it and look at your ass, and that We may make you a sign to man and
look at the bones, how We set them together, then clothed them with
flesh, so when it became clear to him, he said, 'I know that Allah has
power over all things.71"

The story goes like this: Ozair (a.s.) was passing by a village. He
passed by the village graveyard wherein graves were piled upon one
another and had thrown out the bones and skeletons of the corpses. He
looked at one of the bones that had turned powdery and thought, 'How can
Allah grant it life again?' It was noon then and Prophet Ozair (a.s.),
who was 25 years old, was sitting under a tree and had tied his ass to a
tree. He had just spread his dining cloth to have his lunch. His meal
comprised of a cup of milk, fig and a loaf of bread. He was busy eating
when suddenly he spotted the bones and he mused, 'How can Allah
resurrect it?'

Quran informs that at that very moment Allah captured his soul and he
remained in this condition (of death), when Allah resurrected him and
asked, "How long have you stayed over here?' He (Ozair) replied,
'Perhaps a day or part of a day.' Surah Ankaboot: 14
Surah Baqarah: 259

Allah the Almighty retorted, 'No! You are here for a hundred years! For
a century, Ozair (a.s.) was lying in the graveyard, under the scorching
sun, floods of water flowed over him, chilly winter enveloped him, days
and nights passed through him, yet he neither turned dust nor powder.

He remained totally safe, sound and untouched. His food too was safe
and therefore, the Holy Quran ordered, 'Look at your food and drink,
years have not affected them.' Man himself, (Allah's creature) with his
limited power, produces a refrigerator that has the ability to retain
the freshness of meat for such a time that it can be exported from one
country to another for consumption. Does Allah the Almighty does not the
power to protect food and drink for a particular duration in similar
circumstances? Thereafter, Allah the Almighty says, 'Look at your ass.
It has died and become dust. But We will resurrect it and clothe it with
flesh.'

Ozair (a.s.) observed a sudden tumult in the earth, the bones of the
ass were gathered and within a fraction of a second, the ass regained
life. Then Allah the Almighty ordered, 'Now, mount it and continue with
your journeys to cities and towns.' Ozair (a.s.) mounted it and arrived
in his city but to his utter amazement, it had undergone a complete
change. Its streets and areas had transformed to an unrecognizable
extent.

Finally, with extreme difficulty, he managed to locate his residence
and saw an old man with a flowing white beard residing in it. The old
man asked, 'Who are you?' Ozair (a.s.) responded, 'I am Ozair'. Not
believing the response, the old man retorted, 'Don't talk rubbish. Ozair
left this place more than a hundred years ago, never to return
again.72"

This incident is about two Ozairs (a.s.) One, who lived for 150 years
and another who lived for 50 years. That is, Ozair (a.s.), separated
from his brother at the age of 25 and died. He regained life after a
hundred years and again lives with his brother for another 25 years,
dying at the age of fifty.

This incident is narrated in the Old Testament and other heavenly
books. The Holy Quran has also mentioned it in the 259th verse of Surah
Baqarah and there is no vagueness or ambiguity whatsoever in it for it
to be interpreted or explained in any other way. There are many such
instances in the Holy Quran wherein Allah the Almighty has manifested
His power for the people.

Here, we don't want to claim right at the outset that the long life of
Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is in Allah's power. For, our aim is to first
establish the possibility of the subject and once that is done, we shall
show that it is in the hands of Allah to do the same. Because,
impossibilities are of two types: One that is beyond the realm of
intellect (mahaal-e-aqli) and second that is usually impossible
(mahaal-e-aadi) (as is not observed commonly). Intellectually impossible
is that about which the intellect decrees it to be impossible in
occurrence. Normally impossibility is that about which the intellect
does not judge that it's impossible but has not occurred yet.

Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 14, p. 360-362; vol. 46, p. 310

All scientific inventions are of the second category like human forays
into space, invention of the airplane, conception of numerous
life-saving drugs, solutions of various medical problems, etc. For
instance, till recently, man has been unable to find a remedy for AIDS
but the possibility of an antidote cannot be ruled out.

Intellectually impossible is that about which the intellect has a firm
judgment that it is impossible for it to occur. Now, longevity is beyond
the domain of both the impossibilities. In the first instance, we
observed that intellect does not regard long life for humans to be
impossible as there can be no scientific explanation that can deem it
impossible. Thereafter, we also established that it is also not normally
impossible because numerous examples of people living long lives73 have
been seen and science too does not negate the possibility. Therefore,
Quran, science, philosophy and history establish the belief in the
longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). It is neither an impossibility nor
in contrast with science, Islam, Quran and traditions.

A few years ago, the renowned magazine "Reader's Digest", which is
circulated globally in various languages, carried an article captioned,
"Death Fears Us". It discussed about the people of Azerbaijan in
erstwhile Russia, where the normal lifespan of people was in the range
of 120-150 years. They were also involved in day-to-day activities of
their lives. This was a common sight amongst them and none stared at
them with amazement. Likewise, historical references provide us
documents about people who enjoyed long lives. Exclusive books and
special chapters have been devoted to the subject wherein the ages of
Hazrat Adam (a.s.) (930), Hazrat Shoaib (a.s.) (912), Hazrat Lut (a.s.)
(732), Hazrat Idris (a.s.) (300), Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) (950+), etc. have
been mentioned. (Ref: Aaftaab-e-Subh-e-Ummeed, p. 83, 84).


