Reapparance of Imam-e-zaman (a.t.f.s.)
======================================

**vis-à-vis excess of oppression and injustice**

Among the important discussions that are being debated in the society
nowadays and many have been unable to find a suitable answer to it is
the question: Is it necessary and essential for the world to be replete
with injustice and oppression to enable Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) to
reappear?

Will he (a.t.f.s.) not come if there is not enough of oppression and
tyranny? Moreover in furtherance to these questions, another query is
raised: Then should we increase oppression and injustice to prepare the
ground for his reappearance or no, this is not our duty?

Since this discussion is not yet clear for the common people, hence
numerous misconceptions and wrong notions have cropped up in their
minds. Consequently, some even have the idea that any step taken in the
way of reformation is a step backwards vis-à-vis the reappearance of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and hence, we must do our best to spread
mischief and corruption in the land so that he (a.t.f.s.) comes
faster.

On analyzing these questions, we realized that incidentally the
question of spreading mischief and corruption, notwithstanding its
absurdity and inanity, is a theory with revolutionary face in the modern
world. The originator of such an idea was Karl Marx who propounded,
"Till discontent does not reach boiling point, revolution cannot occur."
Then, following the instructions of Marx, what should be done?
Definitely, one must try to increase mischief in the land and create as
many hindrances as possible in the way of reformations and improvements
in order to augment discontent to pave the path for a revolution!!

Therefore, the communists were of the view that we must enter the
intelligence service, torture the people, torment the innocent, pluck
out their nails, etc. so that when they are released from the prisons,
they will abuse the government and help the people develop a negative
opinion about the rulers. Marxists doctors also refrained from treating
the sick in hospitals and clinics and created such delays in their
treatment that the sick would die. This would anger the relatives of the
deceased who formed the view that doctors of government hospitals don't
treat the patients and act as catalysts in reaching them to the
graveyard. All these steps were taken to increase discontent among the
people to pave the way for a revolution of the proletariat.

Following such theories, the communists of the former regime as well as
during the present times are trying their best to destabilize things in
the country. This was precisely the reason why they opposed the
installation of Qarzul Hasanah100 boxes in mosques, as it would drug the
people into numbness and inaction.

Interest free loans

All the opponents of establishment of private polyclinics in the
Islamic nation (of Iran) were leftists who were indirectly responsible
for the slogans of the intellectual elite as well as few religious
scholars declaring from the pulpits, "Why are you drugging the people?
Instead of admitting these patients in private hospitals, send them to
government hospitals that they must encounter problems and difficulties
and consequently, shout 'death to the government'!!" The leftists
projected this move as a revolutionary step. Exactly like the doctor who
sits in the hospital and does not attend to the sick.

Or like some government servants who warm their office seats, draw
their salaries but deliberately don't solve the people's problems or
will create obstacles in their paths. They will make them run from
pillar to post for a small work in order to disenchant the public from
the government. If the action of the leftists and the communists is
revolutionary, then indeed the aforementioned doctor and government
servant are also revolutionaries of the highest caliber, albeit with
Marxist support.

Therefore, the matter of increasing discontent and restlessness is not
a thought that is propounded by ignoramuses and believed by others on
the basis of a few traditions. Rather, it can also turn serious when
given a social and revolutionary color for universal acceptance.

But our Shia faith rejects all such theories, and on the basis of
Islamic values and principles, does not consider it as a premise for the
reappearance of Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

Well, then how would one justify the following tradition, which is as
clear as daylight when it prophesies?

"Through him (Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)), Allah will fill the earth with
justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and
oppression101." At the first instance, this tradition is pretty eloquent
in its prophecy that the primary task of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) would
be to fill the earth with justice and equity, as it would be fraught
with injustice and oppression. Hence, some have misconstrued this
tradition like one says, 'the dining cloth will not be spread unless the
room is full of people." Now, if he does not spread the dining cloth, we
ask, 'Mister! Why have you not spread the dining cloth?' He replies, 'I
said that I will not spread it till the room is packed with people.' So,
if you really have few people and intend to spread the dining cloth,
then you must go on the road, get a few people for dinner and then
spread it! They have misinterpreted the above tradition in this very
manner when they say that the world should be 'full' of injustice and
tyranny for Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) to reappear. If it is

Muntakhab al-Asar by Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani, p. 247

asked as to why he has not yet reappeared? They answer because the
earth lacks in inequity and oppression!

The discussion I want to present for you today is the same that I did
eighteen years ago and the method of analysis that I will adopt today is
exactly the same too. In order to draw complete attention of the
audience, I told them that if you intend to truly await Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.), then what should you do?

Fill the earth with oppression and tyranny. We are in a class and say
that the teacher will not come till the class is full of students. Now,
what should the students do, who are truly awaiting their teacher?
Obviously, they will stand at the door of the school and bring all those
students who are playing in the nooks and corners of the school, in the
classroom, to facilitate the arrival of the teacher. Similarly, if we
want to become true awaiters, we must fill the earth with injustice and
oppression because our religion has ordered us, "The best action is to
await the reappearance.102" That is, awaiting the reappearance is better
than all other acts like prayer, fasting, etc. Awaiting salvation
implies striving for it and in this context, the best thing to do would
be to fill the earth with injustice and oppression!!

In all the gatherings in which I raised this issue, I first asked: This
is the doubt. Do you have any answer for it? In more than a hundred
speeches, I raised this question. Of these, I received only one response
and that too was quite an interesting refutation from an eleven-year-old
boy. He replied, "Our duty is to fight against oppression and tyranny."
I retorted, "It is not so. For, although it is your duty to fight
against oppression and tyranny, you have an even more important
obligation and that is to wait for the reappearance. Waiting for the
reappearance implies that you do all those things by which Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) reappears. And of course, he (a.t.f.s.) will not reappear
till the earth is full of injustice and oppression." I continued, "The
gathering in which you are sitting now, your act and the gathering
itself are violations of trust of Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Why? Because
he (a.t.f.s.) says that I will not come till the earth is fraught with
injustice and inequity. So, you must see to it that there are no such
gatherings!"

On hearing this reply, the young boy kept quiet. But after a few
moments, he sought permission to speak again and replied, "Did you not
say that our gathering was breach of trust?" I responded in the
affirmative. He said, "Did you not say that the world should be full of
oppression, tyranny and violations?" I said, "Certainly." He replied,
"Fine! Now, on the basis of your objection, we are playing our part in
hastening the reappearance through violations of trust on holding such
congregations. As you have said that the world should be full of
violations and breach of trust, for Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) to reappear.
So, we are not doing anything wrong and are actually waiting for the
reappearance.

Behaarul Anwaar by Allamah Majlisi, vol. 52, pp. 122-150

Through our violations, we are helping the cause of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) as per your own confession."

Well, this answer did not provide a solution but nevertheless, it did
contravene the objection. So, let us attempt to find a real solution to
this objection. The contents of the tradition under discussion were as
follows:

"Through him (a.t.f.s.), Allah will fill the earth with justice and
equity as it would be fraught with injustice and oppression."

In another tradition from Imam Muhammad Baqer (a.s.), the word like has
been used103 instead of as but it does not make any difference to our
argument. In this tradition, to find a solution to the problem, we shall
discuss three critical terms i.e. (a) it would be filled with (b)
injustice and oppression, and (c) like it would be filled with or after
it is filled with.

(a) In the term 'it would be filled with', being 'full' is relative.
Full of what?
Because the consequence of being full has different connotations for
different things. Like, the room being packed with people has one
meaning while the room being full of flowers has a totally different
connotation, and the room being full with fragrance has yet another
implication. Quite often it is said, 'the room was brimming with
perfume'. Well, if the room is full of fragrance does it imply by any
means that there is no carpet in that room, sofa or table in it? Does
it
mean that there are no humans, chandelier, or lampshade in it? Or no,
while the room is bursting with fragrance, it has all other things in
it as
well? Thus, to state that the room is filled with fragrance does not
contradict the fact that there are other things in it too. Similarly,
we often
say that the road is packed with cars while we are seeing that there
are a
number of people walking on it. Yet, the statement that the roads are
packed with cars is valid. Likewise, we state that the city garden is
bursting with trees and flowers despite the fact that there are
numerous
people roaming in it. To sum it up, contrast of a thing that is full
should
be from a thing belonging to the same species, not to other species.

(b) "Oppression and tyranny" means to transgress, to violate unlawfully
and
injustice. This is distinct from mischief and disbelief. When we say,
"full
of oppression and tyranny", it neither suggests being replete with
those
Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 36, p. 359. Of course, this term has also been
used in Doa-e-Adeelah but Shaikh Abbas Qummi (a.r.), on the authority of
his teacher Mirza Mohaddis Noori (a.r.), considers this supplication to
be from some scholars and not from the infallible Imams (a.s.). In the
last tauqee of Hazrat Baqiyatullah (a.t.f.s.) to the last special
deputy, as mentioned earlier, it has come, "This (reappearance) will
occur only after a lengthy duration, the hardening of hearts and the
earth being replete with injustice and inequity."

who abandon their prayers (taarek al-salaat) nor those who don't fast
nor other ethical violations, and not even polytheism and disbelief. It
just means oppression. Incidentally, the idea of oppression does not
indicate in any way that each and every individual should be an
oppressor. The term 'oppression' is very much like perfume in the
aforementioned example of the room being fragrant. Thus, it is possible
that the world is enveloped with injustice and oppression yet there
exist some individuals who are piety and justice personified.

For the world to be full of injustice and oppression does not mean you
and me start beating each other, I abandon the prayers while you become
an atheist. Certainly, it is not so. We can say that on the day of
Aashura, injustice and tyranny surrounded Karbala. But in these very
circumstances, Imam Husain (a.s.) was also present there. Does this, by
any chance, suggest that God forbid, Imam Husain (a.s.) also was an
oppressor? For the validity of the statement 'being filled with
injustice and oppression', it is not essential that we become corrupt,
mischief- makers, impious, transgressors, polytheists, unbelievers, etc.
Rather, it is sufficient that two powers clash with each other and kill
the innocents, and yet there is a nation that is virtuous and
righteous.

Therefore, if oppression and tyranny seize the world, why should you
rule on the basis of inequity? Why should you help and assist the cause
of mischief and corruption? It is not that if you are good, the world
will not become fraught with evil. Regardless of you being good or evil,
it is possible that the world will be full of evil and it is also
possible that it might not. Hence, the concept of the world becoming
full of injustice and oppression is in no way contradictory with me or
you or a particular family or tribe become moral and righteous.

(c) The words 'like or after it would be fraught with' merely relate
the circumstances prevalent at the time of reappearance and don't speak
about the stipulation necessary for it. Let us elucidate the point
further: For everything, we have two kinds of things; one is stipulation
and the other is the time and place for its occurrence. For instance, is
sunset a stipulation for you to serve Iftaar or is sunset the time of
serving Iftaar? Obviously, the latter holds true and not the former.
Now, if we want to do something that you may serve Iftaar earlier,
should we try to change the course of the sun that it may set sooner?
Definitely not, because changing the course of the sun is beyond our
control.

By stipulation or prerequisite, we mean that like it is said: Anybody
who comes late to the Majlis should give a treat to others. This is a
stipulation or a pre-requisite. Sometimes, I say that I will come to
your house at 3 p.m. Here, my coming to your house at the appointed time
is not the condition for my coming; rather it is the time of my coming
to your house. At other times, I say that I will come to your house only
if its door remains open. Now, this 'if' implies stipulation and if you
desire that I should visit your house, you should keep its door open.

Similarly, the world becoming full of injustice and oppression is NOT
the stipulation for the reappearance of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). In
fact, it speaks just about the state of affairs at that time. Traditions
merely talk about the situation then and never imply that till the earth
does not become full of injustice, oppression and tyranny, Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) will not reappear. They simply state that when he (a.t.f.s.)
arrives, he will fill the earth with justice and equity after it would
be fraught with injustice and oppression. Thus, it is possible that a
stipulation can be the obligation of the people but time is never a duty
of those who wait because it is not in their control.

The most significant proof that injustice and oppression is not the
stipulation for the reappearance of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the fact
that the cause of occultation was not the scarcity or lack of injustice
and oppression. For, when a thing is a pre-requisite, it holds some
significance. For example, I say that till everybody does not sit down,
I will not speak. You see that I am standing but am not speaking. One of
you stands up and says, "Mr. Iftekharzadeh! Commence your speech soon!"
I reply, "I said that I will not speak till everybody sits down."

Now, if others ask this gentleman that why Mr. Iftekharzadeh is not
commencing his speech, he will give the same reason i.e. since everybody
is not sitting down, he is not beginning his address. If I am asked, I
too will cite my condition for beginning my talk. Thus, if the condition
and stipulation for my speech is the sitting down of people, then
certainly, the cause of my silence is the standing of the people.

On the same lines, if the condition for the reappearance of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the world becoming full of injustice and
oppression, then the cause of occultation must be definitely their
paucity and shortage. Now, is it true that when Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
went into occultation, injustice and oppression were lacking in the
world? Did he (a.t.f.s.) announce to Motamid, the Abbaside ruler, that
since you are not perpetrating enough atrocities and injustices, I am
going into hiding, and will reappear only and only when your oppression
and violence will reach to my desired limits! Did Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) rebuke the people of that era that I am going into
occultation because all of you are quite religious, and will manifest
myself only when you become irreligious and impious? During the world
wars, did Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) say to the warring countries
"Excellent? Thank you very much! Please continue to fight and spread
carnage that I may reappear at the earliest!"?

Therefore, if filling of the earth with injustice, tyranny and mischief
is the pre-requisite for the reappearance of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), he
(a.t.f.s.) must really appreciate and thank all the tyrants, oppressors
and mischief- mongers of the world as they are helping his cause. But is
this the case? Since we know the impropriety and falsity of the claim
that Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) did not go into occultation because of the
shortage of injustice and oppression then, we can easily conclude that
filling of the earth with injustice and oppression will never be the
pre-requisite for his reappearance. Consequently, this tradition will
never become a stipulation and it will be wrong on our part to say that
this is the cause of the reappearance of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).
Anybody, who attempts to interpret the tradition in this manner, has
actually not understood Islam correctly.

To complete the discussion and classify our duties, let us cite an
example here, which incidentally will clarify a number of problems,
besides illuminating our obligations.

Suppose we have a class and the principle says to the students:
Children! Your teacher will come late to the class. Even if one minute
remains for the class to end, he will definitely arrive and discharge
his duty. So, the arrival of the teacher is a certainty. The students
know that when the teacher enters the class he will convert the noisy
and undisciplined class into a disciplined and controlled one. He will
reprimand and punish the saboteurs and mischief-makers and throw them
out of the class. As a result, the noisy class will become calm and
controlled one that he may teach peacefully. Thus, you dear students
must wait for your teacher. Meanwhile, the principal selects one student
as a monitor. Also, he requests him to ensure discipline in the class
and revise the previous lesson for the students. Moreover, the principal
reminds all the students of the class that he, along with their teacher,
will keep a watch over them from the upper window.

One of the students asks: When will our teacher come? The principal
replies: I can't say! Maybe he might come after half an hour, or ten
minutes, or five minutes, or just before the final bell rings. But you
wait for him, regardless of the time of his arrival.

After the principal walks out of the class, there are four
probabilities concerning the situation of the class:

Firstly, the monitor thinks, 'What have I got to do? Let the teacher
come and take care of his class. I am going to sit in my place, write my
exercises and study my lessons. Secondly, the monitor says, 'Who is with
whom? Boys! Let us have a free for all (fight).'

Thirdly, the monitor takes a cane and stands near the blackboard and
threatens, 'Silence!' But, the moment the class seems to come under
control, one of the backbenchers takes aim at the monitor and hits him
with a missile, leaving the entire class in raptures. Tired and angry,
the monitor fails to instill discipline in the class despite all his
efforts and the students keep mocking and poking fun at him.

Fourthly, the monitor gains instant control over the class. He
organizes the class nicely and the moment the teacher walks in the
class, the monitor hands over the class to him with complete
preparedness. Thus, the four conditions vis-à-vis the duty of the
monitor can be summed up as follows:

1. Irresponsible behavior of the monitor
2. Collusion of the monitor with the mischief-mongers
3. Utter failure of the monitor in achieving his aim, notwithstanding
his efforts and struggles, and
4. Success of the monitor in instilling control and discipline in the
class

In all the aforementioned conditions, there is one sincere student who,
regardless of the state prevalent in the classroom, suggest to his
partner that 'come on, let's not disturb the class and sit together to
complete our assignments. If possible, let us also make the neighboring
students aware that they don't make noise in the class and if they
agree, then the few of us will not spoil or worsen the situation of the
class.' Perhaps, the thought of this sincere student makes way in the
minds and hearts of other students as well, although he is not an
appointed monitor. Consequently, everybody in the class starts emulating
these desirable steps. It is also possible that the moment the sincere
student gives this noble suggestion to his partner, the latter rejects
it and colludes with the rioters, leaving the admonisher to fend for
himself alone.

In the first instance, the teacher of the class, observing the state of
his students from a distance, remarks to the principal, 'Sir! This
monitor is highly inefficient and indifferent. Please mark his name so
that when I go to the class, I may reprimand him for his behavior. But
at that very moment, when the teacher looks at the sincere student
sitting at the end of the class, says to the principal, 'Look! That boy
at the far end of the class is sitting quietly and busy completing his
assignments. Do you permit me to go to the class now?' The principal
replies, 'Wait! Have patience!' In the second instance, the teacher
cries in despair, 'Principal! How careless and sloppy could this monitor
be! He has taken the initiative in spreading mischief and trouble in the
class!' But when his eyes fall on the sincere student and his partner,
he says, 'Look at those two at the far end of the class, they are busy
doing their work and are totally inattentive to the waywardness of the
troublemakers. Moreover, they are also trying to guide the other two
students to work with them, which take the tally to four.

In the third instance, the teacher remarks to the principal, 'This
young monitor is tired and exhausted but the students are not weary of
their naughtiness. But at the far end of the class, there are four
students who are performing their tasks diligently.'

In the fourth instance, the teacher comments, 'Let's go, principal. The
class is ready, the monitor is successful and the state of affairs
desirable. The class is working in a most smooth and efficient manner.
This instance is the most ideal state for both the teacher as well as
the principal. In all the four instances mentioned above, the door of
the class opens suddenly and the teacher makes his entry.

In the first instance, immediately on entering the class, the teacher
gives a hard slap to the monitor on his back, while the troublemakers
too get a kick in the rear. He also congratulates the sincere student
for his efforts. In the second instance, he enters and straightaway
kicks the monitor on the back and throws him out of the class. He
follows it up with words of encouragement and appreciation for the
sincere and diligent student.

In the third instance, he cheers and is grateful to the monitor for his
efforts and struggles despite his failure in instilling discipline in
the class. Later, he appreciates the hard-working and industrious
students of the class, who were busy with the tasks on hand.

In the fourth and final instance, on his entry, when the students stand
up in reverence, he says a general thank-you to them all and
immediately, gets on with the task of teaching in the class. In the
first three instances, a lot of time had been squandered on instilling
discipline and numerous efforts were wasted in establishing control in
the class. But in the fourth instance, as things were as desired, the
teacher could get on with the vital task of teaching straightway on his
entry in the classroom, without undue delay. Of course, it should be
borne in mind that the duty of the teacher is not to keep the class
silent and maintain discipline in it. These are just preliminaries for
his main task i.e. teaching and training.

Now, the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) appointed from the side of Allah
the Almighty as the dean of the University of Humanity, said, 'O people!
You have a teacher in occultation, which will come later.' The Muslims
became observers and monitors of all other people, while the Shiites
happened to be the monitors of the Islamic world. Finally, the Ulama and
scholars were appointed as controllers of the Shias around the globe.

In the first case, many went into their houses and sat down, saying,
'What have we got to do? Let Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) come and change
things for the better. Observers of this category are aplenty, who
suggest, 'Eesa (a.s.) for his religion and Moosa (a.s.) for his
religion. We are surrounded by corrupt governments and dishonest rulers,
so let us just remain in the confines of our houses.'

In the second case, the monitors and observes themselves participate in
spreading mischief and trouble throughout the world.

In the third case, the monitors and observers try their utmost in
finding a solution to the problems plaguing humanity but to no avail.
They drop down, weary and exhausted. The day the first martyr or the
second martyr or Shaikh Fadhlullah (may Allah's mercy be on them all),
were lynched by the tyrants of their eras, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), on
observing the state of affairs, must have remarked, 'O Allah! They want
to eliminate the monitors and controllers from their midst. Permit me to
go and transform the state of affairs.' To which, Allah the Almighty
must have replied, 'Wait! The time has not yet come!' During the course
of history, we had numerous observers and monitors, who left no stone
unturned and literally sweated to death, but ultimately collapsed with
defeat. The troublemakers and mischief-makers did not allow their class
to achieve the desired results.

In the course of all these events, there were some like the sincere and
diligent students. They decided that they would not spread mischief in
the earth and try to convince at least a few of their friends and
acquaintances to tread this path. For, if Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
appears tonight, why should his time be wasted in controlling the class
and establishing discipline in it? Why on earth should we be responsible
for squandering his valuable time? Let us revise our lessons, become
well versed with the commentaries and exegesis of the Holy Quran, and
learn jurisprudence and other course material, so that when Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) arrives, his time should not be wasted in revising the
syllabus. When the principal says to us that your teacher will come and
regulate your undisciplined class, he also reminds us of reviewing and
revising the previous lessons.

We must not make trouble in the class that when the teacher arrives, he
becomes busy in settling the class down because whether we make mischief
or not, the teacher will come for sure. For, the principal has assured
that even if one minute remains for the final bell to ring, the teacher
will come definitely and perform his task.

"Even if one day remains for the world to end, Allah will prolong this
day till He raises a man from my nation (ummah). He will fill the earth
with justice and equity as it would be replete with injustice and
tyranny.104"

So, as the advent of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is certain and definite,
what is our duty? We are the observers for the rest of the world and in
the Shiite society our role is akin to that of the diligent and sincere
student. It is our religious obligation to organize a small batch of ten
students, to have one class and try to prepare at least these few
students for the arrival of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Each one of us must
strive to the best of our ability, be it our person, locality,
organization, school, country, society, etc. to prevent our neighbor
from indulging in or spreading mischief in the earth.

If the world becomes organized and disciplined by the Shiite
leadership, we will become all ready and prepared for the reappearance
of Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Establishing global security, safety,
comfort and peace are the premises for the final and ultimate aim of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) i.e. to expand upon the teachings and sciences
of the divine Prophets (a.s.) and Messengers (a.s.) for humanity. He
should not become busy in ensuring peace and tranquility in the world,
which is not his main objective. This is our duty. If everybody treads
this path, whenever a reformer takes a step in improving the society, he
will think: Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is observing us. On his part, our
Imam (a.s.) will pray: O Allah! He intends to do our work. Please help
him and make him successful.

This is our state vis-à-vis Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and the explanation
of the tradition under discussion.

O Allah! Send blessings on Muhammad (s.a.w.a) and the progeny of
Muhammad!


