The Benefits of a Hidden Imam
=============================

Among the discussions concerning Hazrat Baqiyatullah (a.t.f.s.) is his
benefit and advantage during the major occultation. This argument is
rooted in the fact concerning his perfections. In other words, once, we
discuss about a thing whether it has any benefits or not, while on
another occasion, we argue as to what is the advantage that one can draw
from him. Thus, the first step that we should take is to separate these
two issues. That is, first and foremost, whether the existence of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has any advantage at all or not. Secondly, is
his existence of any use and benefit for us or not? Quite often there
are existents that are useful but hold no benefit for us.

Sometimes, there are things that, in our view, don't have any advantage
or benefit per se. For example, an herb available in the jungles of
Africa cures cold, thereby proving its utility. Now, if thousands are
unable to utilize this herb to their advantage, we cannot rule out its
usefulness and declare that this herb should be destroyed because it's
useless. No, it has its benefits but it is for those suffering with cold
to gain from it. But if those suffering from cold pursue this herb and
after using it, realize that it is absolutely ineffective in curing
their cold, only then can they say that this herb did not serve our
purpose at all.

This reasoning can be applied for all things like people, houses,
books, stones, etc. but usually these two issues are mixed up and people
end up being confused. Concerning the existence of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.), primarily it should be analyzed whether he has any advantage
or benefit at all or not. Thereafter, we must evaluate that if we have
failed to gain from him, does it imply that he is of no use or was it
some lacking on our part to derive benefit from him?

Basically, it should be observed what is the meaning of a man being
beneficial and advantageous? Again, prior to this, it must be seen
whether the basis of existence of every man is his being useful for
others? That is, if something is not useful and advantageous for others,
should it be told to cease to exist? Should this be the criterion for
granting existent to creatures or no, it is absolutely incorrect to
formulate such a norm? Many are of the view that if a thing has no
utility value, it does not have the right to exist and hence they
question the rationale of some existents like snake, scorpion, serpent,
earthworms, etc.

Before arguing those two points, it should be evaluated: Is the basis
for the existence of persons or things their utility value or no, this
is not the case? The answer is as follows: This is certainly not the
criterion for Allah that if He has to create anything, He has to ensure
that it has benefits for others. Allah the Almighty can confer the
bounty of existence on any creature merely because He intends to do so,
regardless of the fact that it is of no use for others. How can you
judge that since the housefly has no utility value, it has no right to
exist?

Even if it is assumed that it has no advantage for others,
nevertheless, it enjoys the gift of existence. On what grounds has the
criterion of benefiting others been made for gaining the right to
existence?

Secondly, what is the ground for establishing that the existent should
be advantageous for humans only? Who has formulated this theory (and
from where) that man is the center of existence and that whenever Allah
intends to create anything, it must definitely be useful for mankind?
Certainly this is not the case. There is a famous incident that one day
Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) went towards Mount Tur. On the way, he saw a beetle
playing in sheep dung.

Instantly, a thought crossed his mind as to why Allah the Almighty has
created this beetle. Anyhow, he proceeded to Mount Tur and got so
engrossed in supplications that he forgot to ask this question from his
Lord. Later, when he wanted to return, Allah inspired to him, 'O Moosa!
You want to ask a question?' Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) replied, 'O Lord! I
could not get the opportunity to ask.' 'Never mind! You can ask now'
rejoined the Almighty and continued, 'O Moosa! Are you aware that the
moment you passed by the beetle, what did it think?' Moosa (a.s.)
replied in the negative. Allah informed, "The beetle prayed in that very
instant, 'O Lord! Why did you create this Moosa? Of what use is he to
me?'"

Who says that we humans are the pivots of existence and when we see
that something is not beneficial for our existence, we raise objections
against Allah concerning the rationale behind its existence?!

It is quite likely that before we complain, the housefly might protest,
'O Allah! Of what use is mankind? For a few minutes of comfort, he
sprays pesticide and kills hundreds of our species! Why did You create
this transgressor, who spreads mischief in the earth?'

Therefore, this criterion for creation of all species, that is lending
benefit and advantage to our existence, more importantly, me, is totally
fallacious and should be rejected at the very outset.

You ask: Of what use were the Prophets (a.s.) to us? As if we are the
cream of creation that even the honourable Prophets (a.s.) were created
for us, while this was not the case and even there is no need for it. Of
what use were the Prophets (a.s.) to us? Nothing. Then why did they
come? How are you concerned! They are existents and creatures of Allah
in their own right and we are another creation. Of what use is our
creation to the Prophets (a.s.)?

The idea that Allah the Almighty has created the Prophets (a.s.) for
us, is highly erroneous. He neither created the Prophets (a.s.) nor Imam
Husain (a.s.) and the infallible Imams (a.s.) for us. They did not
sacrifice what all they had for us. Imam Husain (a.s.) didn't lay his
life for us. The holy Imams (a.s.) did not get martyred for our cause.
They did all these for themselves, to serve their purpose. They sought
the obedience of Allah, their Lord and they chose the path of our help
to achieve this aim. So, we are not the aim of the creation of the
Prophets (a.s.) or Imams (a.s.). The Imams (a.s.) are for themselves and
for their Lord.

Ultimately, for them, one mode for divine proximity and elevation in
degrees was to rescue us (from ignorance) and guide us.

Thus, this is one basic point that we are not the cause of the
existence of the Prophets (a.s.) and Imams (a.s.). Now, of what use is
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) unto us? Let us assume that he (a.t.f.s.) is of
no benefit for us. Does it mean that he (a.t.f.s.) should not exist? Who
says that we are the center of creation and if he (a.t.f.s.) is not
advantageous for us, he (a.t.f.s.) must cease to exist. The first
question and the foremost point that was raised: Of what use is
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) unto us? The reply is that you have crossed your
limits, as this question does not concern you at all. He is an existent
like us. What is our benefit to him (a.t.f.s.)? Nothing. Therefore, even
if we assume that he (a.t.f.s.) is of no use unto us, should not be much
of a problem. This is a very critical point of which most of us are
unaware. We think that the Prophets (a.s.), Imams (a.s.) and other
illustrious personalities of religion were created for us!

This was the first point. After we are through with this, now let us
ask the question: What is his benefit and advantage? Does he (a.t.f.s.)
have any utility value or not?

In response, we submit that the benefit and advantage of a thing is
relative. What is the use of this glass? Let us sit and talk about its
benefits. We will realize that the advantage derived from a thing
depends upon how it is being used and as to how benefit is sought from
it. Man, in relation with the entire existence, is of some benefit and
of much more use and advantageous for those who seek benefit from him.

Divine proofs, Prophets (a.s.) and Imams (a.s.) have some existential
benefits, which we have already discussed under the subject of the
noblest creation (imkaan-e-ashraf). They truly are the pivots of all
existence. In the chapter of the perfections of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.),
we mentioned that creatures are sustained due to his blessings and due
to his existence the heavens and the earth survive.

Therefore, the greatest advantage of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is that he
(a.t.f.s.) is the pivot of creation, the personification of the perfect
human being. But these discussions were concerning the benefits of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) with the entire existence. So, if we keep the
above discussions in consideration, no further queries will arise. The
greatest benefit of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is that if he did not exist,
we would neither. He enjoys the right of existence over us. He
(a.t.f.s.) truly is the center of existence. The fruits that we eat, the
water that we drink, the sweet that we enjoy the stability of the earth,
etc. are all due to him (a.t.f.s.). Finally, the greatest advantage of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the spiritual right of him being the pivot of
creation.

Suppose, we say those two kilometers from here, there is a superstore
or warehouse, wherein everything is available. They ask: They sell meat?
I say: Yes. They ask: They sell fruits? Again I reply in the
affirmative. They ask: They sell garments? Yet I again say: Yes. They
ask: Do they sell books? I say: Yes. So, whatever they require and ask
for, my reply is in the positive. But they don't budge from here to
reach there. Now, if they sit here till the Day of Judgment, they will
never be able to procure the meat, fruits, garments, books, etc. that
are available in the superstore. Indeed, the superstore is useful but we
are not attempting to gain advantage from it. You may light two thousand
lamps over here but if you take your book to read in a dark room, you
may never be able to gain anything from it and the lamps will be
inconsequential for you. The lamps have light but you don't want to gain
from it.

The Perfect Man is the treasure-chest of all bounties and the Pure
Imams (a.s.) are the source of all endowments. In Ziyarat-e-Jaameah, we
address them in the following words:

"Peace and salutations be on you, O (you, who are) the household of
Prophethood, the situate of messengership, the place of ascent and
descent of angels, the station of descent of revelation, the
treasure-trove of mercy and the treasurers of knowledge."

Thus, if you put two thousand Prophets (a.s.) together and roam in the
streets and don't derive benefit from them, is it their fault? You get
the best of scholars and imprison them. Is it their mistake or that of
the people? You may have the best of books in the libraries but if there
are no readers, does it mean that the books are useless or that the
people are not striving to gain from it?

To sum it up, whatever benefits we want, physical or spiritual, is
available with Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). In other words, if you want the
know-how for development and progress in the field of agriculture,
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) knows it. If you want money and wealth, he
(a.t.f.s.) has it. If you want health, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) can
provide you with health and safety. If you want your sins to be
forgiven, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has the power to get them erased. The
keys of Allah's treasures are in his noble hands. The keys of treasures
of creation are in his hands. If you really want, go to him and obtain
it! So, from the view of being beneficial, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has
everything, knowledge, science, perfections of kinds, spiritual as well
as material. These perfections are found not only in Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) but also in his holy ancestors, the infallible Imams (a.s.),
who have departed from this world. Hence, we can gain immense benefits
from the holy existence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) but there are
obstacles and hindrances, which are our own creation and which we have
already discussed in the chapter of the philosophy of occultation.

Indeed, there is no doubt that all the benefits of his existence are
not accessible to us and we are deprived of most of these. But this
deficiency is neither on account of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) nor due to
his Lord. Being deprived of the benefits of an existence that brims with
bounties is not the proof of his being of no utility value. If we cannot
derive benefits from the knowledge of a scholar, it does not imply by
any means that he does not have knowledge. In fact, the opposite holds
true. He has plenty of knowledge and information, but we are the
unfortunates, dispossessed of his fountain of knowledge.

The advantages and benefits of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) are aplenty. He
is the source of bounties. A series of direct endowments reach to all
the existents. In traditions, it has come that the infallible Imams
(a.s.) were asked, 'How will one derive benefit from Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) during his occultation?' They (a.s.) replied, 'Just as the
sun extends its benefits to one and all despite being behind the
clouds.105'

The advantages of Imam-e-Zaman's (a.t.f.s.) existence reaching to the
people are very orderly and systematic: spiritual benefits to all the
existents, special spiritual benefits for Islam and very, very special
benefits for the Shias. Among all these gains, one imperceptible benefit
is the protection of religion and Quran during occultation. This is one
special support of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) for the Shias. During this
entire period of occultation, major as well as minor, Imam-e- Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) has helped and rescued the Shias from disastrous situations,
in particular, the religious scholars. Some of the Shias he (a.t.f.s.)
has helped directly and others, indirectly.

There were a series of problems in the protection and preservation of
religion, in which, time and again, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has shown
the benefit of his hallowed presence. Among these is the dream seen by
Mirza Naaeni (a.r.), the renowned scholar, in the midst of the world war
in Iran. The story goes as follows: Mirza Naaeni (a.r.) was highly
disturbed thinking about the fate of Iran and its people on account of
the world war. One night, he saw Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in a dream,
standing at a distance and indicating to a point.

Mirza (a.r.) goes ahead and expresses his discomfort at the prevailing
situation. Imam (a.t.f.s.) addresses Mirza (a.r.) as follows, 'Look at
that wall'. Mirza (a.r.) says that I saw there was a high wall, which
had become crooked in a particular area and was on the verge of
collapse. Then Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) said, 'this wall is Iran, which
has become crooked but we will not allow it to cave in because there are
Shias in it.'

This dream was seen by Mirza Naaeni (a.r.) about 70-80 years ago and is
in concordance with situation prevalent then. Suddenly, things changed.
Today,

Muntakhabul Asar by Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani, p. 270-272

things are so bad that we feel that had it not been for some
protection, it would not have been possible for us even to survive. But
who is the cause of survival? In the course of history, we have
witnessed numerous such benefits from Imam- e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) but have
not seen the master himself.

Since the discussion of benefits requires a detailed analysis of
history, therefore, keeping brevity in consideration, we would like to
submit that innumerable benefits from Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) to
individuals, societies of Shias and Muslims, visible as well as
indiscernible benefits to all the existents have been witnessed.
Notwithstanding all these gains and advantages, it is worth mentioning
that those that have been seen and witnessed cannot be compared at all
with those that are not yet witnessed.

That is, the amount of benefits gained from him (a.t.f.s.) is just a
miniscule particle compared to what has yet remained untapped. The
endowments and bounties, which he (a.t.f.s.) has not yet conferred, are
a hidden ocean. Truly, the knowledge and sciences of Imam-e- Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) are yet to be seen, his concealed, leadership qualities are
still to be manifested, and his ultimate, majestic authority in the
society remains to be observed. Withdrawal of these aspects of his
personality is not due to his shortcoming. It is our fault, the fault of
the societies that inhabit the world and the fault of those who created
hindrances and obstacles for the people to gain from him (a.t.f.s.). All
these were discussed earlier in the chapter of the philosophy of the
major occultation.

In other words, did Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) confer
the society with all the benefits that he could? Certainly not! Did the
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) grant to the people to the extent of his
ability? Obviously not! Was it a deficiency on the part of these holy
and infallible personalities? Definitely not! It was the careless
attitude of the people and their heedlessness that led to their
deprivation of bounties emanating from these noble persons viz. the
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) and the infallible Imams (a.s.).

The conclusion of the discussion is that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is
replete with bounties and benefits, individual as well as social,
spiritual as well as material, of which, only a fraction of a fraction
has reached unto the people.

We have witnessed instances of such benefits in our personal lives and
viewed the guidance granted to the Shiite scholars in the course of
history. Yet, we haven't had access to most of these benefits and we
wait for that day when the world will brim with the endowments and
bounties conferred on it by its master.

Of course, instances of those who had the opportunity to visit
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) during occultation and gain direct benefit from
his holy existence have been recorded and compiled in separate books.
Similarly, independent volumes have been written on his sayings and
quotations, letters and documents that comprise of important Islamic
gnosis, jurisprudence, laws, etc. apart from the various supplications
and invocations narrated on his authority.

"O Allah! Surely we are inclined to you concerning the noble
government. Through it, you will honour Islam and its followers, and
degrade hypocrisy and its supporters. And that you make us from among
those who call towards your obedience and guide to your path."


