The Future of the Universe in the View of Religions and Schools of Thought
==========================================================================

Basically, what is the view of humanity concerning its future? What are
the views and opinions of scholars, congresses and schools of thought?
How do we picture the future of mankind, a journey that started from
times ancient? Is the belief in Mahdaviyyat, a progressive creed or a
regressive one?

We observe that most religions, philosophical and even political
schools consider the future of mankind to be better than his past.
Therefore, all the worldviews, heavenly or otherwise, constantly strive
to improve the future upon the past and the present.

Fundamentally, the proposition of Utopia (ideal state) in Platonic
philosophy, before Christ and prior to Islam, is a style of
philosophical development. Of course, it is possible that some of its
characteristics may be imaginary in the view of modern sociologists.
Nevertheless, the four pillars of an ideal state, as propounded by
Plato, 'justice, chastity, wisdom and bravery' are in themselves a sign
of positive futurism.

In these four bases, wisdom accompanies chastity (or knowledge with
ethics) and bravery supplements justice. (To borrow an ancient
philosophical term) why is the world limping today? The reason is that
because one or even two of these pillars are found wanting in the modern
society. Moreover, an ignorant society is the one that is devoid of all
these four essentials.

These four bases are the factors of perfection for an individual as
well as a society. The lack of any one of these signifies a serious
shortcoming. An illiterate person, a coward scholar, a courageous
scholar but devoid of chastity, a courageous, chaste scholar but unjust
and oppressive, are all examples of imperfect persons. The presence of
only one or few and not all the four pillars does not lead to
perfection.

But if these four attributes or Utopia (using Plato's term) are
available in any single individual, such a person is deemed to be a
perfect. And if these were found in a society, it would be considered as
an ideal state. Hence, Utopia (ideal state) is positive futurism.

Most philosophical works that deal with politics and civics are based
on this hypothesis. Sadruddin Shirazi2 in the end of his book, 'Al-Mabda
wa al-Maad' has brought a discussion concerning the backdrop of social
governance. The gist of his view is regarding the benefits that society
will enjoy, which possesses these four pillars. If an individual bears
these four attributes, he is a leader and if a leader is devoid of any
one of these four traits, he will no longer remain a leader.

Similarly, a society that has all of these four qualities prevalent in
it can Also known as Mulla Sadra, the great Iranian philosopher er
societies. Lastly, if these four elements are found in the world, the
entire humanity will move towards perfection and the state of affairs
shall enjoy considerable desirability.

This thought, as discussed briefly, perhaps may have its roots in
divine religions but philosophical schools have also endorsed it. The
Zoroastrians view the future as positive, labeling it as 'the victory of
Ahura Mazda's army over the forces of Ahreman (devil)'. In Hinduism too
the future is considered to be bright and prosperous.

Last, but not the least, even the materialist schools of thought,
headed by Marxism, foresees the future to be better than the past,
albeit using different terms like single family patterns, co-operative
ownership, joint government, etc. Anyhow, they never opine that the
future is doomed. Rather, they suggest that future will tread the path
of perfection but there are differences in the interpretation of the
term 'perfection', some of which we have already hinted at above3.

Thus, we must accept this as a principle. Regardless of the sect that
we belong to Shias, Sunnis, or any other faction of humanity, we must
look at the future positively and search for the basis of this positive
outlook. Basically, due to his humanity, man feels a sense of
responsibility and accountability, which persuades and coaxes him to
search and investigate.

Had the future been damned, there would be no incentive for the
scientists to seek and spread science. The same would apply for the
reformers, philosophers and all other advocates of some thought or
science. For, the research and investigation of all these scholars is
based on the fact that they consider the future to be positive and the
way to reach to this zenith is this particular way. Thus, had there been
no peak to attain, there would be no need for any guidance or
leadership.

This is basic principle and we Shias among the followers of all sects
and schools of thought, hold our heads high and declare that we
subscribe to such a creed. That is, we consider the future to be
positive. Moreover, our positive outlook is to that extent that if we
are sure that tomorrow is the Day of Judgment and only one day remains
from the end of this world, yet we will say that the final outcome will
be implemented. This last day will be prolonged to a length so that
sufficient time is there for the accomplishment of this final result.

The Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) has conveyed the aforementioned
concept in a beautiful tradition, come down in successive transmission
(tawaatur) and recorded in the books of both Shias as well as Sunnis.
The tradition goes as follows:

These lectures were prior to the breaking up of Soviet Russia
(U.S.S.R.) and other East European countries. But this disintegration is
in no way contradictory to the discussion that the future of mankind is
better than the past.

"If there remains only a day for the world to come to an end, Allah
will prolong this day till He raises a man from my progeny/nation. His
name will be my name. He will fill the earth with justice and equity as
it would have fraught with injustice and oppression.4"

Therefore, even if all the angels of the heavens descend and declare
that tomorrow is the Day of Judgment, we will contend that since the
reformer, who will fill the earth with justice and equity, has not yet
appeared, this day will be prolonged to an extent that the promise is
fulfilled. Yes, we are so positive about the future that if all
scientists come together and prophesize that tonight the earth will
split and come to an end, we will not believe it. We will refute it as
we have firm conviction in the Prophet's (s.a.w.a.) prediction and
hence, despite all threats of doom, will sleep comfortably.

The following sentences of Doa-e-Ahd are the best proofs of a positive
outlook about the future:

"O Allah! If death comes between me and him (Imam-e-Zaman's (a.t.f.s.)
reappearance), which you have made compulsory and obligatory upon your
servants, then bring me out from my grave, (in the condition that) I am
wearing my shroud, my sword naked, my spear uncovered, responding to the
call of the caller in cities as well as deserts.5"

You saw how lovely and beautiful the statements of this supplication
are! This discussion has come in various sources. In these books, apart
from the prophesies of the heavenly religions, glad-tidings of the
various schools are also reflected. There are scholars, who have
researched on this subject, and extracted forecasts on this topic from
the Old Testament, the New Testament, the Avestha, Indian scriptures,
etc.

Some have even investigated and compiled books written on Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) from the first century of Islam till date. Hence, we have
books that have been written in the first century and another book,
which I have in hand right Muntakhabul Asar by Lutfullah Safi
Gulpaygani, p. 153 Mafaateeh al-Jenaan by Shaikh Abbas Qummi (a.r.) now,
has been penned in the second century and is a compilation of traditions
regarding Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), much before his birth.

**The Future from the Islamic View

The Quranic View:**

We have stated before that Islam, like all other religions, portrays an
optimistic picture of the future. This portrayal has been done in the
manner most beautiful in the Holy Quran. Therefore, right in the
beginning of creation, it is stated that the first creature on earth
would be Allah's Caliph; it was the wish of Allah to appoint His caliph
on the earth.

"And when your Lord said to the angels, 'Surely I am going to appoint a
Caliph in the earth."6

At this juncture, the angels expressed their amazement and Allah
replied to their query, which is known to one and all. One of my
teachers, a highly respectable and knowledgeable person,7 explains this
incident in a very interesting manner. He says that on that day, the
angels saw the bridge of Tajrish (in Iran) and the promenades of Paris
and said, "Will you appoint somebody who will create mischief in it?"
and then they saw the first and second World Wars and said, "and shed
blood?" But Allah the Almighty saw Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) and said,
"Surely I know what you do not know."

According to the Holy Quran, the aim of creation of mankind on the
earth is based on the very appointment of Allah's Caliph. Thus, in the
beginning of creation, Allah says, "Surely I am going to appoint a
Caliph in the earth." After his advent on the earth, Allah has provided
a model for him so that all may strive to emulate him.

For further understanding of this concept, let me cite an example.
Suppose that a person builds a school and expresses his desire to
educate students to become engineers, doctors, specialists, etc in it.
After the passage of some time, when one student passes out of this
institution, the builder of these schools brings him forward and says,
'For him only have we built this institution? All our efforts were
directed towards this very individual.'

Baqarah: 30 Ayatullah Shaykh Husain Waheedi Khurasani in one of his
speeches in Masjid-e-Arak of Tehran.

Some of the traditions that explain the virtues of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.) and his pure progeny (a.s.) carry a similar meaning. For
instance, Allah the Almighty says to the Holy Prophet (s.a.) :

"If you were not there, I would not have created the universe."8 Allah
the Almighty created Hazrat Adam (a.s.), the father of humanity, as a
role model from all aspects and ordered the others to emulate him and
strive to be like him. But as time passed, and other human beings tread
on the face of the earth, they failed to emulate their role model, as
was expected of them for the fulfillment of the divine promise, and much
to the disappointment of the righteous.

Yet, Allah the Benevolent, by sending the other Prophets (peace be on
them) to them, indicates that the appointment of His Caliph on the earth
is not rendered null and void. Rather, He would send more such people on
the earth, who would not only be like His first Caliph, but more
perfect.

Some are of the opinion that such verses are only for the gradual
finalization of Allah's Promise. Hence, in the Holy Quran, first He
says, "Surely I am going to appoint a Caliph in the earth" and
thereafter the Prophets (peace be on them) reminded the people. And when
the series of Prophethood reached to Hazrat Dawood (a.s.) and Hazrat
Sulayman (a.s.), Allah says, "Surely I have written in the Psalms after
the Old Testament that surely the earth, My righteous servants shall
inherit it."9

To understand the above verses in their right context and comprehend
their relevance, let me cite an example. You loosen the nuts and bolts
of this tape- recorder, dismantle it completely, mix it with some
additional screws that do not belong to it and tell somebody to assemble
it once again in the desired order.

Now, if somebody like me, who is totally ignorant about its
technicalities, takes it in his hand, he will never manage to sort out
its nuts and bolts with the additional screws or assemble it. But if it
is given to somebody who is an expert in this field, immediately, he
will get on with the task of separating its nuts and

**Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 15, p. 28**

Anbiyaa: 105 and within no time, he will assemble it and hand it over
back to you.

Similarly, the Quranic verses concerning Imamat and Qaemiyyat are as
scattered as the parts of the tape recorder in the above example. As we
are unacquainted with Allah's Book, we do not know as to which verse
talks about Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.). But if we hand over these verses
to the one who is well familiar with them, he will bring one verse from
the beginning, another from the middle and yet another one from the end.
He will place about twenty to thirty verses next to each other in such a
manner that they will not be applicable for anybody except the Promised
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

From such verses, we can select a few. For instance, Surely I am going
to appoint a Caliph in the earth" being one of them. If you ask what
this verse means, it will be answered, 'It means that there must be a
divine caliph in the earth.'

The second verse is that very one which has been discussed above and
which states that divine promise is definite. For, Allah the Almighty
assures, "And indeed We have written in the Psalms after the Old
Testament (in the various exegesis, the word zikr implies both the Old
Testament as well as remembrance-its literal meaning) that the earth, it
shall be inherited by My righteous servants."

So how much of the earth will they inherit? Is it about three hundred
or four hundred meters of a land? No, definitely not. It is not talking
about just a piece of land but about the whole earth. The definitive
article used in the word 'the earth' is used to connote the whole in
Arabic. Thus, the righteous servants of Allah will inherit the entire
earth.

In yet another verse, Allah the Almighty prophesies, "…Surely the earth
is for Allah, He causes it to be inherited by anyone of His servants, as
He pleases and the hereafter is for the pious ones."10 Here too the
servants have been categorized as the righteous and pious servants. The
last part of the verse is a pledge where Allah says that this is My
promise to you.

A'raaf: 128

It is better to clarify this point over here that some times we speak
in general that I will do this work. But at other times, we say it in
the form of a vow. We practice this in our daily lives. For instance,
one of our friends usually comes to us and says that 'I intend to invite
you'; but this is a general statement. But when? Where? Will he not
regret? Thus, it is still not a promise.

One day he comes and says, 'Sir, please note and remember that I intend
to invite you.' Fine, we remember but still he has not taken any
commitment from us. But one fine day he comes and takes a promise from
us. That is, he says, 'I want to officially invite you all on such and
such day, at such and such time, and in so and so place for dinner.'
These are the three stages of glad tidings.

Of course, it should be known that there are two kinds of prophecies,
one is a promise (wa'd) and another is a threat (waeed). It is certainly
better if a threat is not carried out. But if a promise is not
fulfilled, it is wrong and evil. In the case of Allah, He has threatened
a lot, 'I will throw you in hell, I will punish you…' but later, He
forgives. On account of His being a Forgiver, maybe He does not carry
out His threat. But if He does not fulfill His promise, then it is
indeed wrong and evil.

Now, when this is clear, Allah the Almighty, promises, "Allah has
promised those of you who believe and perform good deeds."11 In the
beginning, He said, 'Surely I am going to appoint a Caliph in the earth'
But now He says,

"Allah has promised those of you who believe and perform good deeds
that He will certainly appoint them as heirs in the earth as He has
appointed as heirs those before them (one type of such caliphs were
Prophets Dawood and Sulayman (a.s.))

And certainly He will establish for them their religion which He has
chosen for them." Where in the Holy Quran has this chosen religion been
mentioned? It is mentioned in the following verse, 11 Noor: 55

"Today, I have perfected for you your religion, completed My bounties
upon you and chosen for you Islam as a religion."12 So in this verse, it
has been explained in clear terms as to which are the religion chosen by
Allah for His servants.

Thereafter, He says, "And He will surely convert their fear into
security". What does fear and security imply in this verse? Fear is a
general term e.g. fears of hunger, fear of insecurity, fear of world
war, fear of an atomic war, etc. All these are fears and hence Allah
promises that He will convert their fear into security. In other words,
We will change the atmosphere of fear and insecurity into one of
security and comfort.

The verse continues, "(as) they worship only Me, do not associate
anything with Me. Then whoever disbelieves after that, and then indeed
these are the transgressors."

Therefore, all the above are promises of Allah. Now let us see, whether
these statements are definite promises of Allah, tantamount to His
Intention, or they are just general statements made by Him. In this
regard, there is another verse that pledges,

"And We intend to oblige those who have been rendered weak in the earth
and that We make them the Imams and We make them the heirs. And We will
establish them in the earth and We will show Firaon, Hamaan and their
armies what they were dreading from them."13

It should be known that the word "mustaz'af" does not mean weak.
Rather, its true connotation would be those who have become weak
willingly and voluntarily or have been rendered weak. For, it is
possible that those who have preferred to remain weak willingly could be
strong and powerful. (They have preferred being the oppressed one rather
than the oppressor.)


