The View of Traditions
======================

Traditions narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.) in this regard can be
classified into three broad categories. The first group of traditions is
those that talk about the immediate successor of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.). The second group talks about all his successors while the third
discusses about his last successor, the reformer of Islam and the
promised one of humanity. Under the last category, various topics can be
initiated and traditions can be further classified under them.

Maaedah: 3 Qasas: 5,6

Initially, it is necessary for us to know that for which type of
discussions should we refer to the traditions and on what topics we can
rely on them and for what kind of people should these traditions be
quoted. For example, can we use traditions as an argument for a youth
who cannot digest the concept of longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) or
somebody who thinks that what sort of social problems could be solved by
believing in Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)?

Certainly not, because such persons are absolutely unwilling to enter
the field of traditions. Their question or skepticism is not related to
traditions. Even if we quote two thousand traditions for them to prove
longevity, they will raise yet another question: Why have the traditions
supported a concept that is contradictory to science and intellect?

Then in what circumstances or on what occasions should we rely on
traditions? If we consider the appointment of the Imam to be from
Allah's side and that of His messenger (s.a.), then there is no other
way to know who the twelfth Imam except through traditions is. If we
consider the Prophet (s.a.) as the final authority in the appointment of
his successor and Imam, then the appropriate and scientific way would be
to refer to his sayings. And if we desire to know about a person and his
biography, then the only way would be to refer to the books of
traditions and history. Any other approach would be unscientific and
incorrect.

It was necessary to present the above preface because in the past we
have encountered such people who have demanded that we prove the
existence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) through scientific ways and means.
And when somebody forwards traditions and quotes from the Prophet
(s.a.), they refute it by countering, 'Mister, tradition is not science.
Prove to me scientifically.' Maybe somebody might attempt to prove the
same scientifically for him. But we prefer to avoid this approach and
say, 'Well, you please prove scientifically that you are the son of your
father or that Shah Abbas was a Safavi king!'

Of course, the scientific and correct method to prove this would be the
books of history and for every subject; the appropriate approach to
solve its intricacies and difficulties would be through its own ways,
means and references. If we want to establish the geographical location
of a particular place, it certainly would not be through physics,
chemistry or mathematics but geography. That too, the geography of Iran
under the subject of divisions of states and provinces. Therefore, if
somebody refers to the geography books, then indeed he has adopted a
scientific approach. Similarly, if somebody refers to the books of
traditions regarding the appointment of an Imam, then surely his method
is right.

Principally, this is the only correct procedure in this discussion.
Hence, today if I have brought books of traditions to present before you
some of these, it is with the sole purpose of executing a job in a
scientific manner and not to show that I am a mullah. Why I'm using the
word mullah or sheikh is that because some people have the habit of
driving the opponent away by using such terms like 'don't be a mullah or
don't be a sheikh', and say, if you are right, go to the laboratory and
prove your theory. But, a laboratory is a place for a different kind of
science. Recently, each science has developed its own form of a
laboratory and the laboratory for historical discussions is the history
books.

This only will be the right approach to solve its problems and there is
nothing unscientific about it.

After discussing this preface, let us come to the main topic. We said
that numerous books have been written about Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) and
plenty of traditions have been narrated about him from both Shia as well
as Sunni sources. Among the books that have compiled the traditions
concerning Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), is the book of "Muntakhabul Athar
fil Imam al-Thaani Ashar" by Ayatullah Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani.
Firstly, I would state the sources of this book and then present the
list of topics, albeit briefly.

Among the references of this book are Saheeh-e-Bukhari, Sunan-e-Abi
Dawood, etc. It is worth mentioning that in this book more than 60
sources of the Ahle Sunnat have been used.

This book comprises of ten chapters, altogether and each chapter is
further divided into sub-chapters. At the beginning of each chapter and
sub-chapter, the author mentions the subject of its discussion. The
first two chapters of this book are as follows:

First Chapter: Contains traditions that state that the Imams (a.s.) are
twelve in number. It is further divided into eight sub-chapters.

Sub-chapter 1: The Imams are twelve in number and the sources used are
Saheeh-e-Bukhari, Saheeh-e-Tirmidhi, Saheeh-e-Muslim, Saheeh-e-Abi
Dawood, and many other books of Shias and Sunnis.

Sub-chapter 2: The number of Imams (a.s.) is equal to the number of the
asbaat (grandsons) and nuqaba (chosen ones) of Bani Israel and the
hawariyyoon (companions) of Hazrat Eesa (a.s.). There were twelve
grandsons in the Israelites, twelve companions of Hazrat Eesa (a.s.) and
twelve Imams (a.s.) in the Islamic nation. Forty traditions have been
narrated in this sub-chapter from the narrators of both the major
sects.

Sub-chapter 3: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number of whom, the first
is Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). It contains 133 traditions along with their
references. The references in this sub-chapter are from the likes of
Yanaabiul Mawaddah of Qundoozi.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.) said, "O Ali! You are my successor. Your war is
my war and your peace is my peace. You are an Imam and the father of
eleven Imams those that are purified and infallible. Among them is
Mahdi, one who will fill the earth with justice and equity."

Sub-chapter 4: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number, of whom the first
is Ali (a.s.) and the last is Mahdi (a.s.). It is comprised of 91
traditions. Sub-chapter 5: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number, of
whom the last is Mahdi (a.s.). It contains 94 traditions like the
following one, The Messenger of Allah (s.a.) said,

"Surely Allah the Almighty took my covenant and the covenant of twelve
Imams after me. They are Allah's proofs upon His creatures. The twelfth
among them is the Qaem who will fill the earth with justice and
equity."

Sub-chapter 6: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number, of whom nine are
the descendants of Imam Husain (a.s.). It is comprised of 139
traditions. Sub-chapter 7: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number, of
whom nine are the descendants of Imam Husain (a.s.), with special
emphasis on, â€¦the ninth among them is their Mahdi or their Qaem". It
contains 107 traditions.

Sub-chapter 8: It comprises of traditions that prove the existence of
the twelve Imams (a.s.) along with their names. That is, we have
traditions wherein the Holy Prophet (s.a.) has given the number of Imams
(a.s.) to be twelve and also mentioned their names. It's a very
interesting tradition and contains all of their peculiarities and
characteristics. It comprises of fifty traditions, the renowned
'Hadith-e-Lauh' from Jabir Ibn Abdullah being among them and which will
be included in our discussion. It is a very reliable tradition and its
references are very authentic.

Second Chapter: It comprises traditions that discuss about the
reappearance of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), his names, attributes,
characteristics and glad-tidings. Forty-nine sub-chapters have been
discussed in this chapter.

Sub-chapter 1: Regarding the reappearance and uprising of Hazrat Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) and glad-tidings concerning him. Contains 657 traditions,
among the traditions is the one quoted from Saheeh-e-Tirmidhi which
says, "The Holy Prophet (s.a.) says, 'The world will not come to an end
till an Arab from my progeny will rule over it. His name will be like my
name." Thereafter, a similar tradition with resembling wordings is
narrated from Saheeh-e-Tirmidhi and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal.

Sub-chapter 2: Regarding the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is from
the progeny of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and from his Ahle Bait (a.s.) and
off-spring, containing 389 traditions.

Sub-chapter 3: Concerning the fact that the name and agnomen of Imam-e-
Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is akin to that of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and that he
is the most similar of men to the latter. Also, that when he reappears
he will act on the sunnah of the Holy Prophet (s.a.). It contains 48
traditions. Sub-chapter 4: Regarding the qualities of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) and are comprised of 21 traditions.

Sub-chapter 5: Concerning the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is from
the children of Ameerul Momineen (a.s.). It contains 214 traditions.
Sub-chapter 6: Pertaining to the reality that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is
from the children of Hazrat Fatema Zahra (s.a.) and not from any other
wife of Ameerul Momineen (a.s.). It is comprised of 192 traditions.
Here, the first tradition is from Mustadrakus Saheehain, followed by
quotes from Yanaabeeul Mawaddah and Muntakhabo Kanzil Ummal. Thereafter,
quotes from Shia books and a few Shia exegesis of Quran are also
mentioned.

Sub-chapter 7: Regarding the truth that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is from
the progeny of Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain (a.s.) and it contains
107 traditions.

Sub-chapter 8: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is a descendant of Imam
Husain (a.s.). It is comprised of 185 traditions.

Sub-chapter 9: Pertaining to the fact that he is one of the nine Imams
(a.s.) from the progeny of Imam Husain (a.s.) and it contains 160
traditions.

Sub-chapter 10: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the ninth son of Imam
Husain (a.s.) and it contains 148 traditions.

Sub-chapter 11: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the descendant of Ali
Ibn Husain (a.s.) and is comprised of 185 traditions.

Sub-chapter 12: That he is the descendant of Imam Baqer (a.s.) and it
contains 103 traditions.

Sub-chapter 13: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the descendant of Imam
Sadeq (a.s.) and it consists 103 traditions.

Sub-chapter 14: Regarding the fact that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the
sixth descendant of Imam Sadeq (a.s.), comprising 99 traditions.
Sub-chapter 15: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the descendant of Imam
Musa Ibn Jafar (a.s.). It consist 101 traditions.

Sub-chapter 16: Concerning the truth that he is from the progeny of
Imam Musa Ibn Jafar (a.s.) and is his fifth descendant. It comprises of
98 traditions. Sub-chapter 17: That he is the fourth descendant of Imam
Reza (a.s.) and it consists 95 traditions. Sub-chapter 18: Pertaining to
the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the descendant of Imam Muhammad
Taqi (a.s.) and is his third offspring. It consists of 90 traditions.

Sub-chapter 19: Concerning the truth that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is
the descendant of Abul Hasan Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) and
comprises of 90 traditions. Sub-chapter 20: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
is the son of Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.) and consists 146 traditions.
Sub-chapter 21: Regarding the fact that the name of his father is Hasan
(a.s.) and comprises 147 traditions.

Sub-chapter 22: That the mother of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the chief
of the maids and the best of them. It consist 9 traditions. Sub-chapter
23: Contains two traditions stating that wherever there are three names,
Muhammad, Ali and Hasan, in sequence, the fourth has to be Hazrat Qaem
(a.t.f.s.). That is, Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.), Imam Ali Naqi (a.s.) and
Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). This is a tradition from the Holy Prophet
(s.a.) wherein he prophesies,

"Whenever the names Muhammad, Ali and Hasan from the Imams from my
progeny, are in sequence, then the fourth of them is al-Qaem (a.s.), the
Expected, the Awaited."

Thus, it will not suffice if somebody's name is Muhammad Ibn Al-Hasan
(to claim to be Mahdi). It is essential that his grandfather should be
Ali and his great grandfather, Muhammad.

Sub-chapter 24: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the twelfth and the
last Imam. That is, after him there will not be any other Imam. We do
not have a thirteenth Imam and he is the seal of the Imams (a.s.). It
consists of 137 traditions. Sub-chapter 25: Regarding the prophesy that
he will fill the earth with justice and equity and it comprises 123
traditions. Sub-chapter 26: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has two
occultations. This sub- chapter contains 10 traditions.

Sub-chapter 27: Concerning the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will
have a long and major occultation till Allah the Almighty permits him to
reappear. It comprises 91 traditions.

Sub-chapter 28: Regarding the causes of his occultation and it consists
of 7 traditions.

Sub-chapter 29: Pertaining to the benefits of his existence, the method
by which people can derive benefits from him in occultation and the
modus operandi of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in his works. It comprises 7
traditions. Sub-chapter 30: Concerning longevity and contains 318
traditions.

Sub-chapter 31: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will possess a youthful
visage and it comprises 8 traditions.

Sub-chapter 32: Regarding the concealed birth of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) and it contains 14 traditions.

Sub-chapter 33: Concerning the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will
not carry the allegiance of anybody on his neck. It consists of 33
traditions.

Sub-chapter 34: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will eliminate the enemies
of Allah the Almighty, purify the earth of polytheism, etc. It contains
19 traditions. All the remaining sub-chapters of this chapter are
related to the details of Imam- e-Zaman's (a.t.f.s.) plan, which is
irrelevant to our present discussion.

**HADITH-E-LAUH**

As stated earlier, among the traditions of this book is the
Hadith-e-Lauh of Jaabir or Lauh-e-Hazrat-e-Fatemah (s.a.). It is a
tradition that has been relied upon in various Shia books and addresses
quite a few problems.

Jaabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari is one of the reliable companions of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.), and Shias as well as Sunnis accept his traditions.
Incidentally, he lived till the time of Imam Baqer (a.s.) and Imam Sadeq
(a.s.). When Imam Baqer (a.s.) questioned him regarding the incident of
Lauh, Jaabir explained him thus:

"I hold Allah as Witness that during the life of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.), I went to your mother, Hazrat Fatemah (s.a.), to congratulate
her on the birth of her son, Imam Husain (a.s.). I saw a green tablet in
her handâ€¦.I asked, "May my parents be sacrificed for you, O daughter of
Allah's Messenger (s.a.), what is this tablet?" She replied, "Allah the
Almighty has gifted His Prophet (s.a.) with this tablet. It bears the
names of my father, my husband, my two sons and the names of the Imams
(a.s.) from my sons. The Holy Prophet (s.a.) gave me this tablet to give
me glad tidings through it."

Jaabir says, "Your mother gave me this tablet, I read it and copied it
down." Imam Sadeq (a.s.) who was along with his father in this meeting
and is the narrator of this tradition, says, "Can you show me your
copy?" Jaabir replied in the affirmative. Thereafter, they both went to
the house of Jaabir who removed the copy from a leather bag. My father
said, 'O Jaabir, you look in your copy and I will read from mine (in
order to tally the two versions).' Jaabir was checking his copy while my
father was reading it and they matched word to word."

The incident of Jaabir acquiring the Hadith-e-Lauh from Janab-e-Fatemah
(s.a.) belongs to 3 A.H. In 10 A.H., the Holy Prophet (s.a.) expired.
Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) expired in 40 A.H. Imam Hasan (a.s.) departed
from this world in 50 A.H. Imam Husain (a.s.) was martyred in 60/61 A.H.
But Jaabir is still alive and on the fortieth day (arbaeen) of his
martyrdom, he goes for ziyarat-e- arbaeen.

Thereafter, in 85 A.H. (approx.), Imam Sajjad (a.s.) expired and Jaabir
who was still alive witnesses the period of Imam Baqer's (a.s.) Imamate.
The aforementioned meeting takes place between them and the authenticity
of Jaabir's copy of Hadith-e-Lauh is established. This tablet has become
famous as "Lauh-e-Hazrat-e-Fatemah (s.a.)" because it was gifted to her
or as "Lauh-e- Jaabir" because he is the main narrator of this
tradition.

From the Shia viewpoint, the oldest book in which this tradition has
been narrated is 'Usul al-Kafi". And as everyone is aware, this book was
written more than eleven hundred years ago.

A person from abroad wrote to one of the scholars from Mashhad, "The
present manuscript of al-Kafi that we are having is belonging to the
Safavide era. Do you have any idea whether any manuscript of this book
that has been written prior to the Safavide era is available? For, if
such a manuscript is indeed available then it will dispel the doubt that
it was compiled by the scholars of the Safavide reign." The respected
scholar says, "I went and searched in the library of Madrasa-e-Nawwaab
of Mashhad and found a copy that was eight hundred years old. Probably,
this copy was the oldest available one of al-Kafi in Iran. Perhaps, an
older version is available outside Iran." Anyhow, this tradition has
been narrated in Usul al-Kafi as well as in other books.

Now let us see as to what are the contents of this tradition. This
tablet was from Allah's side for His Prophet (s.a.). Initially, some
reminders regarding divine recognition are given and thereafter Allah
the Almighty says, "Surely I did not raise a Prophet but that I
appointed for him a successor.. I have selected your cousin, Ali Ibn Abi
Talib as your heir apparent. After him, I will honour you with your two
grandsons, Hasan and Husain. The latter will be followed by his son,
Ali, the adornment of the worshippers. Then, Muhammad Baqir al-Uloom,
the splitter of My knowledge and the treasure chest of My wisdom will
follow him. After him, his son Jafar and after him, in a period of utter
darkness and deviation, his son, Musa will attain the position of
Imamat. He will be followed by his son Ali, who will be martyred by an
arrogant demon.

He will be buried in a city built by My righteous servant, next to the
worst of My creatures (implying Haroon al-Rashid, the Abbaside Caliph
because Imam Reza (a.s.) is buried next to his grave)." Then the Imams
(a.s.) after him are mentioned till Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) and then
Allah the Almighty says, "And I will complete this (chain of Imamate)
with his son, Meem-Ha-Meem- Daal."

The alphabets (huruf-e-muqatteaat) are used because in that period it
was prohibited to take the name of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Now, the
tablet continues, "He possesses the perfection of Musa, the brightness
of Eesa and the patience of Ayyub. My friends will be degraded in his
time (of occultation). They will be killed and burnt and will be in a
constant state of fear, apprehension and dread. The earth will be
coloured with their blood. Wailing and crying will be aloud among their
women. They are My true friends. Through them, I will dispel every dark
mischief, remove all tremors because of them, and do away with all
doubts, skepticism and chains on account of their blessings. They are
those on whom are the blessings and mercy of their Lord and they are the
guided ones."14 This tradition is an instance in which the name of
Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) and his occultation have been talked about in
such an explicit manner. Of course, as stated earlier, there are plenty
of traditions in this regard. For example, apart from this
Hadith-e-Lauh, Jaabir himself has narrated numerous traditions, of which
we explained the aforementioned tradition just as an example.

Thus, we saw in the traditions of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) that while
inviting the people towards Prophethood, divine justice, resurrection,
and the principle of Imamat, he (s.a.) also introduces a principle in
the minds of the Muslims and that is the existence of an unseen
reformer. Moreover, he (s.a.) has repeated this concept on various
occasions to let the people understand that the belief in Hazrat Mahdi's
(a.t.f.s.) existence is a part of our religious creed.

Aside from the Holy Prophet (s.a.), we see that all the other
infallibles (a.s.) have also lend significance to this issue and spoke
about it on numerous occasions. Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) says, "Verily, O
Allah, the earth cannot be (Al-Kafi by Shaikh Kulayni, vol. 1, p. 527,
528; Kamaaluddin by Shaikh Saduq, p. 308-311). void of a divine proof"15
and on another occasion he says, "The Mahdi of this nation is from my
descendant."16 When people objected at him for signing the peace treaty
with Muaviyah, Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.) justified his action in the
following words,

"Do you not know that each one of us (Imams) has to wear the allegiance
of the tyrant of his time around his neck, except the Qaem, behind whom
Allah's Spirit, Isa Bin Maryam, will perform namaz?"17

Imam Husain (a.s.) has talked about Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in various
places. In the sermon that he delivered in the Umayyide Mosque, Imam
Sajjad (a.s.), while enumerating the virtues of the Ahle Bait (a.s.),
said, "â€¦Allah's Messenger (s.a.), Jafar Tayyar in the heaven, the two
grandsons (sibtain) of this nation and the Mahdi, the one who will slay
Dajjal, are all from us."18

Evidently, when someone talks about his virtues and merits in front of
the opponents, he will make a mention of only those qualities that are
accepted by the people. Therefore, it becomes known that just as people
were aware of the names, position and status of Jafar-e-Tayyar and
Hasanain (a.s.), the principle of Mahdaviyyat was also firmly entrenched
in their minds and hence Imam Sajjad (a.s.) has mentioned his name in
his speech from the pulpit.

Then, we reach to the times of Imam Muhammad Baqer (a.s.) and Imam
Sadeq (a.s.), a period when this discussion truly blossomed. More
traditions have been narrated from the former than by the latter. Among
the traditions quoted from him is the one by Umme Haani-e-Saqafiyyah.
Umme Haani is a lady whose equal can be rarely found today. Of course,
even in the times of Imams (a.s.), women like her were few and far
between. She narrates: I went to Imam Baqer (a.s.) and said, "O son of
Allah's Messenger! I read a verse from the Holy Quran, which amazed me,
no end and has indeed made me restless because I could not follow its
meaning?" Imam Baqer (a.s.) asked, "Which is that verse?" Umme Haani
responded,

But nay! I swear by the stars, That run their course (and) hide
themselves, And the night when it departs, And the morning when it
brightens.19 Nahjul Balagha, compiled by Sayed Razi, 497.

Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 35, p. 48 17Ibid., vol. 51, p. 133 and vol. 44,
p.19 18Muntakhabul Asar, Safi Gulpaygani, p. 173 19Surah Takveer: 15-18
What are these stars that will hide themselves and what is this night
that will depart?"

Of course, it should be borne in mind that Umme Haani is an Arab lady
and is well-versed with the literal meaning of these verses. But what
she was not aware and was interested to know was its exposition. Umme
Haani says, "I reflected a lot but in vain. In fact, I deliberated upon
it the entire night." Rarely do we find someone who reflects and
deliberates upon a verse of Quran for a whole night. Imam Baqer (a.s.)
replied her query thus, "O Umme Haani! You have asked a very good
question. (These verses refer to) a child who will be born in the last
era."20

Thereafter, Imam (a.s.) begins to enumerate the characteristics of
Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), his advent in the world, illuminating the
universe with divine light, occultation, the dark periods of the two
occultations, and then once again, his reappearance and its infusion of
a new life in the world. In the times of Imams (a.s.), this matter was
discussed under various headings. Both Imam Baqer (a.s.) and Imam Sadeq
(a.s.) were asked about it. Sometimes the narrator came in the service
of the Imams (a.s.) and asked, 'Sir, are you Mahdi? Are you Qaem?' Imam
(a.s.) used to reply, 'All of us will establish Allah's command' or 'All
of us guide towards Allah.'21

In this regard, we have an interesting tradition from Imam Baqer
(a.s.). The story of this tradition runs as follows that Kumait Ibn Zaid
Asadi, the famous poet came to Imam Baqer (a.s.) and Imam Sadeq (a.s.)
during ayyaam al- beedh22. After seeking permission from the Imams
(a.s.), he began reciting his poems depicting the oppression inflicted
on the Ahle Bait (a.s.) till he reached the following verse:

"When will the truth rise among you, when Will the second Mahdi from
you, rise."

Hearing this couplet, Imam (a.s.) retorted, "Soon, if Allah wishes,
soon." Imam (a.s.) continued, "Our Qaem is the ninth descendant of Imam
Husain (a.s.). As the Imams (a.s.) after the Holy Prophet (s.a.) are
twelve in number, the twelfth is Qaem."

Kumait asked, "Who are these twelve illustrious personalities?" Imam
(a.s.) replied, "The first among them is Ali, followed by Hasan and
Husainâ€¦."Imam (a.s.) named each Imam till he reached Hazrat Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) and then, he explained his reappearance and uprising.23
Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 51, p. 137 Ibid., p. 141 22The beedh days are the
13th , 14th and 15th of every month.

23Al-Ghadeer by Allamah Ameeni, vol. 2, p. 202; Muntakhabul Asar, p.
123 Imam Reza (a.s.) too has posted numerous reminders on this subject.
Among these is the invocation that he has recommended to be read in the
qunoot of every Friday prayer.24 It is as follows:

"As we reach to the eras of the last Imams (a.s.), viz. Hazrat Jawaad
(a.s.), Hazrat Hadi (a.s.) and Hazrat Askari (a.s.), we observe that
they have talked at length on this topic. Thus, if we intend to derive
an accepted concept and belief from the history of Imams (a.s.), we do
not have any topic that has been talked unanimously by all of them more
than the subject under discussion. This fact should be borne in mind
that these conclusions have been derived only from the available quotes
of the Imams (a.s.) and the present books of traditions, notwithstanding
the reality that many traditions have not reached unto us.


