The Imamat of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)and the Minor Occultation
==============================================================

As stated in the previous chapter, Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) was born on
15th Sha'baan. Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) requested those involved to
keep this event as a secret. From the year 255 A.H., Hazrat Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) was being nourished and nurtured in the house of his father
but in a way that the ordinary folks were unaware about it.

The Introduction of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) to the elite among the
Shias Numerous traditions have cited that some of the companions of the
Imams (a.s.) were coming to Saamarra. They used to come with various
types of questions, many of them concerning Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).
Like they asked Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) as to who would be the Imam
after him.

To the tried and true, Imam (a.s.) gave clear and detailed
explanations. Among those who referred was a person by the name Ahmed
Ibn Ishaaq. Shaykh Sadooq (a.r.) in his book, "Kamaaluddin" has narrated
his incident in the chapter of traditions narrated from Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) in the discussion concerning Hazrat Mahdi's (a.t.f.s.)
occultation.

Ahmed Ibn Ishaaq says, "I went to Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) to
ask him about his successor and the Imam after him. Before I could pose
my query, Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) said, 'O Ahmed Ibn Ishaaq! Allah
the Almighty has not left His earth without a proof since the creation
of Adam (a.s.). Nor will it remain without His representative till the
day of judgement.' I said, 'O son of Allah's Messenger! Who is the Imam
and successor after you?' Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.) stood up quickly
and went into a room. Later, he emerged with a three year old boy in his
arms whose face shone like a full moon. Then he said, 'Had you not
enjoyed such a status and rank in front of Allah the Almighty and His
Proofs (a.s.), I would not have shown my son to you."

Sometimes, in these five years, the companions of Imam Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.) attended to him and were narrating a few things to him. On these
occasions, they were also inquiring from him about his successor, to
which Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.) was replying in general. One such
person was Abu al-Adyaan, whose incident is reported as under:

"I was a servant of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), and carried his
letters to different cities and environs. I had the honour to attend to
his service in his last illness. He (a.s.) gave the letters to me and
said, 'Go to Madaaen. Your journey will last for fifteen days. On the
fifteenth day, you will return to Saamarra. Here, wails and cries from
my house will greet you. You will see me in the room where corpses are
given the ritual bath.'

I asked, 'Master! In such a case, who will be the Imam after you?' Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) responded, 'One who will ask you about the
replies to my letters will be my successor.' I requested, 'Please
provide me more details.' Imam (a.s.) replied, 'He will lead my funeral
prayers.' I pleaded again, 'Please furnish more information.' He (a.s.)
retorted, 'He will inform you about what is in the bag.'

The awe-inspiring personality of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) prevented
me from further inquiry about the bag. Anyway, I took the letters to
Madaaen and procured the ripostes. On the 15th day, just as Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) had predicted, I entered Saamarra. Loud voices of
wailing and crying echoed from the house of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.).
I saw Ja'far, the brother of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), standing on
the door and receiving condolences and consolation from the local
Shias.

I said to myself, 'If this man is the Imam, then it will be clear that
the position of Imamat has undergone change. For, I have seen him drink
wine, gamble and play musical instruments.' I went near him and offered
my condolences. He did not ask me anything. Afterwards 'Aqeed' emerged
from the house and said, 'Master! Your brother has been shrouded. Come
and lead his funeral prayers.'

Ja'far went ahead to lead the prayers. As he was about to announce the
Takbeer, a young boy with a wheatish complexion, curly hair, broad
teeth, shining like a brilliant moon, came out of the house. He caught
hold of Ja'far's robe and threw him aside, saying, 'Uncle! Move aside. I
am more worthy of leading the funeral prayers of my father.'

Ja'far withdrew in a corner as his face went colourless. The child went
ahead to recite the prayers on his father's dead body and buried him
next to his father's (10th Imam's) grave. Thereafter, he turned towards
me and said, 'O Basri! Give me the replies of the letters that are with
you.' I handed the letters to him and said to myself, 'Two prophecies
are already fulfilled. Now only the third one about the contents of the
bag remains.'

We were sitting when some residents of Qum arrived and asked about the
condition of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). When they were informed about
his demise, they inquired about the Imam after him.

People guided them towards Ja'far Ibn Ali. They saluted him and offered
their condolences. They wanted to know from him about the money that
they had brought along with themselves, to whom did it belong and how
much? Ja'far stood up from his place, and while gathering his clothes,
he said, 'They expect me to know the unseen.'

Afterwards, a servant emerged from the house of Imam Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.) and announced, 'The letters of so and so are in your possession.
You also have a bag containing a thousand dinars. Of which, only ten
dinars are pure. They gave rvant saying, 'The one who has sent you must
be an Imam.30'

The story of this man has also been recorded in books of traditions. It
should be borne in mind, as stated earlier, these are the particulars of
an individual and one should not expect to search for these in general
books of history or even Islamic history. For, these are personal
matters and if a few traditions are available in this regard, we simply
accept them.

Anyway, we repeatedly emphasize that our basic belief vis-à-vis the
existence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is not related to these traditions.
If someone refuses to accept these traditions as true and correct, we
will reply, 'Well, what is the basis of your rejection? For, the onus is
on you to prove the falsity of these traditions. Even if we assume the
above tradition to be false and unacceptable, yet the basic belief
remains unharmed and unaffected on account of the numerous consecutive
traditions narrated concerning the twelfth Imam (a.t.f.s.). Now, when
the basic belief remains unharmed, and the discussion is from the aspect
of belief itself, and moreover, there is no proof to refute a tradition
or to establish its absence, we shall narrate traditions while
maintaining our stand that this is just a narration and only a part of
the general history.

**Steps taken by the Caliph to Arrest Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)**

Due to the funeral prayers led by Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) and the
instigation of Ja'far, the government became very sensitive. The Caliph
Mo'tamid used all possible steps to gain access to and arrest
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). The commanders of the Caliph swooped on the
house of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). They searched it in and out but to
no avail. Instead, they began plundering the house. Perhaps, while they
were busy pillaging, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) took the opportunity and
fled, to escape captivity.

After this episode, the Abbaside government became busy with its
internal problems. The incidents of Yaqoob al-Laith, Saaheb al-Zanj,
etc. took place, which occupied their attention to such an extent that
they really could not bother about Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). During the
reign of Mo'tazid, another event occurred that is worth reading.

Mo'tazid dispatched three officers to Imam al-Askari's (a.s.) house.
The orders were clear- behead anybody you find among the males and get
their heads to the court as souvenirs. Rasheeq Maarzaani, one of the
three selected officers, narrates the incident thus:

As per the orders, we attacked the house…We saw a room so huge as if it
was an ocean. At the end of the room, there was a straw mat spread on
water. On the mat, a man with a handsome visage and awe-inspiring
dignity sat performing Kamaaluddin, vol. 2, p. 457; Behaarul Anwaar,
vol. 50, p. 332, H. 4 and vol. 52, p. 67 & 68 H. 53. namaz and did not
pay any heed to our presence. Ahmed Ibn Abdullah (one of us) went ahead
with the intention of entering the room but was drowned. He struggled to
survive inside the water and waved at us vigorously so that we may
extend our hands to pull him out, but to no avail. The second one among
us also attempted to enter the room and met with the same fate.

I was left standing alone, perplexed and confused. I pleaded with the
owner of house, 'I seek pardon from Allah and from you. By Allah! I
don't know what's happening and whom I have approached. I seek
repentance from Allah.' He did not pay heed to my talks at all and was
engrossed in his own work. I got scared and returned. After the failure
of this attempt, Mo'tazid sent more officers with the same orders. When
they reached the house, they heard somebody reciting the Holy Quran in
the cellar (sardaab).

They surrounded the cellar to prevent anybody from escaping.
Thereafter, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) emerged from the cellar right in
front of all those present. Miraculously, with Allah's permission, the
commander could not see him and hence behaved as if nothing had
happened. For others, the silence and non-objection of the commander was
a tacit approval and consequently, they too did not protest or demur. It
was too late when they realised as to what had actually occurred31.

**The Cellar (Sardaab)**

This is an issue about which there are a lot of misconceptions. A few
Sunni biased scholars in order to denounce the Shias have also misused
these misinterpretations. Therefore, it is essential that we throw more
light on this issue.

It should be known that the cellar was the residence of three Imams
(a.s.) viz. Imam Hadi (a.s.), Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) and
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) himself. Incidentally, this house was the
personal residence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). For, it is unanimously
accepted by the historians that none of the Imams (a.s.) had an
underground residence in Saamarra. Even for the house of Ameerul
Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), we cannot state its precise location
with certainty, either in Madina or Kufa. Some say it's in Baab-e-
Jibraeel but its very general place. But for the cellar of Samarra, it
was believed in the long duration of one thousand four hundred years,
that it was the abode of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.t.f.s.). Due to this
reason alone, the cellar at Saamarra is a holy place for us.

It is an established fact that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) did not sink in
the cellar's wall nor did its earth swallow him. He did not disappear
like the Jinn from the human eyes nor did he fly to the skies in the
form of angels. Just as the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had become invisible
for the Meccan polytheists at the time of For details of these
incidents, one can refer to the book, 'Tarikh al-Ghaibah al-Sughra' by
Sayed Muhammad Sadr.

emigration, similarly Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) emerged from the cellar
but the Caliph's men were unable to see him (of course with Allah's
permission).

From the time of Imam Hadi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), a
person was appointed in Baghdad who acted as the representative of the
two Imams (a.s.). Later, on the command of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.)
and Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.), he also became the special deputy of the
latter in Baghdad. The general Shias were unaware and uninformed of the
exact location of Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.). The special representative
was a narrator of traditions and a majestic scholar, at the same time
being an ordinary businessman involved in selling oils.

Of course being a narrator of traditions is an important position from
the aspect of knowledge and relation of traditions. But this special
deputy did not possess the customary appearance of a religious scholar.
He was a businessman selling oils that answered by the name of "Usman
Ibn Saeed Amri" and knew the exact residence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).
Quite often, Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) was either in his house, some other
close companions, or his proximate relatives. In reality, Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) became invisible from the eyes of the people in this very
meaning.

In the compound of Imam-e-Zaman's (a.t.f.s.) house, there was a well
from which he drew water. Apart from its function of providing water,
the aforementioned well does not have any significance in our
traditions. Thus, those who visit Saamarra, take the mud of this well
(as tabarruk), throw a letter in it, or think that an Arab is still
sitting on the edge of the well with his sword hidden inside his robe,
so that whenever Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) emerges, he would kill him. All
these are talks of stupidity, emanating from the foolishness of a Sunni.
Worse is the one who believes that the Arab is still sitting over there
waiting to kill Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) or that he is living inside the
well or that he was swallowed by the wall of the cellar.

We don't believe in the Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) who is living inside
the well or is swallowed by the cellar's wall. But we respect the cellar
only and only because it was the place of worship for three Imams (a.s.)
and because in the length of one thousand four hundred years,
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has visited it a number of times and was his
personal residence for a considerable period of time. Thus, even today
when a person visits the cellar, he feels that he is the guest of Hazrat
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). Finally, if the Shias revere the cellar, it is because
of the owner of the house and not because of the story of the well or
any other such absurdity.

**Commencement of the Minor Occultation (Ghaibat-e-Sughra)**

The minor occultation commenced from the year 260 A.H. Why the minor
occultation? Perhaps because its duration is shorter or maybe because
there was a link between Imam (a.s.) and the people. During this era,
Usman Ibn Saeed Amri (r.a.) took many people to the service of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and brought the replies of numerous letters from
Imam (a.s.) to them. Therefore, those Shias, who were inclined to get
some information from Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and desired to forward
their queries to him, almost had a direct contact with him (a.t.f.s.).
That is, they got their religious queries answered through minimum links
and on numerous occasions through Imam's letters and signatures.

In this period, it was prohibited to utter the name of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.). Why? Because it created some problems and difficulties for
the Shias and hence, they remembered him by the title of "Saahebuz
Zamaan". Thus, for the Shias, it was forbidden to take the name of Imam
(a.s.), which was the same as the name of the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.). Quite a few jurists considered this edict to be applicable
till date. The reason they cite is that when something is declared to be
illegal, it continues to be so, till the promulgator who has issued the
legislation, lifts the restriction. And in this case, its illegality has
not yet been removed.

Some other jurists are of the view that this restriction was confined
to the era of the minor occultation, when Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) was
subject to danger. But presently, it has been revised and they don't
regard uttering the name of Imam- e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in this time as
haraam (forbidden). This restriction was applicable only in olden times
when even in the books his name was written as M-H-M-D.

**The Special Deputies of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)**

Usman Ibn Saeed was the special deputy for duration of two and a half
years. After his demise, as per the advice of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.),
his son Muhammad Ibn Usman was raised to the state of deputyship. A
reliable narrator of Imamite traditions, he remained in this coveted
position for a period of thirty- five years and executed his
responsibilities.

After him, an Iranian from the renowned family of Nawbakht, Husain Ibn
Rauh Nawbakhti, became the special deputy and continued to be so for
duration of twenty years.

Ali Ibn Muhammad Samori or Seymouri, an inhabitant of Saamarra,
followed Husain Ibn Ruh on the advice of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and the
recommendation of Husain Ibn Ruh.

The era of special deputyship of these four lasted till the year 329
A.H. Of course, apart from these four special deputies, Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) did have deputies and representatives in far-flung Islamic
cities and towns but these formed the core of representation. These
representatives were either appointed by Husain Ibn Ruh and his ilk or
some times by Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) directly but ultimately, had to
act through any of these four special representatives. From among this
second line of deputies, there was one in Qum who abused his position
after being in it for some time. Although he was a directly appointed
representative of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), yet this appointment did not
render him an infallible. Finally, he misused his status and attributed
lies and falsity to Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). He put the people's wealth
and property to personal use. Consequently, Husain Ibn Ruh received a
signed letter from Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) cursing this deputy. His name
was "Muhammad Ibn Ali Shalmaghani", who was based in Qum and was
conferred with special deputyship. Apart from him, there were a couple
of other people who were rejected by Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) after being
appointed as deputies.

In the preface of the book "Kalemah al-Imam al-Mahdi"32, a brief
history of the deputies has been jotted and a list of fifteen people has
been mentioned, who were appointed by Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) directly.
Of course, these fifteen did not bear the same position as the four
special representatives and hence, in common understanding, it is famous
that the special deputies were only four in number.

Six days prior to his death, the fourth special deputy, Ali Ibn
Muhammad Seymouri (a.r.) received a signed letter (tawqee) from
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), reminding him of a few things. This letter is
quite well known and has been recorded in quite a few books with
explanations.

"O Ali Ibn Muhammad Seymouri! May Allah increase the reward of your
brothers concerning you? You will die after six days. Now, you don't
appoint anybody as your successor for special deputyship because the
door of representation now stands closed and the major occultation shall
begin. The reappearance will not occur except by the order and
permission of Allah.

This reappearance will take place only after the earth becomes replete
with injustice, oppression, and the hardening of hearts. Beware! Soon
there will be This book was compiled by the martyr Sayed Husain Shirazi
(a.r.) and has been translated into Persian by the author of this
book.

a number of my Shias who will claim to meet me. Anybody who makes such
a claim before the emergence of Sufyani and the heavenly shriek is a
liar and a deceiver. There is no power and strength except that of
Allah.33" In this letter, mention has been made of the prolongation of
the major occultation, the shutting of the door of representation, and
the fact that anybody claiming to meet Imam (a.s.) at will, is a liar
and a cheat. Six days after the receipt of this letter, Ali Ibn Muhammad
(a.r.) completed his pending tasks, made his will and expired.

This was the brief history of the minor occultation till the
commencement of the major one, which began when Imam-e-Zaman's
(a.t.f.s.) age was seventy-four. Behaar al-Anwaar, by Allama Majlisi,
vol. 51, p. 361.


