The Endowed Perfection of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)
=================================================

Alongside acquired perfection, there exists a gifted or endowed
perfection from the side of somebody else and it differs from the
previous mentioned perfect traits or attributes.

Let us explain endowed perfection with an example. Suppose that you are
unaware of a thing and personally want to acquire its knowledge. You
have to browse through a few books and spend a few hours in order to
acquire it. Instead of this effort, if someone comes across and makes
you aware of the entire concept in a jiffy, that is, presents this
knowledge to you on a platter. So, you have got a new perfection, which
was neither present in you at the time of birth nor have you attained it
through your efforts. Rather, it has been gifted to you and you have
become its owner. Or like in material perfection, one man toils from
morning till evening, works hard and sweats to earn a couple of hundred
dollars. Meanwhile, there walks in another person who hands over two
hundred dollars to him and makes him the owner of this wealth.

Spiritual perfection is also the same. That is, I commit a sin and
usurp the rights of the people. To compensate for this perpetration, I
should strive to earn money and pay the aggrieved party. But somebody
walks in and reimburses the victims on my behalf, eases my struggle and
consequently, my crime is forgiven. Of course, the element in my
forgiveness is the one who has indemnified the right of the people on my
behalf.

Another example is that of a person who goes for Hajj and bears
numerous difficulties in performing its various rituals. But suppose, he
appoints me as his representative and sends me to perform all the
tedious and tiresome rituals on his behalf. Then, although I am the one
who has borne all the difficulties, the reward is written in his name as
well, as I was his nominee. Consequently, his perfection is augmented
due to my efforts.

This endowment can take place during the life of a man or after his
death. After the death of the Messenger of Islam the Muslims have gifted
numerous perfection to him (s.a.w.a.). The reward of every statement of
'There is no god but Allah' that is uttered goes in his (s.a.w.a.)
account. Whenever a person recites salawaat in any nook or corner of the
world, its dividend reaches to him (s.a.w.a.). The same applies for
prayers, fasting and all other obligatory and recommended actions. Of
course, the performer of all the above actions too is eligible for his
share of the reward. For, when I perform a good deed on your behalf,
both of us reap the dividends for it without the reward of either of us
being reduced.

One of the gifted perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) is the salutation
offered to him by the previous divine proofs, jurists, believers and
followers. Thus, when a person recites salawaat and sends salutations in
the following ziyaarat every morning after the obligatory prayers, its
reward goes to the account of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) as well57.

Here, we have opened another account, which is the account of
perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) offered to him (a.t.f.s.) by the
previous divine proofs, jurists, martyrs, believing men and women. None
can match Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) in this perfection or be his equal. In
this very Masjid-e-Jamkaran, where you have the privilege of
congregating, there are numerous people who repent and seek forgiveness
in the name of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.), supplicate, invoke, send
salutations, etc. All these acts of worship and servitude are performed
on behalf of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.). Therefore, one of our duties in the
major occultation is to do good deeds on his behalf.

To summarize the discussion, we have discussed three stages of
perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.).

The perfection that has been divinely endowed to perform the important
task
of conveying Allah's message and its implementation;
The acquired perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.);
The gifted perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) that has been conferred on
him
by others through their acts and good deeds, a series that commenced
from
the time of Hazrat Adam (a.s.) and has continued through the chain of
Prophets (a.s.), Nuh (a.s.), Ibrahim (a.s.) Moosa (a.s.), Eesa (a.s.)
and even
the last Prophet, Hazrat Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) prays for him (a.t.f.s.).
Imam
Sadeq (a.s.) too has offered the Dua-e-Nudbah as a compliment before
the
birth of his descendant, Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.).

Therefore, the preparations and arrangements have begun right from the
time of Hazrat Adam (a.s.), without any formality, and continued till
his birth and after it through the four special deputies, scholars,
jurists, believers, righteous ones, martyrs, truthful ones, etc. Hence,
in the existence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.), we have a total and complete
human being in all respect.

Instead of visiting the shrines and tombs of lesser mortals and
invoking inferior humans, let us take the first step and cry out from
the depths of our hearts, 'O Saaheb al-Zamaan' and ask from him
(a.t.f.s.) whatever one desires. On the subject of perfection, we have
some other discussions that shall be set fortht in their appropriate
places.

Mafaateeh al-Jenaan by Shaikh Abbas Qummi, in the chapter of Ziyaaraat
of Hazrat Baqiyatullah (a.t.f.s.) after Dua-e-Nudbah.

**LONGEVITY**

A discussion that should be dealt with independently is that of
longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)-A point that is often treated with
cynicism and skepticism. It is a cause of deviation of many a group in
the long course of history, particularly in the last hundred years or
so.

At the first level, we shall analyze longevity from the angle of
proving it, so that we may see as to what is the reason that
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is alive for such a long period. Thereafter, the
mode of his life in this era and the standard of effect of longevity on
his physique will be investigated. Initially, the discussion shall be
examined from the aspect of traditions and Islamic texts, followed by
the presentation of doubts and then from various angles, their replies
will be given.

The Sunnis have accepted the belief in Mahdaviyat in principle and many
of their prominent scholars have even confessed to the fact that he
(a.t.f.s.) is from the progeny of Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) and Imam Husain
(a.s.). But they have not acknowledged that he (a.t.f.s.) is alive and
has a long life. Rather, they are of the view that he (a.t.f.s.) will be
born in the last era. Some of them (Sunnis) opine that Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) is dead and will be reborn because there are some traditions
that declare, "He will rise after his death58". Relying on this
tradition, they subscribe to the view that he (a.t.f.s.) will die and be
resurrected. In response to this group, we state that this tradition
implies the death of his remembrance (and not Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
himself), as we have in some traditions, 'He will rise after the death
of his remembrance (from the minds of the people)'59.

Anyway, there are some who believe in the existence of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) but do not consider him to be alive during occultation and
are of the view that occultation means to die, to be given a new life
and finally, to bring a revolution. Of course, there are few takers for
this theory. For, people either reject the existence of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.), or believe Imamate to be position-oriented (and not
person-oriented)60. Or, if they think him (a.t.f.s.) to be the son of
Imam Behaar al-Anwaar, Allama Majlisi, vol. 51, p. 30, H.6 Ibid. H.4

There are very few in the Islamic world, who consider Prophethood and
Messengership to be position-oriented (nau'ee). That is, they don't
believe that anybody can possess the conditions of Prophethood, receive
revelation from Allah and claim Prophethood among the people. Rather,
they believe Prophethood to be person-oriented and consider the
appointment of a Prophet as a prerogative of Allah and deem a Prophet to
be from the side of Allah. But in the case of Wilayat, Imamate and
leadership of the Ummah, most of the Sunnis and some of the Sufis
(Gnostics) reckon it to be position oriented.

They opine that anybody can attain the status of Imamate and leadership
through worship, self-development and treading the path of gnosticism.
Thereafter, he has some effect in the world of creation and is effectual
in it and also takes control of the reins of the people in his hand,
particularly those who tread the path of Sufism, and becomes their
pivot, guide and master. They regard the door of Wilayat as open for
anybody and think that he who has the capacity of treading the path of
Sufism (Sair-o-Suluk) under the guidance of a pivot (qutb) can reach to
this venerable position. Often, they use the term Wilayah for Imamate,
and like the former, they consider Imamate as an attainable position for
the students of their schools. Hasan Askari (a.s.), then wittingly or
unwittingly, they subscribe to the theory of longevity.

Traditions Concerning Longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) We have
numerous traditions from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) as well as the
infallible Imams (a.s.) regarding the longevity of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.). In these quotes, just as the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.)
and his successors (a.s.) have talked about occultation itself, its
peculiarities, etc., they have spoken about longevity as well. For
instance, "Surely for the Qaem among us, there is an occultation, the
duration of which will be long.61"

This tradition is from Imam Sadeq (a.s.). In another quote, Imam Zainul
Aabedeen (a.s.), the fourth Imam, says, "In Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.),
there are a few characteristics of the previous prophets. Among them is
longevity, which was available in Hazrat Adam (a.s.) and Hazrat Nuh
(a.s.)62." The aforementioned statement is found frequently in the
traditions of the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) and the infallible Imams
(a.s.).

Longevity is among the peculiarities of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) so that
if somebody claims this eminent position, in the absence of this
important characteristic, indeed his falsehood and lie will be proved
and established for one and all. Thus, longevity is an distinguished
particularity of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), much before his birth,
endorsed by traditions from both Shia as well as Sunni references. Imam
Reza (a.s.) foretells,

"When (Mahdi) reappears, he will be old in age but young in
appearance.63" Another tradition predicts,

"And from his signs is that he will not become old by the passage of
days and nights.64"

But in the creed of Ithna Ashari Shiism, Imamate, like Prophethood, is
person-oriented and limited, and regard its affair to be in the hands of
Allah. It is only Allah the Almighty, Who appoints a few, limited people
to this esteemed and honourable position. He has instilled in them the
necessary and required conditions for this great status and created them
with volition, which is of course a pre-requisite. He has made the
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) introduce them to the people just as He
made the previous Prophets (a.s.) familiarize their successors to their
nations. Hence, on the basis of the famous quote of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), 'After me, there will be twelve successors, first of them is
Ali and the last, Mahdi", if somebody considers Imamate as an attainable
position and does not deem it to be limited and confined to a few
people, then indeed such an idea emanates from ignorance or disbelief in
the tenets of the Ithna Ashari faith and is in direct contradiction to
its creed.

Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p. 142 Ibid. p. 217

63Ibid. vol. 52, p. 322

So, it is our belief that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is alive and during
this period, with the passing of the days and the nights, he grows in
age like all of us, but his appearance does not change and remains like
that of a youth. In the just mentioned tradition, it is said that
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will look like a forty year old man or even
lesser.

In yet another quote, a person came to Imam Baqer (a.s.) and asked,
'Are you the one who will kill the enemies of Allah?' He (a.s.) replied,
'How can I be that person when I am already forty-five years old?!65"

Thus, the existence of longevity and youthful appearance
simultaneously, in Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has been mentioned as his
distinct characteristics, singular only to him and none else, as found
in the aforementioned citations of the infallible Imams (a.s.).

**Answer to the Objections**

Now let us proceed to the objections and doubts pertinent to longevity.
Initially, it should be borne in mind that principally, in religious
discussions, most of the doubts that are raised are mostly questions.
For, in such debates, we have two kinds of queries: questions and
doubts.

In solving matters related to our creed, the first step that we take is
to ask the opponent: Is the point you are raising a question or a
doubt?

For, a question is something that a man does not know but a doubt is
that about which he knows but is skeptical of. For instance, if I ask
the value of the carpet spread on the floor, it is a question, because I
am not aware of its price. My interest lies in knowing the consideration
of the carpet. But if I ask as to why is the carpet spread over here,
then this is a doubt and not a question because I am not unaware of the
carpet being spread over the floor. I know that it's there and nothing
about it is concealed from me but I don't agree to the propriety of it
being laid in the place it is kept. Hence, this is a doubt.

Most of the religious questions that arise in the minds of the people
as doubts, if evaluated scientifically, will clarify that these are not
doubts but genuine questions that need to be elucidated. Thus, the first
step that we must take is to bring the opponent down from the position
of a skeptic to that of an unaware person.

Thereafter, we must evaluate whether his question is from the necessary
and obligatory beliefs or is it otherwise? If it is from the former,
then his question must be answered. But if it's from the non-obligatory
kind of question, then even if we don't answer it, will not be very
harmful because in life, there are n numbers of queries that are still
left unanswered and unattended to. Like, questions relating to the seas,
the oceans, the jungles, the skies, the levels of Muntakhab al-Asar,
Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani, p. 285 Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p. 141

earth, matter, atom, etc. remain to be replied and hence, there is no
problem if, along with these millions of questions, one more question
remains unresolved. If knowing a question is not a part of religious
compulsions, and is merely recommended or beneficial or bears scientific
significance only, then not being aware of its answer will not harm the
fundamental beliefs of a person.

Therefore, in most of the religious questions, it should be borne in
mind that at the very first step, the questions should be separated from
the doubts. Now, let us analyze whether longevity is a question or a
doubt. Initially, we shall treat this query as a doubt that has been
raised in various ways, the gist of which is as follows:

Firstly, man is like a car. After a car has been used for a certain
period of time, it wears out. It is not possible that a car is used
constantly and its condition does not deteriorate. On account of
incessant utility, the nuts and bolts of the human body are subject to
wear and tear. It's not necessary that it should work in excess. If he
just continues to live, nourishes, has internal physical activity, and
the cells of his body are busy and active, these will ensure the
antiquity of the body cells. So, in this doubt, man is likened to a car,
which deteriorates on utility, followed by antiquity and extinction.

Another example of the skepticism pertinent to longevity is that every
kind of existent has a particular age limit, after which, it becomes old
and expires. A mosquito lives for a maximum of five weeks but a lion
continues to live for fifty years. An orange tree has a specific age,
while a banyan tree has its own age limit. Similarly, the lifespan of
the human species is 80-90 years and at the most, he may live for a
hundred and fifty odd years. But more than this duration would be
against the normal course of human life.

Another doubt that is connected to the aforementioned objection is the
hereditary effect in human age. For instance, if we scrutinize the age
of the members of a family, we will observe that if the ancestors of
that family lived for an approximate duration of 50-60 years, then in
all probability, the normal age of their descendants too will be the
same. Thus, when we analyze the ages of the ancestors of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.), we observe that all of them lived for a period of maximum
50-60 years and the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.), despite all his
greatness, lived for not more than a precise 63 years. Therefore, under
the aforementioned law, the age of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) must not
exceed that of his ancestors.

Another point raised is that even if we accept the longevity of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), the concept of him remaining young despite the
years, creates even more doubts and is not at all in accordance with
scientific standards. For, in any case, the cells of the human body get
antiquated and definitely affect the appearance of face, teeth, skin,
hair, etc. So, on what basis can we accept the youth of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) with longevity?

Moreover, a few Quranic verses are used in support of these criticisms,
one of which is the oft-quoted one, "Every soul has to taste death66."

Then how can one claim that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) does not die?
Another cited verse is,

"(O Prophet!) Surely you will die and surely they will die67." Yet
another verse relied upon is, "And whosoever We give long life, We
render him miserable in creation.68" Allah the Almighty relates this
judgment as a law and a tradition. Then how can it be said that a
person, who has already lived for more than a thousand years and might
probably live for another couple of thousand years more, will remain
young in appearance and will have no signs of old age?!!

All these are doubts that are raised by relying on Quranic verses. Of
course, there are other doubts as well but their sources are these very
objections that we have mentioned. Finally, anybody can raise these
objections with minor modifications.

Now, in reply to these objections, let us first analyze the premise. In
other words, let us answer these queries from various viewpoints.
Initially, we shall discuss longevity from the philosophical angle.
Thereafter, we will debate it from the scientific aspect and evaluate it
in the light of natural sciences. Finally, we will respond to the
Quranic verses relied upon in support of these criticisms and cite some
other verses that support longevity. Therefore, we will resolve this
issue (of longevity) in three ways: Philosophy, physical science (in
general) and Quran.


