Self-restraint, the Purpose of the Holy Month of Ramadhan
=========================================================

**In the Name of God; the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful**

***“O you who believe, fasting is prescribed to you as it was prescribed
to those before you, that you may learn self-restraint.” Qur’an 2:183***

Al-Shaikh As-Saduq in an authentic Hadith quoted from Imam Ar-Ridha’
(a.s.) from his fathers up to Imam Ali (a.s.) that: On the last Friday
of Sha’ban the Prophet of Islam (S) ascended the pulpit and delivered a
lecture to the Muslims. He said: 

"O you people, verily the month of Allah is approaching you with
blessings, mercy and forgiveness, a month which is the best month in
Allah’s view. Its days are the best days and its nights are the best
nights and its hours are the best hours. It is a month in which you are
invited to be Allah’s guests and chosen to be of those with Divine
honour. Your breathing in this month is counted as Tasbeeh and your
sleep as worshipping. Your rituals are accepted and your prayers are
granted. So, ask Allah, your Lord, with a sincere intention and a
purified heart, to give you good luck for fasting and reciting His Book.
Since, unlucky is the one who misses God’s forgiveness in such a great
month. 

Remember, while you are hungry and thirsty the hunger and the thirst of
the Hereafter. Pay charity to the poor and the needy. Respect your
elders and be kind to the younger. Visit your relatives. Save your
tongue from what you are not supposed to say, your eyes from what you
are not supposed to look at, and your ears from what you are not
supposed to listen to.

Be humble to the orphans of other people so that your orphans would be
humbled. Repent to Allah from your sins and raise your hands to Him for
praying in your prayers time. Since, it’s the best time that Allah will
be looking at His servants with mercy. He answers when He is whispered
to, and grants when He is called upon, and responds when He is requested
for. 

O you people, verily, your spirit is held in pledge for your deeds,
release it then by asking for forgiveness. Your back is heavy from your
sins, lighten it by your long prostrations. Acknowledge that Allah the
Almighty promised in the name of His Majesty that He would not punish
those who pray and prostrate, nor does He frighten them by the Fire of
Hell in the Hereafter. 

O you people, whoever gives breakfast to a fasting believer in this
month, s/he will be having the reward of freeing a slave as well as
forgiveness for his/her previous sins. The prophet by then was asked,
‘what if someone was not able to invite people for breakfast?’ The
prophet replied: ‘Safeguard yourselves from the Fire even with half a
date or a glass of drink. Surely Allah will be giving the same reward to
those who can not afford more than this.

O you people, whoever makes his/her behaviour better s/he will be
proceeding easily on the Path (Serat) when many feet will tend to slip.
Whoever reduces the chores of those who are working for him/her, Allah
will be lightening his/her sinful account. Whoever restrains his/her
devil from others, Allah will restrain His anger from him/her in the
Hereafter. Whosoever cuts off his/her relations with his/her relatives
Allah will cut off His blessings from him/her in the Hereafter.

Whoever performs recommended prayers, Allah will prescribe for him/her a
discharge from the Fire. Whoever performs a daily Salat, s/he is going
to have the equal reward of seventy Salat in other months. Whoever sends
frequently, Salawat on me, Allah will make his/her positive account
increased when it’s going to be decreased. Whoever recites an Aya from
the Holy Qur’an, s/he will be rewarded the equal reward of reciting the
whole Qur’an in other months.

O people, verily, the gates of Paradise are open in this month. Ask your
Lord not to close them to you. And the gates of Hell are closed in this
month. Ask your Lord not to open them to you. Devils are handcuffed. Ask
your Lord not to give them a free hand to you...” When the sermon was
over, Imam Ali (a.s.) stood up and asked the Prophet, what was the best
action in that month? The Prophet of Islam (S) replied:

‘The best action in this month is to restrain from whatever Allah has
forbidden.’”


