Preface
=======

Our discussion is pertaining to Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)1. In this
context, there are approximately twenty topics. For each of these
discussions, there is an appropriate method of presentation, evaluation
and analysis, bearing finer aspects of knowledge. To approach these
topics from any other way would be inaccurate and erroneous.

These topics are in the following order:

1) The future of mankind in heavenly and non-heavenly religions. In
other words, what is the future of the world in the opinion of various
schools of thoughts? Is humanity heading towards decline or to
perfection? Is this perfection voluntary or involuntary?

2) If this future is positive, in what conditions will it occur? What
are the characteristics of this future and the pre-requisites for its
leadership? 3) How is the future of humanity in the Islamic view?

4) What kind of prophesies are found in Islam (Quran and traditions)
concerning the future of mankind? To know the Islamic opinion, there is
no other way but to refer to the Holy Quran. Hence, if somebody proves
his stance regarding the future through the Holy Quran, he cannot be
asked to establish his view through modern science, and not Quran.

As we are talking about Islam, it is not required on our part to prove
our point through books of Physics or Chemistry. The right way to
approach this problem, and in order to get to know the Islamic stance on
it, is to refer to the Islamic texts, nothing else. Hence, wittingly or
unwittingly, here the 1 Hazrat Baqiyatullah, the son of Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) discussion will pertain to Quran and traditions only.
If we cite traditions over here, it is only because it is a necessity.
Here, it would be a necessary stipulation for a person to be well versed
and thorough with traditions to enable him to analyze the verses of the
Holy Quran and the books of traditions comfortably.

5) What is the basis of this belief in Islam? Is it an offshoot belief,
or has it been mentioned in Islam as a principle? In other words, is
this creed from the principles of religion (usul-e-deen) or from its
branches (furu-e-deen)?

If it is from the principles, is it confined only to one sect or is it
general for all Islamic factions? In other words, does the entire
Islamic world subscribe to this belief and is it a necessity of religion
(zarooriyyat-edeen)?

For example, Namaz is for all Islamic sects and consequently, is deemed
as a pre-requisite of religion. The moot point here is that is the
subject of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) like Namaz? So, in this chapter, our
efforts will be focused on finding the status of this belief in Islam
and we will attempt to answer an old question in this regard, i.e. ‘Is
this belief an Islamic one or is it confined to the Shias only?’

6) Has this matter, which has been related by the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.) and the infallible Imams (a.s.) as an Islamic principle, has
yet come into occurrence or not? To put it simply, has the birth of the
universal reformer, Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), taken place or will he be
born in the future? Another facet of this discussion is whether this
universal reformer is a known and specific individual or anybody
bringing reform would be the Mahdi?

7) How was the birth and personal life of the promised one? People have
heard a lot about the general discussions pertaining to Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) but most are unaware about the particularities. His example
is like that of a garden about which we have heard a lot but never
stepped into it. Here, we would like to explore the following: the
personal characteristics of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.); the conditions
during his birth; the mode of his life; the manner and reasons for his
occultation and so on and so forth.

As you observe, these are historical discussions and scientific or
natural insight will not serve any purpose to achieve breakthroughs in
them. These are purely historical deliberations and hence, one should
refer only to books of history. Of course, it is evident for all that
it’s not essential at all to find these particularities in the Holy
Quran.

8) Occultation and its meaning. What do we mean when we say that Imame-
Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is in occultation?

9) The philosophy of occultation. This talk is quite significant as to
why Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) went into concealment and why he (a.t.f.s.)
is not yet appearing?

10) Life of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) during occultation
