The Meaning and Concept of Occultation (ghaibah)
================================================

One of the discussions highly misunderstood and in which most people
falter on account of ignorance is the meaning and concept of
occultation.

In the traditions, the concept of Hazrat Mahdi’s (a.t.f.s.) occultation
is likened to that of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.). Now let us analyze the mode
of the latter’s occultation. The brothers of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) took
him and threw him in a well. As you know, Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) finally
landed up at Egypt. His father Hazrat Yaqub (a.s.) knew that Hazrat
Yusuf (a.s.) is alive but was unaware of his whereabouts. Importantly,
the brothers of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) came to him, conversed with him but
failed to recognize him while he recognized them. Narrating this
situation, the Holy Quran states,

<p dir="rtl">
.« و جاء إخوه. يوسف فدخلوا عليهِ فَعرفه. م و هم لَه. منكرون »
</p>

“And the brothers of Yusuf (a.s.) came to him. He recognized them but
they failed to recognize him.34”

Traditions of the infallible declare the occultation of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) to be like that of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) i.e. Allah has put a
veil between him and the people in a way that .« . يرونه. و لا يعرِفو.نه
»

“…they see him but do not recognize him.35”

In other words, just as the brothers of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) could not
recognize him, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) lives among the people, they see
him but cannot recognize him. We see a number of people from morning to
evening on the streets but don’t know them. Or, do we recollect now as
to how many people we saw yesterday on the roads?

Therefore, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is not like Jinn, angel, fairy, etc.
nor does he walk through a wall (like the invisible man). Incidentally,
he does not always live a life with miracles nor does he claim to always
walk through closed doors and walls nor does he claim to dominate minds
in a way that they be unable to see him or recognize him.

From the above, we can state that the occultation of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) is not like that of Allah the Almighty because He is without
place but Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) does occupy space by residing in a
place.

Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) resides on this very earth of God, walks, eats,
sleeps, rests and perhaps, like all other humans, is also subject to
illnesses and sickness. Of course, those who have seen him earlier and
recognized him, if they see him, possible might recognize him. Thus,
generally, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) does not 34 Surah Yusuf: 58

35 Muntakhabul Asar by Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani, p. 301.

go to such people. Those who do not recognize him, perhaps they may see
him a number of times but fail to notice him. Hence, the concept of
occultation is that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is without an address. We
don’t know where and how he resides.

Now, as we don’t know where and how he resides, does it mean that our
ignorance is the cause of his non-existence? We approach Hazrat Yaqub
(a.s.) and ask him, ‘O Yaqub! Is your son alive or not?’ He (a.s.) will
reply in the affirmative. ‘Will you see him in the future?’ Again, his
response is positive. We question him again, ‘Where is he now?’ He will
say ‘I don’t know.’ ‘What does he eat?’ ‘I don’t know.’ ‘What does he
do?’ ‘I don’t know.’ Certainly, he does not know despite being a prophet
the whereabouts of his son Yusuf (a.s.). For, Allah the Almighty has not
granted him this knowledge.

Similarly, if we ask the brothers of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) concerning the
whereabouts of their brother, they will reply in the negative and
perhaps, might even go to the extent of saying that probably their
brother is not alive. Therefore, they lied in the very presence of
Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) and hence he did not come forward to introduce
himself initially36. There was a gap of only 20-30 years between the
brothers but they could not identify him. This is the very concept of
occultation37. Hence, at the time of reappearance, a number of people,
on seeing Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), will vouch to have seen him
earlier.

From another aspect, it cannot be said that he does not have any
address at all because he does have a general address. For instance, it
is said to us that Imame- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) participates in the Haj
rituals every year and during this season, he is present there as the
chief of the pilgrims. He does make annual trips to Mena and Arafaat.

This is one address. Any other address? Yes, he has been seen at
Karbala too and at the shrines of other Imams (a.s.), his holy
ancestors. Religious scholars (ulama) of the past have also seen him at
Masjid-e-Jamkaran (near Qum). But does he always sit in
Masjid-e-Jamkaran that people should come there and see him? Certainly
not. Similarly, there are also possibilities of meeting him at
Masjid-e-Kufa, the shrine of Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) at Najaf, Masjid-e-
Sahlah (in Kufa), the Cellar (at Saamarra) and other such places, but
not always. Attention and Care of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) Toward the
Shias Some of the speakers, in order to make their speeches successful,
swear that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is present in their congregations.
What is the proof of their claim? One should not make such claims with
such ease and without any qualms. Yes, they must indeed talk about his
attention and care (but not to make such claims). For, being present in
one place is one thing and being attentive and 36 Surah Yusuf: 77

37 Al-Ghaibah by al-Nomani, p. 163, H.4; Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 51, p.
142. caring is completely another thing. For example, I am sitting right
here but can see the farthest end of this room and am also aware about
it. If I open this window, my view will become more extensive and if I
use binoculars, then my vision will certainly improve by leaps and
bounds and I can even relate to you the details. Although I am not
present there, but with the help of some unusual tools, my attention is
focussed on it. Of course, one vision I have is that of the eyes.

Allah the Almighty has opened one of the windows of the unseen for His
messengers (a.s.) and the infallible Imams (a.s.) that whenever they
intend to refer to it, they can do so. But very often it happens that
man does not want to know many things and as he does not have any
intention of knowing a particular thing, his ignorance is not a defect
in him. Rather, we can term it as voluntary ignorance. For example, if
you ask me that how much change does you have. I will reply that I don’t
know. Will this be called as ignorance? No because it is enough for me
that I put my hand in my pocket, bring out the change, count it and let
you know.

Thus, if a Prophet (a.s.) or an Imam (a.s.) says for a question that I
don’t know or if they question others about something, it is because
they don’t always use their knowledge of the unseen and this is
certainly not their shortcoming. Only if he intends to know something
but fails to do so, then it can be called as an imperfection. And if you
question him that being in touch with the Almighty, how are you unaware
about this matter, he will retort that He has not permitted here (to
know).

The difference between Allah and His messengers (a.s.) and Imams (a.s.)
is that everything is present with Allah. His knowledge is not made out
of ignorance but is absolute. But the knowledge of His messengers (a.s.)
and that of the Imams (a.s.) is with their intention and Allah’s
permission. If He does not permit, they cannot know the answer of a
particular question.

Thus, it is possible that sometimes we are under the direct vigil of
Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and many a time, only our deeds are presented
to him and he browses through them. For, it is available in traditions
that the actions of the Shias are furnished before Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.). Even in this scroll of deeds, he can either cast a cursory
glance or go through the details of a person’s conduct. In the letter
that he wrote to Shaykh Mufeed (a.r.), Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
declared,

<p dir="rtl">
.« فإنّا ي.حيطُ عِلم.نا بِأنبائِكُم و لا ي.عزْب. عنّا شيء. مِن
أخبارِكُم »
</p>

“Then surely our knowledge encompasses your news and none of your
information is hidden from us.38”

38 Al-Ehtejaaj, by Abu Mansoor Ahmad Ibn Abi Taalib al-Tabarsi, vol. 2,
p. 324-325, printed at Najaf, circa 1386 A.H.

The word ‘your news’ encompasses the particulars and details of
everybody’s actions as well as the general condition of the Shiite
society. Hence, sometimes he becomes attentive toward the particulars of
an individual's life and informs about its profound aspects. Thus, the
knowledge of the unseen does not mean to have encompassing knowledge
about everything at all times. Also, it does not imply that as
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is aware of us, then definitely he is present
over here.

The conclusion of our discussion is that occultation means not being in
a specific or known place like the occultation of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) or
the distancing of Hazrat Yunus (a.s.) from his people. There are quite a
few books in which an entire chapter is devoted to the likeness of
Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) occultation to that of the Prophets (a.s.).
For instance, Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) was in hiding from his nation for
forty days. Did he go to the skies? No, he went to the mountains. The
Messenger of Islam, Hazrat Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) went in occultation.
Where did he go? The people of Mecca were unaware. He went towards
Medina, but neither the Medinites knew about his exact whereabouts in
the vast desert and the cave in which he was not hiding nor were the
Meccans aware about his precise location.

Many of the Prophets (a.s.) and Imams (a.s.) had such an occultation
and when we say that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is in hiding, it is in this
very meaning. Anybody, who goes to perform the Haj, is more hopeful that
perhaps the man sitting next to him in Mena is Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
or that he may see him in Arafaat. Especially, as the duration of stay
in Arafaat is much shorter than that in Mena, (from noon to sunset), one
is almost sure that during this brief period, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
will certainly come and he may get the opportunity to visit him. This
feeling or emotion is not found in any other venue except Arafaat, where
one is sure that Allah’s proof is bound to be present there at that
time.

The spirituality observed in Mena and the almost surety of the
acceptance of the believers’ prayers in it is due to the supplications
of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) there. This topic should be discussed in
detail in the special discussion related to “seeing Imam-e-Zaman”
(a.t.f.s.) so that in such instances, we know how we should behave in
such contacts wth Imam (a.t.f.s.).

**The life of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) During Occultation**

After the concept of occultation, let us proceed to talk about the life
of Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) during occultation. Here, the question that
immediately comes to mind is, ‘Is Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) married or
not?’ Often this question comes in the guise of a doubt. That is, if he
is married, then it is obvious that he must be having a wife/wives and
children, leading to the exposure of his secret life and people
recognizing him. For, his wife would say that my husband is so and so,
his children would say, ‘our father is Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)’, and
hence, nothing would remain a secret. Therefore, his marriage
contradicts his occultation.

So, if we believe that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has family and children,
such questions are bound to arise. But if we say that he has not married
at all, it will give rise to another objection i.e. Is Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) not a Muslim? For, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has said,

<p dir="rtl">
.« النّكاح. س.نّتي فمن ر.غِب. عن سنّتي فَلَيس. مِنّي »
</p>

“Nikaah is from tradition (sunnah). Thus, whoever is disinclined from
my tradition is not from me.”

How come even after more than a thousand year of living on this earth,
he is not yet married?!

If he is married, then this doubt and if he is not married, then that
doubt! Thus, when we see objections raised from both probabilities, the
only conclusion that can be drawn is that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) does
not exist at all!

To answer the above queries, first and foremost let us analyze the
quoted tradition of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). The term used in it is
‘whoever is disinclined from my tradition…’ Sometimes a person is
disinclined in doing a particular work. On other occasions, he is not
disinclined in that deed but the conditions are inappropriate for it and
the premises or foundation of that work is not provided for. Or,
perhaps, he has got a more important and difficult work at hand that
needs to be performed. Thus, in such cases, if a person cannot execute a
task, then it will not be called as disinclination. So, if Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) has not married, he has not disobeyed the instructions of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

Another important point is that marriage itself or its absence is not a
part of our core belief. That is, marriage of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is
not among the essentialities of our faith. These are particulars that
are not generally covered a priori in the traditions. Rather, this is a
query that is to be put to Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) himself that did he
get married after attaining maturity? Therefore, this is not something
that Imam Hadi (a.s.) or Imam Askari (a.s.) or Imam Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.) have stated in their sermons or traditions that our son Mahdi
will get married.

Generally, the previous infallible Imams (a.s.) have not discussed the
personal details. These are related to Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.)
personal life and should be asked from him only. Even those who had the
opportunity to meet Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) during occultation had more
important matters to be sought and discussed than raise queries over
this issue. Fundamentally too, such trifle questions are not asked.
Often we are acquainted with a person for a number of years but don’t
deem it necessary to question him as to how many children you have or
which family does your wife belong to?

For the seventy-four years of minor occultation (ghaibat-e-sughra), one
does not see any information or news about Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.)
marriage, family and children, and no clue in this regard can be seen
from the four special deputies either. When the main issue itself is
inconsequential, then to discuss whether he’s married or unmarried does
not make sense at all. Even if we assume that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
has married in the major occultation, then does it mean that a wife
should know all the intimate details of her husband’s life? For, to act
upon the tradition on the Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.) tradition concerning
marriage, it is not necessary that she should be aware of all the
particulars of his life.

Moreover, is it necessary that from every marriage, there should be
children? Well, maybe Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has married a woman who
cannot bear children. And even if she begot children, is it obligatory
that they continue to live? It’s quite possible that they were stillborn
or died some time after their birth. Let’s assume that the children
survived, grew and turned into men but were unable to recognize their
father with all the particulars…Is it essential, in all cases, that the
children know their father completely in and out? Or, does knowing mean
that it should be announced publicly?

Thus, it’s not right to think that had he been married, certainly he
would have had children who would know him and also let these facts be
known to the people around them. No, none of these assumptions that we
have discussed above will affect our belief in Imamat in any way.

In traditions and supplications concerning Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), one
can see some talk about his children and his progeny. For instance, in
Doa-e-Nudbah, it is said, “O Allah! Bless Muhammad and the progeny of
Muhammad”. This sentence is not about the Holy Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) but about the last Muhammad (al-Mahdi) because it is followed
by the sentence. “..And bless Muhammad, his ancestor, your Messenger,
the Master, the Great.” Hence, here the first supplication is for
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and the second one is for the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.).

In other supplications too, we find sentences like “O Allah! Grant him
concerning himself, his progeny, his followers…and the leaders from his
sons.39” Therefore, in invocations and supplications one can find
references to the children of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Well, now let us
see as to which century did these children belong to? Are they present
in our times today? We don’t know. Let’s assume that in the fifth
century, he bore children who grew and died. Or, in the eighth century
again, he had some more offspring. Yes, it is not essential that if we
believe that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) had children during the period of
occultation, then they should be living in this era too.

Concerning the abode of Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) children, it is
possible that they are in an island. For, we have traditions, which need
not be necessarily subscribed to but there’s no reason to reject them
either. Somebody relates that we were traveling in a ship when it was
wrecked. We prayed to Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) when suddenly we saw a few
people who saved us. Thereafter, they took us to a lush, green island,
which was called too as Greenland. We noticed that the inhabitants of
this island were very good looking and beautiful. It was a fantastic
place from all aspects. They informed us that this place belongs to
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). We were treated and entertained for one
complete week and after bringing us to the shore, they made us board
another ship, after which we could never find that place40.

Now, is this incident true or false? Perhaps, it may be either of the
two. For, we cannot say with certainty that it is false. If we locate
the narrator of this incident and find him to be a truthful and reliable
person, then on what grounds can we refute his narration?

Of course, some people object that had there existed such a place, then
certainly the geography experts would have found it by now and named it.
We reply that this objection is not sustainable because all islands on
the globe have not been discovered yet nor have all the villages on
earth. A few days ago, a newspaper in Khorasan (a province in Iran) did
not write that a hamlet in Khorasan was discovered that did not have any
contact with Mashhad (its nearest city) for three hundred years nor did
any government official ever pay a visit to them.

Anyway, this is not an essential part of our creed that if we don’t
believe in it we will turn apostates. Nor do we have the right to reject
a narration as being a lie or a superstition. So, there are some matters
relating to the life of Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) that we are not aware
of and it is not necessary to know them either. Like we don’t know as to
what he eats or wears. The clothes that are attributed to him are not
necessarily a turban, cloak, and sandals. In other words, 39 Mafaateehul
Jenaan by Shaikh Abbas Qummi (r.a.) under the chapter of invocations in
Friday afternoons (Salawaat of Abul Hasan Dharraab Isfahani)

40 Behaarul Anwaar of Allamah Majlisi, vol. 52, p. 159.

it is not obligatory for Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) to wear a black
ammamah, a cloak, a pair of yellow sandals, etc.

People have seen Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in the dress of the Ulama, in
Arabic robe and in tribal Iraqi attire as well. The great scholar, late
Shaykh Hashim Qazveeni (r.a.) of Mashhad used to say that don’t be
surprised if you happen to see Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in modern Western
outfit. Hence, it’s wrong to think that certainly and surely
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will have only one sort of a dress and that of a
religious scholar and it is not at all obligatory or essential for us to
have such a belief.

Of course, it should be known that although Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
changes his dress but his appearance is constant and unchangeable. Thus,
if we meet an old man or an infant or a blind or lame person, we can say
with cent percent surety that this is not Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). For,
he is young in looks and his appearance does not change. Even in
traditions one can find that the passage of time does not affect him,
notwithstanding the fact that his age keeps increasing.

Vis-à-vis his residence too, it is possible that Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) keeps changing his dwelling. That is, he spends some time in
the mountains, some in the villages and yet some other time in the
deserts. Sometimes, he is in Iraq, sometimes in Iran and sometimes in
some other country. Hence, it is not essential to believe that
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) always lives in Mecca. In the letter to Shaykh
Mufeed (a.r.), he wrote, “Due to reasons, I have left my previous abode
and have begun to live in far-off mountains.

Soon, I will forsake them too and come to the deserts and then to
inhabited towns and villages.” Anyway, these particulars of his life are
in no way connected to the essentialities of faith. As mentioned in
traditions, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) lives a very normal life. That is,
he sleeps, eats, and drinks. We also find in the narration of the
infallible that the food of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is not very
delicious, fatty or made up of large portions. His dress too is not very
soft and expensive41. This is because he has used this opportunity of
longevity for excessive worship of Allah and attainment of perfection, a
subject that shall be discussed exclusively at a later gathering, God
willing. Then, we shall see that if Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.) has
worshipped his Lord in such glorious style and manner in a brief life
span of 63 years, how his son al-Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) must be extolling his
Lord in his thousand plus years- ranging from his namaz, recitation of
Quran, fasting, nightly prayer vigils, etc. If such worship and
reverence are factors in human perfection (which they certainly are)
then these thousand plus years of divine examination and test, must have
certainly made Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) Allah’s most perfect creature, a
topic in itself that shall be discussed at its appropriate place.

41 Behaarul Anwaar of Allamah Majlisi, vol. 52, p. 355


