The Perfect Personality of Imam-e-zaman (a.t.f.s.)
==================================================

This discussion is about Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) himself with regards to
his personality in relation with Allah and his perfection, whether
divinely endowed or acquired.

Initially, it should be borne in mind that Allah the Almighty has not
created all humans equal, and all that has b1een granted to mankind is
not in uniform measure. Of course, from one aspect- in their generality-
they are all same but in most of the perfection and virtues, Allah has
not created them similar. All humans are created on the nature of
monotheism (fitrat-e-tauheedi), thereby enabling them to know Allah and
worship Him. Therefore, in this regard, they are all responsible. But
spiritual capabilities and attraction vary from person to person.

What is the basis for this difference? One facet of this difference is
related to two points that should be borne in mind. One of them refers
to the world termed in our traditions as the world of pre-existence
(aalam-e-dhar)42. The second refers to divine grace and bestowal, whose
unequal grant will not affect justice.

What will be deemed to violate norms of justice is differentiation in
rights, but as far as ‘grace’ is concerned, distinction does not enter
the domain of justice. Therefore, one differentiation is in rights and
the other is in grace. If partiality is observed in rights, it is
injustice. For instance, if a person owes each one of us fifty dollars,
but while repaying, he pays me only thirty but pays the other person,
seventy dollars. Then, this is injustice because I had an equal right on
him.

Another instance can be as follows: None of us present could demand
from the host to bring various kinds of fruits like orange, pineapple,
bananas, etc. for us.

So, had he not brought all these, he would not have meted any injustice
to us because he did not owe it to us. On the morrow, had he invited
other guests, and served them water only, they would not have the right
to question him as to why did he differentiate between the two. He would
be told that ‘you don’t enjoy any right over me. I just wanted to shower
my grace and bounty on the previous day’s guests and hence the unequal
treatment.’ If the guests question as to what was the basis of your
disparate treatment? Was it baseless and meaningless? He will reply that
certainly it was neither. My treatment did carry some wisdom but it is
not necessary for me to disclose my reasons to you. For, it was sheer
grace that made act in this manner. This is just an indication and if
this discussion is dealt in detail, it will solve quite a few questions
on divine justice.

42 For discussions relating to Aalam-e-Zar, refer to the fifth volume
of Behaarul Anwaar, pp. 225-276. Allah the Almighty has created the
creatures on the basis of grace. Therefore, one He has made the sun, the
other moon, the third as the earth, one ocean he has made as sweet and
the other, salty, etc.

<p dir="rtl">
.« ذلك فضل اللّه يؤتيه م.ن يشاء »
</p>

“This is the grace of Allah. He gives to whosoever He pleases.43”

The sun is the source of energy and light. The earth does not possess
the energy of its own, thereby depending on the sun. One is sand, the
other, water and the third, herbs. These differences are due to Allah’s
grace. One is a wild animal devoid of all understanding while another is
a human being, with abundant comprehension and understanding. These
divine bounties emanate from zero and continue infinitely. At the
moment, Allah the Almighty has given preference to one creature over
another on the basis of His wisdom and rendered one as superior over
another.

It should be borne in mind that as Allah created the creatures
differently, their responsibilities vary as well. Had their
accountability been equal (despite their differences in creation), it
would tantamount to injustice. Hence, as endowments differ so do
obligations and hence the declaration,

<p dir="rtl">
.« لا يكلِّف. اللّه نفساً الّا وسع.ها »
</p>

“Allah does not impose a burden on any soul except as per its
capacity.44” He has not bestowed intellect to the animals and therefore,
has not imposed any responsibility on them. But as He has endowed man
with wisdom and intelligence, as per their levels, He has imposed
obligations and duties on them. So, on the basis of the aforementioned
premises, Allah the Almighty on the basis of His prudence, which is one
of the aspects through which He deals with the creatures on the earth,
desires to make the earth slush green and vegetative. Hence, He makes
the clouds carry water, the fruits ripe and juicy, the air blow smooth
winds, guide mankind, etc. Among mankind, He also intends to create a
man who is worthy of leading other human beings. That is, for this task,
He creates a man who is more perfect than others.

The initial perfection that Allah has endowed on the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), He has not granted to you and me. Similarly, the duties and
obligations that He has imposed on him (s.a.w.a.), He has not placed on
us either. We are relieved of the heavy burden of prophethood and
messengership that He has decreed for His Messenger (s.a.w.a.).

Therefore, when Allah the Almighty intends to execute a task, He
creates a creature, which is capable of performing it. Now, if it
performs the work involuntarily, then there is no virtue for him in it.
But if it undertakes the task 43 Surah Maaedah: 54
44 Surah Baqarah: 286

with the help and assistance of the perfection granted to him by his
Lord but with its own volition, then certainly it is his achievement.

The sun shines involuntarily and performs many a task for the Almighty
but it is not said that the sun enjoys superiority over the earth in the
eyes of Allah. But the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a) discharges his
responsibilities voluntarily. That is, Allah endows him (s.a.w.a.) with
perfection and orders him to go and render a particular obligation.
Hence, when he (s.a.w.a.) does perform that task, his position is higher
than that of others. Therefore, the conclusion is as follows: Allah
creates people for the tasks that He intends to execute. He gives them
the power to do that job, after which He declares,

<p dir="rtl">
.« اللّه. اعلم. حيثُ يجعلُ رِسالته »
</p>

“Allah knows best where to place His message45”

Because He is the One Who has created that particular creature for the
task. Among the divine tasks, the most significant one is that one man
should be able to carry His spiritual grace and convey it to the
creatures. This spiritual grace has two stages: one is the general
spiritual grace in existence itself, and the second is in the guidance
of the people and to enforce the laws of His religion among them.

The first level i.e. general spiritual grace requires an independent
philosophical discussion. Philosophers have established this discussion
on metaphysical grounds, while the holy Quran and traditions have also
talked about it. That is, between Allah and the creatures there should
be a link or a medium46. Between the infinite greatness of Allah and
this insignificant and small existent, there should be somebody who
takes the grace and distributes it.

We observe this tradition in nature as well. If we connect this small
electric lamp directly to the hydroelectric power station, it will burst
instantaneously as it cannot bear the power of the station. This does
not indicate the weakness of the power station but displays the
feebleness and incapability of the small lamp.

If you place a small pearl against the force of a powerful dam, it will
split because it does not have the capacity to bear the force of such
strong water current. Hence, there is a medium that acts as a link
between the two extremes.

Such links and media are found in everything as per their proportion to
grasp the grace and then distribute it among the other creatures, as per
their capacity. This is the case with the electric stations and
sub-stations and the same is for water dams, canals and turbines in
controlling the flow of water. In all types of works, there should be
such a medium that takes the grace and distributes it. 45 Surah An’aam:
124

46 It is worth noting that this view is best suited for philosophical
discussions but in divine texts and traditions, there is no place for
such a hypothesis. For, if Allah so desires, He can do the work directly
Himself without any medium. Of course, presently, divinity has designed
the system as discussed above and generally, this is the method of Allah
that there should be a medium or link for the execution of a task.
Nevertheless, the examples that are cited and shall follow, are not very
correct in our opinion and suggest an analogy between the work of the
Creator and the creature, implying immanence in divinity, a belief that
should be strictly avoided.

This link should have some proportion with the source and some
proportion wth those who derive benefits from the source and
philosophically, such a link is termed as “mumkin al-wujood al-ashraf”
(the most honorable creation). This argument has come in various
philosophical works, especially those of Muslim philosophers like Mulla
Sadra, and in the books of gnosis, by the name “Imkaan-e-Ashraf”. That
is, among the creatures, there should be a noble creation that is the
noblest of them all, which receives grace from the infinite Being of
Allah and disburses it among the creatures. In gnostic terms, he should
possess two facets: one towards Allah and the other towards the
creation.

The work of this intermediary creature (link) is to apportion the grace
to the creatures. It is an existent that enjoys divine attributes like
knowledge, power, holiness, etc. Of course, it is NOT God because God
does not have any partner. Nevertheless, notwithstanding it being a
creature of God, it possesses a certain level of purity, spirituality
and perfection due to which it possesses the ability to obtain divine
grace.

In Islamic terminology, this creation is called as “the light of
Muhammad”, based on the saying of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.),

<p dir="rtl">
« اولُ ما خلق اللّه. نوري »
</p>

“The first thing that Allah created was my light47”. Another term that
is used for it is “the first intellect” (aql-e-awaal). Yet another name
is “the first produce” (saadir-e-awwal). In the traditions of the Ahle
Bait (a.s.), it is termed as “the light of mastership” (noor-e-vilayat).
That is, Allah endows it with the light of existence and this light, as
per the levels, keeps granting existence to other creatures, conferring
this all-important grace on them. Now, if this bond between the Creator
and the creature is removed, the entire creation will cease to exist.

By these explanations, it is clear that this link has the right of
existence over other existents or creatures. That is, he can say that if
I were not there, you too would not exist. He does not pose before the
creatures but the creatures too should recognize him and know that if he
were not there, they (creatures) would not exist. For example, Allah the
Almighty, addresses His Prophet (s.a.w.a.) declaring,

<p dir="rtl">
.« لولاك. ما خَلَقت. الافلاك »
</p>

“If you had not been there, I would not have created the spheres.48”
Such traditions are available aplenty in the collections of traditions,
narrated by both Shias as well as Sunnis.

47 Behaar al-Anwaar of Allamah Majlisi, vol. 15, p. 24.
48 Ibid. p. 28

Now, the point that we should appreciate is that this noble existent
and light reality manifests himself on this earth. This lightface was
first personified in the holy physical persona of the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.), followed by Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.), trailed by Hazrat
Zahra (s.a.) and the other infallible Imams (a.s.). In the lifetime of
the Imam (a.s.), he is the link between Allah and His creatures as well
as the proof between Allah and His creatures. According to a number of
traditions, if the earth would be void of a divine proof, it would be
destroyed49. Why? In reply, we submit that because the role of a divine
proof is that of a medium. In Dua-e-Adeelah, one can find,

<p dir="rtl">
.« بِي.منِه ر.زِق الوري و بو.ج.وده ثبتت الارض و السماء »
</p>

“Through his blessings, the creatures are sustained and by his
existence, the earth and the sky subsist.”

For, an Imam is the medium. In Ziyaarat-e- Jaameah, we read

<p dir="rtl">
بكُم فتح اللّه و بكم يختم. الله و بكم ينزّل الغيث و بكم ي.مسك السماء ان
تقع علي الارض الّا » . « باذنه
</p>

“Through you (Imams (a.s.)), Allah opens, and through you, Allah seals,
and through you, He sends down rains, and through you, He controls the
sky from falling on the earth but with His permission.50” Such sentences
can be found in abundance in the supplications, invocations and
salutations. Now, let us state an ordinary instance that is commonly
found in our lives.

Suppose that one of you invites a famous personality to your house for
dinner and he too promises to accept your invitation. You are not
bothered about the amount that he is going to eat. Maybe, he will not
eat more than a few apples.

But in his honor, you prepare an extensive range of meals, dishes and
fruits, and in his reverence, you also invite quite a few others for the
dinner. The more people you invite, the more benefits will accrue to
different creatures, like the flowers will get more water, the leaves of
trees will be washed properly, the house will be swept clean, and dirt
and dust will be thrown out. Moreover, due to this gathering, the cats
and dogs of the area can feast on the remains to their hearts content,
flies and other pests will have a field day, etc. You witness all this
and to each one of these, who are deriving advantage of this party, you
address in your heart, ‘O negligent creature! Don’t be misled. Whatever
you are enjoying today is merely on account of the presence of this
respectable guest.’

49 Ibid., vol. 23, pp. 33-38
50 Ibid.- Tr.

Such is the system of creation that when man has a respectable guest,
he extends the benefits of this invitation to a number of other
creatures. At that moment, this invited guest can reprimand these
creatures thus, ‘O you who are enjoying the benefits of this party! You
should know that the host has invited you to this dinner for my sake.’
When will this honorable guest post such a reminder? When he sees that
none of the invitees are attentive towards him and are so busy hogging
that they conveniently ignore the real guest and are comfortably sitting
with their backs to him. It is here that their sitting with their backs
to the real guest and their negligence to him is considered as
ingratitude.

Allah’s aim in creation was to create a man who would be a worshipper
(abd) in the truest sense of the word. He says:

<p dir="rtl">
.« إني جاعلٌ في الارض خليفه »
</p>

“Surely I intend to appoint a representative (caliph) on the earth.51”
For this perfect man or perfect worshipper, He created the earth and the
skies, and made the water flow on this earth to allow its inhabitants to
survive. Thus, it is necessary for the existents to live on this earth,
which should be green and vegetative and that the rains descend, et
al.

In this manner, Allah the Almighty created His beloved messenger, the
seal of the Prophets (s.a.w.a.). What affinity He had with him
(s.a.w.a.) is not relevant as our discussion is about the perfect man.
For the comfort of us imperfect people, Allah the Almighty has created
so much of lush greenery, and made so many of the animals at our
disposal for us to feast on them. And all this is for our
semi-perfection. Now, if this perfection is raised to a level, in which
man becomes Allah’s representative (khalifatullah) in every sense of the
term and that perfect man, sincere slave and pure worshipper enjoys the
right of life over every existent and possesses the highest
perfection.

Hence, from the birth and Imamate of Imam-e-Zaman, Hazrat Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.), this perfection of linkage between the Creator and the
creature, this light reality (haqeeqat-e-nooriyyah), and the one due to
whose blessings the creatures are sustained, all are collected in the
existence and persona of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) and he is the perfect
man. At that moment, all of us bow down in front of him as he enjoys
tremendous privilege over us. This is one of his spiritual rights over
us.

Now let us return to the example of the invitation by our friend. If we
see that the guests, who have been invited because of that famous
personality, become so busy in eating and drinking that they completely
ignore him, and after having filled their stomachs, simply leave the
place, we will certainly look at them with disdain. Similarly, the
angels look down with contempt at those human beings 51 Surah Baqarah:
30

that are inattentive towards Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) and consider them as
mean creatures.

Worse are those who deny the existence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.). And the
worst are those who abuse and say bad things about him (a.t.f.s.). From
all this, one can also realize the greatness of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) that
although most of us are negligent of him despite being sustained on his
account, he (a.t.f.s.) does not become angry at us nor do we become the
victim of his wrath.

Among those who are being sustained on his account, the closest are the
ones who eat from the Sahme-Imam (half of Khums), i.e. they get their
money directly out of his pocket. The inattentiveness and negligence of
such people towards their Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) is indeed a massive
ingratitude and a huge tragedy. This is an independent discussion, which
shall be dealt with at an opportune moment. Anyhow, this is one of the
perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.).

The discussion about the eminence and excellence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.)
and other infallible Imams (a.s.) is a separate one under the subject
“Imam Cognition”. The best source for information on this topic is
Ziyarat-e-Jaameahe- Kabeerah and some other supplications. In the
invocations of the month of Rajab, one has been related on the authority
of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) himself as follows:

<p dir="rtl">
.« اللّهم إنّي اسألُك بمعاني جميع مايدعوك به ولاه امرك المأمونون علي
سرك »
</p>

“O Allah! I ask You for the sake of the essence of all by which those
appointed in authority prayed to You, those trusted with Your secrets.”
This supplication is great. And among other invocations, is the salawaat
of the month of Shabaan, which describes the general perfection of all
the Imams (a.s.).


