The Primary Perfections of Imam-e-zaman (a.s.)
==============================================

Another question that arises is as to what is the highest perfection of
Imam-e- Zaman (a.s.)? The responsibility and duty that Allah the
Almighty has imposed on our Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) is more important than
that of other Imams (a.s.), rather it is even more significant that that
of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). The reason being that generally, Allah
has two levels of duties for His creatures, one is of conveyance
(iblaagh) and the other is of implementation (ijraa). That is, at the
first level, Allah states that these are the commands and at the second
level, He orders that the commands that I have specified should be
implemented.

The stage of conveyance commences from the beliefs and terminates at
the laws of Shariat. From Hazrat Adam (a.s.) to the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.), there were difficulties for this stage. The people rejected
Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) at this very stage of conveyance. Why? Because if what
Allah wants is bound to happen or He forces the people to act on His
will, then in this case, there is neither the need for conveyance nor
implementation by the people. In other words, Allah will create a
robot-like human who will simply follow His commands. In this case, man
will no longer remain human because man is called so till he finds
freedom and independence of thought in his existence. He does his works
with knowledge and freedom.

If Allah snatches this most vital trait from man (of freedom and
intention), then the very concept of humanity will be rendered null and
void. In this regard, Allah the Almighty expresses,

<p dir="rtl">
.« و لو شاء. ربك لآمن من في الارضِ كلّهم جميعا »
</p>

“And had Your Lord willed, all that is in the heavens and the earth
would have believed.52”

There would be no responsibility and Allah would snatch from the entire
humanity the power to deviate. Everybody would become like sticks, if
they were standing, they would continue to do so till eternity. A stick
cannot rise and strike somebody on its own. Similarly, Allah would
render us harmless like the stick or make us lust-less like the
angels.

But as Allah did not desire so, He ordained guidance for the free and
independent man that he may achieve the desired aim. Hence, to reach the
desirable destination, He ought to give them some commands and the one
who conveys these commands should be higher than the ordinary people,
and must be able to show them the method of implementation of these
commands.
The religion of God is conveyed to man at the level of perfection and
every man, on an individual basis, is responsible for the implementation
of these commands and orders. Thus, every man, right from Hazrat Adam
(a.s.) till date, can tread on the religion of God within his own
existential world and finally reach to the status of being Allah’s
representative (khalifatullah). Hazrat Adam (a.s.) is one such
individual. Similarly Hazrat Sheeth (a.s.), Hazrat Idris (a.s.) and each
one of the prophets (a.s.) were in their own, a world full of justice
and equity; but, of course, in their own individuality (and not in the
external world).

So, the possibility of implementing the universal justice prevails in
my existence and is certainly not impossible. But when can this
possibility occur? The moment when the religion of Allah is conveyed to
me, because if it is not conveyed, I will never know as to what should I
do. When it is conveyed, the person to whom it is conveyed becomes
responsible for its implementation and if he does implement it
successfully, only then will he be said to have attained the aim of his
creation.

Considering this background, we should not await Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.)
for implementing justice and equity on a personal level. That is, I
should not wait 52 Surah Yunus: 99

for the implementation of Allah’s orders in my existence except for
those laws that I have not understood and wait for him to come and make
me comprehend them. But as for those laws and commandments that I have
understood, it is upon me to implement them in my life and existence.
Just as Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) implemented and Salman, Miqdad,
companions of Imam Husain (a.s.) and others, followed suit.

If they wait for Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.), it is because they want to
observe the implementation of justice and equity by him on a social
level, assist him in achieving this goal and partake its reward along
with him (a.t.f.s.). And if they are unable to find his time, they
implement the justice and equity in their own world and wherever they
encountered difficulties and problems, they asked the Imam of their
time, Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) or Imam Husain (a.s.).

Therefore, from Hazrat Adam (a.s.) till the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.), all were at the level of conveyance, and in their own ways,
active in the accomplishment of these laws, whether it was for a nation,
for a family, or for an individual. For instance, Allah the Almighty
makes Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) responsible for conveying the commandments
universally but restricted his powers of implementation only to the Bani
Israel. At the level of execution, those who were with Hazrat Moosa
(a.s.), create a number of obstacles. Allah the Almighty completed the
procedure of conveyance to the Bani Israel from Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) till
Hazrat Sulaiman (a.s.). Only Hazrat Dawood (a.s.) and Hazrat Sulaiman
(a.s.) succeeded in implementing these commandments among the Bani
Israel and that too, their success was confined to just one people, one
group.

Allah the Almighty conveys to the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.), who in
turn communicates to the people. These were the thirteen years in Mecca
and the initial six years in Medina and its environs. From the fifth or
sixth year onwards, he (s.a.w.a.) commences his mission of conveyance on
a universal level. But at the execution level, he (s.a.w.a.) could not
achieve complete and total success even in Medina. Allah had given him
(s.a.w.a.) the powers to convey all divine laws, an authority that was
not given to Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) or to Hazrat Eesa (a.s.). (That is,
neither of them had the authority to convey all the laws globally).

Thus, the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) possesses the perfection of
finality of prophethood, by which he (s.a.w.a.) can convey all the laws
at a universal level. Hence, after the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), there is
no law or commandment left untold.

Now, the all-important question is to whom the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.) has conveyed all these laws and commandments.

Of course, he (s.a.w.a.) has not conveyed it to all and sundry. Rather,
he (s.a.w.a.) has communicated all the laws to Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)
and hence, the day he (s.a.w.a.) introduced Ali (a.s.) to the world, it
was announced,

<p dir="rtl">
.« اليوم أكملت. لكُم دينكُم و اتمت. عليكم نِعمتي و رضيت. لكم الاِسلام
ديناً »
</p>

“This day I (Allah) have perfected for you your religion, completed My
bounties on you and have become satisfied with Islam as a religion for
you.53” Here, it is necessary that we cite an instance through which
many questions pertinent to the issue of Imamate and the history of
Imams (a.s.) are solved. We can give the example of a teacher or a
government official. The official desires to go to a village behind the
mountain and civilize its inhabitants like the people of the country’s
capital. Let us assume that he wants to say a hundred concepts to them
and intends to supervise their implementation among the villagers.

The official reaches to the village and meets a youth with tremendous
potential and abilities. He is encouraged as he sees that the youth
understands his discussions well. From that very day, he starts teaching
the youth from the alphabet A. Thereafter, he comes to the villagers in
order to teach them but they drive him away saying that they don’t need
his training. It takes a few months for the official to convince the
villagers. These villagers, who till now were involved in a number of
litigation and disputes among themselves, now begin to feel a sense of
unity and see their fights being resolved in a friendly way. Thereafter,
with the help of the villagers, the official opens a school and begins
teaching them right from the alphabet A.
After two years, his office term is about to terminate and he has to
return to the capital. For most of the two years, the villagers were
busy fighting among themselves and only in the last phase, became
involved in the construction of the school and learning their
fundamentals. Now, has the official imparted to the youth, whom he
encountered in the beginning, the same amount of teaching and training
that he has done to the other villagers? Certainly not! Whatever he had
desired to teach the villagers, he has taught to the bright youth right
in the beginning. At the end of the term, he gathers the villagers and
reminds them of their disputes, litigation, illiteracy, etc. that
existed in their society two years ago. Due to these, he could not get
the opportunity to teach them all that he wanted and desired but that he
has taught all of these to this young man, who showed extraordinary
enthusiasm and brilliance right from day one. Now, as he is about to
leave, he hands over this responsibility of teaching and training the
villagers to this young man.

When the official leaves the village, the villagers, as per their old
habit, refer to their chief. As the chief himself has learnt some new
things from the official, he picks up his spade, goes to the village
center, gathers the people and declares, “The village should be
inhabited!” The people support him and express their submission to his
leadership. Meanwhile, on seeing that the chief has no real intention of
destroying the newly established school, the youth helplessly adopts 53
Surah Maaedah: 3

silence as his strategy. Of course, the chief has extracted the
submission from the people with the help of his spade and there is no
infighting among them, but the school is subjected to total neglect.
Occasionally, a few alphabets are taught in it and whatever the children
do not know, the chief fabricates a few yarns from his side and teaches
to the students.

The educated youth is rendered unused and obsolete because the
government official has taught only five of the hundred concepts that
should have been taught to the people, and five concepts here and there
have been conveyed by the youth to a few individuals. Thus, the
remaining concepts that have remained untold are taught to one student
of the next generation. This student attempts to teach these concepts to
the people but they don’t listen to him, and helplessly, he too hands
over the teachings to a student of the following generation.

The third generation student sees that the chief actually is trying to
destroy the village and hence confronts him saying, “The first teacher
built the school for the people and suggested them to become educated
and instilled a sense of unity among them. Now you are trying to destroy
the village and its folks?! You do not inhabit the village nor are you
treading the path of the first teacher.”

Therefore, the following students too are unable to convey all the
teachings and concepts of the first teacher and approximately seven to
eight concepts are taught to a few people of the coming generations
while the remaining ninety and odd remain untaught. Consequently, the
stage of conveyance is not achieved in toto and the dream of the capital
to make this village as a role model, with its special characteristics
and distinctions, for others to follow.

The example of the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) and Ameerul Momineen
(a.s.) is exactly the same. The day the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.)
was raised as a Prophet; there were differences and disputes galore
among the people of Mecca and Medina. In the midst of all these, the
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) struggled for thirteen years and tried to
make all the people submit under the banner (of Islam). But right from
day one, when Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) said, ‘O Messenger of Allah’, he
(s.a.w.a.) has not left him (a.s.) in the lurch and whatever Allah the
Almighty revealed to him (s.a.w.a.), he (s.a.w.a.) taught it to Ameerul
Momineen (a.s.).

Arriving in Medina, the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) commenced the development of
the school and taught a few alphabets. Some students like Salman (a.r.),
Abuzar (a.r.), Miqdad (a.r.), etc. jotted down a few alphabets and
memorized them. Generally, the conditions were peaceful and at rest but
the Islamic sciences that were supposed to be taught to the society were
not yet transferred. Hence, on the day of Ghadeer, the Messenger of
Islam (s.a.w.a.) stood up and announced to the people, ‘Do you remember
your previous state?’ That is, he (s.a.w.a.) reminded them of their
earlier conditions and took an answer in the affirmative from them. Then
he (s.a.w.a.) asked them, ‘Did I wrong you in anyway?’ They all
responded, ‘No, O Messenger of Allah!’ Thereafter he (s.a.w.a.)
declared, ‘After me, all these tasks (of development and progress) will
be pursued by this gentleman (Ali) and whatever you don’t know, ask
him.’

Unfortunately, after the martyrdom of the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.), the people said that Abu Bakr and Umar are good chieftains.
Though, the purpose of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was not to take over the
reins of the government. Rather, the aims were knowledge, divine
commandments, Islamic realities, etc. They said, ‘They will rule
better.’ But the aim of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was not to conquer the
world. Never did he (s.a.w.a.) desire that the Arabs should invade
foreign lands, destroy their cities, plunder their gold and silver,
bring them to their women, and while making them wear these beautiful
necklaces, say, ‘Long live Islam!’ No! Certainly, this was not the aim.
His purpose was to convey to the people that Islamic knowledge that came
down from Hazrat Adam (a.s.) till his own person (s.a.w.a.) and apprise
them of the same.

The goal of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) was not that the Quran should be
recited with beautiful intonation and that in competitions of Quran;
readers should participate and display their talents! Surely, this
wasn’t the purpose. The aim was that the realities of Quran should dawn
upon the people. In short, one tradition states that all the sciences
and knowledge are in 27 alphabets. From Hazrat Adam (a.s.) till the
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.), of the 27, only two alphabets have been
conveyed to the people. The remaining 25 are with Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.),
which he will teach to the people after his reappearance54.

Therefore, from Hazrat Adam (a.s.) till the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.), and from the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) till Imam Hasan
Askari (a.s.), at the level of conveyance, all the teachings, regardless
of them being the laws of Shariah, principles of religion and other
Islamic sciences, have not been conveyed to the masses. Moreover,
whatever has been conveyed, including what is compiled in the books of
traditions, is also not completely comprehended and has not reached unto
us.

Thus, based on what has been discussed, it can be said that divine
commands are classified in two levels, conveyance and promulgation. The
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) conveyed the message and had the opponents
permitted, Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) would have completed the level of
conveyance and introduced the implementation of these laws and sciences.
Unfortunately, that was not the case. Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) laments,

<p dir="rtl">
أما و اللّه لوثُنِي لي الوِساده. لحكمت. بين اهل التواره بتوراتهم, و بين
اهل الاِنجيل بانجيلهم و بين » .« اهل الزّبور بزّبورهم و بين اهل الفرقان
بفرقانهم
</p>

“But by Allah! Had they (opponents) allowed, I would have judged
between the people of Torah (Old Testament) with their Torah, between
the people of Injeel (New Testament) with their Injeel, between the
people of Zaboor 54 Behaar al-Anwaar, Allama Majlisi, vol. 52, p. 336

(Psalms) with their Zaboor and between the people of Furqaan (Quran)
with their Furqan.55”

But they did not let Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) do this and consequently,
the onus fell on the shoulders of others. But at the level of
implementation, these laws and sciences can be implemented in one
individual, a family, or even a city. Of course, Allah’s plan is to
implement these laws and sciences throughout the universe.

Now, after the aforementioned premises, the conclusion is that he who
has the responsibility of conveying the entire message to the people and
observing its implementation on a general scale, must himself possess
all the necessary characteristics and traits required. That is, his
large-heartedness, knowledge, power, forbearance, spirituality and
reliance on Allah must be of the highest order.

Hadeeth-e-Lauh of Jaabir (Ibn Abdullah Ansari), while discussing about
Imame- Zaman (a.s.), mentions that, “…with him is the perfection of
Moses (a.s.), the brightness of Jesus (a.s.) and the patience of Job
(a.s.)56…” Khwaja Naseeruddin Tusi (a.r.) has prepared a salutation from
the contents of different invocations and supplications that goes as
follows:

<p dir="rtl">
اللّه.م صلِّ و سلم و زد و بارك علي صاحب الد.عوه النُّبويه و الص.وله
الحيدريه و العصمه الفاطميه و » ثر الباقريه و الآثار الجعفريه و العلوم .
الحلم الحسنيه و الشجاعه الحسينيه و العباده السجاديه و الم .« الكاظميه و
الحجج الرضويه و الجود التقئيه و النقاوه النقويه و الهيبه العسكريه و
الغيبه الإلهيه
</p>

That is, all those characteristics and traits that the infallible and
pure Imams (a.s.) possessed are available in the holy persona of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.). Thus, the perfect characteristics that have been
endowed on him (a.s.) by Allah the Almighty have to be in proportion to
the massive responsibility placed on his shoulders. Consequently, he
(a.t.f.s.) has to be the most perfect of all the previous successors and
divine proofs.

**The Acquired Perfections of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.)**

As for the acquired perfect characteristics, it should be borne in mind
that basically the importance of perfection is from both aspects,
quantity as well as quantity. The more units of salaat that a person
prays, the more perfection he acquires. The perfection of the Messenger
of Islam (s.a.w.a.) after thirteen years of Prophethood was certainly
more than it was at the commencement of his 55 Behaar al-Anwaar, Allama
Majlisi, vol. 40, p. 136, 144 56 Ayyub in Arabic

mission. Similarly, his perfection at the end of his life was certainly
more than at the time of his migration.

Therefore, the more one prays, the more perfection he attains; the more
one struggles, the more excellence he secures. The same yardstick
applies for tableegh, services to Islam, and all other forms of worship
and recommended acts.

Hence, among the duties of a Muslim is to preserve his physical health
and safety that he may use it more in the way of Allah. It is his
obligation to use this world as a field to the maximum possible extent
to reap the highest possible dividends in the hereafter. Due to this
reason, suicide is prohibited. Moreover, it is not allowed in Islam to
put one’s body in unnecessary and needless trouble. For this very reason
we see that the Imams (a.s.), notwithstanding their great zeal in
meeting their Lord (leqaaullah), strove till the last moments of their
lives to increase their worship and augment their good deeds.

On the eve of Aashura, Imam Husain (a.s.) requested the enemies to give
a night’s time to indulge in more worship of his Lord and increase his
good deeds in the short period available. Ameerul Momineen (a.s.) knew
that he would be martyred on the morrow, yet spends the entire night in
prayers. All the infallible Imams (a.s.) endeavored till the last breath
of their lives to increase their perfection and virtues.

Of course, there are some virtues, whose rewards are reaped by man even
after his death but they are only after he has performed the actions.
For instance, a man plants a tree, the fruits of which are enjoyed by
others even after his death. But, the dead man cannot plant a new tree.
The rewards of a believer’s excellence never cease and its door is never
shut. Rather, they are added to his account and the advantage is in his
favour. But he does not live to add newer sources of rewards for his
hereafter.

Thus, whoever kills a friend of Allah has indeed oppressed him. True,
the victim has attained martyrdom but it does not mean that he kisses
the hand of the killer in gratitude saying, ‘Thank you very much! You
have helped me achieved this great status! Indeed you have obliged me by
sending me away from this world!’ Of course not! On the contrary, he
will confront him saying that you have deprived me of many a grace. Had
I been alive, I could have served Islam and Muslims even more. Hence,
killers and assassins have not obliged the martyrs by helping them
attain the stage of martyrdom and being in the company of Allah.

Therefore, it can be asserted that acquired perfection, both
qualitatively as well as quantitatively, can be increased, and the more
the better. On this basis, the units of prayers by Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) are surely more than that of other Imams (a.s.). Why? Because
more than one thousand one hundred and sixty seven years of his life has
passed, during which, he (a.t.f.s.) has performed Namaz-e-Shab, fasted,
served the creatures, helped in dispelling the difficulties of the
people, etc.

Compared to the previous divine proofs (a.s.), he (a.t.f.s.) has worked
more for the uplift of the downtrodden, visited the sick, participated
in funeral processions, propagated the religion of Allah, etc. Although
his work has not yet reached to its logical conclusion due to the
various obstacles and impediments that arose in his way, nevertheless,
in this lengthy period, certainly his acquired perfection has risen by
the second. In this extensive term, he (a.t.f.s.) has indulged in
supplications in the service of his Lord, prostrated before Him, bowed
in front of Him, and other similar acts of worship and servitude have
made him (a.t.f.s.) spiritually gigantic.

Another most important acquired perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) is
his confinement. What is confinement? The gnostics and the sufis draw a
line for their disciples and order them not to go beyond it. This line
is that of asceticism. Well, for how long should we not cross it? Let us
say, ten hours. Being patient for these ten long hours leads to the
perfection of the disciple’s soul.

Or for example, none of us have any work outside this house for now.
But if we just call it as a prison, the next two hours will seem like an
age passed. There are quite a few days when man does not eat food for
the entire length of the day and does not even feel the pangs of hunger.
But when you name this very day as ‘fast’ (saum), at eight in the
morning, he becomes thirsty, at nine, he becomes hungry and feels the
twinge of both. This line is the line of asceticism for, ‘Man is greedy
for what is forbidden.’

This pressure, patience and forbearance make man perfect. It is among
the great attributes of the infallible Imams (a.s.) that they bear
insults of the people but as Allah the Almighty has refrained them from
using their celestial powers, they don’t do so.

Bearing this point in mind, we see that during the last eleven hundred
years and more, Allah says to Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.), ‘Keep yourself hidden
from the people…’ This very command carries tremendous significance.

Sometimes, a speaker is atop the pulpit and recites a Quranic verse. A
person, who is sitting down and knows the verse, too, starts reading it
aloud so that those around in the gathering may know that he is also
aware of the verse. This person has the knowledge but no self-control
and cannot avoid ostentation of the self. But the perfect man sits in
front of the pulpit with complete silence like a kid, so much so that
the speaker considers him to be an illiterate person. Of course, this is
a fine ethical point that requires more discussion. Now you can imagine
the perfection of him who is angel-faced but conceals his appearance,
handsome but doesn’t show himself to the people, knowledgeable but
doesn’t express his knowledge in front of others, powerful but does not
use force, can take revenge but due to Allah’s command, refrains from
vindictiveness…

You observe that more than eleven hundred years have passed,
Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) is the most knowledgeable of mankind but Allah the
Almighty has ordered him not to manifest his information for the
commonality. He (a.t.f.s.) possesses true power and all these so-called
super powers use their power to the hilt but Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) never
displays his might in front of others. He (a.t.f.s.) is handsome but
unlike other good looking people who always desire to flaunt their
looks, he (a.t.f.s.) never shows himself to people unless Allah the
Almighty permits him to do so. Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) sees all these
difficulties and problems, and can come and bring an end to all this
misery but is patient and forbearing.

For instance, he (a.t.f.s.) has witnessed the entire Iran-Iraq war and
must have definitely been pained at the mass killings on both sides.
Yet, on the command of Allah, he (a.t.f.s.) bears patience. Can
Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) act in violation of the divine commands? Of course,
he is free like us and can do so but does not. Yes, staying within the
confines of the line of self-restrain for the last eleven hundred years
and more has made Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) an infinite person. It is on
account of this perfection that all the angels have become his servants
and all the Prophets (a.s.) envy him. The successors and divine proofs
are all waiting for him (a.t.f.s.) in order to serve him (a.t.f.s.).

When Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) looks at Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), he takes a
glance at that moment of his life when he could not control himself and
boxed the Egyptian to death and consequently, fled the city. Hazrat
Moosa (a.s.) could not discipline the force that he possessed in
attacking the Egyptian. Although, while committing this act, Hazrat
Moosa (a.s.) has not perpetrated any sin but it would certainly have
been better had he not attacked the Egyptian and restrained himself.
This very Moosa (a.s.), when sees from the world of Barzakh, how
Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.), despite possessing all the powers of yore as well
as the morrow, does not use it simply because Allah has not given him
the permission. Still Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) is within the confines of the
lines and is careful about implementing the commands of Allah the
Almighty.

Thus, if we understand this point, we realize that the existence of
Imam-e- Zaman (a.s.) for us is that of a perfect man and that he
(a.t.f.s.) is the Caliph of Allah in its entirety. As the era of his
occultation increases, his acquired perfection and divine perfection is
aggrandized.

**The Endowed Perfection of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)**

Alongside acquired perfection, there exists a gifted or endowed
perfection from the side of somebody else and it differs from the
previous mentioned perfect traits or attributes.

Let us explain endowed perfection with an example. Suppose that you are
unaware of a thing and personally want to acquire its knowledge. You
have to browse through a few books and spend a few hours in order to
acquire it. Instead of this effort, if someone comes across and makes
you aware of the entire concept in a jiffy, that is, presents this
knowledge to you on a platter. So, you have got a new perfection, which
was neither present in you at the time of birth nor have you attained it
through your efforts. Rather, it has been gifted to you and you have
become its owner. Or like in material perfection, one man toils from
morning till evening, works hard and sweats to earn a couple of hundred
dollars. Meanwhile, there walks in another person who hands over two
hundred dollars to him and makes him the owner of this wealth.

Spiritual perfection is also the same. That is, I commit a sin and
usurp the rights of the people. To compensate for this perpetration, I
should strive to earn money and pay the aggrieved party. But somebody
walks in and reimburses the victims on my behalf, eases my struggle and
consequently, my crime is forgiven. Of course, the element in my
forgiveness is the one who has indemnified the right of the people on my
behalf.

Another example is that of a person who goes for Hajj and bears
numerous difficulties in performing its various rituals. But suppose, he
appoints me as his representative and sends me to perform all the
tedious and tiresome rituals on his behalf. Then, although I am the one
who has borne all the difficulties, the reward is written in his name as
well, as I was his nominee. Consequently, his perfection is augmented
due to my efforts.

This endowment can take place during the life of a man or after his
death. After the death of the Messenger of Islam the Muslims have gifted
numerous perfection to him (s.a.w.a.). The reward of every statement of
‘There is no god but Allah’ that is uttered goes in his (s.a.w.a.)
account. Whenever a person recites salawaat in any nook or corner of the
world, its dividend reaches to him (s.a.w.a.). The same applies for
prayers, fasting and all other obligatory and recommended actions. Of
course, the performer of all the above actions too is eligible for his
share of the reward. For, when I perform a good deed on your behalf,
both of us reap the dividends for it without the reward of either of us
being reduced.

One of the gifted perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) is the salutation
offered to him by the previous divine proofs, jurists, believers and
followers. Thus, when a person recites salawaat and sends salutations in
the following ziyaarat every morning after the obligatory prayers,

<p dir="rtl">
اللّهم ب.لِّغ مولاي صاحب. الزَّمان صلوات اللّه عليه عن جميع المؤمنين و
المؤمنات في مشارقِ » الارض و مغاربها و برها و بحرها و سهلها و جبلها,
حيهِم و ميتهم و عن والدي و ولدي و عني من .« الص.لوات و التَّحيات زِنه
عرش اللّه
</p>

its reward goes to the account of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) as well57.

Here, we have opened another account, which is the account of
perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) offered to him (a.t.f.s.) by the
previous divine proofs, jurists, martyrs, believing men and women. None
can match Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) in this perfection or be his equal. In
this very Masjid-e-Jamkaran, where you have the privilege of
congregating, there are numerous people who repent and seek forgiveness
in the name of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.), supplicate, invoke, send
salutations, etc. All these acts of worship and servitude are performed
on behalf of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.). Therefore, one of our duties in the
major occultation is to do good deeds on his behalf.

To summarize the discussion, we have discussed three stages of
perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.).

.. The perfection that has been divinely endowed to perform the
important task of conveying Allah’s message and its implementation;

.. The acquired perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.);

.. The gifted perfection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) that has been conferred
on him by others through their acts and good deeds, a series that
commenced from the time of Hazrat Adam (a.s.) and has continued through
the chain of Prophets (a.s.), Nuh (a.s.), Ibrahim (a.s.) Moosa (a.s.),
Eesa (a.s.) and even the last Prophet, Hazrat Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) prays
for him (a.t.f.s.). Imam Sadeq (a.s.) too has offered the Dua-e-Nudbah
as a compliment before the birth of his descendant, Imam-e-Zaman
(a.s.).

Therefore, the preparations and arrangements have begun right from the
time of Hazrat Adam (a.s.), without any formality, and continued till
his birth and after it through the four special deputies, scholars,
jurists, believers, righteous ones, martyrs, truthful ones, etc. Hence,
in the existence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.), we have a total and complete
human being in all respect. Instead of visiting the shrines and tombs of
lesser mortals and invoking inferior humans, let us take the first step
and cry out from the depths of our hearts, ‘O Saaheb al-Zamaan’ and ask
from him (a.t.f.s.) whatever one desires. On the subject of perfection,
we have some other discussions that shall be set fortht in their
appropriate places. 57 Mafaateeh al-Jenaan by Shaikh Abbas Qummi, in the
chapter of Ziyaaraat of Hazrat Baqiyatullah (a.t.f.s.) after
Dua-e-Nudbah.


