Longevity
=========

A discussion that should be dealt with independently is that of
longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)-A point that is often treated with
cynicism and skepticism. It is a cause of deviation of many a group in
the long course of history, particularly in the last hundred years or
so.

At the first level, we shall analyze longevity from the angle of
proving it, so that we may see as to what is the reason that
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is alive for such a long period. Thereafter, the
mode of his life in this era and the standard of effect of longevity on
his physique will be investigated. Initially, the discussion shall be
examined from the aspect of traditions and Islamic texts, followed by
the presentation of doubts and then from various angles, their replies
will be given.

The Sunnis have accepted the belief in Mahdaviyat in principle and many
of their prominent scholars have even confessed to the fact that he
(a.t.f.s.) is from the progeny of Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) and Imam Husain
(a.s.). But they have not acknowledged that he (a.t.f.s.) is alive and
has a long life. Rather, they are of the view that he (a.t.f.s.) will be
born in the last era.

Some of them (Sunnis) opine that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is dead and
will be reborn because there are some traditions that declare, “He will
rise after his death58”. Relying on this tradition, they subscribe to
the view that he (a.t.f.s.) will die and be resurrected. In response to
this group, we state that this tradition implies the death of his
remembrance (and not Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) himself), as we have in
some traditions, ‘He will rise after the death of his remembrance (from
the minds of the people)’59.

Anyway, there are some who believe in the existence of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) but do not consider him to be alive during occultation and
are of the view that occultation means to die, to be given a new life
and finally, to bring a revolution. Of course, there are few takers for
this theory. For, people either reject the existence of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.), or believe Imamate to be position-oriented (and not
person-oriented)60. Or, if they think him (a.t.f.s.) to be the son of
Imam 58 Behaar al-Anwaar, Allama Majlisi, vol. 51, p. 30, H.6

59 Ibid. H.4

60 There are very few in the Islamic world, who consider Prophethood
and Messengership to be position-oriented (nau’ee). That is, they don’t
believe that anybody can possess the conditions of Prophethood, receive
revelation from Allah and claim Prophethood among the people. Rather,
they believe Prophethood to be person-oriented and consider the
appointment of a Prophet as a prerogative of Allah and deem a Prophet to
be from the side of Allah. But in the case of Wilayat, Imamate and
leadership of the Ummah, most of the Sunnis and some of the Sufis
(Gnostics) reckon it to be position oriented.

They opine that anybody can attain the status of Imamate and leadership
through worship, self-development and treading the path of gnosticism.
Thereafter, he has some effect in the world of creation and is effectual
in it and also takes control of the reins of the people in his hand,
particularly those who tread the path of Sufism, and becomes their
pivot, guide and master. They regard the door of Wilayat as open for
anybody and think that he who has the capacity of treading the path of
Sufism (Sair-o-Suluk) under the guidance of a pivot (qutb) can reach to
this venerable position. Often, they use the term Wilayah for Imamate,
and like the former, they consider Imamate as an attainable position for
the students of their schools. Hasan Askari (a.s.), then wittingly or
unwittingly, they subscribe to the theory of longevity.

**Traditions Concerning Longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)**

We have numerous traditions from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) as well as
the infallible Imams (a.s.) regarding the longevity of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.). In these quotes, just as the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.)
and his successors (a.s.) have talked about occultation itself, its
peculiarities, etc., they have spoken about longevity as well. For
instance,

<p dir="rtl">
.« إنُّ لِقائم منّا غيبه يطول امد.ها »
</p>

“Surely for the Qaem among us, there is an occultation, the duration of
which will be long.61”

This tradition is from Imam Sadeq (a.s.). In another quote, Imam Zainul
Aabedeen (a.s.), the fourth Imam, says, “In Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.),
there are a few characteristics of the previous prophets. Among them is
longevity, which was available in Hazrat Adam (a.s.) and Hazrat Nuh
(a.s.)62.” The aforementioned statement is found frequently in the
traditions of the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) and the infallible Imams
(a.s.).

Longevity is among the peculiarities of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) so that
if somebody claims this eminent position, in the absence of this
important characteristic, indeed his falsehood and lie will be proved
and established for one and all. Thus, longevity is an distinguished
particularity of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), much before his birth,
endorsed by traditions from both Shia as well as Sunni references. Imam
Reza (a.s.) foretells,

<p dir="rtl">
.« إذا خرج كان في سن الشّيوخ و منظر الشّباب »
</p>

“When (Mahdi) reappears, he will be old in age but young in
appearance.63” Another tradition predicts,

<p dir="rtl">
.« و إن من علاماته أن لا يهرم بمرور الأيام و اللّيالي »
</p>

“And from his signs is that he will not become old by the passage of
days and nights.64”

But in the creed of Ithna Ashari Shiism, Imamate, like Prophethood, is
person-oriented and limited, and regard its affair to be in the hands of
Allah. It is only Allah the Almighty, Who appoints a few, limited people
to this esteemed and honourable position. He has instilled in them the
necessary and required conditions for this great status and created them
with volition, which is of course a pre-requisite. He has made the
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) introduce them to the people just as He
made the previous Prophets (a.s.) familiarize their successors to their
nations. Hence, on the basis of the famous quote of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.), ‘After me, there will be twelve successors, first of them is
Ali and the last, Mahdi”, if somebody considers Imamate as an attainable
position and does not deem it to be limited and confined to a few
people, then indeed such an idea emanates from ignorance or disbelief in
the tenets of the Ithna Ashari faith and is in direct contradiction to
its creed. 61 Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p. 142

62 Ibid. p. 217

63 Ibid. vol. 52, p. 322

So, it is our belief that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is alive and during
this period, with the passing of the days and the nights, he grows in
age like all of us, but his appearance does not change and remains like
that of a youth. In the just mentioned tradition, it is said that
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will look like a forty year old man or even
lesser.

In yet another quote, a person came to Imam Baqer (a.s.) and asked,
‘Are you the one who will kill the enemies of Allah?’ He (a.s.) replied,
‘How can I be that person when I am already forty-five years old?!65”

Thus, the existence of longevity and youthful appearance
simultaneously, in Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has been mentioned as his
distinct characteristics, singular only to him and none else, as found
in the aforementioned citations of the infallible Imams (a.s.).

**Answer to the Objections**

Now let us proceed to the objections and doubts pertinent to longevity.
Initially, it should be borne in mind that principally, in religious
discussions, most of the doubts that are raised are mostly questions.
For, in such debates, we have two kinds of queries: questions and
doubts.

In solving matters related to our creed, the first step that we take is
to ask the opponent: Is the point you are raising a question or a
doubt?

For, a question is something that a man does not know but a doubt is
that about which he knows but is skeptical of. For instance, if I ask
the value of the carpet spread on the floor, it is a question, because I
am not aware of its price. My interest lies in knowing the consideration
of the carpet. But if I ask as to why is the carpet spread over here,
then this is a doubt and not a question because I am not unaware of the
carpet being spread over the floor. I know that it’s there and nothing
about it is concealed from me but I don’t agree to the propriety of it
being laid in the place it is kept. Hence, this is a doubt.

Most of the religious questions that arise in the minds of the people
as doubts, if evaluated scientifically, will clarify that these are not
doubts but genuine questions that need to be elucidated. Thus, the first
step that we must take is to bring the opponent down from the position
of a skeptic to that of an unaware person. Thereafter, we must evaluate
whether his question is from the necessary and obligatory beliefs or is
it otherwise? If it is from the former, then his question must be
answered. But if it’s from the non-obligatory kind of question, then
even if we don’t answer it, will not be very harmful because in life,
there are n numbers of queries that are still left unanswered and
unattended to. Like, questions relating to the seas, the oceans, the
jungles, the skies, the levels of 64 Muntakhab al-Asar, Lutfullah Safi
Gulpaygani, p. 285

65 Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 51, p. 141

earth, matter, atom, etc. remain to be replied and hence, there is no
problem if, along with these millions of questions, one more question
remains unresolved. If knowing a question is not a part of religious
compulsions, and is merely recommended or beneficial or bears scientific
significance only, then not being aware of its answer will not harm the
fundamental beliefs of a person.

Therefore, in most of the religious questions, it should be borne in
mind that at the very first step, the questions should be separated from
the doubts. Now, let us analyze whether longevity is a question or a
doubt. Initially, we shall treat this query as a doubt that has been
raised in various ways, the gist of which is as follows:

Firstly, man is like a car. After a car has been used for a certain
period of time, it wears out. It is not possible that a car is used
constantly and its condition does not deteriorate. On account of
incessant utility, the nuts and bolts of the human body are subject to
wear and tear. It’s not necessary that it should work in excess. If he
just continues to live, nourishes, has internal physical activity, and
the cells of his body are busy and active, these will ensure the
antiquity of the body cells. So, in this doubt, man is likened to a car,
which deteriorates on utility, followed by antiquity and extinction.

Another example of the skepticism pertinent to longevity is that every
kind of existent has a particular age limit, after which, it becomes old
and expires. A mosquito lives for a maximum of five weeks but a lion
continues to live for fifty years. An orange tree has a specific age,
while a banyan tree has its own age limit. Similarly, the lifespan of
the human species is 80-90 years and at the most, he may live for a
hundred and fifty odd years. But more than this duration would be
against the normal course of human life.

Another doubt that is connected to the aforementioned objection is the
hereditary effect in human age. For instance, if we scrutinize the age
of the members of a family, we will observe that if the ancestors of
that family lived for an approximate duration of 50-60 years, then in
all probability, the normal age of their descendants too will be the
same. Thus, when we analyze the ages of the ancestors of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.), we observe that all of them lived for a period of maximum
50-60 years and the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.), despite all his
greatness, lived for not more than a precise 63 years. Therefore, under
the aforementioned law, the age of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) must not
exceed that of his ancestors.

Another point raised is that even if we accept the longevity of
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), the concept of him remaining young despite the
years, creates even more doubts and is not at all in accordance with
scientific standards. For, in any case, the cells of the human body get
antiquated and definitely affect the appearance of face, teeth, skin,
hair, etc. So, on what basis can we accept the youth of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) with longevity?

Moreover, a few Quranic verses are used in support of these criticisms,
one of which is the oft-quoted one,

<p dir="rtl">
.« كلّ نفسٍ ذائقه الموت »
</p>

“Every soul has to taste death66.”

Then how can one claim that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) does not die?
Another cited verse is,

.« إنّك ميت و انّهم ميتون » “(O Prophet!) Surely you will die and
surely they will die67.” Yet another verse relied upon is,

.« و من نعمره نُنكّسه في الخلق » “And whosoever We give long life, We
render him miserable in creation.68” Allah the Almighty relates this
judgment as a law and a tradition. Then how can it be said that a
person, who has already lived for more than a thousand years and might
probably live for another couple of thousand years more, will remain
young in appearance and will have no signs of old age?!!

All these are doubts that are raised by relying on Quranic verses. Of
course, there are other doubts as well but their sources are these very
objections that we have mentioned. Finally, anybody can raise these
objections with minor modifications.

Now, in reply to these objections, let us first analyze the premise. In
other words, let us answer these queries from various viewpoints.
Initially, we shall discuss longevity from the philosophical angle.
Thereafter, we will debate it from the scientific aspect and evaluate it
in the light of natural sciences. Finally, we will respond to the
Quranic verses relied upon in support of these criticisms and cite some
other verses that support longevity. Therefore, we will resolve this
issue (of longevity) in three ways: Philosophy, physical science (in
general) and Quran.

**1. Longevity: A Philosophical Perspective**

According to philosophy, every thing has a cause. Thus, nothing can
come into existence without cause occurs. And anything that comes into
existence, for it to become non-existent, another cause is required. So,
just as it is essential that for every existent there should be a cause,
it is also necessary that for its non-existence, there must be some
reason. For, if there is no 66 Surah Aale Imran (3): 185

67 Surah Zumar (39): 30

68 Surah Yaasin (36): 68

cause, the first cause (of existence) will provide continuity to its
effect. Therefore, whatever exists is due to a cause and whatever ceases
to occur is again because of some reason. If we have proof for the
existence, we must have proof to establish that it no longer exists;
otherwise, we must believe in the perpetuity of its existence.

Based on this principle of logic, Islamic jurisprudence has a law named
“Isteshaab”. If I have placed this card on the table and have a proof
that I have done this work, then if I want to say that the card is not
on the table, I must furnish evidence in support of my claim. Of course,
to prove that the card is not on the table is the responsibility of the
one who makes such a claim and not me, who believes that the card is on
the table.

No doubt, “Evidence is the responsibility of the claimant while oath is
for the one who denies” is a well-established principle of
jurisprudence. But if the claimant has brought the proof for the
existence of the thing that he claims exists, then it is for the
opponent to provide evidence for its non-existence because it is a new
claim and not just denial. If it is established that ‘A’ lives, then the
one who claims that he is dead, must bring some proof for his claim,
otherwise it will be assumed that A continues to live.

Let us cite an instance for better understanding of the issue. Suppose,
one day we plant fifty trees on the road. The first day when we see
these fifty trees, the question that crops up in our minds: Till when
will these fifty trees continue to live? Immediately, we will remember
this law and say to ourselves that till the time it is necessary for
them to survive, they will continue to do so provided no obstacles or
impediments come in the way of their lives. But after ten days, when we
see that five of these trees are missing, the query that comes in the
mind as to why be these five trees missing? We don’t ask ourselves as to
why are the remaining forty-five trees still surviving. We search for
answers for the former question and come to know that these five trees
are missing because they dried up or were cut down, or they were not
watered properly, or some children have uprooted it, and so on and so
forth.

The same law applies for animals and for humans. For example, in a
maternity home, fifty infants are born. On seeing them, the question
that arises in our minds is that how long will they continue to live? In
reply to this question, we shall say that if the demands of their lives
are provided for and the obstacles done away with, then they shall
continue to live and we have no proof for their non-existence because
they have already come into existence. After ten days, two infants die.
Now the question will be asked as to why these two failed to survive? It
is due to this law of continuity of existence that whenever we hear of
somebody’s death, we ask for the reasons for his death and never
question a person that why is he continuing to live?

**2. Longevity: A Scientific Perspective**

From the scientific aspect, the statement that man is like a car is
baseless because man is not a car. For, the day it comes out of the
factory, a car is subject to deterioration and wear and tear. But man,
from the first day of his birth, constantly craves for perfection. Body
cells are not like nuts and bolts or like parts of machine. In the human
body, the process of renewal and discarding of the old cells is a
never-ending process till they attain a certain degree of perfection.

Hence, to strike a similarity between a newborn child on par with a
justproduced factory car is absurd because on the whole, a living being
differs vastly from a car. You may recite a thousand elegies in front of
a car and yet it will not budge. But if you inflict just a single
spiritual tragedy on man, it will reduce his age to half. Similarly, it
does not make any difference to a car whether it is being used for
carrying a bride to her groom’s home or is being used as a hearse. But
it does matter to man as to how he is being used. Thus, from both
material and spiritual aspects, man varies vastly from stones as well as
vegetation.

As for the hereditary factor in longevity it can be said: firstly from
the scientific aspect hereditary has not been established in longevity.
Secondly in numerous hereditary factors some are seen in the next
generation while others are not. Moreover, the hereditary factor is
propounded just as a probability and it is not that all the
characteristics of an individual are transferred or transmitted to the
next generation, leave alone to all his descendants. Therefore, even if
we assume the proof of hereditary as true for the sake of argument yet
under this rule, we cannot claim that all the sons are exactly identical
in age to their father. As we see that there have been people who
enjoyed long lives but their sons were either still born or die at a
very young age. Also there have been people who died in the prime of
their youth but their sons enjoyed extremely long lives.

Without prejudice to whatever we have discussed, even if we assume that
longevity is hereditary, it will apply only for natural lives. But if in
a family, all the ancestors have been poisoned or killed, we cannot
submit that the short lives of the ancestors will affect their eleventh
generation descendant (particularly where all have been either poisoned
or killed). Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) belongs to that family where all his
forefathers, till Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.) have been martyred and did
not die their natural deaths. Thus, even if accept the argument of
legacy, it will not be applicable for this particular family.

As for establishing longevity, numerous anthropologists have presented
and jotted down their investigations. Among the best books on the
subject is that of Dr. Paaknejaad and I advise all of you to go through
it. Its title is “Awwalleen Daanishgaah wa Aakhareen Peyaambar” (The
First University and the Last Prophet). In the second or third volume,
he discusses longevity and mentions the views of various scientists on
the subject.

The anthropologists mentioned in this book opine that man is like an
existent whose structure is such that if all his requirements are
provided for and external factors are kept at bay, he will continue to
live for an indefinite period. A comparison will facilitate the
understanding of the discussion.

Let’s say, a watermelon that is kept in the open will become rotten in
a week or a month even if none touches it. But this card is unlike the
watermelon. For, if this card is kept here for years together and none
touches it, it will remain unaffected. This is because the atoms of the
watermelon are perishable while those of the cards are not.

Regarding man, the anthropologists suggest that human cells contain
inherent potential perpetuity. Now, let me cite a quote from the book
“Man: The Unknown” by Dr. Alexis Carrel. I have read this book during my
days as a student. Regardless of the author being from the East or the
West, we must admit that it is a masterpiece from the scientific aspect.
It provides a profound insight into the human being while discussing
about human cognition and inter-human spiritual relations.

While submitting his investigations, Dr. Carrel writes that if the
human cells are protected in the desired manner, he can continue to live
infinitely. It can also be said that he will not die and remain young
forever69.

Anyhow, we don’t intend to get involved into the debate vis-à-vis the
mode or means of longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Rather, we just
want to answer the objection raised by some that according to modern
science, longevity is impossible. We refute this objection by saying
that as per the anthropologists, it is very much possible for man to
live a long life. If you talk about hereditary, we state that the
hereditary factor has not been established in determining the human
lifespan. Even if we assume heredity as a factor in longevity, it will
not apply in the case of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). If you argue that
everything in the universe is perishable, we deny the contention, as
this is not the general principle of nature. Thus, the objection raised
is refuted at the outset.

We observe human interference in this very nature and witness that he
manages to reduce as well as increase the lifespan of other existents.
He plucks a flower from a plant to decorate his vase. Had he not plucked
it, the flower would have continued to live for a few more days or
weeks. This proves that man has an effective role to play in mostly
increasing or sometimes reducing the life of other creatures. Like a
gardener, through various procedures of Bonsai, protects a flower from
being affected by extreme weather conditions like summer and winter,
thereby increasing its 69 Man, the Unknown, p. 173 (Persian). Interested
readers can refer to the original English version. life to a
considerable duration. Similarly, man strives to augment the lifespan of
animals and other human beings as well.

If man can augment or reduce lifespan, it shows that some kind of a
method or procedure is involved in the same. Now, this procedure
involves either direct interference in the nature of the existent or to
enhance the characteristics that will help it in prolongation of its
life. For example, some stimulant or booster is added to its diet that
helps increase its age.

Nowadays, scientific researches are debating furiously the ways and
means of increasing the average age of mankind. All efforts of medical
science are in the direction of augmenting the standard age of humanity
and they have indeed succeeded to a certain extent. For example, if
previously the mean age of humanity was 25-30, now it has gone up to
35-40. Scientists and doctors have focused their efforts in preventing
man from dying. In other words, their researches are directed to explore
the secret of survival, longevity and youth of mankind.

Before proceeding with the discussion on Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), let
us make a general query: Is there or not a nutrient, herb or medicine
available in nature, which on being used will increase a person’s life?
Does there exist a scientific possibility or not? We ask the scientists:
Do you consider it scientifically possible or do you deem it to be
impossible? In other words, is it possible that a man, facing all
psychological pressures that the society inflicts on him and the
spiritual stress that he encounters, benefits from such a nutrient,
which will enhance his lifespan and increase his age? They will
certainly reply in the positive. Why? For, only he can answer in the
negative, which has researched and investigated each and every existent
in nature. Therefore, when we have not done so, how can we make such a
claim that there is no such medicine or nutrient at all?

Now let us come and evaluate the standard of investigations. Is there
not a chance that among the herbs there is a flower or plant that can
enhance human life? Is it possible or not? How many of the total plants
and herbs existent in the universe you have studied and researched? Can
they reply that we have researched all the herbs and plants existent in
the universe? How many of the herbs present in the jungles and deserts
have reached to the physical laboratories of the world?

We say that we have stated about the herbs, now let us talk about the
animals. Is it possible that the flesh of an animal possesses the
ability to increase the longevity of mankind? Or perhaps, the flesh of
some beast bears this particularity? The sheep that you eat everyday,
have you completely researched and studied about its bones, veins,
joints, etc. and are you sure that there are no signs of longevity
available in it? If you are not fully aware about one sheep, then what
about the entire animal kingdom! Also, animal kingdom ranges from the
beasts of the land to the sea creatures.

Even if we assume that all herbs, fruits or animals are researched
thoroughly and it is found that there is no sign of longevity in them,
yet the same cannot be said when two plants, two vegetables, two herbs,
etc. are cross-fertilized and other similar permutations and
combinations. For example, if we say that the watermelon does not
possess the trait of longevity in it, for that matter the cucumber too
does not contain this particularity. But then, what about the product
that is the result of grafting of a watermelon and a cucumber? It’s here
that an entire ocean of ignorance unfolds before man.

Consequently, to answer the aforementioned question in the negative is
beyond the realm of science. Science can never reply the query of
longevity in the negative. To conclude the discussion, we submit that
never can a congregation of scientists declare that it is impossible for
a human being to live beyond a certain age. Therefore, we ask the
skeptics of longevity, ‘Are your discussions scientific or based on
ignorance?’ If it is scientific, you should know that a scientist could
never declare longevity as impossible. And if your discussions are based
on ignorance, then we have no arguments with the ignorant and you too
kindly take off your scholarly guise.


