3. Longevity in Quran
=====================

Now let us proceed to have a Quranic analysis (with regards to
longevity). Firstly, let us evaluate the verses. One such verse is .«
كلّ نفسٍ ذائقه الموت »

“Every soul will taste death.” Of course, none denies this fact. But,
the limit (of age) for death has not been defined. We cannot claim at
this moment that so and so has died. If asked why? We answer that
because Quran says that every soul will taste death.

Another verse declares, .« إنّك ميت و انّهم ميتون »

“Surely you will die and they will die.” When this verse was revealed
on the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), did he (s.a.w.a.) die instantly? Like
the previous verse, this one too does not fix the time of death and
hence cannot be used for the above purpose.

As for the third verse that declares, .« و من نعمره نُنكّسه في الخلق
»

“And whosoever We give long life, We render him miserable in creation”,
has stated the matter very explicitly. To elaborate a little, sometimes
when we initiate the cause, the effect is bound to follow and it is not
possible for us to prevent the effect. For example, any glass that I
strike with a stone breaks. But I don’t say that I strike the glass with
a stone and I break the glass. Why? Because striking the glass with a
stone and its breaking is one and the same thing.

In logic, sometimes the relation between the subject and the predicate
is that of a cause and effect. At other times, both are related to one
object and neither is the subject of the other. In the former instance,
when the relation is of cause and effect, when the cause is brought into
existence, the effect occurs automatically. Like we said, when we strike
the glass with a stone, the glass breaks automatically. But the same
does not apply to the statement: I will give watermelons to all the
guests whom I invite. In other words, it is possible that I invite some
guests but don’t offer watermelons to them. It is in my hands whether to
give them watermelons or not. Invitation of guests and offering them
watermelons are not one and the same thing. Choice lies with the hosts,
whether to offer the watermelons to the guests or not.

Similarly, when the Holy Quran declares, “And whosoever We give long
life, We render him miserable in creation”, it does not mean that
whosoever We give long life, We have to render him abject in creation.
No, this verse does not relate this law. Rather, it explains a general
law of creation that whosoever lives a long life, will become abject in
state. But those possibilities are in the hands of Allah. If He wants,
He can render his condition pitiable or else, He can also allow him to
remain young and handsome despite longevity.

Thus, the terms of Quran are such that both the possibilities are
mentioned and both of them are related to divine intention. First, He
explains the general law that whosoever He increases his lifespan, He
will render him abject in state. Now, we ask humbly, O Allah! If You
want to give somebody a long life and prevent his condition from being
pitiable, can You not do so? He, the Almighty, will retort angrily, ‘Of
course! I can. The choice lies with Me (because I have power over all
things).

Therefore, nowhere does the aforementioned Quranic verse create any
doubt whatsoever. For, Allah’s sunnah is such that He can provide
exceptions for any rule that He makes. For example, the sunnah of Allah
is that He brings a person into existence after copulation of man with a
woman and the necessary processes that follow. But in one instance,
Allah the Almighty, willed to create Hazrat Eesa (a.s.) without a
father. There are plenty of such exceptions.

After replying to the verses that are cited as evidences against
longevity, now let us proceed to establish longevity from the Quranic
verses itself. The first clear proof from the Quran is about the
longevity of Hazrat Nuh (a.s.). The Holy Quran informs,

<p dir="rtl">
« و لقدارسلنا نُوحاً إلي قومِهِ فلبث فيهم الف سنه إلّا خمسين عاما
فاخذهم الطوفانْ و ه.م ظالمون »
</p>

“And indeed We sent Nuh to his nation, then he stayed with them for a
thousand save fifty years. Later, the deluge overtook them while they
were unjust.70”

Obviously, Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) did survive for quite a few years even
after the deluge. This is not an absolutely clear verse of Quran that
does not call for esoteric interpretation nor is it an ambiguous
verse.

Likewise, in the Majestic Quran, there are various instances when Allah
the Almighty has displayed His Power and granted long lives to some of
His creatures. Here, we shall mention one such verse for the benefit of
our readers. In the story of Hazrat Ozair (a.s.) [or Irmiya (a.s.)
according to some interpreters as the name is not mentioned in the
Quran] it has come down as follows:

<p dir="rtl">
أو كالّذي مرُّ علي قريهٍ و هي خاويه. علي ع.رْوشها قال أنّي يحيي هذه
اللّه. بعد موتها فأماته. اللّه. » مائه عامٍ ثم. بعثه قال كم لبثت قال
لبثت يوماً أو بعض يومٍ قال بل لبثت مائه عام فانظر إلي طعامك و شرابك لم
يتسنّه و انظر الي حمارك و لنجعلك آيه للناس و انظر الي العظام كيف ننشزها
ثم .« نكسوها لحما فلما تبين له قال أعلم أن اللّه علي كلِّ شي ءٍ قدير
</p>

“Or the like of whom (Ozair) who passed by a town and it had fallen
down on its roofs. He said, ‘When will Allah give it life after its
death?’ So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, and then raised
him to life. He said, ‘How long have you tarried?’ He said, ‘I have
tarried a day or a part of a day.’

He said, “Nay! You have tarried a hundred years, then look at your food
and drink- years have not passed over it and look at your ass, and that
We may make you a sign to man and look at the bones, how We set them
together, then clothed them with flesh, so when it became clear to him,
he said, ‘I know that Allah has power over all things.71”

The story goes like this: Ozair (a.s.) was passing by a village. He
passed by the village graveyard wherein graves were piled upon one
another and had thrown out the bones and skeletons of the corpses. He
looked at one of the bones that had turned powdery and thought, ‘How can
Allah grant it life again?’ It was noon then and Prophet Ozair (a.s.),
who was 25 years old, was sitting under a tree and had tied his ass to a
tree. He had just spread his dining cloth to have his lunch. His meal
comprised of a cup of milk, fig and a loaf of bread. He was busy eating
when suddenly he spotted the bones and he mused, ‘How can Allah
resurrect it?’

Quran informs that at that very moment Allah captured his soul and he
remained in this condition (of death), when Allah resurrected him and
asked, “How long have you stayed over here?’ He (Ozair) replied,
‘Perhaps a day or part of a day.’ 70 Surah Ankaboot: 14

71 Surah Baqarah: 259

Allah the Almighty retorted, ‘No! You are here for a hundred years! For
a century, Ozair (a.s.) was lying in the graveyard, under the scorching
sun, floods of water flowed over him, chilly winter enveloped him, days
and nights passed through him, yet he neither turned dust nor powder. He
remained totally safe, sound and untouched. His food too was safe and
therefore, the Holy Quran ordered, ‘Look at your food and drink, years
have not affected them.’ Man himself, (Allah’s creature) with his
limited power, produces a refrigerator that has the ability to retain
the freshness of meat for such a time that it can be exported from one
country to another for consumption. Does Allah the Almighty does not the
power to protect food and drink for a particular duration in similar
circumstances? Thereafter, Allah the Almighty says, ‘Look at your ass.
It has died and become dust. But We will resurrect it and clothe it with
flesh.’

Ozair (a.s.) observed a sudden tumult in the earth, the bones of the
ass were gathered and within a fraction of a second, the ass regained
life. Then Allah the Almighty ordered, ‘Now, mount it and continue with
your journeys to cities and towns.’ Ozair (a.s.) mounted it and arrived
in his city but to his utter amazement, it had undergone a complete
change. Its streets and areas had transformed to an unrecognizable
extent.

Finally, with extreme difficulty, he managed to locate his residence
and saw an old man with a flowing white beard residing in it. The old
man asked, ‘Who are you?’ Ozair (a.s.) responded, ‘I am Ozair’. Not
believing the response, the old man retorted, ‘Don’t talk rubbish. Ozair
left this place more than a hundred years ago, never to return
again.72”

This incident is about two Ozairs (a.s.) One, who lived for 150 years
and another who lived for 50 years. That is, Ozair (a.s.), separated
from his brother at the age of 25 and died. He regained life after a
hundred years and again lives with his brother for another 25 years,
dying at the age of fifty.

This incident is narrated in the Old Testament and other heavenly
books. The Holy Quran has also mentioned it in the 259th verse of Surah
Baqarah and there is no vagueness or ambiguity whatsoever in it for it
to be interpreted or explained in any other way. There are many such
instances in the Holy Quran wherein Allah the Almighty has manifested
His power for the people.

Here, we don’t want to claim right at the outset that the long life of
Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is in Allah’s power. For, our aim is to first
establish the possibility of the subject and once that is done, we shall
show that it is in the hands of Allah to do the same. Because,
impossibilities are of two types: One that is beyond the realm of
intellect (mahaal-e-aqli) and second that is usually impossible
(mahaal-e-aadi) (as is not observed commonly). Intellectually impossible
is that about which the intellect decrees it to be impossible in
occurrence. Normally impossibility is that about which the intellect
does not judge that it’s impossible but has not occurred yet.

72 Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 14, p. 360-362; vol. 46, p. 310

All scientific inventions are of the second category like human forays
into space, invention of the airplane, conception of numerous
life-saving drugs, solutions of various medical problems, etc. For
instance, till recently, man has been unable to find a remedy for AIDS
but the possibility of an antidote cannot be ruled out.

Intellectually impossible is that about which the intellect has a firm
judgment that it is impossible for it to occur. Now, longevity is beyond
the domain of both the impossibilities. In the first instance, we
observed that intellect does not regard long life for humans to be
impossible as there can be no scientific explanation that can deem it
impossible. Thereafter, we also established that it is also not normally
impossible because numerous examples of people living long lives73 have
been seen and science too does not negate the possibility.

Therefore, Quran, science, philosophy and history establish the belief
in the longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). It is neither an
impossibility nor in contrast with science, Islam, Quran and
traditions.

73 A few years ago, the renowned magazine “Reader’s Digest”, which is
circulated globally in various languages, carried an article captioned,
“Death Fears Us”. It discussed about the people of Azerbaijan in
erstwhile Russia, where the normal lifespan of people was in the range
of 120-150 years. They were also involved in day-to-day activities of
their lives. This was a common sight amongst them and none stared at
them with amazement. Likewise, historical references provide us
documents about people who enjoyed long lives. Exclusive books and
special chapters have been devoted to the subject wherein the ages of
Hazrat Adam (a.s.) (930), Hazrat Shoaib (a.s.) (912), Hazrat Lut (a.s.)
(732), Hazrat Idris (a.s.) (300), Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) (950+), etc. have
been mentioned. (Ref: Aaftaab-e-Subh-e-Ummeed, p. 83, 84).

**The Philosophy of Occultation (ghaibah)**

The philosophy of occultation is one of the fundamental discussions.
That is, among the seventeen or eighteen discussions regarding Hazrat
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), the philosophy of occultation is among the most
sensitive. Some of these questions are as follows:

• ‘Why has Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) gone into concealment?’
• ‘Why occultation was not for other Imams (a.s.) as well?’
• ‘Why Allah did not place the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) in hiding
to achieve the same goal destined for His last Hujjat (a.t.f.s.)?’
• ‘Why Allah has not hidden Ameerul Momineen (a.s.)?’ ‘Basically, what
is the need for occultation?’
• ‘Was it not possible for Allah that when the conditions of
reappearance were provided for, to raise a person, who would take all
those steps that are supposed to be taken by Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) and
establish universal justice on the earth?’

These questions are occasionally put across as objections and at times,
are asked with the intention of poking fun at the concept of
occultation. The opponents contend that, ‘This mode of putting in
occultation of a man and making him reappear after a thousand years
implies that Allah is unable to train a man and hence, He has kept him
concealed for this day. What was the harm if the twelfth Imam, like the
previous Imams, would perform all the tasks assigned unto him and like
his ancestors was killed through poison or sword? Whenever Allah willed,
He could have got His work done. Just as He had sent the Messenger of
Islam (s.a.w.a.) at an appropriate time, He could have dispatched an
individual to realize His aim at an opportune moment. As Allah did not
send Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) in occultation for the necessity of the
arrival of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), in this instance too, there was
no need to conceal Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.). As and when the need arose, He
could have sent a man to achieve the desired objective.

In reply to the question, ‘why Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) has gone into
occultation?’ traditions have furnished various types of answers. Here,
we shall present the numerous reasons that have been cited and then try
to establish a relationship between them and draw some conclusion.

We find in traditions that the infallible Imams (a.s.) were questioned
as to why Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) went into hiding? They (a.s.) replied, “He
feared being killed.74” In some traditions, Imam Baqer (a.s.) and Imam
Sadeq (a.s.) ‘Pointed towards his stomach’, thereby suggesting
apprehension of murder75. Therefore, one group of traditions has
established that Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.) went into occultation to avoid
being killed.

Another group of traditions has considered occultation as a mode of
examination of Shias. Why did Imam (a.s.) go into occultation? Because
Allah the Almighty intended to test the Shias during occultation76. Of
course, more traditions talk about apprehension of being killed. Yet,
some other traditions are of the view that Allah alone knows the real
reason and we are unaware of it77.

Most of the scholars have relied on the last mentioned reply that only
Allah knows the real reason of this affair and that we are totally
uninformed about it.

They also bring instances to prove their point as to how on occasions
Allah Himself or His appointees have performed some tasks whose
rationale were unknown to anybody. For example, they cite the story of
Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) and Hazrat Khizr (a.s.). The latter did some things,
while the former was unaware of their logic. He objected to Hazrat Khizr
(a.s.) but was told of the reasons much later. This group is of the view
that after the reappearance of Imam-e-Zaman (a.s.), people will know the
real rationale behind occultation. Therefore, as few reasons have been
cited, let us gather them and reach to the core of the discussion. That
is, let us examine the various rationales given in the traditions and on
further intensive research and investigation; hope to understand the
philosophy of occultation with the help of these traditions.

To understand this concept, it is necessary to analyze a few topics and
clarify them. Firstly, it is not necessary that Allah should guide
everybody forcibly. For, mankind has been created in a way that he
should strive to achieve perfection voluntarily and attain the status of
a complete worshipper.

For Allah, creating a perfect man is very much possible, but of course,
through coercion. But if He has decreed that man must acquire this
position on his own volition and accord, then the onus is on him.

In other words, divine grace is conferred on one and all. But how each
individual realizes this potential is dependent on him and related to
his freedom. It does not imply, by any means, that Allah the Almighty is
unable to create a 74 Al-Ghaibah of No’mani, Chapter 10, p. 176
75 Ibid. pp. 176, 177
76 Ibid. pp. 201-211

77 Muntakhab al-Asar by Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani, p. 266

perfect and complete man; rather, it suggests that it is the intention
of Allah that man should attain this level on his own accord.

Sometimes, Allah gives two different individuals exceptional talent but
while one of them uses it aptly, the other misuses and abuses it in an
undesirable manner. For example, the talent that Allah confers on
Allamah Hilli (a.r.) is the same that is endowed on Hitler. The
geniality that is given to Shaikh Murtuza Ansari (a.r.) is also granted
to the other criminals of history like Chengiz Khan. This is the first
geniality, potential and perfection that are given to all the
aforementioned individuals. But, while Shaikh Murtuza Ansari (a.r.)
realizes his potential in the way of Allah and comes to be know as the
great Shaikh Ansari (a.r.), Chengiz Khan uses this talent in the way of
murder and killings and gains notoriety as Chengiz. Therefore, the light
of grace is conferred on both kinds of people, but one type of them does
not use it in the desirable manner.

The grace of guidance of the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.), in his
capacity as Prophet, shines on all companions but they are not the same
(in aptitude). On his own volition, one amongst them turns away from
truth, does not accept guidance and turns criminal. On the other hand,
another benefit from this leadership becomes righteous and attains lofty
levels.

Hence, it was Allah’s wish that man should gain perfection on his own
volition and this applies to man as an individual as well as to the
human society. Mankind, on a singular basis, receives potential from
divinity, but everybody does not realize the promise equally. Only a few
achieve success in fulfilling the promise. As Allah the Omniscient knew
in advance that only these selected few will strive to realize their
potential to the fullest and not squander it away due to their freewill,
He appoints them to the status of Prophethood or Imamate. If Allah knew,
on account of His pre-knowledge, that of all these people who will
realize their potential positively, only one will use it to the maximum
and take it to unparalleled heights and others will not be able to match
him, although they could, He will appoint this sole individual to this
great position and protect him for the same.

It is asked: Why did Allah preserve him? Could He not create another
individual?

We state: Of course, Allah could very much create another individual
with all the desired qualities and characteristics. But this creation
would be a creation by coercion and not the one who had acquired all
perfection through his volition and freewill. Therefore, in reply, we
submit: Allah the Almighty did not preserve Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) at the
time because He knew that after Ibrahim (a.s.), there was another
mortal, who would benefit from God-given potential and ability
voluntarily and become Moosa (a.s.). Hence, the need to preserve Ibrahim
(a.s.) was not called for. The same logic applied for the
nonpreservation of Moosa (a.s.) and Eesa (a.s.). For, Allah knew that
after these two Prophets (a.s.), there was yet another human viz. Hazrat
Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.), who would utilize his potential positively
to the maximum possible limits and attain the status of a complete
worshipper.

Similarly, in not conserving the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.), Allah
knew that he (s.a.w.a.) would be succeeded by Ameerul Momineen Ali ibn
Abi Talib (a.s.), followed by the eleven Imams (a.s.) from his
progeny.

So why did Allah the Almighty preserve Hazrat Baqiyatullah (a.t.f.s.)
and safeguard him? This is because He knew that had He granted me all
the endowed and acquired perfection, I could not become the remnant of
Allah voluntarily. Why? He knew that I have the volition and would
squander away the talent conferred on me. In a single moment, in which
Hazrat Baqiyatullah (a.t.f.s.) acquires perfection voluntarily, I would
not remain even within the confines of piety.

It should be known that Allah the Almighty had conferred huge potential
on Iblis as well. So, why did he not realize this talent and instead
rose in rebellion against his Creator? The answer lies in volition. He
did it on his own freewill. For, the actual meaning of volition and
freewill is that its onus cannot be laid on anybody else and the buck
ends at the person possessing the freewill. This discussion is
applicable to all creation. Therefore, if it is decreed that man should
reach perfection on his own volition, Allah the Almighty knows that none
will reach this esteemed status with success save the son of Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.). Hence, He confers him with all these perfect
attributes and preserves him for the great mission.

This is one view that it is decreed for man to achieve perfection on
his own accord. On a social level too, the same applies, as Allah
declares,

<p dir="rtl">
.« و لو شاء رب.ك لآمن من في الارض كلُّهم جميعا »
</p>

“Had your Lord willed, indeed everyone who is on the earth would have
believed.78”

Thus, as this world is one of volition and the universe follows the
pattern of freewill, the human society moves on its own freewill and
accord. That is, all discussions pertaining to historical determinism
and the future perfect of humanity, particularly in the gatherings of
plagiarists and gleaners, are incorrect.

For, if man is decreed to be free, there can be no reason of coercion
for the perfection of humanity except that we prophesy that as man is
free and wise, he should improve in the future. Although, this
prediction itself is not a definite law yet it can be applicable to a
certain extent.

Let us presume that there is a very brilliant student. But can we say
for sure, that he will turn out to be a doctor, an engineer, or a
religious scholar? Certainly, 78 Surah Yunus (10): 99

there is no such law but we can just make a rough prediction as he is
free, wise and a dutiful child, he will study well. This forecast is
merely circumstantial. Verily, humanity should acquire perfection in
knowledge and science. But it cannot be said with utmost certainty that
it will because there is no proof for it. Allah the Almighty informs
about one reality of humanity but not law. For, the statement ‘the
future of the world will be perfect’ is a law. Sometimes, we forecast
the future but it is not a law. For example, ‘a stone that is thrown up
will come down’ is a scientific law. But to say that the host will
certainly serve us tea is a prediction about an eventuality based on the
host’s volition, not coercion.

Now, it is decreed that the future of humanity will be better,
voluntarily because this world is one of free will. That is, both the
leaders as well as the societies are free. The leader makes himself
perfect on account of his freewill and enters the society. We would like
to explain two levels of humanity and society vis-à-vis volition: One is
the level of conveyance of laws (iblaagh) and second is their
implementation (ijraa).

The stage of conveyance commenced with the raising of the first
prophet, Hazrat Adam (a.s.). It is resolved that man attains the
position of ‘khalifatullah’ and for rendering this position common,
Allah conveys to one individual and commands him to implement these laws
in himself. Thereafter, Allah orders him to convey the message to the
people and as their leader, supervise its implementation. For, on an
individual level, they have to implement themselves but on a social
plane, they require a leader having an upper hand over their actions.

Consequently, Allah the Almighty conveys His religion to Hazrat Adam
(a.s.), who puts these laws into practice on a personal level. But
Allah’s conveyance to Adam (a.s.) and his execution do not belong to a
very high level. In other words, it does not befit Adam (a.s.) to commit
Tark-e-Awla despite possessing inherent infallibility. His knowledge too
is not on par with that of the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.). Yet, Allah
conveys His laws to Adam (a.s.), who implements the same in his person
and has reached to the position of ‘khalifatullah’. But when Adam (a.s.)
ventures out to convey to the people, he encounters difficulties. That
is, none heeds his admonishments. Those who do hear his advices don’t
put them into practice.

Generally, from Adam (a.s.) to Nuh (a.s.), conveyance was incomplete
and was confined to a few principles of monotheism but religion, as a
constitution, was not communicated. Why? Because the people were not
accepting, Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) actively propagated religion to the people
for more than nine hundred and fifty years but failed to complete his
mission. For, whenever he intended to complete his shariah, the people
did not accept. As for the practice aspect, the lesser said the
better.

Well, in such conditions, couldn’t Allah implement His laws forcibly?
No because the custom of Allah is not based on coercion. And had force
and compulsion been the norm, there was no need for all these
difficulties either. He could have set things right merely by an
intention. But He has neither desired nor decreed this mode. Of course,
Allah assists supports and prepares the premises for the actions but
when the actual moment of action arrives, it is the volition of man that
has the final say. Possibly, Allah provides 99 % of the premises but the
moment man intends to select the action, Allah does not push him
forward. For, if Allah pushes him forward, compulsion enters the
scene.

Now, perhaps for this 1 %, man trips and does not perform the deed.
Therefore, it was not decided that Allah should have angels in the earth
as He has plenty of them. Nor was it decided that He should have animals
as donkeys abound. Rather, the decision was to have a wise, intelligent
and free man and hence the entire discussion revolves around humans and
their freedom and independence.

So, we revert to history and ask, “O so and so! Why did you not heed to
Nuh’s (a.s.) advice?” Inevitably, we curse them just as Nuh (a.s.) had
cursed them in his time. We proceed forward and question, “O unjust
ones! Why did you not pay attention to Ibrahim’s (a.s.) admonishments?”
And proceed to deem them to be evil and deviated.

Here, some people step forward and search for excuses on behalf of
Namrud and his followers. They opine, “They did not possess perfect and
complete intelligence and wisdom.” This view is absolutely wrong because
had this been the case, then why would we curse them? If there wisdom
was not yet perfected, as you suggest, and their phase had not yet
arrived in the tunnel of historical determinism, then to provide for
them a universal constitution is invalid and inappropriate while we
firmly believe that Ibrahim’s (a.s.) Shariah was indeed general and
worldwide. Therefore, the pretext of their intelligence and wisdom being
incomplete and imperfect does not hold water.

It should be borne in mind that basically; we don’t have any proof to
claim that generally, today’s man is superior in intelligence, wisdom
and understanding than his counterpart was a thousand years earlier.
This idea too belongs to the school of plagiarism in their effort to
prove evolution in human understanding. They have inculcated this
thought in our minds that today’s man holds superior powers of
comprehension than the humans of a millennium earlier.

Of course, we accept that experimental science has advanced and
generally, science has progressed in some aspects but this development
cannot be generalized for all nations and humans. We don’t have any
proof to substantiate our claim that the Englishman of today is superior
in intelligence and understanding than the Englishman of say, the
eighteenth century. On the contrary, sociologists are unanimous in their
view that in this last century, the British have had a steady decline.
Moreover, there are quite a few nations, who while climbing the
development staircase, suddenly came tumbling down to a reckless fall.
Was Iran more progressive during the Qaajaar dynasty or in the Safavide
rule? Certainly, Iran was much better in the Safavide era in knowledge,
science, philosophy, arts, construction, social security and
religiousness than it was during the Qaajaar reign.

Therefore, the Prophets (a.s.) arrived to convey the message but
encountered difficulties in the same. Occasionally, they did manage to
gain some amount of triumph in their aim. Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) was
certainly more successful in his mission of conveyance than his
ancestor, Hazrat Nuh (a.s.). The reason for his success was two-fold:
One, Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) certainly strove more and two, the
willingness to accept was found more in his people.

Of course, it cannot be said that the nation of Ibrahim (a.s.)
possessed more understanding and intelligence that that of Hazrat Nuh
(a.s.) and hence, the former was more successful in his mission. No! Man
is free and independent and on the basis of this very freedom, he
accepted the call of Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.). Is it not possible that in a
second, man decides to reform himself and change the course of history?
Such instances abound in history when individuals have changed its path.
Hence, the acceptance of the nation of Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) to his call
helped the generations that followed and pushed forward the premises for
conveying the message to a certain extent.

Hazrat Moosa (a.s.), in his time, conveyed the message to the Bani
Israel to the extent that its implementation was possible for him.
Hence, he was the only Prophet who was successful in both the levels of
his mission, conveyance as well as implementation to a certain extent
and consequently, could give some shape to the concept called Ummah, a
task in which Hazrat Ibrahim could not achieve much. It was precisely
for this reason that Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) could provide salvation for his
people from Egypt as they paid heed to his advices. But after they
reached Mount Sinai, these very people who had reached to the state of
implementation, suddenly made a volte-face, in a way that they even
refuted his message. Not only they denied Hazrat Moosa’s (a.s.)
commandments, they even challenged his God and started worshipping the
calf. This was a turnaround of the worst kind.
If perfection was forced, there was no possibility of turning back and
if the journey towards perfection was a certainty and determined by
history, surely the people of Israel would have never betrayed Hazrat
Moosa (a.s.) and worshipped the calf. Thus, when Moosa (a.s.) returned
from the Mount Tur, he had to start his mission all over again. All the
tasks, right from the basics of purification to the narration of
beliefs, commenced afresh and hence, the delay in implementation of the
message. Although, it was decided earlier that Moosa (a.s.) would take
the Bani Israel from the desert of Sinai to the Promised Land, he
resisted from doing so. For, he observed that the mission has not yet
been conveyed, thereby making the ultimate implementation and
promulgation impossible. Therefore, he had no option but to keep the
Bani Israel in the desert of Sinai for forty years.

During this time, Moosa (a.s.) departed from this world. Yusha Ibn Nun
(a.s.), his successor, took upon himself the mantle of completing the
mission of his predecessor. But the moment they arrived in Palestine,
the Israelites turned apostate again. Dawood (a.s.) succeeded Yusha
(a.s.) and gained a semblance of success in both the levels of his
mission, conveyance as well as implementation. He handed over his
kingdom to his son, Sulaiman (a.s.), who formed an ideal form of divine
government, albeit limited. It was during his reign that the entire Bani
Israel had become monotheists and obeyed Allah’s commands. In other
words, most of them were Allah’s caliphs on the earth.

Sulaiman’s (a.s.) successors wished to propagate this message to the
other parts of the globe but were trapped at the level of conveyance and
propagation. Consequently, those who had moved from the stage of
conveyance to that of implementation once again turned their backs on
Allah’s religion and became apostates. Bani Israel were again on the
road to decline and killing of Prophets became the order of the day.
Things reached to a state that they killed Prophets within 24 hours,
despite the fact that these (Bani Israel) were the very people who had
attained the state of divine caliphate not very long ago.

History flips once again. Bakht al-Nasr, the tyrant emperor, invades
and attacks Palestine. He turns it into ruins, rendering naught all the
good works of the previous Prophets. As a result, the entire mission had
to be started all over again. Now, Hazrat Eesa (a.s.) arrives on the
scene and starts to convey the mission not on a global scale but only
for the Bani Israel. Unfortunately, he fails in his efforts.

Finally, prophethood reaches to the seal of the Prophets, the Messenger
of Islam, Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.). The secret of his success lies in
the fact that he could convey the general principles worldwide. That is,
he managed to do what Ibrahim (a.s.), Moosa (a.s.) and Eesa (a.s.) could
not. Hence, he was successful in implementing the message to a nation,
viz. the Arabs.

When the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) departed from this transient
world, he had accomplished his mission of conveyance, a task in which
the previous Prophets (a.s.) were unsuccessful. In other words, Moosa
(a.s.) could not hand over to his brother Harun (a.s.) whatever was
necessary for humanity. The reason for this being that we see that the
successors of Hazrat Moosa (a.s.) were once again raised for Prophethood
to renew their link with their Creator and to convey His message to the
people.

But the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) completed the message with the
appointment of Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). Had he
(s.a.w.a.) not done so, the conveyance of his message would have
remained incomplete. Allah the Almighty commands in the Holy Quran, .«
يا أيهاالرُّسولُ بلِّغ ما اُنزل اليك من ربك و ان لم تفعل فما بلَّغت
رسالته »

“O Messenger! Convey what has been sent down upon you from your Lord.

And if you fail to do so, then as if you have not conveyed His message
at all.79” Thus, with the appointment of Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi
Talib (a.s.), the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) completed the conveyance
and departed from this world. This explains the reason for the
non-necessity of prophets and messengers after him (s.a.w.a.) because
the primary duty of the Prophet is to convey the message, a task duly
performed by the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.). The method of this
conveyance was that he (s.a.w.a.) conveyed the general principles on a
general level himself and on the special plane, he (s.a.w.a.) appointed
Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).

Ali (a.s.) came forward to convey as well as execute the mission of the
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.). Had he not encountered resistance and
hostility and been allowed to further the mission of the Messenger of
Islam (s.a.w.a.), for say approximately ten years for conveyance and
twenty years for execution and implementation, the scenario would have
been completely different than what it is today. Ameerul Momineen Ali
Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) himself says in this regard, .« اما واللّه لو ثُني
لي الوساده لحكمت بين اهل التَّوراه بتوراتهم و بين اهل الانجيل بانجيلهم »
“By Allah! Had I been allowed (to do my job), I would have judged
between the people of Torah with their Torah, with the people of Injeel
with their Injeel.80”

In another place, he (a.s.) mentions,
“Had you permitted me and did not place obstacles in my path, I would
have manifested the bounties of the earth and the skies, extricated the
treasures of the mines and made the bounties of the heavens descend for
you.” In other words, I would have arranged this world in a proper and
worthy manner for you. Unfortunately, they did not allow him to do so
and placed all sorts of hurdles and hindrances in his path. Why did they
do this? Were they not having any intelligence? No! They did have
intelligence but it was accompanied with volition, which led them to
their lust for power and consequent destruction of all. This matter is
clearer in our times today when people, despite their knowledge and
understanding, crave for power and social status, and in the process,
don’t hesitate to even murder their closest of friends and
acquaintances. How does man get so barbaric? It’s quite natural and
should not amaze one at all. The gist of the discussion is that Allah
has not created man as angel and this 79 Surah Maaedah (5): 67

80 Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 40, pp. 136, 144

should not be forgotten. Hence, it should also not be surprising as to
why some of the senior companions of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) behaved in
such a manner. When power became the focal point, dispute and
differences were easily the order of the day. Coups, conspiracies,
uprisings, etc. were common and finally, they even marched to the house
of Hazrat Zahra (s.a.), the daughter of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.). All
these happenings and occurrences are not at all surprising for us,
particularly those who, in our times, are witnessing similar phenomena.
Thus, we observed instances that a Prophet conveys his mission statement
but when he intends to execute the same, obstacles are placed in his
path. They even go the extent of creating hurdles in the conveyance of
the message itself and worse, distort the memorandum of the Messenger of
Islam (s.a.w.a.). Hence, the wheel that was brought in motion by the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), had its control been in the hands of Ameerul
Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.), things would have occurred as planned
and desired. They not only prevented the progress of the wheel but also
turned it backwards and consequently, “All the people turned away (from
Islam) except three.81”

The Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) had moved the caravan rapidly but
they attacked it midway and plundered it. As a result, only three people
remained on true Islam after him. They (enemies of Ali) became the
biggest hurdles in the path of those who were moving towards the
position of ‘khalifatullahi’ and therefore, as per our traditions, they
are responsible for the sins of the jinn and the men. This is precisely
the case. For, all the efforts of the Prophets and Messengers had
reached to the fruit bearing stage when these transgressors arrived on
the scene and rendered everything naught. What a turnaround that during
Moaviyah’s rule,

when he heard the Azaan (call for prayers) he remarked, “What is this
call that is repeated throughout the day? Abu Bakr came and went but his
name is not mentioned in it. Umar and Usman too arrived and departed but
their names are not cited. Then why is the name of Muhammad repeated so
often in it via the call, “I bear witness that Muhammad is the messenger
of Allah? By Allah! I will bury this name forever.82” The conclusion of
the talk is that the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) arrived and
conveyed.

Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) too came to complete the
message and implement it. But both the conveyance as well its
implementation was brought to a grinding halt. Thus, when the conveyance
was stopped on a general level, then what would Ali (a.s.) do? Was it
possible to implement without conveyance or completion of the message?
It was here that Ali (a.s.) and Zahra (s.a.) stood up and decided to at
least prevent the wheel from going backwards to the maximum possible
extent. Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) said to Ali (a.s.), “O Ali! Don’t you intend
to rise and demand your right?” It is worth mentioning that it was not
the intention of 81 Ibid, vol. 28, pp. 238-239

82 Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, Ibn Abi al-Hadid al-Motazeli, vol. 5, p.
129

Hazrat Zahra (s.a.) to procure the right of her husband for worldly
benefits.

Rather, she just spoke out the query of the people throughout history
when they would ask that if Ali (a.s.) was right, why did he not rise
and demand his due? Why did he just sit in his house and take things as
it is? Incidentally, at that very moment, the voice of the Azaan was
heard and Ali (a.s.) asked, “O Zahra! Don’t you desire that this voice
(of Azaan) survives? At least, things are maintained to the level in
which the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) had brought them. If you want
them to remain up to this mark, then let the line be that I have drawn.”
Thus, Ali (a.s.) and Zahra (s.a.) tried to preserve the message to the
extent it was conveyed by the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) and strove
incessantly to prevent distortions from creeping in the Islamic Shariah
to the best of their abilities. The Caliphate introduced innovations in
religion almost by the day in the name of Islam and as a result, the
infallible Imams (a.s.) had to wage a continuous battle against these
innovations and distortions.

When his reign commenced, Yazid intended to reverse all those things
that the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) had brought, to the period of
Jaahiliyyah. This was a major step towards degeneration and destruction
of Islam. Accordingly, Imam Husain (a.s.) realized that there was only
one way to stop this effort to weaken and destroy Islam. That is, he had
to revolt and be martyred in its way so that this attempt fails and
Allah’s religion survives. So, Imam Husain (a.s.) took the desired steps
and protected the endeavours of all the Prophets, Messengers and
successors from Adam (a.s.) till himself and became the heir of Adam
(a.s.).

<p dir="rtl">
.« السلام عليك يا وارث آدم صفوه اللّه »
</p>

“Peace be on you, O heir of Adam, the chosen one of Allah.”

Therefore, the reason behind Imam Husain’s (a.s.) martyrdom was neither
government nor divine love nor all the things discussed previously.
Rather, he (a.s.) rose and sacrificed his life to protect Islam. His
great sacrifice ensured that the message of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
was not completely obliterated and Quran remained amongst the midst of
the people.

Of course, besides Imam Husain (a.s.), Imam Sajjad (a.s.) and the
prisoners of Karbala, Imam Baqer (a.s.) and Imam Sadeq (a.s.) also
partook in this holy war. Imam Baqer (a.s.) and Imam Sadeq (a.s.) took
due advantage from the martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s.) and the mental
state of the masses to convey the message. That is, whatever the
Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) had conveyed but had not reached to Mecca
from Medina, they propagated it throughout the Islamic world. They
disseminated matters related to Quranic sciences, divine verses and
Islamic laws throughout the Islamic sphere.

Hence, from the time of Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) till
the era of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), the conveyance of divine laws
was the task of the infallible Imams (a.s.). During this period, the
Islamic laws that Allah wanted to convey was transmitted in phases. The
mode of conveyance was such that it was firmly established in the minds
as well as the hearts of the companions and the commonality. Slowly but
surely, these discussions took the form of books and treatises. This was
the crucial phase that did not occur during the time of Hazrat Ibrahim
(a.s.) and Hazrat Moosa (a.s.). In other words, the Imams (a.s.)
dictated the laws and discussions while their companions jotted them
down. Of course, these companions did not belong to the celestial world.
Rather, they were all humans possessing volition and freedom.

Among these independent and free individuals, Imam Husain (a.s.) had
just seventy-two. Imam Ali (a.s.) had only four. Therefore, when Ali
(a.s.) said, “O people! I wanted to reveal that which is concealed in my
heart. I have a lot treasured in it. I want to teach you all these.
Listen to it and note it down that you may derive benefit from it in the
future and also allow others to profit from it”, they did not pay heed
to his advice and some even mocked at it.

Didn’t Ali (a.s.) have even a small gathering to understand his
teachings and fathom the treasures of his knowledge? Occasionally, he
(a.s.) used to take a lone individual like Kumail Ibn Ziyad al-Nakhai
(a.r.) to the desert and teach him a few things. So, he (a.s.) did not
have the required people. Why? Because the people are free and it is
decreed that Allah will not deal with people through coercion.

Imam Sadeq (a.s.) had four thousand (4000) students, who listened to
him but only twenty or thirty of these could toe his line. They wrote
books and had their gaze fixed on the future. But for implementation of
the message, the number didn’t suffice. For, at the level of conveyance,
conflict of interests is absent and the only criteria are comprehension
of concepts and mental preparedness. But at the stage of execution and
implementation, conflict of interests does occur. Consequently, not more
than seventy-two companions remain and others flee the scene. Imam Sadeq
(a.s.) had four thousand students at the level of conveyance and there
were many others spread out in various nooks and corners. Sometimes, a
group of these used to come and enquire from him, “O son of Allah’s
Messenger! Since you have already conveyed the message, now rise and
ensure its implementation!”

Imam (a.s.) asked, “With whose assistance?”
They used to reply, “With our support. We have a huge support base in
Khorasan (a province in Iran) and they all send blessings (salawaat) for
your well-being.”
Imam Sadeq (a.s.) asked the man from Khorasan, “Are you among these
diehard supporters?”

He (a.s.) replied, “Yes, as I am their representative.”

Imam Sadeq (a.s.) remarked, “Fine” and ordered the pit-fire to be lit.
When the order was duly executed, he (a.s.) asked the man to repeat his
claim. He repeated, “You have a huge following in Khorasan and I am one
of them. So what are you waiting for and why don’t you rise in revolt?”
Imam (a.s.) commanded him to jump in the pit-fire. On hearing this
command, he trembled and questioned, “Are you serious?”

Imam (a.s.) retorted, “Of course. I am serious.”

He asked again, “Are you really serious?” Imam (a.s.) shot back, “Well,
it’s an order.” He queried, “Is this command obligatory (waajib) or
recommended (mustahabb)?”

Imam (a.s.) replied, “Obligatory.” He asked again, “Then what about my
wife and children? What is the logic behind such a command? Certainly,
such an order is not in conformity with rationality!”

Imam (a.s.) thundered, “This is an order. Go and jump in the pit-fire.”
He said apologetically, “As of now, it is not possible for me to obey
your command. Please excuse me!”

Imam (a.s.) accepted and said, “Good enough. Now wait for a while.”
Meanwhile, a companion of Imam (a.s.) entered and saluted, “Peace be on
you, O son of Allah’s Messenger!” Imam (a.s.) replied to his salutation,
“Peace be on you too! Go and jump in the pit-fire.” Although he had just
entered, without the slightest of refrain, he obeyed the command of Imam
(a.s.) and jumped in the pit-fire83.

Why did Imam Sadeq (a.s.) take such a test? He did so because Ameerul
Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) came at the stage of conveyance and
passed through it successfully. But at the level of implementation, the
best of his friends betrayed him and (during the battle of Siffin)
refused to fight, justifying that since the enemy had raised the Quran,
it was haraam (forbidden) for them to fight.

Therefore, Ali (a.s.) did convey the message successfully but at the
level of execution, he could not meet with much success due to the lack
of co-operation from ignorant among his followers. It was precisely this
emotion that he (a.s.) expressed in the following statement:

<p dir="rtl">
.« . قصم ظهري رجلان : عالم. متهتِّك و جاهلٌ متنسك »
</p>

“Two persons broke my back: The scholar, who tore the veil apart84 and
the pious ignorant worshipper.85”

83 Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 47, p. 123. Of course, I have not stated the
exact wordings of the incident, mentioning only its gist. Also,
traditions bearing such concepts are numerous while we have narrated
just one to explain the point. (The remaining part of this tradition
will be stated in the future).

84 That is, they did not care to preserve our secrets 85 Munyatul
Mureed, by Shahid Saani, p. 61

So, while Moaviyah on one hand, as an internal factor, acted as an
obstacle in the implementation of the message, Shareeh Qazi and Hasan
Basri acted on the other. They did not desire that the implementation
must see the light of the day.

For, some could not understand while others saw it going against their
interests. Now, as the implementation and execution could not
materialize and actualize, does it mean that we go and sit in our
houses? Certainly not. The best thing is at least to convey the message
even if implementation is not possible. Keep conveying till one
individual acts upon it, followed by one family, one city, till the
entire universe acts upon it. Who? Me Imam Husain (a.s.), me Imam Sajjad
(a.s.) will implement it in this manner. Well, if they resist our
implementation, then what should we do? We will continue to do our duty
(conveyance) and will not sit idle. In the process, we will put the
entire blame of non-implementation directly on the society, i.e. on
individuals as well as the society as a whole. As the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.) had warned,

<p dir="rtl">
.« كلُّكم راعٍ . و كُلُّكم مسؤولٌ عن رعي.ته »
</p>

“All of you are shepherds and all of you will be questioned about your
flock (of sheep).86”

Thus, till the time of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) the process of
conveyance was completed. That is, whatever had to be conveyed was duly
done and the argument on them finalized so much so that no era could
object against Allah on the Day of Judgment that the message did not
reach to them.

In the time of the infallible Imams (a.s.), their students had compiled
four hundred books captioned, “Usul Arba’ Maeh” (Four Hundred
Principles), comprising of divine laws and injunctions. This task of
compilation and propagation of these principles was performed by the
students of Imam Sadeq (a.s.). But suddenly, in the last days of the
Imam’s (a.s.) life, some events took place that only became obstructive
factors but led to the people’s deviation. Who played this mischief? The
court of the Abbaside (dynasty) caused this harm in the name of Islam
and created pseudo-scholars like Abu Hanifah. This man arrived on the
scene and became a spoke in the wheel and a huge obstacle in the
implementation of the divine message. But Imam Baqer (a.s.) and Imam
Sadeq (a.s.) had performed their task in such manner that there was no
further need of an infallible conveyor due to the presence of conveyance
and message at social level that was to be completed in the time of Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). That is, everything was now in black and white
till the period of the eleventh Imam’s Imamate. It was during his time
that these writings took the form of books and collection of traditions
arrived on the social scene. Students of Imams (a.s.) 86 Mustadrak
Safinah al-Behaar by Ayatullah Ali Shahroodi Namazi (a.r.), vol. 4, p.
188; Nahj al-Fasaahah by Abul Qasim Paaendeh

taught in various schools and the message of all Prophets, from Adam
(a.s.) to the Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) was conveyed in detail to
the various nooks and corners of the Islamic world. If the unbelievers
will ask Allah on the Day of Judgment as to where was the true Islam?
They will be replied that in these very Muslim countries.

Then, the message was conveyed but why did implementation fail? For,
had they co-operated during the time of the Messenger of Islam
(s.a.w.a.), execution too would have been accomplished. In other words,
the task that will be achieved by Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in the future
will take effect whenever preparedness and mutual co-operation is found
among the people.

Sometimes, we inform about a real incident that has occurred and at
other times, we intend to outline the duties. For example, occasionally
we state that it is not your obligation to heat the tea now but to wait
till dusk and only then heat the tea. (Assuming it is Ramazan). Thus,
even if the guest is sitting and expecting to be served but if you are
asked, ‘why you aren’t heating the tea?’ you will reply, ‘because I am
not supposed to do it before its scheduled time’. If you are asked, ‘How
much time is left for dusk?’ You will reply, ‘Now, it is ten to seven
and still another hour left for dusk.’ Probably, you have made all the
preliminiary arrangements to prepare tea but will not take any further
steps to serve it.

Sometimes too, the time factor is not an issue and whenever the tea is
prepared, we will readily drink it. It is under such circumstances that
we say, ‘Mister, rise and prepare tea.’ If it is asked, ‘Why you have
not yet prepared the tea?’ You will reply, ‘The arrangements are not yet
provided for.’ Here, we shall ask about a fact, ‘When will you provide
tea for us?’ The answer will be, ‘Another hour or so.’ Now, is this hour
required because that is the time remaining for tea to be drunk, or
because the arrangements will require an hour? This information is from
the facts.

Similarly, if the discussion pertains to the facts that if the
government of Ahle Bait (a.s.) belongs to the last era, and that Mahdi
will reform the global society in it, and to longevity, and the
lengthiness of occultation, then all these are facts, nothing else. That
is, we cannot say that for the next two thousand years, there will be no
news. For, it is said that if the required preparedness were found
during the times of the previous Imams (a.s.), this revolution would
have indeed taken place then. Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.) had remarked
that if his companions would have co-operated with and supported him, he
would have brought about this universal government. Unfortunately, they
did neither. This is a fact and an undeniable reality. But this teamwork
will certainly occur in the future.

Explaining the reasons for his peace treaty, Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba
(a.s.) wrote a letter to Moaviyah, the contents of which are indeed a
very important lesson for all of us. He (a.s.) wrote,

<p dir="rtl">
.« . لو وجدت. صابرين عارفين بحقّي غير م.نكرين, ما سلَّمت. لك و لا
اعطيتُك ما تريد »
</p>

“Had I found friends who were patient and aware of my rights and not
denying (my position), I would never have submitted to you nor would I
have handed over to you what you desired.87”

Here, two characteristics have been mentioned: Patience and Awareness
because there are many who are aware of the rights but flee on the day
of battle. Also, there are many who are patient and steadfast but are
complete devoid of any recognition and awareness. Hence, Imam Mujtaba
(a.s.) remarked that if I found companions who possessed these traits,
certainly I would never have bowed down before you and would not have
given to you what I had to. So, why did things reached to such a state?
Because companions with these qualities were non-existent, the same
concept was relayed by the following Imams (a.s.) like Imam Husain
(a.s.), Imam Sajjad (a.s.), Imam Baqer (a.s.), etc. That is, if we had
companions with the aforementioned characteristics and attributes, Bani
Umayyah would not succeed in usurping our rights.

In some instances, the Imams (a.s.) have stated to some of their
friends that had you not fled and allowed the Bani Umayyah to rule, our
rights would not have been squandered. If you had not co-operated and
assisted the Bani Umayyah, they would never succeed in grabbing our
rights88.

To sum up the discussion, the conclusion that we reached to was that
man is decreed to acquire perfection on his own volition. Man’s volition
is directly proportionate to the ability gifted to him by Allah. Allah
knew from before that even if He granted this capacity and blessings,
which He has gifted to Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.) to you and me, we will
not become him and he is the one and only. Allah is not helpless that He
cannot create by force but as the decree is for volition, then anything
other than that will not take place. Therefore, but for the holy
existence of Hazrat Baqiyatullah (a.t.f.s.), no other complete man
exists on the face of the earth, worthy of implementing the divine laws
for the formation of an universal government. And hence, He has
preserved and protected him. Another question is that whether
preservation of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is on the basis of compulsion or
freewill? It should be known that a certain degree of difficulties and
calamities in death reaches to everybody directly from the side of
Allah. The Almighty keeps away these calamities and difficulties from
Imame- Zaman (a.t.f.s.). These mishaps, to an extent, resulting in the
death of a person, 87 Behaarul Anwaar, vol. 44, p. 45

88 Al-Ghaibah, No’mani, p.177

are from the side of other existents due to their own volition and if
Allah wants, He can seize their freewill. In this case, freewill will be
converted to compulsion. For example, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is present
over here and I have a weapon by which I intend to assassinate him (God
forbid). But my weapons fail at the time of perpetration of this heinous
crime and consequently, this act of God is compulsion. Or, I raise my
sword to severe his head from his body but Allah paralyses my hand and
again I fail in my attempt to murder him. This too is a form of
compulsion.

So, in the protection of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), Allah the Almighty
keeps away all those factors that can effectively cause his death.
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) also keeps at bay those things that emanate from
his own side and can become the reason of his death. Moreover, those
reasons that are from the side of the people and can cause his death,
are dispelled in two ways: One, he (a.t.f.s.) disappears from the eyes
of the people so that they cannot cause any harm unto him and second, he
appears and anybody who intends to injure him in any form, his weapon
rusts and becomes ineffective.

The second option leads to compulsion. Then, what should be the mode of
protection that Allah should adopt to preserve His one and only present
proof (hujjah)? The answer is only occultation (ghaibah). Why? The
reason being that if he appears, he will be killed and hence, he went
into hiding “For he feared assassination.89” Of course, this fear is not
because he wants to live more so that he can enjoy life. Rather, he has
a commitment to keep for which mankind needs him desperately and hence,
survival is a necessity. Here, they (the skeptics) ask: Why doesn’t he
reappear to fulfill his commitment? Why doesn’t he come now? Or why he
did not arrive four to five hundred years or a thousand years ago? We
reply: Well, he would have come a thousand and four hundred years ago
but the people did not co-operate with and assist him.

They ask again: Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) came to this world a thousand
and hundred years ago, then how could he keep his commitment four
hundred years ago? We reply: Fourteen hundred years ago, he appeared in
the form of Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.) and intended to fulfill Allah’s
promise but the people neither supported nor assisted him in this
gigantic task.

Here, I shall conclude the discussion by reading out a beautiful and
interesting treatise written with the help of one of the sisters.

Approximately, six to seven years ago, I had been to Langrud (a
province in Iran), where there was a congregation of women. When I
entered the gathering, I requested the ladies present that if anybody
had a question, she can feel free to ask. Most of the participants of
this congress were the daughters of the teachers. A girl, who was
actually a daughter of one of the participants, expressed her desire to
ask a question, which I duly conceded. She asked, “What is the reply to
89 Al-Ghaibah, No’mani, p. 177

the statement made by George Jordache concerning Ali (a.s.)?” I
questioned, “Which statement?” She replied, “The same statement that you
had written two to three weeks back on a card.”

The incident was that we had decided to hold a function in Tehran to
celebrate the birthday of Ameerul Momineen Ali (a.s.). On the invitation
card printed for the occasion, we had quoted an attractive sentence from
George Jordache, a Christian, regarding Ali (a.s.). The sentence went as
follows: ‘O world! What’s wrong with you? Why don’t you gather all your
strength and bestow on us one Ali (a.s.) in every era, with his thought,
his heart, his speech and his sword?90’ We had printed this statement
behind the card and the girl who had asked the question received this
invitation. Now, when we were visiting Langrud, she encountered us with
her query concerning the statement.

I thought that the girl wanted me to elaborate on this statement in my
response. Therefore, I started discussing about George Jordache and a
comparison of thoughts of Ali (a.s.) with the charter of the United
Nations, followed with the view of George Jordache. Finally, we reached
to the printed statement in which he addresses the world that instead of
giving us all these philosophers, thinkers, politicians, scientists,
rights activists, etc. and all the strength that you have gathered in
the form of Einstein, Galileo, Abu Ali Seena, etc., if you (world) would
have given us only ONE Ali, everything would fall in place.

After being at pains to explain my viewpoint for about half an hour,
the young girl remarked, “Mr. Iftekharzadeh, this is not the reply!” I
retorted, “Are you trying to imply that you, a young girl from Langrud,
while sitting here, want to reply to every statement that is being made
throughout the world?” The girl shot back, “Do you mean that this has no
answer?” I answered, “No! How can such a beautiful statement have any
answer? It is glorifying Ali (a.s.) and whoever listens to it,
appreciates it.” The young girl audaciously remarked, “I have written a
response to this statement of George Jordache. If you permit, I will
read it out for those present.” Without deliberating for even a second,
I said, “Read!”
The young girl started reading. Initially, I was inattentive but after
she had read two or three lines, I realized that what she was reading
made considerable sense. After four or five lines, I saw that she
herself was gripped by emotions, tears flowing down her cheeks. After
eight or nine lines, I appreciated that the entire gathering was crying.
I would like to confess, as there is nothing to hide from you, that
after ten to twelve lines, I was in tears myself.

The article was not of more than twenty lines but replete with content.
Later, I requested her to pen it down for me and I still have her
handwriting preserved with me. She was a student of Class V but at
laying her hands on my invitation card, she wrote a riposte to the
statement of George Jordache. The content of the rejoinder was as
follows:

90 Imam Ali: The Voice of Human Justice, George Jordache, vol. 1
“George Jordache has made a statement concerning Ali Ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.) (and reproduced the statement mentioned earlier). But I would
like to say to him: Mr. George Jordache! You are lying! You don’t desire
Ali! Ali’s God did give you Ali but you placed him under house arrest
for twenty-five years and went after others. Thereafter, in the battle
of Siffin, you left him stranded, burrowing a lone furrow!

George Jordache! You don’t desire Ali! Ali’s God gave you another Ali
after the first Ali but you poisoned him and forced him into submission
before Moaviyah. George Jordache! You don’t desire Ali! Ali’s God gave
you a third Ali but you left him alone in the desert of Karbala crying
out for help, “Is there a monotheist who fears Allah concerning our
rights? Is there a refuge that hopes for divine reward in providing us
protection?91” But you raised his severed head on the spear and obeyed
the instructions of Yazid!


