The Future of the Universe in the View of Religions and Schools of Thought
==========================================================================

Basically, what is the view of humanity concerning its future? What are
the views and opinions of scholars, congresses and schools of thought?
How do we picture the future of mankind, a journey that started from
times ancient? Is the belief in Mahdaviyyat, a progressive creed or a
regressive one?

We observe that most religions, philosophical and even political
schools consider the future of mankind to be better than his past.
Therefore, all the worldviews, heavenly or otherwise, constantly strive
to improve the future upon the past and the present.

Fundamentally, the proposition of Utopia (ideal state) in Platonic
philosophy, before Christ and prior to Islam, is a style of
philosophical development. Of course, it is possible that some of its
characteristics may be imaginary in the view of modern sociologists.
Nevertheless, the four pillars of an ideal state, as propounded by
Plato, ‘justice, chastity, wisdom and bravery’ are in themselves a sign
of positive futurism.

In these four bases, wisdom accompanies chastity (or knowledge with
ethics) and bravery supplements justice. (To borrow an ancient
philosophical term) why is the world limping today? The reason is that
because one or even two of these pillars are found wanting in the modern
society. Moreover, an ignorant society is the one that is devoid of all
these four essentials.

These four bases are the factors of perfection for an individual as
well as a society. The lack of any one of these signifies a serious
shortcoming. An illiterate person, a coward scholar, a courageous
scholar but devoid of chastity, a courageous, chaste scholar but unjust
and oppressive, are all examples of imperfect persons. The presence of
only one or few and not all the four pillars does not lead to
perfection. But if these four attributes or Utopia (using Plato’s term)
are available in any single individual, such a person is deemed to be a
perfect. And if these were found in a society, it would be considered as
an ideal state. Hence, Utopia (ideal state) is positive futurism.

Most philosophical works that deal with politics and civics are based
on this hypothesis. Sadruddin Shirazi2 in the end of his book, ‘Al-Mabda
wa al-Maad’ has brought a discussion concerning the backdrop of social
governance. The gist of his view is regarding the benefits that society
will enjoy, which possesses these four pillars. If an individual bears
these four attributes, he is a leader and if a leader is devoid of any
one of these four traits, he will no longer remain a leader. Similarly,
a society that has all of these four qualities prevalent in it can 2
Also known as Mulla Sadra, the great Iranian philosopher

become a leader and guide for other societies. Lastly, if these four
elements are found in the world, the entire humanity will move towards
perfection and the state of affairs shall enjoy considerable
desirability.

This thought, as discussed briefly, perhaps may have its roots in
divine religions but philosophical schools have also endorsed it. The
Zoroastrians view the future as positive, labeling it as ‘the victory of
Ahura Mazda’s army over the forces of Ahreman (devil)’. In Hinduism too
the future is considered to be bright and prosperous.

Last, but not the least, even the materialist schools of thought,
headed by Marxism, foresees the future to be better than the past,
albeit using different terms like single family patterns, co-operative
ownership, joint government, etc. Anyhow, they never opine that the
future is doomed. Rather, they suggest that future will tread the path
of perfection but there are differences in the interpretation of the
term ‘perfection’, some of which we have already hinted at above3.

Thus, we must accept this as a principle. Regardless of the sect that
we belong to Shias, Sunnis, or any other faction of humanity, we must
look at the future positively and search for the basis of this positive
outlook. Basically, due to his humanity, man feels a sense of
responsibility and accountability, which persuades and coaxes him to
search and investigate.

Had the future been damned, there would be no incentive for the
scientists to seek and spread science. The same would apply for the
reformers, philosophers and all other advocates of some thought or
science. For, the research and investigation of all these scholars is
based on the fact that they consider the future to be positive and the
way to reach to this zenith is this particular way. Thus, had there been
no peak to attain, there would be no need for any guidance or
leadership.

This is basic principle and we Shias among the followers of all sects
and schools of thought, hold our heads high and declare that we
subscribe to such a creed. That is, we consider the future to be
positive. Moreover, our positive outlook is to that extent that if we
are sure that tomorrow is the Day of Judgment and only one day remains
from the end of this world, yet we will say that the final outcome will
be implemented. This last day will be prolonged to a length so that
sufficient time is there for the accomplishment of this final result.

The Messenger of Islam (s.a.w.a.) has conveyed the aforementioned
concept in a beautiful tradition, come down in successive transmission
(tawaatur) and recorded in the books of both Shias as well as Sunnis.
The tradition goes as follows:

3 These lectures were prior to the breaking up of Soviet Russia
(U.S.S.R.) and other East European countries. But this disintegration is
in no way contradictory to the discussion that the future of mankind is
better than the past.

لَو لَم ي.بقُ مِنُ الدنيا الا يوم واحد لطول اللّه ذلك اليوم حتي يبعثَ
فيهِ رج.لاً مِن أمتي و مِن أهل » .« بيتي ي.واطئُ اسم.ه. اسمي يملأ الأرض.
قسطاً و عدلاً كَما ملِئت ظُلماً و جورا “If there remains only a day for
the world to come to an end, Allah will prolong this day till He raises
a man from my progeny/nation. His name will be my name. He will fill the
earth with justice and equity as it would have fraught with injustice
and oppression.4”

Therefore, even if all the angels of the heavens descend and declare
that tomorrow is the Day of Judgment, we will contend that since the
reformer, who will fill the earth with justice and equity, has not yet
appeared, this day will be prolonged to an extent that the promise is
fulfilled. Yes, we are so positive about the future that if all
scientists come together and prophesize that tonight the earth will
split and come to an end, we will not believe it. We will refute it as
we have firm conviction in the Prophet’s (s.a.w.a.) prediction and
hence, despite all threats of doom, will sleep comfortably.

The following sentences of Doa-e-Ahd are the best proofs of a positive
outlook about the future:

<p dir="rtl">
اَللّهم إن حالَ و ب.يني و بينه. الموت. الّذي جعلتَه. علي عِبادِك. حتماً
م.قضِياً فأَخرِجني مِن قَبري » .« م.ؤتزراً كَفني, شاهِراً س.يفي, م.جرداً
قناتي, م.لبياً د.عوه الداعي في الحاضر و البادي
</p>

“O Allah! If death comes between me and him (Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.)
reappearance), which you have made compulsory and obligatory upon your
servants, then bring me out from my grave, (in the condition that) I am
wearing my shroud, my sword naked, my spear uncovered, responding to the
call of the caller in cities as well as deserts.5”

You saw how lovely and beautiful the statements of this supplication
are! This discussion has come in various sources. In these books, apart
from the prophesies of the heavenly religions, glad-tidings of the
various schools are also reflected. There are scholars, who have
researched on this subject, and extracted forecasts on this topic from
the Old Testament, the New Testament, the Avestha, Indian scriptures,
etc.

Some have even investigated and compiled books written on Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) from the first century of Islam till date. Hence, we have
books that have been written in the first century and another book,
which I have in hand right 4 Muntakhabul Asar by Lutfullah Safi
Gulpaygani, p. 153

5 Mafaateeh al-Jenaan by Shaikh Abbas Qummi (a.r.)


