The View of Traditions
======================

Traditions narrated from the Holy Prophet (s.a.) in this regard can be
classified into three broad categories. The first group of traditions is
those that talk about the immediate successor of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.). The second group talks about all his successors while the third
discusses about his last successor, the reformer of Islam and the
promised one of humanity. Under the last category, various topics can be
initiated and traditions can be further classified under them.

12 Maaedah: 3
13 Qasas: 5,6

Initially, it is necessary for us to know that for which type of
discussions should we refer to the traditions and on what topics we can
rely on them and for what kind of people should these traditions be
quoted. For example, can we use traditions as an argument for a youth
who cannot digest the concept of longevity of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) or
somebody who thinks that what sort of social problems could be solved by
believing in Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)?

Certainly not, because such persons are absolutely unwilling to enter
the field of traditions. Their question or skepticism is not related to
traditions. Even if we quote two thousand traditions for them to prove
longevity, they will raise yet another question: Why have the traditions
supported a concept that is contradictory to science and intellect?

Then in what circumstances or on what occasions should we rely on
traditions?

If we consider the appointment of the Imam to be from Allah’s side and
that of His messenger (s.a.), then there is no other way to know who the
twelfth Imam except through traditions is. If we consider the Prophet
(s.a.) as the final authority in the appointment of his successor and
Imam, then the appropriate and scientific way would be to refer to his
sayings. And if we desire to know about a person and his biography, then
the only way would be to refer to the books of traditions and history.
Any other approach would be unscientific and incorrect.

It was necessary to present the above preface because in the past we
have encountered such people who have demanded that we prove the
existence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) through scientific ways and means.
And when somebody forwards traditions and quotes from the Prophet
(s.a.), they refute it by countering, ‘Mister, tradition is not science.
Prove to me scientifically.’ Maybe somebody might attempt to prove the
same scientifically for him. But we prefer to avoid this approach and
say, ‘Well, you please prove scientifically that you are the son of your
father or that Shah Abbas was a Safavi king!’

Of course, the scientific and correct method to prove this would be the
books of history and for every subject; the appropriate approach to
solve its intricacies and difficulties would be through its own ways,
means and references. If we want to establish the geographical location
of a particular place, it certainly would not be through physics,
chemistry or mathematics but geography. That too, the geography of Iran
under the subject of divisions of states and provinces.

Therefore, if somebody refers to the geography books, then indeed he
has adopted a scientific approach. Similarly, if somebody refers to the
books of traditions regarding the appointment of an Imam, then surely
his method is right.

Principally, this is the only correct procedure in this discussion.
Hence, today if I have brought books of traditions to present before you
some of these, it is with the sole purpose of executing a job in a
scientific manner and not to show that I am a mullah. Why I’m using the
word mullah or sheikh is that because some people have the habit of
driving the opponent away by using such terms like ‘don’t be a mullah or
don’t be a sheikh’, and say, if you are right, go to the laboratory and
prove your theory. But, a laboratory is a place for a different kind of
science. Recently, each science has developed its own form of a
laboratory and the laboratory for historical discussions is the history
books. This only will be the right approach to solve its problems and
there is nothing unscientific about it.

After discussing this preface, let us come to the main topic. We said
that numerous books have been written about Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) and
plenty of traditions have been narrated about him from both Shia as well
as Sunni sources.

Among the books that have compiled the traditions concerning
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), is the book of “Muntakhabul Athar fil Imam
al-Thaani Ashar” by Ayatullah Lutfullah Safi Gulpaygani. Firstly, I
would state the sources of this book and then present the list of
topics, albeit briefly.

Among the references of this book are Saheeh-e-Bukhari, Sunan-e-Abi
Dawood, etc. It is worth mentioning that in this book more than 60
sources of the Ahle Sunnat have been used.

This book comprises of ten chapters, altogether and each chapter is
further divided into sub-chapters. At the beginning of each chapter and
sub-chapter, the author mentions the subject of its discussion.

The first two chapters of this book are as follows:


