First Chapter: Contains Traditions That State That the Imams (a.s.) Are Twelve in Number
========================================================================================

It is further divided into eight sub-chapters.

Sub-chapter 1: The Imams are twelve in number and the sources used are
Saheeh-e-Bukhari, Saheeh-e-Tirmidhi, Saheeh-e-Muslim, Saheeh-e-Abi
Dawood, and many other books of Shias and Sunnis.

Sub-chapter 2: The number of Imams (a.s.) is equal to the number of the
asbaat (grandsons) and nuqaba (chosen ones) of Bani Israel and the
hawariyyoon (companions) of Hazrat Eesa (a.s.). There were twelve
grandsons in the Israelites, twelve companions of Hazrat Eesa (a.s.) and
twelve Imams (a.s.) in the Islamic nation. Forty traditions have been
narrated in this sub-chapter from the narrators of both the major
sects.

Sub-chapter 3: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number of whom, the first
is Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.). It contains 133 traditions along with their
references. The references in this sub-chapter are from the likes of
Yanaabiul Mawaddah of Qundoozi.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.) said,

<p dir="rtl">
يا علي أنت وصيي, ح.رب.ك. ح.ربي و سِلم.ك. سِلمي و أنت. الامام. و أبو
الأئمهِ الاِحدي عشر الذينُ ه.م. » .« الطَه.رونُ الم.عصومون, و مِنهم
الم.هدي. الّذي يملأ الأرض قِسطاً و عدلاً
</p>

“O Ali! You are my successor. Your war is my war and your peace is my
peace. You are an Imam and the father of eleven Imams those that are
purified and infallible. Among them is Mahdi, one who will fill the
earth with justice and equity.”

Sub-chapter 4: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number, of whom the first
is Ali (a.s.) and the last is Mahdi (a.s.). It is comprised of 91
traditions. Sub-chapter 5: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number, of
whom the last is Mahdi (a.s.). It contains 94 traditions like the
following one, The Messenger of Allah (s.a.) said,

<p dir="rtl">
إن اللّه تعالي أخَذ ميثاقي و ميثاقُ اثني ع.شرُ إماما ب.عدي و ه.م ح.جج.
اللّهِ علي خَلقِه. الثّاني عشر » .« منهم القائم. الّذي يملأ بهِ الأرض.
قسطاً و عدلا
</p>

“Surely Allah the Almighty took my covenant and the covenant of twelve
Imams after me. They are Allah’s proofs upon His creatures. The twelfth
among them is the Qaem who will fill the earth with justice and
equity.”

Sub-chapter 6: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number, of whom nine are
the descendants of Imam Husain (a.s.). It is comprised of 139
traditions.

Sub-chapter 7: The Imams (a.s.) are twelve in number, of whom nine are
the descendants of Imam Husain (a.s.), with special emphasis on, .« و
تاسِع.ه.م قائم.ه.م و م.هدي.ه.م ... » “…the ninth among them is their
Mahdi or their Qaem”. It contains 107 traditions.

Sub-chapter 8: It comprises of traditions that prove the existence of
the twelve Imams (a.s.) along with their names. That is, we have
traditions wherein the Holy Prophet (s.a.) has given the number of Imams
(a.s.) to be twelve and also mentioned their names. It’s a very
interesting tradition and contains all of their peculiarities and
characteristics. It comprises of fifty traditions, the renowned
‘Hadith-e-Lauh’ from Jabir Ibn Abdullah being among them and which will
be included in our discussion. It is a very reliable tradition and its
references are very authentic.

Second Chapter: It comprises traditions that discuss about the
reappearance of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), his names, attributes,
characteristics and glad-tidings. Forty-nine sub-chapters have been
discussed in this chapter.

Sub-chapter 1: Regarding the reappearance and uprising of Hazrat Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) and glad-tidings concerning him. Contains 657 traditions,
among the traditions is the one quoted from Saheeh-e-Tirmidhi which
says, .« لا تذهب. الد.نيا حتّي ي.ملك العرب رج. ل مِن أهلِ بيتي , ي.واطِ
ي اسم.ه. اسمي » “The Holy Prophet (s.a.) says, ‘The world will not come
to an end till an Arab from my progeny will rule over it. His name will
be like my name.” Thereafter, a similar tradition with resembling
wordings is narrated from Saheeh-e-Tirmidhi and Ahmad Ibn Hanbal.

Sub-chapter 2: Regarding the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is from
the progeny of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and from his Ahle Bait (a.s.) and
off-spring, containing 389 traditions.

Sub-chapter 3: Concerning the fact that the name and agnomen of Imam-e-
Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is akin to that of the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and that he
is the most similar of men to the latter. Also, that when he reappears
he will act on the sunnah of the Holy Prophet (s.a.). It contains 48
traditions.

Sub-chapter 4: Regarding the qualities of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and
are comprised of 21 traditions.

Sub-chapter 5: Concerning the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is from
the children of Ameerul Momineen (a.s.). It contains 214 traditions.
Sub-chapter 6: Pertaining to the reality that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is
from the children of Hazrat Fatema Zahra (s.a.) and not from any other
wife of Ameerul Momineen (a.s.). It is comprised of 192 traditions.
Here, the first tradition is from Mustadrakus Saheehain, followed by
quotes from Yanaabeeul Mawaddah and Muntakhabo Kanzil Ummal. Thereafter,
quotes from Shia books and a few Shia exegesis of Quran are also
mentioned.

Sub-chapter 7: Regarding the truth that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is from
the progeny of Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain (a.s.) and it contains
107 traditions.

Sub-chapter 8: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is a descendant of Imam
Husain (a.s.). It is comprised of 185 traditions.

Sub-chapter 9: Pertaining to the fact that he is one of the nine Imams
(a.s.) from the progeny of Imam Husain (a.s.) and it contains 160
traditions. Sub-chapter 10: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the ninth
son of Imam Husain (a.s.) and it contains 148 traditions.

Sub-chapter 11: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the descendant of Ali
Ibn Husain (a.s.) and is comprised of 185 traditions. Sub-chapter 12:
That he is the descendant of Imam Baqer (a.s.) and it contains 103
traditions.

Sub-chapter 13: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the descendant of Imam
Sadeq (a.s.) and it consists 103 traditions.

Sub-chapter 14: Regarding the fact that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the
sixth descendant of Imam Sadeq (a.s.), comprising 99 traditions.
Sub-chapter 15: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the descendant of Imam
Musa Ibn Jafar (a.s.). It consist 101 traditions.

Sub-chapter 16: Concerning the truth that he is from the progeny of
Imam Musa Ibn Jafar (a.s.) and is his fifth descendant. It comprises of
98 traditions. Sub-chapter 17: That he is the fourth descendant of Imam
Reza (a.s.) and it consists 95 traditions.

Sub-chapter 18: Pertaining to the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is
the descendant of Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.) and is his third offspring.
It consists of 90 traditions.

Sub-chapter 19: Concerning the truth that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is
the descendant of Abul Hasan Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ali al-Hadi (a.s.) and
comprises of 90 traditions.

Sub-chapter 20: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the son of Imam Hasan
al- Askari (a.s.) and consists 146 traditions. Sub-chapter 21: Regarding
the fact that the name of his father is Hasan (a.s.) and comprises 147
traditions.

Sub-chapter 22: That the mother of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the chief
of the maids and the best of them. It consist 9 traditions.

Sub-chapter 23: Contains two traditions stating that wherever there are
three names, Muhammad, Ali and Hasan, in sequence, the fourth has to be
Hazrat Qaem (a.t.f.s.). That is, Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s.), Imam Ali
Naqi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). This is a tradition from
the Holy Prophet (s.a.) wherein he prophesies,

<p dir="rtl">
إذا تَوالَت أربعه أسماء مِنُ الأئمهِ مِن و.لدي, محمد و علي و الحسنْ
فُرابِع.ها ه.و. القائم. المأمولُ » .« المنتظَر
</p>

“Whenever the names Muhammad, Ali and Hasan from the Imams from my
progeny, are in sequence, then the fourth of them is al-Qaem (a.s.), the
Expected, the Awaited.”

Thus, it will not suffice if somebody’s name is Muhammad Ibn Al-Hasan
(to claim to be Mahdi). It is essential that his grandfather should be
Ali and his great grandfather, Muhammad.

Sub-chapter 24: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the twelfth and the
last Imam. That is, after him there will not be any other Imam. We do
not have a thirteenth Imam and he is the seal of the Imams (a.s.). It
consists of 137 traditions. Sub-chapter 25: Regarding the prophesy that
he will fill the earth with justice and equity and it comprises 123
traditions.

Sub-chapter 26: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has two occultations. This
subchapter contains 10 traditions.

Sub-chapter 27: Concerning the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will
have a long and major occultation till Allah the Almighty permits him to
reappear. It comprises 91 traditions.

Sub-chapter 28: Regarding the causes of his occultation and it consists
of 7 traditions.

Sub-chapter 29: Pertaining to the benefits of his existence, the method
by which people can derive benefits from him in occultation and the
modus operandi of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) in his works. It comprises 7
traditions.

Sub-chapter 30: Concerning longevity and contains 318 traditions.

Sub-chapter 31: That Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will possess a youthful
visage and it comprises 8 traditions.

Sub-chapter 32: Regarding the concealed birth of Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) and it contains 14 traditions.

Sub-chapter 33: Concerning the fact that Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will
not carry the allegiance of anybody on his neck. It consists of 33
traditions.

Sub-chapter 34: That Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will eliminate the enemies
of Allah the Almighty, purify the earth of polytheism, etc. It contains
19 traditions.

All the remaining sub-chapters of this chapter are related to the
details of Imame- Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) plan, which is irrelevant to our
present discussion.


