Realization of the Prophecies
=============================

In this chapter, we shall discuss whether the prophecies of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) and the infallible Imams (a.s.) concerning Hazrat
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) have occurred or not. For example, it has been
prophesied that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the ninth son of Imam Husain
(a.s.). Now we shall see whether this prediction has been actualised or
Allah forbid, there was an element of falsehood in this statement. Here,
we should refer to history.

Our subject of historical investigation is whether the birth of this
promised person has taken place or not? If yes, when? Who was his
father? Where was he born? In other words, we will try to find out the
details of Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) birth certificate. Of course, this
is a partial discussion that should not be searched for in the general
Islamic history. This discussion should be pursued in the life history
of the Imams (a.s.), and that too, the twelfth Imam (a.t.f.s.).

Anyway, it should also be known that books of traditions compiled on
this subject prove that a detailed knowledge of the birth of Prophets
(a.s.) and Imams (a.s.) are not an essential part of our creed. For, it
is possible that somebody believes in the basic principle of
Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) Imamat and also accepts his existence, but
does not accept that he was born on the 15th Sha’baan. It does not
weaken his belief in Imamat in any way.

The characteristics of birth are not an important subject that belief
in it necessitates a series of historical references. Even for other
Imams (a.s.) too, we do not have traditions dwelling in detail about the
birth of all of them.

Perhaps in this regard, the least controversial and most informative is
the discussion concerning Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Of course, for some
other Imams (a.s.) too, a lot of traditions have been narrated e.g.
regarding the birth of Imam Husain (a.s.) {3rd Sha’baan}, numerous
quotes are available. But concerning the Holy Prophet’s (s.a.w.s.)
birthday, considerable differences are found. Anyhow, regardless of such
differences, it does not create any contrariety in the basic principle.
Hence, we can see quite a few contrasts regarding the birth dates in the
books of traditions and history. But the 15th Sha’baan is the most
famous and most authentic date narrated.

The year of Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) birth has been given as 255 or
256 A.H. The cause of this difference may be because in the past,
history was jotted on the basis of Abjad (arithmatcal arrangement of
Arabic alphabet). In Hazrat Mahdi’s (a.t.f.s.) case, the contrariety
arose due to the word “Noor” (light) and “Nahr” (river), the differing
handwriting of historians gave birth to such variances.25 Hence, if we
read “Noor”, it will be 256 and in “Nahr”, it will be 255 A.H.

25 According to some rare quotes, his birthday has also been cited as
the month of Ramadhan of 254 A.H. or 8th Sha’baan, 257 A.H.

The special characteristics of Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) birth gain
more significance because from the time of the ninth Imam, Muhammad Taqi
(a.s.), the reigning Caliphs became very sensitive on the issue of
Imamat. After the martyrdom of Imam Reza (a.s.), there were uprisings by
the Hashimites and other children of Imam Moosa al-Kaazim (a.s.) in
different nooks and corners of Iran and other parts of the Islamic
world. Splinter groups raised the banner of rebellion against the
government and all were coming under one umbrella i.e.

the children of Imams (a.s.). All this led to the ruling Caliphate
becoming very tense, thereby causing the disintegration of Madina as the
capital of the Islamic world.

It should be known that the infallible Imams (a.s.) always strove to
retain Madina as the city of their residence and never desired to
abandon it. For, Madina was the focal point of travel of all Muslims and
was considered to be the religious and spiritual capital of the Islamic
world. Notwithstanding the transfer of the political capital of the
ruling caliphate, the twin holy cities of Mecca and Madina held their
own as the focus (of the Muslims).

Today, we don’t have any focal point like Mecca and Madina. The Shia
scholars ceased to lend significance to such a centre, maybe out of
grave misjudgment, or gross negligence or sheer inability of
preservation.

Anyway, to the best of their ability, the Imams (a.s.) did not forsake
Madina. When the Haj or Umrah pilgrims visited Madina, the Imams (a.s.)
or their companions went among the pilgrims and tried to maintain
contact with them. Basically, the Abbasides were cunning hypocrites and
ostentatious. From this aspect, they were far ahead of the Ummayyid
Caliphs and the Ottoman rulers. Their deportation of Imam Reza (a.s.)
from Madina to Khorasan under the ruse of appointing him as the crown
prince was a clear poof of their deceit and trickery.

After the martyrdom of Imam Reza (a.s.), they saw to it that Imam Jawad
(a.s.) also was kept away from the holy city of Madina. In this
instance, the apparent excuse was to get him married to the Caliph’s
daughter and hence, force him to reside in Baghdad.

Therefore, in the face of such trickery and machinations, a very
formidable strategy was required to counter them, defeat their purpose
and expose the designs of the Caliphs for the public. Thus, despite
having a beautiful and learned wife (the Caliph’s daughter), Imam (a.s.)
married a slave girl and fathered her child, an honour not granted to
the daughter of Mamoon. Of course, this was a well-executed plan to
defeat Mamoon’s designs and consequently, anybody who became aware of
the entire scenario, realised that Imam Jawad (a.s.) did not migrate to
Baghdad because of Mamoon’s daughter.

In the reign of Mutawakkil or Mo’tasim Abbasi, Imam Hadi’s (a.s.) entry
in Madina was prevented outright. Initially, he (a.s.) was kept in
Baghdad under surveillance; but when they noticed that he was coming
into contact with his Shias even in Baghdad, he was shifted to Saamarra.
Here too, the strict vigil of the government could not prevent him
coming into contact with his followers. Finally, out of sheer
desperation, the government shifted him to the military cantonment
(which is called as Askar) where Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) was born
and lived, and hence got the title of “Askari”.

Briefly, the Caliphs with all the power at their disposal, tried their
best to prove as wrong the prediction of the Prophet (s.a.w.s.)
regarding the Promised One, the ninth descendant of Imam Husain (a.s.).
They planned to eliminate the progeny of the Imams (a.s.) and then
announce that the eighth descendant of Imam Husain (a.s.) did not bear
any offspring, thereby proving the prophecies to be false and
fabricated. With this purpose in mind, they attempted to impose as many
controls as possible on the house and family of Imam Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.).

One day, Mo’tamid, the Abbaside Caliph, said to Imam Askari (a.s.),
“Dear cousin, I feel sorry for you. Permit me to dispatch two slave
girls to your house as domestic help.” Imam (a.s.) retorted, “We the
progeny of Muhammad (s.a.w.s.), discharge our responsibilities
ourselves. And I don’t have so much work that I will need your slave
girls.” Despite constant pressures from the Caliph, Imam Askari (a.s.)
firmly turned down his offer in order to prevent spies from entering the
holy household.

**Birth of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)**

Hakeemah Khatoon, the aunt of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) narrates the
incident of Imam Mahdi’s (a.t.f.s.) birth as follows:

“One day, I went to Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). He (a.s.) requested
me, ‘Aunt, Stay with us tonight because my successor will appear.’ I
asked, ‘From whom?’

He (a.s.) answered, ‘Narjis’. I reasoned, ‘But I don’t see any signs of
pregnancy in her!’ He retorted, ‘Her likeness is of the mother of Hazrat
Moosa (a.s.) who did not have any signs of motherhood till the actual
hour of delivery.’ I and Narjis slept in one room. At midnight, I became
busy in performing the midnight prayers. I said to myself, ‘Dawn is near
but whatever Imam Askari (a.s.) had said has not yet come to pass.’
Suddenly from the next room, Imam Askari (a.s.) called out, ‘Aunt! Don’t
be in haste.’ Being ashamed (of my thought), I returned to my room.
Narjis came forward to receive me, restless and shivering. I held her
close to my chest and recited Surah Tauheed, Surah Qadr and Ayat
al-Kursi for her. As I was reciting the above verses, the child in the
womb was reading along with me. At that very moment, the room shone with
light. The sight of Allah’s newborn representative in prostration
towards the Holy Ka’bah delighted me. I picked him up in my arms. Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) called out, ‘Bring my son to me.’

I took the infant to his father. He put his tongue in his mouth and
laying him in his lap, he ordered, ‘Son, talk, by the permission of
Allah.’ At once, the infant began reciting,

<p dir="rtl">
أعوذ بِاللّه السميع الع.ليم مِن الشّيطان الرّجيم. بِسم اللّه الرُّحمن
الرُّحيم. و نُريد أن نَم.نُّ علي » الّذين استُضعِفوا فِي الاَرض و
نَجعلهم أئمه و نجعلهم الوارثين. و نُمكِنُّ لَه.م فِي الارض و نُري. فرعون
و هامان و جنودهما مِنهم ما كانوا يحذَرون . و صلي اللّه علي محمد المصطفي
و علي. المرتضي و فاطمه الزهرا و الحسن و الحسين و علي بن الحسين و محمد بن
علي و جعفر بن محمد و موسي بن .« جعفر و علي بن موسي و محمد بن علي و علي
بن محمد و الحسن بن علي أبي
</p>

‘I seek refuge in Allah, the All-Hearing, and the All-Seeing from the
accursed Shaitan. In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
And We intend to oblige those who have been rendered weak in the land
and that We will make them the Imams and We will make them the heirs.
And We will establish them in the earth and We showed Firaon and Haamaan
and their armies from them what they were warned. And blessings of Allah
be upon Muhammad al-Mustafa, Ali al-Murtaza, Fatema al-Zahra, al-Hasan,
al- Husain, Ali Ibn Husain, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ja’far Ibn Muhammad, Moosa
Ibn Ja’far, Ali Ibn Moosa, Muhammad Ibn Ali, Ali Ibn Muhammad and, my
father Hasan Ibn Ali.

Hakeemah says, ‘We were surrounded by green birds’. Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) looked at one of them and cried, ‘Take care of him (the
new infant) till Allah grants him permission. Allah will take His affair
to completion.’ I enquired, ‘Who is this bird and who are the other
birds that are accompanying him?’ He (a.s.) replied, ‘He is Jibraeel and
the others are the angels of divine mercy.’ Thereafter, he (a.s.) said,
‘Aunt! Kindly return the child to his mother so that she becomes happy
and joyous. Know that Allah’s Promise is true but most of the people
know not.’

I returned the child to his mother. He was very clean, pure and
unblemished. On his right shoulder, it was inscribed,

<p dir="rtl">
.« جاء. الحق و ز.هق الباطِل إنُّ الباطِل كانُ زهوقاً »
</p>

‘Truth has come and falsehood vanished. Surely, falsehood was bound to
vanish.26’

This was the incident of Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) birth which we have
supported from the books of traditions. In the past, whenever this
occurrence was narrated, some skeptics objected that all the traditions
about Imam-e-Zaman 26 Al-Kharaaej wa al-Jaraaeh, vol. 1, p. 455, 456,
H-1; Hilyah al-Abraar, vol. 2, p. 536; Kashf al-Ghummah, vol. 2, p. 498.
Numerous traditions have been narrated on the authority of Hakeemah
Khatoon concerning the birth of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

(a.t.f.s.) terminated at one woman and that the validity of a woman’s
narration is unacceptable because her testimony is disallowed under
Islamic laws. These skeptics have not realised the fact that the
tradition concerning Hazrat Mahdi’s (a.t.f.s.) birth does not end at
Hakeemah Khatoon. It is just the narration of the actual process of his
birth that has been narrated by the mid-wife who happened to be Hakeemah
Khatoon. The same applies for every newborn baby whose news is given by
the mid-wife or the nurse. The question of witnesses or testimony does
not arise. Moreover, traditions other than that of Hakeemah Khatoon have
been narrated regarding the birth of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). For
details


