The Imamat of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)and the Minor Occultation
==============================================================

As stated in the previous chapter, Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) was born on
15th Sha’baan. Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) requested those involved to
keep this event as a secret. From the year 255 A.H., Hazrat Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) was being nourished and nurtured in the house of his father
but in a way that the ordinary folks were unaware about it.

The Introduction of Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) to the elite among the
Shias Numerous traditions have cited that some of the companions of the
Imams (a.s.) were coming to Saamarra. They used to come with various
types of questions, many of them concerning Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).
Like they asked Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) as to who would be the Imam
after him.

To the tried and true, Imam (a.s.) gave clear and detailed
explanations. Among those who referred was a person by the name Ahmed
Ibn Ishaaq. Shaykh Sadooq (a.r.) in his book, “Kamaaluddin” has narrated
his incident in the chapter of traditions narrated from Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) in the discussion concerning Hazrat Mahdi’s (a.t.f.s.)
occultation.

Ahmed Ibn Ishaaq says, “I went to Abu Muhammad Hasan Ibn Ali (a.s.) to
ask him about his successor and the Imam after him. Before I could pose
my query, Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) said, ‘O Ahmed Ibn Ishaaq! Allah
the Almighty has not left His earth without a proof since the creation
of Adam (a.s.). Nor will it remain without His representative till the
day of judgement.’ I said, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! Who is the Imam
and successor after you?’ Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.) stood up quickly
and went into a room. Later, he emerged with a three year old boy in his
arms whose face shone like a full moon. Then he said, ‘Had you not
enjoyed such a status and rank in front of Allah the Almighty and His
Proofs (a.s.), I would not have shown my son to you.”

Sometimes, in these five years, the companions of Imam Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.) attended to him and were narrating a few things to him. On these
occasions, they were also inquiring from him about his successor, to
which Imam Hasan al- Askari (a.s.) was replying in general. One such
person was Abu al-Adyaan, whose incident is reported as under: “I was a
servant of Imam Hasan al-Askari (

a.s.), and carried his letters to different cities and environs. I had
the honour to attend to his service in his last illness. He (a.s.) gave
the letters to me and said, ‘Go to Madaaen. Your journey will last for
fifteen days. On the fifteenth day, you will return to Saamarra. Here,
wails and cries from my house will greet you. You will see me in the
room where corpses are given the ritual bath.’

I asked, ‘Master! In such a case, who will be the Imam after you?’ Imam
Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) responded, ‘One who will ask you about the
replies to my letters will be my successor.’ I requested, ‘Please
provide me more details.’ Imam (a.s.) replied, ‘He will lead my funeral
prayers.’ I pleaded again, ‘Please furnish more information.’ He (a.s.)
retorted, ‘He will inform you about what is in the bag.’

The awe-inspiring personality of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) prevented
me from further inquiry about the bag. Anyway, I took the letters to
Madaaen and procured the ripostes. On the 15th day, just as Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.) had predicted, I entered Saamarra. Loud voices of
wailing and crying echoed from the house of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.).
I saw Ja’far, the brother of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), standing on
the door and receiving condolences and consolation from the local
Shias.

I said to myself, ‘If this man is the Imam, then it will be clear that
the position of Imamat has undergone change. For, I have seen him drink
wine, gamble and play musical instruments.’ I went near him and offered
my condolences. He did not ask me anything. Afterwards ‘Aqeed’ emerged
from the house and said, ‘Master! Your brother has been shrouded. Come
and lead his funeral prayers.’

Ja’far went ahead to lead the prayers. As he was about to announce the
Takbeer, a young boy with a wheatish complexion, curly hair, broad
teeth, shining like a brilliant moon, came out of the house. He caught
hold of Ja’far’s robe and threw him aside, saying, ‘Uncle! Move aside. I
am more worthy of leading the funeral prayers of my father.’

Ja’far withdrew in a corner as his face went colourless. The child went
ahead to recite the prayers on his father’s dead body and buried him
next to his father’s (10th Imam’s) grave. Thereafter, he turned towards
me and said, ‘O Basri! Give me the replies of the letters that are with
you.’ I handed the letters to him and said to myself, ‘Two prophecies
are already fulfilled. Now only the third one about the contents of the
bag remains.’

We were sitting when some residents of Qum arrived and asked about the
condition of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.). When they were informed about
his demise, they inquired about the Imam after him.

People guided them towards Ja’far Ibn Ali. They saluted him and offered
their condolences. They wanted to know from him about the money that
they had brought along with themselves, to whom did it belong and how
much? Ja’far stood up from his place, and while gathering his clothes,
he said, ‘They expect me to know the unseen.’

Afterwards, a servant emerged from the house of Imam Hasan al-Askari
(a.s.) and announced, ‘The letters of so and so are in your possession.
You also have a bag containing a thousand dinars. Of which, only ten
dinars are pure. They gave the letters and money to this servant saying,
‘The one who has sent you must be an Imam.30’

The story of this man has also been recorded in books of traditions. It
should be borne in mind, as stated earlier, these are the particulars of
an individual and one should not expect to search for these in general
books of history or even Islamic history. For, these are personal
matters and if a few traditions are available in this regard, we simply
accept them.

Anyway, we repeatedly emphasize that our basic belief vis-à-vis the
existence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is not related to these traditions.
If someone refuses to accept these traditions as true and correct, we
will reply, ‘Well, what is the basis of your rejection? For, the onus is
on you to prove the falsity of these traditions. Even if we assume the
above tradition to be false and unacceptable, yet the basic belief
remains unharmed and unaffected on account of the numerous

consecutive traditions narrated concerning the twelfth Imam (a.t.f.s.).
Now, when the basic belief remains unharmed, and the discussion is from
the aspect of belief itself, and moreover, there is no proof to refute a
tradition or to establish its absence, we shall narrate traditions while
maintaining our stand that this is just a narration and only a part of
the general history.

Steps taken by the Caliph to Arrest Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) Due to the
funeral prayers led by Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) and the instigation of
Ja’far, the government became very sensitive. The Caliph Mo’tamid used
all possible steps to gain access to and arrest Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).
The commanders of the Caliph swooped on the house of Imam Hasan
al-Askari (a.s.). They searched it in and out but to no avail. Instead,
they began plundering the house. Perhaps, while they were busy
pillaging, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) took the opportunity and fled, to
escape captivity.

After this episode, the Abbaside government became busy with its
internal problems. The incidents of Yaqoob al-Laith, Saaheb al-Zanj,
etc. took place, which occupied their attention to such an extent that
they really could not bother about Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). During the
reign of Mo’tazid, another event occurred that is worth reading.

Mo’tazid dispatched three officers to Imam al-Askari’s (a.s.) house.
The orders were clear- behead anybody you find among the males and get
their heads to the court as souvenirs. Rasheeq Maarzaani, one of the
three selected officers, narrates the incident thus:

As per the orders, we attacked the house…We saw a room so huge as if it
was an ocean. At the end of the room, there was a straw mat spread on
water. On the mat, a man with a handsome visage and awe-inspiring
dignity sat performing 30 Kamaaluddin, vol. 2, p. 457; Behaarul Anwaar,
vol. 50, p. 332, H. 4 and vol. 52, p. 67 & 68 H. 53. namaz and did not
pay any heed to our presence. Ahmed Ibn Abdullah (one of us) went ahead
with the intention of entering the room but was drowned. He struggled to
survive inside the water and waved at us vigorously so that we may
extend our hands to pull him out, but to no avail. The second one among
us also attempted to enter the room and met with the same fate. I was
left standing alone, perplexed and confused. I pleaded with the owner of
house, ‘I seek pardon from Allah and from you. By Allah! I don’t know
what’s happening and whom I have approached. I seek repentance from
Allah.’ He did not pay heed to my talks at all and was engrossed in his
own work. I got scared and returned.

After the failure of this attempt, Mo’tazid sent more officers with the
same orders. When they reached the house, they heard somebody reciting
the Holy Quran in the cellar (sardaab). They surrounded the cellar to
prevent anybody from escaping. Thereafter, Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
emerged from the cellar right in front of all those present.
Miraculously, with Allah’s permission, the commander could not see him
and hence behaved as if nothing had happened.

For others, the silence and non-objection of the commander was a tacit
approval and consequently, they too did not protest or demur. It was too
late when they realised as to what had actually occurred31.

**The Cellar (Sardaab)**

This is an issue about which there are a lot of misconceptions. A few
Sunni biased scholars in order to denounce the Shias have also misused
these misinterpretations. Therefore, it is essential that we throw more
light on this issue.

It should be known that the cellar was the residence of three Imams
(a.s.) viz.

Imam Hadi (a.s.), Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) and Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) himself. Incidentally, this house was the personal residence
of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). For, it is unanimously accepted by the
historians that none of the Imams (a.s.) had an underground residence in
Saamarra. Even for the house of Ameerul Momineen Ali Ibn Abi Taalib
(a.s.), we cannot state its precise location with certainty, either in
Madina or Kufa. Some say it’s in Baab-e- Jibraeel but its very general
place. But for the cellar of Samarra, it was believed in the long
duration of one thousand four hundred years, that it was the abode of
Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.t.f.s.). Due to this reason alone, the cellar at
Saamarra is a holy place for us.

It is an established fact that Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) did not sink in
the cellar’s wall nor did its earth swallow him. He did not disappear
like the Jinn from the human eyes nor did he fly to the skies in the
form of angels. Just as the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) had become invisible
for the Meccan polytheists at the time of 31 For details of these
incidents, one can refer to the book, ‘Tarikh al-Ghaibah al-Sughra’ by
Sayed Muhammad Sadr.

emigration, similarly Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) emerged from the cellar
but the Caliph’s men were unable to see him (of course with Allah’s
permission).

From the time of Imam Hadi (a.s.) and Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), a
person was appointed in Baghdad who acted as the representative of the
two Imams (a.s.). Later, on the command of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.)
and Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.), he also became the special deputy of the
latter in Baghdad. The general Shias were unaware and uninformed of the
exact location of Imam-e- Zaman (a.t.f.s.). The special representative
was a narrator of traditions and a majestic scholar, at the same time
being an ordinary businessman involved in selling oils.

Of course being a narrator of traditions is an important position from
the aspect of knowledge and relation of traditions. But this special
deputy did not possess the customary appearance of a religious scholar.
He was a businessman selling oils that answered by the name of “Usman
Ibn Saeed Amri” and knew the exact residence of Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).
Quite often, Hazrat Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) was either in his house, some other
close companions, or his proximate relatives. In reality, Imam-e-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) became invisible from the eyes of the people in this very
meaning.

In the compound of Imam-e-Zaman’s (a.t.f.s.) house, there was a well
from which he drew water. Apart from its function of providing water,
the aforementioned well does not have any significance in our
traditions. Thus, those who visit Saamarra, take the mud of this well
(as tabarruk), throw a letter in it, or think that an Arab is still
sitting on the edge of the well with his sword hidden inside his robe,
so that whenever Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) emerges, he would kill him. All
these are talks of stupidity, emanating from the foolishness of a Sunni.
Worse is the one who believes that the Arab is still sitting over there
waiting to kill Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) or that he is living inside the
well or that he was swallowed by the wall of the cellar.

We don’t believe in the Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) who is living inside
the well or is swallowed by the cellar’s wall. But we respect the cellar
only and only because it was the place of worship for three Imams (a.s.)
and because in the length of one thousand four hundred years,
Imam-e-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has visited it a number of times and was his
personal residence for a considerable period of time. Thus, even today
when a person visits the cellar, he feels that he is the guest of Hazrat
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). Finally, if the Shias revere the cellar, it is because
of the owner of the house and not because of the story of the well or
any other such absurdity.


