Surah al-Ghafir, Verses 46 - 63
===============================

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 46
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّارُ يُعْرَضُونَ عَلَيْهَا غُدُوّاً وَعَشِيّاً وَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ
السَّاعَةُ أَدْخِلُوا آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ أَشَدَّ الْعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. The Fire, they are exposed to it, morning and evening. And on the
Day when the Hour will be established [it will be said]***

Between death and Resurrection lies a period in which sinners find out
that their abode is Hellfire. Thus the blessed Verse says that their
excruciating torment is the fire in which they suffer every morning and
evening.

Pharaoh’s people are ordered to taste the most excruciating torment. It
is worthy of note that mention is made of Pharaoh’s family, companions,
and adherents who were all astray. When they become entangled with such
dire fate, Pharaoh will have a far worst fate in store for him.

Secondly, the Verse says that they will taste Hellfire every morning and
evening, but they will taste the worst excruciating torment on the Day
of Resurrection which explicitly indicates that the former torment will
be that of purgatory to be inflicted after this world and prior to the
Day of Resurrection and will entail tasting Hellfire.

Such torment will make soul shiver with terror and will also affect the
body.

Thirdly, the phrase:

***“morning and evening” (ghadw wa ‘ashi)***

may either refer to the progression of the torment, as it is said he is
our pest morning and evening, i.e. at all times, or it makes reference
to the discontinuity of the purgatorial torment, i.e., torments will be
inflicted upon them in the morning and in the evening when they were
engaged in merry making and boasting their power.

The expression:

***“morning and evening”***

should not be a source of wonder as to the existence of times of the day
in purgatory, since Qur’anic Verses reveal that there will be morning
and evening even in the Hereafter as it is reflected elsewhere in the
Holy Qur’an:

***“And they will have therein their sustenance, morning and
evening”***[^1]***.***

It is not inconsistent with the permanence of the Bounties of Paradise,
as reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an:

***“Its provision is eternal and so is its shade”***[^2]

since there exists the possibility that despite the permanence of
provisions and sustenance, certain Bounties be bestowed upon the people
of Paradise.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 47
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ يَتَحَاجُّونَ فِي النَّارِ فَيَقُولُ الضُّعَفَاءُ لِلَّذِينَ
اسْتَكْبَرُوا إِنَّا كُنَّا لَكُمْ تَبَعاً فَهَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُغْنُونَ
عَنَّا نَصِيباً مِنَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. And when they will dispute [and producing arguments] in the Fire,
the weak will say to those who were arrogant: “Indeed we followed you.
Are you able to take from us some portion of the Hellfire?”***

The preceding Verses treated of Divine Wrath against Pharaoh’s family.
These Verse reflect the dialogs of the arrogant and Pharaohs down the
centuries with their flattering companions and supporters in Hell.

Thus it is said in this Verse:

***“When they will dispute [and producing arguments] in the Fire, the
weak will say to those who were arrogant: “Indeed we followed you. Are
you able to take from us some portion of the Hellfire?”***

The weak say unto the arrogant that they were their followers but they
wonder whether they could take some of the torments of Hellfire in lieu
of them.

***“The weak”***

refers to those who were not intellectually independent and blindly
followed the chiefs of disbelief referred to in the Holy Qur’an as the
arrogant.

Their followers in Hell indubitably know that their chiefs like them are
entangled with Divine torment in Hell and are not able in the least to
protect them. A question is raised here as to the grounds lying behind
their request from their former chiefs as to taking from them some
portion of Hellfire.

A number of Qur’anic exegets maintain that it was their habit to seek
refuge in them upon being afflicted with severe afflictions as a
consequence of which they are unconsciously reacting likewise. However,
it would be better to say that such request is a kind of derision and
reproach toward them so that they know that all their claims were false
and groundless.

It is worthy of note that the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as)
in a sermon delivered on one of the days of Ghadir called people to
monotheism and bade them to follow those whom God appointed as leaders.

Reminding people of the Verse in question, he asked:

*“Do you know what arrogance is? It is failure to obey those whom you
are supposed to follow. Arrogance is to regard yourselves superior to
them. There are recurrent instances in which the Holy Qur’an treats of
the same such that if man reflects upon it, the Holy Qur’an provides him
with admonitions and impedes him from committing evil deeds.”*

In fact, Imam ‘Ali (as) intended to warn that there was no excuse for
those who consigned the Noble Prophet’s (S) testament on the Day of
Ghadir and followed others.[^3]

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 48 - 49
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا إِنَّا كُلٌّ فِيهَا إِنَّ اللَّهَ قَدْ
حَكَمَ بَيْنَ الْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ فِي النَّارِ لِخَزَنَةِ جَهَنَّمَ ادْعُوا رَبَّكُمْ
يُخَفِّفْ عَنَّا يَوْماً مِنَ الْعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. Those who were arrogant will say [in reply]: “We are all in this
[Fire]! Indeed Allah has judged between [His] servants [justly]!”***  
***49. And those in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell: “Call upon
your Lord to alleviate for us the torment for a day!”***

No one will be able to carry the burden of others on the Day of
Resurrection. How one who is the Fire save others from torment?

According to the blessed Verses in question, the arrogant will say:

*“We and you are in Hellfire and share the same fate and God judged
between His servants with justice. Had we been able to render you help,
we would have helped ourselves. We cannot do anything here.*

*We may neither ward off torment from you nor from us, nor are we able
to take from you some of your torment. God never chastises anyone
without any reason. Whoever has committed evil will be chastised
accordingly.*

*Our burden of sins is heavier than yours since we were in error
ourselves and sent you to error as well. Had we been able to do
anything, we would have done something for ourselves. You have also
committed sins for having followed us out of your free choice. You could
believe in God as some you did and saved themselves from torment.”*

When all of them lose their hope, they seek refuge in the angels of
torment.

Verse 49 is saying that when they become totally desperate, they turn to
the keepers of Hell and angels of torment:

***“and those in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell: “Call upon
your Lord to alleviate for us the torment for a day!”***

They know that there is no escape from Divine chastisement, but they
merely request that Divine torment be alleviated form them for one day
so that they may be able to take a rest and are content with the same.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 50
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا أَوَلَمْ تَكُ تَأْتِيكُمْ رُسُلُكُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ قَالُوا
بَلَی قَالُوا فَادْعُوا وَمَا دُعَاءُ الْكَافِرِينَ إِلَّا فِي ضَلالٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. They [keepers of Hell] will say: “Did there not come to you, your
Messengers with miracles?” They will say: “Yes.” They will reply: “Then
call [invoke God Almighty]! And the invocation of the disbelievers is
nothing but in vain!”***

Conversion to belief in God upon tasting Divine Wrath shall be of no
avail, since repentance upon death shall be in vain. Upon drowning,
Pharaoh repented his sins, but it was said unto him that now it will be
of no use since you committed sins without repentance[^4].

According to the blessed Verse in question, keepers of Hell will say:

*“Now that you are entangled with Divine torment, you may invoke God
Almighty as you wish; however, you are supposed to know that
disbelievers’ invocations will not be answered and they will be in
vain.*

*You confess that Divinely appointed Messengers came unto you with clear
proofs and miracles, but you ignored them and disbelieved. Therefore,
your invocations will be fruitless since God Almighty will never answer
disbelievers’ prayers.”*

A number of Qur’anic exegets maintain that the last sentence indicates
that keepers of Hell say unto disbelievers:

*“You may invoke God yourselves, since we are not supposed to invoke God
Almighty without His Permission.”*

The sentence demonstrates that when angels lack such permission, the
gates to deliverance are all closed and disbelievers’ invocations will
not be answered.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 51 - 52
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا لَنَنْصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْأَشْهَادُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ لا يَنْفَعُ الظَّالِمِينَ مَعْذِرَتُهُمْ وَلَهُمُ اللَّعْنَةُ
وَلَهُمْ سُوءُ الدَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. Indeed We will truly make triumphant Our Messengers and those who
believe in this mundane life and on the Day when the witnesses will
stand forth [to bear witness],***  
***52. The [same] Day when wrong doers’ excuses will be of no use.
Theirs will be the curse, and theirs will be the evil abode.***

It is Divine practice to render support to Messengers and believers. It
is a Divine Promise that Truth becomes victorious over falsehood. Verse
51 is saying:

***“Indeed We will truly make triumphant Our Messengers and those who
believe in this mundane life and on the Day when the witnesses will
stand forth [to bear witness].”***

Such support is emphatically unconditional and boundless; as a
consequence of which it entails different triumphs, including becoming
victorious in arguments, battles, sending down Divine torment upon
opponents and causing their perdition, and also sending down invisible
succors invigorating hearts and souls through Divine Favor.

In Verse 51 we come across a new expression concerning the Day of
Resurrection - the Day when the witnesses will stand forth [to bear
witness]. The word ***ashhad*** is the plural form of shahid
(“witness”).

Different interpretations have been produced as to the identity of such
witnesses which are all consistent with each other:

1. Angels recording deeds,

2. Messengers bearing witness concerning their peoples,

3. Angels, Messengers, and believers who bear witness to deeds of
mankind.

The expression is worthy of attention referring to the point that on
that Day when all people shall gather together, witnesses shall rise to
bear witness. Being disgraced on that Day is the worst as victory on
that Day is the best. God shall support His Messengers and believers on
that Day and shall make them more prestigious.

Nonetheless, that Day is the day of disgrace and misfortune for
disbelievers and wrong doers as reflected in Verse 52:

***“The [same] Day when wrong doers’ excuses will be of no use. Theirs
will be the curse, and theirs will be the evil abode.”***

Firstly, their excuses before witnesses shall be of no avail and they
shall be disgraced at that great tribunal; secondly, they shall be
deprived of Divine Mercy and Divine curse shall befall on them; thirdly,
they shall suffer physical chastisement and torment in the worst abode,
in Hellfire.

It would be of interest to make mention of some Qur’anic Verses
concerning Messengers and Divine Succor bestowed upon Messengers and
believers in order to provide further exposition for :

***“Indeed We will truly make triumphant Our Messengers and those who
believe in this mundane life and on the Day when the witnesses will
stand forth [to bear witness].”***

***“If you help God, He will help you”***[^5]***.***

Noah’s (as) deliverance:

***“We delivered him and those with him on the ship”***[^6]***.***

Abraham’s (as) deliverance:

***“O Fire! Be cold and safe [for Abraham]”***[^7]***.***

Lot’s (as) deliverance:

***“When We saved him and his family all”***[^8]***.***

Joseph’s (as) deliverance:

***“Thus We established Joseph on the land”***[^9]***.***

Shu’ayb’s (as) deliverance:

***“We saved Shu’ayb and those who believed with him”***[^10]***.***

Salih’s (as) deliverance:

***“And thus We do deliver the believers”***[^11]***.***

Hud’s (as) deliverance:

***“We saved Hud and those who believed with him”***[^12]***.***

Jonah’s (as) deliverance:

***“And We saved him from sorrow”***[^13]***.***

Jesus’ (as) deliverance:

***“I will take you and raise you to Myself”***[^14]***.***

The Noble Prophet of Islam’s (S) deliverance:

***“Indeed We have given you a manifest victory”***[^15]***.***

Believers’ deliverance:

***“And Allah has already made you victorious at Badr when you were a
weak little force”***[^16]***;***

***“Then Allah did send down His reassurance on the Messenger (S) and on
the believers”***[^17]***;***

***“He it is Who sent down reassurance into the hearts of the believers
that they may grow more in faith”***[^18]***;***

Answering the prayers of Noah, Jonah, Zachariah, and Job (as)[^19];

Answering the invocations of righteous believers:

***“And He answers the invocation of those who believe and do righteous
good deeds”***[^20]***.***

Divine Deliverance of Prophets and believers manifests itself in diverse
forms as follows:

***“To strengthen your hearts”***[^21]***;***

***“Allah will keep firm those who believe with the word that stands
firm in this world”***[^22]***.***

***“Then his Lord answered his prayers”***[^23]***;***

***“My Lord! Leave not one of the believers on the
earth!”***[^24]***.***

***“Indeed We have sent Our Messengers with clear proofs”***[^25]***.***

***“We had conferred given the family of Abraham a great
kingdom”***[^26]***.***

***“Truly Allah has given you victory on many
battlefields”***[^27]***.***

***“And Verily Allah sent down upon him His reassurance and helped him
with invisible hosts”***[^28]***.***

***“So We took retribution from them. We drowned them in the
sea”***[^29]***.***

***“Is it not enough for you that your Lord should help you with three
thousand angels sent down?”***[^30]***.***

***“And He cast terror into their hearts”***[^31]***.***

***“He it is Who has sent His Messenger (S) with guidance and the
religion of truth to make it victorious over all
religions.***[^32]***”***

***“The We saved him and those with him on the ship”***[^33]***.***

***“Surely Allah weakens the deceitful plots of the
disbelievers”***[^34]***.***

Therefore, man is in need of Divine deliverance at all times.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 53 - 54
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَی الْهُدَی وَأَوْرَثْنَا بَنِي إِسْرائيلَ
الْكِتَابَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُدیً وَذِكْرَی لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. And verily We gave Moses (as) the Guidance and We made the
Children of Israel to inherit the Scripture [the Torah],***  
***54. A guide and a reminder for men of understanding.***

Guidance is a Divine Favor and all people, even the Prophets, are in
need of it.

Thus, the blessed Verses in question say:

***“We gave Moses (as) the Guidance and We made the Children of Israel
to inherit the Scripture [the Torah].”***

The Divine Guidance bestowed upon Moses (as) embraces a broad semantic
range which includes Prophethood, Revelation, the Scripture (Torah), the
Guidance granted to him in order to fulfill his mission, and the
miracles granted to him.

The expression inheritance connoting the Torah indicates that Children
of Israel could avail themselves of it down the generations non gratia
like the property inherited without toil, though they misused this
Divine inheritance.

Verse 54 further adds that this Scripture was Divine Guidance a reminder
for men of understanding. The difference between guidance (hidaya) and
reminder (dhikra) is that the former indicates the inception of
something whereas the latter designates reminding what one has already
heard and believed in it, but he has consigned it into oblivion. In
other words, the Scripture is the origin and the means of progression of
guidance.

However, men of understanding, rather than the blind biased and obdurate
ignorant, reap the harvest in the beginning and thereafter. Intellection
and fear of God are the prerequisites of understanding Divine teachings.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 55
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْبِرْ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ لِذَنْبِكَ
وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ بِالْعَشِيِّ وَالْأِبْكَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. Therefore be patient. Indeed, the Promise of Allah is true, and
ask forgiveness for your sin and glorify the praises of your Lord in the
time period after the noon till sunset and in the time period from early
morning or sunrise till evening.***

In this blessed Verse, God Almighty gives three injunctions of
significance to the Noble Prophet (S). Although they are addressed to
the Noble Prophet (S), but they are in fact given to all people.

The blessed Verse in question opens with the injunction:

***“Be patient as the Promise of Allah is true.”***

He is asked to be tolerant against his enemies’ obduracy, enmity, and
sabotage and also against the ignorance, weakness, negligence, and the
harms of a number of his friends. He is asked to be patient against
unchecked passions and anger since the key to victory is patience
against vicissitudes at all times.

God’s Promise to make him and his followers victorious is true.
Believing in the truth of Divine Promise encourages him and makes him to
preserver against vicissitudes and difficulties.

He is many a time asked to be patient at all times, as it is reflected
in the Verse in question and elsewhere, and at times, specific instances
are mentioned, e.g.:

***“So bear with patience all that they say and glorify the praises of
your Lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting. And
during a part of the night glorify His praises and after the
prayers”***[^35]***;***

***“And keep yourself patiently with those [your seemingly poor
followers] who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His Face
and let not your eyes overlook them”***[^36]***.***

All the victories of the Prophet (S) and early Muslims were the fruits
of patience and perseverance. Even today, one may not vanquish so many
enemies and solve so many problems without the same.

The second injunction says:

***“Ask forgiveness for your sin.”***

Owing to his infallibility, the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) did not
commit sins, but as mentioned above, such Qur’anic expressions
concerning the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) and other Prophets (as)
indicate relative sins, since at times, some of the deeds which are
regarded as good deeds and acts of devotion for ordinary people are
considered as sins for Prophets (as):

***(“The good deeds of the righteous are the sins of those close to God
Almighty”).***

They are not supposed to avoid preferable acts for one single moment.
Owing to their exalted station and understanding, they are supposed to
stay away from such acts and they should ask forgiveness whenever they
commit the same.

A number of Qur’anic exegets maintain that sins committed by Muslims are
ad hoc intended or those sins committed against the Noble Prophet (S),
and asking forgiveness is arbitrary and devotional; however, these
interpretations are not seemingly possible.

The last injunction says:

***“Glorify the praises of your Lord in the time period after the noon
till sunset and in the time period from early morning or sunrise till
evening.”***

The Arabic word ***‘ashi*** designates “afternoon till before sunset”
and abkar is used in the sense of “early morning.”

They may indicate these two times when man is prepared to praise and
glorify Allah, since he has not preoccupied himself with daily affairs
or he has finished them.

The expression may demonstrate the continuity of praising and glorifying
God Almighty throughout the day and night, as we say, for instance, take
care of him morning and night,” by which we mean at all times.

Some have also maintained that such praises and glorification refers to
morning and evening prayers or all daily prayers; however, the
contextual content of the Verse encompasses a broader semantic range and
daily prayers may solely be regarded as their instances.

It is worthy of note that these three comprehensive injunctions aim at
purification of the self for gaining victories through Divine Favor.
They may be used as the provisions required for proceeding on the path
toward attainment of significant goals.

It is incumbent upon man to endure the vicissitudes of life and its
obstacles, purify his heart of sins and any other impurities, and
embellish it with the remembrance of the Lord.

Such embellishment depends upon praising God Almighty for His Perfection
and glorifying Him for His being far from any imperfection. Such praise
and glorification of God Almighty sheds light onto His servants’ hearts,
absolves them of impurities, and adorns them with perfect attributes.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 56
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُجَادِلُونَ فِي آيَاتِ اللَّهِ بِغَيْرِ سُلْطَانٍ
أَتَاهُمْ إِنْ فِي صُدُورِهِمْ إِلَّا كِبْرٌ مَا هُمْ بِبَالِغِيهِ
فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْبَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. Indeed those who dispute about the Ayat (Verses, Signs) of Allah
without any authority having come to them, there is nothing else in
their breasts except pride. They will never have it [nor shall they reap
the fruits of their disputes]. Therefore, seek refuge in Allah. Indeed
it is He Who is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.***

Disputation with the Truth springs from vanity rather than sensibility
and the vain obdurate may not achieve their goal which is leadership.

Thus the blessed Verse says:

***“Indeed those who dispute about the Ayat (Verses, Signs) of Allah
without any authority having come to them, there is nothing else in
their breasts except pride.”***

As mentioned above, the word ***mujadala*** indicates “disputation and
illogical discussions,” though the same is also employed in the
semantically broader sense of truth and falsehood.

The expression:

***“any authority having come to them”***

lays emphasis on the meaning of disputation since authority (sultan)
designates the argument substantiating a claim which leads to one’s
superiority over the other party.

The phrase:

***“having come to them”***

alludes to the arguments revealed by God Almighty and the emphasis on
Revelation is due to the fact that it is the most assuring way of
substantiating the true claims.

Divine Ayat which were subject to disputation refers to the miracles and
Verses of the Holy Qur’an and the relevant discussions regarding Origin
and the Hereafter, at times referred to as sorcery, madness, stories of
the ancients (asatir al-awwalin)!

Therefore, the blessed Verse bears witness to the fact that disputes
Originate from vanity and arrogance, since the arrogant and the vain,
owing to their keen interest in themselves are indifferent to others and
regard their own thought and words true and those of others as false
hence their persistence in the veracity of their baseless claims.

The Arabic particle:

***inna (“indeed”)***

indicates that the such claims originate from vanity and arrogance;
otherwise, how may one insist on one’s claims without producing evidence
and arguments?

The word:

***“breasts” (sudur)***

refers to hearts which in turn designates “soul, thought” recurrently
attested in Qur’anic Verses.

Some Qur’anic exegets interpret the word:

***kibr (“arrogance, vanity”)***

in the aforesaid blessed Verse as hasad (“envy, jelousy”) and maintain
that disputants envy the Noble Prophet’s (S) exalted spiritual and
worldly station and rank; however, the word kibr does not denote hasad
but it may connote it, since the vain and the arrogant are usually
envious as well and wish all bounties for themselves and grieve when
others enjoy them.

The blessed Verse further adds:

***“They will never have it [nor shall they reap the fruits of their
disputes].”***

They intend to satisfy their own vanity and arrogance and rule the
society, but they shall not reap anything but degradation and
debasement. They will neither achieve their vain goals nor will they be
able to nullify the truth through their baseless disputes.

The blessed Verse closes with Divine Injunction to the Noble Prophet
(S):

***“Therefore, seek refuge in Allah. Indeed it is He Who is the
All-Hearer, the All-Seer.”***

God Almighty hears their baseless disputes and sees their vicious deeds
and conspiracies. The point is that not only the Noble Prophet of Islam
(S) but also all believers treading the Path of Truth are supposed to
seek refuge in God Almighty in the vicissitudes of life and against
insensible disputants.

It is for the same reason that against the tempest of Zulaykha’s lust,
Joseph (as) says:

***“I seek refuge in Allah! Truly, he [your husband] is my master! He
made my living in a great comfort! Indeed wrong doers will never be
successful”***[^37]***.***

Verse 27 of the Chapter in question reads:

***“Moses (as) said: ‘Indeed I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from
every arrogant person who believes not in the Day of
Reckoning!’”***[^38]***.***

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 57
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَخَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ أَكْبَرُ مِنْ خَلْقِ النَّاسِ
وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than
the creation of mankind; yet, most of people know not.***

If we take a glance at the grandeur of the creation of the world of
existence, we will never find ourselves superior to others.

Since one of the most significant issues disputed by disbelievers
against the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) is Resurrection, the blessed
Verse in question explicitly raises the issue saying:

***“The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the
creation of mankind; yet, most of people know not.”***

One Who is Able to create such celestial bodies and galaxies with such
grandeur and set them in order will not be incapable of raising the
dead. Some people are too ignorant to understand such truths.

Most of Qur’anic exegets maintain that the blessed Verse is a response
to disbelievers’ disputes against Resurrection.[^39]

Some also hold that the blessed Verse may be a response to the arrogant
who consider their narrow minded though great; however, compared to the
grandeur of the world of existence, they were not but an iota. The
latter is not too remote from the contextual meaning of the Verses, but
taking the following Verses into account, the former interpretation
sounds more appropriate.

Thus, ignorance is mentioned in this blessed Verse as one of the reasons
of false disputes. The issue of vanity and arrogance was already raised
and the two, i.e., ignorance and vanity, are closely intertwined since
vanity springs from ignorance toward one’s limited extent of knowledge.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 58
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَسْتَوِي الْأَعْمَی وَالْبَصِيرُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا
الصَّالِحَاتِ وَلا الْمُسِيءُ قَلِيلاً مَا تَتَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. And not equal are the blind and those who see; nor are [equal]
those who believe and do righteous good deeds and those who do evil.
Little do you remember.***

Those who neglect understanding truths are like the blind. Some of the
people do not know and some of those who know refuse to acknowledge the
truths.

In an explicit comparison, the blessed Verse depicts the state of the
ignorant arrogant against understanding believers, saying:

***“And not equal are the blind and those who see; nor are [equal] those
who believe and do righteous good deeds and those who do evil.”***

The blind refers to the ignorant whose eyes are covered by the veils of
vanity and arrogance thus hindered from perceiving the truth. Au
contraire, the seers is a reference to those who perceive the Truth in
the light of knowledge and logical arguments.

Are they equal? Now, are the believers who do righteous good deeds on a
par with vicious and evil doers? The former comparison aims at knowledge
and understanding and the latter makes a reference to the reflection of
such knowledge in their deeds.

The point is that seers perceive their humbleness and the grandeur of
the world of existence; as a consequence of which they are aware of
their state and rank, but the blind solely perceive their spatial and
temporal states rather than their surrounding world, that is why they
make mistakes concerning their own existence at all times and are
entangled by vanity and arrogance which lead them to doing evil deeds.

It is also possible to make use of the twain clauses of the blessed
Verse to the effect that having faith and doing righteous good deeds
make man see and disbelief and committing evil deeds render him blind
such that the blind are impeded to draw a distinction between truth and
falsehood.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 59
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ السَّاعَةَ لَآتِيَةٌ لا رَيْبَ فِيهَا وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ
النَّاسِ لا يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***59. Indeed the Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt about it, yet
most men believe not.***

Doubts concerning the coming of Resurrection originate from
disbelievers’ ignorance of Divine Omnipotence and Omniscience.

The blessed Verse in question explicitly and decisively apprises people
of the coming of Resurrection, saying:

***“Indeed the Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt about it, yet
most men believe not.”***

***“Indeed” (inna),***

***“surely” (la- in la-atiyatun),***

and

***“there is no doubt about it” (la rayba fi-ha)***

recurrently emphasize that the Day of Resurrection shall definitely
arrive. Many arguments for the substantiation of the coming of
Resurrection are to found in Qur’anic Verses and there are also
attestations of the issue as a certainty without providing arguments.

According to Raghib’s Mufradat, the word:

***sa’a (“hour”)***

is originally employed in the sense of a division of time and since the
coming of Resurrection and Reckoning of deeds shall be carried out
instantly, the word in question is used to convey the idea.

The expression is to be found in tens of Qur’anic Verses in the same
sense; however, it is employed at times regarding the Resurrection per
se at times concerning the end of the world and the beginning of
Resurrection.

Since the twain are closely intertwined and they both occur
unexpectedly, they are referred to as:

***“the Hour.”***

The clause:

***“yet most men believe not”***

is not a reference to the ambiguity and concealment of Resurrection, but
if designates that one of the significant reasons lying behind denial of
Resurrection is inclination toward liberty in taking unconditional use
of worldly possessions and concupiscence.

Furthermore, boundless and vain desires impede man from reflection on
the coming of Resurrection and expressing his belief in the same.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 60
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمُ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***60. And your Lord said: “Invoke Me, I will respond to your
[invocation]. Indeed those who scorn My worship, they will surely enter
Hell in humiliation.”***

God Almighty asks us to invoke Him despite the fact that He is All-Aware
of our needs, but invoking Him entails consequences.

The preceding Verses included warnings against disbelievers and the
vain; however, the blessed Verse in question, He promises the repentant
to bestow His Bounties and Favors on them, saying:

***“And your Lord said: ‘Invoke Me, I will respond to your
[invocation].’”***

Many an exeget maintain that invocation herein and also in numerous
traditions cited in their exegeses under the blessed Verse in question
as to invocation and its Divine Rewards refers to its literal sense.

Nevertheless, following Ibn ‘Abbas, the exeget of repute, some other
Qur’anic exegets hold that invocation attested herein may designate
monotheism and worshipping God Almighty, i.e.

***“Worship Me and believe in My Unity.”***

However, the former interpretation sounds more appropriate.

It is worthy of note that the blessed Verse in question makes mention of
a number of points:

God Almighty wants believers to invoke Him in their devotions.

Answering prayers follows invocation, but we know that it is a
conditional Promise, since solely prayers are answered that they have
the required qualifications as to the invoker and the subject of
invocation. The point was already raised and a detailed discussion on
the same as well as on its philosophy and true meaning are to be found
under 2:186.

Prayer is a form of worship since the word worship is applied to it in
the blessed Verse in question.

Those refraining from invoking God Almighty are thus severely warned:

***“Indeed those who scorn My worship, they will surely enter Hell in
humiliation.”***

Numerous traditions narrated from the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) and
Imams (as) clearly refer to the significance of invocation.

A number of the instances include:

According to a Prophetic tradition:

*“Invocation is worshipping God.”*[^40]

According to a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as), the Noble Imam
is asked:

*“What do you say about two persons who entered a mosque and one of them
established more prayers and the other invoked God Almighty in more
devotions. Which one enjoys a more exalted state?”*

The Imam replied:

*“Both did righteous good deeds.”*

He was again asked:

*“I know that, but which one is superior to the other?”*

The Noble Imam replied:

*“The one who invoked God in more devotions is higher in rank. Have you
not heard that invocation is the greatest worship?”*[^41]

It is reported that Imam Baqir (as) was asked on the excellence of
invocation.

He replied:

*“There is nothing more excellent that invoking God Almighty in
devotions and no one is more detested before God Almighty than one who
is too arrogant to invoke him to bestow His blessings and bounties on
him.”*[^42]

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that there are stations on the Path
toward God Almighty whose attainment is solely possible though
invocation. If one fails to invoke Him, nothing will be granted to him.
Therefore, invoke God Almighty to grant you His Favors, since if you
knock at any door and persevere, it will be finally opened to you.”

According to some traditions, invocation is even considered to entail
more excellence than recitation of the Holy Qur’an, since it is narrated
from the Noble Prophet (S), Imam Baqir (as), and Imam Sadiq (as) that
invocation is more excellent than the recitation of the Holy
Qur’an.[^43]

A brief analysis may lead to the profound contextual meaning of these
traditions, since invocation of God Almighty in devotions leads man to
knowing God Almighty that is the best possession for him on the one hand
and makes him perceive that he is in need of Him and he should be humble
before Him, cast away vanity and arrogance resulting in misfortunes and
disputes concerning the Signs and Verses of God Almighty on the other.

Thus, man feels inferior before His Pure Essence. It is through invoking
God that man perceives that Bounties are bestowed by God Almighty; as a
consequence of which he loves Him thus strengthens his spiritual nexus
with His Presence.

It is in this vein that man perceives that he is in need of Divine
Favors and feels the obligation to submit to Him and obey His Command.

Besides, when man understands that answering prayers is not
unconditional, but it depends on sincerity of intention, purity of
heart, repentance from committing sins, and meeting the demands of
friends and the needy, he will purify his heart and endeavors to avoid
from excesses and impurities.

Furthermore, invocation leads to self confidence and impedes man from
sinking into hopelessness and encourages him to make further attempts to
attain to his goals.

Finally, a significant point is to follow this brief discussion.

According to Islamic traditions, invoking God is required when man
spares no effort in attaining to his goals, but his endeavors are of no
avail; it is then that he invokes God Almighty to render him help. In
other words, man may not invoke God Almighty in lieu of making his
efforts, since in this case, his invocations will not be definitely
answered.

As per a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“There are four groups whose invocations will not be answered: one who
stays at home and asks God to grant him sustenance.*

*It is said unto him:*

*‘Did I not ask you to endeavor?’*

*One who hurts their spouse and the latter prays to God to help them get
rid of them.*

*It is said unto them:*

*‘Did I not permit you to get divorce?’*

*One who squanders their possessions but invokes God to provide them
with sustenance.*

*It is said unto them:*

*‘Did I not provide you with injunctions as to moderation and economy?
Did I not command you to manage your financial affairs wisely?’*

*One who loans their possession to someone without any witness and the
receiver of the loan denies the receipt. The lender invokes God Almighty
to make the denier acknowledge the loan.*

*It is said unto them:*

*‘Did I not command you to take witnesses upon lending your possessions
to others?’”*[^44]

It is needless to say that in such instances, such people do not take
the required care as to making efforts and taking the precautions and
entangled themselves by the undesirable consequences thereof and their
invocations in this vein will not be answered.

Now it has been clarified why many an invocation are not answered: some
people to desist from making efforts and seek refuge in prayers, but God
Almighty shall never answer them. There exist other reasons for prayers
not being answered; for instance, many a time, man makes mistakes as to
distinction between gains and losses.

At times, he invokes God Almighty wholeheartedly to grant him something
which is not to his interest and later on he may notice that his request
was not to his interest.

For example, a patient or a child may ask their nurses to provide them
with delicious foods but acting upon their requests will aggravate their
ailment or their lives may be jeopardized. In such cases, the Most
Compassionate and the Most Gracious Allah will never answer prayers but
saves them for their Hereafter.

Furthermore, answering prayers are subject to conditions mentioned in
Qur’anic Verses and Islamic traditions[^45]. It is mentioned in numerous
traditions that committing certain sins, e.g. malevolence, hypocrisy,
delaying the establishment of daily prayers, slander, consumption of
unlawful food, failure to pay alms tax and expending in Allah’s Cause
impedes prayers from being answered.[^46]

The discussion closes with a significant tradition narrated from Imam
Sadiq (as).

In his Ihtijaj, Tabarsi cites a tradition from the Imam (as):

*“The Noble Imam was asked:*

*‘Does God Almighty not ask His servants to invoke Him and He will
answer the prayers?’ We see many people in need who pray but their
prayers are not answered. We see many wronged people who invoke God to
render them victorious over wrong doers but they are not helped.’*

*The Imam (as) said:*

*‘Woe unto you! No one invokes Him whose prayer is not answered.
However, the wrong doers’ invocations are not accepted unless they
repent.*

*The prayers of the wronged will be answered and the evils are warded
off and at times they are not apprised of the same or the rewards are
abundantly saved for them for their time of need (Day of Resurrection).
Whenever His servants invoke Him to grant them something against their
benefits, He will not answer such prayers.*[^47]

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 61
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ اللَّيْلَ لِتَسْكُنُوا فِيهِ
وَالنَّهَارَ مُبْصِراً إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَی النَّاسِ
وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لا يَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. Allah, it is He Who has made the night for you that you may rest
therein and the day for you to see. Truly, Allah is full of Bounty to
mankind; yet, most of mankind give no thanks.***

It is solely the Creator of the day and night and the Provider of our
needs Who is worthy of being invoked. Since invoking God is secondary to
knowing Him, the following Verse treats of the truths which raise the
level of human understanding and meets one of the requirements of
invocation which is setting one’s hope in its being answered.

The blessed Verse says:

***“Allah, it is He Who has made the night for you that you may rest
therein and the day for you to see,”***

since the darkness of night leads to the obligatory stoppage of daily
activities on the one side and darkness per se engenders serenity and
resting of body and soul and light leads to motion and activity on the
other.

The blessed Verse says:

***“the day for you to see”***

so as to brighten the living environment and prepare it for all
activities. It is worthy of note that ***mubsiran*** indicates “seeing”
and thus depicting the day actually emphasizes making people see.

The blessed Verse further adds:

***“Truly, Allah is full of Bounty to mankind; yet, most of mankind give
no thanks.”***

The precise order of the night and day and the consecution of light and
darkness are instances of Divine Bounties and Favors bestowed upon
servants considered among significant factors of the life of mankind and
other living beings.

There will not be life and motion without light. Without temporary
darkness, all creatures will be weakened and plant will wither. However,
most of people take no account of such Divine Great Bounties and pass
them unnoticed.

It is worthy of note that we normally expect a pronoun for the second

***al-nas (“people, mankind”),***

namely:

***“Truly, Allah is full of Bounty to mankind; yet, most of them give no
thanks,”***

but the use of

***“mankind”***

instead of pronoun may indicate that uncultured mankind are ingratiate
for Divine Blessings, as it is reflected elsewhere in the Qur’an[^48]:

***“and man is indeed an extreme wrong doer, a disbeliever.”***[^49]

However, if man happens to have seeing eyes and a wise heart to perceive
“the showers of His Boundless Mercy have penetrated to every spot and
the banquet of his unstinted liberality is spread out everywhere,” he
will unconsciously express his gratitude and praise before God Almighty
and will feel humble and inferior before Divine Mercy and Glory.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 62 - 63
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ لا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ
فَأَنَّی تُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَلِكَ يُؤْفَكُ الَّذِينَ كَانُوا بِآياتِ اللَّهِ يَجْحَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things: there is no
god but Allah. How then are you turning away [from the Path of
Truth]?***  
***63. Thus were turned away those who used to deny the Ayat (Verses,
Signs) of Allah.***

God Almighty Who is the Lord of mankind and the Creator of all beings is
worthy of praise. One who does not set his hope in the Origin of
existence will deviate from the True Path.

The blessed Verse 62 opens with the Unity of Divine Lordship and closes
with the Unity of Creatorship and Lordship, saying:

***“That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things: there is no god
but Allah.”***

Abundant Divine Bounties actually indicate His Lordship and expediency
of His Acts. Creatorship of all things reveals His Unity of Lordship,
since the Creator of all beings is the Possessor and Fosterer of them.

We know that Divine Creatorship does not designate that He creates all
beings and then leaves them on their own, but all beings of the world of
existence enjoy His Emanations at all times and such Creatorship is
inseparable from Lordship. It is evident that God Almighty is solely
worthy of praise and Divinity.

Thus,

***“the Creator of all things”***

serves as an argument for

***“That is Allah, your Lord”***

and

***“There is no god but Allah”***

is the conclusion.

Verse 62 closes thus:

***“How then are you turning away [from the Path of Truth]?”***

The question raised is:

***“Why do you turn away from worshipping God Almighty and instead you
turn to idolatry?”***

It is noteworthy that tu’fakun is a verb in the passive voice
designating that they make you turn away from the Path of Truth, as if
idolaters are so weak minded that they lack free choice in their course
of action.

Verse 63 lays emphasis on the foregoing points, saying:

***“Thus were turned away those who used to deny the Ayat (Verses,
Signs) of Allah.”***

The verb form yajhadun derives from j-h-d designating denial of
something entertained in one’s heart, i.e. believing in something and
denying the same or believing in the denial of something but proving the
same.

Stingy and closefisted people who pretend to be poor are called jahd and
ard jahda is applied to a land with less plants.[^50] Some other
lexicographers define jahd and juhud as thought accompanied by
knowledge.[^51]

Thus, the semantic range of jahd entails some obduracy and/or enmity
against God Almighty.

Such people confront with truths with such attribute and they merely
turn away from the Path of Truth, since a truth seeking man who is
submitted to Divine Will may solely attain to the Truth which requires
purification of the self and fearing God Almighty as a prerequisite for
believing in Him, as reflected in the Holy Qur’an[^52]:

***“This is the Book whereof there is no doubt, a guidance to the God
fearing pious.”***

[^1]: 19:62

[^2]: 13:35

[^3]: Misbah by Shaykh, apud Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 4, p.526.

[^4]: 40:85

[^5]: 47:9

[^6]: 10:73

[^7]: 31:69

[^8]: 37:134

[^9]: 12:21

[^10]: 11:94

[^11]: 21:88

[^12]: 21:66

[^13]: 10:

[^14]: 3:55

[^15]: 48:1

[^16]: 3:123

[^17]: 9:26

[^18]: 48:4

[^19]: 21:76

[^20]: 42:26

[^21]: 8:11

[^22]: 14:11

[^23]: 12:34

[^24]: 71:26

[^25]: 57:25

[^26]: 4:54

[^27]: 9:4

[^28]: 9:4

[^29]: 7:136

[^30]: 3:124

[^31]: 59:2

[^32]: 61:9

[^33]: 29:15

[^34]: 8:18

[^35]: 51:39-40

[^36]: 18:28

[^37]: 12:23

[^38]: 40:27

[^39]: Fakhr Razi’s Majma’ al-Bayan; Kashshaf; Ruh al-Ma’ani; Tafsir
Safi; Ruh al-Bayan.

[^40]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 8, p. 528.

[^41]: Ibid, p. 529.

[^42]: Kafi, vol. 2, Bab Fadl al-Du’a (“Chapter on the Excellence of
Invocation”), p. 338.

[^43]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, apud al-Mizan, vol. 2, p. 34, under 2:186.

[^44]: Usul Kafi, vol. 2, Bab Du’a (“Chapter on Invocation”), hadith 2.

[^45]: for details, see the exegesis of 2:186

[^46]: Ma’ani al-Akhbar, apud Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 4, p. 534.

[^47]: Tafsir Safi, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^48]: 14:34

[^49]: Tafsir al-Mizan; Ruh al-Ma’ani, under the blessed Verse in
question.

[^50]: Raghib’s Mufradat, under j-h-d.

[^51]: Lisan al-’Arab, apud Jawhari.

[^52]: 2:2


