Surah al-Ghafir, Verses 64 - 85
===============================

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 64
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ قَرَاراً وَالسَّمَاءَ بِنَاءً
وَصَوَّرَكُمْ فَأَحْسَنَ صُوَرَكُمْ وَرَزَقَكُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ
ذَلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***64. Allah, it is He Who has made for you the earth as a dwelling
place and the sky as a canopy, and has given you shape and made your
shapes good and has provided you with good things. That is Allah, your
Lord: so Bountiful and Exalted is Allah, the Lord of the worlds.***

The earth as a serene dwelling place, fashioning the sky, creation of
man, and providing him with blessings are all for fostering him as his
good shape and pure provision and sustenance are manifestations of
Divine Lordship.

The blessed Verse in question resumes the discussion on Divine Favors
bestowed upon servants so as to accord them further knowledge and hope
in whose light they may invoke God Almighty and their prayers be
answered.

It is worthy of note that the preceding Verses treated of temporal
bounties, i.e. night and day, and the blessed Verse in question deals
with spatial Bounties, e.g. the earth as a dwelling place and the
elevated canopy of the sky, saying:

***“Allah, it is He Who has made for you the earth as a dwelling
place.”***

God Almighty created all the prerequisites for the establishment of a
secure and serene dwelling place, free from quaking, harmonious with
human physical and psychological aspects, and abounding in many Bounties
encompassing all human needs.

The blessed Verse further adds:

***“and the sky as a canopy.”***

The word bana’, according to Ibn Mansur’s Lisan al-’Arab, is applied to
tents and canopies and the like used by Bedouin.

The sky is interestingly depicted as a canopy surrounding the earth. It
is worthy of note that the word sky indicates the atmosphere surrounding
the earth like a canopy.

This great Divine canopy serves as a means of protection against severe
sun shine without which the rays of the sun and the fatal rays of
galaxies would have perished all living beings on the face of the earth.

It is for the same reason that astronauts have to constantly wear
specially heavy and valuable clothes to protect them against such rays.

Furthermore, the “canopy” protects the earth from meteors constantly
absorbed toward the earth and burns them at the outset of entering the
atmosphere due to their velocity and pressure so that their ashes calmly
subside on the earth.

The same idea is attested elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^1]:

***“And We have made the heaven a roof, safe and well guarded.”***

The blessed Verse proceeds from physical to spiritual issues:

***“[He is the One Who] has given you shape and made your shapes
good.”***

With his erect, well built body, and beautiful visage, man is superior
to other living beings and he is thus able to perform all kinds of
delicate or heavy tasks and live conveniently and enjoy the bounties of
life. Contrary to most of animals that use their mouths nozzles to eat
and drink, man uses his hands to select healthy food, peel fruits, and
dispense with useless pieces.

A number of Qur’anic exegets interpret

***sura (literally “visage, face”)***

herein in the sense of outward and inward aspects designating faculties
and tastes created by God Almighty in man through which he is superior
to all living beings.

The fourth and the last Bounty mentioned in the blessed Verse is that
God Almighty

***“has provided you with good things.”***

The word tayyibat is of broad semantic range encompassing any good and
pure thing, e.g. food, clothes, spouses, homes, mounts, and even good
words and conversations. Man may render such bounties impure through
ignorance, but God Almighty has created them pure.

Following an enumeration of these four great Bounties, which are two by
two granted to the sky and the earth and man, the blessed Verse says:

***“That is Allah, your Lord: so Bountiful and Exalted is Allah, the
Lord of the worlds.”***

The Bestower of all these bounties upon mankind is the Creator of the
world of existence and He is worthy to be worshipped for His Lordship.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 65
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الْحَيُّ لا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ فَادْعُوهُ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ
الدِّينَ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***65. He is the Ever-Living, there is no god but Allah. Therefore,
invoke Him, having made your worship pure for Him Alone. All the praises
and thanks are to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.***

Real existence belongs to God but the existence of other beings is
limited, transient, and contingent. The blessed Verse treats of knowing
God Almighty and invoking and worshipping Him.

The question of the Unity of worshipping God Almighty proceeds from a
different course in this Verse which is acknowledgement of existence in
the real sense of the word as belonging to Him Alone, saying:

***“He is the Ever-Living,”***

since His Existence springs from His Own Essence Which is Independent of
other beings and Immortal. It is solely God Almighty Who possesses such
Attributes and all living beings besides Him lead a limited and
transient life which springs from Divine Essence.

The object of worship is supposed to be Ever-Living as:

***“There is no god but Allah. Therefore, invoke Him, having made your
worship pure for Him Alone.”***

Man is supposed to leave aside all beings besides God Almighty, since
they are transient and constantly change in the course of their life.

***“You are not subject to alteration. You are the only Being Who has
not died and shall not die.”***

The blessed Verse closes thus:

***“All the praises and thanks are to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”***

The statement is actually an admonition to Allah’s servants who glorify
and praise Him for the Bounties mentioned in the preceding Verses, the
Bounties encompassing all human existence, particularly that of life.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 66
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي نُهِيتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ الَّذِينَ تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ
اللَّهِ لَمَّا جَاءَنِيَ الْبَيِّنَاتُ مِنْ رَبِّي وَأُمِرْتُ أَنْ
أُسْلِمَ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***66. Say: “I have been forbidden to worship those whom you worship
besides Allah, since there have come to me Signs from my Lord and I am
commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds.***

Believers may not suffice to believe in Allah in their hearts, but they
are supposed to express their belief. Association with Allah’s friends
and dissociation from His enemies should accompany each other. Having
not warded all kinds of polytheism and disbelief, we may not be
monotheists in the real sense of the word.

The blessed Verse in question makes a conclusion of the foregoing
discussions on Divine Unity and so as to render polytheists and
idolaters desperate, the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) is thus addressed:

***“I have been forbidden to worship those whom you worship besides
Allah, since there have come to me Signs from my Lord and I am commanded
to submit to the Lord of the worlds.”***

The blessed Verse impedes man from idolatry and produces manifest,
sensible, intellectual, and narrational arguments which have come to him
from his Lord.

It is also an injunction as to submission against

***“the Lord of the worlds”***

which presents a sufficient argument for total submission against His
Pure Essence.

It is worthy of note that injunction (amr) and prohibition (nahy) are
distinct in this Verse, injunction toward total submission before God
Almighty and prohibition from idolatry.

The reason lying behind the distinction may lie in the fact that in
terms of worshipping idols, man worships what he is prohibited from it,
but in terms of worshipping God Almighty, man, besides worshipping Him,
is supposed to submit to His Commands.

It is attested elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^2]:

***“Say: ‘Indeed I am commanded to worship Allah by obeying Him and
doing religious deeds sincerely for His sake only. And I am commanded
[this] in order that I may be the first of those who submit themselves
to Allah as Muslims.”***

It is worthy of note that the Verse is saying that I have received
injunctions and prohibitions, namely you are supposed to take care of
yourselves without provoking their sense of obduracy.

The last word about the preceding Verses is that the Divine Attribute:

***“Lord of the worlds”***

is reiterated in three consecutive Verses:

***“So Bountiful and Exalted is Allah, the Lord of the worlds,”***

***“All the praises and thanks are to Allah, the Lord of the worlds,”***

***“I am commanded to submit to the Lord of the worlds.”***

The logical sequence is evident: Divine Immortality and Bountifulness;
all praises and thanks are devoted to His Pure Essence; His Sacred
Essence as the only Object of worship.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 67
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ نُطْفَةٍ ثُمَّ مِنْ
عَلَقَةٍ ثُمَّ يُخْرِجُكُمْ طِفْلاً ثُمَّ لِتَبْلُغُوا أَشُدَّكُمْ
ثُمَّ لِتَكُونُوا شُيُوخاً وَمِنْكُمْ مَنْ يُتَوَفَّی مِنْ قَبْلُ
وَلِتَبْلُغُوا أَجَلاً مُسَمّیً وَلَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***67. It is He Who has created you from dust, then from semen, then
from a clot, then brings you forth as an infant [from womb], then [makes
you grow] to reach the age of full strength, and afterwards to be old,
though some among you die before [you reach an advanced age, but some of
you live and] reach an appointed term in order that you may
understand.***

Man is created from clay rather than from animals through evolution. It
is Divine Omnipotence that makes the reasoning and thinking man from
inanimate clay. The best subject of intellection is man’s creation whose
death does not lead to his perdition but it is taking his soul from his
body.

Thus the blessed Verse in question says:

***“It is He Who has created you from dust, then from semen, then from a
clot, then brings you forth as an infant [from womb], then [makes you
grow] to reach the age of full strength, and afterwards to be old,
though some among you die before [you reach an advanced age, but some of
you live and] reach an appointed term in order that you may
understand.”***

Therefore, the first stage is man’s creation from clay, since all
nutrient elements constituting man and his semen stem from clay. The
next stage is that of semen which concerns all men but Adam and his
wife, Eve.

The third stage is the one in which semen has evolved into a clot. The
fourth stage is that of mudgha (“small chunk of chewed flesh”) in which
organs begin to develop and it is the stage of sense and movement. The
Holy Qur’an does not make mention of these three stages herein but it is
mentioned elsewhere in It.

The fourth stage is mentioned herein as that of the birth of the embryo.
The fifth stage is that of development of physical strength maintained
by some as the age of thirty in which physical strength reaches its
zenith, though some have considered it earlier or later than thirty
years of age; however it is different in different people.

The mentioned age is termed as:

***“utmost growth or maturity” (bulugh ashadd)***

in the Holy Qur’an. After the age of thirty, faculties begin to regress.
The sixth stage is old age which comes in time. Finally, the last stage
arrives which is the end of life and man is taken to his immortal
dwelling place.

Taking some many expressions, systematic and well measured developments
there remains no room for doubts as to the Omnipotence and Glory of the
Origin of the world of existence and His Bounties and Favors.

It is worthy of note that the clause:

***“He created you” (khalaqakum)***

is employed with regard to the first four stages concerning man’s
creation from clay, semen, clot, and the birth of the infant in which no
role is stipulated for man; however, the three stages following birth,
i.e. the stage of attaining to the zenith of physical strength, old age,
and the end of life, the clauses:

***“that you reach” (li-tablughu)***

and

***“that you be” (li-takunu)***

are employed which refer to man’s existential independence following
birth and probably to the fact that the three stages may be attained
earlier or later owing to man’s prudence or imprudence; in other words,
man may cause his early old age or early death mentioning which makes a
reference to Qur’anic precise expressions.

The verbal form:

***yutawaffa (“you die”)***

referring to death indicates that within the context of Qur’anic Verses,
death is not equal to perdition, but angels of death take human soul to
the other world.

This recurrent Qur’anic motif explicitly reveals the Islamic attitude
toward death thus totally stripping death of the material concept which
is perdition and non-existence and considers it as a gate to the world
of immortality.

The clause:

***“some among you die before [you reach an advanced age]”***

may either refer to the period of life prior to death or to all the
preceding stages in which man may come to the end of his life.

It is also worthy of note that all these stages are intertwined with

***“then” (thumma)***

indicating consecutiveness with interludes except the last stage which
is the end of life connected with

***“and” (wa).***

This different expression may demonstrate that reaching the end of life
does not necessarily occur following attaining to an old age, since:

***“many a youth died before reaching advanced years”***

and even some children or young adults die before reaching youth.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 68
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ فَإِذَا قَضَی أَمْراً فَإِنَّمَا
يَقُولُ لَهُ كُنْ فَيَكُونُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***68. It is He Who gives life and causes death. And when He decides
upon a thing He says to it only: “Be!” and it is.***

It is solely God Almighty Who gives life and causes death. He is
omnipotent and nothing lies beyond His Omnipotence. His Will is
inevitable and irresistible.

The blessed Verse treats of the most significant manifestations of
Divine Omnipotence which is the question of life and death. Despite
scientific advancement, the two phenomena are still dilemmas. Life and
death in the broader sense of the words as applicable to plants,
animals, and human beings in diverse forms are within Divine
Omnipotence.

It is worthy of note that living beings, from monocellular to gigantic
beings living in the dark depths of oceans to the birds soaring in the
sky, to planktons, to trees whose heights reach tens of meters each have
a particular type of life and circumstances. It is in the same vein that
they differ in the manner of death.

Forms of life are indubitably the most diverse and the most wondrous
forms of the world of creation, particularly coming from the inanimate
into the animate world and vice versa are one of the most amazing
manifestations of Divine Omnipotence.

It is needless to say that none of these intricate and significant
issues constitutes any difficulty before Him and they come into being so
long as He commands them to do likewise.

Therefore, the blessed Verse thus closes:

***“And when He decides upon a thing He says to it only: ‘Be!’ and it
is.”***

The employment of

***“Be”***

and

***“and it is”***

indicates the incompetence of words in conveying meaning, otherwise
there would be no need to such words since Divine Will directly leads to
the creation of the being.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 69 - 70
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَی الَّذِينَ يُجَادِلُونَ فِي آيَاتِ اللَّهِ أَنَّی
يُصْرَفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِالْكِتَابِ وَبِمَا أَرْسَلْنَا بِهِ رُسُلَنَا
فَسَوْفَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***69. See you not those who dispute about the Ayat (Verses, Signs) of
Allah? How are they turning away [from Truth]?***  
***70. Those who deny the Book and that with which We sent Our
Messenger, they will come to know [the consequences of their acts].***

Familiarity with the history of ancient obdurate peoples provides modern
peoples with lessons and peace of mind. Disputing about Qur’anic is on a
par with going astray; that is why warning could be quite fruitful in
propagation.

The blessed Verse in question treats of those who dispute about Divine
Ayat and deny the arguments and Calls of Messengers. The fate of such
people is vividly depicted in these Verses.

Verse 69 opens thus:

***“See you not those who dispute about the Ayat (Verses, Signs) of
Allah? How are they turning away [from Truth]?”***

such disputes are accompanied by obduracy and enmity and these blind
imitations and unfounded biases lead them astray, since Truth manifests
itself solely through the spirit of truth-seeking.

The rhetorical question addressed to the Noble Prophet (S) indicates
that taking into account their state, any impartial person wonders at
their error and asks himself:

*“what do they not see the truth despite the availability of so many
clear Signs and Verses?”*

Verse 70 adds:

***“Those who deny the Book and that with which We sent Our
Messenger.”***

It is worthy of note that the clause:

***“those who dispute about the Ayat (Verses, Signs) of Allah”***

is attested thrice in the Chapter in question[^3] and the contextual
meaning indicates that the Ayat of Allah refers to the Signs of
Prophethood and the contents of the Scriptures.

Since the Signs of Divine Unity and the issues concerning Resurrection
were included in Scriptures, they were also subject to disputes. Does
the reiteration lays emphasis on this significant topic or some other
issue were intended by the same?

The latter sounds more viable, since each of the here Verses treat of
some specific topic. Verse 56 deals with the incentives of such
disputes, namely vanity and arrogance, whereas Verse 35 discusses their
worldly chastisement which is sealing up their hearts by God Almighty.

The blessed Verse in question[^4] treats of their otherworldly
chastisement and kinds of torments to be inflicted on them in Hell.

It is also noteworthy that the verbal form:

***yujadilun (“they dispute”)***

is in the present tense and indicates progression. It is a reference to
those who deny Divine Signs and verses so as to justify their vicious
false beliefs and vicious deeds and preoccupy themselves with baseless
disputes.

Thus they are warned at the close of the Verse:

***“[Soon] they will come to know [the consequences of their acts].”***

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 71 - 72
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذِ الْأَغْلالُ فِي أَعْنَاقِهِمْ وَالسَّلاسِلُ يُسْحَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي الْحَمِيمِ ثُمَّ فِي النَّارِ يُسْجَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. When iron collars will be rounded over their necks and the chains
they shall be dragged along,***  
***72. In the boiling water, then they will be burned in the Fire.***

The word ***aghlal*** is the plural form of ghull indicating “iron
collar” as a token of debasement and denigration.

***Salasil*** is the pluralized form of silsila (“chain”) and the verbal
forms ***yusbahun*** and ***yusjarun*** designate “they are dragged
along” and “they are burned” respectively. Depiction of Resurrection and
the diverse kinds of torments as reflected in Divine Revelation warns
and fosters man and creates the fear of God in him.

Thus the two blessed Verses in question say:

***“When iron collars will be rounded over their necks and the chains
they shall be dragged along in the boiling water, then they will be
burned in the Fire.”***

Some Qur’anic exegets maintain that they are filled with fire, though
the two meanings are not inconsistent. The torment is actually a
reaction against the deeds of those who obdurately and arrogantly
disputed about Divine Ayat and denied them out of vanity and ignorance.

Thus, they entangle themselves in the chains of blind imitations and
biases and on that Day, they will be fettered with iron collars and
shackles with utmost humility. They will be dragged along in boiling
water and they will turn into kindling in Hell.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 73 - 74
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قِيلَ لَهُمْ أَيْنَ مَا كُنْتُمْ تُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ قَالُوا ضَلُّوا عَنَّا بَلْ لَمْ نَكُنْ نَدْعُوا
مِنْ قَبْلُ شَيْئاً كَذَلِكَ يُضِلُّ اللَّهُ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. Then it will be said to them: “Where are [all] those whom you
used to associate in worship as partners***  
***74. Besides Allah?” They will say: “They have vanished from us [then
thus they will lie]: Nay, we did not invoke anything before.” Thus Allah
leads astray the disbelievers.***

The Day of Resurrection is the day of manifestation of truths and
fruitlessness of polytheism. The blessed Verses are saying that besides
inflicting physical torments upon them, they shall suffer from
psychological excruciating torments.

***“Where are [all] those whom you used to associate in worship as
partners Besides Allah”***

so that they may intercede on your behalf and save you from such painful
torments and the blazing Hellfire? Now, where are they to intercede on
your behalf?

Bowing their heads in shame, they will reply:

***“They have vanished from us and perished such that we know nothing of
them.”***

As reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an, these false objects of
worship are indubitably in Hell and most probably they are beside their
former worshippers, but since they are ineffective, it seems as if they
are deaf and blind!

Then they notice that their former confession to their praiseworthiness
is a stigma of disgrace on them; as a consequence of which they deny
their praiseworthiness, saying:

***“Nay, we did not invoke anything before.”***

They try to say that they were not but illusions, like a mirage in the
desert of life that we regarded as real springheads; however they now
know that they were names devoid of meaning whose worship was solely
vanity and error. Thus they express an indubitable reality.

Another possible interpretation is that they try to tell lies, assuming
that they may deliver themselves from disgrace and shame through lying,
as reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^5]:

***“there will then be [left] no excuses for them but to say: ‘By Allah,
our Lord, we were not those who joined others in worship with Allah.’
Behold! How they lie against themselves! But the [lie] which they
invented will disappear from them.”***

Thus Verse 74 closes:

***“Thus Allah leads astray the disbelievers.”***

Their disbelief and obduracy serve as veils covering their hearts and
thought, as a consequence of which they deviate from the Straight Path
and go astray. On the Day of Resurrection, they shall be deprived of
Paradise and shall enter Hell. Thus God Almighty leads disbelievers
astray.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 75 - 76
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَفْرَحُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ
وَبِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَمْرَحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْخُلُوا أَبْوَابَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا فَبِئْسَ مَثْوَی
الْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. That [torment] was because you had been exulting in the earth
without any right and that you used to rejoice extremely [in your
error].***  
***76. Enter the gates of Hell to abide therein and what an evil abode
of the arrogant!***

The Islamic faith is in man’s natural and primordial disposition
(fitra). It is not against happiness which is in man’s original nature.
It is only inappropriate exultations which are subject to criticism a
number of whose instances are reflected in the Holy Qur’an.

The blessed Verse 75 says:

***“That [torment] was because you had been exulting in the earth
without any right and that you used to rejoice extremely [in your
error].”***

They rejoiced in denying the Prophets, slaying believers, and
suppressing the deprived and the weak. They were falsely proud of
committing sins and breaking the law. Now they have to meet the
consequences of such improper exultation, arrogance, negligence, and
concupiscence in shackles and fetters and amid blazing flames of
Hellfire.

The verbal form ***tafrahun*** derives from f-r-h (“exult, rejoice”)
which may be employed in an ameliorative sense, as in 30:4-5:

***“And on that Day, the believers will rejoice [the people of the Book
against the Magians] with the help of Allah,”***

or a pejorative one, as reflected in the story of Korah[^6]:

***“Remember when his people said to him: ‘Do not exult in vain, since
Allah likes not those who exult vainly.’”***

The difference between the two connotations should be distinguished and
it is evident that it is employed pejoratively in the blessed Verse in
question.

The verbal form tamrahun derives from m-r-h and according to a number of
Qur’anic exegets and lexicographers it designates

***“rejoice excessively.”***

Some maintain that the word connotes rejoice in vain but some others
hold that it implies rejoicing by making use of Divine Bounties in vain.

These senses apparently refer to the same signification, since excessive
rejoicing leads to error and is accompanied by sins, impurities, and
concupiscent desires.

Such vain exultations imbued with arrogance, neglect, vanity, and
concupiscent desires lead man astray in the twinkling of an eye and
impede him from comprehending the truth. Such attitude renders realities
facetious and truths, vain. The fate reflected in the preceding Verses
is in store for such people.

Verse 76 is addressed to the people condemned to torment who are being
asked to

***“enter the gates of Hell to abide therein and what an evil abode of
the arrogant!”***

The Verse is a further emphasis on the fact that misfortunes stem from
vanity and arrogance, serving as the origin of all evils, a veil before
the truth seeking eyes of man, resistance to Messengers, and persistence
in error.

Again, we come across

***“the gates”***

of Hell in the blessed Verse in question. Does entering the gates of
Hell indicate that each group enters a specific gate?

Or a group enters different gates? It may imply that there are different
gates and levels in Hell, in the manner of terrible prisons with
labyrinthine corridors with many cells, and a number of those who were
obdurately in error have to descend all these levels and find their
everlasting abode on the lowest level at the depth of Hell!

In this vein, a tradition is narrated from the Commander of the
Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) as the interpretation of a Qur’anic Verse[^7]:

***“It [Hell] has seven gates, for each of those gates is a [specific]
group [of sinners] assigned,”***

saying:

*“Hell has seven gates. It has seven levels on top of each other.”*

Then, he laid one hand on the other, saying:

*“Like this!”*[^8]

There is another interpretation according to which the gates of Hell,
like those of Paradise, refer to different factors leading man to Hell
or Paradise, e.g. sins and good righteous deeds, as reflected in Islamic
traditions. The number seven indicates multiplicity rather than number.
It is worthy of note that the eight gates of Paradise designate that
Bounties exceed torments.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 77
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْبِرْ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ فَإِمَّا نُرِيَنَّكَ بَعْضَ
الَّذِي نَعِدُهُمْ أَوْ نَتَوَفَّيَنَّكَ فَإِلَيْنَا يُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***77. Therefore, [O Prophet] be patient! Indeed the Promise of Allah is
true and whether We show you some part of what We have promised them or
We cause you to die [before that] then [in any case] still it is to Us
they all shall be returned.***

The Veracity of Divine Promises is the source of patience and serenity,
since Divine Acts occur timely.

Resuming the foregoing discussions on disbelievers’ impediments and
their arrogance and vanity and denial of Divine Verses and Signs, the
Noble Prophet (S) is thus consoled:

***“Therefore, [O Prophet] be patient! Indeed the Promise of Allah is
true.”***

In other words, the Promise of victory to the Noble Prophet (S) and the
Warning against the excruciating chastisement of the arrogant are both
true and shall be indubitably fulfilled.

In order to hinder the enemies of Truth from conceiving that any delay
in their chastisement may deliver them from Divine chastisement, the
Verse further adds:

***“If we show you some part of what We have promised them or We cause
you to die [prior to their entanglement with torments] then still [it
does not matter, since] it is to Us they all shall be returned [and We
shall fulfill Our Promises].”***

The Noble Prophet’s (S) obligation was to clearly declare his Call and
impart the Truth to all people such that the hearts of the awakened
people may be enlightened through your propagation of the Islamic faith
and there remains no room for the opponents of the true faith.

The Noble Prophet (S) was merely asked to attend to the fulfillment of
his obligation without feeling sympathy for the affliction of the
obdurate disbelievers with Divine torments. The Verse is evidently a
clear warning against them so they know that they shall be entangled
with Divine torment in the Hereafter as some of them met their dire ends
on the battlefield of Badr.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 78
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلاً مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْهُمْ مَنْ قَصَصْنَا
عَلَيْكَ وَمِنْهُمْ مَنْ لَمْ نَقْصُصْ عَلَيْكَ وَمَا كَانَ لِرَسُولٍ
أَنْ يَأْتِيَ بِآيَةٍ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ فَإِذَا جَاءَ أَمْرُ
اللَّهِ قُضِيَ بِالْحَقِّ وَخَسِرَ هُنَالِكَ الْمُبْطِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***78. And verily We have sent Messengers before you of some of them We
have related to you their story. And of some We have not related to you
their story and it was not given to any Messenger that he should bring a
sign except by the Leave of Allah. But, when comes the Commandment of
Allah [the Day of Resurrection], the matter will be decided with truth
and the followers of falsehood will then be at loss.***

One of the means of education and guidance, made use of many a time in
the Holy Qur’an, is to narrate the history of the ancients and good
models. The Day of Resurrection is the Day of Divine Judgment and the
disgrace of the followers of falsehood.

To further console the Noble Prophet (S), the blessed Verse in question
makes a reference to the Prophets of ancient peoples who were entangled
with such difficulties but pursued the propagation of their teachings
despite the impediments; as a consequence of which they became
victorious:

***“And verily We have sent Messengers before you of some of them We
have related to you their story. And of some We have not related to you
their story”***

each of whom faced such intolerable vicissitudes and many a vain and
obdurate disbeliever; nevertheless, finally Truth prevailed and wrong
doers and sinners were vanquished.

Since obdurate and querulous polytheists and disbelievers asked
Messengers to show unto them their miracles at all times and the
polytheists contemporaneous with the Prophet of Islam (S) requested the
same, the blessed Verse in question further adds:

***“And it was not given to any Messenger that he should bring a sign
except by the Leave of Allah.”***

All miracles are wrought by Divine Will rather than by disbelievers’
requests who consider them to be playthings.

Thus, the Noble Prophet (S) may not accept their requested miracles;
rather God Almighty made evident unto people what was required for
public guidance at the hands of Prophets.

The blessed Verse addresses with a serious and warning tone the
disbelievers who said unto the Noble Prophet (S) that had he been right,
how come that Divine torment would not have been sent unto them.

Thus the blessed Verse warns them:

***“But, when comes the Commandment of Allah [the Day of Resurrection],
the matter will be decided with truth and the followers of falsehood
will then be at loss.”***

On that Day, no repentance shall be accepted and all the ways of
returning to Allah shall be obstructed. Moans and cries shall be of no
avail.

It is on that Day that the followers of falsehood shall clearly perceive
that they have missed their opportunities without accruing any righteous
good deeds, rather they have been entangled with Divine Wrath and
excruciating torments.

Why then do they ask for the coming of that irreversible Day? As per
this interpretation, the blessed Verse in question makes a reference to
the torment of desperateness.

However, some Qur’anic exegets maintain that the blessed Verse refers to
the Divine Command of inflicting torments upon wrong doers on the Day of
Resurrection. It shall be on that Day that the deeds of all men shall be
judged with truth and the followers of falsehood shall be apprised of
their total loss.

The interpretation is substantiated by another Qur’anic Verse[^9]:

***“And on the Day that the Hour will be established, on that Day the
followers of falsehood shall lose [everything].”***

Phrases like:

***“Divine Decree”***

are applied to the torment in this world in numerous Qur’anic
Verses[^10]. The Verse may be of a broader semantic range to encompass
the torments in this world and the Hereafter. It is worthy of note that
the total loss of the followers of falsehood become evident in both.

It is also noteworthy that according to a number of narrations there was
a clown in Medina who make people laugh and at times said that Imam
Sajjad ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) had irritated him since he had not been
successful in making him laugh.

Thus, one day the Imam (as) was passing by and the clown took away his
aba (‘aba’), but the Noble Imam (as) did not take any heed of him. The
Imam’s companions followed the clown and restored the cloak. Imam (as)
inquired them about his identity.

They replied:

*“He is a clown who makes Medinans laugh.”*

The Noble Imam (as) asked them to say unto him:

*“There shall be a Day on which followers of falsehood shall be at
loss.”*

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 79 - 81
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَنْعَامَ لِتَرْكَبُوا مِنْهَا
وَمِنْهَا تَأْكُلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَكُمْ فِيهَا مَنَافِعُ وَلِتَبْلُغُوا عَلَيْهَا حَاجَةً فِي
صُدُورِكُمْ وَعَلَيْهَا وَعَلَی الْفُلْكِ تُحْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُرِيكُمْ آيَاتِهِ فَأَيَّ آيَاتِ اللَّهِ تُنْكِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***79. Allah it is He Who has made quadrupeds for you that you may ride
on some of them and of some you eat.***  
***80. And you have benefits from them and that you may reach by their
means a desire that is in your breasts and on them and on ships you are
carried.***  
***81. And He shows you His Ayat [i.e., Signs and Verses, at all times].
Which then of the Ayat of Allah do you deny?***

Taking heed of Divine Bounties is the best means of development and
reinforcement of knowledge and gratitude. In this vein, attending to
those Bounties which may be perceived and used by all people at any time
and any place is the best way.

Thus, these Verses refer to the Signs of Divine Omnipotence and His
All-Embracing Bounties and reveal some of them so that people may be
further acquainted with His Glory and thereby arouse the sense of
gratitude as a means of knowing God Almighty in them.

The blessed Verse reads:

***“Allah it is He Who has made quadrupeds for you that you may ride on
some of them and of some you eat.”***

Some cattle, e.g. sheep, are used for their meet and some larger ones
are used as mounts as well, e.g. camel which is the ship of parched
deserts and is also used for its meat.

The Arabic word ***an’am*** (plural form of na’am) was originally
employed in the sense of camel but its semantic range further developed
to include camel, cow, and sheep. The word is a cognate of ni’ma
(“delight”), since cattle are among the delights of man.

Even today, despite the availability of vehicles used on the land and in
the air, at times men have solely to make use of cattle for crossing
sandy deserts and narrow mountainous passageways.

The creation of diverse quadrupeds, particularly owing to their
domesticability, is at times stronger than the most powerful men serve
as Great Signs of God Almighty. There are small beasts of prey which are
dangerous for men, but at times, a child may lead a file of enormous
camels and

***“he may take them where ever he wishes!”***

Besides, man makes many other uses of them as reflected in Verse 80:

***“And you have benefits from them.”***

Man makes use of them for their milk, fleece, hair, hide, and even their
feces as fertilizer. In short, there is nothing useless in cattle; even
some drugs are made from them.

The blessed Verse proceeds to add that there was another reason for
their creation:

***“that you may reach by their means a desire that is in your
breasts.”***

A number of Qur’anic exegets maintain that the Verse makes a reference
to the transportation of consignments with quadrupeds as reflected in
the preceding clauses, but

***“a desire that is in your breasts”***

may also indicate personal uses, such as making use of them for the
purposes of recreation, emigration, travel, races, gaining prestige, and
the like.

Since they are all used for traveling on the land, the Verse closes
thus:

***“on them and on ships you are carried.”***

The employment of the phrase

***“on them” (‘alayha)***

whose antecedent is

***“quadrupeds”***

precedes

***“ships” (fulk)***

indicates that God Almighty provided men with means of transportation in
deserts and seas so that they may reach their destinations conveniently.
God Almighty created a quality in ships that despite their heaviness,
they stay afloat. He set order in the flow of winds such that they may
be used for sailing and “visiting friends.”

Verse 81 lays further emphasis on Divine Bounties and asks mankind to
bear testimony to them:

***“And He shows you His Ayat [i.e., Signs and Verses, at all times].
Which then of the Ayat of Allah do you deny?”***

Neither His physical nor His non-physical Signs, e.g. man’s creation out
of clay, developments of embryo and fetus, the stages of development
following birth, and His Signs concerning life and death, are
undeniable. Divine Signs and Manifestations are visible everywhere, but
despite such undeniable evidence, some men deny them.

The eminent Qur’anic exeget, Tabarsi, maintains that such denial may
spring from the following:

1. Following concupiscent desires leads man to make attempts at
concealing the Truth with unfounded doubts and act upon his vain desires
since acknowledgement of the Truth restricts him through obligations.
However, despite evident arguments, they fail to acknowledge such
obligations and deny the Truth.

2. Blind imitation of others, particularly their ancestors, thus making
attempts at concealing the Truth.

3. False biases and beliefs of their predecessors which have penetrated
their minds and impede impartial investigation of Divine Signs; as a
consequence of which they fail to perceive them.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 82
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَيَنْظُرُوا كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ
الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ كَانُوا أَكْثَرَ مِنْهُمْ وَأَشَدَّ قُوَّةً
وَآثَاراً فِي الْأَرْضِ فَمَا أَغْنَی عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***82. Have they not traveled through the land and seen what was the end
of those before them [and the manner of their perdition]? They were more
in number than them and mightier in strength and in traces in the land;
yet all that they used to earn availed them not.***

One of the Qur’anic criticisms is failing to travel so as to acquire
knowledge and experience. Disbelievers’ opposition against the Noble
Prophet (S) stemmed from their vanity for their large number and might.

Thus, the Holy Qur’an says that God Almighty destroyed those mightier
than them and one of the reasons lying behind the fall of civilizations
is opposition against Prophets and turning away from Divine Commands.

Following the expression of Divine Omnipotence and reminding mankind of
His Bounties, Prudence, and the orderly system of creation, the blessed
Verse in question proceeds to warn disbelievers and remind them that
those who deny Divine Signs and Verses and the Noble Prophet (S) should
travel through the land and see the manner of their predecessors.

The blessed Verse reveals that the ruins of the cities of ‘Ad and Thamud
were still visible at the time of the Revelation of the blessed Verse,
since it is encouraged herein to travel and see them and perceive that
those people who were superior to them in terms of might, valiance, and
number failed to resist Divine Wrath and were entangled with torment.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 83 - 84
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا جَاءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَرِحُوا بِمَا
عِنْدَهُمْ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ
يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا قَالُوا آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَحْدَهُ
وَكَفَرْنَا بِمَا كُنَّا بِهِ مُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***83. Then when their Messengers came to them with clear miracles, they
were glad with that which they had of the knowledge [failing to
acknowledge Prophets’ logical arguments] and that [Divine Wrath] at
which they used to mock, surrounded them.***  
***84. Therefore, when they saw Our chastisement, they said: “We believe
in Allah Alone and reject that we used to associate with Him as
partners.***

Divine appointment of Prophets to provide mankind with decisive
arguments as to Divine Unity is one of Divine Acts.

It is worthy of note that human sciences and experiments may not
substitute Divine teachings and render man needless of Prophets, since
being arrogant of one’s knowledge leads to derision of Divine Promises.

There have been people in human history who owing to the sciences which
have led to the development of civilizations and accruing worldly
possessions or due to their knowledge concerning their ancestors or
other peoples imagine that they are needless of Divine Revelation and
Prophetic teachings.

Men with small capacities, upon acquisition of limited knowledge or
attainment to credentials and positions become arrogant.

According to the Holy Qur’an, there are three types of knowledge:

1. Fruitful knowledge which leads to human spiritual growth, as when
Moses (as) said unto Khidr:

***“May I follow you so that you teach me something of that knowledge
which may lead to my [spiritual] growth”***[^11]***.***

2. Fruitless knowledge such as knowledge as to the precise number of the
people of the Cave:

***“[Some] say that they were three, the dog being the fourth among
them; and [others] say they were five, the dog being the sixth, guessing
at the unseen; [yet others] say they were seven and the dog being the
eighth. Say [O Muhammad]: ‘My Lord knows best their number; none knows
them but a few.’ So debate not [about their number] except with the
clear proof [which We have revealed to you], nor consult any of them
about the people of the Cave”***[^12]***.***

3. Harmful knowledge, e.g. magic and sorcery for separating men from
women.

It is said in Verse 83:

***“Then when their Messengers came to them with clear miracles.”***

The antecedent of the pronoun is apparently the disbelievers entangled
with torment the ruins of whose cities were still visible at the time of
Revelation of the blessed Verse.

The Verse is saying that such people denied Divinely appointed
Messengers and regarded their teachings as false tales. In fact, it was
not their knowledge, but absolute ignorance since they were deprived of
true knowledge which could lead to their deliverance from error.

They considered their apparent knowledge to be the true one:

***(“They know solely the outside appearance of the life of the world
and they are heedless of the Hereafter,”***[^13]***).***

It is mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an that

***“this is their utmost knowledge,”***

i.e. their knowledge is limited to the affairs of this world rather than
to those of the Hereafter. They imagined that they possessed knowledge,
rejoiced at it, and derided Messengers; as a consequence of which they
were surrounded with Divine torment.

According to Verse 84:

***“Therefore, when they saw Our chastisement, they said: ‘We believe in
Allah Alone and reject that we used to associate with Him as
partners.’”***

Nevertheless, upon tasting Divine chastisement, their repentance shall
be of no avail, since they may not be provided with the opportunity to
compensate for their vicious deeds and they are condemned by Allah
Almighty to torment in Hell.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 85
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمْ يَكُ يَنْفَعُهُمْ إِيمَانُهُمْ لَمَّا رَأَوْا بَأْسَنَا سُنَّتَ
اللَّهِ الَّتِي قَدْ خَلَتْ فِي عِبَادِهِ وَخَسِرَ هُنَالِكَ
الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. Then their Faith could not avail them when they saw Our
chastisement. This has been the way of Allah in dealing with His
servants. And there the disbelievers shall be utterly at loss.***

Unexpected happenings and emergencies flourish man’s original
disposition and reminds disbelievers to embrace faith; however,
converting to belief in Divine Unity is supposed to be out of free
choice rather than obligation and desperateness.

It is Divine tradition that forced belief is of not avail. Divine
tradition refers to what God Almighty made prevalent among His servants.

It is for the same reason that repentance after tasting Divine torment
shall not be accepted by God Almighty thereby:

***“disbelievers shall be at utterly at loss.”***

According the blessed Verse in question, the laws and the system of
creation are such that they come to their end upon death, since when man
comes to the end of his life, whatever potential perfection he has comes
to its end as a consequence of which his repentance shall not be
accepted.

It would be of interest to make mention of two traditions at the end of
the exegesis of the Chapter in question. According to the first
tradition, a Christian man fornicated with a Muslim woman at the time of
Mutawakkil, the ‘Abbasid Caliph. He converted before being chastised.

Yahya ibn Aktham said:

*“His conversion to the Islamic faith solved the problem and there is no
need to chastise him.”*

A dispute arose between them concerning the same issue. Mutawakkil wrote
a letter to Imam Hadi (as) and inquired about his opinion.

The Noble Imam (as) replied:

*“Whenever a disbeliever violates a Muslim woman, he should be killed.”*

A number of Muslim scholars found fault with his opinion saying that it
was unprecedented in the Holy Qur’an and traditions (sunna).

Imam (as) referred to the Verse in question[^14] and replied:

*“Since the man is a Christian and he has converted to Islam at the time
of chastisement, his conversion is of no avail and he has to be
chastised.”*[^15]

The other tradition is narrated from Imam Rida (as) on the authority of
Ibn Babiwayh as per which, the noble Imam (as) is asked:

*“Why did God Almighty drowned Pharaoh when he believed in Divine
Unity?”*

the Imam (as) replied:

*“He believed when he tasted Divine torment, and such belief shall not
be accepted.”*

Then He alluded to the blessed Verse in question.[^16]

[^1]: 21:32

[^2]: 39:11-12

[^3]: 35, 56, 70

[^4]: 70

[^5]: 6:23-24

[^6]: 28:76

[^7]: 15:44

[^8]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vols. 5-6, p. 338 (under 15:44); Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 8, p. 289.

[^9]: 45:27

[^10]: e.g. 11:43, 76, 101

[^11]: 18:66

[^12]: 18:22

[^13]: 30:7

[^14]: 40:85

[^15]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^16]: Atyab al-Bayan, under the blessed Verse in question.


