Surah Fussilat, Verses 41 - 54
==============================

Surah Fussilat - Verse 41 - 43
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِالذِّكْرِ لَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ وَإِنَّهُ
لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ يَدَيْهِ وَلا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ
تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يُقَالُ لَكَ إِلَّا مَا قَدْ قِيلَ لِلرُّسُلِ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ إِنَّ
رَبَّكَ لَذُو مَغْفِرَةٍ وَذُو عِقَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***41. Indeed, those who disbelieved in the Reminder [the Holy Qur’an]
when it came unto them [shall be chastised]. And indeed, it is an
honorable [well-fortified respected] Book.***  
***42. Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it; [it is]
sent down by the All-Wise, Worthy of all praise.***  
***43. Nothing is said unto you [O Muhammad!] except what was said unto
the Messengers before you. Verily, your Lord is the Possessor of
Forgiveness and the Possessor of excruciating chastisement.***

The Holy Qur’an reminds man of his neglect and negligence.

The title:

***‘Aziz (“honorable”)***

is exclusively employed to refer to the Holy Qur’an from amongst
Scriptures.

The blessed Verses are addressed to all polytheists and disbelievers who
regard the Holy Qur’an as encompassing magic and falsehood and also
those who do not believe in some of Qur’anic Injunctions, e.g. usury,
murder, adultery, and calumnious accusation and slander as well as
Divine Commands as to one-fifth tax and pilgrimage to Mecca, and act
against them.

It also addresses those who subjectively interpret Qur’anic Verses like
those regarding the Guardianship, Infallibility, and Purity of Ahl
al-Bayt (Prophet’s family).

Verse 42 is saying that Falsehood cannot find its way into it from any
side, that is, there are no contradictions in its form, i.e., words, nor
are they any falsity in it. No alteration may find its way into it.

There is neither decrease nor increase in it. It is well fortified and
serves as the Argument for all responsible for their religious duties to
the Day of Resurrection. Another Qur’anic Verse[^1] makes a reference to
the same:

***“Indeed, it is We Who have sent down the Reminder and truly We will
guard it [from distortion and corruption attempted by disbelievers and
the envious].”***

According to traditions narrated from Imam Baqir (as) and Imam Sadiq
(as), there are no falsity in Qur’anic Verses concerning the past events
and the prognostications about future.

It is said in a tradition narrated from Imam Baqir (as) that there is no
point in Scriptures like the Bible to abrogate the Qur’an nor will there
be any book in the future to do the same;

***(“Falsehood cannot come to it from before it or behind it”).***[^2]

Thus the Holy Qur’an stays unaltered in the face of passage of the time
and falsehood may not penetrate into it, since it is descended from the
Origin of Wisdom which is Firm as a consequence of which it stands
unchanged at all times.

Verse 43 is a consolation to the Noble Prophet (S) as to disbelievers’
accusations who called him by terms like magician, liar, poet, augur,
soothsayer, and lunatic.

It is said unto the Prophet (S) that his predecessors were also the
subject of false accusations and indeed his Lord is Oft-Forgiving and
Merciful toward the repentant and He is also the Possessor of
excruciating torment and chastisement against disbelievers and enemies
of religion.

Surah Fussilat - Verse 44
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ جَعَلْنَاهُ قُرْآناً أَعْجَمِيّاً لَقَالُوا لَوْلا فُصِّلَتْ
آيَاتُهُ أَأَعْجَمِيٌّ وَعَرَبِيٌّ قُلْ هُوَ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا هُدیً
وَشِفَاءٌ وَالَّذِينَ لا يُؤْمِنُونَ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَقْرٌ وَهُوَ
عَلَيْهِمْ عَمىً أُولَئِكَ يُنَادَوْنَ مِنْ مَكَانٍ بَعِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. And if We had sent this as a Qur’an in a foreign language, they
would have said: “Why are not its Verses explained in detail? What! [A
Book] not in Arabic and [the Messenger] an Arab?” Say: “It is for those
who believe, a guide and a healing. And as for those who disbelieve,
there is deafness in their ears and it [the Qur’an] is blindness for
them. [As if] they are those who are called from a place far away [but
they fail to hear the call].”***

The Arabic word a’jami is cognate with ‘ujma designating intelligible,
since other languages were intelligible to Arabs hence the designation
for non-Arabic languages. Enemies never desist from finding faults.

When the Holy Qur’an is in the Arabic tongue, they say that they are
hard of hearing and when it is in any languages other than Arabic, they
say it is not intelligible to them. In other words, the blessed Verse in
question treats of the state of disbelievers, saying that had God
Almighty revealed the Holy Qur’an in any language other than Arabic,
they would have asked why it was not intelligible to them since the
audience were Arabs.

The blessed Verse is saying that had the Holy Qur’an been sent to them
in any tongue other than Arabic, they could ask why it had not been
revealed in Arabic. Qur’anic exegets maintain that “non-Arabic”
indicates any tongue other than Arabic, e.g. Persian and Turkish;
however, the Holy Qur’an was revealed in the Arabic tongue since the
Noble Prophet (S) was an Arab by descent.

The blessed Verse apparently makes a reference to the Arabs who, despite
the revelation of the Holy Qur’an in eloquent Arabic, noticed that it is
so eloquent in terms of form and meaning that it was hard for them to
fully comprehend it hence they asked whey Qur’anic Verses were not quite
intelligible to them.

Thus, God Almighty addresses His Messenger (S) and says unto him:

***“O Muhammad! Say unto them that the Qur’an is a healing and guidance
to those who believe.”***

It apparently indicates that the Holy Qur’an is the Path of guidance,
happiness, and righteousness and its propagation may heal disbelievers’
hearts and absolve them of their impurities. In fact, the Holy Qur’an is
addressed to them through which they may find the path toward happiness
and may thereby attain to their main goal.

It is worthy of note that any sound mind may comprehend the
inimitability of the Holy Qur’an and anyone who fails to believe in
Qur’anic Verses suffer from defects in their perceptive faculties such
that they fail to perceive its message through their ears and hearts.

Upon the recitation of the Holy Qur’an, they are as if they hear sounds
and voices from afar but fail to comprehend the messages, since their
ears and hearts fail to perceive the inimitability of the Qur’an, hence
their disbelief.

Surah Fussilat - Verse 45
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا مُوسَی الْكِتَابَ فَاخْتُلِفَ فِيهِ وَلَوْلا
كَلِمَةٌ سَبَقَتْ مِنْ رَبِّكَ لَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ وَإِنَّهُمْ لَفِي
شَكٍّ مِنْهُ مُرِيبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. And indeed We gave Moses the Scripture [the Torah], but dispute
arose therein. And had it not been for a Word that went forth before
from your Lord [regarding granting respite], the matter would have
[definitely] been settled between them [and all disputants would have
been chastised]. But truly, they are in grave doubt [and suspicion]
thereto [the Qur’an].***

Familiarity with the history of Prophets is a source of consolation to
the Noble Prophet (S) and Muslims. Divine Lordship grants respites to
sinners so that they may repent and attain to spiritual growth. God
Almighty grants respites to sinners to repent otherwise they had no way
to turn to repentance.

The blessed Verse is a consolation to the Noble Prophet (S) saying that
the disputes concerning the Qur’an amongst Muslims and subjective
interpretations thereof is not unprecedented since the people of Moses
(as) did the same – some of them acknowledged the Torah as a Divinely
Revealed Scripture and some denied his Prophetic Call.

The blessed Verse is saying that had it not been for a Word, i.e. God’s
Promise, that went forth before from Him regarding granting them
respite, He would have definitely chastised them; however, the fact is
that these disbelievers turn away from the Qur’anic Message and they
will remain in doubt and suspicion, hence their disbelief.

Surah Fussilat - Verse 46
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحاً فَلِنَفْسِهِ وَمَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا وَمَا
رَبُّكَ بِظَلَّامٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. Whosoever does righteous good deeds, it is for his own self; and
whosoever does evil, it is against his own self. And your Lord is not at
all unjust to [His] servants.***

Favorable and unfavorable consequences follow man’s conducts and he is
not supposed to put the blame on others. There is no doubt concerning
the fact that whoever does righteous good deeds will reap the benefits.
Righteous good deeds are to be based on Qur’anic Injunctions and Islamic
teachings. Such person will enjoy Divine Favors.

Au contraire, one who commits evil deeds, i.e. turns away from Divine
Injunctions and follows concupiscent and satanic desires will pay for
the evil consequences thereof. The torments in store for disbelievers
are the consequences of their vicious deeds. God Almighty never wrongs
His servants and it is worthy of note that any good or evil deed will
lead to consequences.

Surah Fussilat - Verse 47
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَيْهِ يُرَدُّ عِلْمُ السَّاعَةِ وَمَا تَخْرُجُ مِنْ ثَمَرَاتٍ مِنْ
أَكْمَامِهَا وَمَا تَحْمِلُ مِنْ أُنْثَی وَلا تَضَعُ إِلَّا بِعِلْمِهِ
وَيَوْمَ يُنَادِيهِمْ أَيْنَ شُرَكَائِي قَالُوا آذَنَّاكَ مَا مِنَّا
مِنْ شَهِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour. No fruit comes out
of its sheath, nor does a female conceive nor brings forth [young],
except by His Omniscience. And on the Day when He will call unto them
[polytheists saying]: “Where are My partners?” They will say: “We inform
You that none of us bears witness to it [that they are Your
partners]!”***

The Arabic word ***akmam*** is the plural form of kimm (“sheath, calyx,
perianth”) and kumm (“sleeve”). Kumma is applied to head gear, like
skullcap. The verbal form adannaka (“we inform you”) derives from a-d-n
(“inform, proclaim”).

It is reported concerning the occasion of the Revelation of the blessed
Verse in question that the Noble Prophet (S) was inquired about the Hour
of Resurrection. The blessed Verse was revealed as a reply to the
question, saying that only God Almighty is Aware of the same.

The word:

***al-sa’a (“the Hour”)***

indicates Resurrection and the designation may refer to its spontaneity.
Disbelievers inquired the Noble Prophet (S) regarding the time of
Resurrection and he replied that it will be spontaneous and dependent
upon Divine Will and it is solely God Almighty Who is All-Aware of it.

No fruit comes out of its sheath unless God Almighty God Almighty is
All-Aware of its quantity, quality, color, and its other
characteristics. No female conceives unless God Almighty is All-Aware of
the contents of the womb in terms of its sex, form, complexion, and so
on. No female brings forth young unless God Almighty is All-Aware of the
time of delivery.

On the Day of Resurrection, polytheists and disbelievers will be
reproached thus:

*“Where are those who were associated as partners with me by you? Today
is the day of your misfortune. Seek them so that they may deliver you
from torments.”*

They will reply:

*“We have already informed You that there is no witness to bear
testimony to Your partners.”*

It will be at that time that disbelievers confess to Divine Unity since
they will attain to certainty concerning the same. What requires
arguments to prove in this world will become evident on the Day of
Resurrection.

Those who worshipped idols and imagined that they were of exalted
stations realize that there are no partners for Allah and they
dissociate themselves from idolatry and idolaters.

The closing clauses of the blessed Verse,

***“We inform You that none of us bears witness to it [that they are
Your partners]”***

may refer to those whom polytheists and disbelievers set up as partners
of God Almighty, hence they say that there is not anyone from amongst
them to bear witness to the veracity of their false claim as to
associating partners with Him.

Surah Fussilat - Verses 48 - 49
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَضَلَّ عَنْهُمْ مَا كَانُوا يَدْعُونَ مِنْ قَبْلُ وَظَنُّوا مَا
لَهُمْ مِنْ مَحِيصٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يَسْأَمُ الْأِنْسَانُ مِنْ دُعَاءِ الْخَيْرِ وَإِنْ مَسَّهُ
الشَّرُّ فَيَؤُوسٌ قَنُوطٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. And those whom they used to invoke before [in this world] shall
disappear from them, and they will perceive that they have no place of
refuge.***  
***49. Man does not become tired of invoking Allah to grant him good
things, but when an evil touches him, then he gives up all hope and is
lost in despair.***

The Arabic word mahis indicates refuge or place of refuge. On the Day of
Resurrection, polytheists and disbelievers find out that they have lost
their past opportunities and a dire fate is in store for them. It will
be at that time that the idols invoked by them have disappeared.

They will find out that they have no way out and they may not set their
hopes on idols any longer and they have definitely no refuge.

Verse 49 is saying that man always seeks material gains and happiness
and invokes God Almighty to grant them to him and is never tired of
invocation, but when he is touched with some affliction, he will lose
his hope and turns away from God Almighty. The Arabic words ya’s and
qunut indicate hopelessness and despair respectively.

Surah Fussilat - Verse 50
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَاهُ رَحْمَةً مِنَّا مِنْ بَعْدِ ضَرَّاءَ مَسَّتْهُ
لَيَقُولَنَّ هَذَا لِي وَمَا أَظُنُّ السَّاعَةَ قَائِمَةً وَلَئِنْ
رُجِعْتُ إِلَی رَبِّي إِنَّ لِي عِنْدَهُ لَلْحُسْنَی فَلَنُنَبِّئَنَّ
الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِمَا عَمِلُوا وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُمْ مِنْ عَذَابٍ
غَلِيظٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. And indeed, if We give him a taste of Mercy from Us, after some
adversity has touched him, he is sure to say: “This is due to my
[merit]; [he becomes so arrogant that he says:] I think not that the
Hour will be established. But if I am brought back to my Lord, surely,
there will be for me the best [exalted state] with Him. Then, We verily,
will show to the disbelievers what they have done and We shall make them
taste a severe torment.***

Seeking Mammon leads to neglect and at times denial of Resurrection. Man
is intolerant and arrogant and upon his access to bounties becomes
arrogant. Likewise, upon tasting afflictions, man loses his heart and
cries out for assistance.

The blessed Verse makes a reference to one of the undesirable states of
men who lack knowledge and faith, namely, arrogance and vanity, saying:

***“Whenever we give him a taste of Mercy from Us, after some adversity
has touched him, he is sure to say: ‘This is due to my merit.’”***

Such miserable and arrogant person forgets that had it not been for
Divine Favor, he would have been afflicted with adversity. It was in the
same vein that arrogant Korah who was granted many a material gain for
his trial refrained from doing good.

When he was asked to do good in return for Divine Favors, he claimed
that he possessed his material possessions because of his knowledge and
merits,

***“He said: ‘This has been given to me only because of the knowledge I
possess’”***[^3]***.***

The blessed Verse further adds that such arrogance will lead him to
denial of Resurrection and he will say:

*“I do not think that the Hour will be established, but whenever I
return to my Lord, surely, there will be for me the best [rewards and
bounties.”*

He says that his Lord has cherished him in this world and will surely
grant him better rewards!

Surah Fussilat - Verse 51
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا أَنْعَمْنَا عَلَی الْأِنْسَانِ أَعْرَضَ وَنَأَی بِجَانِبِهِ
وَإِذَا مَسَّهُ الشَّرُّ فَذُو دُعَاءٍ عَرِيضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. And when We show favor unto man, he withdraws and turns away, but
when evil touches him he has recourse to long supplications.***

Welfare and hardship are the best means of assaying man’s characters and
his spiritual blights. The blessed Verse expresses the states of such
people at the time of fortune and misfortune in this mundane world and
makes mention of their forgetfulness at the time of enjoying bounties
and his restlessness at the time of afflictions.

The blessed Verse is saying that when God Almighty provides man with
bounties, he turns away arrogantly from God, but when he is touched by
the slightest adversity, he invokes God Almighty many a time to remove
it.

The Arabic word ***na’*** is taken from na’y which literally indicates
going away and when it is collocated with:

***janib (“side”),***

it connotes arrogance and vanity, since the arrogant turn away their
faces and go away with indifference.

The word:

***‘arid (“wide”)***

is the opposite of tawil (“long”). Both are employed in the Arabic
tongue to connote multiplicity.

Such faithless and godless person suffers from such miserable states of
mind at all times. When he is granted bounties, he becomes avaricious,
arrogant, and forgetful and when such bounties turn away from him, he
loses his heart and beseeches God Almighty to bestow them upon him once
more.

Au contraire, men of truth and the true followers of Prophetic teachings
are so tolerant and rich inwardly that neither bounties nor afflictions
may make them lose their heart. The most profitable transactions and the
greatest of remunerations may not keep them from remembrance of God.

They are well acquainted with vicissitudes of life and are aware that
unfavorable circumstances serve as reawakening and favorable states of
affairs are Divine trials. Adversities are at times the consequences of
man’s neglect and bounties at times urge God’s servants to express their
gratitude.

The most significant signs of belief in God Almighty include
magnanimity, i.e. greatness of spirit, broadmindedness, tolerance, and
preparedness to confront hardships, vicissitudes, and struggling against
the unfavorable states of mind resulting from availability of bounties.

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) in teaching his companions
certain invocations says:

*“We invoke God Almighty to help us be so tolerant that no bounty may
make us arrogant and vain and no aim may impede us from obeying Divine
Commands, and may not regret nor grieve upon the hour of death.”*[^4]

Surah Fussilat - Verse 52
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ كَانَ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ ثُمَّ كَفَرْتُمْ بِهِ
مَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنْ هُوَ فِي شِقَاقٍ بَعِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. Say: “Tell me, if it [the Qur’an] is from Allah, you disbelieve
in it. Who is more astray than one who is in opposition far away [from
Allah’s Straight Path through his utter denial of the Qur’an]?***

The wise keep away from contingent losses. If the Qur’an is Revealed by
God Almighty, what will happen to those who disbelieved?

The blessed Verse in question is addressed to the Noble Prophet (S)
saying:

*“Say unto these disbelievers if you know that the Qur’an is Revealed by
God Almighty but you still do not acknowledge that it is Divine
Revelation, who is more astray than one who knows the Truth but still
denies it and opposes it with such forcefulness? Such person is quite
far away from Truth.”*

In other words, such person has gone to extreme in his opposition and
enmity against God Almighty.

Surah Fussilat - Verse 53 - 54
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَنُرِيهِمْ آيَاتِنَا فِي الْآفَاقِ وَفِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَتَّی
يَتَبَيَّنَ لَهُمْ أَنَّهُ الْحَقُّ أَوَلَمْ يَكْفِ بِرَبِّكَ أَنَّهُ
عَلَی كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلا إِنَّهُمْ فِي مِرْيَةٍ مِنْ لِقَاءِ رَبِّهِمْ أَلا إِنَّهُ
بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ مُحِيطٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. We will show them Our Signs in the universe, and in their own
selves, until it becomes manifest to them that this [the Qur’an] is the
Truth. Is it not sufficient in regard to your Lord that He is a Witness
over all things?***  
***54. Know that they are in doubt concerning the Meeting with their
Lord on the Day of Resurrection. Verily! He it is Who is surrounding all
things!***

Divine Manifestations of His Omnipotence and Omniscience are
innumerable.

***“We will show them Our Signs in the universe”***

indicates that besides the Signs perceptible to man, he will be shown
further Signs in future. These two blessed Verses closing the Chapter in
question make mention of two important points which in fact include a
summation of the points raised herein. The first Verse treats of Divine
Unity and the Holy Qur’an and the second one makes mention of
Resurrection.

Verse 53 says:

***“We will show them Our Signs in the universe, and in their own
selves, until it becomes manifest to them that this [the Qur’an] is the
Truth.”***

Signs of the horizon (ayat afaqi) include creation of the sun, the moon,
and the stars with the order governing them, creation of all kinds of
animals, plants, mountains, and seas with their innumerable wonders and
mysterious creatures whose novel mysteries are unraveled in time and
each of which demonstrates the Truth of His Pure Essence.

Signs of the soul (ayat anfusi) include creation of different systems of
human body, the order governing the wondrous mechanisms of brain and the
systematic movements of heart, blood vessels, textures, and bones, and
coagulation of semen and growth of embryo in the womb, and above all,
the mysteries and wonders of human soul each aspect of which reveals the
Omniscience of God Almighty, the Creator of the world.

It is true that these Signs have already been sufficiently manifested by
God Almighty, but taking into account the verbal form:

***sanurihim (“we show unto them”),***

one notices that this present verb is in the progressive mode indicating
that such manifestation is an ongoing process and even if man lives for
hundreds of thousand years, he will discover many a novel mystery and
will notice Divine Signs in time, since the mysteries of this world is
endless.

All books on natural sciences and anthropology in all their dimensions
including anatomy, physiology, psychology, and psychiatry, and also the
sciences of botany, zoology, mineralogy, astronomy and so on all serve
as expositions of Divine Unity and knowing God, since they generally
unravel wondrous mysteries which demonstrate the Omniscience and
Omnipotence of the Creator of this world.

At times, a scientist devotes all his life to one of these sciences, or
one branch from amongst tens of branches of one of these sciences, but
at the end of his life, he regrets that he knows nothing about that
branch and his limited knowledge has made him perceive the depth of his
ignorance.

The blessed Verse 53 is complemented with a beauteous and meaningful
sentence:

***“Is it not sufficient in regard to your Lord that He is a Witness
over all things?”***

What Signs are more evident than the Manifestation of His Omnipotence
through Creation of all creatures, leaves of trees, petals of flowers,
mysterious layers of brain, delicate multilayer membranes of eyes, the
face of the sky, the heart of the earth, and in short all creatures
demonstrate the Signs of Divine Unity and bear witness to Divine
Creation of the world.

The above constitutes one of the well-known interpretations of the
blessed Verse in question according to which the blessed Verse solely
treats of Divine Unity and the manifestation of the Signs of Truth in
horizons and souls.

The other interpretation treats of the inimitability of the Holy Qur’an
which may be summed up thus:

*“We show Our Diverse Signs and Miracles in different regions of the
Arabian Peninsula as well as other regions of the world and We show Our
Signs regarding these polytheists and disbelievers so that they may know
that the Holy Qur’an is Divine Revelation.”*

Signs of horizon also include the triumph of Islam in different
battlegrounds, in the arena of logical arguments produced in debates and
also in different regions conquered by the Islamic faith prevailing
thoughts.

The Muslim community formed a minority at the time of the Revelation of
these Verses in Mecca. They enjoyed no opportunities to engage in
propagation activities.

Consequently, upon Divine Command, they emigrated and in a short while
were able to conquer many a land and their religion was embraced by a
large number of people throughout the world. Signs of souls also include
the triumph of Muslims over Meccan polytheists and disbelievers in the
battle of Badr and the conquest of Mecca and penetration of the light of
Islam into the hearts of many of the conquered.

These Signs of the horizon and the soul demonstrated that the Holy
Qur’an is Divine Revelation. Thus God Almighty Who is the Witness of all
things bore witness to the Truth of the Holy Qur’an as Divine
Revelation.

The last Verse treats of the origin of the adversities of this
polytheist, corrupt, and tyrannous group of people, saying:

***“Be aware that they are in doubt and suspicion regarding their
meeting with their Lord on the Day of Resurrection.”***

They commit all crimes and disgracing deeds since they do not believe in
Divine Reckoning and Recompense. Their hearts are wrapped up in veils of
neglect and arrogance and forgetting the fact that they shall meet their
Lord on the Day of Resurrection has denigrated them from the zenith of
humanity to nadir of humility.

However, they should know that

***“God surrounds all things.”***

He is All-Aware of their intentions, words, and deeds all which are
being recorded for that great Tribunal. The Arabic word mirya designates
entertaining doubt in making decisions and some Qur’anic exegets
maintain that it indicates great doubt and suspicion.

[^1]: 15:9

[^2]: Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn; ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s Tafsir.

[^3]: 28:78

[^4]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 64.


