Surah al-Shura, Verses 27 - 53
==============================

Surah al-Shura - Verse 27
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ بَسَطَ اللَّهُ الرِّزْقَ لِعِبَادِهِ لَبَغَوْا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَلَكِنْ يُنَزِّلُ بِقَدَرٍ مَا يَشَاءُ إِنَّهُ بِعِبَادِهِ خَبِيرٌ
بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. And if Allah were to enlarge the provision for His servants, they
would surely rebel in the earth, but He sends down by measure as He
wills. Truly! He is in respect of His servants the Well-Aware, the
All-Seer.***

In the same manner that Divine Bounties are His Favors, depravations are
at times Divine Favors. In the same vein, enlarging provision for
servants leads at times to their neglect, rebellion, and exceeding
limits.

Many a servant have trodden the way to perdition owing to mundane
possessions. as sending down provision by measure impedes corruption,
enlarging the same and granting respites to the affluent serve as
trials.

Thus provision is measured as per a general rule, but man’s provision
may be enlarged as a means of trial.[^1]

Thus, the blessed Verse in question guides believers saying that they
should not be saddened by the restriction of their provision, since they
are supposed to know that their interest lies in the same and it is
preordained by Divine Will and Wisdom that some should have access to
less means, since the increase in their provision will lead to the
disobedience of the concupiscent soul whetting their vain desires for
mundane possessions and making them veer off the path of Divine Law.

Poverty is one of the means of making man approach God Almighty, since
the poor believe in the measurement of Divine provision and they are at
all times preoccupied by the same and turn to Him and seek their
provision from Him.

Au contraire, worldly possessions and affluence may preoccupy man with
attending to concupiscent desires and he is thus made remote from the
Truth, since God Almighty is All-Aware of the affairs of His servants.

He restricts the provision and enlarges the same through His Divine
Wisdom. It is worthy of note that healthful social relations are
prerequisites for rational and well measured life style. Divine Bounties
are granted as per Divine Wisdom and Discretion rather than human
desires.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 28
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي يُنَزِّلُ الْغَيْثَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا قَنَطُوا وَيَنْشُرُ
رَحْمَتَهُ وَهُوَ الْوَلِيُّ الْحَمِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. And He it is Who sends down the rain after they have despaired
and spreads His Mercy. And He is the Protector, Worthy of all praise.***

Rain is a manifestation of Divine Mercy and decrease in the amount of
rain impedes man’s disobedience.

The Arabic word ghayth is applied to fruitful rain whereas the word
matar designates any kind of rain, fruitful or harmful, as it is
reflected elsewhere[^2] in the Holy Qur’an:

***“And indeed they have passed by the town [of Prophet Lot (as)] on
which was rained the evil rain.”***

The blessed Verse in question says that one of the Signs of Divine
Bounty and Mercy is that you were desperate at the time of famine, but
He sent down rain for you and distributed His Mercy so that your
provision may be enlarged and your trees and crops may thrive. He is you
Friend whom you are supposed to obey in return for His Bounties and you
are supposed to praise your Lord.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 29
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ خَلْقُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا بَثَّ فِيهِمَا
مِنْ دَابَّةٍ وَهُوَ عَلَی جَمْعِهِمْ إِذَا يَشَاءُ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth
and whatever moving [living] creatures He has dispersed in them both.
And He is Omnipotent over their assembling whenever He wills.***

Creation of the heavens, the earth, and moving living creatures is one
of Divine Signs. All creatures in the heavens, on the earth, and those
in between them from inanimate beings, plants, and animals dispersed in
them are all Signs of the Existence of the Necessary Existent Being and
the Most Beauteous Names indicating His Omniscience, Omnipotence, Will,
Unity, and so on serve as Attributes of the Glory and Beauty of the
Creator and the Provider of the world, since we may know the Originator
of creation through such intelligible and praise and worship the Lord.

The word dabba may indicate animals and mankind that will be assembled
on the Day of Resurrection and the prepositional phrase:

***fihi-ma (“whatever in them both”)***

may include all creatures in the heavens as well, like angels and other
creatures whose knowledge of existence rests with God Almighty.

All these creatures existing between the heavens and the earth shall be
assembled on the Day of Resurrection through Divine Will.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 30
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَصَابَكُمْ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فَبِمَا كَسَبَتْ أَيْدِيكُمْ
وَيَعْفُو عَنْ كَثِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. And whatever of misfortune befalls you, it is because of what
your hands have earned. And He pardons many [of your sins].***

There exists a nexus between man’s conduct and the vicissitudes of life;

***(“And whatever of misfortune befalls you”).***

His problems are the consequences of some of his vicious deeds rather
than all of them, since God Almighty forgives many sins committed by
man;

***(“And He pardons many [of your sins”).***

The blessed Verse is a warning to sinners that whatever hardship or
misfortune befalling on them is the consequence of their deeds.

It is a reference to the fact that vicious deeds breed undesirable
consequences which are different from the recompense of wrong doing to
inferiors whose venomous fruits are reaped in a brief period of time, as
it is imagined by the short-sighted that the recompense to which sinners
are warned is not solely restricted to their recompense in this world
but it is far less than the one to be measured at the Divine Tribunal on
the Day of Resurrection.

***“And He pardons many [of your sins]”***

indicates that many a sin will be forgiven by God Almighty since He is
the Glorious, of permanent Bounties, and Pre-Eternal of Beneficence
(qadim al-ihsan), such that He pardons many a sin committed in a number
of years with one single repentance.

It should not be imagined that whoever is afflicted with some affliction
or hardship is paying for his evil deeds, since the blessed Verse in
question addresses sinners who are afflicted by misfortunes as the
consequences of their sins.

It is even out of Divine Mercy that worldly afflictions alleviate their
torments in the Hereafter. According to a Prophetic tradition narrated
on the authority of Imam ‘Ali (as), the Messenger of God (S) is reported
as saying:

*“It is the best of Verses revealed in the Divine Book. O ‘Ali (as),
there is no scratch nor falling down unless it is the consequence of
committing sins and God is Greater than chastising those who have
committed sins in this world but they were forgiven by Him. He is so
Just that He never again chastises sinners who have been chastised in
this world.”*[^3]

It is however worthy of note that the infallible Prophets and Imams (as)
suffer from afflictions in this world and thereby their exalted state
shall be promoted and such afflictions are not the consequences of their
evil deeds.

In this vein, the blessed Imam (as) is quoted as saying as per a
tradition cited in the book titled Wafi, the Chapter on believers’
afflictions, that the more believer’s faith grows, the more his
afflictions will be. Thus, whoever is nearer to God Almighty is
afflicted with more afflictions.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 31
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَنْتُمْ بِمُعْجِزِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ دُونِ
اللَّهِ مِنْ وَلِيٍّ وَلا نَصِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. And you cannot escape from Allah [and leave His Dominance] in the
earth and besides Allah you have neither any protector nor any
helper.***

Man pays for the consequences of his evil deeds but he may not harm God
Almighty in the least. The motive behind many a vicious deed is to seek
protectors and helpers, but the truth is that God Almighty is the true
Protector.

The blessed Verse is an objection raised against polytheists and
disbelievers warning them that they are not supposed to be able to
escape from God Almighty and leave His Dominance through their evil
deeds and words.

The blessed Verse aims at encouraging worship and obedience to God
Almighty and discouraging disobedience saying that it is solely God
Almighty Who is Able to ward off torment and He is the only Protector
Who grants Succor.[^4]

Surah al-Shura - Verses 32 - 33
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ الْجَوَارِ فِي الْبَحْرِ كَالْأَعْلامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ يَشَأْ يُسْكِنِ الرِّيحَ فَيَظْلَلْنَ رَوَاكِدَ عَلَی ظَهْرِهِ
إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآياتٍ لِكُلِّ صَبَّارٍ شَكُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. And among His Signs [of Omnipotence] are the ships [sailing] in
the sea like mountains.***  
***33. If He wills, He causes the wind to cease, then they would become
motionless on the back [of the sea]. Truly, in this are Signs [of Divine
Omnipotence] for everyone patient and grateful.***

The Arabic word al-jawar is the plural form of jariya designating a
sailing ship and the phrase ka-al-a’lam indicates colossal ships or
moving icebergs. The role played by wind in nature is also noteworthy.

Respiration of living beings, movement of ships and clouds, pollination
of plants, and modification of cold and heat all depend upon blowing of
wind and it is one of the sources of energy in modern times.

The word ***sabbar*** is attested four times in the Holy Qur’an all
instances of which are followed by the word:

***shakur (“grateful”).***

Such coincidence bears testimony to the fact that they play a
significant role together. It is narrated from the Noble Prophet of
Islam (S) that faith has two branches: patience and gratitude.[^5]

The blessed Verses in question are saying that Divine Signs of
Omnipotence and Mercy include the ships as tall as mountains sailing in
the seas but if the wind does not blow upon Divine Will, no one will be
able to move such colossal ships in the sea.

Ships sailed in seas in former times, so if the wind blew gently and the
sea happened to be calm, ships could easily reach their destinations.
Nonetheless, it was quite perilous for ships to sail in stormy seas in
thunder and lightning. If there was no wind, ships would stay still in
water.

As a consequence, the blessed Verse reminds men that they are all Divine
Signs of Omnipotence and whenever He wills, the wind blows gently and
ships with their passengers and their possessions reach destinations
safely;

***(“Truly, in this are Signs [of Divine Omnipotence] for everyone
patient and grateful”).***

How similar is mundane life to a ship in water. The sea is agitated at
times and man is perplexed and entangled with vicissitudes and at times,
it is stagnant and man is perplexed as what to do. At times, Divine
Mercy is granted on him and he finds serenity.

It is as if it serves as a reminder reminding men that these are Divine
Signs of Omnipotence. He makes the wind blow whenever He wills. It may
be likened to man’s life wherein at times he is perplexed when he finds
everything stagnant and wonders as what measure to take. At times Divine
Mercy is granted to him and he finds serenity.

The blessed Verses evidently guide those whose inner eyes have opened
and they see these alterations in Divine Signs of Omnipotence providing
them with the admonition that they are supposed to be quite patient,
tolerant, and grateful in the face of ups and down.

Such people benefit from what happens to them and they will be rescued
from the sea of perplexity, since they know that what is preordained for
them is through Divine Wisdom. Those who are submerged in the agitated
sea of concupiscent desires will be drowned unless Divine Mercy rescue
them from the abyss of the world and guide them to the shore of
deliverance.

Surah al-Shura - Verses 34 - 35
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ يُوبِقْهُنَّ بِمَا كَسَبُوا وَيَعْفُ عَنْ كَثِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ يُجَادِلُونَ فِي آيَاتِنَا مَا لَهُمْ مِنْ
مَحِيصٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. Or He may destroy them [the ships] because of that which their
[owners] have earned. And He pardons many [people and does not drown
them].***  
***35. And those who dispute as regards Our Ayat [Signs, Verses] may
know that there is no place of refuge for them.***

The verbal form:

***(“He destroys them”)***

derives from the root w-b-q (“destroy”) and it is ad hoc employed in the
sense of “drown.” The word ***mahis***, deriving from h-’-s (“flee,
escape”), designates “way of return and deliverance.”

To depict Divine Glory, the blessed Verses in question further add:

***“Or He may destroy them [the ships] because of that which their
[owners] have earned.”***

As it was reflected in the preceding Verses, human afflictions are often
the consequences of his own deeds; however, man finds Divine Mercy;

***“and He pardons many [people].”***

If He does not grant His Mercy, no one besides the Infallible Prophets
and Imams and also those pure and sincere at heart may not stay away
from Divine Chastisement, as it is reflected elsewhere[^6] in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“And if Allah were to punish men for that which they earned, He would
not leave a living being on the face of the earth, but He grants them
respite to an appointed time and when their term comes, indeed Allah is
the All-Seer of His servants.”***

God Almighty is Omnipotent and may impede winds from blowing so that
ships stay standstill in the heart of oceans and He is All-Able to turn
winds into severe storms to crush colossal ships and roll them on
gigantic waves, but His All-Inclusive Mercy impedes the same.

Verse 35 says:

***“And those who dispute [and rise in denial] as regards Our Ayat
[Signs, Verses] may know that there is no place of refuge for them [but
Divine Pure Essence].”***

Such people may not be granted Divine Forgiving, since they willfully
rise against him and persist in their enmity and obduracy. They are
deprived of His emanating fountainhead of Forgiving and Mercy and may
not find deliverance from His torment.

As mentioned above, the word ***mahis***, deriving from h-’-s (“flee,
escape”), designates “way of return and deliverance.” The word mahis
denotes place and is employed in the sense of place of refuge.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 36
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا أُوتِيتُمْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَمَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَا
عِنْدَ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَی لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَلَی رَبِّهِمْ
يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. So whatever you have been given is but [a transient] enjoyment
for this worldly life, but that which is with Allah is better and more
lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord.***

The preceding Verses treated of disputes and the blessed Verse in
question evidently reveals that disputes spring from attachment to this
worldly life which is not more than a transient enjoyment.

However, it is worthy of note that the blessed Verse addresses mankind
saying that whatever God Almighty gives them from worldly possessions,
knowledge, and other things is to benefit from this world.

In other words, man is granted Bounties so as to proceed on the path of
betterment, but whatever is with God Almighty, e.g. otherworldly
Bounties, true knowledge, and everlasting life, is far better and
intransient for those who regard God Almighty, their Lord and Provider,
as their refuge and rely on His Grace.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 37
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَجْتَنِبُونَ كَبَائِرَ الْأِثْمِ وَالْفَوَاحِشَ وَإِذَا
مَا غَضِبُوا هُمْ يَغْفِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. And those who avoid the grave sins and vicious deeds, and when
they are angry, forgive.***

The preceding Verse treated of faith and putting one’s trust in God
Almighty both of which are attached to the heart. The blessed Verse in
question treats of believers’ practical strategies.

What are grave sins (kaba’ir al-ithm)? In his Tahrir al-Wasila, Imam
Khomeini (May God Almighty sanctify his noble spirit) in discussing the
qualifications of the Imam leading a congregational prayer states that
it is incumbent upon such Imam to abstain from committing grave sins
which include any sin for committing which the Holy Qur’an promises
torment, or those against which there are strict injunctions, or those
for which there exist arguments bearing testimony to the fact that they
are on a par with or worse than grave sins, or the ones which are deemed
as such by intellection, or those regarded as such by the common run of
believers, or there exists certain reason to regard them likewise.

Then, he proceeds to enumerate a number of instances, including:

1. Despair of Divine Mercy

2. Forging lies against Allah and His Noble Prophet (S)

3. Homicide and fornication

4. Accusing a married woman of a groundless imputation

5. Desertion at the time of war

6. Being cursed and disinherited by one’s parents

7. Breaking off all relations with relatives

8. Practicing magic

9. Fornication

10. Sodomy

11. Transgressing the rights of the orphan

12. Withholding truth

13. Bearing false testimony

14. Breaking one’s promise

15. Drinking alcoholic drinks

16. Overstepping the stipulations of a will

17. Usury

18. Gambling

19. Stinting or scrimping in selling something

20. Consumption of pork and corpse

21. Bearing wrong-doers assistance and relying on them

22. Extravagance and prodigality

23. Withholding people’s rights

24. Forging lies

25. Arrogance

26. Treachery and disloyalty

27. Backbiting

28. Underestimation of the excellence of pilgrimage to Mecca

30. Failing to establish of daily prayers

31. Withholding religious alms tax (zakat)

32. Persistence in committing lesser sins

33. Preoccupation with libidinous pleasures

34. Associating partners to God Almighty

35. Theft

36. Consumption of blood

37. Consumption of corpse

38. Consumption of the meat of an animal at whose slaughter the Name of
God Almighty was not uttered or the one slaughtered by non-Muslims

39. Bearing false testimony

40. Feeling safe against Divine Scheme

41. Bearing wrong-doers assistance

42. Perjury

43. Fraudulence in transactions and entertaining hatred and stealing
from the war booty before its distribution

44. Waging war against favorites of God Almighty

The blessed Verse in question treats of the exalted states of those who
believe in God Almighty and put their trust in their Lord knowing that
what is provided for them with their Lord is far better and enduring
than the limited material possessions with which disbelievers are
provided.

It is also worthy of note that it is an attribute of believers that they
abstain from committing grave sins and vicious deeds and forgive others
when they are in a rage against them.

Surah al-Shura - Verses 38 - 39
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُوا لِرَبِّهِمْ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلاةَ
وَأَمْرُهُمْ شُورَی بَيْنَهُمْ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنْفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَهُمُ الْبَغْيُ هُمْ يَنْتَصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. And those who answer the Call of their Lord, establish prayers,
[conduct] their affairs by consultation, and expend of what We have
bestowed upon them.***  
***39. And those who when an oppressive wrong is done to them [do not
surrender but] seek succor.***

Attending to Divine Lordship enthuses man to act upon Divine
Injunctions. Those who love establishing prayers and expending in the
Cause of Allah shall reap better and enduring Bounties in the Hereafter.

Talha and Zubayr said unto Imam ‘Ali (as):

*“We support you provided that you seek our consultation regarding all
issues, since we are different from others.”*

The Noble Imam (as) replied:

*“I look into the Book of Allah and Prophetic traditions and act upon
them. I have no need for your consultation in this respect; however if I
come to issues for which I could not find any argument thereto and feel
the need to seek your consultation, I will do likewise.”*

Verse 38 lays emphasis on consultation in the administration of society
hence the designation of the Chapter, Shura (“consultation”). A number
of traditions will be cited hereunder regarding consultation.[^7]

*“Consult with pious scholars, those who fear God Almighty who prefer
the Hereafter to worldly possessions. Consult with the wise who are
knowledgeable and experienced. Do not consult with the avaricious, the
timid, and the greedy.*

*Consult with those who are truthful and have no attachments. Reveal
your secrets unto them so that they may present their comprehensive and
complete opinions. Consultation with the benevolent wise leads to growth
and Divine Blessing. Regarding your affairs, consult with one who
possesses five excellences: sensibility, knowledge, experience,
benevolence, and fear of God Almighty.”*[^8]

It is worthy of note that one is supposed to seek consultation regarding
the affairs of people, but one is not supposed to do likewise concerning
Divine matters, e.g. Resurrection, Imamate, and worship of God.
Establishment of prayers is a Divine Covenant and believers are supposed
to keep their promise without seeking consultation.

Imamate and leading the Muslim community are also Divine Covenants,
since Abraham (as) invoked God Almighty and asked Him to appoint his
offspring to lead the community and God Almighty answered to him:

*“Leadership and Imamate are My Covenants and appointment of individuals
to the same is dependent upon My Will rather than your invocation, since
wrong-doers do not deserve leadership.”*

Thus, we should surrender to Him in terms of the leadership of the
Muslim community, as it is reflected in the Holy Qur’an,

***“Indeed, I appoint you as the leader of people.”***

Imamate depends upon Divine Will, but consultation regards people’s
social affairs rather than Injunctions and Divine Laws. It is noteworthy
that that Islam is a comprehensive and complete religion in terms of
ideological, ethical, social, economic, religious, and political issues.
The present tense indicating progression is employed to express such
characteristics.[^9]

Other characteristics of those who believe in God and in Whom they put
their trust is that they act upon Divine Injunctions and establish
prayers. In establishing their prayers, they seriously observe the
outward aspects, e.g. the order of their parts and conditions, and the
inward aspects, e.g. sincerity and presence of mind and all the affairs
that lead to the acceptance of their acts by God Almighty.

Believers also consult with each other and act upon each other’s
discretion. They do not act opinionatedly. Consultation is fruitful in
consulting with the wise and scholars since it leads to favorable
consequences.

Besides, it breeds friendship amongst believers, since they trust each
other in their secrets, keep company with them, and seek their own good
from them. Furthermore, believers provide others with the material
possession, knowledge, recognition, and rank which are all granted to
them by God Almighty.

They expend their material possessions in the Cause of Allah through
bearing aid to the poor and the miserable. They make use of their power
and rank to assist the oppressed and the needy.

Verse 39 is saying that it is a characteristic of believers who take
vengeance upon disbelieving wrong-doers when they are wronged by them.
They never surrender to their opponents rather they struggle against
them valiantly such that they defeat them, since the humility of Muslims
is on a par with that of the Islamic faith.

It is worthy of note that it is incumbent upon Muslims to defend
themselves with seeking aid from believers. Silence against being
wronged is forbidden. It is incumbent upon Muslims to forgive believers
but believers are supposed to defend themselves against wrong-doers and
seek aid from other believers

***(“forgive,” “seek succor”).***

Surah al-Shura - Verses 40 - 41
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَزَاءُ سَيِّئَةٍ سَيِّئَةٌ مِثْلُهَا فَمَنْ عَفَا وَأَصْلَحَ
فَأَجْرُهُ عَلَی اللَّهِ إِنَّهُ لا يُحِبُّ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَنِ انْتَصَرَ بَعْدَ ظُلْمِهِ فَأُولَئِكَ مَا عَلَيْهِمْ مِنْ
سَبِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***40. The recompense for an evil is an evil like thereof; but whoever
forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is with Allah. Indeed, He
likes not the wrong doers.***  
***41. And indeed whosoever seeks succor [for compensation] after he has
suffered wrong for such there is no blame against them.***

One may take just vengeance against the transgression of his rights;

***(“The recompense for an evil is an evil like thereof”);***

however, one who is powerful enough to take vengeance but he forgives
and makes reconciliation shall be granted a great Reward;

***(“but whoever forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is with
Allah”).***

The clause;

***“his reward is with Allah”***

is attested twice in the Holy Qur’an; an instance of which[^10] regards
Meccan Emigrants (Muhajirun) and the other instance concerns forgiving
the evil deeds committed by others attested in the blessed Verse in
question. Thus, it is evident that the recompense for forgiving and
making reconciliation is on a par with emigration toward Allah.

The blessed Verse 40 is saying that believers are such that if someone
wrongs them, they take a well-measured vengeance upon them and a
believer who forgives the wrong done to him by his brother in faith
shall be granted a great Reward by God Almighty, since Allah does not
favor wrong-doers.

Verse 41 is saying that one who takes his revenge upon someone who has
wronged him shall stay unharmed by the Muslim community nor shall he be
chastised nor reproached for his vengeance.

It is everyone’s legitimate right to take revenge upon the wrong-doer
since it is not reproached in this world nor will it be recompensed in
the Hereafter. However, if he forgives the wrong-doer, he shall be
rewarded by God Almighty.

Surah al-Shura - Verses 42 - 43
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا السَّبِيلُ عَلَی الَّذِينَ يَظْلِمُونَ النَّاسَ وَيَبْغُونَ
فِي الْأَرْضِ بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ أُولَئِكَ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَنْ صَبَرَ وَغَفَرَ إِنَّ ذَلِكَ لَمِنْ عَزْمِ الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. The way [of blame] is only against those who oppress men and
rebel in the earth without justification; for such [wrong-doers] there
will be an excruciating torment.***  
***43. And verily, whosoever shows patience and forgives [the
wrong-doer] that would truly be from the things recommended by Allah.***

It is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an[^11] that

***“No ground of complaint can there be against good-doers.”***

It was also reflected in the preceding Verse that the oppressed are not
subject to reproach. The blessed Verse 42 is saying that wrong-doers are
to be reproached. Islam is a comprehensive religion that recognizes the
rights of the oppressed and also leaves room for forgiving. Verses 41
and 42 express the states of the wrong-doers and the wronged.

According to the Qur’anic Verse:

***“Thus the one who wrongs you, you may take your revenge upon them”***

when believers take revenge upon wrong-doers proportionate to the wrong
done to them, they shall not be chastised by believers since they have
attained their right. Nonetheless, those who wrong people and make
mischief on the earth without justification are supposed to be chastised
by believers and an excruciating torment is in store for wrong-doers.

Verse 43 is saying that one who is patient and forgives believers
possesses determination and excellences.

The blessed Verse may allude to the fact that those who have been
wronged by others and failed to attain to their rights have been
patient. Such people possess determination since it requires a strong
and confident soul to confront hardships and persevere in making efforts
to achieve one’s goals.

Such were Arch-Prophets (as) so strong and perseverant that they could
bear the wrongs done to them by people, but they never make attempts at
taking their revenge upon their enemies unless they were divinely
appointed to wage war against disbelievers in order to support religion.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 44
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ وَلِيٍّ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ وَتَرَی
الظَّالِمِينَ لَمَّا رَأَوُا الْعَذَابَ يَقُولُونَ هَلْ إِلَى مَرَدٍّ
مِنْ سَبِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. And whomsoever Allah sends astray [and abandons him in his
error], for him there is no protector for him. And you will see the
wrong-doers when they behold the torment, they will say: “Is there any
way of return [to the world]?”***

Transgression of people’s rights entails deprivation from Divine
Guidance and entanglement with the abyss of error, perplexity, and
remorse. Those who are in error are supposed to know that no power shall
deliver them from error.

They are those who are not guided through Divine Guidance. One who
voluntarily turns away from Truth and failed to be guided by God
Almighty shall proceed the way toward the abyss of humility and error
and he will have neither friends nor protectors.

The Noble Prophet’s (S) heart was so enlightened by Divine Light that he
could notice that disbelievers would be encompassed by Hell and was also
able to see that upon tasting Divine torment in the Hereafter, they
would desperately inquire if they could return to the world and
compensate for their evil deeds.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 45
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَاهُمْ يُعْرَضُونَ عَلَيْهَا خَاشِعِينَ مِنَ الذُّلِّ يَنْظُرُونَ
مِنْ طَرْفٍ خَفِيٍّ وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّ الْخَاسِرِينَ
الَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَأَهْلِيهِمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَلا
إِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ فِي عَذَابٍ مُقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. And you will see them brought forward to it [Hell] made humble by
disgrace, [and] looking with stealthy glance. And those who believe will
say: “Truly, the losers are they who lose themselves and their families
on the Day of Resurrection. Verily, the wrong doers will be in a lasting
torment.***

Those who are arrogant today shall be in disgrace tomorrow. The fright
caused by noticing the Resurrection will make evil-doers lose their
eye-sight.

The blessed Verse in question addresses the Noble Prophet (S) and says:

*“You also notice the state of wrong-doers who wronged themselves and
were deprived of Divine Guidance. Now it is the time that they tasted
Divine torment.*

*They will be so desperate, humbled, and disgraced that they will be
afraid of taking a glance at Hellfire but look at stealthily. When
believers who are saved from torment see the torment of disbelievers,
they say these are the losers who spent their mundane life in vain
instead of gaining benefits from their transactions.*

*They are losers and together with their adherents fall into the abyss
of Hell. The people of the world are supposed to be aware that
disbelieving and polytheist wrong-doers shall remain in torment and Hell
everlastingly.”*

Surah al-Shura - Verse 46
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لَهُمْ مِنْ أَوْلِيَاءَ يَنْصُرُونَهُمْ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ
وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. And they will have no protectors to help them other than Allah.
And he whom Allah sends astray, for him there is no way [of
deliverance].***

The blessed Verse in question is saying that polytheists and
disbelievers who invoked idols and other objects of worship to intercede
on their behalf and assumed that they would be effective in warding off
torment in their time of desperate need were in error unaware of the
truth that there is no friend nor support to deliver them from torment
and whoever failed to find the path to happiness through Divine Guidance
will have no other way of deliverance.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 47
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اسْتَجِيبُوا لِرَبِّكُمْ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَ يَوْمٌ لا مَرَدَّ
لَهُ مِنَ اللَّهِ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ مَلْجَأٍ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَمَا لَكُمْ
مِنْ نَكِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. Answer the Call of your Lord before there comes from Allah a Day
which cannot be averted. You will find no refuge on that Day nor will
there be for you any denying [of your sins].***

Acting upon Divine Injunctions leads to our growth.

Thus, we are supposed to obey our Provider;

***(“Answer to the Call of your Lord”).***

Following Divinely appointed Prophets preserves man from incurring loss.
The preceding Verses treated of losers and the blessed Verse in question
says that the solution lies in obedience to God Almighty and serving
Him.

Two possible interpretations have been provided regarding the contextual
meaning of

***“there comes from Allah a Day which cannot be averted”:***

1. Sinners may not return to the world.

2. That Day will indubitably come and it may not be averted. It is
worthy of note that the blessed Verse in question addresses mankind.

They are asked to answer the Divine Call and acknowledge and act upon
the Injunctions Divinely revealed to His Prophet (S) before you miss the
opportunity of saving righteous good deeds in this world for the Day of
desperation.

The Resurrection Day shall come whereon there shall not be any return
for anyone, since losers have actually spent in vain the faculty of
perfection.

They there shall be no refuge to be sought since they had all Divine
Decisive Arguments available to them but they knowingly denied the
Prophetic Call and the Truth of the Holy Qur’an. They may not deny their
disbelief at the Divine Tribunal on the Day of Resurrection.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 48
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ أَعْرَضُوا فَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظاً إِنْ
عَلَيْكَ إِلَّا الْبَلاغُ وَإِنَّا إِذَا أَذَقْنَا الْأِنْسَانَ مِنَّا
رَحْمَةً فَرِحَ بِهَا وَإِنْ تُصِبْهُمْ سَيِّئَةٌ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ
أَيْدِيهِمْ فَإِنَّ الْأِنْسَانَ كَفُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. But if they turn away [do not be sad, since] We have not sent you
[O Muhammad] as a protector over them [to make them believe]. Your duty
is to convey [the Message]. Indeed, when We cause man to taste of Mercy
from Us, he rejoices thereat [and neglects his duties]; but when some
ill befalls them because of the deeds which their hands have sent forth
[they consign Divine Bounties to oblivion and] then verily, man
[becomes] ingrate!***

The Noble Prophet’s (S) duty was to impart Divine Call rather than make
people believe in God Almighty. Mercy is from God Almighty but
afflictions are the consequences of man’s vicious deeds.

To console His Messenger (S) deeply concerned with disbelievers’ denial
of his Call, God Almighty bids unto him to not be sad since He did not
appoint him to watch over their deeds rather his duty solely lies in
guiding them to the Strait Path of Divine Laws and impart his Prophetic
Call.

The blessed Verse closes with human vices saying that whenever God
Almighty makes man taste of His Mercy and Bounties, he rejoices and
whenever he is afflicted with afflictions as the evil consequences of
his vicious deeds, he becomes ingratiate, since it is a human
characteristic that he is ingratitude for Blessings.

It is his natural disposition that even if he rejoices Blessings for a
hundred years but is afflicted with some unfavorable circumstance, he
will forgive those Blessings and Favors and complaints of afflictions
and becomes ingratitude for Divine Blessings.

Surah al-Shura - Verses 49 - 50
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ يَخْلُقُ مَا يَشَاءُ يَهَبُ
لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ إِنَاثاً وَيَهَبُ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ الذُّكُورَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ يُزَوِّجُهُمْ ذُكْرَاناً وَإِنَاثاً وَيَجْعَلُ مَنْ يَشَاءُ
عَقِيماً إِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He
creates what He wills. He bestows female [offspring] upon whom He wills,
and bestows male [offspring] upon whom He wills.***  
***50. Or He bestows both males and females [in the same womb], and He
renders barren whom He wills. Indeed, He is the Omniscient, the
Omnipotent.***

Since pre-Islamic Arabs living in the Age of Ignorance preferred male
offspring over female ones, the word

***yahabu (“bestows”)***

is employed for both male and female offspring in Verse 49 to indicate
that they are both Divine Gifts and the word:

***inathan (“female [offspring]”)***

precedes

***al-dhukur (“male [offspring]”)***

with the definite article to say that the male offspring at whom you
rejoice are also Divine Gifts.

The clause:

***yuzawwijuhum (“bestows them”)***

designates that God Almighty at times bestows male and/or female
offspring.

Verse 49 is saying that the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth
solely belongs to God Almighty since He is the Possessor of the heavens
and the earth and creation of the world and all creatures has been made
possible through His Omnipotence and Omniscience and everything is
dependent upon His Will. He bestows male and female offspring upon
whomever He wills as per His Discretion and Wisdom. He may bestow male
and female offspring in pairs or many male and female offspring.

It is dependent upon His Wisdom and Discretion that He makes some
females barren and sterile. He is the Omnipotent, the Omniscience. These
blessed Verses make a reference to Divine Perfect Might and Knowledge.
Nothing may impede His Will.

Surah al-Shura - Verse 51
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِبَشَرٍ أَنْ يُكَلِّمَهُ اللَّهُ إِلَّا وَحْياً أَوْ مِنْ
وَرَاءِ حِجَابٍ أَوْ يُرْسِلَ رَسُولاً فَيُوحِيَ بِإِذْنِهِ مَا
يَشَاءُ إِنَّهُ عَلِيٌّ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***51. It is not given to any human being that Allah should speak unto
him unless [it be] by Revelation [descended upon his heart], or from
behind a veil, or [that] He sends a messenger [an angel] to reveal what
He wills by His Leave. Verily, He is Most High, Most Wise.***

Occasion of Revelation. A number of Qur’anic exegets present an occasion
of Revelation for the blessed Verse in question whose summary is as
follows.

A number of Jews came unto the Noble Prophet (S) and said:

*“Why do you not speak unto God nor do you look at Him? If you are the
Messenger of God, speak unto and look at Him in the manner that Moses
(as) did. We never believe in you unless you do likewise.”*

The Noble Prophet (S) replied:

*“Moses (as) never saw God Almighty.”*

Then, the blessed Verse in question was revealed unto the Noble Prophet
(S) to express the manner of the Prophet’s nexus with God Almighty.[^12]

Divine Revelation is from God Almighty. It is not dependent upon human
will. It is from the Exalted Lord and it is based on His Wisdom. Since
the preceding Verses treated of Divine Bounties, the blessed Verse in
question treats of the most significant of Divine Bounties and Favors
bestowed by Him upon humanity.

These Bounties and Favors are Divine Revelation and the Prophets’ nexus
with God Almighty.

In the first place, the blessed Verse says:

***“It is not given to any human being that Allah should speak unto him
unless [it be] by Revelation [descended upon his heart], or from behind
a veil”***

in the manner that Moses son of ‘Imran spake unto God Almighty and
received His Answers through sound waves produced by God in the air
without His being seen, since looking at Him is impossible.

Such communication is also possible through sending a messenger to
impart unto him the Divine Message

***(“or [that] He sends a messenger [an angel]”).***

Likewise, the angel of Revelation, the Divine Messenger, Gabriel the
trustworthy, descended upon the Noble Prophet of Islam (S). It is at
that time that God’s Messenger imparts unto His Prophet (S) whatever He
wills through His Command.

There exists no other means of communication between God Almighty and
His servants, since He is Most Exalted and All-Wise;

***(“Verily, He is Most High, Most Wise”).***

He is far Exalted such they no one may see or speak unto Him. All his
Acts are Wise and His Nexus with His Prophets are well-measured. The
blessed Verse serves actually as a clear response to those who may out
of ignorance imagine that Divine Revelation designates that Prophets may
see God Almighty and speak unto Him.

The blessed Verse concisely and precisely reflects the nature and truth
of Divine Revelation.

The contextual meaning of the blessed Verse indicates that there are
solely three means of communication between Prophets and God Almighty:

Revelation unto heart, instances of which are to be found with many a
Prophet, e.g.

***“Therefore, We revealed unto him [Noah (as) saying]: ‘Construct the
ship before Us and as per Our Command’”***[^13]***.***

From behind the veil, in the manner that God Almighty spake unto Moses
(as) on the Mount of Tur

***(“And to Moses (as) Allah spake directly,”***[^14]***).***

Through sending down a Messenger, in the manner that God Almighty spake
with the Noble Prophet of Islam (as):

***“Say [O Muhammad (S)]: ‘Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel [is an enemy
of God Almighty], since verily he has brought it [the Holy Qur’an] down
unto your heart through Allah’s Permission,’”***[^15]***.***

It is to be noted that it was not the exclusive means of receiving
Divine Revelation by the Noble Prophet of Islam (S). Divine Revelation
was also descended upon Prophets through revealing unto him Divine
Message when he was awake as it was mentioned above.

At times, Prophets received Divine Revelation in sleep through true
dreams, for instance in the case of Abraham (as) who received the Divine
Command to sacrifice Ishmael, although a number of Qur’anic exegets have
considered it an instance of Divine Revelation from behind a veil.

Although the main means of sending down Divine Revelation constitute the
three means mentioned in the blessed Verse in question, but each of
which may fall into further categories, as a number of Qur’anic exegets
maintain that sending down Divine Revelation through the angel of
Revelation constitutes four means:

Where the angel of Revelation imparted the Divine Message unto the Noble
Prophet’s (S) heart without appearing before him, as it is reflected in
a Prophetic tradition saying:

*“The Holy Spirit has revealed unto my heart that no one dies unless he
receives his provision in full; therefore, fear God Almighty and be not
avaricious in seeking your provision.”*

At time, the angel of Revelation appeared in human form, addressed the
Noble Prophet (S) and imparted the Divine Message unto him. According to
a number of traditions, Gabriel appeared in the form of Dahya (or Dihya)
Kalbi.[^16]

At times, he heard Divine Revelation like chimes and it was the hardest
means of receiving Divine Revelation such that even in very cold days
his blessed visage perspired and if he was mounted, the mount was not
able to carry the burden and sat down.

At times, Gabriel appeared to him in his original form as he was created
by God Almighty. It happened only twice in his life time, as it will be
revealed below under 53:12.[^17]

Finally, it may be mentioned that means are Divine Revelation falls into
ten categories in the book Wujuh al-Qur’an; however, taking into account
all the instances of the word:

***wahy (“Revelation”)***

and its derivatives, it may be concluded that Divine Revelation falls
into two categories: legislative Revelation (wahy tashri’i) sent to
Prophets (as) between whom and God Almighty existed a particular nexus
through which they received Divine Commands and Truths, and existential
Revelation (wahy takwini) constituting the specific instincts,
faculties, conditions, and laws placed by God Almighty in different
creatures of the world.

### Some Traditions Concerning Divine Revelation

There are numerous traditions regarding Divine Revelation mentioned in
Islamic sources which shed some light on this mysterious nexus between
Prophets and the Originator of creation.

It is reported in a number of traditions that when the angel of
Revelation descended upon the Noble Prophet (S) he was alright but when
immediate nexus was established he felt an extraordinary burden such
that at times he became unconscious.

According to a tradition narrated by Saduq in his Tawhid on the
authority of Imam Sadiq (as) that the Noble Imam (as) was asked:

*“What was the state of unconsciousness experienced by the Noble Prophet
(S) at the time of Divine Revelation?”*

He replied:

*“It occurred when the Revelation was sent down upon him at the time of
Divine Immediate Manifestation.”*[^18]

When Gabriel was sent down to the Noble Prophet (S), the Archangel
respected him, as it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“When Gabriel came to the Noble Prophet (S), he sat down before him
like servants and never entered without permission.”*[^19]

A number of traditions indicate that it was through Divine Blessing and
inward intuition that the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) could easily
recognize Gabriel, as it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“It was solely through Divine Blessing that the Messenger of God (S)
recognized that God Almighty had sent down angel Gabriel.”*[^20]

An interpretation which is worthy of note is attested in a tradition
narrated on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas concerning the Noble Prophet’s
unconsciousness at the time of Divine Revelation:

“When Divine Revelation was descended upon the Noble Prophet (S), he
felt an excruciating pain and suffered from headache and felt an
extraordinary heaviness. It is in this vein that the Holy Qur’an says
that God Almighty sent down a grave Word on him. The tradition further
adds that Gabriel was sent down onto the Messenger of Allah (S) sixty
thousand times.[^21]

Surah al-Shura - Verses 52 - 53
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ رُوحاً مِنْ أَمْرِنَا مَا كُنْتَ
تَدْرِي مَا الْكِتَابُ وَلا الْأِيمَانُ وَلَكِنْ جَعَلْنَاهُ نُوراً
نَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ نَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا وَإِنَّكَ لَتَهْدِي إِلَی
صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِرَاطِ اللَّهِ الَّذِي لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ
أَلا إِلَی اللَّهِ تَصِيرُ الْأُمُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. And thus We have sent to you a Revelation of Our Command [the
Holy Qur’an]. You knew not what the Book is, nor what the faith. But We
have made it [the Qur’an] a Light wherewith We guide whosoever of Our
slaves We will. And verily, you [O Muhammad] are indeed guiding [people]
to the Straight Path.***  
***53. The Path of Allah to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and
all that is in the earth. Verily, all matters at the end go to Allah.***

The Chapter in question opened with the Verse of Revelation:

***(“HM.’A S Q. Likewise Allah, the Omnipotent, the All-Wise sends
Revelation unto you [O Muhammad]”)***

and it closes with the same;

***(“And thus We have sent to you a Revelation of Our Command [the Holy
Qur’an]”).***

Some Qur’anic exegets maintain that the word:

***ruh (“spirit”)***

in Verse 52 refers to ruh al-amin (“the faithful or trusted spirit,
Gabriel”) and some others hold that it indicates an angel more exalted
in rank than other angels:

***(cf. “Therein descend the angels and the spirit,”***[^22]***).***

Some also hold that it makes a reference to the Holy Qur’an. The last
interpretation seems to be preferable. Spirit is the essence of life and
the Holy Qur’an is the secret of man’s spiritual life.

In the same manner that body without spirit disintegrates and decays,
society without The Book, the Holy Qur’an, is unimaginable and in the
same manner that spirit never becomes old and useless, so is the Holy
Qur’an that will defy the passage of time.

It is worthy of note that the blessed Verses in question proceed the
general discussion on Divine Revelation raised in the preceding Verses
and treat of the same saying:

*“In the same manner that We sent Our Revelation upon former Prophets
through diverse means, We have sent to you a Revelation of Our
Command.”*

The adverb

***“thus” (ka-dhalika)***

may indicate that all the three types of Divine Revelation were realized
for the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) and at times he established immediate
nexus with the Pure Essence of Lord, at times heard the Revelation
through the angel of Divine Revelation, and at times he heard a voice
like sound waves as reflected in the aforesaid Islamic traditions.

Concerning the meaning of

***“spirit’***

in this context, Qur’anic exegets maintain two views. Firstly, the Holy
Qur’an is being intended which rejuvenates hearts and souls. The
majority of Qur’anic exegets hold the same view.[^23]

In his Mufradat, Raghib also says that the Holy Qur’an is termed as
spirit in the Verse:

***“And thus We have sent to you a Revelation of Our Command”***

since it leads to the life in the Hereafter.

The interpretation is consistent with the different pieces of evidence
attested in the Verse, e.g. the adverb:

***“thus” (ka-dhalika)***

alluding to Divine Revelation and the expression:

***“We have sent a Revelation” (awhayna)***

and the expressions regarding the Holy Qur’an under the Verse in
question.

Secondly,

***“spirit”***

connotes the Holy Spirit or an Archangel who accompanied the Noble
Prophet of Islam (S) at all times and was more exalted in rank than
those like Gabriel and Michael.

Based on the same interpretation, awhayna is used in the sense of
anzalna, namely We have sent down the Holy Spirit or an Archangel onto
you.

The blessed Verse proceeds to say:

***“You knew not what the Book is, nor what the faith. But We have made
it [the Qur’an] a Light wherewith We guide whosoever of Our slaves We
will.”***

In other words, it was Divine Favor bestowed upon you that besides
guiding you by this Great Scripture and its Guidance, He guides His
other servants through this Divine Light covering the east and the west
throughout the centuries to the end of the world.

Thus Verse 52 closes:

***“Verily, you guide people unto the Straight Path.”***

The Holy Qur’an is the Divine Light for you and all people and also a
means of Guidance for those treading the path leading to Truth, and the
elixir for the thirsty.

The exposition of the Straight Path follows in Verse 53:

***“The Path of Allah to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all
that is in the earth.”***

Could there be found any path more straight than the one leading to the
Originator of the world of existence? Is there any path smoother than
the one leading to the Creator of the world of existence? True happiness
is what God Almighty calls people unto it and the only way leading to it
is the one which is chosen by Him.

The last sentence of the Verse which is the last sentence of the Chapter
as well actually serves as an argument substantiating that the Straight
Path is solely the one which leads toward God Almighty:

***“Verily, all matters at the end go to Allah.”***

Since He is the Possessor and the Organizer of the world of existence
and owing to the fact that all human plans toward perfection are to be
accepted by this Great Organizer, the Straight Path is the only Path
leading toward Him and any other path besides this one leads to error
and falsehood.

Is there any Truth other than His Pure Essence in the world of
existence? It is worthy of note that the sentence bears a glad tiding to
the God fearing and a warning to wrong-doers and sinners who shall all
return unto God Almighty.

It also bears testimony to the fact that Revelation should solely be
from God Almighty, since the return of all existent beings shall be
toward Him and with Him rests the management and judgment of all things.

Therefore, He should be the Origin of Divine Revelation sent down onto
Prophets so that people may find true Guidance. Thus, the order of the
Verses from the opening to the close of the Chapter is interrelated and
the opening and the close of the Chapter are consistent with its
prevailing theme of the same.

[^1]: Tafsir al-Mizan.

[^2]: 25:40

[^3]: Majma’ al-Bayan.

[^4]: Majma’ al-Bayan.

[^5]: Tafsir Safi.

[^6]: 35:45

[^7]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid’s Commentary on Nahj al-Balagha, vol. 7, p. 41.

[^8]: Tafsir Nur, p. 412.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 105, apud Tafsir Nimuna.

[^10]: 4:100

[^11]: 9:91

[^12]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 8, p. 5783.

[^13]: 23:27

[^14]: 4:164

[^15]: 2:97

[^16]: Dahya or Dihya ibn Khalifa al-Kalbi was the Noble Prophet’s (S)
foster brother and one of the most handsome men of his time. At times,
Gabriel came unto the Noble Prophet (S) in his form, see Majma’
al-Bahrayn, s.v. w-h-y. he was an eminent Companion of the Noble Prophet
(S). The Prophet (S) sent him as an emissary to Heraclius, the Roman
emperor in 6/627 or 7/628 and he lived to the reign of Mu’awiya
(41-60/661-680), see Lughat-nama-yi Dihkhuda.

[^17]: Fi Âalal al-Qur’an, vol. 7, p. 306.

[^18]: Saduq’s Tawhid, apud Bihar al-Anwar, vol.18, p. 256.

[^19]: ‘Ilal al-Shara’i’, apud Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 18, p. 256.

[^20]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 18, p. 256.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 18, p. 261.

[^22]: 97:4

[^23]: For instance, Óabarsi in Majma’ al-Bayan, Shaykh Óusi in Tibyan,
Fakhr Razi in Tafsir Kabir, Maraghi in Tafsir Maraghi.


