Surah al-Zukhruf, Chapter 43, Verses 1 - 39
===========================================

**(The Gold Adornments)**

**Section (juz’ 25)**

**Number of Verses: 89**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

Except for Verse 45, the rest of the Verses of the Chapter were revealed
in Mecca.

The title of the Chapter derives from Verse 35 in which the word

***zukhruf (“gold, silver; adornments”)***

is attested. Main issues discussed in the Chapter include: the Holy
Qur’an and prophethood; opponents’ reaction against prophets; arguments
substantiating Divine Unity, struggles against polytheism; partial
narration of the legends of prophets; and a depiction of the Hereafter.

A point worthy of note is that seven consecutive Qur’anic Chapters,
namely Ghafir, Fussilat, Shura, Zukhruf, Dukhan, Jathiya, and Ahqaf
termed as Hawamim or Suwar Al Ha Mim, open with the detached letters HM.

Merits of the Recitation of the Chapter
---------------------------------------

Many sources on Qur’anic exegesis (tafsir) and tradition (hadith)
include Islamic traditions concerning many a merit for the recitation of
the Chapter in question, an instance of which is a Prophetic tradition
saying:

*“One who recites Surah al-Zukhruf is among those who are thus addressed
on the Day of Resurrection:*

*‘O My servants, you are to entertain neither fear nor grief on this day
as you shall be admitted to Paradise*[^1] *provided that you act upon
religious instructions.’”*

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 1 - 4
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْكِتَابِ الْمُبِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا جَعَلْنَاهُ قُرْآناً عَرَبِيّاً لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ فِي أُمِّ الْكِتَابِ لَدَيْنَا لَعَلِيٌّ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. HM***  
***2. By the illuminating Book [the Qur’an].***  
***3. Indeed We have made it a Qur’an in the Arabic [tongue] that you
may be able to understand [It].***  
***4. And indeed It is in the Mother of the Book [the preserved tablet,
lawh mahfus] with Us indeed exalted, full of wisdom, and firm on Its
basis.***

The characteristics of the Holy Qur’an as a Divinely Revealed Book
include: manifest and illuminating (mubin); springing from Divine
Omniscience (fi Umm al-Kitab); of immaterial origin (ladayna); Its form
and content are exalted (‘aliy); Its contents are full of wisdom and
firm on Its basis (hakim).

The word

***qur’an (“book”)***

derives from the root q-r-’ (“recite, read”).

***‘Arabi (“clear, manifest”)***

is taken from ‘Arab (“the Arabs”). The Arabic tongue is employed in the
sense of clear and unambiguous language.

The Chapter in question as well as the following ones includes
discussions by Qur’anic exegets concerning HM to the effect that the
detached letters constitute the title of the Chapters or they may serve
as a reference to the Most Beautiful Divine Names e.g. the Praiseworthy
(Hamid), the All-Glorious (Majid), the Compassionate (Hannan), the
Benevolent (Mannan), the Protector (Hafis), and the Noble (Majid).

It is said that all the letters of alphabet opening a number of the
Qur’anic Chapters apparently serve as codes between God Almighty and His
Prophet (S) regarded as Qur’anic equivocal Verses (mutashabihat) the
knowledge of which rests with God and those well rooted in knowledge
(al-rasikhun fi ‘l-ilm) thus dropping the subject is more appropriate.

***Waw (“by”)***

is the word of oath which ad hoc makes a reference to the manifest Book,
namely the Holy Qur’an, which is clear in terms of form and eloquence
and is inimitable, i.e., producing the same form, meaning, and
intricacies rests beyond human capacity.

A brief reflection on the form and content of Qur’anic Verses clearly
indicates that the most eminent scholars fail to discover Its least
intricacies even if they exert themselves assiduously; none the less Its
injunctions and laws are manifest:

***(“Indeed We have made it a Qur’an in the Arabic [tongue] that you may
be able to understand [It]”).***

The preceding clause is the apodosis of the oath which is ad hoc
employed in the sense of taking an oath to the Qur’an Divinely Revealed
by God Almighty to His Prophet (S) in the Arabic tongue so that the
Arabs ponder on Its meaning and intricacies.

One of the grounds behind Revelation of the Holy Qur’an in the Arabic
tongue is that it is the most eloquent and the most comprehensive
language and eminent scholars bear testimony to the fact that it rests
on comprehensive and precise rules possessing the capacity to convey the
most intricate and significant points and issues.

Another reason is that according to the Holy Qur’an:

***“And war your tribe of near kindred”***[^2]

as per which the Noble Prophet (S) was Divinely appointed to guide his
kith and kin and since they were from the Quraysh tribe wo were speakers
of the Arabic tongue, the Holy Qu’an was Revealed in it. However, there
are other secrets known by experts.

The fourth Verse enumerates three more characteristics of the Holy
Qur’an:

1. Prior to Its Revelation to the Noble Prophet (S), the Holy Qur’an had
been recorded in the Mother of the Book, namely the Preserved Tablet
(lawh mahfus), in Divine Presence.

2. It is the Most Elevated Book among all Divinely Revealed Books and it
the Most Comprehensive Book abrogating preceding ones. It will serve as
Divine Guidance to man to the Last Day without being abrogated by any
other book.

3. The Holy Qur’an is full of wisdom, namely it provides man with
wisdom. All Its injunctions and laws rest on reason and logic and Its
Verses are consistent with intellectual proofs and arguments.
Furthermore, it rests on the golden mean such that a brief reflection on
It will suffice for the wise and scholars to acknowledge that It is
Revealed by the Wise Originator of creation.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verse 5 - 8
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَنَضْرِبُ عَنْكُمُ الذِّكْرَ صَفْحاً أَنْ كُنْتُمْ قَوْماً
مُسْرِفِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَمْ أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ نَبِيٍّ فِي الْأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ نَبِيٍّ إِلَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَهْلَكْنَا أَشَدَّ مِنْهُمْ بَطْشاً وَمَضَى مَثَلُ الْأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. Shall We then take away the Reminder [i.e., the Holy Qur’an] from
you, because you are transgressors beyond bounds.***  
***6. And how many a prophet have We sent amongst the ancient.***  
***7. And never came there a prophet to them but they would mock
him.***  
***8. Then We destroyed men stronger [in terms of power] than them
[transgressors of bounds] and the fate of the ancient was recurred.***

Ignoring Divine injunctions is regarded as transgression of bounds
(israf). All prophets were mocked by disbelievers; therefore, any
prophet was expected to be aware of his predecessors so that he would
not desist from carrying out his duty for disbelievers’ mockery.

Verse five is a reference to the preceding one.

***“Shall We then take away” (a-fa-nadribu)***

is a rhetorical question conveying the meaning that are We supposed to
leave you in your ignorance and take away the Reminder, namely the Holy
Qur’an, from you so that you may be deprived of such Divine Favor
despite your transgression of bounds, persistence in disbelief and
animosity to the extreme, and your being astray in the abyss of error?

It may allude to disbelievers’ persistence in staying in error and
denial of Divine Guidance, namely the inimitable Word emanated from the
springhead of Divine Favor revealed to the Prophet (S) for guidance and
felicity.

Despite disbelievers’ turning away from the Reminder, God Almighty
provides humanity with everlasting Grace and innumerable Favors through
the Revelation of the Holy Qur’an in order that they may benefit from
Divine Guidance.

Addressing the Noble Prophet (S), the following Verses serve as a
consolation to him and a warning against polytheists by saying that God
Almighty appointed many a prophet among the polytheist ancient who
transgressed the bounds.

Their disbelief did not hinder Divine appointment of prophets. All
prophets were subject to the mockery of ancient disbelievers and it was
their disbelief that led to the chastisement of the most powerful of the
ancient nations and their perdition.

A number of instances are attested in the Holy Qur’an as per which the
glory and power of the ancient could not impede their being chastised
for their persistence in disbelief and their treatment of their
prophets. Their dire fate may serve as a lesson to others.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verse 9
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ سَأَلْتَهُمْ مَنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ
لَيَقُولُنَّ خَلَقَهُنَّ الْعَزِيزُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. And indeed if you ask them, “Who has created the heavens and the
earth” They will surely say: “The Omnipotent, the Omniscient [God]
created them.”***

Polytheists regarded God as the Creator, but they worshipped idols which
bears testimony to the fact that even if vanity, ignorance and imitating
ancestors overshadows human intellection, primordial natural disposition
(fitra) fully comprehends Divine Omniscience and Omnipotence.

Addressing the Noble Prophet (S) the blessed Verse in question is saying
O Muhammad (S), if you ask these disbelievers and polytheists about the
Creator of the heavens and the earth, they will unhesitatingly answer,

*“the Omniscient, the All-Victorious, the All-Conqueror God has created
them.”*

It alludes to the fact that human primordial disposition is by nature
inclined toward Divine Unity bearing to the existence of the One God
through his primordial disposition since human intellect bears testimony
to the fact that no construction, movement, or created being may exist
without constructor, mover, or creator.

Reflecting on his existence, man comprehends that he is created ex
nihilo, how could he deny the existence of Divine Unity when reflecting
on the systematicity of creation, the glory of the vast world and the
secrets of Creation manifest throughout the world of Creation all bowing
to precise laws.

Nonetheless, man is too ignorant and wrong doing (saluman jahula) to
associate other objects of worship with God and it is through his
imperfect intellect that he imagines that other entities besides God may
be of any effect in the world of existence.

The blessed Verse warns disbelievers who refrain from following
prophetic teachings and neglect the truth that anyone, through his
primordial disposition, comprehends that he is in the presence of the
Sublime God and all the higher and lower creatures are subjugated to His
Creation; however, disbelievers resort to frail creatures, such as
inanimate things that are far inferior to them, for support and
protection.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verse 10
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ مَهْداً وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ فِيهَا سُبُلاً
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. Who has made for you the earth a resting place, and has made for
you roads therein, in order that you may find your way.***

The path to Guidance is a Divine Favor. If the regions of the earth were
detached by lofty mountains and deep valleys, mankind would be unable to
live on it. Therefore, the possibility of constructing roads is a Divine
blessing.

Traversing lands and perceiving them may lead man to the path of
Guidance. The blessed Verse indicates Divine Unity and His Essential
Attributes a posteriori saying that God Whose Existence is acknowledged
by you is the Creator of the heavens and the earth.

He is the Creator of all things Who has made the earth for you like a
cradle through His Grace and Bounty. The similitude of the earth to a
cradle is a reference to the rotation of the earth on its axis.

The rotary movement of the earth is also discovered by modern science.
It is worthy of note that astronomers of the old maintained that the
earth is motionless and the sun rotates around the earth once in 24
hours and the existence of nights and days are resulted from the solar
rotary movement.

Qur’anic exegets have interpreted the word mahd as peace and rest, but
the word means the cradle used for infants as a place of rest. The
discovery of the rotary motion of the earth on its axis by modern
science bears testimony to one of the Qur’anic miracles and secrets
unknown to any anyone in olden times.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 11 - 12
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِي نَزَّلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً بِقَدَرٍ فَأَنْشَرْنَا بِهِ
بَلْدَةً مَيْتاً كَذَلِكَ تُخْرَجُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِي خَلَقَ الْأَزْوَاجَ كُلَّهَا وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الْفُلْكِ
وَالْأَنْعَامِ مَا تَرْكَبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. And Who sent down water from the sky in due measure, then We
revived a dead land therewith, and so you will be brought forth [from
the graves].***  
***12. And Who has created all the pairs and has appointed for you ships
and cattle on which you ride:***

The preceding Verse and the One in question make mention of Divine Unity
and the Hereafter respectively. The word ***qadar*** is either used in
the sense of “measure” or “ordainment and plan,” i.e., He sent down rain
in due measure or sent down rain as per ordainment and plan; therefore,
all rain drops are sent down according to a well calculated plan;

***(“sent down water from the sky in due measure”).***

According to the blessed Verse, it is another Divine Favor that He sends
down water from the sky so that the soil which is dead in winter season
turns verdant in springtime.

***“So you will be brought forth [from the graves]”***

indicates that in the same manner the dead soil turns verdant in
springtime as if it is revived, the dead undergo a drastic change on the
Day of Resurrection and an everlasting life is bestowed upon them. The
revival of the dead on the Day of Resurrection is likened to the
rejuvenation of the dead soil in springtime in many a Qur’anic Verse.

The secret may lie in the fact that soil per se remain dormant in winter
season but the land is not verdant with plants and in the meantime,
through divine Omnipotence and Wisdom, rears water, freshness, and seeds
in it such that it may be covered with verdant and lush coverage in
springtime.

In like manner, man may turn mortal through death, but his material
being turns invisible in this world and all his acts acquired and
actualized in his lifespan turn invisible; however, they are reared
posthumously and it will be through Divine Will that he will be accorded
a new life on the Day of Resurrection which is the last stage of his
journey toward the Divine.

On such Day, he will reap whatever he has sown such that if he sowed
fruitless and bitter plants in the field of his being, he shall
certainly reap the same on the Last Day.

Verse 12 is a Reminder from God Almighty to man that He has created all
male and female pairs. It was mentioned elsewhere that all creatures
have been created in male and female pairs, even constituent elements
include positive and negative elements which stand on a par with male
and female pairs in the animal world.

True Unity solely belongs to God Almighty, the Necessary Existent Being.
The Verse in question also makes mention of other Divine Favors, e.g.
ships that may easily traverse water and quadrupeds used for riding and
other purposes, bestowed on mankind in order to meet their needs.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 13 - 14
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِتَسْتَوُوا عَلَی ظُهُورِهِ ثُمَّ تَذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ رَبِّكُمْ إِذَا
اسْتَوَيْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ وَتَقُولُوا سُبْحَانَ الَّذِي سَخَّرَ لَنَا
هَذَا وَمَا كُنَّا لَهُ مُقْرِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّا إِلَی رَبِّنَا لَمُنْقَلِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. In order that you may mount on their backs and then may remember
the Favor of your Lord when you mount thereon and say “Glory to Him Who
has subjected this to us and we could never have it [by making
efforts].”***  
***14. And indeed to our Lord we shall return.***

Benefiting from Divine Bounties is to be accompanied by remembrance of
God Almighty and gratitude toward Him rather than vanity and negligence.
Divine Bounties and their due measure is a reflection of Divine
Lordship.

The blessed Verse says that when you mount on ships and quadrupeds, you
should be aware that they are Bounties bestowed upon you by your
Creator. You are supposed to say that God Almighty Who has subjected all
these creatures in the heaven and on the earth are All-Glorious and man
is too weak to subject such overpowering creatures to his will.

Thus man is supposed to be grateful toward God Almighty for the
innumerable Bounties bestowed upon man. He should never be neglectful of
remembering his Lord.

The Verse says:

***“And indeed to our Lord we shall return”***

which alludes to the remembrance of the Divine Origin of creation and
the Hereafter. Whoever reflects and acknowledges through certain
knowledge (‘ilm al-yaqin) that God Almighty has subjected all creatures
for human growth and perfection and each being is ordained to have a
purpose and final end, he will acknowledge that man who is the ultimate
end (ghayat al-ghayat) is supposed to attain to the final end of his
being which is to return to his Origin.

Such return shall be done on the Day of Resurrection as the final stage
of human development. Returning to God Almighty is a great Favor for
righteous believers bestowed by God Almighty Whose Most Beautiful Names
include the All-Compassionate (al-Rahman) and the All-Gracious
(al-Rahim).

Au contraire, disbelievers and hypocrites return to God Almighty Who is
Wrathful and Whose Most Beautiful Names include All-Subjugating
(al-Qahhar) and Strict in Punishment (Shadid al-‘Iqab).

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 15 - 16
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلُوا لَهُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ جُزْءاً إِنَّ الْأِنْسَانَ لَكَفُورٌ
مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمِ اتَّخَذَ مِمَّا يَخْلُقُ بَنَاتٍ وَأَصْفَاكُمْ بِالْبَنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. [Polytheists said: “Angels are daughters of God”] and they
assigned to some of His servants a share with Him. Indeed man is a
manifest ingrate.***  
***16. Or has He taken daughters out of what He has created and He has
selected for you sons?***

It would be unbefitting to regard daughters a disgrace and imagine that
that God Almighty has daughters. The blessed verse in question alludes
to disbelievers’ ignorance that they assign to some of His servants a
share with Him, such that angels who are His creatures are termed as
God’s daughters. This inappropriate attribution is a manifest token of
disbelief.

The other point is that:

***“or has He taken”***

as a rhetorical question with hamza of denial in Arabic is a reproach to
them to the effect that disbelievers regard weak creatures as God’s
offspring.

The blessed Verse inquires disbelievers:

*“Would it be fitting that God Almighty select daughters for Himself
from among His Creatures and select sons for you?”*

Such attributions reveal their ignorance and inanity since daughters and
sons are accorded shares with their parents but the Necessary Being is
the Originator of the world.

He is One, Glorified, and Free from corporeality as it is mentioned in
the Holy Qur’an:

***“He begets not, nor was He begotten. And there is none co-equal or
comparable unto Him”***[^3]***.***

As a consequence, the blessed Verse 15 closes with saying that indeed
man is a manifest ingrate.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verse 17
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُمْ بِمَا ضَرَبَ لِلرَّحْمَنِ مَثَلاً ظَلَّ
وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدّاً وَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. And if one of them is informed of the news of what pleases God
the All-Compassionate, his face becomes dark and he suppresses his
grief.***

Those filled with grief upon being informed of the birth of a daughter
and imagine that sons are better than daughters suffer from polytheistic
superstitions.

The blessed Verse is a reproach to disbelievers who upon being informed
of the news of the birth of a daughter that they set forth as a parable
to the Most Gracious Allah, their faces became dark out of suppressed
rage and ire since they deemed it a disgrace to have daughters and as a
consequence of their malice and viciousness they attributed female
offspring to God and called them Allah’s daughters.

The Verse reproaches disbelievers whose faces darkened from suppressed
anger upon hearing the news of the birth of female offspring. However,
the Creator of daughters and sons is the Same and they are both human
beings and their offspring.

The Verse inquires of disbelievers:

*“Why do you attribute to God what you deem weaker and attribute to
yourselves what you regard stronger?”*

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verse 18
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَمَنْ يُنَشَّأُ فِي الْحِلْيَةِ وَهُوَ فِي الْخِصَامِ غَيْرُ
مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. Is [it appropriate that] the one who is brought up in adornments
and who in dispute cannot make herself clear [be attributed to God
Almighty]?***

We noticed in Verse nine that polytheists regarded the Glorious and
Omniscient God as the Creator of being.

The blessed Verse in question says:

*“why do you who regard the Creator as Glorious and Omnipotent attribute
daughters to Him who are brought up in adornments and are subjugated by
their feelings and sentiments in disputes, but the fact is that firmness
and decisiveness rather than sentimentality are the prerequisites of
endearment and logic and argumentation rather than being subjected to
feelings are necessary for the acquisition of knowledge.”*

The Verse inquires of disbelievers,

*“Why do you regard as Divine offspring the one who is brought up in
adornments and who in disputes cannot make herself clear but regard sons
as your offspring?”*

The word ***yunsha’u (“is brought up”)*** derives from nasha’a (lit.
“make something,” ad hoc “be brought up”). The words *hilya* and
*khisam* are employed in the senses of “adornment” and “dispute”
respectively.

Two feminine characteristics noticed in the majority of females
springing from their sentimentality are to be found in the blessed Verse
in question, i.e., their keen interest in adornments and their
insufficient capacity for substantiating their arguments which is due to
their modesty and prudency.

There are indubitably females not so interested in adornments and a
moderate interest in adornments is by no means a demerit for them. The
demerit lies in extreme keenness of adornments as if they are born in
adornments and are brought up there.

Likewise, there are females who possess a remarkable capacity for logic
and argumentation, but it may not be denied that because of modesty and
prudence, compared with males, the majority of females possess a weaker
capacity for argumentation and disputation.

The major theme of the blessed Verse in question is that disbelievers
regard female offspring as Allah’s daughters and deem their sons as
their own offspring.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verse 19
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلُوا الْمَلائِكَةَ الَّذِينَ هُمْ عِبَادُ الرَّحْمَنِ إِنَاثاً
أَشَهِدُوا خَلْقَهُمْ سَتُكْتَبُ شَهَادَتُهُمْ وَيُسْأَلونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. And they make the angels who themselves are servants of the Most
Gracious [Allah] females. Did they witness their creation? Their
testimony [for superstitions] will be recorded and they will be
questioned.***

All testimonies and words are recorded in the presence of Allah.
Superstitious beliefs are to be severely suppressed. The blessed Verse
reveals their unworthy and baseless words regarding their false beliefs
according to which angels who are Allah’s servants are termed as His
daughters.

The Verse inquires:

*“Were they present at the time of their creation to witness the manner
of their making and learn that they were male or female? Their false
words and testimonies will be recorded soon and they will be questioned
on the Day of Resurrection and will be chastised for their words and
acts.”*

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verse 20
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَوْ شَاءَ الرَّحْمَنُ مَا عَبَدْنَاهُمْ مَا لَهُمْ بِذَلِكَ
مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَخْرُصُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***20. And they said: “If it had been the Will of the Most Gracious
[Allah], we should not have worshipped them.” They have no knowledge
[nor scientific reason] whatsoever of that. They say nothing but out of
conjecture and supposition.***

Wrong doers make attempts at justification of their acts and take
advantage of Divine Will as their pretext.

The word yakhrusun derives from khars which is employed in the sense of
words based on conjecture and supposition. Words having no basis on
knowledge, particularly those concerning dogmatic issues, are not to be
acknowledged.

Consequently, the blessed Verse in question says that had the Most
Gracious Lord willed, we would not have worshipped idols and false
deities; thereby, they made attempts at exonerate themselves of sins
saying that it had been Divine Will that they worshipped deities besides
Allah.

The blessed Verse is a reply to them to the effect that such words, like
other baseless words uttered by them, indicate their ignorance and
illogicality.

They are liars since they utter untrue words since God Almighty never
wills the disbelief of disbelievers as it is reflected in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“He is not pleased of His servants’ disbelief”***[^4]***.***

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 21- 22
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ آتَيْنَاهُمْ كِتَاباً مِنْ قَبْلِهِ فَهُمْ بِهِ مُسْتَمْسِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ قَالُوا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا عَلَى أُمَّةٍ وَإِنَّا عَلَی
آثَارِهِمْ مُهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. Or have We given them any Book before this to which they are
holding fast?***  
***22. Nay! [It is not so.] They say: We found our fathers following a
certain religion, and we have found guidance by following them.***

Polytheism and superstition have neither intellectual nor narrational
bases. The blessed Verse in question makes a reference to another
argument which may be produced by disbelievers.

The Verse says,

***“Or We have provided them with any Book before this to which they
hold fast,”***

i.e., they are supposed to take resort to rational or narrational
arguments in order to substantiate their claim; nonetheless, they fail
to provide either of the twain since all intellectual arguments as well
as the teachings of prophets and scriptures bear witness to Divine
Unity.

Verse 22 makes a reference to their main pretext which is no more than a
superstitious claim serving as the pivot of another.

The blessed verse in question informs of their false claim:

***“We found our fathers following a certain religion and we have found
guidance by following them.”***

They blindly imitated their ancestors and forefathers. It is interesting
to know that they regarded themselves guided to the right path whereas
in dogmatic issues no wise person may rely on imitation particularly in
the manner of ignorant imitation of the ignorant.

We know that their ancestors possessed no knowledge but they were
preoccupied with superstitious beliefs and ignorance wielded a vast sway
in their thoughts and society.

The point is that imitation is solely sensible in minor issues and such
imitation is supposed to be based on scholarly and expert advice such
that patients and non-specialists take the advice of physicians and
experts. As a consequence, it may be said that disbelievers’ blind
imitation from their ancestors and forefathers was inaccurate.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verse 23
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ مَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فِي قَرْيَةٍ مِنْ نَذِيرٍ
إِلَّا قَالَ مُتْرَفُوهَا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا عَلَى أُمَّةٍ
وَإِنَّا عَلَى آثَارِهِمْ مُقْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. And similarly We sent not a warner before you to any town but the
luxurious ones among them said: “We found our fathers following a
certain religion and we will indeed follow their footsteps.”***

The word

***mutraf (“living in ease and luxury”)***

derives from tarifa (“to live in opulence”) and implies one whose
opulent life has led him to vanity.

It was mentioned in the preceding Verse that common people believe that
their ancestors’ way of life was true and they may follow their
footsteps in order to tread the path of guidance:

***(“we have found guidance by following them”).***

However, the blessed Verse in question says that those living in luxury
think about opulence and worldly possessions rather than attaining to
guidance and following their ancestors’ beliefs is not for attaining to
guidance:

***(“we will indeed follow their footsteps”).***

In this blessed Verse, God Almighty informs His Prophet (S) that all the
prophets before him said unto people that they were all treading the
path of falsehood and prophets were appointed by God Almighty, the
Creator of the world, to lead them to the right path and show them the
path of felicity and deliverance so that they may know that the God of
the world is One and he has no associates in His Divine Being and
Essence rather he creates out of His Will.

He provides for His creatures through Omnipotence. He is neither part of
a whole nor any thing is part of Him. He is All-Glorious and free from
corporeality.

***“He begets none, nor was He begotten”***[^5]***.***

All attributes of Perfection, e.g. Everlastingness and Unity are His.
Such Divine Being rather than incompetent and ignorant objects of
worship is Praiseworthy. In response to the prophets’ wise admonitions,
they did not resort to their reason and common sense but said that they
followed the footsteps of their ancestors and believed in their
religion.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 24 - 25
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَوَلَوْ جِئْتُكُمْ بِأَهْدَی مِمَّا وَجَدْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ
آبَاءَكُمْ قَالُوا إِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلْتُمْ بِهِ كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانْتَقَمْنَا مِنْهُمْ فَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ
الْمُكَذِّبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. [Their Prophet] said, “[Would you desist from following your
ancestors’ footsteps] if I bring you better guidance than that which you
found your fathers following?” They said: “Indeed we disbelieve in that
with which you have been sent.”***  
***25. Therefore, We took revenge on them then see what was the end of
those who denied [monotheism].***

It is worthy of note that one may offer a better alternative in
forbidding evil;

***(“I bring you better guidance”).***

One method of the presentation of a school of thought is to compare and
contrast the teachings of different schools. In their Calls, prophets
made use of reason and intellection where as their opponents resorted to
tribalism and imitation.

The point is that taking revenge and violence in their appropriate
places are not inconsistent with Divine Mercy and Grace.

According to the last two Verses their prophets inquired them to make
use of their intellection to perceive if prophets provide them with a
better course leading to righteousness and felicity they must
acknowledge the truth and thereby benefit from Divine Favors. However,
they turned away from Divine Guidance and went to extremes in the
persecution of prophets.

They were so entangled with tribalism, vanity, and enmity that they were
not supposed to turn to Divine Guidance rather regarding them the Holy
Quran says:

***“[They are] the deaf, dumb, and blind. Therefore, they do not
understand”***[^6]***.***

Then it was the proper season for taking revenge;

***(“Therefore, We took revenge on them”)***

and they were subject to Divine Wrath and they were afflicted with
diverse torments such as drowning, tempest, and icy gale.

The Noble Prophet (S) is here addressed thus:

***“See what was the end of those who denied [monotheism].”***

It is apparently addressed to the Noble Prophet (S) but it implies a
warning to polytheists and disbelievers.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 26 - 28
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ لِأَبِيهِ وَقَوْمِهِ إِنَّنِي بَرَاءٌ مِمَّا
تَعْبُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الَّذِي فَطَرَنِي فَإِنَّهُ سَيَهْدِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. And [remember] when Abraham (as) said unto his father [his
paternal uncle, Azar] and his people: “Indeed I dislike what you
worship, “Except Him Who did create me; and indeed He will guide me.”
And he made it [the formula of Divine Unity, namely “There is no god but
Allah”] a Word lasting among his offspring that they may turn back
[toward Divine Unity].***

As mentioned above, idolaters’ logic rested on following their
ancestors’ footsteps. According to the blessed Verse in question,
Abraham (as) bitterly criticized the religion of his guardian who was
his uncle as well.

The subject (fa’il) of the verb:

***ja’ala (“made”)***

in the clause:

***wa ja’ala-ha kalimat-an baqiya (“and he made it a Word lasting”)***

may be either God or Abraham (as); the former made Abraham (as)
offspring to believe in Divine Unity thanks to Abraham (as) faith; it
may also be said that Abraham (as) left the Call of Divine Unity and
abstention from polytheism with his offspring.

According to a narration from Imam ‘Ali (as), the Noble Prophet (S) is a
descendant of Abraham (as) and the Prophet’s Household (as) are
descendants of Abraham (as) and Muhammad (S).[^7]

Mention is briefly made of Abraham (as) and his encounter with his idol
worshipping people of Babylon to complete the discussion on the reproach
of blind imitation in the preceding Verses, since Abraham (as) was the
most eminent Arab figure well respected by everyone and being descended
from him was regarded as an honor.  
 He was the one who tore asunder the veils of blind imitation. The Holy
Qur’an is saying that were they speaking the truth, they would follow
his footsteps. Why did they blindly imitate idolaters if they were
inclined toward adherence to their forefathers?

The other point is that the idolaters whose false beliefs were
criticized by Abraham (as) resorted to the same groundless claim of
following their ancestors’ footsteps; nonetheless, Abraham (as) did not
acknowledge their baseless claim as it is in the Holy Qur’an:

***“They said, ‘We found our fathers worshipping them.’ He said, ‘Indeed
you and your fathers have been in manifest error’”***[^8]***.***

It is to be noted that it is a consolation for the Prophet (S) and early
Muslims so that they know that such oppositions are not unprecedented
and they are not supposed to lose their hope.

Firstly, it is said,

***“[Remember] when Abraham (as) said unto his father [his paternal
uncle, Azar] and his people: ‘Indeed I dislike what you worship.’”***

The following Verse says that since many an idolater worshipped god as
well, Abraham (as) immediately makes an exception saying:

***“Except Him Who did create me; and indeed He will guide me.”***

In this terse clause he makes mention of an argument according to which
God alone is supposed to be worshipped since the object of worship is
the Creator and the Governor of the world and everyone believed that God
is the Creator of the world. It is also a reference to Divine Guidance
in matters of existence and legislation as necessitated by Divine Grace.

According to Verse 28, Abraham (as) not only adhered to the principle of
Divine Unity and struggled against any form of idolatry but also he made
his utmost efforts to make the Word of Divine Unity last in the world
for ever, as it is mentioned in the blessed Verse 28:

***(And he made it [the formula of Divine Unity, namely “There is no god
but Allah”] a Word lasting among his offspring that they may turn back
[toward Divine Unity]).***

It is worthy of note that the word ***‘aqib*** is literally used in the
sense of “heel,” but it is figuratively employed in the sense of
“offspring.”

It is of interest to know that the followers of all world religions
believing in Divine Unity are inspired by Abraham’s (as) teachings
regarding Divine Unity and the three arch-prophets Moses (as), Jesus
(as), and Muhammad (S) are his descendants and it bears testimony to the
veracity of the Qur’anic prediction in this vein.

It is true that prophets preceding Abraham (as), e.g. Noah (as)
struggled against polytheism and idolatry and called the world to
believe in Divine Unity,but it was Abraham(as) who made the Word of
Divine Unity rest on its firm basis.

As an iconoclast, he raised the flag of Divine Unity everywhere.

In his lifetime, not only he made his utmost attempts at the continuity
of belief in Divine Unity but also in his supplications he inquired the
same from God Almighty:

***(“and keep me and my sons away from worshipping
idols,”***[^9]***).***

According to another interpretation, the antecedent of the pronoun of
ja’ala in Verse 28 is God Almighty as per which the meaning of the
clause is that God placed the Word of Divine Unity in Abraham’s (as)
Household.

However, the first interpretation as per which the antecedent of the
pronoun is Abraham (as), seems preferable.

On the basis of different traditions narrated on the authority of the
Noble Prophet’s Household (as), the antecedent of the pronoun is the
question of imamate and naturally the antecedent of the subject pronoun
is God; namely, God Almighty made the question of imamate last among
Abraham (as) descendants.

It is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an[^10] that when God said unto Abraham
(as) that He appointed him as the imam, he prayed to God to appoint his
descendants as imams and God answered to his prayer but He made an
exception for wrong doers:

***(“He said [unto him], ‘Verily, I am going to make you an Imam for
mankind [to follow you].’ Abraham (as) said, ‘And of my offspring [to
make Imams].’” [Allah] said, ‘My Covenant [prophethood] includes not
wrong doers.’”***

The question arising at the first glance is that there is no mention of
imamate in the Verse in question unless the clause:

***“He will indeed guide me” (sayahdin)***

be interpreted in a like manner since the prophets’ and imams’ guidance
derives from Divine Guidance and the truth of imamate is identified with
that of guidance.

It would be preferable to say that the question of imamate is included
in that of Divine Unity since one of the branches of Divine Unity is the
Unity of rule, guardianship, and leadership. We know that Imams derive
their guardianship and leadership from Allah and they do not rely on
themselves.

Likewise, such narrations specify a subcategory of the universal concept
of:

***“And he made it [the formula of Divine Unity, namely “There is no god
but Allah”] a Word lasting”***

which is not inconsistent with the aforementioned exegesis.[^11]

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 29- 30
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ مَتَّعْتُ هَؤُلاءِ وَآبَاءَهُمْ حَتَّى جَاءَهُمُ الْحَقُّ
وَرَسُولٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمُ الْحَقُّ قَالُوا هَذَا سِحْرٌ وَإِنَّا بِهِ
كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. [Not only I did not destroy polytheists] but also I made them and
their fathers to enjoy till there came to them the truth (the Holy
Qur’an) and a Messenger (S) making things clear.***  
***30. And when the truth came to them, they said: “This is magic and we
disbelieve therein.”***

God makes believers and disbelievers enjoy and gives respite to all
people.

The blessed Verse 29 says that God Almighty bestowed worldly possessions
and pleasures to Meccan polytheists and fathers until the truth, i.e.,
the Holy Qur’an, and the Messenger of God (S) came to them making things
clear.

Not only God Almighty made them think about the falsity of polytheism
and idolatry and Divine Unity through their intellection and conscience,
but also He gave them respite to benefit from Divine Guidance through
turning to the Holy Qur’an, the Book which is all truth, and the Noble
Prophet Muhammad (S).

***“That they may turn back [toward Divine Unity]”***

in the preceding Verse indicates that Abraham (as) made attempts at
making his offspring turn to Divine Unity; nonetheless, the Arabs
claimed to have descended from him but they failed to turn to It. God
Almighty provided them with further respite through sending the Noble
Prophet (S) with a new Book. It was awakening for a large number of the
Arabs.

According to Verse 30, upon the revelation of the Holy Qur’an they
failed to rectify their past errors and instead opposed the Word of
Truth by saying that it was magic and they disbelieved in it:

***(“And when the truth came to them, they said: ‘This is magic and we
disbelieve therein’”).***

They called the Holy Qur’an magic and the Noble Messenger of God (S)
magician. Had they persisted in their disbelief, they would have been
afflicted with Divine chastisement.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 31 - 32
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَوْلا نُزِّلَ هَذَا الْقُرْآنُ عَلَی رَجُلٍ مِنَ
الْقَرْيَتَيْنِ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَهُمْ يَقْسِمُونَ رَحْمَتَ رَبِّكَ نَحْنُ قَسَمْنَا بَيْنَهُمْ
مَعِيشَتَهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَرَفَعْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ فَوْقَ
بَعْضٍ دَرَجَاتٍ لِيَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُهُمْ بَعْضاً سُخْرِيّاً وَرَحْمَتُ
رَبِّكَ خَيْرٌ مِمَّا يَجْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. And they said: “Why is not this Qur’an sent down to some great
man [in terms of dignity and wealth] of the two towns (Mecca and
Ta’if)?”***  
***32. Is it they who would portion out the Mercy of your Lord
[regarding the Divine appointment of Muhammad to prophethood]? It is We
Who portion out [between them] their livelihood in this world [let alone
the exalted rank of prophethood] and We raised some of them above others
in ranks so that some may employ others in their work. But the Mercy of
your Lord is better than what they amass.***

Some disbelievers entertained inappropriate expectations and said that
such and such person was a man of substance and he was expected to
receive revelation from God but the point is that material possessions
may not necessitate spiritual superiority. Mention was made of
polytheists’ being difficult and making excuses against prophets’ Calls
in the preceding Verses.

At times they called their prophetic calls magic and sometimes they
resorted to blind adherence to their ancestors and turned away from
Divine Word.

Verses 31 and 32 make reference to another baseless excuse saying:

***“Why is not this Qur’an sent down to some great man [in terms of
dignity and wealth] of the two towns (Mecca and Ta’if)?”***

they regarded worldly possessions, ranks, and reputation as the
standards of dignity. Such ignorant people imagined that their wrong
doing tribal chiefs and men of substance were the closest people to God
and were surprised to learn that prophethood and the Divine great Favor
had not been accorded to such people but they had been bestowed upon the
poor orphan, Muhammad (S). It was incredible to them.

Such inaccurate merit system of theirs led to such inferences and they
still account for the afflictions of human societies and the main reason
behind their intellectual deviation which falsely depict the truths of
human life.

The standard bearer of the Divine Call is supposed to be one whose heart
brims with the spirit of piety, awareness, will, determination, courage,
justice, and familiarity with the afflictions of the deprived and the
oppressed.

The required values for imparting the Divine Call do not include
beautiful attires, luxurious palaces, and adornments of all kinds. None
of the prophets enjoyed such opportunities lest true and false values be
confused.

Whom were pointed at by polytheists making excuses? Exegets are not
unanimous on the issue; however the majority of them make references to
Walid ibn Mughayra from Mecca and ‘Urwa ibn Mas’ud Thaqafi from Ta’if.
It is to be noted that polytheists did not apparently specify anyone but
they means men of substance, good name, and noble descent.

Verse 32 is a harsh critique of such inappropriate and superstitious
thought and perfectly explicates the Islamic point of view:

***“Is it they who would portion out the Mercy of your Lord [regarding
the Divine appointment of Muhammad to prophethood]?”***

Anyone may not be accorded prophethood nor may the scripture be revealed
to anyone. It is God Almighty who portions out his Divine Mercy between
them.

He knows better that who is worthy of being appointed to prophethood as
it is said elsewhere in the Holy Quran:

***“Allah knows best with whom to place his message”***[^12]***.***

Furthermore, the differences between people in terms of wealth and
substance may never account for their spiritual ranks, but

***“It is We Who portion out [between them] their livelihood in this
world [let alone the exalted rank of prophethood] and We raised some of
them above others in ranks so that some may employ others in their
work.”***

They forget that man is inclined toward social life and managing the
affairs may solely be carried out through cooperation and had all people
enjoyed the same faculties, opportunities, standards of life, and social
status, the principle of cooperation and division of labor would lose
their balance.

Therefore, they are not supposed to be ensnared by such differences and
imagine that they are the standards of human values:

***“But the Mercy of your Lord is better than what they amass.”***

In other words, worldly possessions and social ranks are of no value
against Divine Mercy and closeness to Him. The word rabbi-ka which is
employed twice in the Verse is a delicate allusion to the Divine Favor
particularly accorded to the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) and appointing
him as the Seal of Prophets.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 33 - 35
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلا أَنْ يَكُونَ النَّاسُ أُمَّةً وَاحِدَةً لَجَعَلْنَا لِمَنْ
يَكْفُرُ بِالرَّحْمَنِ لِبُيُوتِهِمْ سُقُفاً مِنْ فِضَّةٍ وَمَعَارِجَ
عَلَيْهَا يَظْهَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِبُيُوتِهِمْ أَبْوَاباً وَسُرُراً عَلَيْهَا يَتَّكِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَزُخْرُفاً وَإِنْ كُلُّ ذَلِكَ لَمَّا مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا
وَالْآخِرَةُ عِنْدَ رَبِّكَ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. And were it not that mankind would have become of one community
[of disbelievers], We would have provided for those who disbelieve in
the Most Gracious [Allah], silver roofs for their houses and stairs
whereby they ascend.***  
***34. And for their houses, doors and thrones on which they could
recline***  
***35. And adornments of gold. Yet all this would have been nothing but
an enjoyment of this world. And the Hereafter with your Lord is [solely]
for the pious.***

Mundane embellishment is so valueless that God Almighty says in Verse 35
that He is prepared to accord abundant substance to disbelievers;
nonetheless, people are easily deceived by them and if disbelievers be
accorded such possessions, all people shall turn to disbelief.

Verse 33 is saying that disbelievers’ enjoyment of diverse mundane
possessions will lead to all people’s inclination toward disbelief and
error. In such case, God would have made for disbelievers houses with
silver roofs.

***“And were it not that mankind would have become of one community [of
disbelievers], We would have provided for those who disbelieve in the
Most Gracious [Allah], silver roofs for their houses and stairs whereby
they ascend.”***

The word ma’arij is used in the sense of stairs and ladders.

Some exegets maintain that silver stairs are meant herein and the word
***“silver” (fidda)*** is so clear that it is not reiterated;
nonetheless, they do not apparently consider stairs as an indication of
the significance of the houses, but it is not so, since numerous stairs
indicate the splendor of the multi-storey construction;

***“and stairs whereby they ascend.”***

The word:

***saqf (“roofs”)***

is the plural of suqf and some lexicologists consider it to be the
plural for of saqifa (“roofed place”), however the former meaning seems
to be preferable.

Verse 34 adds:

***“And for their houses, doors and thrones on which they could
recline.”***

The sentence may allude to silver doors and thrones since the word

***“silver”***

was employed in the preceding Verse but it is not reiterated herein.

It may also refer to numerous doors and thrones, with due consideration
to the indefiniteness of

***“doors and thrones”***

mentioned herein to demonstrate significance, which indicate the glory
of the palaces since modest houses do not require numerous doors and
thrones.

Verse 35 further says:

***“And adornments of gold,”***

in other words, they were provided with embellishments of all kinds so
that mundane and gaudy possessions, e.g. luxurious and multi-storey
palaces with sliver roofs, doors and thrones and all kinds of adornments
desired by mammon worshippers, be fully prepared for them.

However, they are all worldly possessions and the Hereafter belongs to
the God fearing:

***(“Yet all this would have been nothing but an enjoyment of this
world. And the Hereafter with your Lord is [solely] for the pious”).***

The word zukhruf in its literal sense indicates any type of adornments
and embellishments with stylized floral motifs but since gold is the
main means of adornment, the word zukhruf is also applied to it.
Muzakhraf indicates idle talk because of the gaudiness and embellishment
applied to it.

In short, mundane possessions and luxuries are so valueless before God
that they should solely fall into lowly people like disbelievers in
Truth and had people of weak faith and mammon worshippers not been
inclined toward disbelief and faithlessness, God Almighty would have
solely accorded them to such disliked and outcast people so that
everyone would know that mundane substance is not the measure of human
dignity.

Indeed, there is not any allegory more eloquent than the one mentioned
in the preceding Verses in order to shatter false values and change a
society whose standards of people’s merits rest on the number of one’s
camels, cash money, maids and servants, houses and mansions, and
luxurious adornments such that the appointment of Muhammad (S) who was a
poor orphan to prophethood was a source of astonishment.

The best thing to do is to shatter such baseless standards and replace
them with human values of fearing God and piety, knowledge, sacrifice,
and courage otherwise none of the superficial and transient reforms will
be of no avail.

The same was carried out in the best manner by the Islamic faith, the
Holy Qur’an, and the Messenger of God (S); as a consequence of which a
society that was regarded as the most underdeveloped and superstitious
societies flourished in a brief span of time.

It would be of interest to know that a Prophetic tradition complements
the aforesaid plan:

*“If the world had any value before God as little as the wings of a fly,
God would not have provided disbelievers with water to drink.”*[^13]

The issue is eloquently expressed by ‘Ali (as), the Commander of the
Faithful, in the Qasi’a Sermon.

Reproaches of the sinful and concupiscent world in Qur’anic Verses and
the traditions narrated from the Prophet’s Household (as) are to found
in tradition sources including: Nahj al-Balagha, Majlisi’s Bihar, Usul
al-Kafi, Jami’ Ahadith al-Shi’a, Kanz al-Ummal, Saduq’s Amali, Mahajjat
al-Bayda’, Ibn Abi ‘l-Hadid’s Commentary on Nahj al-Balagha, Mir’at
al-Uqul, Ghazali’s Ihya’ al-Ulum, Mustadrak, Shaykh Mufid’s Amali,
Wasa’il al-Shi’a, Riyad al-Salihin, Madinat al-Balagha, Warram’s Majmu’a
(“Collection [of Traditions]”), Mishkat al-Anwar.

It is worthy of note that the Islamic Revolution is based on the
revolution of values. As a consequence of losing the genuine values and
because the values of the Age of Ignorance flourish anew among Muslims
in modern times, they live in dire circumstances under the pressures of
merciless and bloodthirsty enemies.

It is unfortunate that men are judged on the basis of worldly
possessions. Knowledge, fear of God, and other virtues have been
consigned to oblivion; they have sunk into mundane gaudy embellishments
and have alienated themselves from the Islamic faith.

So long as the status quo is maintained, they have to pay dearly for
their dire mistake. In such circumstances, they have to make drastic
changes in the values preoccupying them in order to become prepared for
Divine Favors being accorded to them

***(“Verily, Allah will not change the condition of a people as long as
they do not change their state themselves [from evil to
good],”***[^14]***).***

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 36 - 37
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَعْشُ عَنْ ذِكْرِ الرَّحْمَنِ نُقَيِّضْ لَهُ شَيْطَاناً فَهُوَ
لَهُ قَرِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُمْ لَيَصُدُّونَهُمْ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ وَيَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ
مُهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. And whosoever turns away blindly from the remembrance of the Most
Gracious [Allah], We appoint for him a devil to be a companion to
him.***  
***37. And verily, they [devils] hinder them from the Path [of Allah],
but they think that they are guided.***

The preceding Verses made mention of disbelievers sinking in worldly
possessions but the Verses in question make a reference to one of the
tokens of such sinking in gold and adornments.

It is to be noted that the

***“companion”***

may imply bad company, spouse, children, or partner. It is for the same
reason that the indefinite for of Devil (Shaytanan) in ad hoc employed
to include devils of all kind.

According to the preceding Verses, a devil will be appointed by God
Almighty to be the companion of the one who turns away from reflection
on Qur’anic Verses and turns to mundane preoccupations.

The two blessed Verses in question say that one who does not remember
God and the Attributes of his Glory and does not reflect on Qur’anic
Verses and Their secrets and delicacies so that the Truth of the Islamic
faith becomes manifest to him will undoubtedly be occupied with
falsehood and entertains satanic thought in his heart.

Such thought hinders the path of Truth and the passage of angels to his
heart; as a consequence of which his heart turns into the camp of devils
and man will have no other alternative to hinder the path of devils but
to remember God and reflect on Divine Attributes and Creation and
through Divine Aid may be able to hinder the path of devils.

It is narrated from the Noble Prophet (S)[^15] that had it not been for
the devils surrounding man’s heart, he would have taken a glance at the
dominions of the heavens and the earth.

The Prophetic tradition indicates that any man is worthy of attainting
to such station; however, when he is enslaved by his concupiscence,
devils will take control of him surrounding his heart and blinding the
eyes of his heart through which he is supposed to take a glance at the
dominions of the heavens and the earth and discover spiritual truths.

It is to be noted that when one is entangled with the blindness and
darkness of one’s concupiscence, he will falsely imagine that he is on
the right path whereas he is in error.

Surah al-Zukhruf - Verses 38 - 39
---------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّی إِذَا جَاءَنَا قَالَ يَا لَيْتَ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكَ بُعْدَ
الْمَشْرِقَيْنِ فَبِئْسَ الْقَرِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَنْ يَنْفَعَكُمُ الْيَوْمَ إِذْ ظَلَمْتُمْ أَنَّكُمْ فِي الْعَذَابِ
مُشْتَرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. [Satan’s companionship continues] till when [the sinner on
Resurrection Day] comes unto Us saying [unto his companion, Satan,]
“Would that between me and you were the distance of the east and west” –
a worst [type of companion you were] indeed!***  
***39. [But it will be said unto him] “It will profit you not [the wish
to turn away from devils, since] you did wrong [and] that you will be
sharers [you and devils] the chastisement.***

On the Day of Resurrection, sinners wish they could distance from devils
in Hell, but the Holy Qur’an says that they will share the chastisement
with devils and they will not be apart.

Veils will be torn asunder on the Day of Resurrection and many a beloved
will fall into disfavor and many an illusion and false belief will be
manifest:

***(“but they think that they are guided”).***

The two blessed Verses indicate that sinners turn away from God Almighty
as a consequence of which devils turn into their companions in this
world until when they return to God Almighty in the Hereafter:

***(“till when [the sinner on Resurrection Day] comes unto Us”)***

and find themselves in chastisement together with the devils who were
their company in this world.

Addressing their evil company they say:

***“Would that between me and you were the distance of the east and
west.”***

The word

***mashriqayn (“the two easts”)***

may indicate the east and west since they are far from each other.

The word may designate preferential dual (taghlib) as is the case in
“the two suns” (the sun, lit. “the sun and the moon,” shamsayn) and “the
two moons” (the moon, lit. “the moon and the sun,” qamarayn). The two
easts may also designate hibernal or wintry and estival or summery easts
which stand far from each other.

In short, those who have turned away from God Almighty and Qur’anic
verses and instead have taken devils as their company will be their
companions in Hell but their regrets will be in vain, since they have
lost their opportunities with which they were provided in the world.

Turning away from their Origin and Originator and enslaved by their
concupiscence, they have provided Satan with the opportunity to ensnare
them. They have done wrong to themselves and they have to share Divine
Chastisement with their company.

[^1]: Majma’ al-Bayan, the opening of the Chapter.

[^2]: 26:214

[^3]: 112:3-4

[^4]: 39:9

[^5]: 112:3

[^6]: 2:171

[^7]: Tafsir Burhan.

[^8]: 21:53-54

[^9]: 14:35

[^10]: 2:124

[^11]: Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 4, pp. 596-597; Tafsir Burhan, vol. 4, pp.
138-139.

[^12]: 6:124

[^13]: Kashshaf [Exegesis], vol. 4, p. 250.

[^14]: 13:11

[^15]: Makhzan al-’Irfan [Exegesis], p.25.


