Surah al-Zumar, Chapter 39, Verses 1 - 29
=========================================

**(The Groups)**

**Sections (juz’) 23-24**

**Number of Verses: 75**

General Overview of the Chapter
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

The Chapter has 75 Verses and is revealed at Mecca. Like other Meccan
Chapters, it mainly treats of God Almighty and Resurrection.

The word ***zumar*** indicates “groups” and the title of the Chapter, as
mentioned in Verses 71 and 73, alludes to the ingress of the peoples of
Hell and Paradise into their assigned dwellings. The Chapter mainly
focuses on the Unity of the Creator, Lordship, and worshipping Him
particularly sincere worshipping and humble veneration of Him.

The presence of people on the Day of Judgment and their being judged on
the basis of the records of their deeds and the testimony of the
witnesses and the ingress of sinners and the pious into Hell and
Paradise receive further emphasis and detail.

Merits of the Recitation of the Chapter
---------------------------------------

Recitation of Chapter 39 receives remarkable significance in Islamic
traditions and instance of which is the Prophetic tradition saying:

*“One who recites Surah al-Zumar shall not lose hope of Divine Mercy and
shall be recompensed the rewards of the God fearing.”*[^1]

According to a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“One who recites Surah al-Zumar shall be accorded honor and dignity in
this world and the Hereafter even if he lacks in worldly possessions and
family support in such manner that others shall stand in awe upon
meeting him and his body shall not be burned in Hell.”*[^2]

A comparison of the aforementioned merits with the contents of the
Chapter concerning fear of God, setting one’s hope on His Mercy,
sincerity in worshipping Him, and absolute submission to the Pure
Essence of Truth clearly indicates that such rewards shall be reaped by
those for whom the recitation of Divinely revealed Verses serve as a
prelude to reflection based upon which they have faith and do righteous
good deeds.

In other words, the contents of the Chapter find their way into their
heart and they turned into their permanent disposition of mind whose
reflection may be fully noticed in their life. Such people deserve to
reap such great rewards and Divine Boundless Bounties and Favors.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 1-2
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنْزِيلُ الْكِتَابِ مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ بِالْحَقِّ فَاعْبُدِ اللَّهَ
مُخْلِصاً لَهُ الدِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. The Revelation of the Book [unto you in portions at certain times]
is from Allah, the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.***  
***2. Indeed We have sent down this [Revealed] Book unto you in truth;
So worship Allah by doing religious deeds sincerely for Allah’s sake.***

The words:

***tanzil (“sending down in portions at certain times”)***

and

***inzal (“sending down in whole at one time”)***

are both mentioned in these two blessed Verses, opening with the
Revelation of the Holy Qur’an, the former and the latter allude to the
Pure Divine Essence as the Origin of Revelation and the content as well
as the final goal of the Holy Qur’an respectively.

The first Verse says that this Book is Revealed by God, the All-Mighty
and All-Wise.

Any book is known by its revealer or author. Being apprised of the
Divine Origin of Revelation of this Glorious Revealed Book and the fact
that the Omniscience of God Almighty, the Omnipotent and the All-Wise,
is the Origin of the Revelation of the Book thanks to Whose Omnipotence
nothing is impossible and His Boundless Knowledge embraces all things,
we come to comprehend the Gloriousness of Its contents.

It will suffice to acquire certitude concerning the veracity of Its
contents abounding in Wisdom, Light, and Guidance.

It is worthy of note that such expressions opening Qur’anic Chapters
bear witness to the fact that the contents of this Glorious Book is
wholly Revealed by God Almighty; in other words, the contents of the
Holy Qur’an constitute Divine Word rather than that of the Noble Prophet
(S), even though his word is also exalted and full of wisdom.

The second Verse treats of the contents and the goal of the Revelation
of the Holy Qur’an saying:

***“We have sent down this [Revealed] Book unto you in truth.”***

The significant point is that there is nothing but Truth in the Divinely
Revealed Book; that is why seekers of Truth proceed toward it and those
thirsty of finding their way to the valley of Truth are after Its
contents.

The goal behind the Revelation of the Holy Qur’an is to provide humanity
with pure religion as a consequence of which the Verse closes thus:

***“So worship Allah by doing religious deeds sincerely for Allah’s
sake.”***

The word religion may ad hoc designate worshipping God Almighty, since
it is preceded by:

***“So worship Allah”***

which is followed by:

***“by doing religious deeds sincerely for Allah’s sake,”***

making a reference to the fact that the prerequisite of the verity of
worship lies in sincerity of heart and its purity from polytheism and
dissimulation.

Yet, taking into account the wide range of the meaning of the word:

***“religion” (din)***

and its lack of restrictions one may notice that it signifies a wider
range of meaning embracing worship, other deeds, as well as beliefs.

In other words, the word:

***“religion”***

encompasses the corporeal and spiritual dimensions of man. In this vein,
sincere servants of God Almighty are supposed to refine all the aspects
of life from impurities, reject other entities besides God Almighty from
their hearts, souls, words, and deeds, reflect upon Him, love for His
sake, speak and act for Him, and take steps for His satisfaction – this
is

***“religious sincere devotion.”***

Therefore, there would be no need to restrict the meaning of the Verse
to the declaration of faith by uttering “*There is no god but Allah,*”
nor is there any firm ground to delimit the meaning to

***“worship.”***

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 3
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلا لِلَّهِ الدِّينُ الْخَالِصُ وَالَّذِينَ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِهِ
أَوْلِيَاءَ مَا نَعْبُدُهُمْ إِلَّا لِيُقَرِّبُونَا إِلَى اللَّهِ
زُلْفَي إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَحْكُمُ بَيْنَهُمْ فِي مَا هُمْ فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لا يَهْدِی مَنْ هُوَ كَاذِبٌ كَفَّارٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***3. Know that the pure religion is for Allah and those who take gods
besides Allah [said justifyingly] “We solely worship them that they may
bring us near to Allah.” Indeed Allah will judge between them regarding
that wherein they differ. Allah never guides one who is a disbelieving
liar.***

The value of religion lies in its purity lest it is metamorphosed by
vain desires and superstitious beliefs

***(“the pure religion is for Allah”).***

The opening clause of the blessed Verse may be interpreted in two ways.

Firstly, God Almighty solely accepts the pure religion, total submission
to Divine Decree, whereas any polytheism, dissimulation, and confusion
of Divine Laws to those besides them are unacceptable.

Secondly, pure religion is solely bestowed upon man by God Almighty,
since human thought is imperfect and erroneous.

Taking the exegesis of the preceding Verse into account, it sounds more
appropriate to acknowledge the former interpretation since the subject
of purity or sincere devotion is

***“God’s servants,”***

as a consequence of which they are supposed to act accordingly.

Another argument substantiating the same is a Prophetic tradition
according to which a certain man came unto him saying:

*“O Messenger of God (S)! We give out possessions to others in order to
gain reputation. Will we be rewarded thereby?”*

The Noble Prophet (S) replied:

*“No!”*

The man inquired once more that at times they give their possessions for
both acting upon Divine Decree and gaining reputation and he wondered
whether there would be any reward for the same.

The Prophet (S) replied:

*“God does not accept anything unless it is solely done for Him.”*

Then, he recited the blessed Verse:

***“Know that the pure religion is for Allah.”***[^3]

It is worthy of note that the third Verse substantiates the preceding
One.

The former says:

***“Worship God out of sincere devotion and sincerity of heart.”***

The latter says:

***“God Almighty solely accepts righteous deeds.”***

Great emphasis is laid upon

***“sincere devotion” (ikhlas)***

in Qur’anic Verses and Islamic traditions. The opening word of the
Verse, ala is usually employed to attract attention which also bears
testimony to the significance of the subject in question.

The blessed Verse also makes a reference to the falsity of the
polytheists’ baseless arguments since they turned away from the path of
sincere devotion and went astray in error saying that those who
acknowledge gods besides Allah as their objects of devotions justifying
that they worship them to render them closer to God, God will judge
between them regarding that wherein they differ on the Day of
Resurrection.

The falsity and corruption of their thoughts and deeds will be knows to
everyone on that Day:

***(“Allah and those who take gods besides Allah [said justifyingly] ‘We
solely worship them that they may bring us near to Allah.’ Indeed Allah
will judge between them regarding that wherein they differ. Truly Allah
guides not one who is a disbelieving liar.”***

The blessed Verse serves as a serious warning to polytheists that the
Day of Resurrection will be the Day on which differences shall be
removed and the truth shall be clear. On such a Day, God Almighty will
judge between them so that they will be recompensed for their deeds;
furthermore, they will be disgraced before everyone on the Day of
Resurrection.

Human immediate contact with God Almighty is accorded particular
emphasis in the Qur’an- he may speak unto Him, offer Him his devotions,
supplications, ask Him for forgiveness, and the acceptance of his
repentance.

They are all within His Will and Omnipotence. Chapter 2[^4] bears
testimony to this fact since God’s servants recite it in all their daily
prayers thereby they establish immediate contact with their Creator and
invoke Him to answer their prayers.

The manner of repentance and asking God for forgiveness and answering
prayers as mentioned in the devotions transmitted through many a
tradition demonstrate that no intermediary is acknowledged in the
Islamic faith and the same indicates the Truth of Divine Unity.

The question of intercession with God’s saints or favorites is also
based on the Creator’s Permission which once more lays emphasis on the
dogmatic principle of Divine Unity.

The attachment is supposed to be established since He is closer to us
than ourselves, as it is thus said in the Holy Qur’an:

***“We closer to him than his jugular vein” (50:16);***

***“Know that Allah comes in between a person and his heart” (8:24).***

Yet, He is neither far from us, nor are we far from Him; thus there is
no need for intercession. He is closer to us than any other one; He is
Ubiquitous and our hearts entertain Him.

Therefore worshipping intercessors, be them angels, jinn, and the like,
or worshipping stone and wooden idols is baseless and false;
furthermore, such worship is considered ingratitude for Divine
Blessings, since the One Who bestows Bounties, rather than inanimate
objects or needy creatures deserves worship.

Thus, the blessed Verse in question closes with:

***“Allah never guides one who is a disbelieving liar.”***

He neither guides disbelievers to the Straight Path in this world nor
will He admit them to Paradise in the Hereafter, since they have turned
away from Divine Guidance. God Almighty solely guides those who deserve
and are willing to embrace it rather than those who have suppressed
their faculty to accept the same.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 4
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ أَرَادَ اللَّهُ أَنْ يَتَّخِذَ وَلَداً لاصْطَفَي مِمَّا يَخْلُقُ
مَا يَشَاءُ سُبْحَانَهُ هُوَ اللَّهُ الْوَاحِدُ الْقَهَّارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. Had Allah willed to take an offspring [for Himself], He could have
chosen whom He willed out of those whom He created. But Glory is to Him!
[He is above such things]. He is Allah, the One, the All-Subjugator.***

God Almighty has no [real] offspring:

***(“He begets not, nor was He begotten,” 112:3)***

nor any adopted children:

***(“Had Allah willed to take an offspring [for Himself]”),***

since real offspring indicate corporeality, divisibility, bearing
similitude, and having a spouse, whereas He is One.

He is neither divisible nor does He have similitude nor spouse.
Polytheists also regarded a number of their objects of worship as
Allah’s daughters.

Treating of the false belief, the blessed Verse says:

***“Had Allah willed to take an offspring [for Himself], He could have
chosen whom He willed out of those whom He created. But Glory is to Him!
[He is above such things]. He is Allah, the One, the All-Subjugator.”***

At any rate, the blessed Verse is saying that having offspring is either
for assistance or for spiritual intimacy. Even reflection upon such
impossible supposition does not necessitate having offspring since He
could select one among His noble creatures, rather than an offspring, in
order to attain to such a goal.

Nonetheless, He is One God Who is the eternal All-Subjugator of all
things, Needless of the assistance of any entity. He is neither
perturbed by anything hence His Needlessness for intimacy with anyone or
anything, nor is he in need of progeny.

Consequently,

***“Glory is to Him!”***

He is above having real or adopted children.

As mentioned above, these ignorant and lightheaded disbelievers and
polytheists considered angels to be Allah’s offspring and some of them
maintained affinities between Him and jinn and at times regarded Ezra
(‘Uzayr) or Jesus (‘Ïsa) as God’s sons unaware of the manifest truth
that God’s need for real offspring would necessitate corporeality,
divisibility (since an offspring is a part of the progenitor’s being
which separates from him), bearing similitude (because of the similarity
between the progenitor and the offspring), and the need for having a
consort.

God Almighty is Glorified of all these. Adopting children is also due to
the need for corporeal, moral intimacy, and the like and the All-Mighty
and All-Subjugating God is Needless of such things.

Therefore, the Most Beautiful Divine Names:

***“the One” (Wahid)***

and

***“the All-Subjugating”*** ***(Qahhar)***

constitute a decisive argument against such false beliefs.

It is noteworthy that the employment of the conjunction law (“***if***”)
connoting impossible conditions makes reference to the impossible
supposition of God’s adoption of children and had He any need for it, He
would have no need for what they say rather He could have selected one
of his chosen creatures.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 5
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ بِالْحَقِّ يُكَوِّرُ اللَّيْلَ عَلَي
النَّهَارِ وَيُكَوِّرُ النَّهَارَ عَلَي اللَّيْلِ وَسَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ
وَالْقَمَرَ كُلٌّ يَجْرِي لِأَجَلٍ مُسَمّيً أَلا هُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
الْغَفَّارُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. He has created the heavens and the earth with truth. He makes the
night to go in the day and makes the day to go in the night. And He has
subjected the sun and the moon, each running for an appointed term. Know
that He is the Exalted in Might, the Oft-Forgiving.***

The creation of the heavens and the earth, the rotations of the earth
and the moon, and going the night into the day and vice versa are
manifestations of Divine Exaltation in Might.

The blessed Verse substantiates the argument that God is Needless of His
creatures and as an indication of His Unity and Exaltedness in Might is
says:

***“He has created the heavens and the earth with truth.”***

The truth of their creation demonstrates that the great final end has
been nothing but the perfection of beings, particularly that of man,
finally leading to Resurrection.

Following the treatment of this great creation, the Verse proceeds to
make a reference in passing to their extraordinary arrangement, well
measured alterations, and the fascinating and prevailing systematicity,
saying:

***“He makes the night to go in the day and makes the day to go in the
night.”***

The expression is worthy of note – taking a glance without the globe at
the earth’s rotation on its axis leading to the succession of days and
nights makes one notice that it is seems as if the dark ribbon of night
wraps up the brightness of the day and vice versa.

It is to be noted that the verbal form ***yukawwir*** derives from
takwir which is literally employed in the sense of “roll up, wrap up” an
instance of which is mentioned in particular by philologists as “wind up
[a turban].”

The delicacy of this Qur’anic expression is thus clarified; nonetheless,
it is ignored by many an exeget who have make mention of other points
which are not so consistent with the meaning of the word.

The point worthy of note is that the earth is globular rotating on its
axis and as a consequence of the rotation, the black and white ribbons
of night and day constantly rotate around it as if the white ribbon goes
to the black ribbon on the one hand and on the other hand the opposite
occurs.

Diverse expressions have been employed in the Holy Qur’an concerning the
consecution of nights and days each of which makes a reference to a
delicacy from a specific angle.

It is also said in the Holy Qur’an that:

***“He merges the night into the day and He merges the day into the
night”***[^5]***.***

The latter expression designates the quiet and furtive consecution of
days and nights.

It also says:

***“He brings the night as a cover over the day”***[^6]

according to which the night is likened to a dark veil as if covering
the brightness of the day. The blessed Verses in question treats of
“winding” one over the other, the delicacy of which was mentioned above.

The blessed Verse proceeds to treat of the order and systematicity of
arrangement of the world by saying:

***“And He has subjected the sun and the moon, each running for an
appointed term.”***

In its rotation on its axis or its movement with the totality of the
solar system toward a specific point in the galaxy by no means
demonstrates neither the least disorder, nor the moon in its rotation
around on its axis and around the earth reveals any disorder.

All creatures are at His Command, totally subject to the laws of
creation at all times.

Subjection of the sun and the moon may also indicate their subjection
through Divine Permission, as mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an:

***“And He has made the sun and the moon, both constantly pursuing their
courses”***[^7]***.***

The Verse closes with a warning to polytheists and suggestion of
treading the path leading to Divine Favor:

***“Know that He is the Exalted in Might, the Oft-Forgiving.”***

However honorable and powerful polytheists and sinners may be, they may
not escape Divine Chastisement. Thanks to His Oft-Forgiveness, He casts
a veil on the sins of the repentant and bestows His Mercy on them.

The word:

***ghaffar (“Oft-Forgiving”)***

is intensive in form and derives from gh-f-r (“forgive”).

The infinitive form ghufran is literally employed in the sense of
wearing anything which keeps man from uncleanliness and impurity;
applied to God Almighty, it denotes that He conceals the sins committed
by the repentant servant and keeps him from the torment of chastisement.

He is Omnipotent and Oft-Forgiving; the Most Gracious and the
All-Subjugator. The accompaniment of these two Most Beautiful Names at
the close of the Verse creates a sense of fear and hope in servants of
God which mainly and finally leads to human perfection.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 6
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ ثُمَّ جَعَلَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا
وَأَنْزَلَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الْأَنْعَامِ ثَمَانِيَةَ أَزْوَاجٍ يَخْلُقُكُمْ
فِی بُطُونِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ خَلْقاً مِنْ بَعْدِ خَلْقٍ فِي ظُلُمَاتٍ
ثَلاثٍ ذَلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ لَهُ الْمُلْكُ لا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ
فَأَنَّي تُصْرَفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. He created you from a single soul; then made from him his wife.
And He has sent down for you [thanks to His Omnipotence] of cattle eight
pairs [of the sheep, goats, oxen, and camels, two each, male and
female]. He creates you in the wombs of your mothers: creation after
creation in three veils of darkness [flesh, skin, and blood]. Such is
Allah your Lord. His is the sovereignty. There is no god [to be
worshipped] but He. How then do you turn away [from the Straight
Path]?***

In spite of physical differences, all men, irrespective of sex and color
of complexion, share the like genus and soul

***(“single soul”).***

The blessed Verse once more treats of the Signs of Divine Glory, His
creation, and some of the diverse Bounties bestowed upon mankind.

The Verse opens with the creation of man saying:

***“He created you from a single soul; then made from him his wife.”***

Creation of all men from

***“a single soul”***

is a reference to the question of the creation of Adam, our primeval
ancestor.

All human beings, though diverse in creation, dispositions, faculties,
and tastes trace back to one common origin, namely Adam.

The clause:

***“then made from him his wife”***

actually indicates that God created Adam; then, He created his wife from
the remainder of his clay; as a consequence of which the creation of
Adam precedes that of Eve and his offspring.

***“Then” (thumma)***

does not connote temporal posteriority at all times, but at times it is
employed to demonstrate delay in expressing something; an instance of
which is “We noticed your work today; then we saw the work you did
yesterday;” yet, what was carried out yesterday certainly precedes that
of today.

Some exegets have maintained that the aforesaid expression is a
reference to the question of “the world of pre-existence” (‘alam
al-dharr) and the creation of Adam’s offspring following his creation
and prior to that of Eve in the form of ants is inaccurate, as mentioned
above under 7:172.

It is also worthy of note that the creation of Adam’s wife was not done
out of Adam’s body, but from the remainder of his clay, as clearly
specified in Islamic traditions. Nonetheless, according to a tradition,
Eve was created out of Adam’s lowest left rib which is groundless.

The tradition derives from Jewish and Christian traditions
(Isra’iliyyat) and is consistent with the second chapter of the Book of
Genesis, namely the available distorted Torah.

Furthermore, it is inconsistent with observation and sense, since as per
the tradition in question, one of Adam’s ribs was removed from which Eve
was created, as a consequence of which man are supposed to have one rib
less in their left side, whereas we know that men and women do not
differ in the number of ribs and the difference is no more than a
legend.

The blessed Verse proceeds to treat of the question of the creation of
quadrupeds as a significant means of human life. Men use them to produce
clothes out of their skins, nourishment from their milk and meat.

They make clothes and different means of life out of their skin and
fleece.

Quadrupeds are used by men as well as means of transportation:

***“And He has sent down for you [thanks to His Omnipotence] of cattle
eight pairs.”***

By

***“eight pairs”,***

the Verse intends to connote “of the sheep, goats, oxen, and camels, two
each, male and female,” since the word pair (zawj) is applied to either
of the sexes, the males and females of the animals enumerated above make
eight pairs; however it is not consistent with other Arabic expressions;
consequently, Adam’s wife, namely Eve, is mentioned in the opening of
the Verse in question as the

***“pair.”***

As mentioned above, the expression:

***“He has sent down for you”***

does not indicate sending down quadrupeds from above, but it denotes
“descent from a higher state of hierarchy” as a Bounty bestowed upon
those occupying a lower state.

A tradition narrated from the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as),
concerning the interpretation of the Verse in question,

*“sending down eight quadrupeds in pairs is their creation by God.”*[^8]

Some have also maintained that:

***inzal (“sending down”)***

is taken from nuzul (“showing hospitality to guests; first food served
to a guest”) as mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an:

***“therein are they to dwell forever, an entertainment from
Allah”***[^9]***.***

It is to be noted that even though quadrupeds are not used for
transportation as they were used in the past, but the use of such
animals has been on the increase for making other significant products.

Even today, man mainly uses quadrupeds for their milk, meat, clothes,
and other means of life produced out of their wool and skin; as a
consequence of which breeding them constitutes one of the significant
revenues for powerful countries.

The blessed Verse proceeds to treat of other forms of Divine creation,
saying:

***“He creates you in the wombs of your mothers: creation after creation
in three veils of darkness [flesh, skin, and blood].”***

It is needless to say that

***“creation after creation”***

designates consecutive creations rather than creation at one single
time.

It is worthy of note that the verbal form yakhluqukum is in the present
tense, indicating progressiveness and making a brief but significant
reference to extraordinary developments and the different remarkable
forms of the fetus in the womb which is according to embryologists one
of the most extraordinary and the most intricate forms of Divine
creation such that the science of embryology is a complete course in
Divine Unity and theology.

Few people may study such questions in details and fail to praise the
Creator.

The phrase:

***“three veils of darkness”***

refers to the darkness of the womb and the chorion consisting of three
thick membranes or veils covering the fetus.

Ordinary painters have to paint in a well-lit workspace, but the Creator
of mankind paints such fascinating paintings in such strange dark place
that everyone is enthralled by it, where no one may have access to it.
He constantly provides for the nourishment of the fetus that is in a
dire need of it for growth.

In the well known prayer titled ‘Arafa which is a complete and perfect
course on Divine Unity, enumerating Divine Bounties and manifestations
of His Omnipotence before His Threshold, the Chief of the Martyrs
(Sayyid al-Shuhada’), Imam Husayn (as), says:

*“You made my creation to be preceded by drops of semen, then you
proceeded with my creation through placing me in the three veils of
darkness, amidst flesh, skin, and blood. You provided for all my vital
functions; then you brought me into the world in perfect health.”*[^10]

Following the reference to the tripartite chains of Divine Unity
regarding the creation of men and quadrupeds and the developments of
fetus, the blessed Verse closes thus:

***“Such is Allah your Lord. His is the sovereignty. There is no god [to
be worshipped] but He. How then do you turn away [from the Straight
Path]?”***

It seems as if following an observation of such glorious manifestations
of Divine Unity, man has been able to experience personally such
manifestations; then the blessed Verse proceeds to make a reference to
His Sacred Essence saying:

***“Such is Allah your Lord.”***

Any attentive perceiver may perceive Him beyond such manifestations. The
eyes of the head and the heart see the manifestations and the Creator
respectively.

***(“You have come out with many a manifestation, so that I may look at
you with many an eye!”)***

The expressions

***“your Lord”***

and

***“His is the sovereignty”***

are provided as arguments for the exclusivity of the Divine Pure Essence
as the object of worship expressed in the formula

“*There is no god but Allah*.”

He is the Creator as well as the Sole Sovereign and Nurturer; in other
words, the Sovereignty in all the world of existence solely belongs to
Him, so other entities in this world do not deserve to be the objects of
worship.

The blessed Verse calls the ignorant thus:

***“Why do you turn away from the Straight Path of Divine Unity?”***

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 7
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَكْفُرُوا فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَنِيٌّ عَنْكُمْ وَلا يَرْضَی
لِعِبَادِهِ الْكُفْرَ وَإِنْ تَشْكُرُوا يَرْضَهُ لَكُمْ وَلا تَزِرُ
وَازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْرَی ثُمَّ إِلَی رَبِّكُمْ مَرْجِعُكُمْ
فَيُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ إِنَّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ
الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***7. If you disbelieve, then indeed Allah is not in need of you; He
likes not disbelief for His servants. And if you are grateful, He is
pleased therewith for you. No bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of
another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you what
you used to do. Indeed, He is the Omniscient of that which is in
breasts.***

The preceding Verse treats of Divine Bounties in the creation of man and
the provisions bestowed upon him by God. Verse seven makes mention of
man’s obligation which is his gratitude for the bestowal of Divine
Bounties.

Therefore, the blessed Verse in question says:

***“If you disbelieve, then indeed Allah is not in need of you”***

since His servants will reap the recompense of their disbelief and
gratitude.

It further adds that Divine Needlessness does not mean that His servants
are not supposed to be grateful for the Divine Bounties bestowed upon
them nor are they permitted to disbelieve, since obligation is another
Divine Bounty,

***“He likes not disbelief for His servants and if you are grateful, He
is pleased therewith for you.”***

The Verse in question proceeds with treating of another question, namely
any man’s responsibility for his acts and deeds, since the question of
obligation will remain incomplete without such obligation:

***(“No bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of another”).***

It is worthy of note that obligation without recompense is meaningless.

The Verse closes with the question of Resurrection and man’s return to
God Who shall inform him of his past deeds:

***(“Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you what you
used to do”).***

It is worthy of note that Divine Reward and Retribution of human acts
and deeds necessitate being fully aware of secrets.

Thus the Verse comes to Its close:

***“Indeed, He is the Omniscient of that which is in breasts.”***

Therefore, the philosophy of obligation, its characteristics, human
responsibility, and Divine Reward and Retribution are expressed in
concise and consistent clauses. In the mean time, the Verse is a
decisive reply to the followers of the school of predestination whose
number among Islamic schools of thought has been unfortunately large.

The blessed Verse explicitly says:

***“He is never pleased with His servants’ disbelief”***

which clearly bears testimony to the fact that contrary to the false
belief maintained by the followers of the school of predestination it is
not His Will that disbelievers disbelieve in Him, since as long as He is
not pleased with something, He will not will it. Divine Will and
Satisfaction are not apart.

It is a source of wonder that the biased have made attempts to conceal
the evident meaning of the clause by restricting the meaning of:

***“servants” (‘ibad)***

to the pious or the infallible; however the word in question clearly
embraces all servants. God is never pleased with any of His servant’s
disbelief in the same manner that He is pleased with their gratitude.

It is also noteworthy that everyone’s responsibility against his own
acts and deeds are acknowledged by all Divine religions.[^11]

It is also possible that a wrong doer may have an accomplice the render
him support in one way or another, an instance of which is the one who
innovates some vicious thing or tradition and whoever acts upon them
will be responsible like the innovator against the sin of innovation of
vicious things.[^12]

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 8
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَسَّ الْأِنْسَانَ ضُرٌّ دَعَا رَبَّهُ مُنِيباً إِلَيْهِ ثُمَّ
إِذَا خَوَّلَهُ نِعْمَةً مِنْهُ نَسِيَ مَا كَانَ يَدْعُو إِلَيْهِ مِنْ
قَبْلُ وَجَعَلَ لِلَّهِ أَنْدَاداً لِيُضِلَّ عَنْ سَبِيلِهِ قُلْ
تَمَتَّعْ بِكُفْرِكَ قَلِيلاً إِنَّكَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. And when some hurt touches man, he cries to his Lord, turning to
Him in repentance. But when He bestows a favor upon him from Himself, he
forgets that for which he cried for before [for its removal], and he
sets up equals to Allah, in order to mislead [himself and others] from
His Path. Say: “Take pleasure in your disbelief for a while: surely you
are of the dwellers of the Fire!”***

Man is of a small capacity for tolerating hardships and when hardships
touch him, he cries out but the Holy Qur’an criticizes him for his
transient attention toward God in vicissitudes of life and says that he
forgets God when he enjoys comfort:

***(“And when some hurt touches man, he cries to his Lord”).***

The preceding Verses produce arguments for Divine Unity and man’s making
attempts at acquiring knowledge about Him through reflecting upon the
signs of His Glory in horizons and souls (afaq wa anfus); however, the
blessed Verse in question opens with Divine Unity as perceived through
man’s primordial disposition thus clarifying that man’s perception
through his intellection and studying the order of creation is something
innate in his natural disposition manifesting themselves in vicissitudes
and hardships; nonetheless, when the storm of disasters is abated, such
forgetful man is once more preoccupied with neglect and vanity.

The blessed Verse says:

***“When some hurt touches man [the Light of Divine Unity illuminates
his heart], he cries to his Lord, turning to Him in repentance. But when
He bestows a favor upon him from Himself, he forgets that for which he
cried for before [for its removal], and he sets up equals to Allah, in
order to mislead [himself and others] from His Path.”***

***“Man”***

ad hoc makes a reference to those people who are uncultured and
unrefined since they turn away from prophetic teachings, otherwise those
refined by men of God, like their educators, remember Him at all times
in ups and downs and seek Divine Favor.

***“Hurt” (darr)***

ad hoc indicates any kind of physical or mental harm or discomfort. The
verbal form ***“khawwalahu,”*** deriving from khawl is employed in the
sense of constant taking care of something or someone and since such
care necessitates bestowal of favor, the word designates “bestow.”

Some exegets also maintain that khawl indicates rendering service;
therefore, ***khawwalahu*** indicates “granted him servants,” and it is
also applied to bestowing favor to someone. Some have also taken the
word in the sense of taking pride; as a consequence of which they take
the meaning as honor someone through bestowal of a favor.[^13]

The above explanations reflect the question of Divine bestowal of Favors
and Bounties and His special care for His servants.

Muniban, as an adverb of manner, indicates that at the time of hardship
when the veils of vanity and neglect are removed, man abandons
everything and everyone besides God Almighty and turns to Him.

The word:

***“repentance” (inaba)***

demonstrates that God Almighty is man’s origin and place of return.

***Andad (“equals”)***

is the plural form of nidd which is close in meaning to mithl; however
the latter possesses a wider range of meaning, since the former is only
used in the sense of likeness in essence.

The verbal form:

***“sets up” (ja’ala, literally “set up” [past tense])***

demonstrates that man falsely imagines equals and peers for God, whereas
it is inconsistent with reality.

The clause:

***“in order to mislead [himself and others] from His Path”***

reflects the vanity of those in error who make attempts at misleading
others to error. Man a time the Holy Qur’an refers to the link between
reflection upon Divine Unity through innate primordial disposition and
vicissitudes of life as the scenes of its manifestation.

The low capacity of forbearance makes this vain man to turn to Divine
Unity in vicissitudes, but when the storms of disasters are abated, he
obdurately treads the path of polytheism.

Many are such inconstant and capricious people and few are those who may
not be perturbed by triumphs, Bounties, and storms of vicissitudes.

A small vessel or a pond is easily perturbed by a breeze, but the
Pacific Ocean, because of its vastness, may not be agitated by harsh
storms, hence the title “Pacific.”

The blessed Verse closes with a decisive warning to these people:

***“Say: ‘Take pleasure in your disbelief for a while [and spend a few
days in neglect and vanity, but know that]: surely you are of the
dwellers of the Fire!’”***

How may such narrow minded and misleading person have any other thing in
store for him?

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 9
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّنْ هُوَ قَانِتٌ آنَاءَ اللَّيْلِ سَاجِداً وَقَائِماً يَحْذَرُ
الْآخِرَةَ وَيَرْجُو رَحْمَةَ رَبِّهِ قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الَّذِينَ
يَعْلَمُونَ وَالَّذِينَ لا يَعْلَمُونَ إِنَّمَا يَتَذَكَّرُ أُولُو
الْأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. Is one who is obedient to Allah, prostrating himself or standing
in prayer during the hours of the night, fearing the Hereafter and
hoping for the Mercy of his Lord [is better or such a person]? Say: “Are
those who know equal to those who know not?” It is only men of
understanding who will remember [and get a lesson].***

Alongside the preceding Verses depicting the characteristics of the
people of Fire, the blessed Verse in question treats of the believers’
characteristics.

The preceding Verse says that some people solely invoke God in hardships
and forget Him in peace of mind and comfort whereas the Verse question
says that believers irrespective of hardships and comforts remember God
Almighty at all times.

This Verse reflects the employment of the Qur’anic methodological
treatment of questions to ask the rhetorical question:

Is such person worthy of Divine Reward or the one who worships God
Almighty:

***“prostrating himself or standing in prayer during the hours of the
night, fearing the [chastisement] of the Hereafter and Hoping for the
Mercy of his Lord?”***

The disbelieving, forgetful, capricious, astray, and misleading man is
too apart from the one whose soul is awakened and when the neglectful
are asleep prostrates before his Friend and invokes Him in awe and hope.

They neither regard themselves secure from chastisement in comfort nor
do they lose their hope for His Mercy in hardship; as a consequence of
which they constantly, willfully, and attentively tread the Path toward
their Friend.

The present participle:

***qanit (“obedient”)***

indicates the accompaniment of obedience with humbleness. ana’ is the
plural form of ana’ which indicates hour and portion of time.

The emphasis laid on the hour of night reveals that at that time
presence of heart is more and impurities springing from dissimulation
are less than any other time.

***“Prostrating” (sajidan)***

Precedes:

***“standing in prayer” (qa’iman)***

since prostration is a higher state of worship and the absoluteness of
Divine Mercy and Its lack of restriction to the Hereafter reflects the
inclusivity of Divine Mercy in this world and the Hereafter.

According to a tradition narrated from Imam Baqir (as) attested in ‘Ilal
al-Shara’i’ and Kafi:

***“Is one who is obedient to Allah, prostrating himself or standing in
prayer during the hours of the night”***

is interpreted as night prayer.[^14]

Addressing the Prophet (S), the Verse reads:

***“Are those who know equal to those who know not?”***

The reply to this rhetorical question follows thus:

***“It is only men of understanding who will remember [and get a
lesson].”***

Though the question is signifies a wide range of meaning explicitly
referring to those who know and those who know not, men of understanding
and the ignorant, but owing to the fact that the preceding question
treats of the inequality of believers praying to God at night time and
disbelievers, the latter question alludes to the same question, namely
those obdurate disbelievers are not on a par with sincere devout
believers.

It is to be noted that the aforementioned rhetorical question and is
regarded as one of the fundamental slogans of the Islamic faith bears
testimony to the Glory of knowledge and the knowledgeable against the
ignorant and with due consideration of its inclusivity, it is evident
that the two groups are neither on a par at Divine Threshold nor from
the viewpoint of the aware; they are far apart in this world and the
Hereafter. They are inwardly and outwardly unlike to one another.

The word:

***knowledge (‘ilm)***

is not employed ad hoc in the sense of knowing some terms or the
material links amongst things; in other words, it does not indicate
“formal sciences” but it denotes a specific knowledge and awareness that
leads man to obedience (qunut) to God Almighty and fear of Judgment
makes man to set his hopes on Divine Mercy.

This the truth of knowledge and formal sciences constitute knowledge in
case they are in this vein; otherwise, they lead to vanity, neglect,
wrong doing, and corruption in this world and they are no more than
futile discussions not leading to spiritual realization.

Contrary to what the ignorant imagine regarding religion as the opium of
people, the most fundamental prophetic calls addressed gaining knowledge
thereby proclaiming their objection against ignorance at all times.

Besides the Qur’anic Verses imbued with the exposition of such truth,
Islamic traditions abound in such unimaginable expressions concerning
the significance of gaining knowledge.

According to a prophetic tradition:

*“Life is solely fruitful for two people: a knowledgeable person whose
views are followed and students giving their ears to a scholar.”*[^15]

A tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*“Scholars are the inheritors of prophets, since the latter left no
worldly possessions but they left sciences and traditions and whoever
possesses anything enjoys abundant possessions of prophets’ heritage.”*

Imam Sadiq (as) further adds:

*“Be careful from whom you gain your knowledge [from real scholars or
pretenders to knowledge]. Know that at any era, there are just and
trustworthy individuals from amongst us, the Prophet’s (S) Household,
who reject the extremists’ distortions, the deviants’ baseless claims,
and the justifications of the ignorant in order to remove the impurities
from this pure religion.”*[^16]

The blessed Verse in question makes mention of three groups of people:
those who know, those who do not know, and men of understanding.

A tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) includes an interpretation
concerning the three groups mentioned herein:

*“We are those who know, our enemies are those who do not know, and our
followers are men of understanding.”*[^17]

According to a tradition, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as)
departed one night from the Mosque at Kufa toward his house while he was
accompanied by one of his intimate friends, Kumayl ibn Ziyad. Passing by
a house from which they could hear a man reciting:

***“Is one who is obedient to Allah, prostrating himself or standing in
prayer during the hours of the night, fearing the Hereafter and hoping
for the Mercy of his Lord”***

with a pleasing and sad voice, Kumayl was quite pleased with the
spiritual state of the man though he refrained from uttering any word.

Imam ‘Ali (as) turned to him and said:

*“Do not be pleased by this man’s voice. He is among the people of the
Hell! I will inform you of that soon!”*

Kumayl was taken aback since Imam ‘Ali (as) had been able to read his
mind and besides, he had informed him of the apparently pious man’s
place in Hell.

Before long, Seceders (Khariji’s, khawarij) disobeyed Imam ‘Ali (as) and
the Imam waged war against them, though they knew the Qur’an by heart as
It was revealed to the Holy Prophet of Islam (S).

Standing among the carcasses of the rebellious disbelievers, Imam ‘Ali
(as), holding his sword in his hand, turned to Kumayl and pointed with
his sword at one of heads fallen on the battleground and said unto him:

*“O Kumayl! Is one who is obedient to Allah, prostrating himself or
standing in prayer during the hours of the night, fearing the Hereafter
and hoping for the Mercy of his Lord.”*

By which he meant that it was the same person reciting the Holy Qur’an
that night and whose seemingly spiritual state had made you wonder.
Kumal kissed the Imam and prayed for repentance.[^18]

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 10
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا عِبَادِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمْ لِلَّذِينَ
أَحْسَنُوا فِي هَذِهِ الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةٌ وَأَرْضُ اللَّهِ وَاسِعَةٌ
إِنَّمَا يُوَفَّی الصَّابِرُونَ أَجْرَهُمْ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***10. Say: “O My servants who believe! Stand in awe of your Lord and
keep your duty to Him. Good is for those who do good in this world and
Allah’s earth is spacious [so if you cannot worship Allah at a place,
then emigrate to another]! Only those who are patient shall receive
their reward in full without reckoning.”***

Having faith is not sufficient and it is supposed to be accompanied with
fear of God Almighty and abstention from committing sins:

***(“O My servants who believe, stand in awe of your Lord and keep your
duty to Him”).***

The Noble Prophet of Islam (S) said:

*“There shall be no reckoning for a group of people and they will be
admitted to Paradise without answering questions.”*

Then he recited the blessed Verse:

***“Only those who are patient shall receive their reward in full
without reckoning.”***

Following the discussion concerning the comparison between vain
disbelievers and believers obedient to Divine Command and also the one
between

***“those who know”***

and

***“those who do not know,”***

this Verse and the following Verses treat of the main guidelines of
sincere and devout servants in the form of “seven injunctions” included
in a number Verses each opening with:

***“say” (qul).***

The Verse opens with fear of God and asks the Prophet (S):

***“Say: O My servants who believe! Stand in awe of your Lord and keep
your duty to Him.”***

The first guideline is fear of God and abstention from committing sins
and the sense of obligation and responsibility at Divine Threshold. Fear
of God serves as a shield against fire protecting man against deviation
from the Straight Path. It is the main possession on the Day of
Resurrection, and the standard for human character and dignity at Divine
Threshold.

The second injunction is concerned with

***“doing righteous good deeds”***

in this world which is the abode of deeds and encourages people to act
upon it through making mention of the consequences of doing good,
saying:

***“Good is for those who do good in this world.”***

Doing good in this world through good words and deeds, in thoughts
regarding friends and strangers leads to great rewards in this world and
the Hereafter. Fear of God is a preventive factor and doing good is a
moving one and the composite of which is abstention from committing sins
and carrying out obligatory and preferable religious duties.

The third injunction is encouraging believers to

***“emigrate”***

from the centers of polytheism, disbelief, and sin:

***“Allah’s earth is spacious [so if you cannot worship Allah at a
place, then emigrate to another]!”***

It is a response to those people of frail faith who sought pretexts and
said that they were not able to carry out our Divine obligations under
polytheist rule at Mecca.

The Holy Qur’an says that God’s earth is not limited to Mecca; Emigrate
to Medina, the earth is spacious. Move from centers polluted with
polytheism, disbelief, and suppression hindering your freedom and
carrying out your obligations to another place.

The question of emigration constitutes one the most significant issues
that not only played the most fundamental role in the triumph of the
Islamic rule as a consequence of which served as the starting point of
the history of Islam but also enjoys an extraordinary significance at
all times thereby believers do not surrender against pressure and
suppression prevalent in their environment and on the other hand leads
to the dissemination of the Islamic faith to different regions of the
world.

In this vein, the Holy Qur’an[^19] says:

***“Indeed, as for those whom the angels take [in death] while they are
wronging themselves they [angels responsible for taking away their
souls] ask [them]: ‘in what [conditions] were you?’ They reply: ‘We were
weak and oppressed on the earth.’ They ask: ‘Was not the earth of Allah
spacious enough for you to emigrate therein?’ Such men will find their
abode in Hell – what an ominous place!”***

The Verse clearly indicates that where emigration is possible, no
pretext as to pressure and suppression is to be acknowledged at Divine
threshold.[^20]

Since emigration usually entails many a problem in different aspects of
life, the fourth injunction is thus expressed regarding patience and
perseverance:

***“Only those who are patient shall receive their reward in full
without reckoning.”***

The verbal form:

***yuwaffa (“shall receive in full”)***

deriving from w-f-y on the one hand and the phrase:

***bi-ghayri hisabin (“without reckoning”)***

on the other clearly demonstrates that the perseverant patient shall
receive the best reward at Divine Threshold and patience and
perseverance are above any other act.

A well known Prophetic tradition narrated by Imam Sadiq thus bears
testimony to the significance of perseverance and patience:

*“When the scrolls of deeds are unrolled and the scales of Divine
Justice are installed, there shall be neither of the twain for those who
were perseverant despite being entangled with hardships and
vicissitudes.”*

Then the Noble Prophet (S) recited the Verse in question according to
which God Almighty shall reward the patient without reckoning.

Some maintain that the occasion of revelation of the blessed Verse was
the emigration of a large number of Muslims to Ethiopia led by Ja’far
ibn Abi Talib. It has been reiterated above that occasions of Revelation
provide further exposition for the Verses rather than restrict their
significance.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 11 - 13
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ اللَّهَ مُخْلِصاً لَهُ الدِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُمِرْتُ لِأَنْ أَكُونَ أَوَّلَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي أَخَافُ إِنْ عَصَيْتُ رَبِّي عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. Say: “Indeed I am commanded to worship Allah when at the same
time I have rendered the faith pure for him.”***  
***12. Say: “Indeed I am commanded to be the first Muslim [i.e., the
first of those who submit themselves to Allah].***  
***13. Say: “Indeed if I disobey my Lord, I am afraid of the torment of
a great Day.”***

The Noble Prophet (S) was keen on worshipping God sincerely and carrying
out other obligations of his despite the agreement or disagreement of
others;

***(“I am commanded; sincerely; the first Muslim”);***

as a consequence of which the Noble Verse says:

***“Say that having purified my religion for him, I am commanded to
worship God.”***

Verse 12 reads:

***“I am commanded to be the first Muslim, namely be the first to submit
fully to Divine Command.”***

Verse 13 is thus concerned with the seventh and the last injunction,
fear of Divine Chastisement on the Day of Resurrection,

***“Say that if I disobey my Lord, I am afraid of the torment of the
great Day [of Resurrection].”***

It is herein indicated that the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) is one of the
servants of God; he is also commanded to fully submit to Divine Command.

His obligations even far exceed others since he is supposed to be the
forerunner in this respect. He neither claimed divinity nor did he
deviate the path of sincere servantship, but he took pride in such state
hence he is the model for all Muslims.

He never regarded himself to enjoy any privilege and the same clearly
indicates his high rank and truthfulness, unlike pretenders who expect
others to worship them claiming that they stand above human beings in
terms of rank, essence, and origin and calling their adherents at times
to provide them annually with gold and precious stones as per their
weight!

The Noble Prophet (S) is actually saying that he is unlike tyrant
sovereigns who oblige people to carry out obligations but regard
themselves superior to carrying out obligations.

It demonstrates a significant point pertaining to the formative side of
education, namely any educator and leader is supposed to be the
forerunner in acting upon the injunctions of his school; he is supposed
to be the first believer in his own doctrine, the most assiduous
individual and exceed others in making sacrifices such that others trust
his sincerity and regard him as a role model in all matters.

It is thus clarified that his being the forerunner of total submission
to Divine Will is true since he was the first Muslim in all respects,
e.g. in terms of faith, sincere devotion, deeds, making sacrifices,
jihad, resistance, and perseverance. All accounts of his life bear
testimony to the same.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 14 - 15
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهَ أَعْبُدُ مُخْلِصاً لَهُ دِينِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْبُدُوا مَا شِئْتُمْ مِنْ دُونِهِ قُلْ إِنَّ الْخَاسِرِينَ
الَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَأَهْلِيهِمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ أَلا
ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْخُسْرَانُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. Say: “Allah Alone I worship while I have rendered the faith pure
for him.”***  
***15. So worship what you like besides Him. Say: “[real] losers are
those who will lose themselves and their families on the Day of
Resurrection. Indeed that will be a manifest loss!”***

Monotheism surpasses prophetic teachings. Sincere devotion has been so
far mentioned four times in this Chapter since history reveals that
accretion of superstitions, idiosyncratic tastes, and distortions have
been the worst blights of religion.

Following an exposition of the seven injunctions in the preceding
Verses, i.e., fear of God, doing righteous good deeds, emigration,
patience, sincere devotion, total submission [to Divine Will], and dread
of the Master of the day of judgment, emphasis is once more put on
ethical norms particularly those against diverse motives behind
polytheism, saying:

***“Allah Alone I worship while I have rendered the faith pure for him.
So Worship what you like besides Him, [since real] losers are those who
will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection.”***

They neither made use of their own life, nor did their families could
have led them to deliverance, nor could they provide them with honor and
intercession at Divine Threshold.

***“Indeed that will be a manifest loss!”***

The word

***“loss”***

is thrice reiterated to awaken man and make him aware of the loss of the
soul on the Day of Resurrection.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 16
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ مِنْ فَوْقِهِمْ ظُلَلٌ مِنَ النَّارِ وَمِنْ تَحْتِهِمْ ظُلَلٌ
ذَلِكَ يُخَوِّفُ اللَّهُ بِهِ عِبَادَهُ يَا عِبَادِ فَاتَّقُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. They shall have coverings of Fire above them and coverings [of
Fire] beneath them. With this [torment] Allah frightens His servants: “O
My servants, therefore fear Me!”***

The chastisement of those who have turned away from God Almighty and
have turned toward others and have thereby incurred loss is that fire
encompasses them from all sides.

The Noble Verse in question thus presents a depiction of manifest loss:

***“for and above them stand canopies of fire and beneath them are
canopies of fire as well!”***

Thus, they are enfolded with fire. What loss may be worse than that?
What torment may be more excruciating that that?

The word ***sulal***, the plural form of sulla, indicates “awning,
marquee, and canopy” installed from above, hence its application to the
sense of a carpet spread underneath is a metaphorical extension of the
semantic range of the word.

Some exegets maintain that since the people of Hell are entangled in the
layers of Hell, coverings of fire are both above and below them and even
the word sulal is not supposed to be applied to lower coverings.

A similar depiction is to be found elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^21]:

***“On the Day when the torment shall cover them from above them and
from underneath their feet and it will be said: ‘Taste what you used to
do!’”***

It is a depiction of the state of their world in which ignorance,
disbelief, and wrong doing encompassed them.

Further emphasis is laid on it to give them a lesson:

***“With this [torment] Allah frightens His servants: ‘O My servants,
therefore fear Me!’”***

The word:

***‘ibad (“servants”)***

and its relation to “God” reiterated in this blessed Verse indicates
that Divine Warning against torment is for His Mercy and Favor so that
His servants do not meet such ominous fate; as a consequence of which it
becomes clear that the word ibad ad hoc does not necessarily signify
“believers” rather it is applied to everyone, since in case of wrong
doing, no one is secure from Divine torment.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 17 - 18
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اجْتَنَبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ أَنْ يَعْبُدُوهَا وَأَنَابُوا
إِلَی اللَّهِ لَهُمُ الْبُشْرَی فَبَشِّرْ عِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقَوْلَ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ أَحْسَنَهُ أُولَئِكَ
الَّذِينَ هَدَاهُمُ اللَّهُ وَأُولَئِكَ هُمْ أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. Those who avoid false deities [powers antithetical to God] by not
worshipping them and turn to Allah, for them are glad tidings; so
announce the good news to My servants.***  
***18. Those who listen to the Word and follow the best thereof, those
are [the ones] whom Allah has guided and those are men of
understanding.***

One of the characteristics of sincere believers and God’s servants is
their avoidance from false deities, since it is a prelude to
attentiveness to God.

These Verses compare and contrast biased and obdurate polytheists for
whom Hell fire is in store with truth seeking servants of God, saying:

***“Those who avoid false deities [powers antithetical to God] by not
worshipping them and turn to Allah, for them are glad tidings; so
announce the good news to My servants.”***

Since the word bushra is used in the broad sense of the word, it
encompasses all kinds of

***“good tidings”***

for Divine Bounties, material and spiritual; however such inclusive good
tidings solely belongs to those who avoid from worshipping false deities
and turn toward God as it embraces faith and doing righteous good deeds.

Furthermore, the word taghut is taken from tughiyan indicating
transgression of bounds.

Therefore, the word is applied to any object of worship other than God
Almighty, e.g. Satan and tyrants. It is worthy of note that it is used
both in the singular and the plural.

***“Avoidance from taghut,”***

employed in its broad sense, indicates any kind of polytheism, idolatry,
concupiscence, Satan worship, and submission to tyrant rulers.

***“Turning toward Allah” (inaba ila Allah)***

embraces fear of God, piety, and faith. It is needless to say that such
people deserve the good tidings.

It is worthy of note that worshipping Taghut is not restricted to bowing
down and prostration in worship, but it includes any kind of obedience
as well.

According to a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“One who obeys a tyrant ruler, he worships him.*[^22]

*Thus the elite servants of God are represented:*

***‘Announce the good news to My servants.’”***

Verse 18 says:

***“Those who listen to the Word and follow the best thereof, those are
[the ones] whom Allah has guided and those are men of understanding.”***

These two Verses have turned to an Islamic slogan demonstrating Muslim
freethinking and selectiveness in different issues.

According to Verse 17,

***“so announce the good news to My servants,”***

then these servants are presented as people who listen to the words
irrespective of the speakers’ characteristics and make use of their
intellection to select the best of them. They are devoid of any kind of
bias or obduracy, nor is their thought limited by anything.

They seek truth and turn toward it wherever they find it. They drink
their fill of the pure springhead of truth. They are not only after
truth and good words, but also are they selective between good and
better and choose the latter. This is the characteristic of a true
Muslim and a truth seeking believer.

Regarding the word:

***qawl (“word”)***

in the clause:

***yastami’un al-qawl (“[They] listen to Word”),***

exegets present different exegeses.

Some maintain that

***“Word”***

indicates the Holy Qur’an and whatever is included in It in terms of
obedience and lawfulness and regard following the best to indicate
obedience to God Almighty.

Some others hold that the word is employed in the broad sense of Divine
Command irrespective of being mentioned in the Holy Qur’an or elsewhere.
However, there exists no argument to substantiate such restricted
exegeses, since the apparent meaning of the Verse includes any kind of
word.

The faithful servants of God select the best from amongst all the words
and follow the same and act upon it.

It is worthy of note that as per the blessed Verse, those following
Divine Guidance are solely considered to be amongst such people as men
of understanding solely belong to such people.

It makes a reference to the fact that such people are outwardly and
inwardly guided; in other words, they are outwardly guided through
intellection and understanding and inwardly through Divine Light and
Assistance. Such truth seeking freethinkers may solely take pride in the
twain.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 19 - 20
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ حَقَّ عَلَيْهِ كَلِمَةُ الْعَذَابِ أَفَأَنْتَ تُنْقِذُ مَنْ
فِي النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكِنِ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا رَبَّهُمْ لَهُمْ غُرَفٌ مِنْ فَوْقِهَا
غُرَفٌ مَبْنِيَّةٌ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ
لا يُخْلِفُ اللَّهُ الْمِيعَادَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. Is then one against whom the Word of chastisement is justified
[may be guided?] Will you save him who is in the Fire?***  
***20. But those who fear their Lord and keep their duty to Him, for
them are built lofty rooms [in Paradise], one above another under which
rivers flow. [This is] the Promise of Allah and Allah does not fail in
[His] Promise.***

Owing to their obduracy and bias, some people prevent themselves from
Divine Forgiving;

***(“against whom the Word of chastisement is justified”).***

The blessed Verse is saying that the Noble Prophet (S) was keen on
guiding polytheists and those in error and was saddened by those who
deviated from the true Path and were not attentive toward realities.

Verse 20 is a consolation for him by saying that this world is arena of
free will and trial as a consequence of which some people, owing to
their disbelief, deserve Hell fire, saying:

***“Is then one against whom the Word of chastisement is justified [may
be guided?] Will you save him who is in the Fire?”***

The clause:

***“against whom the Word of chastisement is justified”***

alludes to Qur’anic Verses, e.g.

***“That I will fill Hell with you [Satan] and those of them that follow
you, together!”***[^23]

Justification of Divine Word regarding chastisement of this group was
not evidently preordained, since they taste Divine chastisement because
of their evil deeds and their persistence in wrong doing, corruption,
and sinfulness, such that their spirit of faith and distinction is
doomed to perdition and they all deserve Hell fire.

Thus, the clause:

***“Will you save him who is in the Fire?”***

is a delicate allusion to the fact that their being doomed to Hell fire
is so evident that it is as if they are in fire now. It is to be noted
that such people have severed all their ties with God Almighty and are
thus left with no way toward deliverance; even the Noble Prophet of
Islam (S) who is a

***“Mercy for all the world”***

may not save them from Divine chastisement.

As a source of consolation for the Noble Prophet (S) and believers, the
blessed Verse closes thus:

***“But those who fear their Lord and keep their duty to Him, for them
are built lofty rooms [in Paradise], one above another under which
rivers flow.”***

The people of Hell dwell in coverings of fire:

***(“They shall have coverings of Fire above them and coverings [of
Fire] beneath them”)***

but for the people of Paradise are:

***“built lofty rooms [in Paradise], one above another under which
rivers flow,”***

since looking at flowers, water, rivers, and gardens from above the
rooms is more pleasing.

The word:

***ghuraf***

is the plural form of ghurfa (“lofty room”) is taken from gharf
indicating “take up; ladle” hence the water taken from the river for
drinking is referred to as ghurfa; however, it is figuratively applied
to the upper stories of buildings.

Such beautiful lofty rooms in Paradise are further embellished with the
rivers flowing underneath, thus the blessed Verse further adds:

***“under which rivers flow.”***

The Verse closes with:

***“[This is] the Promise of Allah and Allah does not fail in [His]
Promise.”***

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 21
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ أَنْزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَسَلَكَهُ
يَنَابِيعَ فِي الْأَرْضِ ثُمَّ يُخْرِجُ بِهِ زَرْعاً مُخْتَلِفاً
أَلْوَانُهُ ثُمَّ يَهِيجُ فَتَرَاهُ مُصْفَرّاً ثُمَّ يَجْعَلُهُ
حُطَاماً إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَذِكْرَى لِأُولِي الْأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. See you not that Allah sends down water from the sky and causes
it to penetrate the earth [then makes it to spring up] as water springs
and afterward thereby produces crops of different colors and afterwards
they wither and you see them turn yellow; then He makes them dry and
broken pieces. Indeed, in this is a Reminder from men of understanding
[to know that the world is transient].***

Rain is the source of springs and subterranean waters. Natural phenomena
serve to fulfill Divine Will (making plants to grow is God’s work but it
is done by means of water). In the blessed Verse in question, the Holy
Qur’an once more returns to the arguments substantiating Divine Unity
and the Hereafter and pursues to complete the foregoing discussions
concerning disbelief and faith.

From amongst the signs of Divine Glory and Lordship in the world of
existence, mention are made of sending down rain from the sky and making
verdure grow with many a color out of the colorless water, different
stages of life, and attaining to the final stage.

Addressing the Noble Prophet (S), the Verse gives a lesson to all
believers, saying:

***“See you not that Allah sends down water from the sky?”***

The life giving drops of rain are sent down from the sky. They penetrate
the penetrable layer of the earth and the process of penetration stops
at the impenetrable layer. The water fills the subterranean basins and
thence it exudes in the forms of rivers, manmade subterranean water
canals, and spring wells.

The clause:

***salakahu (“caused it [rain water] to penetrate it [the earth]”)***

makes a brief reference to what has been already mentioned. The word
***yanabi’*** is the plural form of yanbu’ (“spring”) is taken from
n-b-’ (“well up; gush forth [water]”).

Had the earth had no impenetrable layer, one single drop of water would
not have been reserved in it and all rain would have flowed into seas.

There would have been no spring, nor manmade subterranean water canal,
nor well. Had it had solely one penetrable layer, all rain would have
penetrated into the earth such that it would have been impossible to
have access to it.

The two penetrable and impenetrable layers are made use of in digging
shallow, semi-deep, and deep wells.

The Verse further adds:

***“Afterward thereby [God Almighty] produces crops of different
colors.”***

The kinds of plants, e.g. wheat, barley, rice, and corn, as well as
their qualities and colors differ; some are light green in color, some
have broad and some narrow and delicate leaves.

The word zar’ is applied to plants with fragile stems, as the opposite
of shajar often applied to trees with strong trunks.

The former is broader in its semantic range embracing non-nutritive
plants, e.g. different kinds of flowers, luxurious plants, and medicinal
herbs extraordinarily diverse in types, forms, and colors, such that at
times different colors are quite interestingly and delicately
intertwined in one branch, stem, twig, or even one single flower or
blossom which sing the song of Divine Glory and Unity.

The Verse further treats of the other stages of the plant:

***“afterward thereby produces crops of different colors and afterwards
they wither and you see them turn yellow.”***

Harsh winds blow uprooting those whose roots are weak,

***“then He makes them dry and broken pieces.”***

It serves as a reminder for thinkers and intellectuals,

***“Indeed, in this is a Reminder from men of understanding.”***

It is a reminder referring to the well measured and astonishing system
of the world of existence and Divine Lordship reflected in this
astounding scene and also a reminder of the end of life and
extinguishing the flames of life, Resurrection, and the raising of the
dead.

Despite the fact that the Verse depicts the world of plants, but It
warns mankind that the same happens in your lifespan, though whose
duration may differ; however they share the same features: birth, youth
and rigor, withering away and old age, and finally death.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 22
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ شَرَحَ اللَّهُ صَدْرَهُ لِلْإِسْلامِ فَهُوَ عَلَی نُورٍ مِنْ
رَبِّهِ فَوَيْلٌ لِلْقَاسِيَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ مِنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
أُولَئِكَ فِي ضَلالٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. Is he whose breast Allah has opened to [convert to] Islam, so
that he is [alighted on] light from His Lord [like someone entangled
with bias, obduracy, and vanity]? So woe to those whose hearts are
hardened against remembrance of Allah! They are in plain error!***

The Islamic faith rests on arguments and one possessing extension of
mind (sharh sadr) may draw a distinction between truth and falsity
through Divine Light.

The blessed Verse in question is asking:

***“Is the one whose breast is opened to convert the Islamic faith by
God and is mounted on Divine Light is on a par with the lightless
hardhearted deprived of Divine Guidance?”***

The Verse further adds:

***“Woe to those whose hearts are so hardened and impenetrable that they
may not be affected by remembrance of Allah.”***

Neither fruitful admonitions, nor good tidings, nor warnings, nor moving
Qur’anic Verses, nor life giving rain of Divine Revelation may cause
flowers of fearing God and piety grow in their hearts. In other words,
they have neither freshness, nor leaves, nor flowers, nor shade!

Such people

***“are in plain error.”***

The word qasiya is taken from qaswa indicating coarseness, uncouthness,
and impenetrability and the word qasi is applied to rough stones.

Likewise, the word is applied to hard hearts unaffected by Divine Light
and Guidance.

The expression is employed as the opposite of “extension of mind” and
openness of heart, since extension and openness alludes to preparation
for acceptance. A desert or a spacious mansion may accommodate more
people and likewise, an opened mind and broad breast may accept more
realities.

According to a report narrated by Ibn Mas’ud, the Noble Prophet of Islam
(S) was asked concerning the interpretation of the Verse,

***“In what manner man may attain to extension of mind?”***

the Noble Prophet replied:

*“When Light penetrates into human heart, it broadens in extent and
returns.”*

He was again inquired regarding the tokens thereof, to which he replied:

*“The tokens include attentiveness toward the everlasting abode,
separation from the abode of vanity, and preparation for welcoming death
prior to its occurrence.”*[^24]

According to the exegetic work by ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim,

***“Is he whose breast Allah has opened to [convert to] Islam, so that
he is [alighted on] light from His Lord [like someone entangled with
bias, obduracy, and vanity]?”***

is revealed for the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as).

As per some Qur’anic exegetic works,

***“So woe to those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of
Allah”***

is addressed to Abu Lahab and his offspring.[^25]

It is worthy of note that Light in

***“[alighted on] light from His Light”***

is expressed such that it reminds one of a mount on which believers are
alighted on it whose speed is extraordinary, whose path is bright, and
whose rigor encompasses the world over.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 23
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ نَزَّلَ أَحْسَنَ الْحَدِيثِ كِتَاباً مُتَشَابِهاً مَثَانِيَ
تَقْشَعِرُّ مِنْهُ جُلُودُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ ثُمَّ
تَلِينُ جُلُودُهُمْ وَقُلُوبُهُمْ إِلَى ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ هُدَی
اللَّهِ يَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ
مِنْ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. Allah has sent down the Best Statement, a Book whose [Verses]
resemble each other. The skins of those who fear their Lord shiver from
[its recitation]. Then their skin and their heart soften to the
remembrance of Allah [through faith and intimacy]. That is Divine
Guidance. He Guides therewith whom He wills and whosoever Allah sends
astray [because of his disobeying Him], for him there is no guide.***

The word:

***hadith***

is employed in the sense of “word, statement.”

In the blessed Verse in question, it makes a reference to the Holy
Qur’an which is the Best Statement, since it embraces comprehensiveness,
eloquence, and firmness.

The word:

***mutashabih (“similar; polysemous; equivocal”)***

is per se polysemous, since some of the Verses are equivocal as opposed
to the clear and unequivocal Ones.

According to a Verse in Chapter three,

***“They [constitute] the Mother of the Book and others [are]
equivocal”;***

however, the word mutashabih in this Verse implies the similarity of
Qur’anic Verses and it is employed as an adjective modifying all the
Verses.

The word:

***mathani***

is the plural form of mathniya (“inclination, tendency”) indicating the
proximity of Qur’anic Verses such that some of which interpret some
others; in other words, the same meaning may be found in different
forms.

It is noteworthy that the preceding Verses treated of God’s servants who
listen to the words and select the best of them and also mention was
made of open breasts and broadened minds prepared to embrace Divine
Word.

In the same vein, the blessed Verse in question makes mention of the
Holy Qur’an in order to complete the foregoing discussions concerning
Divine Unity and Resurrection substantiated with arguments put forward
for the veracity of prophethood.

The Verse opens with:

***“Allah has sent down the Best Statement, a Book whose [Verses]
resemble each other.”***

It further proceeds with an enumeration of the merits of the Holy Qur’an
among which three merits of this Glorious Divine Book is mentioned:

***“a Book whose [Verses] resemble each other.”***

The word mutashabih ad hoc refers to a statement whose constituent
elements are consistent and harmonious, in which neither inconsistency
nor discrepancy may be found, but one is better than the other.

Furthermore, another characteristic of this Book is that it is
oft-repeated (mathani). The expression may allude to the reiteration of
different topics mentioned in the stories and admonitions, but they are
never boring, rather they are enthusing and invigorating.

It is one of the fundamental principles of eloquence that as required, a
point may be reiterated in a novel and interesting manner for a more
profound impression in the audience.

Besides, the reiteration of Qur’anic themes help to interpret each other
and may thus provide answers to many a question. Some maintain that it
makes a reference to the reiteration in reciting the Holy Qur’an and the
fact that Qur’anic Verses never lose their freshness through repetition.

Some also make a reference to the Revelation of the Qur’an once at one
single time on the Night of Decree (laylat al-qadr) and also at
different times within a period of 23 years. It is also possible that
the reiteration of the Qur’anic Truth at any time and a novel
manifestation of the same out of occultation refer to the passage of
time.

The first interpretation sounds more preferable; however the foregoing
interpretations are not inconsistent, rather they complement each other.

Furthermore, the Verse proceeds toward an exposition of the last
characteristics of the Holy Qur’an, namely Its extraordinary and
profound impression, saying:

***“The skins of those who fear their Lord shiver from [its recitation].
Then their skin and their heart soften to the remembrance of Allah
[through faith and intimacy].”***

This is an elegant depiction of the unusual impression caused by
Qur’anic Verses in welcoming hearts that causes fear and awe in the
first place which leads to awakening and beginning of motion. Such fear
makes man attend to his different obligations.

It is in the second place that he attains to flexibility and welcoming
the Word of Truth leading to peace of mind.

The two fold state demonstrating different stages of:

***“treading the Path toward Allah”***

which is quite understandable.

The blessed Verses revealing Divine Wrath and warning the Noble Prophet
(S) make the hearts shiver which are followed by the Verses designating
Divine Mercy and thus leading to peace of mind. Reflection upon the
Essence of Truth and the Pre-eternality and Infiniteness of His Pure
Essence causes fear in his heart as to the manner through which He may
be known, but pondering on the Signs of the Sacred Essence in the
horizons and souls bestows peace of mind on him.[^26]

The history of Islam abounds in instances of the extraordinary
impression of the Holy Qur’an in the hearts of both believers and
non-believers whose hearts were prepared to welcome It and such unusual
impression bears witness to the Divine Revelation of this Holy Book.

According to a tradition narrated on the authority of Asma’,

***“Upon the recitation of the Holy Qur’an, the Companions of the
Prophet (S) wept and shuddered in awe.”***[^27]

Regarding the pious, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) makes
an exposition of such truth in the best possible manner:

*“Those stand in prayer at night time, recite the Holy Qur’an in a
meditative and clearly enunciated manner, immerse their souls in it in a
pleasing sadness, seek the cure of their pain in it; whenever they come
unto any encouraging Verse, they set their hopes on it and the eyes of
their hearts gaze at it in astonishment and they set it as their
example, and when they come unto One in which there are warning and
inspiration of awe, they listen to them wholeheartedly, as if they the
moans and the flames of the awe inspiring Hell fire echo in their
hearts.”*

The blessed Verse closes thus:

***“That is Divine Guidance. He Guides therewith whom He wills and
whosoever Allah sends astray [because of his disobeying Him], for him
there is no guide.”***

It is true that the Holy Qur’an is revealed for the Guidance of all, but
truth seekers and the pious may solely benefit from the Light of Its
Guidance.

Those whose hearts are intentionally sealed and the shadows of bias and
obduracy dominates their souls not only may not benefit from It, but
also owing to their obduracy and enmity, they sink further in error.

Thus the Verse proceeds with:

***“He Guides therewith whom He wills and whosoever Allah sends astray
[because of his disobeying Him], for him there is no guide.”***

Such error is owing to their own deeds springing from their will and it
is in no way inconsistent with the human free will.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 24
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ يَتَّقِي بِوَجْهِهِ سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
وَقِيلَ لِلظَّالِمِينَ ذُوقُوا مَا كُنْتُمْ تَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. Is he then who will confronts with his face the awful torment on
the Day of Resurrection [through faith and righteous good deeds on a par
with one who neglects Divine Wrath on the Day of Resurrection]? And [on
that Day] it will be said to the wrong doers]: “Taste what you used to
ear!”***

The fruit of fearing God Almighty is to turn his face away from Divine
Wrath on the Day of Resurrection. The blessed Verse in question compares
wrong doers and sinners with the believers whose state has been already
mention so that such comparison shed more light on realities.

The Verse in question asks:

***“Is he who turns away with his face the excruciating Divine torment
on a par with the one who is secure on that Day and Hell fire never
touches him?”***

It is noteworthy that the Verse says:

***“confronts with his face the awful torment.”***

The word face is used in this expression since it is one of the most
organs of the body and the significant human sources, i.e., vision,
hearing, smell, and taste, are in it and human beings are basically
recognized through their faces; that is why they try to shield their
hands, arms, and other organs against it to save it from perils.

However, the wrong doing people of Hell have to defend themselves with
their faces, as their hands and feet are in fetters and shackles as
mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^28]:

***“Indeed We have put on their necks iron collars [in which their hands
are also laid] reaching to the chins, so that their heads are raised
up.”***

Some have maintained that the expression indicates that they will be
cast into Fire on their faces, so that their first organ touching the
fire will be their faces, as it is mentioned in 27:90,

***“And whoever brings an evil deed, they will be cast down on their
faces in the Fire.”***

It is also held that the expression solely implies their inability to
save themselves from Hell fire. The three interpretations are not
inconsistent and they may all be comprehended from the contextual
content of the Verse.

The blessed Verse further adds:

***“And it will be said to wrong doers: ‘Taste what you used to
earn!’”***

Angels responsible for inflicting torment inform them of the
excruciating reality that the torment is the consequence of what you
used to earn. Now they embrace and hurt you and the expression per se is
another mental torment for them.

It is worthy of note that the Verse does not say: “*Taste the
consequences of your deeds,*” but it says:

***“Taste your deeds”***

which is another piece of evidence for

***“embodiment of deeds.”***

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 25 - 26
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَأَتَاهُمُ الْعَذَابُ مِنْ حَيْثُ
لا يَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَذَاقَهُمُ اللَّهُ الْخِزْيَ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَلَعَذَابُ
الْآخِرَةِ أَكْبَرُ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***25. Those before them belied and so the torment came on them from
directions they perceived not.***  
***26. Therefore, Allah made them to taste the disgrace in the present
life, but greater is the torment of the Hereafter if they only knew!***

The history of disbelievers and tyrants is a lesson for future
generations. The foregoing discussions made a reference in passing to
the excruciating torments of disbelievers on the Day of Resurrection;
however, the blessed Verse in question treats of their torments in this
world, lest they may imagine that they are secure in their mundane life.

In this vein, the blessed Verse says:

***“Those before them belied and so the torment came on them from
directions they perceived not.”***

Expected blows are less excruciating than unexpected ones, e.g. those
from the most intimate friends, the most beloved means of life, from the
water which is the source of his life, from the gentle breeze which
invigorating, and from the serene land which is his abode and place of
rest and security. Such Divine torments are very excruciating.

The accounts of the peoples of Noah, ‘Ad, Thamud, Lot, Pharaoh, and
Qarun (Korah) reveal that they were inflicted with quite unexpected
torments.

Verse 26 indicates that their mundane torment was solely corporeal but
they were inflicted with mental chastisement as well,

***“Allah made them to taste the disgrace in the present life.”***

It is not an issue when someone is inflicted with a hardship but he
manages to save himself honorably, rather the hardship lies in falling a
victim to torments disgracefully,

***“but greater is the torment of the Hereafter if they only knew!”***

The word greater (akbar) designates the severity of the torment.

According to a Prophetic tradition narrated on the authority of ‘Abbas,
the Noble Prophet’s (S) paternal uncle,

*“Upon shuddering with fear of God, a servant is absolved of his sins in
the same manner that withered leaves fall from the trees.”*[^29]

It is evident that one who is so affected out of fear of God that leads
him to repentance shall be certainly forgiven by God Almighty.

As mentioned above, it is narrated from Asma’ that upon being asked of
the Prophet’s (S) Companions, the answer provided is that as mentioned
in the Holy Qur’an, upon hearing or reciting the Verses, tears ran from
their eyes and their bodies shuddered with fear.

The transmitter asked Asma’ concerning those who faint upon hearing
Qur’anic Verses and they fall into a state of ecstasy, to which the
latter replies:

*“I seek refuge in God Almighty from Satan.”*[^30]

The tradition is actually a decisive critique of Sufi pretenders who
convene sessions in which Qur’anic Verses and certain prayers are being
recited and bodily movements lead them to ecstasy as a consequence of
which they shout and pretend to swoon and some of them may really faint;
nonetheless, such states are not reported from the Noble Prophet’s (S)
Companions but they are Sufi innovations.

It is worthy of note that at times, one may faint out of awe and fear of
God, but it is quite different from Sufi activities in aforementioned
prayer sessions.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 27-28
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ضَرَبْنَا لِلنَّاسِ فِي هَذَا الْقُرْآنِ مِنْ كُلِّ مَثَلٍ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُرْآناً عَرَبِيّاً غَيْرَ ذِي عِوَجٍ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. And indeed We have put forth for [the Guidance of] man, in this
Qur’an every kind of similitude in order that they may remember.***  
***28. An Arabic [and eloquent] Qur’an, without any crookedness in order
that they may fear God.***

Guiding and reminding men of their duties, through producing arguments
or similitude, is of significance.

The Holy Qur’an includes:

***“every kind of similitude”***

for reminding him of his obligations and making him to avoid
neglectfulness.

Ordinary people

***(“for man”)***

are more prone to be impressed by similitude rather than argument.

Proceeding with the aforementioned discussions, the blessed Verse in
question mainly treats of the Holy Qur’an and Its characteristics.

Mention is made in the first place of the question of the
comprehensiveness of the Holy Qur’an:

***“And indeed We have put for [the Guidance of] man, in this Qur’an
every kind of similitude in order that they may remember.”***

The Divine Book includes the excruciating fates of the disobedient and
tyrants in the past, the dire consequences of sinfulness, every
admonition, secrets of creation and its systematicity, clear and precise
Laws and Injunctions, and whatever is required for man’s guidance in the
form of similitude

***“in order that they may remember”***

and return to the Straight Path. It is worthy of note that the Arabic
word mathal is applied to any word that embodies a truth, depicts
something, or likens something to something else.

The expression includes all the facts and points included in the Holy
Qur’an and specifies Its comprehensiveness.

Verse 28 provides another depiction of the Holy Qur’an saying:

***“An Arabic [and eloquent] Qur’an, without any crookedness.”***

Three characteristics are being enumerated herein. Firstly, the
expression Qur’an-an makes a reference to the fact that Qur’anic Verses
are being recited at all times in daily prayers and otherwise, in
solitude and in assemblies, and throughout the history of Islam to the
end of the world; such that It is an ever illuminating Light of
Guidance.

The other point is the eloquence, elegance, and impressiveness of the
Divine Word expressed by the word:

***“Arabic” (‘Arabiy-yan),***

since the word is ad hoc employed in the sense of “eloquent.”

Some philologists and exegets maintain that ***‘iwaj*** and ‘awaj are
applied to inward and outward crookedness respectively, an instance of
which is to found elsewhere in the Qur’an[^31]:

***“You will see in it [i.e., plain] nothing crooked or curved,”***

as a consequence of which a number of philologists consider the former
interpretation to be general.[^32]

It is noteworthy that the Revelation of the Holy Qur’an with so many
characteristics is that man may fear God and be pious.

The other point worthy of note is that the penultimate Verse closes
with:

***“in order that they may remember,”***

where as the last One ends in:

***“in order that they may fear God.”***

The reason is that Remembrance at all times is a prelude to fear of God;
in other words, the latter is the fruit of the former.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 29
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلاً رَجُلاً فِيهِ شُرَكَاءُ مُتَشَاكِسُونَ
وَرَجُلاً سَلَماً لِرَجُلٍ هَلْ يَسْتَوِيَانِ مَثَلاً الْحَمْدُ
لِلَّهِ بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. Allah puts forth a similitude [for Divine Unity and polytheism]:
a [slave] man belonging to many partners disputing with one another
[giving him contradictory orders], and a [slave] man belonging entirely
to one master [taking his orders solely from him]. Are those two equal
in comparison? All the praises and laudations are to Allah! But most of
people know not.***

Monotheists are preoccupied with the satisfaction of the One God,
whereas polytheists are preoccupied at all times with the satisfaction
of different gods.

It is not ill-advised to illustrate examples concerning God in religious
discussions, since the blessed Verse in question uses a similitude to
liken total submission to God to a slave’s obedience to his master:

***(“belonging entirely to one master”).***

The Verse is saying that all individuals and paths besides God lead to
contradiction and inconsistency, since every man is to his taste and
desire:

***(“many partners disputing with one another”).***

Thus the Holy Qur’an illustrates the fates of polytheists and
monotheists by employment of the similitude as per which a slave belongs
to several masters each of whom order him to do something and the point
is that the orders are contradictory.

Therefore, the slave is perplexed as to which order is supposed to be
acted upon. To add insult to injury, each and every master asks the
other to meet the slave’s demands and the latter is perplexed,
miserable, and destitute.

Au contraire, mention is made of a man obedient to one single person:

***(“a man belonging entirely to one master”)***

whose master and orders to be taken and carried out are specifically
clear. He is neither in doubt, nor perplexity, nor contradiction; rather
he takes his steps calmly and confidently, since he is under the
guardianship of one single person who supports him anywhere and anytime.

***“Are those two equal in comparison?”***

Such are the states of polytheists and monotheists. The former are
entangled with every contradiction and inconsistency.

Each and every day they set their hearts on an object of worship and
turn toward different masters at all times. They lack in peace of mind,
security, and a clear path to tread.

Au contraire, the latter set their hearts on God, select Him from the
entire world, and seek refuge in His Boundless Mercy. They have turned
away from all beings besides God and are totally obedient to Him. Their
path is straight and evident and their fate is clear.

According to a tradition narrated from Imam ‘Ali (as) he says

*“I am the man who was totally obedient to the Messenger of God (S) at
all times.”*

It is narrated in another tradition:

*“The men who were actually obedient were ‘Ali (as) and his adherents.”*

The Verse closes with:

***“All the praises and laudations are to Allah!”***

God Almighty illustrates such examples to beacon the Path. He produces
clear arguments to draw a distinction between Truth and falsehood. He
calls every one to sincere devotion leading to security and peace of
mind.

It is the most exalted Bounty that requires praise and laudation.

***“But most of people know not,”***

in other words, despite such clear arguments, some people are
preoccupied with mundane possessions and unchecked vain desires such
that they may not find their way to Truth.

[^1]: Majma’ al-Bayan, the opening of the Chapter.

[^2]: Majma’ al-Bayan; Thawab al-A’mal; Nur al-Thiqalayn.

[^3]: Ruh al-Ma’ani [Exegesis], vol. 23, p. 212, under the blessed
Verses in question.

[^4]: Surah al-Hamd or Surah al-Fatiha

[^5]: 35:13

[^6]: 7:54

[^7]: 14:33

[^8]: Tafsir Burhan, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^9]: 3:198

[^10]: The ‘Arafa Prayer, see Misbah al-Za’ir by Ibn Óawus.

[^11]: For further information, see the exegesis of 17:15.

[^12]: For further information, see the exegesis of 6:94.

[^13]: See Lisan al-’Arab; Raghib’s Mufradat; the Exegetic work titled
Ruh al-Ma’ani.

[^14]: Apud Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 4, p. 479.

[^15]: Kafi, vol. 1, Bab Sifat al-’Ilm wa Fadlihi (“The Chapter on the
Characteristics of Knowledge and its Exellence”) Tradition 7.

[^16]: Ibid, Tradition 2.

[^17]: Majma’ al-Bayan [Exegesis], under the Verses in question.

[^18]: Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 496, the section on accounts of
Kumayl.

[^19]: 4:97

[^20]: For further discussions concerning the significance of emigration
in Islam and its different dimensions, see the Holy Qur’an 4:100; 8:72.

[^21]: 29:55

[^22]: Majma’ al-Bayan, under the Verses in question.

[^23]: 38:85

[^24]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 8, p. 5691, exegesis of Chapter 39, under
the Verses in question.

[^25]: Tafsir Safi, under the blessed Verse in question.

[^26]: The word taqsha’iru (“he has gooseflesh with fear”) derives from
qusha’rira (“having gooseflesh with fear, shudder”), see Raghib’s
Mufradat; Lisan al-’Arab; Tafsir Kashshaf; Ruh al-Ma’ani; Tafsir
Qurtubi.

[^27]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 8, p. 5693.

[^28]: 36:8

[^29]: Majma’ al-Bayan, under the blessed Verses in question. Abu
al-Futuh Razi and Qurtubi have transmitted the Prophetic tradition with
minor variations.

[^30]: Àlusi, Ruh al-Ma’ani, vol. 23, p. 235.

[^31]: 20:107

[^32]: Raghib’s Mufradat.


