Surah al-Zumar, Verses 30 - 55
==============================

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 30 - 31
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ مَيِّتٌ وَإِنَّهُمْ مَيِّتُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ إِنَّكُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عِنْدَ رَبِّكُمْ تَخْتَصِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. Verily you will die and indeed they will die [too].***  
***31. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be disputing before
your Lord.***

Prophets are like ordinary people in their daily life. Being a Favorite
[of God] may not hinder the execution of Divine Ordainments like death:

***(“Verily you will die”).***

Proceeding with the foregoing discussion on monotheism and polytheism,
the blessed Verse in question treats of the consequences of monotheism
and polytheism on the Day of Resurrection.

The Verse begins with the question of death, the gate to Resurrection,
and treats of the general applicability of the law to all humanity,
saying:

***“you will die and they will die too.”***

Death is one of the questions as to which all men are alike. That is the
way of all the flesh. There is neither any exception nor any difference
in death.

***“You will die and they will die”***

apparently indicates the death of everyone in the present tense, but is
in the real present tense that is at times used in the senses of past
and present. Some exegets maintain that the Noble Prophet’s (S) foes
awaited his death and were happy that he would die some day.

The Holy Qur’an raises a question to them,

***“Put the case that he dies, will you be stay alive?”***

Verse 31 treats of the Last Judgment depicting servants’ disputations on
the Day of Resurrection, saying:

***“Then on the Day of Resurrection, you will be disputing before your
Lord.”***

The verbal form:

***takhtasimun (“they dispute”)***

is taken from ikhtisam denoting “disputation” between two individuals or
two groups, each of whom makes attempts at the nullification of the
words of the other; in which case, either or both of them may err, an
instance of which is the disputations of the people in error.

Exegets differ as to the generality of the issue, some of whom maintain
that the disputation in question concerns Muslims and disbelievers, but
some also hold that the disputation may be between Muslims and the
people of their tribes.

In this vein, a tradition is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id
Khudri to the effect that Muslims contemporaneous with the Noble Prophet
of Islam (S) could never imagine that disputations might occur between
Muslims holding that they share the same Creator and religion.

It was on the Day of Siffin that two apparently Muslim parties waged war
against each other that Abu Sa’id learned that the Verse concerns them
as well.[^1]

Nonetheless, the following Verses demonstrate that the disputation
occurred between the Noble Prophet (S) and believers on the one hand and
the polytheists and liars on the other.

It is well known in the history of Islam that following the sad demise
of the Noble Prophet of Islam (S), ‘Umar denied his death saying that
the Prophet (S) might not die but he had gone to his Lord in the same
manner that Moses had been in occultation away from his people for forty
days but had returned to them.

Likewise, the Messenger of God (S) would return and the hands and feet
of those believing in his death was to be severed! Upon hearing the
news, Abu Bakr went to him and recited a number of the Qur’anic Verses
concerning the demise of the Prophet (S) as a consequence of which ‘Umar
became silent and said that it was the first time that he heard
them.[^2]

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 32
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَى عَلَی اللَّهِ كَذِباً أَوْ كَذَّبَ
بِالْحَقِّ لَمَّا جَاءَهُ أَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْویً
لِلْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. Then, who does more wrong than one who utters a lie against
Allah, and denies the truth when it [i.e., the truth] comes to him? Is
there not in Hell an abode for disbelievers?***

The word

***“truth” (sidq)***

in the blessed Verse indicates Divine Word Revealed to the Prophet (S)
as the Holy Qur’an.

The preceding Verses treated of people on the Day of Judgment and
disputations occurring then.

The Verse in question resumes the same discussion dividing people into

***“the lying”***

and

***“the trustworthy.”***

The former have two characteristics as reflected in the Qur’anic Verse
in question:

***“Then, who does more wrong than one who utters a lie against Allah,
and denies the truth when it [i.e., the truth] comes to him?”***

Polytheists and disbelievers uttered many a lie concerning God; for
instance, some regarded angels His daughters, some others regarded Jesus
(as) his son, some considered idols as intercessors interceding on their
behalf, and some others forged false injunctions as to lawfulness and
unlawfulness.

Nonetheless, when the Truth, i.e., the Holy Qur’an Revealed to the
Prophet (S), came unto them, they denied It.

The Verse closes with a brief clause demonstrating the retribution of
these people:

***“Is there not in Hell an abode for disbelievers?”***

It is worthy of note that the word ***mathwa*** is taken from thawa’
which indicates “residence, residing, abiding,” hence the former ad hoc
designates permanent abode or residence.

Hell embodies all its excruciating torments.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 33 - 35
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِي جَاءَ بِالصِّدْقِ وَصَدَّقَ بِهِ أُولَئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ ذَلِكَ جَزَاءُ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُكَفِّرَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ أَسْوَأَ الَّذِي عَمِلُوا وَيَجْزِيَهُمْ
أَجْرَهُمْ بِأَحْسَنِ الَّذِي كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. And he who brought the Truth and believed therein, those are the
God fearing.***  
***34. They shall have all that they will desire with their Lord. That
is the reward of good doers.***  
***35. So that Allah [thanks to their faith and sincerity] may expiate
from them the evil of what they did and give them the reward, according
to the best of what they used to do.***

One of Divine Favors is that He expiates from sinners the evil of what
they did and gives them rewards in the best manner.

Two characteristics are also mentioned for believers:

***“And he who brought the Truth and believed therein, those are the God
fearing.”***

The clause

***“And he who brought the Truth”***

is interpreted in a number of traditions narrated from Shi’i Imams as a
reference to Imam ‘Ali (as).[^3]

However, it is worthy of note that the blessed Verse presents clear
pieces of evidence, since the clause:

***“They are the God fearing”***

indicates the general applicability of the Verse. It bears testimony to
the fact that the interpretation of the Verse in question to the Noble
Prophet of Islam (S), as the bearer of Divine Revelation and believer in
It is an instance of the applicability (bayan misdaq) of the contextual
meaning of the Verse rather than the meaning thereof in Its entirety.

Consequently, some exegets interpret the clause:

***“he who brought the Truth”***

to be applicable to all prophets and hold that:

***“believed in it”***

designates the true believers of them who are all the God fearing of the
world.

Another interpretation of the Verse in question which is the most
comprehensive, though more or less neglected by exegets despite the fact
that it is more consistent with the outward meaning of the Verses, is
that:

***“he who brought the Truth”***

does not solely refer to the bearers of Divine Revelation, i.e., the
prophets, rather it is addressed to all those who disseminated their
teachings as the Words of Truth.

Therefore, both clauses may refer to the same group, as reflected by the
outward interpretation of the Verse, since:

***“And he who”***

is mentioned solely once.

Thus, the Verse treats both the bearers of Truth and those acting upon
the same. It is concerned with the disseminators of Divine Revelation
and True Word and they, i.e., prophets, the Infallible Imams and
promulgators of their teachings, believe in and act upon the same.

It is noteworthy that

***“Truth”***

designates “Revelation,” making a reference to the fact that they only
word which is not subject to inconsistency and contradiction is Divine
Word Revealed to prophets.

Furthermore, fearing God Almighty may flourish in hearts through
believing in prophetic teachings and acting upon them. The next Verse
enumerates three great rewards for such believers.

Firstly, it says:

***“They shall have all that they will desire with their Lord. That is
the reward of good doers.”***

The contextual meaning of the blessed Verse is so comprehensive that It
includes all this worldly and otherworldly Bounties some of which may be
unimaginable.

It is worthy of note to keep in mind that the Rewards of the Hereafter
and Divine Bounties shall be bestowed upon servants as per the merits
they accrue in this world.

The expression:

***“with their Lord”***

expresses Divine Boundless Favors granted to them as if they are His
guests for good and may request whatever they require.

In

***“That is the reward of good doers”***

the present participial form:

***muhsinin (“good doers”)***

is employed in lieu of demonstrative pronoun to make a reference to the
fact that the main reason behind the bestowal of such Rewards is their
good doing.

Verse 35 treats of the second and the third characteristics granted to
good doers:

***“So that Allah [thanks to their faith and sincerity] may expiate from
them the evil of what they did and give them the reward, according to
the best of what they used to do.”***

The expression is worthy of note. On the one hand, they expect that the
worst of their deeds be expiated thanks to Divine Mercy such that they
may be absolved of them and on the other hand they pray to God Almighty
to regard their best of deeds as the standard of according Rewards to
them and accept all their deeds accordingly!

It is evident in the Verse that God Almighty accepts their request,
namely, He forgives the worst and regards the best as the standard of
granting Rewards. It is to be noted that when worse faults are to be
forgiven by Divine Mercy, other faults will be reckoned accordingly.

The point in question is that man is more concerned by worse faults as a
consequence of which believers are more preoccupied with it.

Now a question arises: Who was the first believer? Many a Shi’i and
Sunni exegets have reported a tradition concerning the interpretation
of:

***“he who brought the Truth and believed therein”***

according to which:

***“he who brought the Truth”***

indicates the Noble Prophet (S) and

***“[he who believed therein]”***

refers to ‘Ali (as).

Eminent exegets, Tabarsi in Majma’ al-Bayan and Abu al-Futuh Razi in
Rawh al-Jananhave narrated the tradition from the Prophet’s Household
(Ahl al-Bayt).

However, a number of Sunni scholars and exegets, e.g. ‘Allama Ibn
Maghazili in Manaqib, ‘Allama Ganji in Kifayat al-Matalib, Qurtubi in
his Tafsir [“Exegesis”], ‘Allama Suyuti in Durr al-Manthur, and Alusi in
Ruh al-Ma’ani,[^4] narrate the Prophetic tradition from Abu Hurayra and
or other transmitters.

As mentioned above, such interpretations are included for referring to
the most evident instances and indubitably, ‘Ali (as) is the first
person to believe in the Noble Prophet of Islam (S). He is the first
believer.

It is to be noted that all Muslim scholars unanimously believe that from
amongst men, ‘Ali (as) was the first who converted to the Islamic faith
and he is many a time mentioned by the Noble Prophet (S) as the

***“first believer”***

or “the first one who converted to the Islamic faith,” the references of
which were mentioned above under 9:10.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 36 - 37
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَيْسَ اللَّهُ بِكَافٍ عَبْدَهُ وَيُخَوِّفُونَكَ بِالَّذِينَ مِنْ
دُونِهِ وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَهْدِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ مُضِلٍّ أَلَيْسَ اللَّهُ
بِعَزِيزٍ ذِي انْتِقَامٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. Is not Allah Sufficient for His servant? Yet they try to frighten
you with those besides Him! And whom Allah sends astray, for him there
will be no guide.***  
***37. And whomsoever Allah guides, for him there will be no misleader.
Is not Allah the Omnipotent, the Lord of Retribution?***

God’s servants are secure from evils since God is their guardian, as
Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus (as) were protected from drowning, fire,
Pharaoh, and crucifixion.

Many an exeget hold that Meccan idolaters warned the Prophet (S) against
their idols lest that he may be harmed or possessed by them! The
occasion of the Revelation of the Verse is the reply to their
warnings.[^5]

Resuming the discussion of the Divine Threats against polytheists as
well as the Promises to His Prophet (S) mentioned the preceding Verses,
the Verses in question treat of disbelievers’ threats saying:

***“Is not Allah Sufficient for His servant? Yet they try to frighten
you with those besides Him!”***

God is the Omnipotent, All-Aware of His servants’ needs and
difficulties, and is All-Merciful toward them. How could He abandon his
faithful servants in the face of vicissitudes and enmities?

When He supports His servants,

***“even if the swords of the world happen to be wielding, no one shall
be harmed against His Will.”***

Likewise, when He Wills to assist someone,

*“even if a thousand enemies intend to destroy me, I shall not entertain
fear when Your are my Friend,”*

let alone idols which are devoid of any power whatsoever.

According to the aforementioned tradition, the occasion for the
Revelation of the Verse in question is the Meccan disbelievers warning
to the Prophet (S) against the wrath of the idols; however, the
contextual meaning of the Verse is so inclusive that It includes any
kind of threat against those besides God.

It is to be noted that the Verse in question is a good tiding to all
those treading the Path of Truth particularly sincere believers residing
in places where they are considered as minorities and are subject to
perils from all sides.

The Verse is a source of consolation, encouragement, and perseverance to
them invigorating their souls, and refreshing them with determination.
It neutralizes the harmful mental impressions and the menaces of their
foes. Through Divine Support, we are not frightened by any one besides
Him. When we distance ourselves from Him, everything inspires awe in our
hearts.

Verses 36 and 37 treat of the questions of Guidance and error, division
of people into the two groups of astray and guided, and the fact that
these are within His Omnipotence.

He Wills that the entire world comprehend that all His servants need His
Threshold. Nothing occurs in this world without His Will, saying:

***“And whom Allah sends astray, for him there will be no guide.”***

***“And whomsoever Allah guides, for him there will be no misleader.”***

It is evident that neither the error nor the Guidance is groundless,
rather either of the twain is the fruit of human will and endeavor.

God Almighty misleads one who is in error, leaves no stone unturned to
extinguish the Light of Truth, makes any attempt to deceive others, and
is deep in sinfulness and rebellion.

God Almighty causes his defeat, renders his understanding and
distinction useless, seals his heart, and casts a veil on his eyes, as
the Retribution of his evil deeds.

Those sincere devout believers aiming to tread the Path toward Allah who
have made the necessary preparations for the same and have taken the
first steps in that direction, the Light of Divine Guidance renders them
assistance, angels of Truth come to their succor absolving their hearts
of satanic temptations, strengthen their will, and make them firmer in
taking steps on the true path, and Divine Mercy protects them in
precipices.

These questions are treated in many a Qur’anic Verses. Those failing to
perceive the interrelation existing between such Verses with others are
so ignorant that they consider them as arguments substantiating the
school of predestination, as if they are unaware of the fact that
Qur’anic Verses interpret each other.

An evident piece of evidence is to be found in the Verse in question:

***“Is not Allah the Omnipotent, the Lord of Retribution?”***

It is well known that Divine Retribution aims at chastisement of wrong
doing, indicating that misleading the wrong doer is the chastisement for
human deeds and His Guidance is the Reward of the sincere deeds and
struggles on the Path toward Allah.[^6]

Guidance is divided into beaconing the path and attaining to the object
of desire, in other words, legislative (tashri’i) and existential
(takwini) Guidance.

It is noteworthy that at times one may show the seeker the way with
total precision and wholehearted benevolence, but it will be incumbent
upon the seeker to proceed on the path and attain to his goal.

However, at times one may take the hand of the seeker and accompany him
on the path till he attains to his goal.

In other words, the guide in the former case merely suffices to inform
the seeker of the laws, the conditions of proceeding on the path, and
the manner of attainment to the goal, but in the latter case prepares
the required means for the journey, removes the obstacles, unravels the
intricacies to be met en route, and renders the wayfarers accompaniment
and support until they attain to their destination.

It is to be noted that the most precise and the best interpretation
consistent with all the Qur’anic Verses concerning Guidance and error is
that legislative Guidance in the sense of beaconing the Right Path is
unconditional and of general applicability, as reflected elsewhere in
the Holy Qur’an:

***“Verily, We showed him the way whether he be grateful or ungrateful”
(76:3), “Verily, You guide them to the Straight Path”***[^7]***.***

It is needless to say that the Noble Prophet’s (S) Call represents
Divine Call since he is Divinely appointed to prophethood.

According to another Qur’anic Verse:

***“Wherewith Allah guides all those who seek His Good Pleasure to ways
of peace and He brings them out of darkness by His Will unto light and
guides them to the Straight Path”***[^8]***.***

In this blessed Verse, obedience to Divine Command and seeking His
Satisfaction paves the path for Divine Guidance.

Regarding some polytheists and those in error another Qur’anic Verse[^9]
says:

***“There has surely come to them the Guidance from their Lord [but they
failed to believe]!”***

It is said elsewhere[^10],

***“Allah guides not the wrong doing people.”***

In the last Verse, emphasis is laid on wrong doing leading to error.

The Holy Qur’an elsewhere[^11] refers to disbelief as the cause of
error:

***“Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.”***

Lying and disbelief have also been mentioned as the sources of
error[^12]:

***“Truly, Allah guides not him who is a liar and a disbeliever.”***

According to another Qur’anic Verse,

***“Allah guides not one who is a transgressor, a liar!”.***[^13]

In other words, transgression of bounds and lying lead to error. It is
to be noted that the aforementioned themes abound in many a Qur’anic
Verse. In short, the Holy Qur’an considers certain characteristics, e.g.
disbelief, wrong doing, vice, lying, transgression of bounds,
prodigality, and ingratitude as leading to error.

Are not such people worthy of being in error? Shadows and veils conceal
the hearts of people with such characteristics. In any case, such deeds
and conducts lead to undesirable consequences, cast a veil on man’s
eyes, ears, and intellect leading him to error.

Since the qualities of all things and the effects of all means are
subject to Divine Will, such error in all cases may be attributed to
God; however, such attribution is consistent with His servants’ free
will. Divine Will on which emphasis is laid in the Verses concerning
with Guidance and error by no means indicate unfounded and unwise Will,
but there are certain conditions in each and every instance consistent
with Divine Wisdom.

According to a Qur’anic Verse,

***“And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants and forgives
sins and He knows what you do”***[^14]

in which acts are attributed to servants rather than to His Sacred
Essence. Therefore, there is no predestination. Hopefully, the above
discussions have shed light on the issues.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 38
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ سَأَلْتَهُمْ مَنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ
لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ قُلْ أَفَرَأَيْتُمْ مَا تَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ
اللَّهِ إِنْ أَرَادَنِيَ اللَّهُ بِضُرٍّ هَلْ هُنَّ كَاشِفَاتُ ضُرِّهِ
أَوْ أَرَادَنِي بِرَحْمَةٍ هَلْ هُنَّ مُمْسِكَاتُ رَحْمَتِهِ قُلْ
حَسْبِيَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ يَتَوَكَّلُ الْمُتَوَكِّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. And indeed if you ask them: “Who created the heavens and the
earth?” Surely they will say: “Allah.” Say: “Tell me then, [Have you
thought about] the things that you invoke besides Allah? [Indeed] if
Allah intended some harm for me, could they remove His harm? Or if He
intended some Mercy for me, could they withhold His Mercy?” Say:
“Sufficient for me is Allah. In Him those who trust must put their
trust.”***

Idolaters believed in God’s creativity but also believed in idol’s
lordship and intercession. The blessed Verse in question says that one
who deserves to be worshipped is supposed to be able to intend
assistance or harm for others.

The preceding Verses treated of disbelievers’ and polytheists’ errors
and their evil consequences. The Verse in question deals with the
arguments for Divine Unity to produce further arguments in order to
complete the discussion.

The foregoing Verses concerned with the sufficiency of Divine Succor and
the same is resumed in this Verse and it is accompanied with arguments.
The Verse opens with the question:

***“If you ask them: ‘Who created the heavens and the earth?’ Surely
they will say: ‘Allah.’”***

It would be unwise to believe that such immense world be created by an
earthly being let alone by inanimate idols devoid of understanding.

Thus, the Holy Qur’an asks them to make use of their intellect,
conscience, and primordial disposition in order to reinforce in their
hearts the first pivot of Divine Unity which is the creation of the
heavens and the earth.

Then, mention is made of the question of assistance and harm in human
affairs to substantiate the fact that idols play no role therein,
saying:

***“Say: ‘Tell me then, [Have you thought about] the things [i.e.,
objects of worship] that you invoke besides Allah? [Indeed] if Allah
intended some harm for me, could they remove His harm? Or if He intended
some Mercy for me, could they withhold His Mercy?’ Say: ‘Sufficient for
me is Allah. In Him those who trust must put their trust.’”***

Now that they are neither creators nor are they able to render
assistance or harm, their worship is meaningless.

Why do you turn away from the Originator of the creation of the world
within His Control lie any assistance and harm and resort to such beings
that are devoid of capability and understanding?

Even if objects of worship happen to possess understanding, e.g. jinn
and angels worshipped by some idolaters, they are neither creators nor
have they any control over assistance and harm.

In this vein, the blessed Verse in question presents a general and final
conclusion saying:

***“Sufficient for me is Allah. In Him those who trust must put their
trust.”***

The belief held by polytheists as to the creation of the sky and the
earth by God is oft-repeated in the Holy Qur’an[^15].

It indicates that they firmly believed in it and the same serves as the
best argument against polytheism, since monotheistic Creatorship,
Lordship, and Sovereignty in the world of existence is the best argument
for monotheistic servantship which leads to trust in Divine Pure Essence
and turning away from all entities besides Him.

It is also worthy of note that the pronouns whose antecedents are false
objects of worship and also the plural forms denoting the same are all
feminine in gender

***(hunna “them [feminine];”***

***kashifat “remover [feminine];”***

***mumsikat “withholder [feminine]”).***

It is worthy of note that firstly, well known idols worshipped by Arabs
bore feminine names (e.g. Lat, Manat, and ‘Uzza) since they believed in
the weakness of the fair sex and God Almighty intends to reveal the
weakness of the idols as per their own beliefs; secondly, many an object
of worship were inanimate and feminine plural forms have been used at
times for inanimate objects as mentioned in the blessed Verse in
question.

It is also worthy of note that owing to the precedence of

***‘alayh (“in”),***

the clause:

***“In Him those who trust must put their trust”***

indicates limitation and restriction (hasr), i.e., those who put trust
solely rely on Him.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 39 - 40
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا قَوْمِ اعْمَلُوا عَلَى مَكَانَتِكُمْ إِنِّي عَامِلٌ فَسَوْفَ
تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يَأْتِيهِ عَذَابٌ يُخْزِيهِ وَيَحِلُّ عَلَيْهِ عَذَابٌ مُقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***39. Say: “O my people! Act upon your stance [and position or
authority]. I [also] act upon mine. Then you will come to know.***  
***40. to whom comes a disgracing torment [of this world] and on whom
descends an everlasting torment [of Resurrection].”***

Believing in Allah and putting trust in Him leads one to adopt a stance
against enemies; therefore, a leader is supposed to act decisively and
kindheartedly.

The blessed Verses in question reveal a Divine and effective warning to
those failing to submit to intellect and conscience by saying:

***“O my people! Act upon your stance [and position or authority]. I
[also] act upon mine. Then you will come to know.”***

Verse 40 informs them as to who will be afflicted with a disgracing
torment in this world and the everlasting torment in the world to come;

***(“to whom comes a disgracing torment [of this world] and on whom
descends an everlasting torment [of Resurrection]”).***

Thus, He asks them to either submit to your intellect and conscience or
await two excruciating torments, one in this world which is disgracing
and another in the Hereafter which is everlasting. These are the
torments caused by you and the fire for making which you have collected
firewood.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 41
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ لِلنَّاسِ بِالْحَقِّ فَمَنِ
اهْتَدَی فَلِنَفْسِهِ وَمَنْ ضَلَّ فَإِنَّمَا يَضِلُّ عَلَيْهَا وَمَا
أَنْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ بِوَكِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***41. Indeed We have sent down unto you [for your Guidance] the Book
[the Holy Qur’an] for mankind in truth. Therefore, whosoever accepts the
Guidance, it is only for his ownself, and whosoever goe3s astray, he
goes astray only for his [own] loss. And you are not a guardian over
people [so that you necessarily have to guide them].***

Following an enumeration of the arguments for Divine Unity and an
exposition of the fates of disbelievers and monotheists, the blessed
Verse in question explicates the fact that they shall be rewarded or
chastised for their acknowledgement or denial of Truth and if the Noble
Prophet of Islam (S) insists on guiding them, it is not for his own
benefit rather he fulfils his obligation toward God.

The Verse reads:

***“We have sent down unto you [for your Guidance] the Book [the Holy
Qur’an] for mankind in truth. Therefore, whosoever accepts the Guidance,
it is only for his ownself, and whosoever goe3s astray, he goes astray
only for his [own] loss.”***

The blessed Verse further adds:

***“You are not a guardian over people [so that you necessarily have to
guide them].”***

His duty is to proclaim his prophetic mission and also to warn them.

The fact that whoever treads the Path of Truth will reap the fruits
thereof and whoever goes astray shall pay for the evil consequences
thereof is oft-repeated in Qur’anic Verses which emphasizes that neither
God nor His Prophet (S) need His servants’ belief nor are they afraid of
their disbelief. God does not aim at gaining anything but He intends to
show His Liberality to His servants.

The word wakil is ad hoc employed in the sense of someone responsible
for converting those in error to faith.

The word is attested in the Holy Qur’an in the same clause or clauses
similar to it which bear testimony to the fact that the Noble Prophet
(S) is not obliged to convert people to the Islamic faith, since such
conversion may not be attained through obligation, rather it is his duty
to proclaim Divine Command to people at all times whether they turn to
it or turn away from the same.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 42
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَتَوَفَّی الْأَنْفُسَ حِينَ مَوْتِهَا وَالَّتِي لَمْ تَمُتْ
فِي مَنَامِهَا فَيُمْسِكُ الَّتِي قَضَی عَلَيْهَا الْمَوْتَ وَيُرْسِلُ
الْأُخْرَی إِلَی أَجَلٍ مُسَمّیً إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآياتٍ لِقَوْمٍ
يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. It is Allah Who takes away the souls at the time of their death
and those that die not during their sleep. He keeps those [souls] for
which He has ordained death and sends the rest for a term appointed.
Indeed in this [taking and giving the soul at the time of sleep and
wakefulness] are [great] signs [of Divine Omnipotence] for a people who
think deeply.***

In order to make it clear that all human affairs including their life
and death is lies within Divine Omnipotence, the blessed Verse in
question says:

***“It is Allah Who takes away the souls at the time of their death and
those that die not during their sleep.”***

Thus, sleep is death’s brother and the former indicates the least
frailty of the nexus between soul and body and many a bond between the
twain is severed at the time.

The Verse further adds:

***“He keeps those [souls] for which He has ordained death and sends the
rest for a term appointed,”***

such that they do not wake up and other souls for who He has ordained to
live on are restored to their bodies for an appointed term. Verily, the
point in question indicates clear signs for those who reflect upon the
same.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 43
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمِ اتَّخَذُوا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ شُفَعَاءَ قُلْ أَوَلَوْ كَانُوا لا
يَمْلِكُونَ شَيْئاً وَلا يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***43. Have they taken [idols] as intercessors besides Allah? Say “Even
if they have power over nothing whatever and have no intelligence [could
they still be intercessors on your behalf]?***

An intercessor is supposed to be authorized by God. By whom are idols
authorized? An intercessor is supposed to be God’s favorite; however,
idols are neither God’s favorites nor is God satisfied with them.

The preceding Verse treated of God’s Sovereignty over human existence
and His plan of actions carried out through death, life, sleep, and
wakefulness.

The blessed Verse in question discusses polytheists’ error as to the
question of intercession in order to substantiate the argument as per
which the Master of intercession is the same as the One of human death
and life rather than unintelligent idols.

The blessed Verse asks:

***“Have they taken [idols] as intercessors besides Allah?”***

As mentioned above, one of the pretexts used by polytheists was;

***“We worship them only that they may bring us near unto Allah”***[^16]

since they either regarded idols as icons and tokens representing angels
and sacred spirits or they considered such inanimate pieces of stone and
wood possess secret powers.

It is noteworthy that intercession is dependent upon intelligence and
understanding in the first place and secondly, it depends on power,
mastery, and sovereignty.

The blessed Verse proceeds to ask polytheists whether they invoke their
idols to intercede on their behalf:

***“Even if they have power over nothing whatever and have no
intelligence [could they still be intercessors on your behalf]?”***

If they consider their intercessors to be angels and sacred spirits,
they are supposed to know that they have nothing of their own but they
are totally dependent on God.

They may not invoke their stone and wooden idols to intercede on their
behalf since besides lack of mastery, they are devoid intelligence and
understanding. Polytheists are asked to abandon such pretexts and turn
to the Master and Sovereign of the entire world of existence and all
paths lead to Him.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 44
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلَّهِ الشَّفَاعَةُ جَمِيعاً لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالْأَرْضِ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. [O Prophet!] Say [unto them]: “To Allah belongs all intercession
[in this world and the Hereafter]. His is the Sovereignty of the heavens
and the earth. Then to Him you shall be brought back.”***

God Almighty is the Master of the entire existence and all the agents
involved in it.

The blessed Verse in question says:

***“To Allah belongs all intercession [in this world and the Hereafter].
His is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. Then to Him you
shall be brought back.”***

Thus, all idols are totally abandoned, since the Unity prevailing the
entire world informs us that intercession is solely possible if it is
permitted by God Almighty;

***“Who is supposed to intercede with Him without His
Permission?”***[^17]

Some exegets maintain that intercession is basically the same as
supplication to the Most Beautiful Divine Names, His Graciousness,
Forgivingness, and Concealing of sins committed by His servants. Thus,
any intercession is supposed to be carried out with His Pure Essence.
Therefore, how may one intercede with Him without His Own
Permission?[^18]

Exegets produce different interpretations as to the nexus between the
clause:

***“then to Him you shall be brought back”***

and the preceding points discussed herein.

1. The clause indicates that not only the intercession in this world is
subject to His Permission and one is not supposed to invoke other
entities besides God to solve their problems and remove their hardships,
but also intercession and deliverance in the Hereafter shall be
dependent upon His Will.

2. The clause in question produces another argument for the fact that
intercession is solely dependent on God Almighty since the first
argument lays emphasis on Divine Mastery and the second one emphasizes
the return of all beings toward Him.

3. The clause serves as a warning to polytheists as per which they all
return unto God Almighty and shall be chastised for their evil deeds. It
is to be noted that all the interpretations sound appropriate; however,
the first two seem to be more suitable as to the contextual meaning of
the Verse.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 45
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا ذُكِرَ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ اشْمَأَزَّتْ قُلُوبُ الَّذِينَ لا
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْآخِرَةِ وَإِذَا ذُكِرَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ دُونِهِ إِذَا
هُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. And when Allah Alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who
believe not in the Hereafter are filled with disgust and when those
besides Him are mentioned, they rejoice immediately.***

One may test his belief and faith in the Hereafter through his disgust
at or attention toward Divine Commands. Likewise, remembrance of God
which is the source of consolation for believers is a source of harm for
disbelievers.

The blessed Verse in question also treats of monotheism and polytheism
depicting quite a vicious picture of polytheists and those denying the
Hereafter confronting the question of Divine Unity, saying:

***“And when Allah Alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who believe
not in the Hereafter are filled with disgust and when those besides Him
are mentioned, they rejoice immediately.”***

Man is at times so accustomed to vices and so far from purity and good
that he is offended upon hearing the Name of Truth and rejoices upon
hearing falsehood, failing to show humbleness toward God, the Creator of
the world of existence, though he kneels down before manmade pieces of
stone and wood, human beings, and creatures like himself.

A similar theme is to be found in 17:46:

***“And when you make mention of your Lord Alone in the Qur’an, they
turn on their backs, fleeing in extreme dislike.”***

Noah (Nuh), the Arch-Prophet, complains to God Almighty about such
misguided people saying:

***“And indeed, every time I called unto them that You might forgive
them, they thrust their fingers into their ears, covered themselves up
with their garments, and persisted [in error], and magnified themselves
in pride”***[^19]***.***

The biased obdurate and the vain ignorant are like that. It is worthy of
note that the blessed Verse in question clearly indicates that the
misfortune of such people sprang from denial of Divine Unity and
faithlessness in the Hereafter.

Au contraire, believers are so rejoiced by hearing the Sacred Name of
the One God that they sacrifice their possessions for Him. The mere Name
of the Beloved makes them some happy and illuminates their hearts that
not only His Name but also whatever is attached to Him rejoices them.

One is not supposed to assume that such dislike is restricted to the
polytheists contemporaneous with the Noble Prophet of Islam (S) but
vicious disbelievers at all times rejoice at hearing the names of God’s
enemies, atheistic schools of thought, and tyrants’ and wrong doers’
triumphs, but the mere names of the good and the pure and their plans
and victories are excruciating pains to them.

As a consequence, as per the interpretations included in a number of
traditions, the blessed Verse in question makes a reference to those
people who dismayed at hearing the excellence of the Noble Prophet’s (S)
Household (as) and the triumphs of their school of thought.[^20]

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 46
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهُمَّ فَاطِرَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ عَالِمَ الْغَيْبِ
وَالشَّهَادَةِ أَنْتَ تَحْكُمُ بَيْنَ عِبَادِكَ فِي مَا كَانُوا فِيهِ
يَخْتَلِفُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. Say: “O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! Omniscient
of the unseen and the seen! You shall arbiter between your servants
about that wherein they used to differ [at all times].”***

Confronting obdurate disbelievers, religious leaders and promulgators of
religion are supposed to remember God and invoke him for succor at all
times. The blessed Verse in question is saying that these obdurate
people and the vain ignorant are even disgusted at hearing the Name of
God Almighty.

God Commands His Prophet (S) to turn away from them and turn toward His
Threshold invoking Him with a tone revealing his profound faith imbued
with his love for Him and complain to Him about such people such that he
may find a source of consolation for his heart filled with sorrow and
also make attempts thereby to awaken disbelievers’ sleeping souls thus:

***“Say: “O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! Omniscient of
the unseen and the seen! You shall arbiter between your servants about
that wherein they used to differ [at all times].”***

The Resurrection Day is the Day of Judgment of all differences. Now many
a truth are concealed from man’s perception, but He is the Master and
the Sovereign, the Creator of all things, the Omniscient of their
secrets. Man will think about compensating his past deeds on that Day,
but it will be of no avail.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 47
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّ لِلَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعاً وَمِثْلَهُ
مَعَهُ لافْتَدَوْا بِهِ مِنْ سُوءِ الْعَذَابِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
وَبَدَا لَهُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ مَا لَمْ يَكُونُوا يَحْتَسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. And those who did wrong, if they had all that is on earth and
therewith as much again, they verily, would offer it to ransom
themselves therewith on the Day of Resurrection from the Divine
excruciating torment [though it shall be of no avail], and there will
become apparent to them from Allah what they had not been reckoning.***

There shall be no ransom for wrong doers on the Day of Judgment, as a
consequence of which the blessed Verse in question says:

***“If wrong doers had all that is on earth and therewith as much again,
they verily, would offer it to ransom themselves therewith on the Day of
Resurrection from the Divine excruciating torment [though it shall be of
no avail].”***

Wrong doing (shirk) ad hoc bears a wide range of meaning which includes
polytheism and other wrong doings as well.

The blessed Verse proceeds further to add:

***“there will become apparent to them from Allah what they had not been
reckoning.”***

They may not imagine the torments to be inflicted upon them. Besides,
they falsely imagine that Divine Mercy will be granted to them but they
were unaware of His Wrath. They do deeds which are supposed by them to
be good deeds whereas some of their deeds were grave sins.

It stands against the Promise given to believers[^21]:

***“No person knows what is kept hidden for them of joy as a reward for
what they used to do.”***

It is reported that on death bed, a Muslim was quite restless.

Upon inquiry, he replied:

*“I recalled the Verse*

***‘and there will become apparent to them from Allah what they had not
been reckoning’***

*and fear wrapped me up. I fear that there will become apparent to me
from Allah what I had not been reckoning.”*[^22]

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 48
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَدَا لَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا كَسَبُوا وَحَاقَ بِهِمْ مَا كَانُوا بِهِ
يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. And [on that Day] the evils of that which they earned [in their
mundane life] will become apparent to them, and that which they used to
mock at will encircle them.***

The Day of Resurrection is the Day on which all secrets shall be known,
thus the blessed Verse in question says:

***“[on that Day] the evils of that which they earned [in their mundane
life] will become apparent to them, and that which they used to mock at
will encircle them.”***

It is noteworthy that four points are raised in this Verse as to
polytheists and wrong doers:

1. Fear of Divine Chastisement is so severe that even if they had all
the worldly possessions, they would not be able to barter them for
deliverance from torment.

2. Different kinds of Divine Chastisement will become apparent to them
which they did not imagine.

3. All sins committed by men will become apparent and embodied before
them.

4. That which they used to mock at will become apparent to them like
absolute or objective reality and they shall find no deliverance.

It is to be noted that :

***“the evils of that which they earned [in their mundane life] will
become apparent to them”***

produces another argument to substantiate the question of the embodiment
of deeds, since there would be no need for the words chastisement and
recompense to be included by predestination.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 49
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا مَسَّ الْأِنْسَانَ ضُرٌّ دَعَانَا ثُمَّ إِذَا خَوَّلْنَاهُ
نِعْمَةً مِنَّا قَالَ إِنَّمَا أُوتِيتُهُ عَلَی عِلْمٍ بَلْ هِيَ
فِتْنَةٌ وَلَكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. When harm touches man, he calls to Us; then when We have granted
him a favor, he says: “Only because of my knowledge [and plan of
actions] I obtained it.” [It is not like that], it is only a trial, but
most of them know not!***

Experiencing hardships renders man to confess to his weakness and
awakens man’s God seeking primordial natural disposition in him and
flourishes the same.

Thus, the blessed Verse says that whenever man is afflicted with loss
and harm, pain, hardship, and poverty, he invokes God for their removal.
He is the same man who disgusted at hearing the Name of the One God, now
that he is entangled with vicissitudes, he seeks refuge in Divine Mercy.

Yet, his refuge is also transient since when God Almighty grants him a
favor, he says that it was solely out of his savoir-faire and
competence:

***(“then when We have granted him a favor, he says: ‘Only because of my
knowledge [and plan of actions] I obtained it.’”)***[^23]

An instance of such ingratitude is attested elsewhere in the Holy
Qur’an[^24] uttered by Qarun (Korah) addressing the scholars of the
Children of Israel providing him with admonitions:

***“This has been given to me only because of the knowledge I
possess.”***

Such ignorant people do not reflect in the least upon the fact that
their knowledge is also a Divine Favor granted to them. Do they assume
that the knowledge leading to gaining abundant possessions is their own?
Is it their innate quality?

Addressing such vain and incapable braggarts who forget their small
capacity when the gain worldly possessions, the Holy Qur’an says:

***“[It is not like that], it is only a trial, but most of them know
not!”***

The trial aims at making them reveal what they entertain in their hearts
upon gaining mundane possessions. Are they rendered desperate upon
experiencing afflictions? Do they become vain upon gaining worldly
possessions?

Do they invoke God or are they ensnared by mammon upon being afflicted
with vicissitudes? Do they consign themselves to oblivion or they notice
their frailties and remember God more than the past?

It is unfortunate that the majority of people are forgetful and do not
attend to such facts. Qur’anic Verses reiterate the truth many a time
that the Omniscient God entangles man with hardships and also bestows on
him peace and other Bounties so as to test him, make him to comprehend
better the true value of his existence, and make him acquainted with the
fact that everything springs from Him.

Vicissitudes basically pave the path for man’s primordial natural
disposition to flourish; it is in the same manner that blessings serve
as a prelude to gaining knowledge.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 50 - 51
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ قَالَهَا الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ فَمَا أَغْنَی عَنْهُمْ مَا
كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَصَابَهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا كَسَبُوا وَالَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْ
هَؤُلاءِ سَيُصِيبُهُمْ سَيِّئَاتُ مَا كَسَبُوا وَمَا هُمْ
بِمُعْجِزِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. Indeed, those before them said it [as well], yet that they had
earned [in the world] availed them not.***  
***51. Therefore, the evil [consequences] of that which they earned
overtook them and those [Meccan disbelievers] who did wrong shall soon
be overtaken by the evil [consequences] of what they had committed and
they shall never be able to render Us desperate [to escape from Us].***

History is the best testimony that upon Divine Wrath mundane possessions
may save man neither in this world nor in the Hereafter.

When God Almighty caused the earth to swallow Qarun (Korah) and his
swelling place, he had no group or party to render him assistance
against Allah, nor was he one of those who could save themselves[^25].

Verse 50 reads:

***“Those before them said it [as well, i.e., they also claimed that
their possessions were the fruits of their knowledge and competence],
yet that they had earned [in the world] availed them not.”***

Vain people like Qarun considered their possessions to be owing to their
own competence and had consigned to oblivion the fact that they were due
to Divine Bounties; however, history bears testimony to the fact that
when God caused the earth to swallow their possessions, there was no one
to render them assistance nor their possessions were of any avail to
them, as it is mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^26]:

***“Therefore, We caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling
place. Then he had no group or party to help him against Allah.”***

The same fate was in store for the peoples of ‘Ad, Thamud, Sheba, and
others.

Verse 51 says:

***“The evil [consequences] of that which they earned overtook them.”***

They were afflicted with Divine Chastisements, e.g. storm, flood,
earthquake, and outcries from the heaven (instantaneous death), and met
their dire end.

The blessed Verse further adds that it was not merely their fate, but
Meccan polytheists and wrong doers would soon be overtaken by the evil
consequences of their vicious deeds and would not be able to escape from
Divine Chastisement. Yet, the dire fate embraces all vain wrong doers in
all eras unaware of Divine Wrath.

Exegets have considered:

***“[they] shall soon be overtaken by the evil [consequences] of what
they had committed”***

to indicate affliction with mundane or otherworldly torment.

However, taking into account:

***“the evil [consequences] of that which they earned overtook them,”***

it sounds that the former is more appropriate herein.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 52
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلَمْ يَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ
وَيَقْدِرُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآياتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***52. Do they not know [yet] that Allah enlarges the provision for whom
He wills? Indeed, in this are signs [of Divine Omniscience and
Omnipotence] for those who believe.***

Man’s knowledge and endeavor are the requisites for gaining provision,
but they are not sufficient. He is not supposed to solely rely on his
knowledge and capabilities, since everything depends on another Power.

In reply to those who considered their possessions as the fruits of
their knowledge and capacities, the Holy Qur’an reminds man to take a
glance at the history of ancient peoples and notice that others uttered
such claims and experienced the afflictions and torments. It is a
historical reply.

Thus the blessed Verse in question produces an intellectual reply:

***“Do they not know that Allah enlarges the provision for whom He
wills?”***

There are many a worthy people overtaken by deprivation, privation,
seclusion, and isolation and there exist many an incompetent and weak
people enjoying all means of mundane welfare.

Had such means of worldly welfare the fruits of their endeavors and
capabilities, there would not have been such discomfort for the worthy
merits. It reveals that there is a Powerful Hand behind worldly affairs
that manages everything as per a well measured plan.

It is true that man is supposed to make his level best in life and
making effort serve as the key to many a problem, but it would be a
gross mistake to forget the Cause of all the causes and merely perceive
the causes and consider ourselves as the real author of all the causes.

One of secrets of the unfulfilled wishes of some competent and
knowledgeable people and the success and prosperity of some incompetent
ignorant people is to remind people that they should not lose the thread
in the world of causes nor are they supposed to rely on their own
capacities.

Thus the blessed Verse ends:

***“Indeed, in this are signs [of Divine Omniscience and Omnipotence]
for those who believe.”***

In this vein, the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (as) says:

*“I knew God through the abrogation of decisions, solution of problems,
and abrogation of wills.”*[^27]

These beacon man’s frailty and weakness so as he may not forget his
incompetence and be not ensnared by vanity.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 53
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَی أَنْفُسِهِمْ لا
تَقْنَطُوا مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ
جَمِيعاً إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***53. Say “O My servants who have transgressed against [and wronged]
yourselves! Despair not of the Mercy of Allah: verily, Allah forgives
all sins, since He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Gracious.”***

Pursuant to the recurrent warning to polytheists and wrong doers
mentioned in the preceding Verses, the blessed Verse in question
provides all sinners with the hope of turning to Allah Almighty, since
the main goal behind all them is to guide man toward Him rather than
hostility and vengeance.

Proclaiming His Boundless Mercy, Forgiving, and Love to all, He says:

***“Say unto them ‘O My servants who have transgressed against and
wronged yourselves! Lose not your hope of Divine Graciousness since God
Almighty forgives all sins.”***

He is Oft-Forgiving and Most Compassionate. Reflection on the meaning of
the Verse indicates that It is the most promising Verse addressed to all
sinners.

According to a tradition narrated from the Commander of the Faithful,
Imam ‘Ali (as), the extent of its implication is such that

*“No Verse may be found throughout the Holy Qur’an to be more inclusive
than this one.”*[^28]

The reason is crystal clear since:

1. The phrase:

***“O My servants!”***

is a beacon of Divine Favor.

2. The employment of the word:

***“transgression” (israf)***

in the senses of “wrong, sin, and crime” is another Divine Favor.

3. The phrase:

***“against yourselves” (‘ala anfusihim)***

designates that man is the source of all his sins. It also makes a
reference to Divine Love, since it may be likened to a father addressing
his child and saying unto them: “*Do not inflict so many wrongs on
yourself!*”

4. The negative imperative verbal form

***“Despair not!” (la taqnatu)***

is also worthy of note since

***“despair” (qunut)***

is originally employed in the sense of despair of good but connotes that
sinners are not supposed to despair of Divine Favor.

5. The phrase:

***“of Divine Mercy”***

following the clause:

***“Despair not”***

lays further emphasis on good and love.

6. The clause:

***“Verily, Allah forgives all sins”***

opened with the emphatic particle inna and taking into account the
plural definite noun al-dhunub (“the sins) which includes all sins, the
Promise reaches its zenith and the sea of Divine Mercy becomes full of
waves.

7. Hopefulness reaches its climax with the adverb of manner

***jami’an (“all”).***

8 and 9. The two promising Divine Beautiful Names:

***“the Oft-Forgiving (ghaffur)”***

and

***“the Most Gracious (rahim)”***

at the close of the Verse leave no room for the least despair and
hopelessness.

Taking the above into consideration, we notice that it is the most
inclusive Qur’anic Verse encompassing Divine Forgiveness of all sins as
a consequence of which it is considered as the most promising Qur’anic
Verses.

One may not expect otherwise from God Almighty Whose Ocean of Mercy is
Boundless. His Graciousness exceeds His Wrath and has created His
servants to bestow His Mercy upon them rather than subject them to His
Wrath and Torment. God Almighty is the Most Merciful, the Most
Compassionate, and the Most Loving.

Man may not expect otherwise.

Two questions have preoccupied exegets that their solutions lie in the
Verse in question and the following One. Firstly, does the Verse include
all sins, even polytheism and grave sins as well?

If so, what is the reason behind the exclusion of the sin of polytheism
among those to be forgiven by God Almighty according to which:

***“Verily, Allah forgives not that partners should associated with Him,
but He forgives except that to whom He wills”***[^29]***?***

The other question concerns whether the Divine Promise as to Forgiving
is conditional upon repentance and the like.

However, the two questions are interrelated and the response may be
found the following Verses, since the latter contain three illuminating
injunctions:

***“Return to your God,”***

***“Submit to His Will,”***

and

***“Follow the injunctions sent down for you by your Lord.”***

The three injunctions inform us that the gates of Divine Forgiving and
Mercy are open to all servants provided that following committing sins,
they perceive that they have sinned and change their course toward
Divine Threshold, submit to His Command, show their sincerity in their
repentance through doing righteous good deeds.

Thus, it becomes known that neither polytheism nor any other sin is
excluded and its conditionality upon Divine All-Embracing Mercy is
indubitable.

Regarding the aforementioned Verse[^30] as to the exclusion of
polytheists from Divine Mercy it is worthy of note that the exclusion is
applicable to those passing away as polytheists rather than those who
wake up and tread of the Path of Truth since almost all Muslims in the
first days of Islam used to be polytheists.

Taking into account the state of many a sinner who following committing
sins turn so grieved and regretful that they may never assume that there
might be a path of return for them and consider themselves to be too
impure to be absolved from their impurities, inquiring whether their
sins might be forgiven and if there might be a path of return toward God
Almighty, we may well comprehend the meaning of the Verse.

They are willing to repent in any way but consider their sins as
unforgivable, particularly when they repented many a time but broke
their repentance.

The Verse in question serves as a source of hope to them all. It is
reported that upon his conversion to the Islamic faith, Wahshi, the
notorious criminal in the history of Islam and the slayer of Hamza, the
Chief of the Martyrs, was afraid that his repentance may not be accepted
since his sin was too grave; however some exegets maintain that the
blessed Verse in question was sent down opening the gates of Divine
Mercy Wahshi and the like.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 54
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنِيبُوا إِلَی رَبِّكُمْ وَأَسْلِمُوا لَهُ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ
يَأْتِيَكُمُ الْعَذَابُ ثُمَّ لا تُنْصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “And turn in repentance and in obedience with true faith to your
Lord and submit to Him before the torment comes upon you then you will
not be helped.***

There is no salvation and attainment of Divine Help except through
return toward Divine Threshold; consequently, repentance is the
prerequisite for the bestowal of Divine Forgiving.

The blessed Verse shows the path toward the Boundless Ocean of Divine
Mercy for all sinners and criminals saying:

***“Turn in repentance… to your Lord”***

and change your course in life for the better.

***“Submit to Him and obey His Command before [Divine] torment comes
upon you then you will not be helped.”***

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 55
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّبِعُوا أَحْسَنَ مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ مِنْ
قَبْلِ أَنْ يَأْتِيَكُمُ الْعَذَابُ بَغْتَةً وَأَنْتُمْ لا تَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***55. “And follow the best of that which is sent down to you from your
Lord before the torment comes on you suddenly while you perceive
not!”***

The blessed Verse bids people to follow Qur’anic injunction since the
best path is toward God Almighty and It is the most comprehensive and
the most perfect of what is sent down unto man.

Following the two steps of repentance and submission to Divine Will, the
Verse treats of the third step which is that of action:

***“follow the best of that which is sent down to you from your Lord
before the torment comes on you suddenly while you perceive not!”***

Thus, there are three steps to take so as to attain to Divine Mercy:

1. Repentance, regret about committing sins, and turning to God
Almighty.

2. Faith and submission to His Command.

3. Doing righteous good deeds. After taking these three steps, one shall
certainly enter the boundless ocean of His Mercy despite the heavy
burden of man’s sins.

What is intended by:

***“follow the best of that which is sent down to you from your
Lord?”***

Exegets produce different possibilities the best of which sounds to be
the one as per which Divine Injunctions are of diverse types: some call
people to carrying out obligatory acts, some address recommended ones,
and some include permissible ones.

Taking the hierarchy of acts into account one may notice that the best
indicates selecting obligatory and recommended acts.

Some exegets take it as a reference to the Holy Qur’an among Divine
Books, taking into consideration Verse 23 of the same Chapter (39) as
per which the Holy Qur’an is the Best Statement (ahsan al-hadith):

***“Allah has sent down the Best Statement, a Book, its parts resembling
each other.”***

However, the two interpretations are not inconsistent with each other.

[^1]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 8, p.497.

[^2]: Ibn Hisham’s Sira [“Biography of the Prophet of Islam (S)”], vol.
4, pp. 305-306 (the account is summarized herein); see also Ibn Athir’s
Kamil, vol. 2, pp. 323-324.

[^3]: Majma’ al-Bayan, under the Verse in question.

[^4]: For further details, see Ihqaq al-Haqq, vol. 3, pp. 177 f.;
al-Muraja’at, p. 64.

[^5]: Khashshaf [Exegesis]; Majma’ al-Bayan; Abu al-Futuh Razi’s
Exegesis [Rawd al-Jinan wa Rawh al-Janan]; Fi Úilal al-Qur’an.

[^6]: In his Mufradat, Raghib says that naqma is employed in the sense
of “retribution, chastisement.” It is to be noted that hidaya literally
denotes “guidance with favor and precision, ibid, under h-d-y.

[^7]: 3:51

[^8]: 5:16

[^9]: 53:23

[^10]: 2:258

[^11]: 2:264

[^12]: 39:3

[^13]: 40:28

[^14]: 42:25

[^15]: 29:61, 63; 31:31; 43: 9, 87

[^16]: 39:3

[^17]: (2:257)

[^18]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 17, p. 286.

[^19]: 71:7

[^20]: Usul Kafi; Rawdat al-Kafi; apud Nur al-Thiqalayn [Exegesis], vol.
4, p. 490.

[^21]: 32:17

[^22]: Majma’ al-Bayan and Qurtubi (Exegeses), under the blessed Verse
in question.

[^23]: The verbal form khawwala is taken from takhwil (“grant a favor”).

[^24]: 28:78

[^25]: 28:81

[^26]: 28:81

[^27]: Nahj al-Balagha, aphorism no. 250.

[^28]: Majma’ al-Bayan; Tafsir Qurtubi; Tafsir Safi, under the blessed
Verse in question.

[^29]: 4:48

[^30]: 4:48


