Surah al-Zumar, Verses 56 - 75
==============================

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 56
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْ تَقُولَ نَفْسٌ يَا حَسْرَتَی عَلَی مَا فَرَّطْتُ فِي جَنْبِ
اللَّهِ وَإِنْ كُنْتُ لَمِنَ السَّاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. Lest a person should say “Alas, my grief that I was undutiful to
Allah and I was indeed among those who mocked [His Verses].”***

The Day of Resurrection is the Day of Regret. Underrating Divine
Injunctions, and worse than that, mocking them all spring from neglect.

Following the emphatic injunction as to repentance and compensation for
the past wrong deeds, the blessed Verse in question is saying that these
injunctions have been sent down lest on the Day of Resurrection one may
say:

*“Woe to me that I failed to act upon Divine Command and I mocked His
Verses and Messengers.”*

The word hasra is employed in the sense of sorrow and grief caused by
past regrettable acts. In his Mufradat, Raghib says that the word
derives from hasr indicating pull way or remove garment but it
figuratively connotes regret about and grieve for the past acts as if
the veils of ignorance have been removed.

When man is raised on the Day of Resurrection and perceives the
consequences of his transgressions of bounds, neglects, sins,
underrating serious affairs, will cry out “*Woe to me!*” A dire sense of
grief and regret wraps up his heart and expresses himself with such
interjections.

Exegets differ as to the meaning of

***janb Allah (“beside Allah”)***

and present many a suggestion.

The word is literally employed in the sense of side and it applies to
anything located at the side of something else, in the same manner that
yamin and yasar signify right and left sides of the body respectively,
but owing to generalization, they imply anything located at the left and
right sides.

The phrase:

***“beside Allah”***

also ad hoc designate all the affairs beside Him, e.g. His Command,
Obedience to Him, Closeness to Him, The Divine Books sent down by Him.

Thus, the sinful regret about and grieve for their undutifulness against
Allah and particularly lay emphasis on mocking Qur’anic Verses and
Divinely appointed Messengers, since their wrong acts mainly stem from
their neglect and derision which in turn spring from ignorance, vanity,
and bias.[^1]

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 57 - 58
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ تَقُولَ لَوْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ هَدَانِي لَكُنْتُ مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ تَقُولَ حِينَ تَرَی الْعَذَابَ لَوْ أَنَّ لِي كَرَّةً فَأَكُونَ
مِنَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. Or [lest] he should say [out of profound grief]: “If only Allah
has guided me, I should indeed have been among the righteous.”***  
***58. Or [lest] he should say when he sees the torment: “If only I had
another chance [to return to the world] then I should be among the good
doers.”***

On the Resurrection Day, sinners aim to acquit themselves of their sins.
On the Day of Resurrection the sinful wish that they could return to the
world in order to do good [to himself and others].

The blessed Verse in question says:

***“Lest that the sinful say: ‘Had God guided me, I would have been
among the righteous.’”***

Such words are apparently uttered upon reckoning, noticing that some
people proceed toward Paradise enjoying all Bounties for their righteous
good deeds. He also wishes that he could accompany them to Paradise.

Verse 60 is saying that upon experiencing Divine Chastisement, he wishes
that he could return to the world to become one of the righteous. Upon
treading the way to Hell, he notices the blazing fire and the
excruciating torment, he sighs wishing that he could be permitted to
return to the world and compensate for his sins through committing
righteous deeds and become one of the good doers.

Thus, each of the three words are uttered at certain times: noticing the
Resurrection he regrets his past deeds; perceiving the rewards of the
righteous, he wishes that the same were in store for him; experiencing
Divine Chastisement, he wishes that he could return to the world and
compensate for his past deeds.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 59
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلَی قَدْ جَاءَتْكَ آيَاتِي فَكَذَّبْتَ بِهَا وَاسْتَكْبَرْتَ
وَكُنْتَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***59. Yes! Indeed, there came unto you My Verses but you denied them
and were vain and were among disbelievers.***

The sinful express some words on the Day of Resurrection:

1. Confessing to neglect

2. Confessing to derision

3. Wishing for guidance

4. Wishing for returning to the world.

God Almighty accepts his confessions but concerning the third word, the
blessed Verse in question says that God Almighty provided you with
Guidance but he denied it.

An answer provided for the fourth word is to be found elsewhere:

***“Even if they are returned [to the world] they shall still be wrong
doers.”***

A reply is provided for the second word as per which Divine Verses came
unto him; however, he denied them and was vain and one of the
disbelievers. He is saying that had Divine Guidance came unto him, he
would have been one of the righteous.

What is Divine Guidance but some many Divine Books, God’s Messengers,
Divine Verses and Signs of Truth in horizons and souls? He saw and heard
them all but what was his reaction toward them but denial, vanity, and
disbelief?

Would it be possible that God Almighty chastises anyone without warning
them? Was he different from the guided in terms of Divine Guidance?
Therefore, he is to blame for his evil deeds. Vanity and denial of
Divine Verses and Signs are the main reasons that lead to disbelief and
faithlessness.

No answer is suggested for the first word, since it is an inevitable
reality – they have to regret and grieve for their past vicious deeds.
Regarding the third word, i.e., request for being returned to the world,
numerous answers are provided, e.g.:

***“if they were returned [to the world], they would certainly revert to
that which they were forbidden. And indeed they are
liars”***[^2]***.***[^3]

Furthermore, the reply suggested for the second word may make a
reference to the reply provided for this question as well – what is the
goal of returning to the world? Is it anything other than being warned
against vicious deeds?

It is worthy of note that God Almighty had already warned them and such
further warnings would be futile. Experiencing torment in the Hereafter
is their sudden awakening which will be rendered futile upon their
return to the world.

In the same vein, the Holy Qur’an makes mention of polytheists entangled
in the agitated sea invoking God with sincere devotion but upon stepping
on the shore they consign everything to oblivion:

***(“And when they embark on a ship, they invoke Allah, making their
faith pure for Him only: but when He brings them safely to land, behold,
they give a share of their worship to others,”***[^4]***).***

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 60
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ تَرَی الَّذِينَ كَذَبُوا عَلَی اللَّهِ
وُجُوهُهُمْ مُسْوَدَّةٌ أَلَيْسَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ مَثْویً
لِلْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***60. And on the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied
against Allah – their faces will be black. Is there not in Hell an abode
for the vain?***

Lying against Allah are of diverse kinds:

1. Associating other objects of worship with Him

2. Likening God Almighty to something

3. Regarding angels as God’s offspring

4. Attributing one’s vicious act to God Almighty

5. Pretending to be God or Divinely appointed Messenger

6. Making distortions and innovations in Divine Commands.

It is narrated in traditions that forging traditions and narrating them
from the Infallible Imams (as) are on a par with lying against God
Almighty, since the Infallible Imams narrate from the Noble Prophet (S)
and the Prophet (S) imparts Divine Word.[^5]

Pursuant to the words of the lying polytheists and the arrogant on the
Day of Resurrection regretting about their past vicious deeds and their
request as to being returned to the world to compensate for their past
deeds which is a futile and unacceptable request, the blessed Verses in
question treat of the same question saying:

***“And on the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied against
Allah – their faces will be black.”***

Although the meaning of

***“lied against Allah”***

is broad in its semantic range, but it is ad hoc applied to associating
partners with God and claiming that angels, Jesus Christ (as), and the
like are His offspring.

The word mustakbir indicates arrogant, but it is herein employed to
refer to those who waxed arrogance against Divinely appointed messengers
calling people to the Religion of Truth and their denial of them. The
liars’ blackened face on the Day of Resurrection reveals their disgrace
and humility.

It is well known that secrets will be manifest and man’s thought and
deeds will be embodied on the Day of Resurrection. Those who have black
hearts and their deeds were dark like their thought will be seen with
dark and blackened faces on that Day.

In other words, what is concealed shall be manifest and faces shall
reflect hearts as a consequence of which those with black hearts shall
appear with blackened faces and those whose hearts are illuminating
shall appear with bright faces on that Day.

It is mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^6]:

***“On the Day [of Resurrection] when some faces will become white and
some faces will become black; as for those whose faces will become black
[unto them will be said]: ‘Did you reject faith after accepting it? Then
taste the torment [in Hell] for rejecting faith.’ And for those whose
faces will become white, they will be in Allah’s Mercy, therein they
shall dwell forever.”***

According to a number of traditions narrated from the Shi’i Imams (as),
lying against Allah will lead to blackness of face on the Day of
Resurrection is broader in its semantic range as per which it includes
false claims to the leadership of the Muslim community (umma).

In the same vein, in his I’tiqadat, Shaykh Saduq narrates from Imam
Sadiq that upon being asked as to the interpretation of the blessed
Verse in question, he replied:

*“It refers to one who pretends to be the Imam.”*

He was asked regarding such person whether he happens to be a descendant
of ‘Ali and Fatima (as), to which he replied:

*“Even if he happens to be of such descent.”*[^7]

It clearly bears testimony to the fact that false claim to Divine
leadership and Imamate is an instance of lying against God. In the same
vein, those who lie against the Noble Prophet (S) and the Infallible
Imams will be on a par with those who lie against Allah.

Thus, it is reported in another tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“Whoever transmits a tradition from us, we will ask him some day
regarding its truth.*

*If he happens to be in the right and he is one of us, he has attributed
a true word to God Almighty and His Messenger (S), but if he lied
against us, he has lied against God and His Messenger (S), since when we
report a tradition, we do not say such and such a person reported thus,
but we say God or His Messenger (S) said it.*

*Then he recited the Verse:*

***‘And on the Day of Resurrection you will see those who lied against
Allah – their faces will be black.’”***[^8]

The tradition clearly bears testimony to the fact that the Shi’i Imams
(as) transmitted nothing of their own, but all the sound traditions
narrated on their authorities trace back to Prophetic traditions.

The fact in question is worthy of note for all Muslim scholars;
therefore those who do not acknowledge their Imamate are supposed to
acknowledge the veracity of their transmissions as Prophetic traditions.

In the same vein, another tradition is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) in
Kafi as per which:

*“The tradition narrated by each of the Imams is another tradition and
our tradition is that of the Messenger of God (S).”*[^9]

It is worthy of note that Qur’anic Verses clearly refer to the fact that
disbelief mainly stems from vanity, as the Qur’anic Verse[^10] says:

***“He refused and was arrogant and was one of the disbelievers.”***

Thus, the arrogant may not dwell nowhere but in Hell.

According to a Prophetic tradition:

***“There is an abode in Hell for the arrogant called Saqar which once
complained to God Almighty about the unbearable heat and requested Him
to take a breath. Upon obtaining the Permission, it took a breath and
set Hell ablaze.***[^11]

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 61
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُنَجِّي اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا بِمَفَازَتِهِمْ لا يَمَسُّهُمُ
السُّوءُ وَلا هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. And Allah will deliver those who are the righteous with their
success, untouched by evil in the least, nor shall they grieve.***

Fear of God leads to deliverance and the God fearing entertain no grief.

The blessed Verse in question treats of the righteous and their
happiness on the Day of Resurrection as opposed to the arrogant and the
vain, saying:

***“Allah will deliver those who are the righteous with their
success.”***

Their deliverance and success are explicated with two terse clauses:

***“[They are] untouched by evil in the least, nor shall they
grieve.”***

They live in a world devoid of anything but good, purity, and happiness.
The brief expression actually encompasses all Divine Bounties.

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 62 - 63
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ عَلَی كُلِّ شَيْءٍ وَكِيلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ مَقَالِيدُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِآياتِ
اللَّهِ أُولَئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. Allah is the Creator of all things and He is the Guardian,
Preserver, and Controller of all things.***  
***63. To Him belongs the keys of the heavens and the earth. And those
who disbelieve in Divine Signs and Verses, such are they who will be the
losers.***

The real monotheist believes in all dimensions of Divine Unity: Unity in
Creatorship, Unity in Lordship, and Unity in worship.

The following Verse says:

***“Do you order me to worship other than Allah?”***

In other words, all existent beings need Him in creation and survival.

***“Allah is the Creator of all things and He is the Guardian,
Preserver, and Controller of all things.”***

The first and the second clauses refer to Unity in Creatorship and Unity
in Lordship respectively.

It is noteworthy that even most of the polytheists admitted Unity of
Creatorship, as it is reflected in Verse 38 of the Chapter in question:

***“If you ask them [i.e., disbelievers]” ‘Who created the heavens and
the earth?’ Surely they will say: ‘Allah.’”***

However, they had gone astray concerning Unity of Lordship, since they
regarded idols as their guardians, preservers and disposers of their
affairs and sought refuge in them in hardships.

The Holy Qur’an actually makes a reference to such belief saying that
disposing the affairs of the world as well as its preservation and
protection are at the hand of its Creator, as a consequence of which,
people are supposed to seek refuge in Him at all times.

In his Lisan al-’Arab, Ibn Mansur makes mention of different senses for
the word wakil, e.g. guardian, preserver, and disposer of affairs. Thus,
it becomes evident that idols lead to neither gain, nor loss. They
neither solve problems, nor do they make problems. They are weak and
useless objects incapable of doing anything.

The clause:

***“Allah is the Creator of all things”***

is employed by some adherents of the school of predestination as an
argument for their false belief, saying that their acts are referred to
in the Verse in question, hence, Allah is the Creator of such acts, even
if people physically carry out such acts.

Their gross mistake stems from their inability to comprehend that Divine
Lordship as to man’s acts has nothing to do with his free will, since
Divine Will and human will are not parallel but rather interrelated
lengthwise; in other words, man’s acts are related to God and to
himself.

On the one hand, all things in the world of existence are encompassed by
Divine Omnipotence hence his acts are created by Him, since He provides
man with power, intellect, free will, and the required means to act.
Consequently, man’s acts may be ascribed to Him.

He wills that man enjoys free will to act. He provides man will the
means required for acting upon his will. Yet, man is free to choose his
acts, as a consequence of which such acts are ascribed to him and he is
responsible against them.

One who claims that man is the creator of his own acts and God has
nothing to do with them is a polytheist, since he believes in two
creators, the Great Creator and the small creator.

If one claims that God is the Creator of his acts and he has nothing to
do with it, he has gone astray since he has denied Divine Wisdom and
Justice.

Would it be possible that man be responsible for His Acts? If so,
responsibility, obligation, the Hereafter, reckoning, chastisement and
reward would be meaningless.

Therefore, the standard Muslim dogmas based on Qur’anic Verses
demonstrate that all human acts are ascribed both to Him and man and
such ascription is not inconsistent in the least, since the relation
between the two is not parallel but lengthwise.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 64 - 65
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَفَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ تَأْمُرُونِّي أَعْبُدُ أَيُّهَا الْجَاهِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ وَإِلَی الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ لَئِنْ
أَشْرَكْتَ لَيَحْبَطَنَّ عَمَلُكَ وَلَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***64. Say: “Do you order me to worship other than Allah? O you
fools!”***  
***65. And indeed it has been revealed to you as it was to those
[Messengers] before you: “If you join others in worship with Allah,
surely your deeds will be in vain and you will certainly be among the
losers.***

The Verses in question are mainly addressed to the Noble Prophet (S) but
all people are also involved in such affairs; yet, God Almighty
addresses the Prophet (S) owing to the significance of the issue
indicating that even if the Prophet (S) disbelieves for a single moment,
his deeds will be in vain and he will be among the losers.

Thus, Verse 65 draws a neat distinction between belief and disbelief,
saying:

***“indeed it has been revealed to you as it was to those [Messengers]
before you: ‘If you join others in worship with Allah, surely your deeds
will be in vain and you will certainly be among the losers.’”***

Therefore, disbelief leads to two consequences which may affect Divinely
appointed Messenger in case of their disbelief: vanity of deeds and
being a loser in one’s life. The former refers to futility of righteous
good deeds owing to disbelief since such acts will solely be
acknowledged if one believes in Divine Unity.

Disbelief is likened to a blazing fire burning the tree of human deeds,
a lightening setting ablaze all the crops of his life, a tempest
rendering human deeds futile, as mentioned elsewhere in the Holy
Qur’an[^12]:

***“The parable of those who disbelieved in their Lord is that their
works are as ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a stormy day;
they shall not be able to get aught of what they have earned. That is
the straying, far away.”***

According to a prophetic tradition:

*“God Almighty reckons the deeds of all servants unless they disbelieve;
surely they shall be sent to Fire without reckoning.”*[^13]

Disbelievers will be among losers since they lose their most valuable
possessions, i.e., intellect and life, in this spacious market of
mundane world and fail to purchase anything except for regret and grief.

A question arises here: Would it be possible that Divinely appointed
eminent prophets turn to disbelief as a consequence of which the Verse
in question treats them in such harsh tone?

The answer to this question is crystal clear: they shall never turn to
disbelief even if they enjoy the free will to do so and infallibility is
not on a par with the loss of free will.

It is to be noted that their excellence of knowledge and their immediate
and constant nexus with the Origin of Divine Revelation hinders them to
entertain disbelief for one single moment. Would it be imaginable that
an intelligent physician aware of the effects of a fatal poisonous
substance entertains the thought of its consumption?

The Verse aims to warn people of the great risk of entertaining
disbelief so as to inform them that God Almighty warns His Messengers
about disbelief. It reminds one of the Arabic proverb:

“*I mean you, but O neighbor! Listen to it!*”

According to a tradition narrated from Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Rida,
inquired by Ma’mun concerning the Verses in question, he said:

*“Such Verses refer to the Muslim community, even if the Messenger of
God (S) is addressed herein.”*[^14]

Surah al-Zumar - Verses 66 - 67
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِ اللَّهَ فَاعْبُدْ وَكُنْ مِنَ الشَّاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالْأَرْضُ جَمِيعاً قَبْضَتُهُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَالسَّمَاوَاتُ مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ
سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَی عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***66. Nay! But worship Allah alone and be among the grateful.***  
***67. They did not appreciate Allah as such as is due to Him, though on
the Day of Resurrection the whole of the earth shall be subject to His
Omnipotence and the heavens will be rolled up in His Hand. Glorified is
He and Exalted is He above all that they associate as partners with
Him.***

Monotheism is the best manner of deliverance from loss and harm;
likewise one may show his gratitude toward God Almighty is to worship
Him.

Thus the blessed Verse lays further emphasis:

***“Nay! But worship Allah alone and be among the grateful.”***

Precedence of Allah is for specification (hasr), i.e., you are solely
supposed to worship the Pure Essence of Allah. What follows is the
Divine Injunction to gratitude since showing gratitude for Divine
Bounties bestowed upon man may serve as a means of knowing God and
rejection of any kind of polytheism and disbelief.

Gratitude for Divine Bounties is in human primordial natural
disposition, but it is supposed to follow the provider of bounties.
Consequently, it leads to the acknowledgement of Divine Unity and thus
idols which provide man with no bounty are abandoned.

Verse 67 treats of another exposition for rejection of polytheism and
disbelief regarding it mainly to stem from not knowing God deservingly
as a consequence of which his Sacred Name was relegated to those of
idols:

***(“They did not appreciate Allah as such as is due to Him”).***

Polytheism and disbelief mainly spring from lack of appreciating God
Almighty as such.

One who knows that His Existence is Boundless, He is the Creator of all
creatures and they are at all times in need of His Source of Emanation
and Divine Bounty, He is the Dispenser of the world of existence and He
is the One Who solves all problems, He is the Provider of all existent
beings and intercession depends on His Permission and Command, may not
turn to another being.

It is worthy of note that duality is not applicable to God Almighty
since two boundless beings are not reasonably possible.

To express Divine Omnipotence and Glory, the Verse in question employs a
figurative expression saying:

***“on the Day of Resurrection the whole of the earth shall be subject
to His Omnipotence.”***

The word qabda is applied to what is grasped by hand and it is usually
used figuratively in the sense of absolute power and sway in the same
manner that it is said in daily speech that such and such city or such
and such property are in hand of so and so.

The word ***matwwiyat*** is taken from tayy which literally denotes “to
be enclosed” and at times it connotes “transience of life” or “passing
by something.”

The aforesaid expression is more clearly attested elsewhere in the Holy
Qur’an[^15]:

***“The Day when We shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up
for books.”***

It is to be noted that one who has rolled up a scroll holding it in his
hand wields perfect sway over it.

The choice of the word:

***yamin (“right hand”)***

is due to the fact that right hand is usually used by most of the people
for carrying out tasks of significance since they feel that it is
stronger than the left one.

In short, all these similes and expressions connote absolute sway of the
Creator over the world of existence in this world and the Hereafter so
that all men comprehend that in the Hereafter, the key to deliverance
and the solution of problems is in the Hand of God Almighty lest they
turn to idols and other objects of worship for intercession and any
other support.

Are not the earth and the heavens under His Sway? Why do they make
mention of the Hereafter? The reply to these questions is that on that
Day, Divine Omnipotence shall be more manifest than any other time as It
shall be evident to such extent that all men shall clearly perceive that
all things belong to Him and they are under His Sway.

Furthermore, on the Day of Resurrection, some men may turn to others
besides God Almighty for deliverance, in the same manner that Christians
raise the question of deliverance for worshipping Jesus Christ (as). It
is in this vein that the Verse treats of Divine Omnipotence on the Day
of Resurrection.

The above clearly bears testimony to the fact that all these expressions
are figurative and it is because of the brevity of words in our daily
life that we have to express such exalted meanings with such small
words.

Only very simple and narrow minded people may entertain Divine
anthropomorphism in their minds. Since words fail to convey Divine
Glory, one has to make use of such words in their figurative meanings
with their broader semantic range.

It is noteworthy that a clear but terse conclusion closes the Verse:

***“Glorified is He and Exalted is He above all that they associate as
partners with Him.”***

Had man not pass judgments with his limited thought concerning His
Glorified and Pure Essence, he would have never turned toward polytheism
and idolatry.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 68
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَصَعِقَ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَنْ فِي
الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا مَنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ ثُمَّ نُفِخَ فِيهِ أُخْرَی فَإِذَا
هُمْ قِيَامٌ يَنْظُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***68. And the Trumpet Shall be blown and all who are in the heavens and
all who are on the earth shall swoon away [and die], except him whom
Allah wills. Then it shall be blown a second time and they shall
suddenly rise up, looking [around].***

All men die upon the blowing of the Trumpet; thus, the exception
attested in the clause:

***“except him whom Allah wills”***

makes a reference to Divine Omnipotence. In other words, God Almighty
wields absolute sway over the world of existence and when all die, He
keeps alive those whom He wills. According to a number of traditions,
[Archangels] Jibra’il, Israfil, and Mika’il, and also martyrs are
mentioned among those who shall stay alive.[^16]

The preceding Verses treated of the Day of Resurrection and blessed
Verse in question pursues the same question and makes mention of many a
characteristic thereof.

It opens with the end of the world, saying:

***“And the Trumpet Shall be blown and all who are in the heavens and
all who are on the earth shall swoon away [and die], except him whom
Allah wills.”***

The Verse proceeds with saying:

***“Then it shall be blown a second time and they shall suddenly rise
up, looking [around].”***

The Verse clearly indicates that a sudden happening shall occur at the
end of the world and the beginning of Resurrection. All animate beings
immediately die at the end of the world and following an interlude, all
human beings shall be suddenly raised and await Reckoning upon
Resurrection.

The Holy Qur’an expresses these two incidents as:

***“blowing of the Trumpet”***

serving as an elegant metaphorical expression connoting sudden and
simultaneous incidents, since ***nafkh*** denotes ***“blowing”*** and
***sur*** is employed in the sense of trumpet or a hollow horn usually
used for setting caravan and or army to get underway or march or making
them stop.

It is worthy of note that the two differed in tunes. The expression also
connotes the ease of carrying out the task indicating that God Almighty
raises all with one single Command likened to blowing of the trumpet
used for getting the caravan underway.

It has been repeatedly mentioned above that our words are invented for
our limited daily life hence they fail to precisely convey the truths of
the metaphysical world upon the end of this world and the beginning of
the other world as a consequence of which we have to attend to the
existing evidence and use ordinary words in a broader semantic range.

It is worthy of note that diverse expressions are attested in the Holy
Qur’an as to the end of this world and the beginning of the world to
come.

In this vein, different Verses (more than ten Verses) treat of:

***“blowing of the Trumpet.”***

In one instance [^17] mention is made of nuqira fi al-naqur which bears
the sense of blowing the trumpet and the like:

***(“Then when the Trumpet is sounded. Verily, that Day shall be a Hard
Day”).***

The expression:

***qari’a (“rigorous striking”)***

is also attested in 101:1-3.

The same theme is also expressed by the word:

***sayha (“harsh shout”)***

as in 36:49:

***“They await only but a single shout which will seize them while they
are disputing,”***

which treats of the shout heard at the end of the world which takes men
unawares.

Verse 53 of Chapter 36 treats of the shout heard on the Day of
Resurrection upon hearing which all men shall raise and they shall be
brought before the Just Lord:

***“It will be but a single shout, so they shall all be brought up
before Us.”***

The aforesaid Verses indicate that a very harsh shout shall make all the
beings of the heavens and the earth die and it shall be the:

***“shout of death.”***

They shall all come back to life by a very harsh shout by the time of
Resurrection and it shall be the:

***“shout of life.”***

What is precisely the manner of the twain shouts? In what manner do they
impress the beings?

Nobody save God Almighty knows the answer to this question. Treating of
the Trumpet to be blown by Israfil at the end the world, a number of
traditions indicate that all the beings of the heavens die upon blowing
the Trumpet and God Almighty issues the Command of his death bidding him
to die and he shall die.[^18]

The majority of Qur’anic exegets interpret nafkh fi al-sur as

***“blowing the Trumpet,”***

as mentioned above. These are delicate expressions concerning the manner
of the end of the world and the beginning of Resurrection. The question
raised at the close of the Verse concerns the number of blowing the
Trumpet.

The majority of exegets maintain that it is blown twice and the blessed
Verse in question apparently makes a reference to the same.

Taking into account other Qur’anic instances regarding the same
indicates the same, such that the first blowing is termed:

***fright (“faza’”);***

***(“And the Day on which the Trumpet will be blown and all who are in
the heavens and all who are on the earth will be
terrified,”***[^19]***)***

and the second one:

***“death and life,”***

referred to in Qur’anic Verses some of which were mentioned above, the
former and the latter are termed:

***“swooning and dying” (sa’q)***

and

***“rising up” (qiyam).***

It is true that there shall not be more than the twain.

Another Qur’anic evidence may be produced for the matter at hand,
namely:

***“On the Day the earth and the mountains will shake violently.”***

The second earthquake shall occur raising servants as peers.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 69
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْرَقَتِ الْأَرْضُ بِنُورِ رَبِّهَا وَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ وَجِيءَ
بِالنَّبِيِّينَ وَالشُّهَدَاءِ وَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ وَهُمْ
لا يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***69. [On that Day] the earth will shine with the Light of its Lord and
the Book of deeds will be placed [forward] and the Prophets and the
witnesses will be brought forward and it will be judged between them
with truth and they will not be wronged.***

The phrase:

***“with the Light of its Lord” (bi-nur-i rabbih)***

denotes either the Light of Truth and Justice with which God Almighty
illuminates the earth on that Day or a Light other than the one shed by
sun and moon to be Divinely created on that Day.

The exegetic work Atyab al-Bayan reads:

*“Since the light of sun and moon is not apparent,*

***“the Light of its Lord”***

*indicates the Light shed by believers,”*

then this Verse in cited as evidence thereof:

***“On the Day you shall see the believing men and women, their light
illuminating before them and by their right hands”***[^20]***.***

The blessed Verse in question resumes the discussion concerning
Resurrection, saying:

***“[On that Day] the earth will shine with the Light of its Lord.”***

Different interpretations have been suggested as to the “shining” with
Divine Light, the most significant of which are the following:

1. Some exegets maintain that Divine Light indicates Truth and Justice
with which God Almighty illuminates the face of the earth.

In his Bihar al-Anwar ‘Allama Majlisi says:

*“That is, the earth shall be illuminated with Divine Justice on the Day
of Resurrection, since Justice is the Light of the earth.”*[^21]

Some other exegets maintain that the Prophetic tradition:

*“Wrong doing manifests itself as darkness and shadows on the Day of
Resurrection”*

substantiating the suggestion in question.[^22]

In his Kashshaf, Zamakhshari suggests the same meaning, saying:

*“On that Day, the earth shall be illuminated by the administration of
justice and fair arbitration of records of righteous and vicious
deeds.”*

2. Some other exegets hold that it is a reference to a Light other than
that of sun and moon which shall be created by God Almighty particularly
for that Day.

3. The eminent author of [the exegetic work] Tafsir al-Mizan [‘Allama
Tabataba’i] says:

*“Illumination of the earth by Divine Light is regarded as one of the
characteristics of the Day of Resurrection which is uncovering veils and
manifestation of the truth behind things and human deeds including good,
evil, obedience, disobedience, truth, and falsehood,”*

following which Verse 22 of Chapter 50 is quoted to substantiate the
suggested meaning:

***“You neglected it, then we unveiled the cover from you and your eyes
see it clearly today!”***

It is true that Divine Light on that Day encompasses all things, but the
emphasis laid on the earth refers to the fact that it makes a reference
to the state of people on earth on that Day.

It is to be noted that the aforementioned interpretations are not
inconsistent; however the first and the third interpretations sound more
appropriate.

The blessed Verse in question indubitably refers to Resurrection and
interpreting it in a number of traditions narrated from the Noble
Prophet’s (S) Household (as) [Ahl al-Bayt] to Imam Mahdi’s (as) Rise at
the end of the world is in fact a kind of comparison and likening,
emphasizing that upon his Rise, incidents resembling Resurrection shall
occur and he will administer justice as per the nature of the world as
the rightful Imam (as), the Successor to the Noble Prophet of Islam (S),
and the Vicegerent of God Almighty on the earth.

Mufaddal ibn ‘Umar narrates from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“Upon the Rise of our Riser, the earth shall be illuminated by Divine
Light and Lord’s servants shall not be in need of sun shine and darkness
shall wither away.”*

The second clause of the blessed Verse in question treats of the record
of deeds, saying that on that Day, the record of deeds shall be put
forward and man’s deeds shall be reckoned;

***(“And the Book [of deeds] shall be put forward”).***

Such records embrace all the significant and non-significant deeds and
according to the Holy Qur’an[^23]:

***“What sort of Book is this that leaves neither a small sin nor a
grave sin, but has recorded it with numbers!”***

The following clause of the blessed Verse in question treating of
witnesses further adds:

***“the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought forward.”***

Prophets shall be summoned to talk to sinners concerning the fulfillment
of their Prophetic Missions:

***(“We shall definitely inquire the Messengers,”***[^24]***).***

Witnesses shall be called to the Just Tribunal to bear witness. It is
true that God is Omniscient, but the testimony of witnesses shall be
required for laying emphasis on Divine Justice. Who are these witnesses?

Qur’anic exegets are not unanimous on the issue. Some regard the good,
the pure, and the just among communities who bear witness to Prophetic
Missions and some regard the deeds of the people contemporaneous with
Prophets.

The Infallible Imams (as) are regarded as the forerunners of the
witnesses.

Substantiating their arguments by the Qur’anic Verse:[^25]

***“And every person will come forth along with his companion to drive
him to Divine Tribunal and a witness accompanies him,”***

some other exegets interpret witnesses as angels bearing testimony to
man’s deeds. Yet, there are exegets who interpret the word alluding to
bodily members, space, and time of obedience and disobedience as
witnesses on the Day of Resurrection.

However, the word

***“witnesses”***

is apparently employed in its broad semantic range and each of the
exegets refer to one of the aspects thereof.

The fourth clause says:

***“It will be judged between them with truth.”***

The fifth clause further adds:

***“They will not be wronged.”***

It is evident that when God Almighty wields sway, the earth is
illuminated by the Light of His Justice, the record precisely reflecting
man’s deeds is put forward, and the Prophets and just witnesses make
their presence, the Judgment shall be based on Truth and Justice and
wrong doing may not find its way there.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 70
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوُفِّيَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا عَمِلَتْ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا
يَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***70. And each person shall be paid in full of what he did and He is
Best Aware of what they do.***

Divine Chastisement and Reward shall be paid in full.

The sixth clause that completes the foregoing discussion is to be found
in the blessed Verse in question:

***“Each person shall be paid in full of what he did.”***

It is neither the Chastisement nor the Reward of the deeds which shall
be given to man but the deeds themselves.

It shall be the best Chastisement and the best Reward that they shall be
paid in full and they shall accompany man at all times. Who is able to
administer justice so precisely but One Whose Knowledge encompasses
everything.

Thus, the seventh and the last clause says:

***“He is Best Aware of what they do.”***

There is even no need for witnesses, since His Omniscience far exceeds
all witnesses. Yet, Divine Favor and Justice require the presence of
witnesses. This is the Day of Resurrection for which we have to prepare
ourselves.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 71 - 72
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسِيقَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِلَی جَهَنَّمَ زُمَراً حَتَّى إِذَا
جَاءُوهَا فُتِحَتْ أَبْوَابُهَا وَقَالَ لَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ
يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِنْكُمْ يَتْلُونَ عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ رَبِّكُمْ
وَيُنْذِرُونَكُمْ لِقَاءَ يَوْمِكُمْ هَذَا قَالُوا بَلَی وَلَكِنْ
حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ الْعَذَابِ عَلَی الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قِيلَ ادْخُلُوا أَبْوَابَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا فَبِئْسَ مَثْوَی
الْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. And those who disbelieved will be driven to Hell in groups till
when they reach it the gates thereof will be opened and its keepers
shall say: “Did not the Messengers come unto you from yourselves
reciting to you the Verses of your Lord warning you of the Meeting of
this Day?” They will say: “Yes, [the Messengers came unto us and recited
Divine Verses unto us],” but the Command of Divine torment has been
justified against disbelievers.***  
***72. It will be said [unto them]: “Enter the gates of Hell to abide
therein and what an evil abode of the arrogant.”***

Driving sinners toward Hell is a humiliation different from other
Chastisements. The blessed Verses in question resume the discussions on
Resurrection providing details concerning what was already said
concisely in the foregoing Verses regarding the Rewards and
Chastisements of believers and unbelievers.

Verse 71 opens with the people of the Hell, saying:

***“Those who disbelieved will be driven to Hell in groups.”***

Who will drive them to Hell? The answer is that the angels responsible
for inflicting torments will drive them to the gates of Hell.

A similar expression is to be found elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an[^26]:

***“And every person will come forth along with his companion to drive
him to Divine Tribunal and a witness accompanies him.”***

The word:

***zumar (“small group”)***

indicates that they will be driven in small and scattered groups toward
Hell. The word siqa is taken from s-w-q (“to drive”).

The blessed Verse 71 further adds that they proceed toward Hell till
they reach it. Then, the gates of Hell will be opened and the guardians
of Hell will reproach them thus:

***“Did not the Messengers come unto you from yourselves reciting to you
the Verses of your Lord warning you of the Meeting of this Day?”***

The expression clearly reveals that prior to their arrival, the gates of
Hell are shut in the same manner that the gates of prisons are closed
but upon the arrival of new comers, they open to them all of a sudden
and the sudden opening of the gates inspires more fear and awe in their
hearts.

Prior to anything else, the people of Hell bombard them with reproaches
saying that all the means of guidance was prepared for you. Messengers
from among yourselves used to recite to you Divine Verses and constantly
warned you to follow the Straight Path.

What did happen that such misfortune befell you? Such words uttered by
guardians of Hell will be among the most excruciating pains by which
they will be welcomed upon their entering Hell.

Their reply is a painful brief sentence:

***“Yes, the Messengers came unto us and recited Divine Verses unto us
and warned us of our disbelief.”***

Consequently, the Command of Divine torment will be justified against
disbelievers.

Some Qur’anic exegets regard the phrase:

***“the Command of Divine torment” (kalimat al-’adhab)***

an allusion to Divine Word upon Adams Fall onto the earth or upon
Satan’s decision as to deceiving the Children of Adam, as reflected
elsewhere in the Qur’an[^27]:

***“But those who disbelieve and belie Our Ayat (“Signs, Verses”), they
are the dwellers of the Fire. They shall abide therein forever. When
Satan said unto God Almighty that he would deceive all but His sincerely
devout servants, He replied: “I will fill Hell with jinn and
mankind***[^28]***.”***

Thus, they confess that they disbelieved the Prophets and Divine Verses
and naturally a better fate may not be in store for them.

It is also possible that:

***“the Command of Divine torment has been justified against
disbelievers”***

indicates that at times, owing to committing many a sin and bearing
animosity, grudge, and prejudice against Truth, man’s heart is sealed
and he may not return in which case the Command of Divine torment will
be justified against him.

It is to be noted that such misfortune stems from man’s deeds and there
is no room for predestination and lack of human free will.

The brief dialogue at the gates of Hell comes to its end by saying unto
them:

***“Enter the gates of Hell to abide therein and what an evil abode of
the arrogant.”***

As mentioned above,

***“the gates of Hell”***

may refer to those set in conformity with human deeds and each and every
group will be driven to Hell as per their acts.

Likewise, the gates of Paradise conform to deeds.

The name of a gate of Paradise, “the gate of warriors” (bab
al-mujahidin) is mentioned by Imam ‘Ali (as):

*“Verily, jihad is one of the gates of Paradise.”*[^29]

It would be of interest to note that from amongst all human vices, the
angels of torment driving man to Hell lay emphasis on arrogance which
bears testimony to the fact that disbelief and sin mainly spring from
arrogance and disobedience against the Truth.

Arrogance casts thick veils over man’s eyes and deprives him of
perceiving the illuminating countenance.

Likewise, it is narrated from Imam Sadiq and Imam Baqir (as):

*“One who entertains the slightest degree of arrogance in his heart may
not enter Paradise.”*[^30]

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 73
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسِيقَ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا رَبَّهُمْ إِلَی الْجَنَّةِ زُمَراً حَتَّی
إِذَا جَاءُوهَا وَفُتِحَتْ أَبْوَابُهَا وَقَالَ لَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا
سَلامٌ عَلَيْكُمْ طِبْتُمْ فَادْخُلُوهَا خَالِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. And those who kept their duty to their Lord will be led to
Paradise in groups till when they reach it and its gates will be opened
and its keepers will say peace be upon you! You have done well, so enter
here to abide therein!***

Purity is the prerequisite to being admitted to Paradise which has come
into being owing to either someone’s primordial natural disposition or
repentance.

According to a narration narrated from Imam ‘Ali (as) in Kitab
al-Khisal,

*“Paradise has eight gates, each of which is for a certain group: one
for Prophets and sincerely devout believers, one for martyrs and good
doers, five for my adherents (shi’a), and one for Muslims who bear no
grudge against me.”*[^31]

The blessed Verse in question resumes the discussion on the hereafter.
The preceding Verses treated of the manner by which believers enter Hell
but the Verse in question expresses the way righteous believers enter
Paradise so that the comparison sheds further light on the issue.

The Verse opens with saying that those who feared God shall be taken to
Paradise in groups.

The expression:

***“will be led” (siqa),***

taken from s-w-q (“drive, lead”) in the clause:

***“Those who kept their duty to their Lord will be led to Paradise”***

arises a question attracting the attention of many an exeget, since the
expression is employed when something is carried out without enthusiasm
and inclination.

It is true about the people of Hell but why is it used for the people of
Paradise who enthusiastically proceed toward Paradise?

Some exegets suggest that the enthusiasm of meeting their Lords has
attracted their attention to such an extent that they do not heed
anything besides him, even Paradise. Some maintain that they are
alighted on mounts taking them to Paradise in no time.

All these suggestions are consistent and stand to reason, but it is
worthy of note that the best interpretation may be the fact that the
more the righteous are eager to enter Paradise, Paradise and angels of
Mercy are more eager to admit them to their everlasting abode.

Likewise, a host may at times be so eager to meet his guest that he will
take him faster than the guest proceeding toward him.

It is noteworthy that the word:

***zumar (“small group”)***

indicates that the people of Paradise proceed toward their everlasting
abode in different groups revealing the hierarchy of their spiritual
states.

Upon reaching Paradise, they notice that the gates have been already
opened to them.

Then the guardians and keepers of Paradise, the angels of Mercy say unto
them:

***“Peace be upon you! You have done will, so enter here to abide
therein!”***

It would be of interest to note that upon reaching Hell, the gates open
where as the gates had been already open for people of paradise.

Having already been open makes a reference to the respect paid to the
people of Paradise, like a host who has opened the gate of his house and
willingly awaiting to meet his guest. The angels of Divine Mercy act
accordingly.

The preceding Verse treated of the people of Hell who are reproached by
the angels of torment upon their arrival censuring them that despite the
availability of the means of guidance, such misfortune befell them.
However, the people of Paradise are welcomed by greetings and words
revealing respect and homage following which they will be invited to
enter their everlasting abode!

The verbal form:

***tibtum (“you have done well”)***

is taken from t-’-b (“be good, be pleased”), which following greetings
is used in the sense of “be pleased, be happy,” in other words, thus the
angels say unto them:

***“Enjoy these pure Bounties, O you who are pure of heart and
nature!”***

However, many an exeget consider the clause to be in the indicative mood
taking it to mean that the angels say unto them:

*“You have been purified of any impurity. Faith and righteous good deeds
have purified your hearts and souls. You are absolved of your sins.”*

Some of the exegets even cite a narration according to which there is a
tree at the gate of Paradise underneath which there is a fountain of
pure water from which believers drink and thus purify themselves
inwardly.

They wash themselves in another spring and thus cleanse themselves
outwardly.

Then the keepers of Paradise say unto them:

*“peace be upon you! You have done well, so enter here to abide
therein!”*[^32]

It is to be noted that

***“everlasting abode”***

is mentioned for peoples of Hell and Paradise so as the former know that
there is no deliverance and the latter may not entertain any concern
regarding the transience of Divine Bounties.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 74
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي صَدَقَنَا وَعْدَهُ وَأَوْرَثَنَا
الْأَرْضَ نَتَبَوَّأُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ حَيْثُ نَشَاءُ فَنِعْمَ أَجْرُ
الْعَامِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***74. And [the people of Paradise] will say: “Praise be to Allah Who
has fulfilled His Promise to us and has made us inherit the land. We can
dwell in Paradise where we will.” How excellent a reward for good
doers!***

It is the permanent disposition of the people of Paradise to say:

***“Praise be to Allah”***

following enjoyment of Divine Bounties.

The blessed Verse in question mentions four terse clauses revealing
their utmost satisfaction:

***“Praise be to Allah Who has fulfilled His Promise to us.”***

The Verse further adds:

***“[He] has made us inherit the land.”***

***“The land”***

ad hoc designates “the land of Paradise” and

***“inherit”***

indicates that so many bounties are bestowed upon them for little
efforts. It is common knowledge that inheritance refers to something
fallen into someone’s share without taking troubles. It may also allude
to the fact that everyone has a place in Paradise and a place in Hell.

When he turns into one of the people of hell for his vicious deeds, his
place in Paradise will be assigned to others, but if one becomes one of
the people of Paradise, his place in Hell will remain there for those
doomed to Hell.

It may also indicate that they may use it freely in the same manner that
one may make use of his inheritance as he wish.

The clause actually reveals the fulfillment of Divine Promise which is
also mentioned in 19:63,

***“Such is the Paradise which we shall give as an inheritance to those
of Our servants who have been God fearing.”***

The third clause thus indicates their free will in making use of their
Lord’s vast Paradise:

***“We can dwell in Paradise where we will.”***

Different Qur’anic Verses indicate that there are many a Garden in
Paradise and the expression

***“the everlasting Gardens of Paradise” (jannat ‘adn,***[^33]***)***

refers to the same. People of Paradise dwell in them according to their
spiritual states and stations. Thus they may freely select their abodes
in the vast Gardens of Paradise.

They never opt for stations more exalted than theirs nor do they request
the attainment to the same.

Finally, thus they say in the last clause:

***“How excellent a reward for good doers!”***

Good doers are those who act upon Divine Commands. It reveals that such
rewards are bestowed because of past righteous good deeds.

Such excellence stems from faith and good deeds. Who asks the last
clause, God Almighty or the people of Paradise?

Qur’anic exegets maintain that both are possible but it would be more
consistent with other clauses in the same Verse if we considered it as
an expression of surprise uttered by the people of Paradise.

Surah al-Zumar - Verse 75
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَی الْمَلائِكَةَ حَافِّينَ مِنْ حَوْلِ الْعَرْشِ يُسَبِّحُونَ
بِحَمْدِ رَبِّهِمْ وَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ وَقِيلَ الْحَمْدُ
لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. And you will see the angels surrounding the Throne, glorifying
their Lord with praises. And they will be judged with truth and it will
be said: “All the praises are to Allah, the Lord of the world.”***

The word:

***hafin (“those who surround”)***

derives from h-f-f (“surround”) and ‘arsh is the seat of Divine
Omnipotence and Will. Angels are prepared to act upon Divine Commands;

***(“surrounding the Throne”)***

glorifying their Lord at all times.

The closing Verse of the Chapter in question is an address to the Noble
Prophet (S), saying:

***“[On that Day,] you will see the angels surrounding Divine Throne
circumambulating it and glorifying their Lord with praises.”***

Making a reference to the angels surrounding Divine Throne either
indicates their preparation for acting upon Divine Commands or alludes
to the cherished spiritual state of those close to Divine Threshold on
that Day. The three interpretations are not inconsistent, but the first
interpretation sounds more appropriate.

Thus the blessed Verse in question proceeds:

***“They [i.e., Lord’s servants] will be judged with truth.”***

Since they serve as tokens of Divine Lordship and glorification of His
Pure Essence with all praises, thus the Verse closes:

***“All the praises are to Allah, the Lord of the world.”***

Who says it? People of Paradise? The righteous? All of them? Seemingly,
the last choice is more appropriate since the wise and those close to
Divine Threshold glorify God Almighty with praises and thanks.

*O Lord! Unanimously with all angels and your obedient servants, we all
thank you for the Bounties that You have bestowed upon us, particularly
studying the Verses of Your Holy Qur’an saying: “Praise be to Allah, the
Lord of the World.*

[^1]: As per many a tradition narrated from Shi’i Imams (as), “beside
Allah” is interpreted as “Shi’i Imams,” for instance a tradition
narrated from Imam Musa ibn Ja’far (as) mentioned in Usul Kafi
interprets “Alas, my grief that I was undutiful to Allah” as: “‘Beside
Allah’ indicates the Commander of the Faithful, Ali (as) and also his
eminent successors to the last of them [i.e., Imam Mahdi (as)].” It is
also reported from Imam Sadiq (as) in ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s exegetic work
that “We are ‘beside Allah.’” See Tafsir Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 4, p.
495.

[^2]: 6:28

[^3]: See also the Holy Qur’an, 23:100.

[^4]: 29:65

[^5]: Tafsir Burhan.

[^6]: 3:106-107

[^7]: Nur al-Thiqalayn [Exegesis], vol. 4, p.496.

[^8]: Majma’ al-Bayan, under the Verse in question.

[^9]: Kafi, vol. 1, the chapter on the transmission of books and
traditions (Bab Riwayat al-Kutub wa ‘l-Hadith), vol. 14.

[^10]: 2:34

[^11]: ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s Tafsir (“Exegesis”), apud Nur al-Thiqalayn,
vol. 4, p. 496; the same theme in Tafsir Safi, under the Verses in
question.

[^12]: 14:18

[^13]: Nur al-Thiqalayn, vol. 4, p. 497.

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: 21:104

[^16]: al-Mizan and Durr al-Manthur [exegetic works].

[^17]: 74:8

[^18]: ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s Tafsir [“Exegesis”], apud Nur al-Thiqalayn.

[^19]: 27:87

[^20]: 57:12

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 6, p. 321.

[^22]: Ruh al-Ma’ani and Ruh al-Bayan, under the Verses in question.

[^23]: 18:49

[^24]: 7:6

[^25]: 50:21

[^26]: 50:21

[^27]: 2:39

[^28]: 32:13

[^29]: Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 27.

[^30]: Kafi, vol. 2, Chapter on Arrogance (Bab al-Kibr), tradition 6.

[^31]: Tafsir al-Mizan.

[^32]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 8, p. 574.

[^33]: 9:72


