Surah al-Ghafir, Verses 23 - 45
===============================

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 23 - 25
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مُوسَی بِآياتِنَا وَسُلْطَانٍ مُبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَی فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَقَارُونَ فَقَالُوا سَاحِرٌ كَذَّابٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا جَاءَهُمْ بِالْحَقِّ مِنْ عِنْدِنَا قَالُوا اقْتُلُوا
أَبْنَاءَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ وَاسْتَحْيُوا نِسَاءَهُمْ وَمَا
كَيْدُ الْكَافِرِينَ إِلَّا فِي ضَلالٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***23. And verily We sent Moses with Our Ayat (Verses, Signs) and a
manifest authority.***  
***24. To Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah, but they called [him] a sorcerer, a
liar.***  
***25. Then when he brought them the Truth from Us, they said: “Slay the
sons of those who believe with him and let their women live” but [they
knew not that] the plots of disbelievers are nothing but in vain.***

Messengers had two weapons of significance against tyrants: the miracle
of Divine Ayat and manifest authority. Prophetic missions mainly aim at
struggling with the chiefs of corruption and disbelief who make use of
force, government, political power, stratagems, mischief, cultural
power, worldly possessions, and economic power.

Resuming the allusion to the dire fate of ancient peoples in the
preceding Verses, the verses in question alludes to the story of
Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah.

Verses 23 and 24 say:

***“We sent Moses with our Ayat and manifest authority to Pharaoh,
Haman, and Korah, but they said: ‘He is a lying sorcerer.’”***

Different interpretations have been produced by Qur’anic exegets as to
the difference between Ayat and manifest authority. Some maintain that
the former and the latter refer to manifest arguments and miracles
respectively.

Some maintain that the former indicates all of Moses’ miracles whereas
the latter designate his prominent miracles such as his walking stick
and illuminating hand which led to his manifest dominance over Pharaoh.
Thus, Ayat refers to his miracles and manifest authority designates his
solid and decisive arguments against the people of Pharaoh.

It is worthy of note that Moses possessed intellectual arguments and
also wrought miracles which demonstrated his nexus with the
supernatural; however, the stance of the people of Pharaoh was that they
accused him of being a liar and a sorcerer.

They made use of such accusations against Ayat and miracles and
disbelieved him against his logical arguments. It bears another
testimony to the acceptability of the two interpretations in question.
To refute the true arguments of men of truth, lords of disbelief have
always made use of such accusations. Even today we find many instances
of such false accusations.

It is noteworthy that three names have been mentioned in this Verse each
of whom symbolize something: Pharaoh as the symbol of rebellion and
tyrannical rule; Haman as the symbol of mischief and satanic stratagems;
Korah as the symbol of material possessions, rebellion, and exploitation
who left no stone unturned to preserve his wealth.

Thus Moses was divinely appointed to put an end to the oppression of
tyrannical rules, the mischief of treacherous politicians, and
transgressions of the arrogant rich and establish a society on the basis
of justice and on a politically, culturally, and economically firm
ground, but those whose illegitimate interests were in jeopardy rose
against him.

Verse 25 exposes some of their mischievous stratagems saying:

***“Then when he brought them the Truth from Us, they said: ‘Slay the
sons of those who believe with him and let their women live.’”***

The expression reveals that slaying males and keeping females alive was
not restricted to the time prior to Moses’ birth but it recurred
following his uprising and prophethood.

It is mentioned elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an that the Children of Israel
said unto Moses (as):

***“We had suffered troubles before you came to us.”***

The Children of Israel said it unto Moses following the conspiracies of
the people of Pharaoh aiming at slaying believers’ offspring.

It is worthy of note that satanic rulers recurrently hatch vicious plots
so as to destroy active forces and keep alive inactive ones for
exploitation.

It is not a source of wonder that such plots were hatched prior to
Moses’ (as) birth for the Children of Israel who were slaves of the
people of Pharaoh and it was regarded as an anti-revolutionary move
following Moses’ (as) uprising so as to severely suppress the forces of
the Children of Israel forever.

At the close of the blessed Verse in question it reads:

***“but [they knew not that] the plots of disbelievers are nothing but
in vain.”***

Their stratagems are like arrows shot in the shadows of ignorance and
error hitting rocks, since they are not convinced that they will pay for
the consequences of their vicious acts. It is Divine Will that the
forces of Truth vanquish those of falsehood.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 26
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ ذَرُونِي أَقْتُلْ مُوسَی وَلْيَدْعُ رَبَّهُ إِنِّي
أَخَافُ أَنْ يُبَدِّلَ دِينَكُمْ أَوْ أَنْ يُظْهِرَ فِي الْأَرْضِ
الْفَسَادَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. Pharaoh said: “Leave me to slay Moses and let him call his Lord
[so that He may save him]. I fear that he may change your religion or
that he may cause mischief to appear in the land.”***

It is the common practice of tyrannical rulers to slay the leaders of
the Path of Truth and it is the policy of the arrogant to deny, menace,
and humiliate.

The struggle between Moses (as) and his adherents on the one side and
Pharaoh and his followers on the other heightened and in order to impede
the revolutionary move of Moses (as), Pharaoh made up his mind to slay
him but it sounds as if his people and advisors declined.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Leave me to slay Moses and let him call his Lord [so that He may
save him].”***

The Verse reveals that the majority of his advisors or at least some of
them were against slaying Moses (as) and produced arguments to the
effect that taking his miraculous acts he might cast a curse and his God
might send down some torment.

Yet, the arrogant Pharaoh said:

*“I will slay him! Come what may!”*

However, the real motive of the adherents and advisors behind such
impediment is not precisely known.

There are different possibilities all of which may be true: firstly,
fear of Divine torment, secondly, fear of slaying Moses (as) and making
a hero and martyr out of him thereby casting him in a halo of sanctity.

Thus, it could increase the number of believers and adherents
particularly when it happened following Moses (as) demonstrating his
feats against sorcerers and his wonderful victory over them.

It is apparently so since Moses had demonstrated the twain great
miracles of his, namely the walking stick and the illuminating hand, in
his first meeting with Pharaoh as a consequence of which he had obtained
the appellation of sorcerer.

He had asked for Moses’ confrontation with his sorcerers and had set his
hope on their sorcery as a consequence of which he awaited the due date
of confrontation.

Taking the above points into consideration, there would remain no reason
for Pharaoh’s decision as to slaying Moses (as) at this time span nor
would he stand in awe as to mass conversion into Moses’ (as) religion.

In short, Pharaoh and his people maintained that Moses is a “menace” but
slaying him would turn him into an “uprising” which would lead to an
uncontrollable effervescent and massive movement.

There were a number of Pharaoh’s people who were displeased with him.
They wanted Moses (as) alive so that Pharaoh might be preoccupied with
him and leave them in peace to take advantage of the preoccupation and
be engaged in their misappropriations.

It is the usually practice that sovereigns’ retinues desire the crown’s
preoccupation with certain affairs so that they could fill up their own
coffers and at times provoked foreign enemies so as to stay secure from
the crown’s peace of mind.

To justify his decision as to slaying Moses (as), Pharaoh produces two
arguments, a religious and spiritual argument and a material and worldly
one, saying:

***“I fear that he may change your religion or that he may cause
mischief to appear in the land.”***

He says:

*“If I keep silence, the religion of Moses (as) will immediately
profoundly penetrate the hearts of the people of Egypt, as a consequence
of which the sacred religion of idolatry protecting your identity and
interests will be substituted with a monotheistic religion against you!*

*If I stay silent today and take measures against Moses (as) after a
while, he will gather many an adherent and bloody conflicts will follow
which will lead to bloodshed, corruption, and unrest throughout the
land. Thus, it sounds expedient that I slay him at the earliest
convenience.”*

It is noteworthy that from Pharaoh’s point of view, religion was nothing
more than being worshipped or idolatry which aimed at fooling the masses
and poisoning their minds and a means of sanctification of their
tyrannical and blood thirsty rule.

By corruption, he intended the creation of anti-arrogance revolution
aiming to liberate the masses in bondage and eradication of the traces
of idolatry and revival of monotheism. To justify their crimes and to
struggle against the men of God the corrupt and tyrants have made
efforts at all times to make use of unfounded pretexts the instances of
which may be seen in our time.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 27
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ مُوسَی إِنِّي عُذْتُ بِرَبِّي وَرَبِّكُمْ مِنْ كُلِّ
مُتَكَبِّرٍ لا يُؤْمِنُ بِيَوْمِ الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. Moses said: “Indeed I seek refuge in my Lord and Your Lord from
[the evil of] every arrogant who believes not in the Day of
Reckoning.”***

We are supposed to seek refuge in God Almighty against the menaces of
enemies since all our affairs are within His Sway and We are all subject
to His Lordship.

Moses (as) said:

***“I seek refuge in my Lord and Your Lord from [the evil of] every
arrogant who believes not in the Day of Reckoning.”***

Moses (as) uttered such words with decisiveness and assurance springing
from his firm faith and reliance on his Lord and demonstrated that he
entertained nor fear of such menace.

The words of Moses (as) explicitly reveal that people with arrogance and
lack of faith in the Day of Resurrection put others in jeopardy and one
is supposed to seek refuge in God Almighty against such people.

Arrogance leads man to bias as a consequence of which he may not
perceive nothing but his own self and thought, regard Divine Signs and
Miracles as sorcery, and consider benevolent reformers to be corrupt and
the admonitions of friends and adherents conservative and weak in
character.

Faithlessness in the Day of Reckoning leads man to a frame of mind into
which no specific plan may find its way.

Such a person may rise against Divine Omnipotence and resort to his
limited power and fight His Messengers, since there is neither reckoning
nor measure in his affairs. Now let us see to what Pharaoh’s threats
led. The following Verses unravels the issue and sheds light on the
manner of Moses’ (as) rescue from the tyrannical rule of that arrogant
and vain Pharaoh.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 28
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَجُلٌ مُؤْمِنٌ مِنْ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ يَكْتُمُ إِيمَانَهُ
أَتَقْتُلُونَ رَجُلاً أَنْ يَقُولَ رَبِّيَ اللَّهُ وَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ
بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ وَإِنْ يَكُ كَاذِباً فَعَلَيْهِ
كَذِبُهُ وَإِنْ يَكُ صَادِقاً يُصِبْكُمْ بَعْضُ الَّذِي يَعِدُكُمْ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لا يَهْدِي مَنْ هُوَ مُسْرِفٌ كَذَّابٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***28. And a believing man of Pharaoh family who concealed his faith
said: “Would you slay a man because he says: ‘My Lord is Allah and he
has come to you with clear signs from your Lord? And if he is a liar,
upon him will be [the sin of] his lie; but if he is telling the truth,
then some of that [misfortune] wherewith he threatens you will befall on
you.’” Indeed Allah guides not one who is a transgressor [of limits] a
liar!***

One of the manifestations of Divine Succor springing from seeking refuge
in Him is appearance of adherents among opponents. Bounties of
forbidding evil extend to such degree that a Messenger may be saved from
being slain and he may save a society from perdition.

This Verse treats of another episode in the history of Moses (as) and
Pharaoh which is solely attested in this Chapter. It is the story of the
believer of Pharaoh’s family, one of his kith and kin who acknowledged
Moses’ (as) Call to monotheism.

However, he did not reveal his faith since he considered it incumbent
upon himself to render Moses (as) well measured support. When he
observed that Pharaoh was severely wrathful and he could jeopardize the
life of the Messenger, he valiantly stepped forward and nullified the
conspiracy aiming at taking his life.

The blessed Verse reads:

***“A believing man of Pharaoh family who concealed his faith said:
‘Would you slay a man because he says: ‘My Lord is Allah and he has come
to you with clear signs from your Lord?’”***

Can you deny his miracles like those of his walking stick and his
illuminating hand? Did you not see him who defeated sorcerers such that
they surrendered to him? Did you not see that they were not moved by our
threats and spared their lives for the sake of their faith in Moses’
(as) Lord? Can such person be called a sorcerer?

Think twice before resorting to any hasty measure. Think about the
consequences of your acts otherwise you will regret your negligence.

Furthermore, there are two alternatives:

***“If he is a liar, upon him will be [the sin of] his lie; but if he is
telling the truth, then some of that [misfortune] wherewith he threatens
you will befall on you.”***

In other words he is saying that if Moses (as) happens to be a liar, he
will be disgraced and will be recompensed for his lies, but it is also
possible that he is an honest man appointed by Allah to impart Divine
Promises and Warnings; consequently, it would be unwise to slay him.

Then he adds:

***“Allah guides not one who is a transgressor [of limits] a liar!”***

If a believer proceeds toward transgression of bounds and telling lies,
he will certainly lose Divine Guidance and if you happen to act
likewise, he will be deprived of His Guidance.

It is worthy of note that the words of the believing man of Pharaoh
family aimed at impressing Pharaoh and his people from different angles:
firstly, Moses (as) does not deserve such severe reaction; secondly, one
should not forget that he produces his own arguments which sound
justified and confrontation with such a man will entail perils; thirdly,
there is no need for your measures, since if he happens to be a liar, he
will be chastised by God Almighty, but there exists the possibility that
he is right and we will be chastised by his Lord!

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 29
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا قَوْمِ لَكُمُ الْمُلْكُ الْيَوْمَ ظَاهِرِينَ فِي الْأَرْضِ فَمَنْ
يَنْصُرُنَا مِنْ بَأْسِ اللَّهِ إِنْ جَاءَنَا قَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ مَا
أُرِيكُمْ إِلَّا مَا أَرَی وَمَا أَهْدِيكُمْ إِلَّا سَبِيلَ الرَّشَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “O my people! Yours is the sovereignty today, you are dominant in
the land. But who will save us from the torment of Allah, should it
befall us?” Pharaoh said: “I show you only that which I see and I guide
you only to the path of guidance!”***

Believers are compassionate to people and prefer to struggle and make
his presence even in disbelievers’ rule rather than keep aloof and live
in solitude. The believing man of the family of Pharaoh was not
satisfied with uttering such words.

Addressing them benevolently in a friendly manner, he said:

***“O my people! Yours is the sovereignty today, you are dominant in the
vast land of Egypt. You are dominant and triumphant. Do not squander
such abundant bounties. Who is going to render us succor if Divine
torment befall us?”***

It is possible that he intended to say unto them:

*“Today you have absolute power and you may pass any judgment as to
Moses’ (as) fate, but do not be deceived by the power nor forget the
contingent consequences of your acts.”*

His words apparently impressed Pharaoh’s people and led to abatement of
their wrath against Moses (as). However, Pharaoh did not keep silent and
said abruptly:

*“The die is cast and I believe in the veracity of my decree. Moses (as)
should lose his life and there remains no other alternative. Know that:*

***‘I guide you only to the path of guidance!’”***

That is the case with all tyrants and wrong doers in the past and
present that they always imagine that their decisions are right and
allow no one to comment on their acts. They consider themselves to be
the masterminds and others are devoid of knowledge and intellect! This
is mere ignorance and inanity.

Let us say a few words concerning the believing man of the family of
Pharaoh. Qur’anic Verses solely reveal that he was a man of Pharaoh’s
people who had believed in Moses (as) but he concealed his faith and
loved Moses (as) at heart.

He regarded it incumbent upon himself to defend him. He was intelligent,
meticulous, tactful, and very sensible who helped Moses (as) at a
critical point and saved him from a perilous conspiracy aiming at his
murder. Islamic traditions and the words of Qur’anic exegets yield
further details regarding him among which mentioned is made of his
relation to Pharaoh.

It is noteworthy that one of the points treated in the blessed Verse is
discretionary concealment of one’s beliefs (taqiyya).

It is not equal to weakness, fear, and conservativeness, au contraire,
it is the concealment of one’s believes employed as an effective means
against the arrogant tyrants through which the secrets of enemies may be
exposed.

Concealment of beliefs, plans, and stratagems of struggles against
enemies may inflict severe blows on them. The believing man of the
family of Pharaoh employed the same means so as to render service to the
religion of Moses (as) and save his life at a critical point.

What is better than having a believing supporter to defend one at the
enemy’s administration through whom one may penetrate into the depth of
enemy’s seat of power and obtain intelligence regarding everything,
inform one’s supporters, impress tyrants’ minds, and alter their plans
and stratagems?

According to a tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as):

*“Discretionary concealment of beliefs is my religion and that of my
forefathers. One who lacks it does not believe in religion. It is Divine
Shield on the earth, since had the believing man of the family of
Pharaoh revealed is faith, he would have lost his life.”*[^1]

It may be particularly employed when believers constitute a minority
under the rule of a merciless and insensible majority. Thus, it may
impede ungrounded sparing of active forces rather it may concentrate and
mobilize them for final uprising.

The Noble Prophet of Islam (as) concealed his Call in the first years of
his Prophethood and make use of the same method; however, following an
increase in the number of his adherents and followers and the
solidification of the original nucleus, he declared his Call in public.

It would be of interest to note the following Prophetic tradition:

*“The first individuals who believed in the Call [of the exalted
Prophet]: Habib the carpenter, the believer among the people of Yasin,
the one who asked the people [of Antioch] to follow the Messengers of
God who are guided themselves and ask you for no remuneration; Ezekiel
(Hizqiyal), the believer of the family of Pharaoh; and ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (as) who is superior to all in rank.”*[^2]

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 30 - 31
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِي آمَنَ يَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ مِثْلَ
يَوْمِ الْأَحْزَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِثْلَ دَأْبِ قَوْمِ نُوحٍ وَعَادٍ وَثَمُودَ وَالَّذِينَ مِنْ
بَعْدِهِمْ وَمَا اللَّهُ يُرِيدُ ظُلْماً لِلْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***30. And he who believed said: “O my people! Indeed I fear for you a
fate like that day [of destruction] of the [former] Confederates!***  
***31. Like the fate of the people of Noah and ‘Ad, and Thamud
[inflicted with tempest, poisonous icy gale, and lightning,
respectively] and those who came after them. And Allah wills no
injustice for [his] servants.***

Do not desist promulgation of faith and Divine Guidance for the sake of
opponents’ words. Solitude does not lie in commanding good and
forbidding evil.

Egyptians at the time were relatively civilized and literate and knew
about historians’ accounts of ancient peoples, like those of Noah, ‘Ad,
and Thamud whose lands did not lie too remote from theirs and they were
more or less aware of their dire fates.

The blessed Verses in question indicate that the believing man of the
family of Pharaoh, after raising objection as to the conspiracy against
Moses’ (as) life faced Pharaoh’s severe resistance who confirmed his
command as to taking the life of Moses (as); however, he did not desist
from making efforts as he deemed it fit and appropriate to do so and
thought of reminding the rebellious people of the history of ancient
peoples and warn them against being inflicted with the same afflictions
so that they may wake up and revise their decision.

Thus he opened his admonition:

***“O my people! Indeed I fear for you a fate like that day [of
destruction] of the [former] Confederates!”***

Then he added:

***“Like the fate of the people of Noah and ‘Ad, and Thamud [inflicted
with tempest, poisonous icy gale, and lightning, respectively] and those
who came after them. And Allah wills no injustice for [his]
servants.”***

He made efforts to convince them, saying:

*“these people were entangled with polytheism, disbelief, and rebellion
and we are apprised of their dire fates. Some of them met their end by a
devastating tempest, some by a horrible gale, some by lightning, and
some by annihilating earthquakes!*

*Do you not think that you may be afflicted by such terrible disasters
as a recompense of your persistence in disbelief and rebellion?
Therefore, allow me to say unto you that I am afraid of such dire fate
in store for you.*

*Could you produce some argument substantiating that you are different
from them and you will not be afflicted with such Divine torments? What
had they done that they were entangled with such torments? They solely
resisted the Calls of Prophets and at times murdered or denied them. You
are supposed to know that whatever befalls on you will be the
consequences of your evil acts since:*

***‘Allah wills no injustice for [his] servants.’”***

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 32 - 33
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا قَوْمِ إِنِّي أَخَافُ عَلَيْكُمْ يَوْمَ التَّنَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تُوَلُّونَ مُدْبِرِينَ مَا لَكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ مِنْ عَاصِمٍ
وَمَنْ يُضْلِلِ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “And, O my people! Indeed I fear for you the Day when there will
be mutual calling.”***  
***33. A Day when you will turn your backs and flee having no protection
from Allah [’ torment]. And whomsoever Allah sends astray [for his evil
deeds and abandons him], for him there is no guide.***

In promulgation of faith we are not supposed to expect achievement of
favorable consequences at imparting the first reminder, but reiteration
is a part and parcel of the task. One should also attend to emotions and
feelings in this vein. We are supposed to remind people of Divine Wrath
in this world and on the Day of Resurrection.

According to Verse 32, the believing man of the family of Pharaoh said:

***“O my people! Indeed I fear for you the Day when there will be mutual
calling,”***

when people call one another for help but they hear no answer. The word
***al-tanad***, originally al-tanadi whose final /i/ is omitted and the
final /i/ indicates the ellipsis derives from n-d-’ (“call”).

Most of Qur’anic exegets maintain that:

***“the Day of mutual calling”***

is one of the names of the Day of Resurrection. Different exegets attend
to very similar aspects of the appellation in question.

According to an exeget, mutual calling refers to calling the people of
Paradise by the people of Hell as it is attested elsewhere in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“And the dwellers of Hell call to the dwellers of Paradise: ‘Pour on
us some water or anything that Allah has provided you with.’ They will
say: ‘Both Allah has forbidden to disbelievers’”***[^3]***.***

They may as well call others seeking refuge in one another and the
Callers of Resurrection call unto them:

***“No doubt! The curse of Allah is on wrong doers”***[^4]***.***

When a believer sees the record of his deeds, he cries excitedly:

***“Here, this is the record of my deeds. Come hither. O people! Read
it!”***[^5]

A disbeliever at that time will fearfully cry out:

***“I wish that I had not been given the record of my
deeds”***[^6]***.***

It is worthy of note that a broader semantic range may be assumed for
the Verse in question such that

***“the Day of mutual calling”***

may comprehend this world as well, since it merely indicates calling one
another and those who are at the end of their tether call one another
but their calling is of no avail.

We find so many instances of mutual calling when Divine torments are
sent down, when societies come to dead ends for their own sins and
faults, when crises and terrible incidents adversely affect everyone,
they flee seeking some refuge but there is not one to be found; all cry
out for succor!

Verse 33 provides an interpretation for the Day of mutual calling:

***“A Day when you will turn your backs and flee having no protection
from Allah [’ torment].”***

One whom God Almighty sends astray [for his evil deeds] may not find any
guide. Such people lose the Path of Guidance and sink in the dire of
ignorance and error and will lose the Path of Paradise and Divine
Bounties.

The aforesaid expression may allude to Pharaoh’s words:

***“I show you only that which I see and I guide you only to the path of
guidance!”***

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 34
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ يُوسُفُ مِنْ قَبْلُ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَمَا زِلْتُمْ
فِي شَكٍّ مِمَّا جَاءَكُمْ بِهِ حَتَّی إِذَا هَلَكَ قُلْتُمْ لَنْ
يَبْعَثَ اللَّهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ رَسُولاً كَذَلِكَ يُضِلُّ اللَّهُ مَنْ
هُوَ مُسْرِفٌ مُرْتَابٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. And verily Joseph did come to you in times gone by with clear
signs, but you ceased not to doubt in what he did bring to you: till
when he died you said: “No Messenger will Allah send after him.” Thus,
Allah leaves astray him who is a transgressor [of limits] and one who
doubts [Allah’s Warning and His Oneness].***

The conducts of the good affects the obduracy of their generation. The
believing man of the family of Pharaoh said:

***“If you do not believe in Moses (as) today, it is no wonder, since
you did not believe in Joseph (as) either.”***

In this blessed Verse, he further proceeds with his admonition.

A brief survey of the preceding Verses and the One in question reveals
that to impress the impenetrable heart of Pharaoh and his people, the
believing man from his family made efforts to cleanse their arrogance
and disbelief by presenting his words in five forms and stages.

Firstly, he opened his remarks with precaution calling that rebellious
and disbelieving people to abstain from contingent loss saying that if
Moses (as) were lying, he would carry the burden of his sins but if he
tells the truth, we will be afflicted with Divine torment, so behave
cautiously and be afraid of the dire consequences of your deeds.

Secondly, he asked them to glance at the accounts of ancient peoples and
warned them against entanglement with such dire fate.

Thirdly, mention is made of an account of other peoples who were not too
remote from them and they were still aware of their history since the
nexus between them and those people were still intact. He raises the
question of Joseph’s (as) Prophethood who was Moses’ (as) forefather. He
also mentions Joseph’s (as) people confronting with his Call.

***“And verily Joseph did come to you in times gone by with clear signs,
but you ceased not to doubt in what he did bring to you.”***

They declined his Call for the sake of their arrogance, obduracy, and
incessant suspicion rather than because of intricacies in his Call.

To dispose themselves of any obligation and in order to persist in their
arrogance and following their concupiscence, they said upon Joseph’s
(as) demise that God would never appoint another Messenger.

On the one side, they transgressed Divine bounds and on the other they
entertained doubts as to everything; as a consequence of which God
deprived them of His Bounties and left them in the mire of error and
they could never expect any fate better than that.

The believing man of the family of Pharaoh further added:

*“If you show the same reaction against Moses’ (as) Call without any
reflection or investigation, he may be a divinely appointed Messenger
but you may deprive your sealed hearts of Divine Guidance.”*

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 35
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُجَادِلُونَ فِي آيَاتِ اللَّهِ بِغَيْرِ سُلْطَانٍ أَتَاهُمْ
كَبُرَ مَقْتاً عِنْدَ اللَّهِ وَعِنْدَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا كَذَلِكَ
يَطْبَعُ اللَّهُ عَلَی كُلِّ قَلْبِ مُتَكَبِّرٍ جَبَّارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***35. Those who dispute about the Ayat (Verses, Signs) of Allah,
without any authority that has come to them, it would lead to a fearsome
Wrath to those who believe. Thus does Allah seal up the heart of every
arrogant, tyrant.***

The word ***sultan*** indicates “authority, argument” and ***maqt***
designates “severe wrath.”

The blessed Verse in question provides further exposition for those
according to which God Almighty seals hearts. It is herein said that God
Almighty seals up the heart of arrogant tyrants.

Treating of

musrif-un murtab-un (“transgressor, doubter”) the Verse explains that
they are those who

***“dispute about the Ayat of Allah without any authority that has come
to them.”***

In other words, they take a stance against Divine Signs and Verses
without producing an intellectual or narrational argument to
substantiate their groundless disputations which spring from baseless
assumptions, temptations, and pretexts.

Such baseless disputations against the Truth lead to Divine Wrath and
detestation of believers, since groundless disputations and taking
insensible stances against Divine Signs and Verses lead to the error of
disputants and others; it extinguishes the light of truth and reinforces
the pillars of the rule of falsehood.

Their failure to submit to Truth is mentioned at the close of the Verse,
saying that thus God Almighty seals the hearts of the wrong doing
arrogant to the extent that their hearts are sealed up that neither
their foul contents may exude nor may the right and invigorating
contents be absorbed by them.

God deprives the arrogant tyrants who rise against the Truth failing to
acknowledge truths of the spirit of truth seeking such that truth tastes
bitter and falsehood tastes sweet to them.

The words of the believing man of the family of Pharaoh were quite
effective and Pharaoh changed his mind as to slaying Moses (as) or at
least postponed the execution of his decision, such that Moses (as) was
saved from the perils and it was the great mission fulfilled by that
intelligent and valiant man at that critical point and as will be
mentioned below, he lost his life for it.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 36 - 37
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ فِرْعَوْنُ يَا هَامَانُ ابْنِ لِي صَرْحاً لَعَلِّي أَبْلُغُ
الْأَسْبَابَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْبَابَ السَّمَاوَاتِ فَأَطَّلِعَ إِلَی إِلَهِ مُوسَی وَإِنِّي
لَأَظُنُّهُ كَاذِباً وَكَذَلِكَ زُيِّنَ لِفِرْعَوْنَ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ
وَصُدَّ عَنِ السَّبِيلِ وَمَا كَيْدُ فِرْعَوْنَ إِلَّا فِي تَبَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. And Pharaoh said: “O Haman! Build a tower for me so that I may
arrive at the ways,***  
***37. “The ways of [ascending] the heavens and I may look upon the God
of Moses: Indeed, I regard him a liar.” Thus it was made fair, in
Pharaoh’s eyes, the evil of his deeds and he was impeded from [treading]
the [Straight] Path; and the plot of Pharaoh led to nothing but loss and
perdition.***

The word ***sarh*** designates “lofty edifice” visible from afar and
tasrih indicates “declaration, clear statement.” The word ***tabab*** is
used in the sense of “continuity in incurring loss.” Materialists regard
everything in terms of materiality.

Pharaoh imagined that God was in the heavens and the way to knowing Him
was only through the senses, like vision:

***(“and I may look upon the God of Moses”).***

Though Pharaoh was impressed by the words of the believing man of his
family to avoid slaying Moses (as), but he was still vain and arrogant
and he failed to make him submit to Truth, since the arrogant man did
not deserve such submission; as a consequence of which he proceeded with
his mischievous measures and ordered that a lofty tower be built for
ascending to the heavens and finding intelligence concerning Moses’ (as)
God, as it is reflected in the blessed Verse,

***“Pharaoh said: ‘O Haman! Build a tower for me so that I may arrive at
the ways.”***

Was Pharaoh so ignorant that he thought Moses’ (as) God was in the
heavens and he could ascend to the heavens through the construction of a
lofty edifice whose height was nothing compared to the mountains?

He apparently took such measure to achieve a number of goals. Firstly,
he intended to preoccupy people with something other than Moses’ (as)
Prophethood and the uprising of the Children of Israel.

Construction of such lofty edifice which according to a number of
Qur’anic exegets was supposed to employ fifty thousand architects,
masons, and construction workers on a vast site could overshadow other
issues and the loftier the tower, the more attention it could attract.

Then people would talk about it and defeating sorcerers by Moses (as)
could temporarily slip into oblivion. Secondly, he aspired to bear
financial assistance to laborers and provide them with at least a
temporary employment for the unemployed so that they may consign to
oblivion his wrong doings and people become more economically dependent
on his treasury.

Thirdly, following the completion of construction, he planned to ascend
it and take a glance at the sky, probably shoot an arrow, return to
people and deceive them by saying that Moses’ (as) claims were baseless,
proceed with your affairs and rest assured! It is worthy of note that he
knew that his lofty edifice could not be taller than mountains and there
would be no difference in looking at the sky from the top of the edifice
or mountains or from the plains.

It is also noteworthy that through ordering the construction of such
lofty edifice, he took a step backwards by saying that he intended to
investigate about God of Moses (as).

By saying:

***“Indeed I regard him a liar!”***

he descended from certitude to doubt.

The sentence

***“Thus it was made fair, in Pharaoh’s eyes, the evil of his deeds and
he was impeded from [treading] the [Straight] Path; and the plot of
Pharaoh led to nothing but loss and perdition”***

reveals that the main reason lying behind Pharaoh’s error was the
embellishment of his evil deeds in his eyes which stemmed from his
arrogance and vanity. The consequence of his vanity and arrogance was
that he went astray from the Path of Truth.

In the third stage, the total defeat of his plans is declared. Three
brief but terse clauses suffice to express the truth. Certainly, such
political stratagems may impress people in the short run; however, in
the long run, total defeat is the consequence of such stratagems.

According to a number of traditions, Haman continued the construction of
Pharaoh’s tower such that strong winds impeded the process.

He came to Pharaoh and said unto him:

*“We cannot construct it loftier than this.”*

A strong wind blew before long and the edifice collapsed.[^7]

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 38 - 39
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِي آمَنَ يَا قَوْمِ اتَّبِعُونِ أَهْدِكُمْ سَبِيلَ
الرَّشَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا قَوْمِ إِنَّمَا هَذِهِ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا مَتَاعٌ وَإِنَّ
الْآخِرَةَ هِيَ دَارُ الْقَرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***38. And the man [from the family of Pharaoh] who believed said: “O my
people! Follow me, I will guide you to the Path of Guidance.***  
***39. “O my people! Indeed this life of the world is nothing but an
[insignificant] merchandise, and verily the Hereafter is the permanent
abode.”***

One is supposed at times to disregard discretionary concealment of one’s
beliefs and express them and call people to tread the Straight Path
single handedly.

And the man [from the family of Pharaoh] who believed said:

***“O my people! Follow me; I will guide you to the Path of
Guidance”.***

It was mentioned in the preceding Verses that Pharaoh said:

***“What I say leads to the Path of Guidance.”***

However, the believing man from the family of Pharaoh refuted his words
and convinced people not to be deceived by his temptations since his
plans would result in defeat and misfortune. He suggests them to follow
the Path of fearing and worshipping God Almighty.

Verse 39 reads:

***“O my people! Indeed this life of the world is nothing but
[insignificant] merchandise, and verily the Hereafter is the permanent
abode.”***

Put the case that we become victorious, turning away from the Truth, and
resorting to wrong doing and bloodshed. How long will we stay in this
transient world? Death takes all into its sickle and sends everyone from
lofty palaces to dust. Our everlasting abode is somewhere else.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 40
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ سَيِّئَةً فَلا يُجْزَی إِلَّا مِثْلَهَا وَمَنْ عَمِلَ
صَالِحاً مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَی وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ فَأُولَئِكَ
يَدْخُلُونَ الْجَنَّةَ يُرْزَقُونَ فِيهَا بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***40. “Whosoever does an evil deed will not be requited except the like
thereof and whosoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female, and
is a true believer, will enter Paradise, where they will be provided
therein without limit.***

Faith and deeds are jointly effective and one of them may not lead to
deliverance.

The question is not merely the transience of this world and the
everlastingness of the world to come, but the significant question is
reckoning deeds, since:

***“Whosoever does an evil deed will not be requited except the like
thereof but whosoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female and
is a true believer, will enter Paradise and will be provided therein
without limit.”***

Secondly, in his well measured words, he refers to Divine Justice on the
one hand through which sinners will be recompensed the like of their
sins and on the other hand, he makes a reference to Boundless Divine
Bounties to be bestowed upon believers without limit.

Such Bounties are without human imagination. Thirdly, the requisite of
the accompaniment of faith and righteous deed is mention. Fourthly,
mention is made of the equality of females and males before God Almighty
and human values.

It is noteworthy that he tersely expresses the fact that despite the
insignificance and transience of the merchandise of this world, it may
lead to gaining boundless rewards. Is there any transaction more
profitable than this?

The phrase:

***“the like thereof” (mithlaha)***

indicates that the recompenses in the Hereafter closely resemble the
deeds committed in this world.

The phrase:

***“without limits”***

may demonstrate that reckoning the Bounties if for those who enjoy a few
of them and fear that failing to keep a record of the same would entail
shortage, but the Lord requires no reckoning since His Bounties are
limitless and bestowing bounties may not decrease them.

A question is raised here as to the consistency of the Verse in question
with:

***“Whoever brings a good deed shall have ten times the like thereof to
his credit”***[^8]***.***

In providing a reply to the question, it is worthy of note to keep in
mind that

***“ten times”***

is the least Divine Reward and in case of expending in the Cause of
Allah, it will be increased to seven hundred times and more and finally
it will be increased to limitless reckoning whose extend is solely known
by God Almighty.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verses 41 - 42
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَا قَوْمِ مَا لِي أَدْعُوكُمْ إِلَی النَّجَاةِ وَتَدْعُونَنِي إِلَی
النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَدْعُونَنِي لِأَكْفُرَ بِاللَّهِ وَأُشْرِكَ بِهِ مَا لَيْسَ لِي بِهِ
عِلْمٌ وَأَنَا أَدْعُوكُمْ إِلَی الْعَزِيزِ الْغَفَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***41. [The believing man of the family of Pharaoh said:] “And O my
people! How is it that I call you to salvation while you call me to
Hellfire!***  
***42. “You invite me to disbelieve in Allah and to associate partners
in worship with Him of which I have no knowledge [whereas] I invite you
to the Omnipotent, the Oft-Forgiving!***

Repentance and turning away from polytheism and disbelief will be
accepted by God Almighty; however such acceptance is not owing to
inability and desperateness, but it signifies that God Almighty, the
Omnipotence, is Oft-Forgiving.

In the fifth and the last stage, the believing man of the family of
Pharaoh tore all veils asunder. He could not conceal his faith any
longer and expressed what was due frankly and as it will be mentioned
below, they made a perilous decision about him.

The contextual meaning of the Verses demonstrates that those vain and
obdurate people were not silent before that faithful and valiant man but
talked of polytheism and called him to embrace idolatry.

In reply, he cried:

***“And O my people! How is it that I call you to salvation while you
call me to Hellfire?”***

In Verse 42, he said:

***“You invite me to disbelieve in Allah and to associate partners in
worship with Him of which I have no knowledge [whereas] I invite you to
the Omnipotent, the Oft-Forgiving!”***

Different Qur’anic Verses and the history of Egypt reveal that besides
worshipping Pharaohs, they also worshipped many an idol, as it is
reflected elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an:

***“The chiefs of Pharaoh’s people said: ‘Will you leave Moses and his
people to spread mischief in the land and to abandon you and your gods?’
He said: ‘We will slay their sons and let live their women and we have
indeed irresistible power over them”***[^9]***.***

Joseph (as) imprisoned at Pharaoh’s prison said unto his inmates:

***“Are many different lords better or Allah, the One, the
Irresistible?”***[^10]

In a crystal clear juxtaposition, the believing man of the family of
Pharaoh reminded them that they call him to polytheism which is
groundless and a dark and perilous path whereas he calls them to tread a
manifest path, that of God Almighty, the Omnipotent, the Oft-Forgiving.

The Divine Most Beautiful Names, the Omnipotent and Oft-Forgiving make a
reference to the Great Origin of fear and hope on the one hand and
allude to the negation of the divinity of idols and Pharaohs lacking
potency and forgiveness on the other.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 43
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا جَرَمَ أَنَّمَا تَدْعُونَنِي إِلَيْهِ لَيْسَ لَهُ دَعْوَةٌ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَلا فِي الْآخِرَةِ وَأَنَّ مَرَدَّنَا إِلَی اللَّهِ
وَأَنَّ الْمُسْرِفِينَ هُمْ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***43. “No doubt you call me to [worship] one who cannot grant [me] my
request in this world nor in the Hereafter. And our return will be to
Allah and the transgressors [of limits] shall be the dwellers of the
Fire!”***

Faith and decisiveness play significant roles in doctrinal issues. We
are supposed to substantiate our arguments with convincing reasons in
matters concerning commanding good and forbidding evil. Idols may not
call people nor do they grant their requests.

The blessed Verse in question is saying that what they call him to may
not grant his requests in this world and the Hereafter. In other words,
these idols have never sent messengers to people to call people to them
nor will they have any power in the Hereafter.

These insentient things may never engender anything. They do not talk;
they have neither messengers nor any tribunal.

In short, they may not solve problems nor are they able to make them.
Thus, we should know that we shall return to God Almighty on the
Resurrection Day. He is the One Who sent His Messengers for man’s
guidance and He is the One Who shall chastise and reward His servants
for their good and evil deeds.

We are also supposed to bear in mind that:

***“transgressors [of limits] shall be the dwellers of the Fire!”***

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 44
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَتَذْكُرُونَ مَا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ وَأُفَوِّضُ أَمْرِي إِلَی اللَّهِ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***44. “And [before long] you will remember what I am telling you and my
affair I leave it to Allah since He is the All-Seer of [His]
servants.”***

The Arabic word ***tafwid*** ad hoc indicates “leaving affairs to Allah”
which is higher in rank than tawakkul “reliance in God” since in the
former the client may supervise the task of the agent but in the former
all the affairs are unquestionably vested with the agent.[^11]

It is worthy of attention that leaving all affairs to God as the slogan
of the believing man of the family of Pharaoh followed all his efforts
toward saving Moses (as) from execution, promulgation of faith, warning
Pharaoh’s people against Divine Wrath, and waking others from neglect.

Such leaving affairs to God Almighty leads to Divine Support:

***(“Therefore Allah saved him from the evils that they plotted [against
him]”).***

Thus, the believing man of the family of Pharaoh finally revealed his
faith and drew a distinction between his monotheism and their polytheism
and singlehandedly resisted them and refuted their polytheistic beliefs.

Finally, he provided them with a meaningful warning to the effect that
they would remember what he said them and that would be when Divine
wrath would afflict you with torments in this world and the Hereafter.
It is unfortunate that it will be too late since all the gates to
repentance will be shut in this world and there will be no return to
this world in the Hereafter.

He further added:

***“my affair I leave it to Allah since He is the All-Seer of [His]
servants.”***

That was why he entertained no fear of their threats, large number,
power, and being singlehanded since he had left all his affairs to God
Almighty, the Omnipotent, the All-Seer of His servants’ states.

It is noteworthy that his last words were his humble devotions to God
Almighty when he was entangled by a powerful and merciless people
invoking God Almighty to protect him in such dire circumstances.

Surah al-Ghafir - Verse 45
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَقَاهُ اللَّهُ سَيِّئَاتِ مَا مَكَرُوا وَحَاقَ بِآلِ فِرْعَوْنَ
سُوءُ الْعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. Therefore Allah saved him from the evils that they plotted
[against him], while an evil torment encompassed Pharaoh’s people.***

It is through Divine Grace that the life and faith of believers are
saved from conspiracies and conspirators and plotters are destroyed. The
blessed Verse in question says that God Almighty did not leave this
believing and struggling servant alone but protected him from their
vicious plots.

The expression:

***“the evils that they plotted”***

reveals that they probably hatched plots against him. What were these
plots? The nature of these plots is not explicitly mentioned herein;
however, they were naturally different punishments, torments, and
finally execution.

The important point is that Divine Grace rendered all those plots
ineffective. A number of Qur’anic exegets maintain that the believing
man took an opportunity to reach Moses and the Children of Israel and
crossed the Nile with them.

It is also said that when the decision was made as to his execution, he
escaped to a mountain and no one could see him anymore.[^12] The twain
interpretations are not inconsistent. It is probable that he hid
somewhere without the city to join the Children of Israel later on and
cross the Nile with them.

Some of the plots in question were probably the imposition of idolatry
and convincing him to abandon monotheism but God Almighty saved him from
these plots as well and made him to proceed more firmly on the Path of
faith, monotheism, and fearing God Almighty.

Au contraire, severe torments were sent down on the people of Pharaoh.

Divine chastisements and torments are all excruciating but the
expression:

***“an evil torment”***

reflects that God Almighty condemned them to a more excruciating torment
which is mentioned in the following Verse.

[^1]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 8, p. 521, under the Verses in question.

[^2]: Saduq, Amali; Ibn Hajar, Sawa’iq, Chapter 2, Section 9.

[^3]: 7:50

[^4]: 11:18

[^5]: 69:19

[^6]: 69:25

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13, p. 125, apud ‘Ali ibn Ibrahim’s Tafsir.

[^8]: 6:160

[^9]: 7:127

[^10]: 12:39

[^11]: Tafsir Nimuna.

[^12]: Majma’ al-Bayan, under the Verse in question.


