INTRODUCTION
============

ERZSÉBET NOVÁKY, VIORICA RAMBA VARGA, MÁRIA KALAS KŐSZEGI

Being on the eve of the 21st century we came to the conclusion it is
time to summarize the information on futures studies in our East and
Central European ex socialist countries between 1960 and 2000 and make
them known far and wide. From a historical perspective we intended to
give a comprehensive and comparative picture about these activities in
the individual countries.

This idea was inspired and guided by an important consideration. The
researchers who have been active since the sixties have accumulated
enormous experience, which is not yet compiled for internationally
consumption for the future. It is our common interest today, that this
accumulated knowledge not be allowed to disappear. Therefore, our
fundamental goal was: to provide a stage for the members of the previous
generation to present their activities and results to convey their store
of learning to the next and the forthcoming generations and to help them
amid their different but not less difficult circumstances.

*Viorica Ramba Varga* , from Bucharest, as her idea, worked out a
Questionnaire for having systematized information on futures studies
from this region. Her conception met with the future-oriented thinking
and commitment of the two Hungarian futurists -*Erzsébet Nováky*
and*Mária Kalas Kőszegi* - we three (members of the World Futures
Studies Federation) immediately set up an Editorial Board in Budapest.
We finalized the Questionnaire and worked out the concept and the
structure of a book.

To reach our aims we turned to the well-known and experienced futurists
and scientific committees/societies of the countries in this region to
participate in this historical work. Appreciating their known valuable
futures studies activities we had every hope to be partners in this
venture. Our intention was to have information from all of the European
ex socialist countries. At the end we succeeded in collecting country
studies from Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, the German
Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, the USSR/Russia
and Yugoslavia.

Here we have to express our thanks for the valuable contributions of
everyone ready to send us their materials in time. Special thanks for
their enthusiastic participation.

It is a great honour for us that*Eleonora Masini* , founding member and
president of the World Futures Studies Federation, identified
immediately with the importance of our concept. She has been familiar
with and interested in the futures studies activities all over the world
including our countries for a long time so her great attention and
empathy concerning this venture was just natural.

We hope to find among the readers of this book not only those who have
been active in the field of futures studies in the past but everyone who
is interested in our futures, who feels responsibility for it and who
forms our common future, and is willing to deal with them on a
scientific level. We also hope this group is a growing one, including
people of different ages, mainly the youth.

The book consists of two main parts: i.e. country studies and the
synthesis of the answers given to the Questionnaires. They covered the
period of 1960-2000, divided into two parts, 1960-1990 and 1990-2000.
The borderline was the fall of the Soviet Union and the socialist
system, when the transition period started. The country studies are
published in their original form under the name of the author as
independent chapters. The Editorial Board made*only some slight
editorial corrections* . The answers to the Questionnaire gave a good
possibility to have a comprehensive and comparative picture about the
futures studies activities and scientific results of the futurists in
the given countries.

In carrying out this venture successfully*Mária Kalas Kőszegi*
and*Erzsébet Nováky* shouldered the work of searching for the
responsible authors from the countries, keeping the contact with the
foreign partners, and the editorial work of the book. The majority of
the staff of the Futures Studies Centre at the Budapest University of
Economic Sciences and Public Administration led by*Erzsébet Nováky* also
participated in the work. From them, however, we have to raise the name
of*Éva Hideg* who provided great help in finalizing the Questionnaire.
The technical infrastructure was aided by this Centre.

The encouragement of UNESCO and the WFSF is also highly appreciated.

Finally, we must mention something else. It gave us a special happiness
to be able to work together with widely known famous colleagues in the
field of futures studies from different countries. That possibility
helped us to bring out such a book, made by everyone, authors and
editors, voluntarily, without any financial or other material
compensation. This fact made us become real partners in this scientific
field.

And now, as a conclusion one can see how people can work together, even
internationally - neglecting any material interest in it. … Can this be
the unselfish future already?


