FORESIGHT STUDIES IN ROMANIA
============================

Mircea Malitza

1. Brief preliminaries
----------------------

Prospective concerns became manifest in Romania at the end of the
sixties and was maintained for some ten years. In 1968 the*Chronicle of
the Year 2000* first appeared as a press serial and was published as a
volume in 1969. In 1973, the futures studies international community met
in Bucharest, creating today’s WFSF. At the beginning of the 70s the
Prospective Commission of the Romanian Academy was set up, which is
working even today. In a series under the heading of*Global Issues of
the Mankind* , the Commission has published 15 volumes. In the same
period was created the International Center for Futures Studies
Methodology with*Mihai Botez* (author of the first Handbook of
Prospective Techniques in Romania, and later a known dissident of the
regime) as its director. Today, the members of the group are
distinguished researchers (World Bank, city planning, science and
technology, management, etc.). The Bucharest group maintained close
relationships with their colleagues in other countries:*Bertrand de
Jouvenel, Johan Galtung, Eleonora Masini, Robert Jungk* , who often
visited them. The problem they faced at home was that of accepting
“several possible futures” (*de Jouvenel* ) in contradiction to the
uniqueness of aim as according to State socialist planning. In 1977, the
Center was expulsed from its headquarters. Meanwhile, it had succeeded
to participate in the world perspective movement and in international
projects such as that of the Development’s Indicators at the UN
University.

2. The present situation
------------------------

After the 1989 Revolution, prospective preoccupations were gradually
resumed, and at the end of the 90s they became of topical interest. A
summary selective presentation must leave aside a big number of
Prospective Clubs that work in cities (*Galati* , etc.), within large
professional associations (AGIR) or in schools and universities. I shall
only mention the Black Sea University Foundation, the UNESCO Prospective
Chair of the Cluj University, the Institute of Economic Forecasting and
the Romanian Academy’s Commission for Prospective Studies. I shall
mention each one’s present activities and projects for the future.

### 2.1. The Black Sea University Foundation (BSUF)

###

This was created in 1993. Ever since, the BSUF has organized 50
post-university international courses annually that enjoyed each year
1,000 participants (from more than 40 countries). Among the themes of
the courses a leading place was held by Prospective (present stage,
methods) and prospective studies in various domains. Issues of special
interest to our region and to the societies in transition were
approached and treated in the light of the prospective (future of the
professions, of the universities, of the cities, etc. One general course
on Prospective was held by*Hugues de Jouvenel* of Futuribles, Paris.
Among the study centers set up by the Foundation, one that distinguished
itself is the National Center for Sustainable Development. In
collaboration with the Romanian Academy and with the support of the
UNDP, it developed the first*Strategy for Sustainable Development* of
Romania, which was supported by Trade Unions and the Employers
associations and endorsed by the Cabinet in 1999. The Black Sea
University Foundation resumed and developed its ties with UNESCO’s
prospective thinking centers, the Club of Rome, the WFSF, the WFS etc.
It also initiated the editing of a quarterly review,*Millennium III* .
Among the members of the board are*Ricardo Diez-Hochleitner, Sergei
Kapitza, Lawrence Klein* and*Ilya Prigogine* (Nobel Prize
laureates),*Federico Mayor, Jean d’Ormesson, Ernst Ulrich Weizsäcker,
Roseann Runte* and*Pentti Malaska* . Furthermore, the Foundation
established ties with the Forward Studies Unit of the EU and
consequently*Scenarios Europe 2010* was translated into Romanian under
the aegis of*Millennium III* . was published in April 2000 in view of a
large debate to which the authors of the Scenarios were invited to
participate.

The Foundation’s main aim was to enhance the awareness about foresight
in Romania and to stimulate the production of studies capable of
supporting the country’s sustainable development. The Foundation shall
play host to WFSF’s World Conference in 2001.

BSUF also devotes its activities to training. Thus, the most recent
initiative based on the experience of the*Conflict Prevention Center*
that works under the aegis of the Foundation was the creation of
the*Five-Seas Academy* (the five seas being the ones that surround the
South-East of Europe). Also, it is worth mentioning that out of the
eleven member countries of BSEC governmental organization, six are
Balkan ones. The area of the Center’s concerns is that of the Black Sea
and Balkan South-East. In addition, on the Foundation’s initiative the
Black Sea Universities Network, linking more than 80 universities, was
set up.

*The Black Sea University Foundation*

Blvd. Primaverii 50, Sector 1, Bucharest, Romania

Tel./Fax: 0040-1-222-4118 & 0040-1-222-7001, E- mail: bseau@rnc.ro

or

*The Black Sea University Foundation,* Casa Academiei

Calea 13 Septembrie, Sector 5, Bucharest, Romania

Tel./Fax: 0040-1-411-2601

### 2.2. The UNESCO Prospective Chair

###

Babes-Bolyai University and Black Sea University Foundation of Romania
have set up since October 1999 a UNESCO Chair Program for education and
research in “social prospective studies, integration of Central and
East-European countries in the European Community, regional resource use
and labour force employment, and education prospective”.

Chaired by Prof. Dr.*Traian Rotariu* , the Program aims to create a
center of excellence in prospective studies and to establish a network
of institutions involved in long-term futures studies in the Black Sea
area and the developed countries.

The Chair was created following a proposal submitted by the BSUF and
approved by*Federico Mayor* in 1997. Since 1999 it is hosted by the
Cluj-Napoca University, which has a European Studies Department. During
its two first years of existence the Chair had not met with a favourable
environment at the Academy of Economic Studies from Bucharest where it
had been initially located.

The Chair’s teaching staff consists of three professors, three
lecturers, one reader, three assistants and one researcher. They have a
management headquarters equipped with computers, printers and xerox
copiers and a library of more than 100 volumes and 300 specialty
reviews.

The Chair was represented at the XVI WFSF World Conference at Bacolod,
the Philippines, 5-8 December 1999 by Professor*Traian Rotariu* , when
it adhered to WFSF.

They started prospective research activities through the projects:
“Romanian Teenagers and Axiologic Changes Associated to Globalization
and Cultures” and “Romania’s Integration into the E.U. Attitudes,
Expectations and Fears of the Population”.

Other activities planned for the year 2000 included:

Setting up a Social Statistics School (organized by the Chair for
Prospective Studies in cooperation with the Sociology Chair and the
Chair of Political Sciences, financed by the Foundation for an Open
Society) for students of Social Sciences of the 3rd and 4th years, May
3-13, 2000. Learning of Methodological Elements of Prospective Research;
Reading by Professor*Tony Stevenson* , WFSF President, May 25, 2000;
Round table on the theme of “Prospective: science, atavism or social
engineering?” Participants: Professor*Tony Stevenson* , the staff of the
Chair, journalists, professors and researchers from Romania, May 24-25,
2000.

International Symposium “ South-East European Transition. The Challenge
of Integration”, November 13-15, 2000.

The Program aims to develop researches in globalisation and the
information society; population, education and social change; the
consumption prospective; transformations in the production system and
the political evolution of democracy in Romania, among others.

Including the following courses of Prospective in the curricula of
Master Degree in Sociology: Prospective Demography, Methods and
Techniques in Prospective Research “Mass Communication and Cultural
Globalisation” October 2000.

Preparing issue number IV, 2000 of “Millennium III” quarterly.

Contact Person:

Professor Dr. Traian Rotariu

Universitatea “Babes-Bolyai”

Facultatea de Istorie si Filosofie, Catedra de Prospectiva

Str. Mihail Kogalniceanu 1, 3400 Cluj-Napoca, Romania

Tel.: 0040-64-405-300/Ext.282

Fax: 0040-64-191-906

### 2.3. Institute for Economic Forecasting

###

The Institute for Economic Forecasting (IEF) was established in 1990, in
order to facilitate policy oriented economic research into the
transitional environment and the impact of EU integration process for
the Romanian economy. Since then the Institute has become an active
center in Romania and its analyses have played a major role in the
decision making process at macroeconomic level, in recent years.
Institutions such as the National Bank of Romania, branch ministries
(Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Industry and Trade, Ministry of
Agriculture, Ministry of Research and Technology, Department for
European Integration), international organizations (UN, World Bank
Mission in Romania), trade unions and entrepreneurs associations are
among the domestic beneficiaries of its studies and analyses.

A leading dimension of IEF’s work is oriented towards the development of
cooperation with regional (Central- and Eastern European CEE), European
and world organizations and other institutions. From the very beginning,
it established research contacts with academic and research institutions
from the UK (LSE, LBS, Heriot-Watt University, Essex University,
Leicester University, Imperial College, University of London), France
(CEPREMAP, ROSES- University of Paris 1, GRATICE - University of
Paris -XII), Austria (Institute for Advanced Studies, Vienna, The Vienna
Institute for International Economic Studies, Belgium (Université Libre
de Bruxelles, Catholic University of Louvain), Germany (University of
Göttingen), the Netherlands (Free University of Amsterdam), Poland
(University of Warsaw, University of Gdansk), Hungary (Central European
University, Economic University of Budapest, Institute for World
Economy, Budapest), the Czech Republic (CERGE - Charles University),
Bulgaria (Institute of Economics, Economic University Sofia), Slovenia
(University of Ljubljana, Macroeconomic Institute), Israel (Hebrew
University of Jerusalem and CINADCO), Canada (University of Toronto,
Institute for Policy Analysis), USA (Harvard University, Stanford
University, University of Michigan, University of Pennsylvania - WEFA
Group), etc.

Now, to mention some of the particular achievements of the IEF:

The development of comprehensive macroeconomic models for the Romanian
economy, in the light of future European Union integration. At present,
three different macroeconomic models implemented by the Institute are
the functional models calibrated for the present Romanian data and used
for analysis and forecast activities (RMSM-WB Model, National Bank
forecast, the base for scenarios within the Government Strategy for
European Integration and Sustainable Growth, Non-Linear Macroeconomic
Model).

Sector and specific studies on aspects of industrial development, reform
and restructuring, developed jointly with the CEE and EU partners or
together with other domestic institutions. Examples of such projects
are: the National Program for Accession to the European Union (PHARE
program - jointly with Adam Smith Institute London, Romanian Ministry of
Finance); Competitiveness evaluation and industrial policies for reform
(Ministry of Industry and Trade, ongoing project with Vienna Institute
of International Economic Studies, a pilot study intended to be expanded
into all other CEE countries).

Impact studies such as labour market analysis, trade and FDI structural
evolution, fiscal and monetary policies. Examples of projects include:
Labour market policy and sector employment re-allocation, A comparative
study for transition economies, jointly implemented with the LSE (London
School of Economics); The impact of indirect taxation on the demand of
gasoline in Romania, jointly with the Ministry of Finance and the Adam
Smith Institute; The Sustainability of Public Debt and Deficits - World
Bank Program and CEROPE, etc.

The researchers of the Institute have published more than one hundred
articles in international publications as well as contributions to
well-established Romanian academic journals, the Institute’s bulletins,
etc. Also, part of some of the Institute’s works were published as
chapters in various books edited by prestigious publishing houses such
as Kluwer, Springer Verlag, OECD, World Bank, etc.

Particular attention was paid to attracting young promising Romanian
researchers and including them in specific training programs, often in
top universities and institutions in the European Community and EEC
countries, including Romania. Practically, all senior researchers of the
Institute have benefited from long spells of training and skill
improvement in the EU or candidate countries, in the form of
fellowships, scholarships, summer schools of economics, academic
bilateral exchanges.

The Institute has also received the visits of numerous senior and junior
researchers from EU member countries or other EEC candidate countries,
involved in fellowships, post-doctoral studies, participation in joint
research workshops, seminars or in conferences organized by the
Institute. Also, the Institute organized workshops, seminars and
conferences with international participation.

Contact Person:

Professor Lucian-Liviu Albu

Academia Romana, Institutul de Prognoza Economica

Calea 13 Septembrie 13

Casa Economiei, et. 3, Sector 5, 76117 Bucharest, Romania

Tel.: 0040-1-410-3200/Ext. 3317 or 3306;

Fax: 0040-1-411-4916 or 0040-1-4103200/ext. 3306

E-mail: ipe@ipe.ro

http://www.securities.com/Romania/Macroenomic Analysis and Forecasts

Publications:*Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasts* and
respectively*Economic Performance Evolution in Transitional Systems,*
Institute for Economic Forecasting, Internet Securities Inc., ISI
Emerging Markets)

### 2.4. Commission of Prospective Studies of the Romanian Academy

###

The 25 members of the Commission, members of the Romanian Academy, are
directors of research institutes and experts in the discipline of
Prospective. The Commission collaborates with the Institute for Economic
Forecasting of the Romanian Academy, the Governmental Center for
Prognosis (moved at present with the Ministry of Finance) and other
centers in the country. Its foreign ties are with the Forward Studies
Unit of the EU in Brussels, Futuribles in Paris, the UNESCO Analysis and
Prospective Center, World Futures Studies Federation in Australia, the
Club of Rome and other similar national centers.

During its almost three decades of existence, it has published 15
volumes of studies under the heading “Global Issues of the Mankind”. The
Commission was in the past years one of the initiators of such works
as*Romania 2020, Romania’s Strategy for Sustainable Future* and
collaborated in writing them and is at present committed in elaborating
the development strategy for medium term in a European perspective by
the Government’s group of experts. It is the initiator of the UNESCO
Chair for Prospective at the University of Cluj-Napoca and has supported
the Black Sea University’s program of prospective studies in close
collaboration with BSU. Furthermore, the Commission was patron of the
National Center for Sustainable Development and members of it are on the
Board of the Center. The Commission is one of the patrons of*Millennium
III* , a quarterly published in English. It also has developed synergic
ties with the other mentioned above centers.

Its aims are, among others, to stimulate and direct prospective studies
in Romania and to elaborate studies on the future development of the
Romanian society in the perspective of globalisation and European
integration.

**Its projects for the years 2000-2001 include the elaboration of a
prospective study of education and work in the light of modularization
of disciplines and a national symposium on the scientific and
technological perspectives opened in Romania by the ICT revolution.**

3. Conclusions
--------------

The slow rhythm of recovery of prospective studies in Romania is partly
due to the heterogeneous political coalitions, which could not make up
their mind upon some prospective strategies, which would have required,
of course, the support of some foresight studies, but also because of
the reservation of the ultra-liberal circles towards the prospective.
The resort to developing politically independent research came from the
area of the civil society, which, with the support of some international
bodies, has produced such studies as*Romania 2020* and the*Strategy for
Sustainable Development.* The fact that they have worked together has
helped the non-governmental organizations. But most particularly, it was
the beginning of negotiations for EU access that was the decisive
factor, which has determined the change in the attitude of authorities
and their implication in such strategies as require prospective studies.
One may state that in the spring of 2000 the elaboration of the
medium-term strategy of Romania with the support of the EU has created a
momentum in favour of such studies and brought them to a broad public
attention. It is most significant that, together with the development of
the strategy to which civil society is called to bring its contribution,
there are ongoing talks about creating a permanent governmental body
capable of guiding and monitoring long-term development.

The mentioned above bodies have found through their activity the
encouraging potential of the civil society. They are to be found among
the initiators of the*Romanian Forum for European Integration* that
includes some 60 NGOs.


