FUTURES STUDIES IN SLOVAKIA
===========================

Stefan Zajac

1. Futures studies before 1989
------------------------------

Futures studies in Slovakia[^21] , as a part of the former
Czechoslovakia, from its very beginning, were linked with economic
planning. The term used in Czechoslovakia, was “prognostics”, which
considered futures studies as the crucial process preceding the
formation of a long-term socio-economic outlook. The foundations of
socio-economic planning were laid according to the regularities of the
advanced scientific-technological progress. Of course, forecasting and
planning differed in levels of objectivity and complexity but they were
necessarily tied. According to a dialectic-materialist outlook, the
future was, in principle, stochastic and not simply a projection of the
past. Therefore, planners and researchers in Czechoslovakia were
concentrated on the analysis of scientific and technological processes
and on their societal consequences (societal progress). This view of the
role and objectives of forecasting was shared by the authorities
responsible for planning until the end of the socialist regime in
Slovakia, although for many years works on global social-economic
forecasting were carried on in different research institutes, especially
in the Slovak Academy of Sciences.

In the midst of the 1960s, another type of futures studies was launched
by the team led by Radovan Richta from the Institute of Philosophy of
the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. Their investigation resulted in
the famous book “Civilisation on the Crossroads”, which characterised
the post-second war period as the advent age of a scientific and
technological revolution, generating a new technical and economic
paradigms, as well as a new way of life. The analysis was so convincing
that the idea of the scientific and technological revolution, of the
transformation of science into a productive factor was generally
accepted and even incorporated in official political speeches, and the
acceleration of science and technology activities was considered as one
of the priority tasks under socialism.

A new phase in the evolution of the futures studies in Slovakia began in
the early eighties, namely in 1983, when the government decided to carry
out a global social and economic forecast of Czechoslovakia, including
Slovakia, up to the year 2010. In Slovakia, it was the SAS, specifically
the Institute of Economics as co-ordinator, which was appointed to
realise the project. The decision to entrust this task to an academic
body followed from the idea of achieving a very global view of the
possible ways of development of the socialist society in a longer period
of time, where economic indicators and tendencies would be one of the
development parameters, themselves influenced by the changing of many
social, cultural and demographic factors. But also some political and
governmental bodies were designed to be the major consultants, and
receptors of the final and partial results of the projects, and were to
be regularly informed on the course of investigations. This new type of
forecasting, was considered to be part of the planning process as a
whole.

The global social and economic forecast of Slovakia was published as a
book in 1991 (Markus, J. et al.). Most important conclusions were
subsumed under following six points (pp. 162 - 170):

1. At the turn of the 1980s and 1990s, Slovakia again stands at a
historical crossroads. Due to internal and external factors and
contingencies, further progress forward is not possible without a deep
social breakthrough, without a radical restructuring of the society,
without its overall qualitative change or transformation. The essential
trait not only of the day but of the entire decade and perhaps of
decades is not continuity, but discontinuity. This involves a disruption
of the evolutionary progression which began dangerously and irreversibly
to increase downwards, towards stagnation and decline. In this
situation, long-term prognosis has for task to outline the course of two
qualitatively divergent developmental roads; they simultaneously form
the framework, the boundaries of Slovakia’s possible future development.

To these two roads there correspond two scenarios of a comprehensive
prognosis of the Slovakian Republic: their common feature is that both
are in a certain sense discontinuous. They can be succinctly
characterised as leading upwards and downwards; as a dynamism of ascent,
naturally painful, complex, full of problems and antagonism, and as an
apparently less risky tactic of small changes; this, however, will lead
to an impossibility of maintaining what we may still assume to possess -
a relative welfare and an appurtenance to advanced, or relatively
advanced countries of the world. These were scenario of the desirable
development and warning scenario.

2. One must realise that every change in the developmental line,
enforced in the present revolutionary situation by objective
circumstances, represents the exacting task of abandoning deeply rooted
structures, mechanisms and methods of the so-called extensive stage of
industrial development.

In this connection, it may concisely be formulated the “sum” total of
the necessity of overcoming of industrialism, its motile logic, and the
mechanism of its application in Slovak society. In case of Slovakia’s
adherence to this logic, it is threatened with the same “fateful”
lagging behind that had been characteristic of non-industrialised
countries at the time of the first industrial revolution. At the same
time, there is no doubt that this lagging, being newly formed, cannot be
overcome in the same manner as had been the case with industrialisation
(although this overcoming, in terms of its significance, is equivalent
to industrialisation as regards the entire society). This mode of
overcoming has one unpleasant trait at the present time, viz. that it
conserves and deepens backwardness and logging behind.

3. New methods for resolving social problems, new modes and means of
satisfying social needs will in their entirety create a new quality of
the social reproduction process; with a certain measure simplification,
this quality may be characterised as informatisation,
intellectualisation and individualisation of that process under
conditions of a growing internalisation (this last aspect will be dealt
with presently).

4. In the future, all major global problems of the present and future
world will incontestably find their reflection also in our national
environment and will demand and initiative response outwards (e.g. in
issues of war and peace, but also in the struggle with famine and other
problems of the third world), and inwards. When speaking of global
problems, mention in made - as being their fountainhead - of a crisis of
culture and ethics, of a sensible weakening of the regulatory strength
of universal values and norms, but also of an indispensable renewal of a
“rule” of cultural, humane, ethical values - if we care that our world
as such is to survive.

5. It must be stressed that the only way internal problems, particularly
scientific-technical, economic, but also cultural ones, Slovakia can be
resolved in future, is through a greater opening to the outside world.
Every attempt to circumvent this mode of solving our developmental
problems will - according to our prospective development until 2010 -
lead to an overall dramatic loss of our - even now not too prominent -
positions in the world, to a considerable relative lagging on an
international scale. The need of internationalisation of our social
reproduction process and our whole life emerges again, and in a new way
at that, a need to learn to live in international and internationalising
conditions and connections of development. A successful entry into these
connections and conditions is possible uniquely in virtue of our own
“face”, national identity, utilisation of our national temperament and
national culture. Uniquely thus shall we succeed not to enter the
international contest and collaboration empty-handed, or with cheap
imitations: uniquely on the basic of our own originality, creative
searching and finding (including also the element of a ready
exploitation of what others have already found) we shall be interesting
to the rest of the world, only thus we shall be able to combine within
ourselves ability to compete and readiness to co-operate, willingness to
give and to receive values. This penetration outward presupposes a
struggle against our inner vices and pseudo-values.

6. What will be Slovakia’s further road through history? It may be said,
speaking with a little modesty, that our searching and our contribution
must start from our knowledge of the historical lane, often no more than
a narrow path of our Slovakia through the complexness of the great
world. We might speak here of our internal history, of history imprinted
in us as of the foundation of our progress into the future and of the
source of our contribution enriching others. We did not pass through
history lightly or easily, we are not here chance, and our stay must not
be in vain: we have our obligations towards ourselves and towards the
world. This presumes broad and deep social activities for the protection
and renewal of positive values, which we carry along from history, and a
struggle for domesticating within the Slovak society of a readiness
inwardly to change in the exacting contest and collaboration with the
outside world.

As far as science in Slovakia is concerned, results were published as a
book in 1990 (Gál, F. et al.). Forecasting activities in science were
organised according to principle so called problem situation in science
(opportunities and threats). This situation was understood in the scope
of discrepancy among actual, anticipated and desirable state of some
subject (e.g. scientific discipline, development process, quantity
etc.), including conditions and ways of its solutions. Within the
problem situation, panel experts (several hundreds of experts) were
participating in seeking for scientific potential (personnel, funding,
endowment, institution and so on) by means of which such a problem
situation could be solved.

2. Futures studies in the 1990s
-------------------------------

The 1989 changes interrupted temporarily the long-term forecasting
exercises. New development issues arose. The problems of transition from
one system to another drove into the background traditional forecasting
concepts and forecasting activities themselves. A great number of
specialists in this field, among the most competent, entered politics
others found better remunerated jobs in private companies. The total
number of active forecasters declined rapidly, along with interest in
forecasting itself.

An interest in forecasting led in 1990 to the foundation of the Slovak
Civic Society for Futurology, promoting the popularisation of main
trends of futurologist thought in the world, but also of the results of
forecast research in Slovakia. The Association is in contact with the
World Federation for Futures Studies and with the Slovak Association of
the Club of Rome and the Society for Sustainable Life. Its members take
part in the world futurological project, The Millennium Project. Several
papers presented at seminars were published in weeklies of large
diffusion and in their own publications.

After a short period of time, at the beginning of the 1990s, the need
for a long-term strategic view in the frame of which restructuring
programs and economic policy could find a sounder base for strategic
decision generated a revival of forecasting activities. In 1992, a
project entitled “Slovakia - Steps towards European Community -
Scenarios of Socio-Political Development, Economic Strategy and the
Development of Higher Education and Technology up to the Year 2005”. The
project was carried out within the framework of a larger international
project: “Central and Eastern Europe up to the year 2000”. The project
was supported by the DG XII of the European Commission, in co-operation
with the Institute for Human Sciences, Vienna and Euroreg (Warsaw
University) Warsaw, and co-ordinated (in Slovakia) by the Institute of
Sociology of the SAS. The results of forecasting exercises were
published in 1994 (Faltan, Ľ. et al., 1994), and in the European Union
in 1995, respectively (Eastern, 1995).

It may be of great importance to note that the Slovak parliament
approved an amendment of the so-called “Competence Act” in March 1995.
According to this amendment the “Office for Strategy of Development of
the Society, Science and Technology” was established. This office is the
central body of the state administration for the “programming of
strategy of development of the society, science and technology and for
regional development”. This Office had prepared “Vision of the Slovak
Republic development up to 2020” (see, R. Tóth, 1998) but it was not
accepted by scientific community, at all. In 1999, the Office was
abolished.

Against this background, in 1997, an important step was made when the
Institute for Forecasting of the SAS succeeded in obtaining a three
years grant for the construction of a global socio-economic forecast of
Slovakia up to the year 2015. Project was entitled as “Structural
Changes in the Decisive Spheres of Slovak Society in Long-term
Perspective”. During three years of research, a very realistic view of
the major tendencies generated by the transition process and the changes
of the international context, was achieved and published in theoretical
reviews, or submitted to official institutions (Economic Council of the
Slovak Government).

On September 2000, Economic Council discussed a new proposal prepared by
the Institute for Forecasting. This proposal was aimed at the vision of
Slovakia up to 2015. However, Economic Council recommended, due to
public procurement rules, that the Slovak government would advertise a
call concerning project proposal for such a vision. This year,
preparatory activities are underway.

Project scope and its methodology were inspired by foresight exercises
carried out in the Czech Republic and Hungary (namely, Hungarian Academy
of Sciences). Vision of Slovakia 2015 is understood as a two-dimensional
development. On the one hand, there is an international context and its
impacts for Slovakia, on the other hand, there are driving forces and
outcomes of domestic context. Latest analyses suggest that major
problems of Slovakia have emerged in the following fields:

1. Geopolitical situation of Slovakia,

2. National identity, traditions and societal changes,

3. Institutional system and the rule of law,

4. Socio-demographic structure and quality of life,

5. Development of education and knowledge-base,

6. Information technologies and competitiveness of economy,

7. Employment and structural changes in economy,

8. Environment,

9. Regional development.

The general aim of the project is to understand how recent and
prospective changes have and will impact on different fields of the
Slovak society. In particular, project has aim:

to assess the extent to which there has been shift in individual fields
(mentioned above) during the transition process;

to identify key issues for Slovakia in respect of how it develops its
policies for catching-up with the European Union;

to produce two scenarios of likely future changes in consequence of the
future Slovakia accession.

One way how to disseminate the results and to include the user
perspective already during the project will be the installation of a
Steering Group consisting first of all of the representatives of the
academic sector, government, non-governmental organisations, business
interest groups, trade unions etc. This group should meet several times
during the term of project. Furthermore, the vision results will be
presented at national scientific conferences and in national (may be
international) scientific journals. Main findings and conclusions of
interim reports as well as that of the final report will be published in
press articles.

3. Conference at Smolenice 1998
-------------------------------

In late 1997, the Institute for Forecasting of the Slovak Academy of
Sciences and its Scientific Council began to assess the past and the
future of the Institute's scientific activities. The idea was to carry
this out in the form of an international conference on “Forecasting in
the Transition Society”. This conference was held at Smolenice castle
(belonging to the Slovak Academy of Sciences), from November 20 - 21,
1998, with the participation of six experts from six countries in
Central and Western Europe and nine participants from Slovakia.

The conference was to provide an international forum for the
presentation and debate of current research and scholarship on the
methodology of forecasting and practical knowledge of forecasting
development in the transition society. The conference aimed at the
current problems of forecasting methodology and the questions for the
future in societies in transition (first of all, prospects for the
catching-up of these societies with the EU nations), as seen by Slovak
and foreign scientists and experts. Thus, providing a forum for
presentation and debates, surveying research agenda and exchanging
experiences in this field were of topical interest in various respects.

Bearing this in mind, and in order to capture the most salient
approaches and analyses offered to explain the processes of transition,
the conference was organised around four broad issues:

importance of forecasting for the process of transition,

forecasting of economic development,

forecasting of social development,

forecasting of regional development.

Participation at the conference was decidedly multi-disciplinary,
encompassing the viewpoints of academics, policy-makers and bankers.
Such multi-disciplinarity favoured the examination and broad discussion
of the issues from a variety angles. Were the problems resolved or at
least explained? The answer would probably be no. This could not really
be expected considering the variety and complexity of conditions and
circumstances involved.

On the other side, scientific results of the conference may be
attributed to the following favourable circumstances:

the support the conference was provided by the Institute for Forecasting
and its Scientific Council, under whose auspices it was conducted,

the extraordinarily quick and efficient financial support given the
conference by the British Council in Bratislava, and

last, but not least, the interest and involvement shown by researchers,
who participated not only in completing their contributions in a very
short time, but also by the programme of the conference, which was very
instructive, stimulating and interesting for all involved, both in their
presentation and remarks and questions to the discussion.

4. CONCLUSIONS
--------------

**The futures studies in Slovakia during the 1990s could be
characterised as follows:**

forecasting activities in Slovakia have not been regularly organised due
to missing competencies,

however, experience with these activities suggests that government,
universities, research institutes (first of all, those from the SAS) and
scientific communities should all be encouraged to undertake, or to be
involved in, forecasting activities,

such activities could develop a transparent process for decision-making
on society, economy, environment allowing to shape the future of
Slovakia.

### REFERENCES

###

Eastern and Central Europe, 2000. Final Report. Studies 2. June 1994.
European Commission, Luxembourg, 1995

Faltan, Ľ. et al.: Slovakia and its transformation in the early 1990s.
Society - Economy - Science and Technology (in Slovak). Bratislava,
Institute of Sociology, SAS, 1994

Forecasting in the Transition Society. International Conference
Smolenice Castle November 20-21, 1998. Edited by Štefan Zajac.
Bratislava, Institute for Forecasting SAS, 1998

Gál, F. et al.: Forecasting the Scientific Advancement (in Slovak).
Bratislava, Veda, 1990

Markus, J. et al.: Slovakia at the turn of the third millennium (in
Slovak). Bratislava, Veda, 1991

Sarmir, E.: Forecasting in Slovakia: Past and Prospects. In: [3]

Tóth, R.:Vision of the Slovak Republic development up to 2020 (in
Slovak). Opening address at the conference “Stála Konferencia Slovenskej
Inteligence Slovakia Plus”, held at Bratislava, June 25, 1998

Zajac, S. et al.: The long-term tendencies in selected areas of the
Slovak society up to 2015 (in Slovak). Series: Forecasts 1. Bratislava,
Institute for Forecasting, June 2000
