FUTURES STUDIES IN THE USSR (1966-1991) AND IN RUSSIA (1991-1999)
=================================================================

IGOR BESTUZHEV-LADA

Futures studies in the USSR/Russia leave by roots in*the precocious
futurology* of the end 19th and beginning 20th centuries, when some
outstanding European, American and Russian scientists - D. Mendeleev, I.
Metc.hnikov, K. Ziolkowsky and others in Russia - have acted in their
works with reflections about the future. In 20s some books and many
articles on this theme were published, including that of V.
Bazarov-Rudnev in 1924-28 with a statement of the concept of the
problems-goals approach to the future, which is now basis of modern
technological forecasting. But it was not to understand for
contemporaries, was forgotten for decades and was entered into futures
studies literature in 80th only. Since the end of 20s and till the
middle of 50s the Stalin’s political regime has liquidated all studies
in social sciences, including the sphere of the future. There was only
imitation of “scientific prediction” in dogmas of “scientific
communism”.

1. Forecasting Boom in the USSR of 60s
--------------------------------------

In the middle of 50s*the thawing* of Krushchev’s reforms has resulted in
some revival of social sciences and during the first half of 60s some
books and articles “about the future in general” were published, but not
yet supported with any special studies (I. Lada: If World Disarms, 1961;
G. Dobrov and A. Golian-Nicolsky: Century of Great Hopes, 1964; I. Lada
and O.Pisarzhevsky: Profiles of the Future, 1965, and others). But such
publications were permitted only by way of the comments to the new
political program of the Soviet communist party therefore it was
necessary to state the forecasts by the language of Esope.

The situation was changed in 1966 only, when the third*perestroyka* ,
i.e. Kossyguin’s liberal reforms, was begun (the first was Lenin’s*new
economic policy* of 1921-29, and the second - the*thaw* of Krushchev’s
liberal reforms of 1956-64). During all three*perestroykas* attempts
were made to revive an realised utopia of*barracks socialism* by some
liberalisation of the political regime, including loosing of repression
and censorship. But then the ruling circles curtailed reforms, which
threatened their autocracy.

In 1966 on the XXIII Congress of the Soviet communist party was decided
to expand the problematic of economic planning by adding of social
aspects and resting on “scientific base”. Unexpected for ruling circles
was reaction to this decision as a movement of scientists and students
under slogan of “scientific and technical forecasting”, i.e. forecasting
in the sphere of science and industries only, not of society in general,
no confrontation against “scientific communism” (please, not to confuse
with*technological forecasting* !). After three years of fierce
ideological struggle with Marxist dogmatics, there was appeared in the
USSR by the end of 60s around a thousand (!) of sectors and departments
in research institutes, big plants, government establishments, which
were engaged in technological forecasting not only in the sphere of
science and industries.

Spontaneously there were appeared some non-government associations with
own magazines beginning to organise almost annual congresses “on
forecasting” with more then a thousand participants everyone. Almost
each month in Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev, Novosibirsk and others USSR
university centres there passed conferences, symposiums, colloquiums,
seminars on this problematic with dozens and hundreds participants
everyone. In this movement, according its leaders was involved not less
than 4000 active participants (more than 800 in Moscow only) and ten
times as much of students and other auditory. Every year left on this
problematic up to a dozen books, some dozens articles, some hundreds
papers. There was published even an independent non-government (strictly
forbidden in the USSR!) monthly review “Voprosy prognozirovania”
(‘Problems of Forecasting”): 14 issues before repression.

In 1966-91 there was published in the USSR over 500 of “scientific
monographs on forecasting” only, not considering thousands reports on
futures studies and publicistications. As a matter of fact it was as
much as continuation of*forecasting boom* of 60s in the West, but with
the Soviet specificity. Two third of all these departments and
publications were that of forecasting in science and engineering (mostly
the last), near a quarter - in economics, near one tenth - in sphere of
town-planning. Other branches of forecasting - concerning environment
and health, sociology and politology, population and culture, psychology
and law, space and war, etc. - made shares of one percent everyone. A
special cluster of forecasting was that in natural sciences: agro-,
hydro-, weather forecasts, in geology and mineralogy, in physics and
chemistry, in medicine and biology, in cosmology etc.

Incompatibility in principle of forecasting in general and technological
forecasting in particular with anyone authoritarian and the more so
totalitarian regime at once was coming to light. At
authoritarianism/totalitarianism the statement of any problem includes
simultaneously also way of its decision, for which has responsibility an
appropriate functionary, who is to be punished if decision has no
success. It is clear, that here no problem-forecast is possible.  At
once a typical Russian/Soviet problem appears: who is guilty and what to
do and where authorities look? It is well known that any forecast
usually reveals a challenge, on which authorities do not have an
appropriate answer and which therefore is perceived as “the anti-Soviet
propagation” with immediate repressive reaction. It is clear, that at
such perception almost any forecast automatically turned in the category
of “secret information” and accordingly was simulated so that not to
cause discontent of any authorities.

It is enough to tell, that from mentioned above 500 Soviet books “on
forecasting” left in the USSR in 1966-91 almost all were devoted to
questions*how* to forecast and only few -*what* is predicted and that in
publicise only so that to avoid a question on efficiency of existing
regime. We could remind, that one of three or four such books containing
not common consideration “on the future”, but more or less concrete
forecasts, though in very “conformist”, “non-problem” phrases (I.
Bestuzhev-Lada: The World of Our Tomorrow, 1986) has sustained in
several European countries up to ten editions, including two in FRG, two
in GDR and on one in the French, Danish, Polish, Bulgarian, and Slovak
languages. So great was the interest to “mysterious Soviet Futurology”.
And in Russian this book has appeared only some years after the numerous
foreign publications 1984-85 and publication practically all of its
chapters in many Soviet magazines 1982-85.

In fact there was only one way to publish concrete forecasts: to present
it under a cap of “criticism on the bourgeois futurology”. The mountain
of such literature quickly has grown - dozens and dozens books out of
five hundreds mentioned above, hundreds and hundreds articles. There
were two preliminary conditions for such publications: all forecasts
were not to compromise the future of the USSR and “socialist camp” on
the whole and were to present the agony of capitalism and non-competence
of “bourgeois futurologists”. These conditions were actual even for
books and articles translated into Russian. Therefore a Soviet reader
could be familiar with works of Western theorists and methodologists of
forecasting could read books about general prospects of mankind, but
books with concrete forecasts, especially touching the USSR, were
inaccessible to him. Let’s tell, works of E. Jantsch, J. Martino, J.
Tinbergen, A. Peccei were translated, but that of J. Forrester and
Medows did appeared in Russian in 90s only, and G. Kahn’s “The Year
2000”and Toffler’s “The Future Shock” were published in Russian as top
secret documents for top Soviet authorities only.

However such a “mimicry” does not helped to Soviet futurists. Since 1969
Soviet authorities frightened by “The Prague Spring” have begun
curtailing the third*perestroyka* and in 1970-71 have smashed once more
all social sciences. Hundreds of scientists protesting against invasion
in Czechoslovakia were dismissed, have several forms of defamation with
prohibition to publish anything, to make lectures for students or
contacts with colleagues in other cities and countries. Some of my
colleagues had such kind of “home arrest” up to 20 years - till 1991 (I
personally - only one and a half year). The Vice-President of USSR
Academy of Sciences Prof. A. Roumiantsev, who “has opened the road” to
forecasting, to “concrete social research” (i.e. not dogmatic Marxist),
to mathematics in economic research, to sociology and politology
strictly forbidden before, - was removed from his post. Some ideological
leaders of “technological forecasting movement” (B. Tardov, I.
Bestuzhev-Lada and others) did get “home arrest” mentioned above.

2. Quasi-forecasting in 70s - 80s
---------------------------------

The USSR has entered in period of stagnation (“*zastoy* ”), has gone
through 4th and 5th dead born*“perestroykas* ” (that of Brezhnev in 1979
and of Andropov in 1982) to the 6th of Gorbatchev in 1985-91, brought to
crash of political regime, disintegration of the USSR and disappearance
of “world socialist system” and at the end to the 7th “perestroyka” of
Eltsin in 1991-2000 (in 2000 Eltsin wasretired after two terms of an
elected Russian President according Russian Constitution). Already to
the beginning of 70s it has become clear for the ruling circles in
Kremlin that the USSR has lost arms race, i.e. a matter of fact has lost
the Third World War under pseudonym “Cold War”. Has lost race with an
enemy, who was four times stronger economically and quality stronger
technologically. Therefore Kremlin near 20 years - till Gorbatchev
capitulation to NATO in 1989 - tried to compensate the techno-economic
weakness by offensive activities in Asia, Africa and Latin America, and
to compensate the fictitiousness of “socialist planning” by “scientific
grounding”.

With this purpose in 1972 there was created some kind of forecasting
state service under pseudonym “Complex Program of Scientific-Technical
Progress”. By 1976 it was developed to a special state system under the
USSR Academy of Sciences, ministries of planning and of building
(“*Gosplan” and “Gosstroy* ”) with more than half-hundred commissions on
all branches in its structure: from industries and international
relations to education and culture. Each commission was in fact a
committee of 30-70 presidents, directors, heads and other top
bureaucrats. Each commission member had behind him dozens and hundreds
subordinated who did drafts of documents under supervising of a
hierarchy of editors-slave-drivers. Thus into system were involved summa
summary as much as 20000-30000 quasi-futurists who had no idea about
forecasting and especially of technological forecasting. This great army
did prepare during first two years of every 5-years planning period*(*
“*piatiletka* ”) in 1972-74, 1976-78, 1982-84 and 1986-88 top-secret
documents with demands to give more money for appropriate branch on 20
years prospect. It was supposed, that these quasi-forecasts would be
developed in*Gosplan* into 10-years programs and at the end into 5-years
plans of a national economic development.

But in fact bureaucrats in*Gosplan* did ignore all quasi-forecasts and
elaborate their quasi-programs and quasi-plans “from achieved”, i.e. put
in their documents only data, which “look good” in politics and
propagation. And top bureaucrats at Kremlin in turn did ignore all these
quasi-plans accepting secret voluntary decisions quite independently of
any forecasts, programs, and plans. So for example according plans the
USSR spent (as if!) 20-30 billions roubles for arms race against 200-300
billions dollars in the USA and none the less got the parity of arms. In
fact it was 16 cents of each dollar of national income in the USA and 88
kopecks of each rouble in the USSR with doubling the charges on race of
arms each five years. It is easy to imagine a real forecast of such a
race and to understand why in the USSR all real forecasts were
considered as secret documents. And why Soviet futurists were simply
frightened to elaborate and to try to publish such forecasts!

Later, in 80s, some departments of the gigantic Central
Economic-Mathematical Institute were reorganised as a special Institute
of economic forecasting with some hundreds fellows and a special
magazine to summarise non-secret materials of commissions mentioned
above. The Institute and all commissions formally exist till nowadays,
but what forecasts under past and present conditions? As results there
were and are two institutes-twins instead of one before, that’s all.

It is necessary to notice that told concerns not only to the USSR. In
German Democratic Republic and in Bulgaria since 1968 till 1991 there
were state forecasting services much stronger, than in the USSR. They
included commissions on forecasting at Politbureau of ruling party and
at premier-minister (that it was not possible to make in Moscow, despite
of many attempts during 1967-70), departments of forecasting almost in
each ministry and in each district, and also at the largest enterprises,
chairs of forecasting at many universities etc. Not so total, but
similar establishments were also in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary,
Romania. And what? They everywhere did “function” as though in
themselves, the planning went in itself, and voluntary decision-making -
in itself. Anything another under totalitarianism is impossible in
principle.

Thus, we see in the USSR in 1966-91 as though three levels of approaches
to problems of the future.

On the first, lowermost level we see hundreds departments of various
establishments elaborating secret technological forecasts “for
confidential using only”. According some expert evaluations there were
prepared during these 25 years dozens of thousands such forecasts - an
ocean of the secret future information. However it is necessary to take
into account, that such forecasts were always “corrected” by several
instances of the heads, which always were influenced first of all by
fear before higher instances and consequently in every possible way did
try to avoid any*problematic* and the more so*heuristics,* innovations
in a statement. And a forecaster himself usually was guided by the same
reasons, so any concrete evaluations and data sunk in habitual (till
now) idle talk, froth.

On the second, intermediate level there were discussions of the done
work at the working meetings mentioned above. There still it was
possible to meet concrete evaluations and data in essences, but they
also sank in froth, because many opponents-dogmatic always may be
denunciators, and authorities strictly stopped any attempts to take
“liberties” with forecasts.

Finally, on the third, top level we see hundreds of books and thousands
of papers with the same “how to predict” or with very common evaluations
of general perspective of that and that phenomenon.

3. Six case studies - one example of hundreds
---------------------------------------------

We shall refer as an example - one of hundreds possible - to works of
the Sector of social forecasting in Institute of Sociology, USSR/Russia
Academy of Sciences - a unique body of this profile in this country
(periodically such sectors arose in Moscow, Leningrad, Novosibirsk, but
all quickly disappeared, because forecasting in sociology, for the clear
reasons, is much more risky, than in the sphere of scientific and
technical progress, economics or town-planning).

In 1969-91 the sector has fulfilled 6 full-scale futures research
projects with some pre-prints on intermediate reports and with final
monograph in Russian on every project (the same title for a project and
a appropriate monograph) and with confidential report in Department of
science, USSR Communist Party Central Committee on every project.

1.*Forecasting in Sociological Research* (1969-78). The theory of
forecasting of changes in needs of the personality and of the society,
in social structure, in structure of time of society (social time), in
spatial organisation of life activities of society (social space) is
developed, are given key evaluations on each direction of research. But
in the monograph, as well as in all subsequent, the censorship has left
only most general trends characteristics, as though “by itself
understood”.

2.*Forecasting Social Needs of Youth* (1969-78). The attempt of
interrogation with the purposes of forecasting not of the experts, but
of usual respondents is made. The restrictions of such approach and ways
of overcoming them are revealed with the help of psychological tests.
The youth was chosen as object of research not only because non-trivial
estimations were expected, but also because some fellows’ rates were
paid by Central Committee of Youth Union. However, all rates were stolen
by Institute’s administration (usual in the USSR) and quite other people
did realise the project. The expectations, that the youth could give
more non-trivial estimations about future things as the aged people do,
has appeared vain because of*presentism* of common consciousness of
people of any age, i.e. likening past and future to the present. Near
all concrete forecasts and even simple youth estimations about the
future have not got in the monograph, have sunk in archives of the Youth
Union.

3.*Social Indicators of the Soviet Society Way of Life* (1976-80). There
was developed the theory of indication - ordering of parameters set in
initial (base) model of a forecasting object on an example of such
complex objects in social forecasting as changes in the society way of
life. But forecasts were remained only in some confidential reports from
the monograph it was deleted all up to one.

4.*Exploratory Social Forecasting* : perspective problems of society.
Essay of systematisation (1981-84). The author’s concept of exploratory
forecast specificity is developed as well as a system of modern global
problems in context of*globalisation* as a special field of futures
studies. Concerning the USSR are made exploratory forecasts of expected
changes in social structure (with some corrections of estimations in the
first project), in the system of needs, in the system of social
organisation and control, in structures of social time and space, in
spheres of labour, family life, education and culture. Clearly, in the
final monograph there were only most common phrases.

5.*Normative Social Forecasting* : perspective goals of society. Essay
of systematisation (1984-87). The author’s concept of normative forecast
specificity in its correlation with such a form of social control
concretisation as goal-setting is developed. If to remove an inevitable
that times in this area the umbrella of “scientific communism”, so you
can see forecasts of desired changes in decision-making of modern global
problems, and concerning the USSR in spheres of labour and family life,
health, education and culture, environment, social organisation and
control. Of course, all these things were castrated in the final
monograph, but a very important step was made to another field of
futures studies, to*alternativistics* , developed in the monograph
“Alternative Civilisation” (1991, published in Russian 1998, to be
published in English by Publ. House*Nova Science* in New York, USA).

6.*Forecasting Founding of Social Innovations* (1987-90, the monograph
was published in Russian in 1993). The theory of innovations in the
social sphere is developed, as well as forecasts of radical changes in
labour, division of powers, stabilisation of family, modernisation of
school, social organisation of science, culture and health, optimisation
of city building, salvation of nature, reduction of crime,
desalcoholisation of Russian society. A special chapter was devoted
to*alternativistics.* The publication of the monograph after years and
years was gave by the price of refusal from the most radical
innovations.

I am sure that among hundreds of such sectors dozens and dozens have
realised similar projects but many without publications - secret reports
for archives only.

4. Non-government forecasting organisation
------------------------------------------

It would be a mistake to say, that Soviet futurists reconciled with such
situation. No, reaction this time was the same as in 60s: non-government
movement expanding parallel with state forecasting service mentioned
above, but no contacts between though there and there mostly there were
the same people.

First, approximately since 1974 there were “half-underground” (a special
Soviet term: it is no permission, but no prohibition) seminars on a loft
of one building of Moscow Air Institute with a hundred and more
participants. In 1976 it was possible to create on this base a
Commission of Technological Forecasting in system of the USSR Council
(later: Union) of scientists and engineers societies. In 1979 the
Commission was unwrapped in Committee of some ten commissions, beginning
from that of theory, methodology, organisation of forecasting and ending
that of social, economic, ecological, global problems of technological
forecasting (Chairman of the Committee was S. Sarkisian, then V.
Leontiev).

The Committee in 80s has restored scales of non-government organisations
in the sphere of technological forecasting at 60-s: almost annually
congresses with a thousand and more participants in university centres
of near all 15 USSR republics, almost monthly (in Leningrad even -
be-weekly) conferences and seminars with dozens and hundreds
participants, a mountain of books and publications. However all this
system could function only when publications and trips to meetings were
paid by state budget. In 1988-90 all this system was disorganised and in
1991 paralysed, though much is formal existing till now (according the
same principle: no permission and no prohibition).

After putsch in August, 1991 the Soviet censorship was disappeared, but
on its place did appear the well known in Western countries “censorship
of the market”: published, “televisioned”, and “radioned” all what is
profitable for anyone who can pay therefore having mercenary interest.
You can add to this an old paradox of any forecast known as*Oedipus
Effect* - so-called self-fulfilling or self-destroying forecasts where
prediction is annihilated by decision (action on decision).

5. Forecasting and decision-making
----------------------------------

It is well known that decisions all over the world are accepted either
in a voluntary way when a decision-maker acts intuitively or after
preparing a decision in decision-maker’s staff, and the chief only
expounds it. In both cases intervention of a futurist warning about
possible undesirable consequences of planned and the more so already
accepted decision is perceived as an attempt on authority of the chief
or, at least, on his staff. Also is rejected from a threshold. Basically
problem is easily decided by connection of a futurist to process of
decision-making at the earliest stage, when nobody’s authority is not
touched yet. But in practice it all over the world occurs rather
seldom - mainly when it is necessary to accept an especially complex and
risky decision.

So is going even in situation of market mechanisms and democratic
regimes. What to tell about authoritarian and the more so totalitarian
regimes? We have already mentioned, that forecasting and totalitarianism
are incompatible basically. As a matter of fact there here is possible
only a*mimicry* - imitation and profanation of forecasting.

The authoritarian regime - and it is completely kept not only in Russia,
but also in other republics of the former USSR - opens, in comparison
with totalitarianism, some practical opportunities of the valid, not
fictitious forecasting. But these opportunities are not used anywhere by
virtue of a number of psychological features of a typical authoritarian
decision-maker.

First, such personality, as a rule, has not a high level of political
and any other culture (people of high culture at an authoritarian regime
either think scorn of politicians or, anyway, almost never make the way
to top positions). Therefore such people always before hand is sure in
correctness of their intuitive or prepared by the staff decision-making.
To such people in general is alien any reflection concerning all
conceived and made - especially concerning future things.

Secondly, such personality is always afraid, that any problem
information, especially forecasts, can expose him in adverse light
before authorities, contenders and enemies. Therefore it
rejected*priory* .

At last, thirdly, when general background of forecasting is obviously
inauspicious (and in Russia today any optimistic forecast from a
threshold is perceived only ironically), the reference to such
information is fraught with danger of further demoralisation for a
leader and his subordinated. Therefore any reference to future -
especially to long-term forecasts - is usually avoided.

However, in mass consciousness of the people the desire is incredible
“to glance into the future”, to foresee, who will win next elections,
what rate of dollar will be, what terrorists can undertake in following
times, etc. Therefore in Russia of 90s, as mushrooms after a rain,
appear dozens “centres of analysis and prognosis”, which earn much money
by attempts of such divination - almost always, as in a roulette,
unsuccessful. They are not embarrassed of such attempts failure in
60-80s: nobody of futurists in the world that times did foresee the USSR
disintegration and disappearance of “world socialist system”, though
there were enough of anti-Soviet theories (non forecasts!) like number
less opuses of Brzesinski. And that many technological forecasts
revealed gathering in the USSR and in “socialist camp” at the whole a
very serious problem situation (more serious then all modern global
problems!) developing in critical and further in catastrophic one was of
no interest for politicians and men in the street. Was perceived in the
best case for some futurists (including personally the author of this
article) only as illustrations for something like “legal”, non-dissident
anti-Marxism. Equally as there was of no interest also normative
forecasts of eventual normalisation of this problem situation.

Indeed, today the mass reader, TV spectator, radio listener not only in
Russia, but in the world has too no interest for exploratory forecasts
of development the global problem situation in critical and catastrophic
one during the first half - may be, even first quarter - of next
century. Equally as no interest for normative forecasts of eventual
transition to an alternative civilisation capable to overcome such
problems: it seems too abstract and too old-fashioned like Club of Rome
some 30 years ago. But it is a tragic mistake!

Certainly, a forecast-divination, say, of the data of beginning the next
world war with sub-sequent wreck of Euro-American civilisation
(including Russia and all the Eastern Europe) like that of Ancient Rome
Empire and by the same reasons could shock world public opinion like
some first reports to Club of Rome 30 years ago. But this time such
quasi-forecasts will be only a kind of imposture (not war - it is
ripping and ripping with predetermined results, but attempts to foresee
something unforeseeable in principle). And nevertheless, in the
foreground of forecasting in Russia today, as well as all over the
world, were and are attempts of divination.

Certainly, here and there in Russia as if on inertia there are
elaborated technological forecasts too - but of no interest for
government and society as years and years before. No more in hundreds,
but in some - may be, in some dozens - futures research centres till
this year (1999) having no regular contacts, very few people except,
between them and with colleagues in the world.

6. Three case studies of 90s
----------------------------

By way of an illustration besides we should again refer to an example,
the only well familiar because on personal experience (no information in
this country of other activities at all!). That of Sector of social
forecasting, Institute of Sociology, Russian Academy of Sciences.

In 1991-95 the sector has realised the 7th futures research project
“Perspectives of Russia Transformation: an expertise future scenario
building monitoring”. Practically it was an annually questionnaire
(three times) for some 60 top experts - equal groups of the economists,
sociologists, politologists, and representatives of other disciplines -
and construction a set of future scenarios on this base: inertial,
evolutionary, revolutionary, catastrophic, ideal, optimal etc. By the
way our experts did well predict in January-February 1991 the putsch in
August 1991 (even the month!), in January-February 1992 the inevitable
fall of the monetarist policy of Gaidar government to the end of this
year (Gaidar was dismissed in December), in January-February 1993 the
civil war between Eltsin administration and Russian communist parliament
after summer this year (the fusillade and dispersal of the parliament
was in October this year) etc. But all this was not a main task of
research. The final monograph under the same title was published in
Russian in Publ. House of Moscow University in 1998. The methodological
part of this monograph was published in Italian by Publ. House of
Istituto di Sociologia Internationale, Gorizia, Italia in 1997. The
publicistic version of the same problems was published in Russian in the
book “Russia on the eve of XX1 century: 1904-2004 - from a colossus to a
collapse and back” (to be published in English by Publ. House*Nova
Science* in New York, USA). But limited circulation of all three books
and the total collapse of the Russian books, magazines and newspapers
market (with exception of detective and similar literature, “yellow
press” etc.) resulted in that as these futures studies like all others
remained unknown even for majority of Russian colleagues, let alone the
foreign colleagues and wider reader’s audience. And of course no
attention of Russian government, politicians, scientists.

In 1996-2000 on the same monitoring technology the sector realises the
8th futures research project “Forecasting of expected and desired
changes in Russian Education System” (Including sub-systems of parents
and pre-school education, elementary, middle, and high school,
universities, training and retraining of employee, general
self-education of adults, complementary education in clubs of interest).
There was published some intermediate reports and the final monograph.
But there is no doubt, that all this is waited the destiny of the
previous project. Anyway, there is no doubt, that it will not be used by
any bodies of Russian national education management, which have today
only one care: no changes because of fear not to deteriorate existing -
very bad - situation. So this project is of no interest not only for
government, but even for Russian academy of education, in spite of a
fact, that director of this project is one of Academy’s top managers.

Parallel, in 1993-1997 in framework of Department for education and
culture, Russian academy of education was realised a special futures
research project “Social forecasting and perspectives of culture” (final
monograph in Russian in 1997). In fact there are forecasts of expected
and desired changes in all twelve types of culture establishments:
books-magazines-newspapers business, TV and radio, cinema and theatre,
club and museum, public library, city and national park, sports, with
the same destiny concerning practical results as mentioned above.

Indeed, similar examples can be continued, but all reminded unknown
behind frameworks of that or other research group till creation of
Russian and International futures research academies in 1997-99 (see
below thereabout). Before creation of these bodies there was in Russia
nearly ten years long (1988-97) no body, no bulletin, no any information
exchange between Russian futurists.

7. Towards Russian Futures Studies Academy
------------------------------------------

It is necessary to tell, that Russian futurists during these ten years
undertook and continue to undertake some attempts to leave from a
situation of the tightened information paralyses.

Since the end of 80s, when the Soviet repressive-censorial system began
to collapse, some new non-government organisations in the sphere of
forecasting like that in 60s and 70s were spontaneously arisen:
“Association for the Future in Co-Operation with World Futures Studies
Federation” (President - I. Bestuzhev-Lada), Association “Forecasts and
Cycles”(President - J. Yakovez), Association of Financial Analysts and
Futurists (President - J. Sidelnikov). In 1997, after some years of
negotiations, these organisations, together with “Kondratiev
Foundation”, research centres “Applied Prognostics”, “Strategy”, Centre
of Human Values did form the Russian Futures Studies Academy (Akademia
prognozirovania) structuring in many branch and regional departments
(President - I. Bestuzhev-Lada). The Academy has begun realisation of
several research projects (some of it see below), publication of
“Bulletin”, “Magazine”and “Yearbook”. But without a well-developed
marketing in national and international scale this work is doomed on
inevitable attenuation. That’s why the Academy in 1999 was coming to
International Futures Research Academy as a confederation of national
academies of the same profile with a common task: to create a civilised
forecasts market including governmental section and also such
international organisations as UNO, UNESCO etc., in co-operation with
World Future Society, World Futures Studies Federation, Futuribles
International and other futurists organisations (Secretary General of
the Academy Organizing Committee - A. Gasparini, Italy).

First joint research project of the Academy “A country and the world in
2001-2010: problems and decisions” is oriented on the market mentioned
above. First potential participants are around two dozens countries all
over the world. Time of the project realisation is: January 1 - June 30,
2000. There will be exploratory and normative forecasts on ten aspects
of expected and desired changes in each appropriate country:

Environment: minimisation of “ecological disaster zones”;

Population: overcoming depopulation trends;

Settlement: crisis of cities and degradation of villages;

Economics, finances, and employment in process of total computerisation;

Tourism as one of leading industries of 21st century;

Transportation, communication, computerisation;

Education and culture versus anti-culture;

Physiology and psychology of a human being in process of cyborgization
of a personality;

State security: disasters of nature, criminality, terrorism, war;

Geopolitics: a country in the world.

Certainly, in the Russian book market always there are a lot of books
“about the future of Russia and World”. And in 2000 under millennium
hysteria them will be ever more. Here you often can meet the word
“forecast” but really there are the same “reflections on the future” as
hundred years ago. There is no research on which base a book or an
article is written. And almost all authors do not suspect about existing
of technological forecasting with its forty years history.

May be, will remind thereabout an “Anthology of Technological
Forecasting Classics: 1952-1999”, which is published by Russian Futures
Studies Academy and which includes the key chapters from the basic works
of R. Jungk, T. Gordon, O. Helmer, B. de Jouvenel, D. Bell, E. Jantsch,
H. Kahn, J. Mchale, F. Polak, E. Cornish, J. Galtung, O. Flechtheim, A.
Toffler, A. Peccei, D&D Meadows and others authors of reports to the
Club of Rome, H. Henderson, J. Naisbitt and others, alternated by
reports of concrete forecasts and brilliant illustrations concerning
next century.

8. Participation in International Futurists Associations
--------------------------------------------------------

In this connection pertinently to remind a drama history of the USSR
participation in international futurists associations. Since 1967 and
till 90s there appeared in all international futures research
directories only one-two Soviet names out of hundreds in reality, and
always the same. The reasons were that Soviet “official science” was in
principle against any interdisciplinary studies like cybernetics or
futures studies, and there was no permission for any participation in
such things, and “top bureaucrats” in science who could get such
permission were afraid because of their career, and others simply had no
real possibilities to take part. It is enough to tell that it was only
one Soviet Club of Rome member and only because he was husband of Soviet
Prime Minister daughter.

In 1967 one Soviet futurist have allowed to publish his works in futures
studies under his real surname. Before since 1951 he had no opportunity
for publications at all (only letters to Stalin and others Soviet
leaders with no reaction of course), and since 1961 he has published
some books and articles under a pseudonym. Becoming “legal” he began
negotiations with R. Jungk and B. de Jouvenel about creation a World
Federation of existing to that time futurists associations, and
therefore all three were elected later as honorary members of the
Federation. But not of associations, simply of some hundreds individual
and some dozens institutional members only, because the Soviet
participant of negotiations was to that time repressed and has no
possibility to help in negotiations between existing futurists
associations. When he was at last got free of his more then a year and
half “home arrest”, he as all his Soviet colleagues had no permission to
take part in activities of any associations or federations of “bourgeois
futurology”. And only the status of an Honorary member for what there
was necessary no permission did give him since 1984 such a possibility.
But in 1996 this status was abolished in principle, and another problem
arisen. Very few people in the West understand the difference of living
standards in the 1st, 2d, and 3d worlds in the world. As a matter of
fact ten dollars of a month per capita income in the 3d world are quite
the same typical (mass, middle etc.) case as hundred dollars in the 2d
(including Russia) and thousand in the 1st. So for example a $40 or 300
fee, a $50 dinner, a $100 hotel, a $1000 air-ticket etc. are for a
Russian participant with his typical salary quite the same thing as $
400 or 3000 fee, $500 dinner, $1000 hotel, $10000 air-ticket for an
American or West European. And if he is not of “New Russians” (2% of
Russians) or has no access to the Western system of sponsorship (very
few have) so no possibilities to take part at all.

In 1970, before his “home arrest”, the same Soviet futurist on the 7th
Congress of International Sociological Association in Varna, Bulgaria
did initiate creation of a research committee on futurology (later - ISA
RC-07 Futures Research). He was elected as President of the Committee,
but having no chancery for telecommunications and being in situation of
“iron curtain”, especially concerning the “bourgeois futurology” he
asked his personal friend Bertrand de Jouvenel to help as co-president
(also elected). After the death of de Jouvenel he was replaced on the
same post by his another personal friend Eleonora Masini. And both
together as two co-presidents did their charge till 1996, because there
was no practical alternative for this co-presidency. At the end after
some attempts in 1996 new Presidium of the Committee was elected. And
the founder of the Committee has received an invitation letter to take
part in Committee activities as if he was a tyro in this case. His name
was deleted from a history of the Committee.

So in practice worked the “iron curtain” in the sphere of futures
studies.

Let us hope, that now, with creation of the International Futures
Research Academy as a kind of daughter organisation of World Future
Society, World Futures Studies Federation, Futuribles International and
other futurists associations (you see here the idea of the “federation
of associations” mentioned above), as a confederation of some dozens
national futures studies academies this type (to the end of 1999 there
were around two dozens of institutional members of the International
academy), as a network of joint futures research projects - let us hope
that now Russia and other republics of the former USSR will begin to
leave from isolation in the sphere of futures studies in the world.

9. Teaching young futurists
---------------------------

It is necessary to tell some words about a quality of the futures
research next generation, i.e. about relation to the future of today
students in Russia.

In principle it is quite the same as of all population: curiosity
quickly passing in indifference. The curiosity, because always is
interesting to find out something “about the future”. Indifference,
because the study of the future, as well as of the past, does not give
any practical results for the present, and will not be claimed attention
by a society. Besides has an effect the*presentism* of ordinary
consciousness mentioned above. It is also important the discredit of
forecasting focused on divination because of nearly always appeared
insolvent. And during last ten years to all this is added in Russia the
total demoralisation of population in general and of the youth in
particular. For the prospects without any forecasts open most gloomy.

That is why attempts to adjust the teaching of technological forecasting
as a special educational subject at university from the end of 60-s till
nowadays invariable suffered failure. Sometimes at that or other
university it was possible on any time to create even chairs of
forecasting (such chairs were available in Moscow, Leningrad,
Novosibirsk, Kiev, Sverdlovsk, Alma-Ata), but it earlier or later should
be closed, as there was a insoluble problem of students specialisation
and then employment. It was said, that futures studies are
interdisciplinary on the character, but Soviet science and teaching are
strictly mono disciplinary in principle. Some enthusiasts managed by
years to read lectures and lead seminars on forecasting at several
faculties of several universities (at the Moscow university, for
example, such lectures and seminars are taken place since 1969 till
now), but it is of course not obligatory courses, facultative for
wishing only. As the manuals there are used till now some text books of
70-80s and “Handbook on Forecasting”(1982).

The similar situation has developed with PhD (candidate of science in
Russia) and DSc dissertations. There are in Russian central libraries
some hundreds, if not thousands dissertations “on forecasting” 1967-99.
But as well as in monographs you will vainly search here even for one
concrete forecast. Even a dissertation “on forecasting methodology” is a
desperately courageous step connected to raise risk not to receive the
necessary majority votes of the scientific council members. Thus nearly
each tenth DSc dissertation “on forecasting” was declined by dogmatic in
such councils. And to try to give concrete forecast in your dissertation
means obviously to go on scandal and failure. And for what? From nearly
a hundred and half of my formal or informal post-graduate students only
two young ladies (now not so young) continue to be engaged in
forecasting, and that only as university professors, one of two later
even as dean and rector. Others have found to themselves more profitable
employment, claimed by the state and society.

This sad situation is beginning gradually to be improved only since the
middle of 90s, when nearly annually “Summer schools for young futurists”
has taken place with some dozens students, post-graduates and young
fellows of several universities. Since 1997 in new created Russian
Futures Studies Academy a special section for young futurist improvers
is organised, though really functioning only in Northwest department of
the Academy (St. Petersburg). Here we see a good perspective for summer
and winter schools of young futurists on the more regular base.

On something greater in the foreseeable future hardly it is possible to
expect.


