FUTURES STUDIES IN YUGOSLAVIA
=============================

Radmila Nakarada

The Questionnaire presupposes conditions of social normality, continuity
and intensive professional communications. Reality in Yugoslavia is
radically different, and thus what may seem a rather simple exercise for
others is a difficult task for me.

After a complete breakdown of the state and society, a terrible war that
has isolated present Yugoslavia, futures research seems like a distant
past. The period you are referring to from 1960 to 1999 covers the
golden age of the socialist regime, its crisis, eruption of nationalism,
secessionism, and its breakdown. The state that was closest to EU as the
end of eighties plunged into a series of tragic wars and final
breakdown. In other words, in the case of Yugoslavia the space of your
research has in the meantime disintegrated. Out of one state, five
states emerged.

In the present Yugoslavia the strength of the past, unresolved problems
and wounds, and the weight of the present completely excluded the future
as a long-term concept, as a coordinated movement with the surrounding
world, as political and economic restructuring toward a higher level of
development. Going through violent conflicts, sanctions, media
satanization, shattering economic crisis, bombing the future was lost in
widespread apathy. In other words, the sociological relations between
the predicament of the society and the stance toward the future are well
illustrated by the drama of Yugoslavia. In an ongoing total social
crisis, the dimension of the future becomes an abstraction. Second, as
far as I know, futures researchers did not anticipate the type of crisis
that would evolve in a number of places after the end of Cold war.

Futures research began to develop its roots in the old Yugoslavia when
the society was a dynamic entity, when a privileged place in the world
community seemed secure, i.e. when there was hope, openness profound
social interest in development. Technology, education (*Miroslav
Pecujlic* ,*The University of the Future,* 1980, translated in English,
Spanish, Italian), environment/urbanism were spheres of prime interest,
although there were attempts to problematize also human needs, values.
The then current streams of thought in this field were translated,
reviewed, discussed. The public was well acquainted with*Jouvenel,
Jungk, Meadows, Kahn, Richta* , and in tune with the ideas that were
then prevalent. (For instance,*Miroslav Pecujlic* , wrote a book*The
Future that Began* at the same time*Richta’s Civilization on the
Crossroads* , was published).

Some of the Yugoslavs were involved in the very beginnings of
international attempts to situate futures studies within a humanistic
framework. Prof.*Mihailo Markovic* took part in the famous Oslo meeting
with*Johan Galtung* and*Robert Jungk* , and later on was one of the
founders of WFSF, and for two terms its Vice-President while I was a
member of the Steering Committee. In Dubrovnik, during the seventies, at
the Inter-University Post-graduate Centre for several years courses in
Futures Studies were offered. However, other than public lectures, and
sporadic courses at some faculties, no systematic studies of the future
were established within the Yugoslav educational system.

In the mid eighties Academy of Arts and Sciences Prof.*Markovic*
organized a Committee for FS that met on a regular basis for a while,
discussing problems of development and human needs. (*Mihailo Markovic*
ed.*The needs of social development* , SANU, Belgrade, 1991).

A group of engineers (*Rajko Tomovic, Slobodan Radoman* ) organized
around their professional organization ETAN an interdisciplinary group
that dealt with visions of an all encompassed strategy of development
(*S. Radoman, V. Stambuk* , eds.*Developing countries and paths of
development* , 1979). There were also attempts to launch futures
research in Novi Sad (Prof.*Stefan Han* , Ambassador*Laslo Bala* ,
Prof.*Dusan Ristic* ) within the Vojvodina Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Later on, in the late eighties Prof.*Han, Ristic, Markovic, Pecujlic*
and*myself* established a branch of WFSF but it never got off the
ground, the crisis was pressing and interest in futures research was not
extensive. Yugoslavia was also a venue of a number of conferences
dealing with futures studies issues. As an illustration, let me mention
that one of WFSF was held in Dubrovnik during the Presidential mandate
of Johan Galtung, the first*International Seminar on Science and
Technology on the Transformation of the World,* as part of the project
Socio-Cultural Alternatives in Changing World (UNU and Belgrade
University) was held in Belgrade, as well as regular conferences*Science
and Society* in Herceg Novi.

After 5th of October 2000, political change has occurred and we are now
in a process of transition. It is too early to say, whether extensive
and profound futures research will re-emerge. For the moment, we are
living a paradox, as if the model of the desirable future is fully
known, all we have to do is apply it. This is the outcome of the
prevailing aim among the ex socialist countries to become part of the
European integration process, Partnership for Peace, NATO, that is, the
future is to become part of the developed West, globalizing world. For
that reason there is not much inter/regional trade or integration in the
Balkans, each country is running for itself toward the distant Europe.
The historical specificities, social costs of hasty reforms are easily
overlooked. This is however, a reflection of a phenomenon that is
global. i.e. not many alternatives, visions exist anywhere today.
Perhaps, once some firm ground is reached, the first phase of transition
is accomplished, the visionary thread will emerge, and the interest for
futures studies will reappear. Reforms of the educational system are now
being initiated and there is reason to believe that space will be
created for new contents, including futures studies. However, since the
political changes have not ended some of Yugoslavia’s greatest
uncertainties, the overwhelming pressure of the immediate present may
still continue for some time.

As far as the Yugoslav youth is concerned their vision of the future is
to become part of the western glittering, consumption society, the
future is in the external world, the EU. If generalizations are allowed,
youngsters here have, by and large, felt deprived of a normal life,
normal communications with their counterparts in Europe, i.e. of
material means and visas. Now they are, as some of my students have
said, “hungry for consumption”, eager to travel and if possible find
good jobs outside of Yugoslavia. Their future is related to their
personal, immediate betterment. No great visions, collective concerns
are attractive. However, keeping up with the high-tech developments,
particularly in information sciences is important, as well as ecological
concerns. Ecological concerns have grown particularly after the NATO
bombing and the use of depleted uranium. It will take some dwelling in
relative normal circumstances before their creative, visionary energy is
rekindled.


