THE COMPREHENSIVE PICTURE BASED ON THE ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE
===================================================================

Viorica Ramba Varga

1. Introductory words
---------------------

The futures research (futures studies) experiences in Central and
Eastern European countries written from inside represents an original
part of the post-war European culture. That is why we have started to
explore the original cultural phenomenon before it might be forgotten.

In 1999 the Editorial Board elaborated a Questionnaire containing six
questions aiming to make possible conduct an international comparative
analysis for the researchers interested in it.

As there is no answer to every question from the approached countries,
the picture will be rather laconic, suffering from numerous gaps. One
may also take in account subjective elements contain in the answers.

*The chosen methodology* will formulate one after the other all six
questions and gives the predominant convergent and/or divergent answers
resulting from the Questionnaire, even if there are some inequalities in
the details of the given information.

2. Similarities and differences among the countries considered
--------------------------------------------------------------

*Q1. What institute(s) in your country did effect futures studies,
research programs in the years 1960-1990, are effecting now? (The name
of institute, city etc.) In sixties:*

The answers show notable*similarities* for the sixties, such as:

The futurology like a newly born science discipline puts its wonderful
collection of forecasting methods (see*Erich Janstch* ) at the disposal
of the futures oriented thinkers, and of decision makers. There was a
great interest for the*methodological* aspects that had prevalence in
future oriented thinking. Also, there existed a vivid interest for the
“distant” future, like the year 2000. Hundreds of book on forecasting
methodology were published. Also university curricula used forecasting
methods in strategic and integrative studies, e.g. Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, Poland. In the USSR there were around 1000 departments of
forecasting among 5000 USSR research institutes in 1966-1971.

In the late sixties a project having the title “Civilization on the
Crossroads” was provided by the interdisciplinary research team of the
Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences headed by the philosopher Radovan
Richta. More than 80 experts elaborated the scenario of the future
development of industrial society, under the presumption that its
political regime could follow the practice of socialist regime. The book
stimulated wide professional discussions among politicians and
futurologically oriented thinkers, and was translated in France, Italy,
Romania, the USSR etc. At the same time with Richta’s book in Yugoslavia
was published M. Pecujlic’s book, “The Future that Began” and the public
was well acquainted with Bertrand de Jouvenel, Robert Jungk, Herman
Kahn, Radovan Richta and others.

*In seventies and eighties:*

Much enough similarities existed also. Futures research was
definitively*divided* in two great streams in each country, with some
time variations.

An “*official forecast* ” raised and was related to the central planning
activities. It was methodologically subordinated to the State Planning
Committees (having specific denomination in each country). There was a
need for more information about future trends as foundation for
decisions to be made and the ways to be chosen: “How to organise society
in the period of the global transition from capitalist via socialism to
communism? How to “unbound” the productive forces? How should the
economy be planned in that age of transition? How could
scientific-technological progress be mastered to the benefit of the
people?” (See Karlheinz Steinmüller: From anticipations of a bright
future to dissolution in this book). The National State Planning
Committees in these countries elaborated and promoted planned research
and programming (short term - 5 years, medium term - 10 years). They
elaborated also its visions of long-term development in which expected
innovations were taken like guides for all productive and consumer
activities of the population. The market economy analyses and social
assessment of expected structural changes of the national economy were
absent.

Analogically, some Academy of Sciences in these countries elaborated
lists of the most promising fields of scientific researches for them,
including expected equipment for experimental technology for the next 15
years, e.g. Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, the USSR.

At the same time an “*unofficial prognostics* ” tendency, born in
sixties, was gradually rejected because of its “thinking different”
capability, as a kind of “internal emigration”, or an “internal
criticism”. For example:

in 1971 a special state forecasting system was created in the USSR: “The
Scientific Council on complex Programming of Technological Progress”
having 52 commissions, which were active in 1972-1990. Futures studies
continue in framework of technological forecasting only in few research
centres, like Department of Social Forecasting, USSR Academy of
Sciences, Institute of Sociology;

in Romania the inhibition appeared later, after 1975, after the
flourishment manifested in 1972 by holding in Bucharest the 3rd World
Conference on Futures Research with participation of Bertrand de
Jouvenel, Johan Galtung, Gennady M. Dobrov, Jacques Delors, Eleonora
Masini, Peter Menke-Glückert and after the creation of Centre for
Futures Research at the University of Bucharest (1971) and of the
International Centre for the Methodology of Futures Research (1973); of
the Committee for Prospective Studies of Romanian Academy (1974).

Besides the similarities it is to mention some*differences* . The main
aspects refer to the fact, that in some countries such as
Czechoslovakia, GDR, Hungary, Poland, Yugoslavia there were not a strong
inhibition for the futures research. For example, in Czechoslovakia the
“unofficial prognostics” orientation was subordinated to the civic
interest in the renewal of democracy. Its institutional form was shaped
mainly by private and academic initiatives. Unofficial futurologist
concentrated their efforts on gathering forecasting methodology
knowledge from abroad and on critics of the official policy. Their
results helped to formulate alternative strategies for political
decisions what were publicly appreciated namely after “velvet
revolution” in 1989, when many members of an unofficial prognostics
became active politicians. But even here, there was an official
incident, when the sessions of the Czechoslovak Scientific and
Technological Society, where above hundred intellectuals were discussing
alternatives to the existing political scene, were officially forbidden
in 1987. In the good manner of resistance the members acted in renewing
public conferences and published their unofficial journal “Prognostika”.
(See Frantisek Petrasek: “Futures Studies in the Czech Republic” in this
book.) While the futures studies in GDR have been absorbed into the
daily business of politics and ideology a new concern about the future
grew, partly within the small opposition movement, partly under the roof
of the churches, partly in academic institutions, but as in other
countries too, mostly without any definite organisational basis. Quite
generally, future thinking - in the form of peace and civil rights
movement and of the concern for the ecological problems - contributed to
the fall of the system.

In the early nineties (Mention: for the last decade, please, see further
Q4.):

After 1989 an unexpected, surprising, paradoxical phenomenon appeared at
the very beginning of nineties: the decreased public interest in the
futures studies, concomitantly with declined, almost collapsed
forecasting activities at all levels.

Let us review a few aspects concerning the circumstances, which in this
phenomenon occurred in the beginning of ‘90th.

Dismantling state planning and the new transition processes to market
economy in the former socialist countries in Central and Eastern Europe
have led in the*early 1990s* to the dissolution and even incrimination
of the futures researchers ordered and financed by the state. No proper
short-, medium and long-term development project was elaborated in place
of the plan for the societies in the region. Nor was elaborated the
perspective concept of their various economic sectors’ evolution and/or
involution. Problems of survival and short-term tasks in economic
restructuring situation were prevalent. The present completely excluded
long-term concept of the future in inside structures of these countries.
Except two guidelines: the programmes of the EU and NATO integration
stipulations. In achieving such criterion, the Central and Eastern
European countries reached very different stages to date.

*Q2. The most important fields of futures research programs in your
country between 1960-1990, since 1990 (today) (E.g. social, educational,
health care, economic, cultural, political, technological,
environmental, and others.)*

The*convergent* answers show that*in 1966-1990* the most part of
forecasting activities were related to*industries and economics* (e.g.
2/3 respective 1/3 in the USSR) followed by*urbanism, territorial
systematisation* and*city building* and*demographic prognoses* .
Comparatively, a relative little part of futures research faced such
broad social matters as education, health care, environmental politics,
demographic prognosis. Exception is Poland, where the demographic
prognosis was well founded, as one of the first in Europe, as well as
the Polish research on the dangers associated with social pathologies,
like alcoholism, delinquency etc.

The 1989 changes interrupted temporarily the long-term futures
researches. After the fall of the Berlin Wall (not foreseen by the
futures researchers) the East German science was restructured and
integrated into the West German research landscape. Some researchers
work in technological assessment or related areas. Like in Bulgaria and
Slovakia, where a great number of specialists in forecasting, among the
most competent, entered politics, others found better remunerated jobs
in private companies. The total number of active forecasters declined
rapidly along with interest in forecasting itself. (See S. Zajac:
“Futures Studies in Slovakia” in this book.)

*After 1990* , economic forecasts (macroeconomic, sectorial analyses,
regional project studies) are followed by political, social,
environmental, educational, health care, a few of technical and other
field of futures research programs. But this preoccupation is
rather*timid* in the 90s. Economic restructuration policy paid a little
attention to the future of some important branches of economy like the
heavy industry, the agriculture, the most important economic domains in
these countries in 1960-1990 (see Romania). Comprehensive strategic
studies for development of the countries appears only in the late 1990s,
excepting Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, where appeared earlier.
The main interest concerns the assessment of opportunities to meet the
European Integration requirements.

*Q3. Please indicate 3-6 more important futures studies concerning the
futures of the fields mentioned above of your home country,*

*of global interest written and published in your country, with
bibliography.*

There is a*long* and*interesting* list which merit the effort to consult
every country’s answers. Here is*some cull of it* :

BULGARIA

1.*The Fourth Civilisation* , A. Tomov, no year indic.

THE CZECH REPUBLIC

*Civilisation on the Crossroads* , R. Richta, Prague, 1969 (translated
in France, Italy, Russia, Romania etc.)

*Prognostica* , unofficial journal of the Czechoslovak futures
researchers, Prague, 1987

After 1990

*Dialogs with the Future* - a futurological revue, Prague, 1991

*A Relevance of the Futurology for the Policy-making* , K. Skalicki,
Prague, 1997

*Starting Point to the Strategic Outlook* , F. Petrasek, Prague, 2000

*Threshold 21, The Czech Republic: Model of the Sustainable
Development,* M. Bedny, Olomouc, 1999

ESTONIA

*Economic and Social Prognostics* , R. Reuter, A. Schipai, Tallinn, 1977

*Global problems and futures scenarios* , L. Valt, no year indic.

*Scenario - packages concerning rural life in Estonia* - with central
point in reestablishment of private farming and real local government,
Tallinn, 1986

*Economically independent Estoni’* s project, 1987

After 1990

The models of:

*“Liberal development Estonia”* ,

*“Green (sustainable) development”,*

*“Continuing trends” were publicly compared, 1991*

Document called*Guidelines for Estonian spatial development until 2010*
, prepared by team from Estonian Institute for Futures Studies, Tallinn,
1999

*Scenarios for development of Central Baltic Sea Region* *- until 2015*
, prepared by international working group leaded by EIFFS, 1999

THE GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

*Gesellschaftsprognostik. Probleme einer neuen Wissenshaft.* G. Heyden
(ed.), Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1968

*Futurologie. Eine Kritishe Analyse burgerlicher Zukunftsforschung.* A.
Bonish, Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1971

After 1990

*Visionen. 1990-2000-2100. Eine Chronik der Zukunft.* A. Steinmüller/K.
Steinmüller, Hamburg, 1992

*Zukunftforshung in Europa. Ein Abriss der Geschicht.* K*.* Steinmuller
and ot. Nomos, Baden-Baden, 2000

HUNGARY

*Long-Range Perspectives and Planning.* G. Kovács, Budapest, 1970

*Practice of Futures Research and Forecasting. A Handbook of
Methodology* . L. Besenyei, E. Gidai, E. Nováky, Budapest, 1977

*Futures Research.* G. Kovács, É. Hideg, A. Korompai, E. Nováky (ed. E.
Nováky) Budapest, 1992

Of global interest

*Future Research in Hungary.* Budapest, 1983

*Developing Environmental Strategies through Futures Research* (ed. by
E. Nováky) Budapest, 1991

*The unfolding new worlds and economics.* J. Hoós, Budapest, 1997

*On the Eve of the 21st century* (ed. E. Gidai) Budapest, 1998

POLAND

*Polish society at the brink of the 20th century and of the 21st
century.* Warsaw, 1985

*In the perspective of the year 2010. Warsaw, 1995*

*Strategy for Poland’s development up to the year 2020. Synthesis.
Warsaw, 2000*

*Changes in the structure of Poland’s economy until 2010. Poland in the
light of the European Union* (A. Karpinski, S. Paradysz, J. Ziemiecki)
Warsaw, 1999

Of global interest

*Civilisational megatrends vs. the process of system transformation,* J.
Pajestka: In:*For the orientation on the future in Polish reforms* ,
Warsaw, 1994

*Wealth and poverty of nations,* S. Albinowski, Warsaw, 1995

*Globalisation of the world economy vs. regional integration.* Warsaw,
1998

ROMANIA

*The Chronicle of the Year 2000.* M. Malitza, Bucharest, 1969

*The series Mankind Global Problems.* Collective volumes of 25-30
chapters each

*Handbook of Perspective Techniques in Romania* . M. Botez, Bucharest,
1974

After 1990

*Ten thousand cultures, one single civilization.* M*.* Malitza,
Bucharest, 1998

*Macro Models of Romanian Transition Economy.* E. Dobrescu, Bucharest,
1996, 1998

*Old and new cultural ecologies on the eve of IIIth Millennium.* V.
Ramba Varga, Bucharest, 1999

*Quarterly review Millennium III.* Issued after 1999. Directed by Mircea
Malitza. Among the members of the board are Federico Mayor, Lawrence
Klein and Ilya Prigogine (Nobel Prize laureates), Ricardo
Diez-Hochleitner, Pentti Malaska, Rosemann Runte, E.U. Wiezsäker, Jean
d’Ormesson, Sergei Kapitza

RUSSIA

After 1990

*Russia on the Eve of XXI. Century: 1904-2004. From a Colossus to the
Collapse and Back.* I. V.,Bestuzhev-Lada, Moscow, 1997

*Perspectives of Russia Transformation. An Experts Scenario-Forecasting
Monitoring.* I. V*.* Bestuzhev-Lada, Moscow, 1998

*Estimated and Desired Changes in Russian Educational System.*
Bestuzhev-Lada, I.V. and coll., Moscow, 2000

Of global interest

*Globalistics: Towards Doomsday. Can We Avoid the Foretold in
Apocalypsis?* Bestuzhev-Lada, I. V., Moscow, 1996

*Alternativistics: Towards an Alternative Civilization.* Bestuzhev-Lada,
I. V., Moscow, 1998

*Ahead is the XXI. Century. An Anthology of Modern Classics in Futures
Studies 1952-1999.* I. V. Bestuzhev-Lada (ed) Moscow, 2000

SLOVAKIA

*Prognosing the Scientific Advancement (in Slovak),* F. Gal. et al.,
Bratislava, Veda, 1990

*Slovakia at the Turn of the Third Millenium* (in Slovak), J. Markus et
al, Bratislava, Veda, 1999

*Slovakia in the early 1990’s. Society-Economy-Science and Technology*
(in Slovak), L. Faltan et al, Bratislava, Institute for Forecasting SAS,
1994

*Forecasting in the Transition Society, International Conference,
Smolenice Castle* , November 20-21 1999, Edited by S. Zajac, Institute
for Forecasting SAS, 1998

*The Long-term Tendencies in Selective Areas of the Slovak Society up to
2015* . Zajac Stefan et al, Bratislava, Institute for Forecasting, SAS,
2000

*Of global interest, written and published in SLovakia:*

*Kelet-Közép-Európa: Honnan - Hova? (ECE: Where from - where to?) Eds.:
É. Ehrlich, G. Révész, P. Tamási, Akadémiai Kiadó, 1994*

YUGOSLAVIA

*The Future that Began.* M. Pecujlic, Belgrade, 1969

*Developing countries and paths of development, eds* . S. Radoman, V.
Stambuk, Belgrade, 1979

*The University of the Future.* M. Pecujlic, Belgrade, 1980

The first “*International Seminar on Science and Technology” as a part
of the project “Socio-Cultural Alternatives in Changing World* ” was
held in Belgrad by UNO and Belgrade University in eighties.

*The needs of social development.* M. Markovic ed., Belgrade, 1991

*Q4. Please explain whether a significant change was seen in the period
of transition on the future orientation of the population and even in
the fields of futures studies activities.*

*a) If there was progress, name the fields,*

*b) If accidentally the interest and activities declined please,
indicate the probable reasons, like the lack of interest of decision
makers, the lack of global vision about future importance of the
different fields of human activities, loss of people’s interest in a
longer than one year futures perspective, other(s).*

The answers to this question show some*sporadic similarities* in some
countries at the point a), and*quasi-general similarities* at the point
b).

a) There was a progress in the use of econometric models in application
to prognoses, mainly in the methodology (Poland). The same progress was
made in the methodology of prospective studies due to both the opening
the international specialized literature and the contact with foreign
experts (Estonia, Romania). New institutes have been founded for the
forecasting, especially for the economic forecasting. Futures researches
have begun rethinking the theoretical, methodological and methodical
knowledge base for futures studies in the circumstances of instability
(Hungary).

*In Bulgaria* the change during the transitional period manifests in the
fact that, “persons who take part in the government are connected with
the Bulgarian futurists. Members of the Foundation’s Board of Trustees
used to be prime-ministers, vice-prime-ministers, bank directors,
experts” (see A. Tomov: “Futures studies in Bulgaria” in this book).

The Slovakian answer: there was no progress.

b)*In the Czech Republic* in*last ten years* from methodological
viewpoint, a*gap* can be seen in comparison with the seventies and
eighties regarding the implementation of futures studies in
institutionally established industrial societies. The interest in
long-term (15 years) perspective was replaced by the state government
and enterprises with the short time decision-making. Futures studies at
the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences were interrupted and no research
and pedagogical unit exists under the state care since that time (see F.
Petrasek: “Futures Studies in the Czech Republic” in this book).

*In Poland* the interest of public opinion in the futures studies
clearly decreased after 1989, for the main reasons:

Society’s rush toward short-term gain (paid work, financial advantages).

Loss of interest of the politicians and decision-makers in the future
periods exceeding the 4 year cycle of the parliament life partially due
to the involvement of political decision-makers mainly in the current
matters.

Critique of the former planning and forecasting.

Failures of the former prognoses from before 1989 - wrong or missed
assessments.

Methodological misunderstandings; a) identifying strategy studies on the
future with prognoses of the traditional style (see A. Karpinski:
“Futures Studies in Poland” in this book).

*In Romania* the main reason for a certain neglect of futures studies
after 1989 was the general rejection of anything that reminded the
notion of social or economic plan or planning, badly abused of in the
previous regime.

Officially, the interest for prospective studies decreased after the
collapse of centralized planning model. The specific evolution can be
explained through the appearance of an unstable, uncertain and
unpredictable economic environment in the transition period. Another
element that led to*decreasing* the interest in prospective studies
consists in the lack of institutions and powerful companies to monitor
the making of long-term strategies on the market; in a high inflation
environment, a severe economic slump background, the firm strategies
were mostly of surviving.

*In Russia* in the 90s nearly all forecasting activities were collapsed.
The interest for the future and futures in Russia has began decline due
the lack of dialogue between futurists and decision makers, due “the
psychological fatigue” of endless doomsday prophecies of globalistics,
and due to rather utopian character of alternativistics. (See I.
Bestuzhev-Lada: “Futures Studies in the USSR/Russia” in this book).

*In Slovakia* the indicated reasons for the decline of future interest
and activities are: first of all, the lack of interest of political
elite, the lack of vision about the future importance of the different
felds of human activities, the loss of interest in a longer than one
year future perspective.

*In Yugoslavia* , after the 1960-1999s blossoming development, the
present drama of Yugoslavia “completely excluded the future as a
long-term concept, as a coordinated movement with the surrounding world,
as political and economic restructuring toward a higher level of
development. Going through violent conflicts, sanctions, media
satanization, shattering economic crisis, bombing, the future was lost
in a widespread apathy. In an ongoing total social crisis, the dimension
of the future becomes an abstraction” (see R. Nakarada: “Futures Studies
in Yugoslavia” in this book).

At the edge of this picture one may*conclude* , that the last decade
shows, paradoxically, a certain fall in unofficial as well as the
governmental interest for futures research. A hypothetical explanation
of the phenomenon could be at the crossroads of such elements as: lack
of financial and material resources; lack of interest by
decision-makers; lack of a global vision on the future importance of
various human activities; growing uncertainty on a global scale; loss of
interest by public at large for future perspectives beyond one year and
spreading interest for the “palpable immediate” (“hic et nunc”), etc.

Thus, a sort of paralysing perplexity in the face of a more and more
uncertain future appeared. In this context, the*loosening interest for
futures research* begets a paradoxical dimension both at cultural and
psycho-sociological levels, not only in the region's countries, but also
perhaps worldwide.

The paradox of the phenomenon becomes striking in the centre of the
emergence of a new set of problems concerning this countries’ inner
transitional processes; the end of the Cold War as well as the galloping
pace of the globalisation process.

*Q5. In your feelings the futures studies in your country will tend to
revive in the near future and the millennium? In both cases: yes or no,
please indicate why.*

Most of the answers are convergently*positive* .*The motivations* in
some countries are mostly connected to the*external factors* first of
all to the requirements of the European Union (Polish), Estonian answers
remarks that the EU is demanding to work out some long-term strategy
development.

Romanian answers mentioning the confidence in reviving futures studies,
estimating that probably, on short term the present situation is bound
to last. The interest to join the European Union and the requirements of
the international organization revived the attention paid to long-term
thinking on development, expressed in the preparation of economic and
social strategies. The Academy has launched a program, called ESSEN
(Evaluation of the system of the natural economy), which played an
important role in this direction.

But there are also*proper* future oriented preoccupations. Some
examples.

*In Poland* are effecting futures researches now, institutions, such as
Futures Studies Committee “Poland 2000 Plus” of the Presidium of the
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw; Governmental Centre for Strategic
Studies, Warsaw; University of Lodz.

*In Romania* , after the dissolution of Planning State Committee in
1990, the Economic Forecasting Institute became subordinated to the
Romanian Academy, Bucharest; likewise, a group of prospective
investigation of Romanian Academy “Romania 2020” effects future oriented
investigation; a Ministry for Development and Prognosis was created in
January 2001 in Bucharest.

*In Bulgaria* , reform in the Bulgarian Future Society and involvement
of new young scholars in it is on the way.

*The futures studies in Russia will tend to revive because growing
interest among people including decision-makers for perspective problems
and ways of its solutions in the future. Some fall non-governmental
forecasting organizations (arose in 60s and 70s) after some years of
negotiations, together with the “Kondratiev Foundation” research centres
applied prognostics, “Strategy”, “Centre of Human values” formed in 1997
the Russian Futures Studies Academy at Moscow. It was created as a
research network of some 36 futures research groups in some 10 regional
departments. In 1999 this Academy was incorporated as an institutional
member into International Futures Research Academy, and during the year
2000 has executed its part of joint research project “Russia and the
World in 2001-2010: Problems and Decisions” (See I. Bestuzhev-Lada:
“Futures Studies in the USSR/Russia” in this book.)*

*In the Czech Republic in 1999 the new stimulation of more long-term and
complex thinking has appeared by the new government initiated project of
strategic management for the governmental socio-economic policy. Futures
studies for establishing national interests and dispositions for joining
the EU, are supposed for that aim.*

Slovakian answer is very confident in the revival of futures studies
mainly for two reasons: 1) Ministry of Education is preparing some kind
of technology foresight for Slovakia; 2) Pre-accession strategy of
Slovakia will need some visions (membership, or non-membership, etc.).
Already in 1997, the Institute for Forecasting Slovak Academy of
Sciences has started a project: “Structural Changes in the Decisive
Spheres of Slovak Society in Long-term Perspective” up to the year 2015,
using the methodology and scope inspired from forecasting practice from
the Czech Republic and Hungary.

*In Yugoslavia* after October 2000 political change has occurred and
there are now a process of transition. It is early to say whether
extensive and profound futures research will re-emerge (see R.
Nakarada).

The luckiest situation for futures studies and researchers was and
continues to be in Hungary. They have been no inhibited, nor forbidden.
The futures research programs were (in 1960-1990) and are supported new
by the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund, having very rich university
curricula. The future orientation of population has become more active
in the period of transition, but changed the accent of it. They are
interested mainly in their own and their family’s future and after that
in the future of the country, but even so, only in the 1-10 years term.
The future orientation of population or different social, economic
actors are accepted in forecasting and drawing up alternative futures
images (see E. Nováky: “Futures Studies in Hungary” in this book).

Finally, one may*concisely conclude* that in the period of the
years*1960-1990* and*1990 till now* futures studies, research programs
and concerns,*determined by* numerous*different factors* reveals
a*waving trend* :

Years                                                          Interest
of futures and futures studies

The sixties:                                                *increasing*

The seventies:                                *decreasing, stagnation*

The eighties:                                  *increasing*

The nineties:                                  *decreasing, stagnation*

Around 2000:                                *hopefully increasing*

In last decade, the mentioned new set of problems stringently claim new,
appropriate approaches.

Nowadays, future is more multi-fold than ever before. The “possible
futures” give researchers far more possibilities than those working
inside planning ever had. It is really a great chance. On the base of
this chance the futures researchers might reborn like Phoenix in the
region considered.

*Q6. In our opinions special attention should be paid to the role of the
youth in forming the forthcoming future. We would like to know the
situation of the youth in the countries forming our common future
therefore we thought to raise some questions connected to have an
overall picture from the countries involved*

a) In your experience are the youth of today interested in their future
short term (1 year), medium term (5 years) and long-term (10 and more
years)

*If yes, name the fields and reasons,*

*If not, please, indicate no more than 5 reasons.*

b) Is futures research taught in your country?

*If yes, at what levels in which fields, in which institutes, and since
when.*

*If not, please, indicate why. If it existed before 1990, please
indicate the place and the years.*

c) Please, make suggestions, recommendations and additional notes to the
questions listed above, if any.

a) To this delicate question although there are different answers one
may detect some important similarities that could be synthesize by the
succinct observation formulated in Polish answer. “Present day youth is
less interested in the future than before 1989”. Reasons are the same as
in Q4.

Similarly with this observation the*Romanian answer* remarks that the
youth are in general trapped by a short-term vision of “hic at nunc” for
the reason of hedonism and “Carpe diem”.*In Russia* there is general
interest for the future including the youth, but as soon as information
of concrete forecast is published, an “effect of future-phobia”
appears.*In Slovakia* , the youth are interested in short term (one
year) future, related to professional career, un/employment, and
occasionally in five years perspective related to emigration, family,
flat, etc. but their ten and more years interest is irrelevant.*In
Hungary* the most important time span interested young people is 1-10
years. The main reason for it is the fact that material values and
success determines the ways of thoughts of the youth. Even if nowadays a
lot of young people have got decision making position in every places of
the life.*In Yugoslavia* youth felt deprived by the normal life, normal
communication with their counterparts in Europe. Their future is related
to their personal lives’ immediate betterment. No collective concerns,
no great visions are attractive. Their vision of the future is to become
part of the western consuming society, to the external EU. However,
keeping up with the high-tech developments, particularly in information
sciences is important, as well as ecological concerns. Ecological
concerns have gone particularly after the NATO bombing and the use of
deplated uranium. It will take some dwelling in relative normal
circumstances before their creative, visionary is rekindled.

As a personal remark: under all these answers based on a certain reality
I can not help yet to suspect a sort of eternal snarl of the olds versus
unguided young people in a too fast changing, not easy intelligible
world.

There is an interesting Romanian remark having, perhaps, a largest
validity: in spite of hedonistic, “hic et nunc” attitude the youth
interest in a rewarding profession and a competitive job move them
increasingly towards at least a medium term vision. The argument for it
is the increasing interest in professional training especially in
universities, manifested in the fact, that in 1990 in Romania, there
were over 90 students to 10 000 inhabitants and nowadays their number is
doubled.

b) The answers are indicated very*different situations* . There are no
answers from the Czech Republic, and only partial answers from Estonia
and Yugoslavia.

*In Estonia* the only case of futures studies training in universities
is a short course in Tallinn Pedagogical Institute, and the Institute of
Geography of Tartu University is starting something like “Modern
strategic planning” course.

*In Poland* futures research is not taught at the universities nor at
scientific institutes. A conversation group on forecasting methodology
was maintained until 1989. It was cancelled after 1989 due to the
absence of sufficient number people interested in it. To the question
“How do you see the possibility of involving new institutes into futures
education or other training form in your country in the near future?”
The answer considers that due to financial limitations there is no
sufficient basis for expanding the future education in the nearest
future.

*In Yugoslavia* after the fall of Dubrovnik Inter-University
Post-graduate Centre that offered for several years, courses in futures
studies, nowadays, other than public lectures, and sporadic courses at
some faculties, no systematic studies of future in established within
the Yugoslav educative system.

Comparatively with the above mentioned situation which in futures
studies are not taught systematically in the educational system, in
other countries the picture shows other aspects:

*In Hungary* futures studies are practiced in many universities as well
as till and until 1989. Such, some universities taught futures research
related to economic, medical, technical etc. aspects, in Budapest
University of Economic Sciences and Public Administration, in Technical
University at Budapest, in Semmelweiss University of Medical Sciences,
in universities of different cities like Pécs, Miskolc, Sopron. The
biennial International Futures Course is organised in Budapest also in
1999 and 2001 having an interesting curricula, as a reedited
continuation of the Dubrovnik Futures Courses.

*In Romania* forecasting studies can be found in the curricula of
Faculties and chairs of*economics* at the Academy of Economic Sciences
of Bucarest (Faculty of Cybernetics, Statistics, Economic Informatics);
in*sociology* at the Universities of Cluj-Napoca and Iassy;
in*technology* at many Faculties of the University “Polytechnica” of
Bucharest. They are also present in other faculties (demography,
epidemiology) and natural sciences (geology and mineral resources).
Likewise, most economic, management and engineering faculties include
Econometrics and forecasting courses. As well as in the curricula of
numerous private faculties include future methods.

*In Slovakia* , futures research is taught at Comenius University
(Bratislava), University of Economics (Bratislava), University of Matej
Bel (Banska Bystrica) and since 1998 there are doctoral PhD studies at
the Institute for foreaasting (Bratislava).

*In Russia* there were and are future oriented courses and seminars in
Universities in Moscow, Kiev, St. Petersburg, etc. But the Russian
answer mentions in the synthesis that it is necessary to tell some words
about a quality of the futures research next generation, i.e. about
relation to the future of today students in Russia.

In principle it is quite the same as of all population: curiosity
quickly passing in indifference. The curiosity, because always is
interesting to find out something “about the future”. Indifference,
because the study of the future, as well as of the past, does not give
any practical results for the present, and will not be claimed attention
by a society. Besides has an effect the*presentism* of ordinary
consciousness mentioned above. It is also important the discredit of
forecasting focussed on divination because of nearly always appeared
insolvent. And during the last ten years to all this is added in Russia
the total demoralisation of population in general and of the youth in
particular. For the prospects without any forecasts open most gloomy.

That is why attempts to adjust the teaching of technological forecasting
as a special educational subject at the university from the end of 60s
till nowadays invariable suffered failure. Sometimes at that of other
university it was possible on any time to create even chairs of
forecasting (such chairs were available in Moscow, Leningrad,
Novosibirsk, Kiev, Sverdlovsk, Alma-Ata), but it earlier or later should
be closed, as there was an insoluble problem of students specialisation
and then employment. It was said, that futures studies are
interdisciplinary on the character, but Soviet science and teaching are
strictly mono-disciplinary in principle. Some enthusiasts managed by
years to read lectures and lead seminars of forecasting at several
faculties of several universities (at the Moscow University, for
example, such lectures and seminars are taken place since l969 till
now), but it is of course not obligatory courses, facultative for
wishing only. As the manuals there are used till now some text books of
70-80s and “Handbook of Forecasting” (1982).

The similar situation has developed with PhD (candidate of science in
Russia) and DSc dissertations “on forecasting” 1967-99. But as well as
in monographs you will vainly search here even for one concrete
forecast. Even a dissertation “on forecasting methodology” is a
desperately courageous step connected to raise risk not to receive the
necessary majority votes of the scientific council members. Thus nearly
each tenth DSc dissertation “on forecasting” was declined by dogmatic in
such councils. And to try to give concrete forecast in your dissertation
means obviously to go on scandals and failure. And for what? From nearly
a hundred and half of the formal or informal post-graduate students only
two young ladies (now not so young) continued to be engaged in
forecasting, and that only as university professors, one or two later
even as dean and rector. Others have found to themselves more profitable
employment, claimed by the states and society.

This sad situation is beginning gradually to be improved only since the
middle of 90s, when nearly annually “Summer schools of young futurists”
has taken place with some dozens students, postgraduates and young
fellows of several universities. Since 1997 in new created Russian
Futures Studies Academy a special section for young futurists improvers
is organised, though really functioning only in Northwest department of
the Academy (St. Petersburg). Here we see a good perspective for summer
and winter schools of young futurists on the more regular base. On
something greater in the foreseeable future hardly it is possible to
expect.

*c) Suggestions and recommendations. In their kind and generous
contributions to the issue after three years of efforts of this book our
colleagues formulates some thoughts, considering that for the
development of futures research and a future orientation sensibility:*

A particular attention should be devoted to the popularisation of
futures studies among the young generation (Poland); more popular books,
articles, TV reports about the future and futurists adopted to mass
consciousness and to organise future oriented special teaching courses
in universities (Russia);

To introduce futures studies at secondary school level for developing
the future orientation of the common people and also on postgraduate
level at the universities, because dealing with the future of
communities is a profession (Hungary);

To attentively take under consideration the informational society, its
new technologies influences, and to prepare the society for it;

To professionalize the futures research, to make it recognized as an
independent profession and to find out relations with different
universities disciplines for make the futures oriented capacities part
of any universities education.

To elaborate PhD programs in futures research.

To study the new paradigms in futures research methodology (Hungary).

A fundamental broadening of the international exchange of information on
the results of futures studies and research in the particular countries
and the international comparative analysis are necessary. To develop
co-operation with ex socialist countries in the field of scientific
projects and the education. It would purposeful to create a European
Centre for futures studies (Poland, Hungary).

3. Final considerations
-----------------------

The results of research effort may add to the clear outlining of the
historical fact that without the contribution of this interesting,
vigorous and original part of Europe, the European culture would be
poorer, while “Europe” would not be “whole”.

Even if nowadays one can see in the considered countries, as well as
world-wide some gap, some*delay* in futures studies approaches on the
new challenges of the globalization process.


