ANNEX: THE QUESTIONNAIRE
========================

In this*questionnaire* we brought together the questions and topics that
would facilitate our work in compiling the studies and writing the
planned book, and not less to make them internationally comparable.

These questions and topics listed below we thought to deal with among
others are:

What institute(s) in your country

did effect futures studies, research programs in the years 1960-1990,

are effecting now? (The name of institute, city etc.)

The most important fields of futures research programs in your country

between 1960-1990,

since 1990 (today). E.g. social, educational, health care, economic,
cultural, political, technological, environmental, and others.

Please indicate 3-6 more important futures studies concerning the
futures of the fields mentioned above

of your home country,

of global interest - written and published in your country, with
bibliography.

Please explain whether a significant change was seen in the period of
transition on the future orientation of the population and even in the
fields of futures studies activities.

If there was progress, name the fields,

If accidentally the interest and activities declined please, indicate
the probable reasons, like the lack of interest of decision makers, the
lack of global vision about future importance of the different fields of
human activities, loss of people's interest in a longer than one year
futures perspective, other(s).

In your feelings the futures studies in your country will tend to revive
in the near future and the millennium? In both cases: yes or no, please
indicate why.

In our opinions special attention should be paid to the role of the
youth in forming the forthcoming future. We would like to know the
situation of the youth in the countries forming our common future
therefore we thought to raise some questions connected to have an
overall picture from the countries involved.

In your experience are the youth of today interested in their future a)
short term (1 year), b), medium term (5 years) and c) long-term (10 and
more years).

If yes, name the fields and reasons,

If not, please, indicate no more than 5 reasons.

Is futures research taught in your country?

If yes, at what levels in which fields, in which institutes, and since
when.

If not, please, indicate why. If it existed before 1990, please indicate
the place and the years.

c) Please, make suggestions, recommendations and additional notes to the
questions listed above, if any.

Thank you for your kind cooperation.


