Endnotes
========

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Despite the GDR had adopted formally a kind of multi-party system,
we will throughout this paper use the word “party” only with reference
to the SED – Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands (United
Socialist Party of Germany).

[^2] On that session, Walter Ulbricht underlined that the working
classes and the party had the task “to elaborate and to use the
Marxist-Leninist societal prognostics to an extent not known before.”
(Ulbricht 1967, p. 92)

[^3] Only some years later Klaus had to apologize: Cybernetics could
never be a universal theory of society.

[^4] The Council of Ministers was formally the government of the GDR,
actually all executive powers were concentrated in the hands of the
politbureau of the SED.

[^5] In 1970 e.g. the newspaper of the communist youth organization
“Junge Welt” organized a competition among its readers to the question
“What will you do on Thursday, January 6, 2000?” Famous scientists
contributed materials on technological and social prospects. The winners
were invited to participate in a banquet on January 8, 2000 – which
really took place. Comp. Steinmüller 1999

[^6] When the Brundtland Report “Our Common Future” appeared 1988, it
was highly discussed in the Academy of Sciences as well as on
conferences of the Evangelic Academies, in the East German Writers’
Union – and last not least in the oppositional Umweltbibliothek (Library
for Environmental Problems).

[^7] “Futures studies in Poland in the works of the Futures Studies
Committee ‘Poland in the 21st century’ – The Committee and its creators
1969-1999 (on the 30th anniversary of the Committee’s founding)”,
Elipsa, Warsaw, 1999

[^8] See: “Action Plan for Economic Structure Reform”, Industrial Policy
Bureau MITI, Tokyo, March 1998

[^9] Its full text was not published until 2000 in “Bulletin Poland 2000
Plus” 1/2000

[^10] Andrzej Krzysztof Wroblewski: “The poverty of prognoses”, Polityka
4/1997

[^11] Witold Pawlowski: “A prognosis cut short”, Polityka 1/2001

[^12] Maciej Rybinski: “Under the charm of false prophets”,
Rzeczpospolita, Dec. 30, 2000-Jan. 01, 2001

[^13] “About the need for strategic concept of the development of Poland
and the role of science in the restructuring of the economy”, Committee
Report, ELIPSA, Warsaw 1993 and “Is it worthwhile to think about the
future”, ELIPSA, Warsaw, 1993

[^14] Józef Pajestka: “Civilisational megatrends vs. the process of
system transformation”. In: For the orientation on the future in Polish
reforms”, ELIPSA, Warsaw, 1994

[^15] “In the perspective of the year 2010 – The road to 2010”, Futures
Studies Committee “Poland in the 21st century”, ELIPSA, Warsaw, 1995

[^16] “Strategia rozwoju Polski do roku [^2020]: Synteza”, ELIPSA,
Warsaw, 2000

[^17] “Strategy for Poland’s development up to the year 2020”, see
above.

[^18] See: Johan Galtung: “The world in economic crisis”, Bulletin
“Poland 2000 Plus” 1/2000

[^19] “Poland 2025 – long-term strategy for development”, published by
the Governmental Center for Strategic Studies, Warsaw, May 2000

[^20] “The perspectives of the advanced fields of science and technology
until 2010”, ELIPSA, Warsaw, 1999

[^21] For a more detailed discussion, see, Sarmir, E., 1998, pp.
22-[^27]:
