PREFACE
=======

FUTURES STUDIES AND THE WFSF IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE MAINLY IN THE PERIOD BETWEEN 1970 AND 1990
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Eleonora Barbieri Masini

What was called the Second World Conference in Future Research (at that
time this was the name of the discipline) took place in Bucharest in
September 1972. It was the first time that scholars and other people
interested in futures studies from Western and Central and Eastern
Europe had met to discuss and exchange views. I was present at the
conference organised by Prof.*Hidetoshi Kato* in Kyoto in 1970 but not
at the very first one in Oslo in 1968 when*Johan Galtung* and*Robert
Jungk* had invited people such as*John McHale* from the United
States,*Hidetoshi Kato* from Japan,*Igor Bestuzhev-Lada* from the USSR
and others from Poland. In this Oslo meeting, Mankind 2000,*Galtung*
and*Jungk* started the discussion of a possible world federation.

The Soviet Union was present at all WFSF meetings with the participation
of*Bestuzhev-Lada,* who was able to give the information on the studies
undertaken.*Lada* ’s personal work was on methods and the use of social
indicators in futures studies as well as on terminology on which I also
worked with him. He certainly kept futures studies alive in the USSR and
especially in the Russian Republic and published extensively. I would
also like to recall*Gennady Dobrov* , a member of the WFSF till his
death, who was for a long time at IIASA in Austria, and in Kiev
organized a school for futures studies which I personally visited.

Bucharest was a wonderful experience with people from the Romanian group
such as*Mircea Malitza, Mihai Botez, Pavel Apostol, Viorica Varga* and
many others actively present. We must think of the historical moment and
what that meant. The group in Romania later took the name International
Center of Methodology for Future and Development Studies. The Romanian
school was mainly made up of mathematicians, because in that period
Romania had an important school in this discipline and was interested in
models. In my understanding, the most important present activity is that
of Prof.*Mircea Malitza,* the founder of the University of the Black
Sea. With his knowledge as a mathematician, but also as a great
humanist, in a different historical moment and a different manner, he is
carrying on the work initiated thirty years ago. I believe that*Ana
Maria Sandi* , also a mathematician, is still working in the area of
development and future thinking, as well as the very open-minded social
scientist*Viorica Ramba Varga,* who has been present since the very
beginning.

In 1972 Poland was strongly represented by Poland 2000, which was the
group within the Polish Academy of Warsaw. It was specially interested
in cultural issues, whether in terms of cultural artefacts, as the
theatre, or in  anthropologically understood culture in Europe. People
from the excellent school of sociology of Poland were also part of the
group, including*Jan Strelecki* , a hero of the resistance against the
German invasion and an excellent and famous sociologist, who died in
mysterious circumstances in 1981,*Andrzej Sicinski,* briefly Minister of
Culture during the first government after the change,*Jan Danecki*
and*Danuta Markowska* . This group was extremely active in the 80s
during the difficult period of change.

In my view, two aspects of the 1972 Conference were of particular
importance: the decision to found a World Federation of Futures Studies
(the WFSF came into being in 1973) and the real interest in futures
studies expressed by Eastern European countries despite the limitations
of the historical period. I would like to stress the important role
played by futures studies and the WFSF in a very difficult time for
these countries, offering what*Milos Zeman* of Czechoslovakia later
referred to as a “window on the outside world”. This is no small role,
if viewed in a historical perspective. Despite its many problems,
Czechoslovakia managed to keep the interest in futures studies alive,
first with*Radovan Richta* , the author of the famous book “Civilization
on the Crossroads” (now impossible to find) and later thanks to the
commitment of many others, including*Milos Zeman* , at present a
high-ranking political leader.

The third WFSF World Conference was held in Rome (1973). Again there
were many scholars from Eastern Europe with Hungary showing the extent
to which interest in futures studies had developed under the leadership
of Prof.*Géza Kovács* and with the presence within the Futures Research
Committee at the Hungarian Academy of Sciences of people of the calibre
of*Maria Kalas Kőszegi and Erzsébet Gidai* . The group in Hungary was
mainly oriented towards economic development and has therefore been able
to play an important role in recent decades and indeed through the
entire historical period. Much was also due to the charismatic figure of
Prof.*József Bognár* , a great economist and member of the Club of Rome.

The very important school of Hungary was present at the Rome conference
but became more visible and active in the following years. Therefore the
European Regional Experts Meeting on “Technology of Future and its
Social Implication” was organised in Budapest in 1987 and three years
later the XI World Conference of the WFSF under the title “Linking
Present Decisions to Long-Range Visions” was also successfully organised
there at the time of the beginning of the transition period in the
European socialist countries.

Yugoslavia did not have a group as such, but many people took an
interest and worked in futures studies.*Mihailo Markovich* was one; for
a longer time and at great personal price,*Radmila Nakarada* was
another. The School of Philosophy and Sociology was mostly involved and
supported*Johan Galtung’* s interesting idea to create an International
University Center (IUC) in Dubrovnik in 1975. Many cutting edge
disciplines were taught there since its foundation in 1975, with the
initial support of the United Nations University and the contribution in
terms of faculty and students of over one hundred universities from all
over the world. Both faculty and students came from Western and Eastern
European countries; among the courses, there was also a Futures Studies
course, the first didactic activity of the WFSF aimed at building the
next generation of futures thinkers. The University was destroyed in
1991 during the war. Although it has been rebuilt, it no longer has a
Futures Studies course as such in Dubrovnik, and the Futures Studies
Department of the Budapest University of Economic Sciences - headed
by*Erzsébet Nováky* - has continued the tradition since 1999.

Courses such as Mediterranean Studies, Women Studies and*Jurgen
Habermas* philosophy and sociology were held in Dubrovnik interacting
with the other courses including futures studies courses. The IUC was an
example of international academic freedom rarely found anywhere in the
world. In Dubrovnik also the Fourth World Conference in Futures Studies
(in 1975) was held with many participants from different countries with
limited but sufficient support from UNESCO. The amount of its support
would today be considered very low but the conference took place because
people wanted to be there and paid their own expenses with dedication
and sacrifice.

To the best of my knowledge and information in all European ex socialist
countries despite the periods survived, sometimes amid extremely
difficult circumstances futures studies and research are again revived
in different forms, places and institutions thanks to those new
generations who had a possibility to work together with the founders of
futures studies in different countries and who are still lucky to pass
on their knowledge and experience to the youngest generation. To our
greatest satisfaction these young people are deeply interested in their
futures and more than one of them have become experts of internationally
renown in this field.

I would like to conclude for my Western colleagues by saying that, from
my own experience as a member of those engaged in the efforts of these
years with*Johan Galtung* ,*Mahdi Elmandjra* and*Robert Jungk* , I know
that, despite the difficult times, people continued to hold meetings and
carry on research with great courage and in great personal danger. They
did so because they believed in the advent of different and alternative
futures to the ones they were experiencing. Has this been so and what
responsibility do we, Western futures thinkers, have from now on?


