FUTURES STUDIES IN ESTONIA
==========================

Erik Terk

1. Institutes and futures research activities in years 1960-1990
----------------------------------------------------------------

It is quite hard to speak about futures studies in modern term at Soviet
time in Estonia. There were some work related to long-term planning
process, so-called predplanovoje razrabotki in Russian language (but
without serious intention to originality from Estonian researchers
engaged) and also some attempts of traditional economic prognostics by
the initiative of individual academic researchers. Dr. Kaljo Kask’s work
in building industry prognostics and Dr. Raul Renter’s in printing
industry prognostics may be mentioned in the last field. From
institutions Estonian Institute of Economics (of Academy of Sciences),
Institute (before it laboratory) of Estonian State Planning Committee
and Estonian branch of Central (All-union) Economic-Mathematical
Institute’s Tallinn branch must be mentioned. Some materials for
students about economic prognostics were published by Economic Faculty
of Tallinn Technical University (=Tallinn Politechnical Institute), but
in general prognostics was not among main research fields of Estonian
universities. Dr. Raul Renter published with his colleague Aleksander
Schipai a book in Estonian, called “Economic and Social
Prognostics”(1977) and defended doctoral theses on the topic of methods
of prognostics in Moscow.

But there were two quite interesting fields more. In chair of
Organization and Management of Economic Faculty of Tallinn Technical
University some young researchers and consultants (Endel Oja, Ain Ivalo,
Erik Terk) started to study modern western company level planning and
corporate strategy building methodology and techniques, this job was
continued later (after year 1978) in Estonian Management Institute. This
field was partly connected with planning, partly with theory of
decision-making (research of Dr. Madis Habakuk may be mentioned in this
field) partly with futures studies. For example publications by French
strategic planning theorists and Pentti Malaska were studied by Estonian
researchers of this field at 1980s. New methodology of thinking (for
example scenario-building) was used in consulting of companies, Later
started some experiments of using this methodology on sectoral level
topics.

Other example is connected with scientific interests of some Estonian
philosophers. Club of Rome’s reports were quite popular in Estonia at
late 1970s and early 80s and some Estonian philosophers interested in
global problems research. Dr. Lembit Valt (scientific field: methodology
of science) and Edgar Savisaar published a book in Estonian “Global
problems and futures scenarios” (1983). At year 1981 Edgar Savisaar
(later initiator of creation of Estonian Popular Front and First Prime
Minister of Independent Estonia) defended his candidate of sciences
thesis on the methodology of Club of Rome’s reports.

From 1986 Edgar Savisaar held a position of perspective planning
department in Estonian State Planning Committee and he initiated at year
1987 a public contest for development of Estonian economy and its main
sectors and fields. Special training for scenario-writing methodology
based on the publications of Finnish futures studies specialists Pentti
Malaska and Tarja Meristö and on some British publications and on
Estonian domestic scenario-building experiences (mainly from company
level) was provided by Erik Terk and Andres Saame. More than 30 teams of
researchers (among them many later political figures) finished the
contest with finished scenario packages about 10 of these presented a
serious interest. Best scenario-packages were about development of rural
life in Estonia (with the central point in reestablishment of private
farming and real local government), about solving of housing problem in
Estonia (connected with the hot problem of migration), about foreign
tourism development and about developing of high-tech production in
engineering industries. The scenario-writing contest gave arguments for
creation of “Economically independent Estonia’s” project (from September
1987) and had quite significant place in political struggle towards
independence at late 1980s.

2. Institutes and futures research activities after 1990
--------------------------------------------------------

There was interesting experience of futures research from the time of
Edgar Savisaar’s Government (1990-1992): several times the team of Prime
Minister’s advisors (Ingrid Preeks and others) mobilised researchers
from different fields for developing futures scenarios (of economic
reform, political dynamic etc.) and for analysis of future’s
alternatives. For example the models of “Liberal development Estonia”,
“Green (sustainable) development” and “Continuing trends” were compared
at year 1991. The analysis of these models by researchers was also
broadcasted by TV.

The main centre is*Estonian Institute for Futures Studies* (established
in December 1991, really started to work from Spring 1882). There are
some other enthusiasts of futures studies also other institutions (Dr.
Alari Purju from Economic Faculty of Tallinn Technical University of
Human Geography of Tartu University, Dr. Raivo Vilu from chemical
Faculty of Tallinn Technical University), but all these people have some
kind of connection with Estonian Institute for Futures Studies (EIFS).
Some of these people worked in Estonian Institute for Futures Studies in
some period, some participated in institute’s projects. Dr. Marju
Lauristin from Institute of Journalism of Tartu University (previous
deputy speaker of Estonian Parliament and Minister for Social Affairs)
participated in some international futures studies projects (for example
project: Futures scenarios for Northern Europe), she also had
cooperation experience with EIFS.

The main research fields of Estonian Institute were:

macro-economic development scenarios of Estonia;

future trends and scenarios of Baltic Sea countries, regional
cooperation perspectives (for example Estonia-Finland);

future of regional disparities in Estonia, future prospects of main
Estonian regions;

personal income differences in Estonia (by social groups, regions,
sectors etc.);

perspectives of main economic sectors of Estonia and main “national
business ideas”: transit transportation, food processing industries,
engineering industries etc.;

problems of Estonian accession into EU;

future of Russia and it’s impact on Estonia’s future prospects;

national innovation system, product and technology development in
Tallinn.

In 1997 EIFS worked out four development scenarios for Estonia (“Estonia
2010” project): “Ferryman scenario”, “Southern-Finland (or “Scandinavian
periphery”) scenario”, “Military info-oasis scenario” and “Great Slam
(or “Interface”) scenario”. These scenarios were discussed with all
political factions in Estonian Parliament, in Government (Cabinet)
meeting, with high level officials and regional leaders and also widely
discussed in media.

Later model calculations were done with macro-economic model of Bank of
Estonia to find the balance of payment parameters by each of mentioned
scenario.

In 1999 document called “Guidelines for Estonian spatial development
(until year 2010)” was prepared by team from EIFS. This document was
approved with some corrections by Government of Estonia in July 2000. At
year 1999 three scenarios for development of Central Baltic Sea Region
(until year 2015) were prepared by international working group leaded by
EIFS specialists and using EIFS methodology. At year 2000 work on
integration scenarios of Tallinn and Helsinki started.

Quite popular in Estonia (from late 80s till now) is the future of
education topic. Several packages of scenarios and strategic conclusions
are prepared. Special NGO “Estonian Education Congress” is active in
this field Krista Loogma from EIFS is engaged in these studies.

Some year ago the sustainable development problematique also become
popular in Estonia. Tallinn Centre of Stockholm Environmental Institute
is active in this field.

3. The questions of Today
-------------------------

It was very popular in Estonia at late 80s, when the interest went down
from year 1992 (problems of survival and short-term tasks in economic
restructuring situation) and new step-by-step rise of interest
approximately from years 1994/95. Last years “outside pressure” (from
EU, UN, WB) to have some long-range development orientirs (for example
National Development Plan) is quite important factor.

The problem is, that Estonian state officials become too “outside
driven”: “If for example EU is demanding to work out some long-term
strategy development, then let’s do it, but by general for us the
medium-term documents are enough”.

Just now the only case of futures studies training in Estonian
universities is a short course in Tallinn Pedagogical Institute.
Institute of Geography of Tartu University is starting something like
“Modern Strategic Planning” course.

About youth: I may to give only some speculations on this topic.
Probably they have quite interested in futures questions (connected with
career planning etc.) but more about medium term than long-term.


