FROM ANTICIPATIONS OF A BRIGHT FUTURE TO DISSOLUTION
====================================================

Karlheinz Steinmüller

1. Introduction
---------------

Future - the bright socialist or communist future - was one of the key
words in official propaganda in the German Democratic Republic, as it
was in all socialist countries. For some time party[^1] ideologists were
able to convince at least parts of the population, that the future
belonged to socialism and that there was a steady progress throughout
the world towards a communist future. Consequently, the relation of the
political system to a more open thinking about the future was never
without tension: If you knew already the outcome of history, why bother
to spend much thought about it? If history follows only one line -
delineated a century ago by Marx and Engels - there was no place for
thinking in alternatives, no room for open-minds. As I. Bestuzhev-Lada
observed, dictatorship and forecasting seem to be mutually exclusive
(*Bestuzhev-Lada* , 1992). Nevertheless, there were some attempts to
establish futures studies in the GDR.

2. Following the Soviet model
-----------------------------

In the early years of the GDR the future was not yet subject to specific
studies. The doctrines of Marxism-Leninism, which was established at
that time at universities too, seemed to answer all questions about
things to come sufficiently. As there was no place for “bourgeois”
disciplines as psychoanalysis or cybernetic, there was none for a
specific futurological discipline. Marxism-Leninism provided the base
for all approaches to the future, were they academic or popular.

Popular interest in the future was stilled mostly by translations of
Soviet books like Sachartchenko’s “A Voyage into Tomorrow” (1954). Soon
East German writers began to follow their example, e.g. Karl Böhm and
Rolf Dörge with “Unsere Welt von Morgen” (“Our World of Tomorrow”,
1959). Writers like these depicted primarily technological developments:
computers, automated factories, space travel, an industrialised
agriculture and the benefits of nuclear energy - but they grew not tired
of stipulating, that cornucopia would come only with the new, socialist
society. In that way they promoted “Perspektivbewusstsein” - the
“awareness of the prospects” of communism and of the superiority of the
socialist system. Like others, even later dissident Stefan Heym (“Das
kosmische Zeitalter”, “The Cosmic Age”, 1959) emphasised the main
catch-phrase of that epoch: “The future has already began. It can be
seen in the Soviet Union”.

3. The race to the year 2000
----------------------------

During the 1960s, the future became a subject for more specific research
attention. In this regard the GDR followed the developments in other
countries. Science and technology progressed rapidly and produced new
challenges for each of the two systems. It was felt that propaganda
alone - making appeal to the image of a bright future - did no longer
suffice for the global competition of socialism and capitalism. But even
disregarding the confrontation with the Western system, there was a need
for more - and more practicable - information about future trends as a
foundation for decisions to be made and ways to be chosen: How to
organise society in the age of the global transition from capitalism via
socialism to communism? How to “unbound” the productive forces? How
should the economy be planned in that age of transition? How could
scientific-technological progress be “mastered” to the benefit of the
people? These questions got even more profile with the introduction of
the “New Economic System of Planning and Direction of the National
Economy” (1963).

The influences of Western futures studies were considerable. Contrarily
to the usual policy of ideological isolation, even one West German
futurological book, Fritz Baade’s “Der Wettlauf zum Jahr 2000” (“The
Race to the Year 2000”, 1960) was published after some years of delay in
the GDR - because it forecasted that the East would be the winner in
that race. Herman Kahn’s and Anthony Wiener’s “The Year 2000. A
Framework for Speculation on the Next Thirty-three Years” (West German
title “Ihr werdet es erleben”, “You will live to see it”, 1967) found a
self-confident answer in the East German publication “Wir werden es
erleben” (“We will live to see it”, 1971). As an integral part of
reception, Western futurology was heavily criticized as a “bourgeois
pseudo-science” and an apology of capitalism, without the sound basis of
a social theory, technocratic in its approach and eclectic in style.

4. Prognostics
--------------

In distinction to futurology, the word “prognostics” (Prognostik) came
in the second half of the 1960s into use - after the 11th plenary
session (1967)[^2] and one year later the VIIth party congress of the
SED had declared that “the Marxist-Leninist societal prognostics is a
decisive instrument of scientific leadership for shaping the developed
social system of socialism in the GDR” (see e.g. Edeling, 1968, p. 12).
Here, like in many other cases, the GDR followed the model of the USSR,
where new efforts of forecasting and planning were undertaken from 1966
onwards (see Bestuzhev-Lada, 1992 and Steinmüller, 2000).

Prognostics was not at all meant to be, as the term may indicate, a
socialist counterpart of (technocratic) forecasting. In the perception
of that time, it was nevertheless strongly connected with cybernetics, a
formerly rejected discipline which was rehabilitated by the philosopher
Georg Klaus[^3] . Prognostics should be based on the knowledge of the
“objective law of social development” (i.e. the dialectics of productive
forces and the mode of production), and it should by itself undergo a
dialectical relation with planning and shaping the socialist society
(see e.g. Edeling, 1968, p. 228). In fact, prognostics reflected the
planning euphoria of that age, which inflicted both systems equally.

In theory prognosis and planning should form a dialectical relation, but
in practical life the gulf between optimistic long-term visions and
academic thinking about the future on the one hand and the problems of
planning for the next four years on the other hand widened. Actually,
prognostics had no real influence on planning, it was effectively
neutralised by attaching it to long-term planning (“Perspektivplanung”).
Moreover, it never became really institutionalised - despite a
short-lived “Institut für Prognostik beim Ministerrat der DDR”
(Institute for Prognostics at the Council of Ministers[^4] ) and
attempts to coordinate all prognostic activities by the Academy of
Sciences (Heyden, 1968). Several organizations engaged to some degree in
prognostics: Institut für Gesellschaftswissenschaften beim ZK de SED
(Institute for Social Sciences at the Central Committee of the SED; this
institute had a specific chair of social prognostics), Institut für
Wissenschaftstheorie und Organisation der Akademie der Wissenschaften
(Institute for Theory and Organisation of Science of the Academy of
Sciences), Zentralinstitut für Wirtschaftswissenschaften der Akademie
der Wissenschaften (Central Institue for Economic Sciences of the
Academy of Sciences), the faculties of economics of several universities
and others. But prognostics never became effective most studies
performed by these organizations were confined to basic questions of the
philosophy and methodology of prognostics.

The late 1960s and early 1970s became years of widespread futurological
publications. Philosophers and economists, but also social scientists
and physicists wrote about the future of society and technology.
Newspapers invited their readers to speculate about the year 2000[^5] .
G. M. Dobrov’s seminal “Prognostics in Science and Technology” appeared
in German translation (1971). First steps towards a science of sciences
(“Wissenschaftswissenschaft”) were undertaken. But as in former years,
the ideological fight against Western futurology continued (see e.g.
Bönisch, 1971). It gained specific momentum by rejections of convergence
theory, then in its heyday, which assumed a slow opening and
transformation of the socialist system under the impact of the
scientific-technological revolution.

5. Confronted with the Limits to Growth
---------------------------------------

The short spring of prognostics ended about 1972. There are two reasons
for that: an internal one and an external. During the early 1970s it
became evident, that all hopes of “Überholen ohne einzuholen” (“Taking
over without catching up” of capitalism) were wishful thinking. The
GDR - and all the socialist bloc - lacked the industrial capacity to
come up to the promises of an alleged technological lead-start.
Investments into high-tech industries had to be cut down, the people
called for a higher living standard. With Honecker’s succession to
Ulbricht and even more with the VIIIth party congress of the SED (1971)
an economic and social re-orientation started. It was also the end of
cybernetic planning optimism for the GDR.

Nearly at the same time the first report to the Club of Rome “Limits to
Growth” (1972) appeared. It had tremendous impact not only in the West,
but likewise in East German academic circles - and also in the public.
Reactions were soon to follow. In newspapers as well as in academic
publications “Limits to Growth” was rejected as a product of
neo-Malthusian doomsday thinking, not taking into account the principal
difference between capitalisms (which is not able to solve its social,
environmental etc. problems) and socialisms (which solves these
problems). Later reports to the Club of Rome found a more differentiated
official reception. All of them were circulated widely in academic and
non-academic circles.

The politics of détente between East and West slightly improved the
climate for futures studies. East German scientists collaborated with
the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis at
Laxenburg/Austria (founded in 1972). International exchange - also to
questions of the future - became less restricted.

6. In the years of decline
--------------------------

During the 1980s, futurists in the GDR should have followed H. Kahn’s
phrase: “thinking the unthinkable”, i.e. the end of the communist
system. With a subliminal feeling of crisis, not to speak of doom,
social and mental barriers against futures studies grew. Studies, whose
outcome was not welcome to party leaders, were classified (e.g. studies
about right-wing extremist tendencies within parts of the East German
youth). Environmental problems, even problems evindent to everyone, were
denied. Official propaganda more than ever was whistling in the dark.
Sometimes it obtained a grotesque character: The economist Erich Hanke
postulated in his book “Ins nächste Jahrhundert. Was steht uns bevor?”
(“Into the next century. What will come to us?”, 1984) that communism
would be achieved if every family earned a monthly income of about 5000
(East German) Marks. And this would be the case sometime between 2020
and 2030.

At that time, futures studies as a discipline were rather non-existent.
When Bönisch wrote his critique of recent tendencies in bourgeois
futurology (Bönisch, 1985), he wrote also about socialist alternatives
in the field of futures studies - and came up with the political and
economic program of the SED: activities to make peace more secure;
experiences of socialist countries with successful planning could help
to overcome global problems; the transition to an intensive type of
reproduction that absorbs less resources. Futures studies by themselves
had been absorbed into the daily business of politics and ideology.

But from the grassroots - or as a kind of counter-culture -, a new
concern about the future grew, partly within the small opposition
movement, partly under the roof of the churches, partly in academic
institutions, but mostly without any definite organizational basis[^6] .
Quite generally, futures thinking - in the form of concern for
ecological problems, of the peace and civil rights movement -
contributed to the fall of the system.

7. The aftermath
----------------

1989, the “freedom revolution” and the fall of the Berlin Wall came as a
wild card, a highly improbable, maybe implausible scenario, foreseen
only by very few persons.

In the subsequent years, East German science was restructured and
integrated into the West German research landscape. Nearly nothing
remained of GDR’s “Science of science”, some researchers found their way
into technology assessment or related areas. From the point of futures
studies, there is no heritage. Some lessons - about mental and
structural barriers for futures thinking - could be learned. But that is
all.

Futures studies never managed to become a distinct branch of science (or
the humanities) in the GDR, there were no specific journals, no specific
institute (with one short-lived exception), no specific university
courses.

But the circumstances in the GDR can be blamed only for part of this
lack of institutionalisation. A parallel history of futures studies in
Western Germany would show some similar deficiencies at least in the
academic sphere. As a multidisciplinary approach futures studies have
still problems to be accepted as a worthwhile scientific enterprise.

### REFERENCES

###

1. Bestuzhev-Lada, Igor: A Short History of Forecasting in the USSR,
1927-1990. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 41, 1992

2. Bönisch, Alfred: Futurologie. Eine kritische Analyse bürgerlicher
Zukunftsforschung, Akademie-Verlag, Berlin, 1971

3. Bönisch, Alfred: Neuere Entwicklungstendenzen der bürgerlichen
Zukunftsforschun. Deutsche Zeitschrift für Philosophie 9, 1985

4. Edeling, Herbert: Prognostik und Sozialismus. Zur
marxistisch-leninistischen Prognostik moderner Produktivkräfte in der
Deutschen Demokratischen Republik, Dietz, Berlin, 1968

5. Heyden, Günther (ed.): Gesellschaftsprognostik. Probleme einer neuen
Wissenschaft, Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1968

6. Steinmüller, Angela/Steinmüller, Karlheinz: Visionen. 1900-2000-2100.
Eine Chronik der Zukunft, Rogner und Bernhard, Hamburg, 1999

7. Steinmüller, Karlheinz: Zukunftsforschung in Europa. Ein Abriß der
Geschichte. In: Steinmüller, K., Kreibich, R., Zöpel, Chr. (eds.):
Zukunftsforschung in Europa, Nomos, Baden-Baden, 2000

8. Ulbricht, Walter: Die gesellschaftliche Entwicklung in der Deutschen
Demokratischen Republik bis zur Vollendung des Sozialismus, Dietz,
Berlin, 1967


