FUTURES STUDIES IN HUNGARY
==========================

Erzsébet Nováky

1. The beginnings and organisational/institutional background of futures studies in Hungary
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Taking an interest in the future and beginning to study it in a
systematic and scientific way, including university-level tuition too,
date back to the mid and late 1960s in Hungary. It was then that a
scientific approach to and the study of the future emerged at several
institutions, motivated primarily by a reaction to the development of
the sciences in the international field.

Coinciding in time with the founding of the Club of Rome, in 1968
University Professor*Géza Kovács* , at the time head of the National
Planning Department of the (then called Karl Marx) University of
Economic Sciences, introduced a new seminar specialising in futures
research. This type of research seminar was a novelty in a number of
ways at the university, partly because futures research itself was a new
branch of science and partly because of the special organic unity
between research and teaching. This research seminar exerted a
particularly strong influence encouraging through the undergraduates too
the introduction and development of futures research at further places
of research and other universities. This is the reason why Hungarian
futures researchers and foreign futures studies centres alike regard the
research group headed at the time by Professor*Géza Kovács* as the
cradle of futures research in Hungary.

Work at the*National Planning Department of the University of Economic
Sciences* was characterised by a future vision-oriented, long-range,
complex and integrative approach, by a striving to renew theoretical and
methodological issues of futures research, and by a future-oriented
handling of questions related to the challenges of a given period in
time within the complex whole. All this played an important part in
establishing the research group as a place that created and maintained a
school of thought. The research team of the*Department of Statistics*
headed by*Lajos Besenyei* dealt with the statistics-oriented prognostic
aspects of futures research as well as making practical, short-range
forecasts. The futures studies group at the*Department of Philosophy of
the Budapest Technical University* , headed by*Judit Fodor* , delved
into the philosophical and epistemological issues of futures research
and investigated the future of man and education. At the*Semmelweis
University of Medicine,* *Erzsébet Gidai* was the first to deal with
futures research. Working mainly with literature in German, she strove
to make futures research strike roots in Hungary too. The*Science
Organization Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences* , headed
by*Lajos Szántó* , focussed on working with and discussing both
international and Hungarian special literature, and on systematising the
obtained knowledge.

The fact that a number of individuals at different universities and
academic research institutes began to deal with diverse aspects of the
future on their own, thereby enriching and broadening the thematic scope
of futures research in this country, was a peculiar feature of the early
days of futures research in Hungary. The following research centres and
researchers must be mentioned by all means: the Department of Transport
of the Budapest Technical University (*Kálmán Kádas* ), the Department
of External Economy of the University of Economic Sciences (*Imre Korán*
), the Janus Pannonius University of Pécs (*Béla Sipos* ), the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Philosophy (*Ervin Bóna* ), Institute
of World Economy (*Mihály Simai* ), Institute of Economic Sciences
(*Ferenc Jánossy* ), Institute of Home Trade (*Radmila Verstovshek* ),
the University of Miskolc (*János Czabán* ), the University of Szeged
(*László Tóth* ) and the University of Debrecen (*Csilla Kemény* ).

The different research teams and academic workshops dealing with futures
research varied in the pace and extent of becoming institutionalised.
The process turned out to be the smoothest in the National Planning
Department of the University of Economic Sciences despite the fact that
the Group headed by*Géza Kovács* had to undergo a number of
organisational changes within the framework of university reforms. In
1979, when the National Planning Department became the National Planning
Institute, the Group was organised as the*Section on Futures Research* ,
and in 1989, when the institute was replaced by the Macro Planning and
Modelling Institute, the institutional*Department of Futures Research
and Planning* came into being under its aegis, this time headed
by*Erzsébet Nováky* . In keeping with the comprehensive educational and
organisational restructuring under way at the university, in 1992
an*independent Futures Research Department* was established in the
Faculty of Economic Sciences, only to be transformed in 2000 into
the*Futures Studies Centre* at the Faculty of Business Administration.

The Futures Studies Centre of the University of Economic Sciences has
benefited, in the shape of the*Futures Research Group* , from the
intellectual and financial support of the*Hungarian Academy of Sciences*
since 1974. The research team was headed until the end of 1998 by
university professor*Géza Kovács* and subsequently by university
professor*Erzsébet Nováky* , who is also head of the Futures Studies
Centre.

*The Department of Philosophy of the Budapest Technical University* has
kept an open mind toward the future amid all the organisational
restructuring. Cultivating and teaching futures research have always
been in close harmony with the university’s profile and have adhered to
the changes in the thematic points of view of the research centre. As a
consequence of the implemented university reforms, it is now
the*Department of Innovation Studies and History of Technology* that
deals with the future in a systematic way under the guidance of*Mrs.
Attila Tóth* .

The research work of the*Semmelweis University of Medicine* was
transferred to the Institute of Social Sciences of the Hungarian
Socialist Workers’ Party and, subsequently, to the Economic and Social
Research Institute of the Trade Unions. The work was carried on
by*Erzsébet Gidai* in the Institute of Social Research and Forecasting.

Futures research at the*Janus Pannonius University of Pécs* acquired a
specific character early on. The activity of*Béla Sipos* focussed on
forecasting the future of business, labour and prices, and on examining
and forecasting short and long-range cycles. In the 1990’s they
established a research team at the*Strategic Management Department* and
began to focus on computer-assisted financial forecasting.

The*Department of Business Economics of the University of Miskolc*
specialised in company and organisation prognostics (*János Czabán* ),
while the*Department of Statistics and Accountancy* focussed on business
prognostics (*Lajos Besenyei* ). The*Institute of Economic Sciences of
the University of West Hungary (in Sopron)* has also been dealing with
futures studies since the mid-90s.

Cultivating and teaching futures research at university level have
become more and more widespread, but only at the University of Economic
Sciences has an independent department been founded.

Practical forecasting work has been undertaken mainly in nation-wide
institutions where the long-range management of problems has made it
necessary, such as the*National Committee for Technological Development*
, the*Scientific and Planning Institute for Urban Development* and
in*sectorial ministries* . The role of the*National Planning Office*
must be emphasised among the other nationwide institutes. Although the
Office itself did not conduct systematic futures research, its
executives realised the convenience of elaborating long-range
macro-level plans on forecasts relying on a scientific basis. The
National Planning Office, therefore, assisted the development of futures
research as a branch of science by commissioning long-range complex
forecasts. It also made efforts so that the results of futures research
be put to use in the process of drafting plans and of decision-making on
the state level.

Looking into the future became part of the activity of the*Central
Statistical Office* too, albeit with an emphasis on short-range economic
forecasts. In the 1990s, Hungary’s banks and the Ministry of Finance
also joined forecasting activities related to economic macro indicators.

Having assessed the research carried out and the scientific results
achieved in the field of futures studies, in 1976 the*Hungarian Academy
of Sciences* established a*Futures Research Committee* to function
within its Section of Economic and Law (which was later extended to
include sociology, demography and public sciences too). The president of
the Committee was*Géza Kovács* , the founder of futures research in
Hungary, who remained in that position for 12 years. From 1988 the
presidency went to*Erzsébet Gidai* , to be followed in 1999 by*Lajos
Besenyei* .

2. Historical periods of futures studies in Hungary
---------------------------------------------------

In the course of the 30 years that have passed since the early days of
futures research in Hungary a sufficient quantity of knowledge and
experience has been amassed for us to look back on the road covered from
a historical perspective and from various points of view. Although the
activities of Hungarian futures researchers have always focussed on
institutionalising futures studies in Hungary, on broadening and
widening the theoretical and methodological questions and on satisfying
the practical needs, each of the three decades displays its own,
different character.

In the first decade, futures research, having overcome the ideological
prejudice manifest upon the emergence of new sciences, was closely
linked to the socialist system of planned economy constituting its
so-called outer sphere. There was a definite endeavour, at the same
time, for futures research to prove its independent character as a
branch of science and to be accepted as an academic discipline*.* In the
second decade, futures research strove to distance itself and become
independent from planning. Attention was increasingly channelled into
elaborating scientifically-based future possibilities. It was in this
phase that Hungarian futures research came into mutually beneficial
contact with the international vanguard of futures studies. In the third
decade, conscious and non-conscious thinking about the future gained
impetus even on the level of the individual. The results achieved by
futures studies became widely incorporated in other sets of knowledge
and in the process of strategic thinking. All this reinforced the
emergence of alternatives in the way of thinking and paved the way for a
change of paradigms in futures studies.

The following essentials correspond to each of the three decades:

the first decade: between 1968 and the late 1970s -

the early years:*the period of proof and acceptance,*

the second decade: between the late 1970s and the late 1980s -

the years of stabilisation:*the period of busy labour,*

the third decade: between the late 1980s and the late 1990s -

the years of renewal:*the period of diversification for futures studies
in Hungary.*

The diverse research character of the three decades is manifest in
scientific research, teaching and the trends in national and
international relations. In what follows, the diverse character of these
three decades will be presented through the changes taking place in
these three fields.

3. Scientific research
----------------------

The peculiarities of the three decades are easy to trace if we examine
in each the theoretical-methodological subjects we investigated, how the
comprehensive Hungarian visions of the future were drawn up and the
trends in our practical research.

### 3.1. The period of proof and acceptance

###

a) The period of the 1960s and 1970s meant a boom and
institutionalisation for futures studies in the industrially developed
western countries. As a consequence, we focussed our research work on
disseminating the findings of international research and adapting in
Hungary the theoretical-methodological-technical results of futures
studies. Like other social studies, futures studies is not devoid of
worth. Therefore, the new science’s system-specific features customary
in the countries of East and Central Europe had to be discovered. Seeing
that futures research in Hungary was launched in the socialist system,
naturally we sought to establish a link between futures research and
planning. Futures research provided a range of variations wider and more
novel than customary in planning, thus loosening up the rigid system of
planning. Long-range futures studies offered orientation possibilities
first and foremost for long-range planning, which in turn provided
greater scope for futures studies to raise novel issues and to seek
novel answers.

We set ourselves the task of collecting and systematising the methods
applicable in futures studies and researched the way they could be
adapted in Hungary. In the first decade, we integrated methods of
forecasting based on mathematical-statistical procedures into the
methodological storehouse of futures research in Hungary, since
recognising the more or less unchanging and still prevailing trends and
“calculating” the probable (and possibly even the most probable) future
possibilities definitely took centre stage in futures research at the
time. These methods emphatically assisted economic forecasting and made
it scientifically more well-founded.

Analyses facilitating the cognition of world models and global reports,
as well as method-specific studies were closely linked to methodological
research. These studies paved the way for our attempt to apply methods
used in world models to smaller (i.e. country-sized) regions. We linked
dealing with global problems to specifying them within the context of
Europe and East and Central Europe, thus contributing to the system of
objectives of our long-range plans becoming embedded in an international
context.

We paid particular attention to the relation between futures research
and social planning. The topical tasks of developing futures research
were caused, partly as a consequence of debates concerning futurology,
by the uneven progress of making future visions and prognostics. This is
why research into making future visions became particularly relevant. We
elaborated the structure of the future vision and the content of its
elements, linking it to social planning. As separate elements of the
future vision we considered the natural environment, the
technical-economic basis of society, the population figures and social
stratification, as well as the categories of lifestyle and values.

b) Work on elaborating future images began in the late 1960s in the
research seminars of the University of Economic Sciences.*The first
Hungarian complex long-range future image* , which went up to the year
2000 and thus significantly surpassed the time period (1970-1985) in the
officially accepted macro-level, long-range plan, focussed on the net
national product per capita. In our forecast for the turn of the
millennium we put the desired level of this index at USD 4000, the lower
threshold of a post-industrial society. For this, a figure surpassing
even the US index of the time, we sought an adequate socio-economic
structure in Hungary. In our forecast, Hungarian society at the turn of
the millennium would not differ essentially from that of the 1970s as
regards economic activity, but would show considerable difference as
regards the number of active wage earners and the dependents. We
considered the transformation of the structure of employment of vital
importance, foreseeing a drop in the agrarian population and a
substantial rise in the different branches of the service industry,
particularly in scientific research and education. We believed that the
more developed and more complex the production processes became, the
greater proportion of the workforce would be tied down in education,
research and development. The distribution of active wage earners
according to the employment structure would differ from the structure
that prevailed in the 1960s and 1970s, pointing towards more modern
economies. For the period covered by our forecast, we indicated as
indispensable that there be significant improvement in the amount of
means of production needed and the efficiency of capital assets and
accumulation, and that the economic structure undergo a thorough
transformation and modernisation.

We applied the so-called top→down approach, using the philosophical
principle that micro processes can be reached from macro processes and
that the development of the economy determines all other (social,
technical-technological and ecological) processes. Even by the means of
this methodology we realised and warned about what the more or less
unchanging trends foreshadowed as economic hardships that could be
expected in Hungary by the 1980s.

c) Satisfying the practical needs in Hungary meant a multidirectional
activity. Let it suffice for our purposes now to mention only the
studies related to scientific and technological development, water
management, transport, the construction industry and urbanisation among
the complex structured, sectorial and regional surveys.

### 3.2. The period of busy labour

###

a) In the second half of the 1970s and the 1980s the need to seek a
qualitatively different, new future arose with increasing persistence.
The theoretical-methodological research of the day ranged in Hungary
from the investigation of lasting trends through the study of lasting
but temporary processes (the so-called “grey zones”), to turning points
in development and the newfangled problem management of forecasting
qualitative changes. We made a thorough study of modelling the future,
the possibilities of forecasting the crucial turning points and social
processes, as well as the brand new interrelation of society, the
economy and the natural environment.

Futures studies in Hungary looked for new methods in order to elaborate
the alternatives. For the purposes of our investigations, we extended
the circle of mathematical-statistical methods used and thus we relied
more and more extensively on the power functions containing the turning
point(s) and the logistic curve. The envelope curve calculations
provided a basis for the study of level breakthrough. With increasing
regularity, we applied methods based on consulting, such as the Delphi
method and the SEER method. Among the modelling methods, we further
developed the cross impact method striving to make the algorithm easier
to follow: we quantified the interaction between events and trends as
well as the limits of probability ranges. We interpreted the extent to
which forecasts are verifiable and reliable and worked out a method to
“measure” the latter.

b)*The second complex long-range future image* elaborated in the
mid-1980s with the participation of experts from the Futures Research
Committee on of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences targeted the period
leading up to 2020. This time we focussed on the basic needs of the
individual (nutrition, housing, health, schooling and the environment)
endeavouring to establish how the growing demand could be met. We were
the first to rely on futures studies to establish the range of basic
necessities and their fundamental features satisfying which was of
utmost importance from the point of view of the long-range balanced
development of Hungarian society and the spread of harmonious character
traits of the members of that society.

Applying the bottom→up approach, we abided by the philosophical
principle that the economy must strive to satisfy the needs arising in
society. We concluded that scientifically-based growing needs could be
satisfied only by developing science-intensive production and services.

c) In the future-sensitive domains we paid particular attention to the
future of social processes, primarily of education, housing and health,
and the assessment of these from the point of view of the development of
society as a whole. One of the most remarkable undertakings of the
1980’s was outlining the socio-economic alternatives of development in
Hungary until the turn of the millennium, including even catastrophic
future alternatives, and examining the interaction of the Hungarian
economy and the environmental subsystem and forecasting their reciprocal
influence. In connection with the latter we relied on the
multidisciplinary model (which composed of the sub-models of economy and
environmental sectors) to determine whether there was any forecast that
was favourable to the Hungarian economy and to the state of the
environment alike. Unfortunately, no such forecast was found amid our
Hungarian circumstances, as no strategy equally desirable from the point
of view of the economy and the environment could be worked out without a
radical change in the character of the relationship between the economy
and the environment. This also signalled that in future profound changes
were necessary in the economy, society and the technological structure,
something that futures studies must indicate in advance.

### 3.3. The period of diversification

###

In the late 1980s and early 1990s futures studies in Hungary also
realised that in order to be able to interpret the behaviour of dynamic
systems in a more complex way and to forecast their future state a new
philosophy, methodology and methodological means must be found. The
future state of systems in an unstable condition is impossible to
forecast in the sense that their future state is unpredictable, in other
words cannot be foreseen with precision. Scientific prediction,
therefore, becomes impossible amid unstable conditions, namely we cannot
forecast the new state or future behaviour of the system with precision.
In chaotic and/or slightly chaotic systems the desire (and possibility)
of drawing up the single (most probable) version of the future must be
given up and building a variety of alternatives and scenarios must be
favoured instead.

a) Theoretical-methodological research in Hungary, therefore, focussed
on the complex investigation of dynamic systems, the study of the
behaviour of complex great systems, ways to apply chaos and evolution
theories in futures studies, the trends of futures studies (particularly
evolutionary and critical futures studies), their relations with the
post-modern current of thought, and the extent to which evolutionary
modelling and forecasting came true.

This decade brought some novelties also in the methodological arsenal of
short-range prognostication in Hungary. The systematisation and further
development of the theoretical background and methodological means of
business cycle research, as well as the development of the
mathematical-statistical means of business and financial prognostication
and the building of its system of information technology coincided with
the new demands made on futures studies and forecasting. Accounting,
statistics and prognostics came to display closer ties than before.

Researching the repercussions in futures studies of the change of the
social and economic era, with particular emphasis on globalisation and
regionalisation, and researching the concept of the future of certain
trends in economic theory were the products of this decade too. The rise
in value of the role of the human factor, the individual directed the
spotlight onto research on future orientation. Determining the
components of future orientation made us more familiar with the way
Hungarian people, including mainly the youth, companies and enterprises,
related to (and feared most about) the future.

b) We applied a new type of approach in our investigation of*the complex
image of the future* carried out between the 1990s and the turn of the
millennium. This was warranted by the fact that the conditions of
forecasting had changed considerably since the late 1980s. A change had
set in the way the socialist countries, collapsing one by one like a
domino puzzle, related to the developed West and the globalising world,
in the progress Hungarian society made on the road to democracy and in
the way people articulated their individual opinions and aspirations
more forcefully than before. The main characteristics of the new
approach are the following:

forecasting is done amid the change of paradigms in a broad sense and
the conditions of instability in a complex sense;

the survey gives greater relevance to the individual, primarily as a
bio-psycho-social being who relates to the future in a way more direct
than before and who, by interpreting a greater variety of future
variations, wishes to obtain/retain greater freedom to choose and to
decide;

the individual must come up to and conform to the expectations of the
future even amid the changes, catastrophes and future shock factors
besetting society, nature and the economy; all this may be assisted by
the new social and individual values;

the new type of investigation of the vision of the future breaks with
the notion that the level of development and the future course of
development of the economic subsystem unequivocally determines the
society of the future, so the numerical forecasting of conventional
macro indicators (e.g. the GDP) is relegated to a minor role, while more
attention is focussed on questions reflecting the interests and values
of the members of society, such as the future orientation of individuals
and institutions.

The fundamental dilemma of working out a new image of the future is that
today it is impossible to outline the probable (or the most probable)
future version and the image of the future built upon it. What can be
attempted is to seek future alternatives by discovering the links
between the possible future versions which are desirable for the
individual and society and which can be detected from the development of
the economy and politics. In order to elaborate these with a
philosophical approach we opted for the combined application of the
top→down approach (which sets out from the macro processes of the
economy and politics) and the bottom→up approach (which sets out from
the attitude to the future of the individual and social institutions).
In this framework we were able to compare the possible versions of the
future offered by the economic and political conditions, and the
versions of the future desired by society and its members. This
comparison could not serve as a balance, however. Nor could it be
carried out like before, in a more or less mechanical way, because - due
to the instability of the processes - the balance (and stability) do not
come automatically, and at the same time the members of society now have
considerable powers to shape the future.

Instabilities (sensitivities) emerge in processes making up the future,
in expectations related to the future and in the interests joining the
two. It is the change in the values that expresses what society and its
members want to and are willing to accept from among the future
possibilities ahead of them. Linking the possible with the desirable
provides a basis on which to outline the future variations, which can
then be put together as future variations and future alternatives. We do
not seek the optimal or the desirable future alternative, but present
alternatives that are acceptable. The criterion of being acceptable is
that the future alternative allows society and its members more
latitude, that it allows charting different courses (i.e. different life
and professional careers in the case of individuals) and progress along
those. Seeking more latitude also expresses the need to create, to
“make” the future together with the members of society. That is how the
image of the future became Hungarian in character. The variety of future
variations indicates that the social and economic future of Hungary is
not yet decided, so forming and shaping it is still possible.

c) The profile of practice-oriented research was renewed and enriched by
new additions as a result of the market economy and other factors
emerging in the wake of the change of regime. We investigated the
relation between community and market decisions; the connection between
futures studies, the information technology society and marketing; the
futures studies components of the analysis of technological efficiency;
the new specifics of business and entrepreneurial forecasting. We had
World Bank support to conduct research into the relationship of
vocational training and socio-economic development, after which we
relied on wide-ranging empirical surveys to work out possible
alternatives for the development trends in vocational training. With the
financial backing of the so-called*OTKA (Hungarian Scientific Research
Fund) programmes* we have researched since 1991 a number of
theoretical-methodological questions of futures studies, such as the
socio-economic development of Hungary, forecasting socio-economic
conflicts, Hungary beyond tomorrow, modernisation and social security,
paradigms in futures studies, non-conscious and conscious attitudes to
the future, modernising the methodology of futures studies in the period
of transition, new methodological approach in futures studies, the
application of the chaos theory in futures studies, evolutionary models
in futures studies, analysing financial time series and further
developing their forecasting methods, short-range prognostics models,
computer models and tools in prognostication, business cycle research,
the role of multinational corporations in business cycle research,
forecasting trends in the world economy and their expected repercussions
in the security of the Hungarian economy, the local prevalence in
Hungary of a global vision of the future, the vision of the future of
Hungarian education, the social, economic and structural effect of the
village on regional agrarian production, the vision of the future of
Hungarian librarianship, possibilities of linking strategies of
different time spans, and the turn of the millennium before and after
us.

With our work, we link onto the research activities of nation-wide
strategic institutions and take part in determining the development
trends of small regions. These activities show our more intensive
participation in the preparation of decisions.

The greater freedom in both Hungary and the international atmosphere has
helped us to carry out valuable research, the results of which have been
widely acclaimed. All this provides a sound basis for us to participate
in international conferences. The number of our publications abroad has
also shown a promising increase.

### 3.4. Scientific results displayed

###

The results we have reached in the field of futures studies are
documented in books, textbooks and university course books, and in
studies published in scientific journals and delivered as conference
lectures. Books on the theoretical-methodological aspects of futures
studies can count on widespread interest and they are particularly
informative.*The list of comprehensive books on futures studies
published in Hungarian and in foreign languages between 1970 and 2001
can be found as part of the bibliography at the end of this study.*

*Prognostics,* launched in the 1970s and practically the only medium
until the 1980s, published by the Science Organisation Group of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, provided an excellent forum for futures
studies publications. Since the 1980s*The Economy and Society* journal
of the Institute of Social Research and Forecasting has provided a forum
for futures studies. The Futures Studies Centre of the University of
Economic Sciences publishes specific forecasts for Hungary in its series
called*Futures Studies* , while the series called*Futures Theories*
contains the latest theoretical-methodological results of futures
studies. The review called*Planetary Consciousness* promotes futures
studies on the whole.

Conferences on futures studies can boast a long-standing tradition in
Hungary. The*1st Hungarian Futures Studies Conference* was held in 1972
with the full exclusion of the press and the media. At that stage we
wished to probe the role of futures research in the socialist planned
economy and its situation in Hungary.*The 2nd Hungarian Futures Studies
Conference* (1978), which attracted many participants, dealt with
complex visions of the future, prognoses and plans as well as
methodological issues. One of the sections of the*3rd Hungarian Futures
Studies Conference* in 1985 transcended the turn of the millennium
analysing the development expected in Hungary for 2020. The second
section focussed on the socio-economic development of the 1980's and the
crucial turning points. An independent (third) section at the same
conference examined the bases for predicting company strategies. The*4th
Futures Studies Conference* was held in 1993, the third decade of
futures studies in Hungary. It focussed on the threshold of the 21st
century and relied on new points of view to outline the socio-economic
development of Hungary in the period following the turn of the
millennium. The*5th Hungarian Futures Studies Conference* , held in
1998, looked back over the development of futures studies in Hungary in
the past 30 years and displayed the results achieved in the new fields
of research. At the scientific conference organised in 2000 on the 175th
anniversary of the founding of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences we
discussed the past, present and future of futures studies in Hungary
together with the results already achieved and the new challenges ahead.
The material of the conferences is available in volumes edited in
Hungarian.

4. University-level teaching
----------------------------

### 4.1. The period of proof and acceptance

###

The teaching of futures studies in higher education in Hungary began
simultaneously with the emergence of the discipline, as it was in the
very institutions of higher education that we began to cultivate this
field of science. In the early days, lecturers and students studied
together the theoretical and methodological questions of this new branch
of science, applying the method of learning through research. They
collected and assessed the methods used in forecasting and forecasts
made elsewhere, striving to further develop them and to make up new
forecasts themselves. Teaching later benefited from the contents of
different theses and papers as well as from the results of research
carried out for practical institutions.

The teaching of knowledge related to futures studies, primarily economic
prognostics, began to appear sporadically in the mid-1960s and to be
taught from the late 1960s at the University of Economic Sciences. The
teaching of Futures Research as a discipline began as early as 1968 at
the University of Economic Sciences, to be followed by the Budapest
Technical University and the Semmelweis University of Medicine in 1972.
In 1978, the Janus Pannonius University of Pécs followed suit too.

Integrating the results of research into teaching happened fast not only
in the university cradle of futures studies; the lecturers and
researchers of other Hungarian universities were also quick to realise
the potential and to seize the opportunity this branch of science
offered. This discipline was cultivated and taught, on the one hand, by
those lecturers and researchers who were interested in the
philosophical-theoretical-methodological issues of the future and, on
the other hand, by those who were more into “calculating” the future,
namely took up an interest in its methods and methodology. This
discipline also attracted other people with an interest in certain
specific aspects of the future, such as the future of cities, the future
of societies, the question of robots and/or humans, and the consequences
of environmental pollution.

The introduction of futures studies in the different higher educational
institutions was by no means smooth sailing. As fast as the university
lecturers and researchers made progress in acquiring, developing and
adapting in Hungary the new scientific knowledge and in finding the
adequate ways of passing it onto the students, so slow was the
institutionalisation of this branch of science in academic circles. In
none of the universities did senior decision-makers see it fit to
include the discipline of futures studies among the main subjects of the
given institution and allocate a sufficient number of teaching periods
for it. University lecturers and researchers, therefore, had to take a
stand on many an occasion so that the subject would be included and kept
permanently in the curriculum. The teaching of this subject never
reached a massive scale, which had the positive result that tuition took
the form of tutorials and there was time for intellectual exchange.

### 4.2. The period of busy labour

###

As a consequence of the welcome growth of futures studies knowledge,
teaching and research experience, the educational curriculum of
universities in Hungary grew more and more ample in the field of futures
studies and branched out in each university in keeping with the profile
of the given college. The Technical University of Budapest, beside
philosophical issues, investigated the future of technology, the
University of Pécs and the University of Miskolc, which started teaching
futures studies in 1987, researched and taught company and business
prediction, while the University of Economic Sciences focussed on
complex, integrative futures studies.

The university-level teaching of futures studies split into two main
branches in the 1980s. One continued to be characterised by the shaping
of attitude, the best possible adaptation to the profile of a given
university, while the other’s principle feature was total immersion in
futures studies as a profession. These two branches of teaching
bolstered and complemented each other well.

### 4.3. The period of diversification

###

The collapse of the old regime posed new challenges for the teaching of
futures studies. By the 1990s the proportion of purely
theoretical-methodological topics and subjects had universally decreased
in teaching, and the processing, analysing and assessing of specific
forecasts had gained more and more ground. Information technology became
an integral part of teaching futures studies. Teaching practical
forecasting emerged relatively late at the university level in Hungary,
so the application of the principle of “knowing how to do it” has only
recently become one of the strengths of teaching futures studies in
higher education in Hungary.

Futures studies spread in education under various names. Since futures
studies is most markedly related to the training of economists, most of
the subjects specialised in teaching the topics of economic forecasting.
Business cycle research, financial forecasting, business forecasting,
economic and entrepreneurial forecasting, socio-economic forecasting,
etc. grew into independent subjects. At the same time, new subjects
emerged (e.g. the future of environmental systems, social forecasting,
education) which deal with the special issues of forecasting in spheres
outside the economy.

By now, teaching futures studies and forecasting has a consolidated
place in the activities of the Budapest University of Economic Sciences
and Public Administration, the Budapest University of Technology and
Economics, the University of Pécs, the University of Miskolc and, since
September 1996, the University of West Hungary (in Sopron) too. The
subjects of futures studies usually enter on the gradual level of
teaching and appear among the optional subjects. They generally last one
term. Teaching usually takes the form of lectures and seminars, with
occasional consultations and computer sessions.

In the course of the 1990s more and more university textbooks and
teaching materials on futures studies were published in Hungary. The
first to appear as a guide on complex problem management was the
teaching material of the University of Economic Sciences entitled
Futures Research. Other university textbooks in the field of business
forecasting were published in co-operation by Pécs, Miskolc and
Budapest, and textbooks came out on business cycle research, applied
system analysis and information technology too. The series called
Futures Studies and Futures Theories, launched at the University of
Economic Sciences in the second half of the 1990s, provide standard
information on the one hand and develop undergraduates’ practical
forecasting skills on the other hand.

5. International relations
--------------------------

### 5.1. The period of proof and acceptance

###

The international relations of futures research in Hungary developed
relatively fast. First, we became familiar with the work of the futures
research and forecasting workshops of the socialist countries
(particularly of Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and the Soviet Union)
within the framework of bilateral co-operation. Then, our contacts
widened and became multilateral primarily due to our active
participation in forecasting summer seminars and forecasting summer
courses organised within the framework of COMECON for young scientists.

Already from the 1970s we participated also in the world conferences of
the World Futures Studies Federation (e.g. in Rome 1973), first as
fellows, but soon with papers.

### 5.2. The period of busy labour

###

In the 1980s we relied on the COMECON forum too to enlighten the
planning-oriented attitude of the socialist countries and to promote a
long-range, forecasting way of thinking.*Géza Kovács* was the chairman
of the COMECON-backed Prognostic Working Groups of the Committee on
Scientific and Technological Co-operation for six years and of the
COMECON’s Prognostic Working Group for three years. As specialists,*Éva
Hideg, Mrs. Mosoni Judit Fried and Erzsébet Nováky* also participated in
the methodological work.*Erzsébet Nováky* was the COMECON’s
representative in Hungary for 10 years in the field of environmental
forecasting.

In those years we participated in every world conferences of the World
Futures Studies Federation (Stockholm 1982, Costa Rica 1984, Hawaii
1986, Beijing 1988) and at the most summer universities organised in
Dubrovnik mostly as lecturers.

In the 1980s we opened up, mainly through the Futures Research Committee
of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, towards the prominent world
centres of futures studies, particularly towards the World Futures
Studies Federation. This world organisation held its*European Regional
Experts’ Conference* in Hungary in 1987 under the title of “The
Technology of the Future and Its Social Implications”, which mobilised
futures studies experts and people interested in futures from far and
wide in Hungary. The conference highlighted that technical and social
development mutually determined each other. Technological development
offers alternatives for society, and the latter will then decide which
among the possible alternatives it will enlist in the service of social
development.

### 5.3. The period of diversification

###

After the collapse of the old regime the international relations of
futures studies in Hungary became unfortunately looser with the
universities and research institutes of the former socialist countries,
and at the same time strengthened with futures studies institutes and
university departments in Western Europe (Italy, Finland, Austria and
Germany) and the United States (Buffalo, Houston and Honolulu). Ties
grew stronger with international futures studies organisations,
particularly with the World Futures Studies Federation (WFSF) and the
World Futures Society (WFS). We managed to establish personal, friendly
ties with internationally renowned futures researchers (such as*Magda
McHale, Eleonora Masini, Jim Dator, Pentti Malaska, Tony Stevenson and
Rick Slaughter* ). This was made possible by our study trips to several
countries and international workshop discussions of the educational
programmes of futures studies as a subject in a curriculum.

We held the WFSF’s XI*World Futures Studies Conference* entitled
“Linking Present Decisions to Long-Range Visions” in Budapest in 1990
following Professor József Bognár’s proposal. The participants of the
world conference stressed that there should be closer links between
long-range visions and decisions taken in the present in order for our
actions to be more authentic, more well-founded and more future-oriented
at the same time.

Part of the success of organising this world conference lay in the
previous fruitful activity of Hungarian futures researchers within the
WFSF.*Mária Kalas-Kőszegi* was a member of the Executive Board of the
World Federation between 1986-1997, and*Erzsébet Gidai* was the
Secretary of the European Liaison of the World Federation between 1987
and 1992. More and more of us (e.g.*Éva Hideg, Tamás Gáspár* ) have
since joined the work of the WFSF.*Erzsébet Nováky* has been a member of
the Executive Board since 1997.

It has become more and more evident in the course of our regular and
active participation with papers and by chairing section meetings at
world conferences of the WFSF (Barcelona 1971, Turku 1993, Brisbane
1997, Bacolod 1999) and through the international exchange of experience
that the futures studies activity going on in Hungary has come up with
results praiseworthy even by international standards. This has gained
expression, among other things, in the fact that the WFSF has
asked*Erzsébet Nováky* and her co-workers from the department to
organise and manage the biennial*Budapest Futures Course* . The first
summer university (meant to replace the futures studies courses of the
summer university of Dubrovnik), in co-operation with young colleagues
and assistants successfully held in 1999, focussed on the future
orientation of young people. It relied on comparative analyses to show
the differences in future orientation in various countries together with
their elements. The participants stressed the determining role of values
in future orientation, which is why the Budapest Futures Course 2001 to
be held in Budapest in August 2001 will channel the flow of discussion
towards the connection between changing values and forming new
societies.

It is welcome news that Hungary already has an honorary doctor of
futures studies in the person of*Eleonora Barbieri Masini* , professor
of the Rome Pontifical Gregorian University and the former President of
the WFSF, upon whom the Budapest University of Economic Sciences
conferred this honour in March 1998. Her lecture on “The Role of Futures
Studies in the Global Society” was followed with avid interest in the
audience.

6. Conclusions for the future
-----------------------------

In keeping with the logical structure of this paper, our conclusions are
related to the scientific research, teaching, the practical sphere and
international relations of futures studies.

As Hungarian futures studies wishes to continue to take an active part
in further developing futures studies as a discipline, we wish to devote
particular attention to the research of new paradigms in futures
studies; to elaborating forecasting methodologies in accordance with the
paradigms describing chaotic conditions; and to the development of
methods accompanying these.

The thorough study of the information society and preparing our society
to receive it are cardinal goals. Our task is to reinforce society’s
sensitivity towards what is new and to discover the changed role of
technology foresight.

We are searching for the new ways and forms of expression as to how the
individual and society relate to the future, placing emphasis on
researching the future orientation of Hungarian society according to new
points of view and examining the connection between non-conscious and
conscious attitudes to the future. On the level of society, it is well
worth studying the process of pluralisation of people’s way of thinking
about the future.

The further development (broadening and deepening) of teaching futures
studies is desirable. The scientific deepening of the contents of
futures studies subjects and the constant widening of the topics
included in futures studies programmes with a view to international
equivalence is an ongoing task of adapting to the changing
circumstances. We can identify as a goal spreading the teaching of
futures studies from university to college level, with particular
attention to teacher training, and taking it even one step further, to
secondary school education too.

Developing and applying new methods seem necessary in order to increase
student participation and interest. In the course of this, the
widespread application of futures workshop techniques is just as topical
as the more integral use of computer modelling and multimedia solutions
in education on the whole.

It is a topical and future-oriented task to achieve that futures studies
grow into a “profession”, in other words, that futures studies be
acknowledged in Hungary as an independent profession on the basis of an
adequate structure of knowledge and skills. Amid Hungarian university
conditions, this is based on the precondition that there be a stronger
link between futures studies and the other subjects taught at the
different universities, that future thinking be an integral part of
teaching at all universities.

We consider it important that an ever-growing circle of undergraduates
become familiar with the basics of futures studies as an obligatory
subject so as to constitute a source of apt students who can
subsequently be trained for the creative cultivation of futures studies.
There should be an independent futures studies Ph.D. programme in
Hungary as soon as possible.

Making long-range, medium-range and short-range attitudes more compact
is a precondition to renewing the practice of forecasting in Hungary.
Futures studies must undertake an ever greater role in reinforcing the
strategic attitude.

We strive to provide as multilateral answers as possible to questions
raised by Hungarian reality which affect the future. With a view to
this, it is advisable for the universities to maintain closer ties with
the regional units of forecasting, with consulting companies and the
business sphere.

We consider our co-operation with the former socialist countries in the
field of research and education an excellent basis for the development
of international relations. Beside bilateral relations comprehensive
co-operation involving several countries ought to be developed too.
Credit-based education may hold great potential.

Ties with the World Futures Studies Federation ought to be strengthened
too, for which modern Internet technology can provide an adequate
background.

In order for the goals ahead of us to materialise, the young people who
belong to the generation of change must be granted an increasing role.
Co-operation with young people provides an excellent ground for the
research of new problems, for the elaboration and application of new
research methods, and may pave the way for the renewal of futures
studies in the next 30 years.

### Bibliography - Comprehensive books on futures studies written by Hungarian authors, 1970-2001

###

Kovács, G.:*Long-Range Perspectives and Planning* . Közgazdasági és Jogi
Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1970 (in Hungarian)

*Futurology - Reading book* , I-IV. (Compiled. Korompai, A., Kovács, G.,
Nováky, E.) Futurology Group National Economic Planning Department,
University of Economic Sciences, Budapest, 1971 (in Hungarian)

Korán, I.:*Futures research and economic forecasting* Közgazdasági és
Jogi Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1972 (in Hungarian)

Gidai, E.:*What is futures research?* Kossuth Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1974

Kovács, G.:*Crucial Turning Points of Future Development.* Közgazdasági
és Jogi Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1975 (in Hungarian)

Nováky, E.:*Methods in Forecasting.* Tankönyvkiadó, Budapest, 1976 (in
Hungarian)

*Glossary for Futures Research* . Akadémai Kiadó, Budapest, 1976

*From the desirable future to possible futures* (studies on future
research) (ed. Fodor, J., Gábor, É.) Gondolat Kiadó, Budapest, 1976 (in
Hungarian)

Sipos, B., Borli, K.:*Forecasting for industrial enterprises using
methods of mathematical statistics* Közgazdasági és Jogi Könyvkiadó,
Budapest, 1977 (in Hungarian)

Besenyei, L., Gidai, E., Nováky, E.:*Practice of Futures Research and
Forecasting* .*A Handbook of Methodology* Közgazdasági és Jogi
Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1977 (in Hungarian)

Korán, I.:*Economic Forecasting* Tankönyvkiadó, Budapest, 1978

Kovács, G.:*Future Research - Social Planning.* Közgazdasági és Jogi
Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1979 (in Hungarian)

Sárkány, P.:*World food crises* Közgazdasági és Jogi Könyvkiadó,
Budapest, 1979 (in Hungarian)

Korán, I.:*Global models. From the reports of the Club of Rome to the
initiative of the UN* Közgazdasági és Jogi Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1980
(in Hungarian)

Besenyei, L., Gidai, E., Nováky, E.:*Forecasting - Reliability -
Reality* Közgazdasági és Jogi Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1982 (in Hungarian)

Sipos, B.:*Production functions - business forecasts.* Közgazdasági és
Jogi Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1982 (in Hungarian)

Adorján, B.:*Computer technology at the crossroads* . Közgazdasági és
Jogi Könyvkiadó, Budapest, 1982 (in Hungarian)

*Future Research in Hungary* (ed. by Bóna, E., Gábor, É., Sárkány, P.,
co-ed. Biró, D.) Akadémai Kiadó, Budapest, 1983

Kovács, G.:*Global Problems - National Perspectives* Kossuth Könyvkiadó,
Budapest, 1983 (in Hungarian)

Sipos, B.:*Business price forecasts* Közgazdasági és Jogi Könyvkiadó,
Budapest, 1985 (in Hungarian)

Kovács, G.:*Long-range tendencies of development* (Hungary up to 2020).
MSZMP KB Társadalomtudományi Intézete, Budapest, 1985

Nováky, E., Benedek, A., Szűcs, P.:*Razvitije tehnologii v obucsenii* ,
Országos Oktatástechnikai Központ, Veszprém, 1985 (in Russian)

Benedek, A., Nováky, E., Szűcs, P.:*Technological Development in
Education.* Tankönyvkiadó, Budapest, 1986 (in Hungarian)

*Economy and Society in the Eighties in Hungary III* .*Tendencies and
the Expected Transformation of Social and Economic Development* (ed. by
Gidai, E.) Társadalomtudományi Intézet, Budapest, 1986 (in Hungarian)

*Chances for the Future* (ed. Némethi, G.): MTA Szociológiai Kutató
Intézet, Budapest, 1987 (in Hungarian)

*Forecasting, Planning and Modeling in Environmental Protection* (ed. by
Nováky, E.) Környezetvédelmi és Vízgazdálkodási Minisztérium, Budapest,
1990 (in Hungarian)

Gidai, E.:*Future alternatives. Possibilities for forecasting of
socio-economic development.* Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest, 1990 (in
Hungarian)

Korán, I.:*Building stones of future in the present and the ways of the
future* . Szakszervezetek Gazdaság- és Társadalomkutató Intézete,
Budapest, 1990

*Developing Environmental Strategies through Futures Research* (ed. by
Nováky, E.) Környezetvédelmi és Területfejlesztési Minsztérium,
Budapest, 1991 (in Hungarian and in English)

Czabán, J., Nováky, E.:*Business Forecasting I.* Tankönyvkiadó,
Budapest, 1991 (in Hungarian)

Hideg. É., Korompai, A., Kovács, G., Nováky, E.:*Futures Research* (ed.
by Nováky, E.), 1.edition: Budapesti Közgazdaságtudományi Egyetem
Jövőkutatás Tanszék, Budapest, 1992, 2.edition: Aula Kiadó, Budapest,
1997) (in Hungarian)

*Kovács, G.: Modernization and social security.* Budapesti
Közgazdaságtudományi Egyetem Jövőkutatás Tanszék, Budapest, 1995 (in
Hungarian)

*Chaos and futures research* (ed. Nováky, E.) Budapesti
Közgazdaságtudományi Egyetem Jövőkutatás Tanszék, Budapest, 1995 (in
Hungarian)

Hideg, É., Kappéter, I., Nováky, E.:*Vocational tranining at the
crossroads* (ed. Hideg, É.). Munkaügyi Minsztérium, Budapesti
Közgazdaságtudományi Egyetem Jövőkutatás Tanszék, Honfoglalás Betéti
Társaság, Budapest, 1995 (in Hungarian)

Tóth, L.:*Globalisation and regionalisation* . Szeged, 1995 (in
Hungarian)

*For the future - in another way (Futures studies)* (ed. Tóth, A.)
Uránusz Kiadó, Budapest, 1995 (in Hungarian)

Hoós, J.:*Business cycle research* BKE Posztgraduális Kar, Budapest,
1996 (in Hungarian)

Kozma, F.:*Strategies for external economy* Aula Kiadó, Budapest, 1996
(in Hungarian)

Hoós, J:*The unfolding new worlds and economics.* Akadémiai Kiadó,
Budapest, 1997

Kovács, G.:*Possibilities and limits to connect medium - and long-term
strategies* . Budapesti Közgazdaságtudományi Egyetem Jövőkutatás
Tanszék, Budapest, 1997 (in Hungarian)

*On the Eve of the 21st century* (ed. Gidai, E). Akadémiai Kiadó,
Budapest, 1998

Hideg, É., Nováky, E.:*Vocational training and the future* . Aula Kiadó,
Budapest, 1998 (in Hungarian)

*Postmodern and Evolutionary Ideas in Futures Studies* (ed. Hideg, É.)
Budapesti Közgazdaságtudományi Egyetem Jövőkutatás Tanszék, Budapest,
1998 (in Hungarian)

*Introduction to the Information Society* (ed. Nováky, E.) KIT,
Budapest, 1999 (in Hungarian)

Sipos, B.:*Business forecasting* *(Theroy - Methodology - Softwares)*
Janus Pannonius Egyetemi Kiadó, Pécs, 1999 (in Hungarian)

*The Youth for a Less Selfish Future. Papers of the I. Budapest Futures
Course* (ed. by Nováky, E., Kristóf, T.) Department of Futures Studies
Budapest University of Economic Sciences and Public Administration,
Budapest, 2000

Gidai, E., Tóth, A.:*Introduction to the theoretical and methodological
questions of futures research* Arisztotelesz Studium, Budapest, 2001(in
Hungarian)

Kovács, G.:*The turn of the millennium before and after us* . Budapesti
Közgazdaságtudományi és Államigazgatási Egyetem Környezettudományi
Intézet Jövőkutatási Kutatóközpont, Budapest, 2001(in Hungarian)

*Evolutionary models in futures studies* (ed. Hideg, É.) Aula, Budapest,
2001 (in Hungarian)

*Hungary beyond tomorrow* (ed. Nováky, E.) Budapesti
Közgazdaságtudományi és Államigazgatási Egyetem Környezettudományi
Intézet Jövőkutatási Kutatóközpont, Budapest, 2001(in Hungarian)


