30 YEARS OF FUTURES STUDIES IN POLAND: Experiences and Conclusions
==================================================================

Andrzej Karpinski

Professional futures studies in Poland were initiated in 1969. First
projects of this type were created by the institutes and committees of
the Polish Academy of Sciences and at a few universities. Initially the
University of Wroclaw was the leader in these studies, while currently
the University of Lodz is the leader. Before 1989, the year of the
breakthrough associated with Poland’s entrance on the road of market
economy, some achievements in this area were accomplished also by some
of the democratic opposition groups at that time, such as the group
“Experience and future”.

Government agencies began the activities in this field much later.
Currently the main role among them is played by the Governmental Centre
for Strategic Studies.

1. From classic prognoses to strategic studies on the future
------------------------------------------------------------

This study is limited mainly to the presentation of the situation in
futures studies conducted by the Polish Academy of Sciences. These
studies began with the foundation of the Futures Studies Committee
“Poland 2000” in 1969. The Committee has been working unceasingly for
over 30 years now, including nowadays[^7] . However, after 1989
fundamental changes took place in the approach to these studies and the
methodologies used in them.

The direction of these changes may be characterised best if one
confronts them with the main world currents in these studies. For on the
world scale today one may distinguish three main trends in the thinking
about the future.

*The first one* may be called:*”the current of global visions”.* For it
seeks the answer to the question: what will the world or the particular
aspects of the economy or society look like in 10, 15, or 25 years
ahead, i.e. it seeks to determine the vision of the future. This trend
of studies is represented by such researchers as:*Bell, Kahn, Wiener,
Naisbitt* , the*Tofflers* , and many others.

Those who represent this trend use mainly the typical methods of making
prognoses with a broad use of econometric methods and mathematical
models. In some prognoses of this type there are also some elements of
normative character, i.e. attempts at answering not only the question
what will the future look like, but also what should it look like.

*The second* current of these studies is worst-case scenarios or*warning
prognoses* . Examples of this trend are the works of the Club of Rome or
the subsequent reports signed by the Meadows. The methodology, similarly
as in the former case, is classic, routine methods of making prognoses.

In contrast to the prognoses of the first trend, the more the
projections of the warning prognosis are avoided, i.e. the more the
reality favourably departs from these prognoses, the better it is.

*The third* current of futures studies may be called
“adapting-preparative”. It was developed most extensively and
consistently by the Japanese[^8] . In this trend the main function of
futures studies is seen not in the answer to the question what will the
future be like, but how to act in order to prepare oneself for this
future in the best possible way and in its various possible options.
Hence the key role in this trend is played by the works on the
formulation of a long-term strategy of development, which reaches far
into the future. To this end it uses mainly the methods of system
analysis and a scenario approach.

In the light of the three main currents of futures studies in the world,
as described above, the works conducted in this field before 1989 at the
Polish Academy of Sciences*were closest to the first one.* For they were
dominated by the attempts to answer the question what will the future be
like. This trend had a number of important achievements in Poland,
concerning both the methodology and the subject matter, particularly in
the area of social studies, which during that period dominated the works
of the Committee of the Polish Academy of Sciences. One of the important
examples is Poland’s contribution in the area of prognoses concerning
education and the role of Prof.*Bogdan Suchodolski* , who for many years
has actively worked also in the World Futures Studies Federation (WFSF),
to mention the least.

The top achievement of this period is the development of the prognosis
“Polish society on the brink of the 20th century and the 21st
century”[^9] in 1982. Many predictions included in that work turned out
to be valid.

However, at the same time this trend experienced many failures in
predicting the future, both in Poland and in the world. In particular it
was not able to predict the fundamental changes in the political system
of the world, following the fall of the Soviet Union. Today this is the
main subject and direction of criticism of this trend. In Poland this
criticism was joined by additional criticism after 1989, which was a
result of reaction against central planning, dominating in the former
system. This was expressed in the press in a wave of total criticism of
the failures of predictions of this type. It questioned the scientific
justification and the sense of prognoses of this type. As an example one
may mention a number of articles published in the press of mass
circulation, with self-evident titles such as, for example, in
“Polityka” - “The poverty of prognoses”[^10] and subsequently - “A
prognosis cut short”[^11] , or in “Rzeczpospolita” - “Under the charm of
false prophets”[^12] . In the effect of this criticism the concept of
futurology took up pejorative features. Today this still affects public
opinion on that matter, despite the complete change of futures studies
methodology, which took place after 1989.

The main change which occurred during the decade of 1990-2000*was the
shift from making prognosis according to the first model of the three
described above, to the third one* , i.e. from classic prognoses to
strategic studies on the future of the new type. They answer completely
different questions than the prognoses of the classic type. In the
futures studies conducted by the Polish Academy of Sciences today this
trend is definitely a dominating one.

The shift to the domination of strategic studies on that subject took
place in a few stages.

*In the first stage* after the breakthrough of 1989 the activities of
the Committee until 1995 were dominated by the striving to justify in
general the need to think about the future, which in this period, as
mentioned above, was questioned. The Futures Studies Committee devoted
its main publications during this period to this subject[^13] . The work
of Prof.*Józef Pajestka* [^14] , who became the main advocate of the
need to think about the future, although in different forms than before
1989, was of particular importance here.

*The second stage* began in 1995 with the publishing of the first Polish
comprehensive concept of a long-term strategy, encompassing the period
until the year 2010[^15] . For the conditions of the time this was a
pioneer work. The priority for education and human investment proposed
in the strategy, was not adopted by the subsequent governments. However,
the concept played an important opinion-making role. This postulate
received a growing support over the following years, although it was not
practically implemented until the end of the century.

Finally,*the third stage* began with the publishing in 2000 a more
advanced new version of the long-term strategy for Poland, with its
horizon extended until the year 2020[^16] . This concept is essentially
more mature with regard to methodology and clearly represents the third
of the trends in futures studies as distinguished before.

The specifics of this strategy as compared to the traditional prognoses
is delineated by its four main features.

*The first one* is making the starting point a different research
question than in traditional prognoses. For it answers not the question
what will the future look like, but the question how to act, what to do,
in order to prepare the economy and the society to various possibilities
of development in the future. All observations as to how will Poland
look like in 2020 are only a derivative of the answer to the mentioned
above fundamental question how to act. According to this, for example,
it is of greater importance to determine the manner of modernisation of
a given industry with regard to its adaptation to the needs of the
future than to precisely predict how much will the given industry
produce in the final year of the period encompassed by the prognosis.

*The second feature* is placing the main emphasis of the strategy not on
the year that ends the period encompassed by its horizon, i.e. in this
case - the year 2020, but on the identification of roads of reaching
that target year, and hence the answer to the question what to do today
in order to reach a specific target level. The problems to solve, which
are necessary to reach that target, are defined in a more precise manner
in the case of the first decade of this period (2001-2010), while only
approximately for the second decade (2010-2020). What is particularly
emphasised is the definition of the way to put the development process
in motion already in the beginning period of the two decades, i.e. in
2001-2005, in order to reach the targets in 2020.

*The third specific feature* of this strategy is expressed in adopting
as the basis various scenarios of possible development of the situation,
while in the prognoses of traditional type the aim was usually to
determine a one-dimensional picture and shape of the future in the
target year. Each of the adopted scenarios has adequate variants of the
strategy.

*The fourth feature* is using mainly the method of system analysis. This
means giving attention only to those elements of the economy, which may
dynamise the whole system. Hence they are of strategic importance in the
implementation of the central objective. Contrary to that, traditional
prognoses tended to include the economy as a whole or its large part in
the prognosis.

2. Polish approach to some methodological problems
--------------------------------------------------

A broader discussion of the content of the strategy presented by the
Committee exceeds the framework of this article. It would be impractical
even more so, considering the fact that its English version has been
published[^17] .

However it is worthwhile to turn our attention to a few original
methodological solutions, which lie at its basis. They concern mainly
seven matters, namely: 1) diagnosis of the starting point, 2) scenarios
and the ways of determining variants, 3) manners of formulating
priorities, 4) key role given to the changes in the macro-structure of
the economy, 5) manner of checking the degree to which the adopted
premises are feasible, 6) manner of determining the investment
priorities, and 7) implementation calendar. These matters are presented
below.

1. One of the most difficult methodological problems in futures studies
is to maintain the right proportions between the work devoted to the
diagnosis of the existing state, and the work concerning the problems of
the future. It is obvious that the diagnosis of the starting point must
determine both the strategy goals and the manner of its implementation.
However, an excessive concentration of attention on this diagnosis may
weaken the attention devoted to the future. For it is easier to evaluate
the existing state than to solve the problems of the future. Such
tendencies of escaping into diagnosis occurred also in the Polish
practice in the past. In order to avoid this danger and to direct as
much of the analytical efforts as possible to the future, in the Polish
practice a decision was made to separate the work on diagnosis into a
distinct phase. Hence the results of this phase are not directly
included in the synthesis of this strategy.

2. In turn, in the diagnosis of the conditions of future development, an
original manner of classification of the particular predictions was
used, which distinguishes four groups of predictions. From that point of
view, there are predictions, which may be considered to be: a) certain,
b) probable to the degree that they should be taken into account, c)
possible, but not yet needed to include in the strategy, d) so difficult
to recognise that they must be considered to be unknown. Of course such
division of the evaluation of predictions does not replace the normally
used SWOT method, i.e. the evaluation of strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats, but it supplements it. Both external and
internal factors are subject to such classification.

In the recognition of conditions of the future much attention is devoted
to the recognition of the consequences of demographic processes and the
repayment of foreign debt. In turn, in the evaluation of the investment
possibilities much attention is devoted to the recognition of the degree
of economy’s involvement in investments already begun and the evaluation
of expenditure necessary for their completion. For only after taking
that into account one may define the area of freedom of choice in
investment and of the undertaking of new investments.

3. In the Polish practice the choice of the central goal is not the
subject of variants, but the variants concern the conditions and the
ways of reaching that goal. In the current strategy two scenarios of the
development of situation were adopted, which have two corresponding
implementation variants, specified precisely in numbers resulting from
macroeconomic calculations for the period 2001-2020.

*Variant I* assumes less favourable external conditions and lesser
possibilities of entering more radical structural changes.*Variant II*
is adapted to more advantageous external conditions and greater chances
for accomplishing deeper structural changes. As a result, variant I
assumes the growth rate of the total production at close to 4.5%, while
variant II - at about 6% annually.

4. The choice of main priorities plays a key role in futures studies
striving to define the strategy for action. These priorities result from
the adopted central aim and the partial goals resulting from the
imperative goal. Priorities determine the hierarchy of importance of the
specific tasks and the order of implementation of the particular
actions. In the strategy for Poland, discussed here, three main
directions for action in the initial period, necessary to dynamise the
economy, were considered to be the following: educational offensive,
breakthrough in residential construction, and increased spending on
science and research.

From this point of view, the concentration of the intensification of
financial effort, necessary to reach these goals, in three subsequent
waves of one-year periods between 2001-2003, is characteristic. This
should give the economy strong stimuli for development. It reminds the
solutions used during the post-war Germany in the form of the so-called
“Bildungswelle, Wohnungswelle, Autobahnwelle”.

An integral element of a thus understood strategy is also the
identification of the preferential area of the state’s economic policy,
i.e. fields, which - in the authors’ opinion - require particular
promotion and support by the state during this period both in industry
as well in science.

In those fields state should facilitate fast development with support
and aid to the extent approved by the EU legislation. This is
information, which is important to foreign investors. It allows
maintaining a conscious innovative policy through the association and
co-ordination of industrial policy based on structural preferences with
the policy of development of science and technical progress.

When determining the priorities, equal attention was given to the
avoidance of the danger of an excessive diffusion of these priorities
into too many goals and a too large area of economy, because then they
lose their sense and effectiveness. That is why, to follow the world
literature, the authors warned for the area encompassed by the
priorities not to exceed 10% of the economy as a whole.

5. In Polish practice much attention is focused on the changes in the
structure of economy and society. The acceleration of these changes is
considered to be an important factor for the dynamisation of the
development of the economy. Hence much attention was devoted to the
identification of those fields, which are able to accomplish that. This
is the purpose for the identification of those branches of economy,
which in the predictable future are characterised by a strong tendency
for development. In the discussed strategy, on the basis of world
prognoses, five branches of economy were selected. These branches - due
to the high dynamics of demand for their products and services observed
in them - may play a fundamental role in the dynamisation of the
economy, mainly in the period at least until 2010, but also later. They
include: 1) business services, 2) high technology industries,
particularly those associated with information technology (IT) and
biotechnology, 3) production and services associated with use of the
leisure time, which will be increasing in a recognisable way along with
the automatisation and robotisation of production, 4) products and
services associated with health care and the prolonged active period of
human life, which is a particularly current issue due to the ageing of
the population, 5) natural environment protection and its shaping. The
support of the process of moving economy resources from declining
branches and of decreasing importance to those five areas may
significantly contribute to the dynamisation of development of the
economy. It is estimated that creating conditions for transferring by
the year 2010 from 0.8 to 1 million people presently working in
non-developmental industries to those five areas may accelerate the
annual growth rate of the economy after 2010 by 1-1.5 points. This is
also why much attention was devoted to the delimitation of boundaries of
two sectors which compose the dual character of economy in Poland,
namely the sector representing advanced technologies and the traditional
sector. The first one includes: high technology industries, firms with
foreign capital participation, enterprises with strong export
orientation, in which exports constitute at least 30% of production,
telecommunications, science, and universities. Particular attention in
the presented strategy is focused on that sector.

6. When making investment choices, in the Polish practice there are
areas or complexes, which are considered to be constant priorities and
are distinguished from those, which are considered to be changeable
priorities of economic policy. The former include those investments,
which are necessary regardless of the GDP variant, since they determine
the functioning or the safety of the society. They include comprehensive
investments in the following areas: food and agriculture, health care,
environment protection, transportation infrastructure, power safety and
state defence. The second group includes those areas of investments,
which are the result of choice and may change considerably depending on
the assumed strategic priorities.

Among the latter, the first places include the need to undertake
significant investments for the development of information technologies
sector. It has been estimated that in this field the necessary growth of
investment will be the greatest, because from 7 to 10 times between 2000
and 2020, at the expected growth of the investment as a whole at 3-4
times. The investment expenditure on that purpose should increase from
7% of total investments in 2000 to 15% in 2020. During the entire
two-decade period they are estimated to be above $180-200 billion, which
will constitute their largest position. This is a kind of an investment
price for the country’s entrance to the era of information society.

7. In the Polish practice when formulating a long-term strategy much
attention is devoted to the macro-economic equilibrium. For this
determines the feasibility of the adopted strategy. Particular attention
from this point of view is paid to five areas, in which the disruptions
of macroeconomic balance occur the most often. They include price level,
unemployment level, budget deficit, trade deficit, and the payment
deficit of foreign trade. With regard to each of those areas a border
level is determined, the exceeding of which should result in state
intervention.

From the point of view of the feasibility of the adopted strategy it is
also important to assume that each solution or action proposed in it,
which requires spending from the state budget or the system of public
finances, must be balanced in its total amount with regard to the
expected GDP and the budget. This constitutes a certain test, which
allows eliminating those proposals, which may turn out unattainable.

8. An important methodological element of the discussed strategy is the
identification of diverse priorities in the subsequent phases of its
implementation, appropriate to the changes of conditions. Such
distribution of these priorities over time results in a certain calendar
of implementation, which determines the order of solving the particular
problems over time. At the same time it makes the adopted long-term
economic policy more apparent. In a particular specific case in Poland
until 2005 the main priority is to be the initiation of activities
dynamising economic growth, which is necessary for the prevention of
unemployment growth. In the years 2006-2008 the main priority will be
the repayment of the foreign debt, which at that time will reach its
peak amount, while in the years 2009-2015 - the main wave of
infrastructure investments should take place and a deep modernisation of
the economic structure should be intensified. In a turn in the years
2016-2020 the main goal should be a stimulation of an accelerated
movement of population from rural areas to the cities. This may remind
of a timetable divided into phases and deadlines.

3. Scale of risks and threats to the adopted long-term strategy
---------------------------------------------------------------

In the work on a long-term strategy the assessment of risk and threats,
which may take place during its implementation, is always a difficult
and very important problem. This is particularly true in the case of
threats, which result from the conditions of the global environment and
the situation of the world market. The first to mention here would be
the risk of a global crisis, which could undermine the conditions for
development of the modern world for a longer time. In the Polish
practice it has been considered impractical to develop a separate
scenario, which assumes such a crisis, although such possibility is
today believed to be more real than 10 or 20 years ago[^18] . The main
argument in this case is that fighting such a crisis requires completely
different means that those, which are used to promote the development
processes, and therefore this would require a completely different
study.

When it comes to internal threats, both social and economic ones, the
Polish practice considers the development of a separate worst case
scenario, and not a separate variant of the present strategy assuming
such threats, to be the best solution. The purpose of such a warning
prognosis is the answer to the question what dangers might occur with
regard to the specific and already adopted strategy, which is more
useful in practice. It has also been decided that the concept of a
long-term strategy and the warning prognosis adapted to it should both
be examined together and treated as two elements on one entity. Such a
warning prognosis is the subject of the Committee’s work in 2001.

The preliminary phase of discussion on the proposed strategy indicates
that the threats to the strategy may take place mainly in the social
area or within the specific economic processes, but to a lesser degree
will concern external factors (if the global crisis does not take
place). Among the social dangers three issues are the source of the
greatest anxiety.

*The first one* is the ability of the existing institutions to undertake
tasks, which actually require deep innovative activities. Bad work of
many sections of state administration, weakened too much during the past
decade, may not be up to the quality requirements of the presented
strategy. This may become the greatest threat to the implementation of
this strategy. At the same time, the implementation of the presented
strategy requires deep changes in functions, competencies, and the
organisational structure of state agencies. From this point of view the
need to determine the position of the Ministry of Finances, different
from the present one, becomes important. Until now, the work of this
ministry was completely dominated by short-term criteria, which resulted
from the cycle of planning yearly state budgets. Without changing the
position of this ministry and extending the horizon for the shaping of
the state’s finances, a long-term strategy would have small chances for
implementation.

*The second threat* is the uncertainty whether the decisions to be made
by the state, the extent of which was seriously limited through
privatisation and the operations of foreign corporations, will suffice
to start the development process. For a large number of decisions was
overtaken by the foreign capital and moved abroad. Of course, in this
situation the implementation of the presented strategy would be
impossible without cooperation with the foreign decision-making centres.

*The third* social threat results from the very critical assessment of
the current innovative and initiative ability of the some part of the
society. Sudden changes in modern technologies and radical processes of
system transformation, too abrupt for the endurance of a single
generation, result in the fact that among some parts of the society
there occurs a phenomenon of psychological passivity and an aversion or
even inability to undertake more active tasks. This may become a great
threat if no means are taken on to change the situation in this area and
to stimulate the initiative and innovative positions of the society.

Among economic threats, the most crucial with regard to results could be
the inability to increase the domestic savings, without which it would
be difficult to undertake the investments necessary for the future,
without the danger of disrupting the balance of payments or even a
monetary crisis.

4. Government long-term strategies - similarities and differences
-----------------------------------------------------------------

As stated in the beginning of this article, the concept of strategy
presented by the Polish Academy of Sciences is the expression of the
opinions of the scientific community represented by the Polish Academy
of Sciences Committee. However, it does not have any executive power,
which may be activated through constitutional rights of the government
and the parliament.

That is why, from this point of view, it is necessary to present the
similarities and the differences between the suggested strategy of the
Polish Academy of Sciences and the government concept of a long-term
strategy[^19] . The first elaborate government’s document on this
subject was published in May 2000, hence relatively late. Indirectly
this indicates that in the past the interest in such a strategy was not
great. This results partially from the fact that under the conditions of
the 4-year parliamentary life cycle the main interests move onto
short-term problems, for which the particular parties are politically
responsible. This is not a good situation and it does not contribute to
make the horizon of economic decisions longer.

The main differences between the strategy postulated by the scientific
community and the strategy of the government might be expressed in 3
points. First, the strategy developed by the government is closer to the
first current in futures studies, described in the beginning, which is
purely prognostic. It even contains some normative elements, i.e. it
attempts to answer not only to the question how Poland in 2025 will look
like, but even how it should look like.

Secondly, the character closer to prognosis results in the fact that the
government strategy does not distinguish most important priorities and
does not attempt their quantification, i.e. quantitative or qualitative
account. At the same time the government strategy is not delineating the
area of preference in the country’s economy as the proposal of the
Polish Academy of Sciences does.

Thirdly, the assumptions of the government strategy aim at encompassing
a much larger area, much closer to the area of the economy as a whole,
while the strategy of the Polish Academy of Sciences concerns only
selected problems and the areas associated with them, which may dynamise
the economy. This is most visible in the case of devoted much greater
attention to the situation in the fields of declining importance which
cause difficult social problems, disappearing or sensitive to foreign
competition, than to the promotion of development industries, to which
the future belongs. It would be a result of the fact, that fields, which
in the world literature are considered to be declining, constitute a
much larger share of the total economy in Poland than it is the case in
developed countries.

By and large the strategy of the government and the proposals of the
scientific community are two different works based on different
methodological assumptions. This is an advantageous phenomenon, since it
increases the scale of choice and creates a perspective for a broader
look at the problems of the future.

5. Substantial elements of the accomplishments of the Polish practice
---------------------------------------------------------------------

When analysing the experiences of the Futures Studies Committee of the
Polish Academy of Sciences during the over 30 years of its existence,
one may recognise some processes and methods, which may be considered a
substantial accomplishment, worthy of continuation in the future. For
the adopted methods and assumptions proved themselves in these areas in
practice.

Particularly seven of them may be considered to be accomplishments.*The
first one* to list is the cross-disciplinary character, i.e. approaching
matters and issues from various points of view and from the perspective
of various scientific disciplines. This not only enriches the
assessments, but also leads to the uncovering of aspects not revealed
when approached by a single discipline. Such approach also prevents the
tendencies of excessive specialisation and closing the particular
disciplines within their own issues. The composition of the Committee
also serves that purpose, since the Committee includes scientists of
various specialisations (philosophers, engineers, lawyers, historians,
sociologists, economists, and ecologists). For some time, the members of
the Committee included internationally acclaimed Polish writers and
journalists such as, for example,*Stanislaw Lem* - the science-fiction
writer, or*Ryszard Kapuscinski* . It is also for that reason that people
completely unrelated to the given discipline are invited to participate
in the Committee’s discussions. This formula proved to be right
considering the objective tendency of growth of importance of the
interdisciplinary forms of science. This direction was later confirmed
by the international experiences. Multisided approach also favoured the
principle of selecting people representing various worldview
orientations and political beliefs, full freedom of expressing
different, often even opposing opinions. Such type of thinking, however,
does not accept any limits.

*The second element* of solid accomplishment is the fact of examining
the problems of Poland always against the world background. Consistently
observing this rule resulted in the development in the Committee’s works
of the subject matter of world mega-trends and their effect on the
situation in Poland. Such approach provided most of all with the
possibility of objective assessments and the avoidance of one-sidedness.
This approach was later confirmed by the international experience, which
found expression in the well-known formula: “think globally, act
locally”.

*The third element* is alternative thinking. It is not limited to the
analysis of the existing forms or forms known from other countries. It
continuously seeks the answer to the question whether there are any
other ways leading to the same or an even better final result. Because
of this the Committee was sometimes accused of too critical approach but
it provided positive effects. For even if some solution functions
effectively, one should think about the alternative ways of its
replacement in the case when it would stop providing good results. It is
important not to undertake the work in that direction too late and to
have an alternative solution in reserve. For the most important and at
the same time the most difficult is always finding a new idea for
organising the reality.

*The fourth solid element* is the holistic, comprehensive approach. The
Committee aimed at the most complex syntheses, at large syntheses,
although often based on working hypotheses. Hence the Committee aimed at
the integration of problems of the society, politics, culture, and
economy, and the analysis of mutual relations between them.

*The fifth solid element* is the priority for the humanistic, social
aspects of the development process. This protected from technocratic
threats, quite effectively in fact, and from the excessive “economism”.
On the one hand the studies on systems of values as well as education,
culture and cultural heritage should be mentioned and on the other hand
on the phenomenon of social pathology (delinquency, alcoholism,
corruption) are worth mentioning.

*The sixth solid element* of the Committee’s work is the above-mentioned
application of the method of system analyses.

Finally,*the seventh element* of the Committee’s work is its educational
role among the staff conducting similar studies in various areas of
economy, society, and culture. The literature published by the Committee
raised at least two generations in the expert and scientific communities
involved in the futures studies in Poland. On the average the Committee
publishes 5-6 books yearly in the area of prognostic literature.

The relations between the Committee and the top-level decision-makers,
particularly the parliament and the government, are also worth
mentioning. There are still many issues, which are not yet fully
resolved and are the subject of mutual criticism.

The government and the top-level decision-makers many times expressed
their wish for the Committee’s publications to include, apart from
diagnosis elements and general strategic concepts, more concrete
proposals for solving the analysed problems.

However, this exceeds the abilities of the Committee as a social
organisation without a broader executive apparatus. At the same time the
Committee often presents opinions, which depart from the proposals of
the government in the case of some issues. In turn, the Committee is of
the opinion that its publications are not always sufficiently used in
the work of the government. This was particularly true in the case of
broad expertises and studies. That is why the Committee developed the
new form of short, 4-pages-long at most, memoranda addressed to the
highest authorities, which present the opinion of the Committee in the
most important matters, regardless of the above mentioned full texts of
expertises. This form turned out to be more effective, but there is a
belief about the still insufficient use of the scientific publications
in the activities of the government and the state administration.

However, the Committee believes that its most important role is its
opinion-making function, which is its only strength. This is
particularly important considering the fact that, as the surveys show,
80% of the readers of the Committee’s works are young people below 25
years of age.

The technical and engineering community also addresses postulates to the
Committee, which are difficult to meet. Engineers and technicians wish
to receive from the Committee more detailed and quantitatively precise
prognoses concerning new technologies and products, which is not always
possible, or even feasible. The Committee is only partially able to
fulfil these postulates[^20] . In the face of enormous changeability of
the modern world and abrupt, but not in a form of extrapolation, changes
in technology, such detailed forms of making prognoses these days do not
give satisfactory results. Nevertheless a close cooperation with the
technical community is considered to be an important condition of the
effectiveness of the Committee’s work.

6. CONCLUSIONS FOR THE FUTURE
-----------------------------

One may draw the following most general conclusions from the hitherto
consideration.

As the economic and social development of the world becomes more
complicated and more difficult to foresee, the need for futures studies
based on scientific principles does not decrease but to the contrary -
it increases. These studies should be of a more continuous character and
based on the monitoring of the phenomena, taking place and on the
identifying of new tendencies.

Futures studies should draw from the achievements of economic models as
broadly as possible. But the methods of formalised econometric models
cannot replace the need to make strategic choices concerning the
directions and the main concentration points of efforts and means, what
the strategy is based on and what the models alone cannot provide.

The practical effectiveness of strategic long-term strategies for the
governments depends on a proper resolution of the problems of
competencies and making financial decisions subject to longer criteria
than those, which decide during the approach to the yearly budget. Hence
the too great position of the financial apparatus may undermine the
effectiveness of a long-term strategy.

In order to ease the effects of an excessive concentration of attention
on the current matters, as part of the 4-years cycle of the
parliamentary life, it is important to seek those problems, which could
receive support of various political forces of the country in the longer
term and could be implemented regardless of changes in governments of
various political orientation.

Most arguments favour the pluralistic approach to futures studies, i.e.
conducting them in many centres, since then the results of their work
will enrich or verify one another.

Scientific methodology creates particularly favourable conditions for
the establishment of such studies of a comprehensive character and not
subject to various forms of pressure of economic sectors, regional and
local.

The development of new advanced technologies and contemporary
principles of functioning of the market economies are growing more and
more universal. That means that they are more and more common for
different countries regardless of the differences in their social,
geopolitical and economic position. It makes the application of the
simulation method more and more useful. Hence the role of this method
will probably increase in the futures studies of tomorrow.

There is a need for a much broader dissemination of knowledge about
futures studies among the youth and in universities.

The processes of integration and of creation international communities
such as for example the EU, and the creation of a new information
civilization, require a fundamental intensification of futures studies
both in the particular countries as well as on the scale of the European
Union. For example, the vision of the future of Europe and its place in
the world is presently particularly needed.

A fundamental broadening of the international exchange of information
about the results of prognoses in the particular countries and the
appropriate comparative analyses are necessary.

The use of resources of the European experiences in futures studies and
programming, which among others concern the countries of Central and
Eastern Europe, may create a strong element of comparative advantage of
Europe over other partners on the world market. This chance should be
used. The creation of the European Centre for Futures Studies, patterned
after the Central European Bank, may favour that.


